A JUST and MODEST VINDICATION OF THE Scots Design, For the having Established
a Colony at Darien.

WITH A Brief Display, how much it is their Interest, to apply themselves to
Trade, and particularly to that which is Foreign.

Sanctiora sunt Patriae Jura, quam Hospitii.* Corn. Nep. in vit. Timoth. Nemo
Patriam amat quia Magna est, sed quia Sua. Senec. Epist. 66. Printed in the
Year, 1699.

TO THE READER.
THere being no Dedication of this Discourse; a Preface is therefore not only
the more allowable, but necessary. For how vain, as well as impertinent soever,
they are deservedly accounted, who think either to recommend, or to cover, an
unseasonable, useless and trifling Book, from Censure, Contempt and Ridicule,
by their Emitting it under the usurped Patronage of a great Name; yet it is to
Treat those, into whose Hands Authors are ambitious to have their Papers to
fall, and of whose good Opinion they are covetous, with Rudeness, as well as
with want of Respect, not to afford them those previous Advertisements, and
vouchsafe them the Lights which may let them decently in to what they are
invited to Peruse, and serve both to obviate Misapprehensions of the Writer,
and to prevent Groundless and Satirical Reflections upon his Performance.

And the endeavoring of the one and the other of these, is the more
indispensably needful in the present case; in that (if credit may be given to
vulgar Reports) there are some advanced to Eminent Posts, and clothed with
lofty Characters, who from Politics peculiar to themselves, have declared
their Opinions, and oracularly given forth their Decisions, concerning the
Question hereafter Debated, as if they were Partisans of the King of Spain,
rather than State-Councellors and Civil Ministers of His Britannick Majesty.
For besides their having in their private Conversations not only questioned,
but aspersed the Legality and Justice of the late Undertaking of the Scots at
Darien; they are by their Friends, as well as by their Enemies, represented to
have given both Encouragement unto, and to have bestowed liberal Rewards upon,
the unmannerly, little and despicable Writer of the Defense of the Scots
Abdicating Darien. In which scurrilous Pamphlet, there are not only those
intolerable Invectives against the whole Kingdom of Scotland, as well as
against the Directors of their Indian and African Company, that are more
calulated to exasperate that Nation, and to run them into disloyalty, than any
ways adapted to allay their Resentments, and to quench their intemperate Heats
under that misfortune; but there are likewise such insolent assertions, and
those bottomed upon Brutal Ignorance, in relation to the Legitimacy of the
Design to have Settled upon the Isthmus of America, that no Spaniard would have
had either the effrontery, or the ill breeding to have uttered them.

For, as if it were not enough for the Mercinary Scribler, to assume the
impudence of affirming, that the Motives upon which the Proclamations were
emitted in the English West India Colonies, forbidding the Supplying,
Relieving, and Assisting the Scots at Darien, or in any parts of America, where
they should Settle, was because the Government of England would not be
accessory to an Act, which the World might judge to be Felonious, p. 4. of his
Epist. Dedicat. he takes the boldness to add afterward in Terms that are most
slanderous, as well as defamatory, p. 7. of the same Epistle, that their
attempt of Planting on the Isthmus, was the Settling a Colony in another Man's
Dominions, unless by virtue of their Presbyterian Tenet of Dominions being
founded in Grace, the Scots, who are the presumptive Elect, pretend a Divine
Right to the Goods of the Wicked, and so take upon them to cloth the
Counselors of their Colony, with such another Commission, as God gave the
Hebrews when they departed out of Egypt. Which Language though agreeable to the
Education, Manners, Politics, and Inferior Stations of Harris and D -- 1 to
have been the one the Belcher, and the other the Voucher of; yet it cannot miss
being esteemed extremely odd and incongruous, that a Person, who is not only a
Scholar, a Gentleman, but a Minister of State, should be reputed to have both
authorized the reproachful Falsehood, and to have paid liberaly for the
inventing and divulging of it.

But the forwardness expressed by one in an Honorable Office (and as is
commonly said with Raptures of Joy) in the speedy Communication to the Spanish
Ambassador, that the Scots had abandonn'd Darien, would seem not only to
insinuate his being possessed with a greater Picque against the Kingdom of
Scotland (omitting at present all those further Instances that give evidence of
it, which occur numerously enough both in the forementioned Pamphlet, and in
that other, Styled, The Defense of the Scots Settlement at Darien Answered,
which are Published under the Safeguard of his Countenance, as well as Vented
and Sold with his Connivance) than is reconcilable with the Duty of one in his
Post under a Prince, who is no less King and Sovereign of that Nation, than he
is of England; but it does also intimate a warmer concern for the Interest of
the Catholic King, and for the having his desires, and the wishes of his
Subjects complied with and gratified, than was either prudential for an English
Secretary of State, or correspondent to the Zeal which a Person in his Station
ought to have had for the Success and Prosperity of all and of every one of his
Masters People in their Undertakings, to have rendered himself obnoxious to the
being charged with. Not to add how little and mean it was in it self, and what
aversion from, and disaffection it proclaimed against the Scots, to have
affected the Pleasure and coveted the Glory of being the first Author and
Conveyer of that News to the forementioned Ambassador. Especially when
transmitted to himself upon no surer Intelligence, than that such a Report
being arrived at Jamaica, the Tidings thereof were dispatched hither by one who
might be suspected the more credulous in believing it; because it was that
which out of Enmity to the Caledonian Colony he earnestly longed for and
desired.

Nor is it without a Pointed (though but tacit) Reflection upon a certain
Gentleman's Conduct in this Matter, that the Writer of the Paris Gazette of
Nov. 14. has inserted in the Paragraph from Madrid of October 22. That il
arriva ici le 14 ^n Courier extraordinaire des pesche de Londres par le Marquis
de Canales Ambassadeur d'Espagne en Angleterre avec s'avis de l'abandonement de
le Colonie de Darien, qui avoit este receu par un des Secretaires d'Estat and
Communique a cet Ambassadeur, There had on the 14th an extraordinary Courier
come thither from the Marquis of Canales the Spanish Ambassador in England,
wish News of the abandoning the Colony at Darien, which one of the Secretaries
of State having received, had Communicated to the said Ambassador.

But there having been a Message delivered since by the same English Minister
to the said Foreign Ambassador, which how ravishing soever it might be unto the
former to Convey, could not be very joyous and delightful to the latter to
Receive; I shall only observe in relation to the diversity of the Matter, and
the different relish between the said Message and the foregoing Intelligence,
that there is sometimes a vast dissimilitude, betwixt what one may find himself
obliged to perform in obedience to the Order and Injunction of a Master, who is
no less wise in what he Commands, than Authoratative and Uncontrollable in the
having it Executed; and what the same Person may run himself into the
indiscretion of Doing when not directed by a greater Prudence than his own, nor
overruled by a Superior Authority.

Which I do take the liberty the rather to suggest, in that it is too often the
misfortune of Princes, to have even those Actions of their Ministers, of which
they were not previously in the least conscious, and much less had enjoined, to
be interpreted as if done either in obedience to their positive Command and
special Direction, or in order to humor their Inclinations and to comply with
their Sentiments. There being but few Men in the World who render the Justice
and pay that Deference to Kings, as to distinguish with that impartiality and
exactness which they ought, between what Persons raised to Emenent Posts in the
Administration, are to have imputed unto them as Acting in abstraction from
their Offices, and as they come to be considered only Personally; and what they
are to be held accountable for as behaving themselves correspondently to the
Characters which they bear, and to the Trusts which are reposed in them; and as
they govern and regulate themselves in the several and respective parts of
their Administrations, both in conformity to the Laws, and to the Measures of
Biensance and Decency, which their Masters out of respect to their own Honor
and Glory, as well as from Principles of Wisdom and Justice, are to be always
supposed to require, as well as to wish, that they may neither trespass
against, nor in the least deviate from. For as Monarchs and Sovereign Princes,
notwithstanding the Innocence of their own Purposes, and the Righteousness of
their Designs toward their Subjects and People, do seldom escape obloquy and
blame, when they upon whom the execution and the exercise of their Authority is
devolved, are found to offend against the Laws, which stand enacted and
established to be the Standards and Boundaries of Governing and Ruling Power;
so it is hardly to be avoided, let Kings and Potentates be never so justly
Celebrated, by reason of their own Wisdom, and the Mannerliness of their whole
Royal Conduct, but that there will be found pevish and ill-natured People
enough, ready to sully the Fame, and to detract from the Glory of their
Prudence, in case they who are employed in the chiefest Offices of the State,
are observed to overlook and forget the Rules of decency, and to trespass
against the Forms of Civility and the Maxims of Discretion.

And that what I have represented, may appear to have been said from a dutiful
regard to His Majesty's Honor and Safety, let me be allowed to set both the
Cases in a clearer Light, by the Proposal of two Suppositions, whereof there
are Proofs within view, to show that they are not visionary and chimerical. For
example, let His Majesty be never so Merciful, as well as Just, nevertheless it
will be impossible, during a season wherein there is no suspension upon any
Acts of Parliament, that his Government should escape the censure of being not
only Rigorous and Severe, but Arbitrary and Despotical, if a Person trusted
with Authority and Power of causing Seize and Apprehend such as are Informed
and Sworn against to be Plotters and Conspirators against the Safety of His
Majesty's Person, the Tranquillity of his Government, or the Peace of his
Dominions, should under that Cover and Pretense, so far contemn and trample
upon the many and several Laws of England, which have been made for the
preservation of the Liberty of English Subjects, as to cause Take up, and by
his Warrants to confine under aspersion of High Treason whom he pleases,
without the vouchsafing to mention in those Warrants his having received
Depositions upon Oath specifying and importing the Crimes for which he Commits
them. Which as it does often prove to be the Ruining them in their Estates and
Fortunes, as well as the scandalizing and blackning them in their Names,
Credits and Reputations, through the charging them with the guilt of disgraceful
and capital Offenses; so it is no less than the reducing and bringing the
People of England into a state and condition of absolute and down right
Slavery, by the making the Liberty of every English Subject, as well as of
some, to depend precuriously, and at the same time entirely, upon the humor of
him who assumeth unto himself the Exercise of such a Jurisdiction. Which makes
me astonished, that they who covet to Act after this illimited and unconfined
rate, are not more Friendly and Kind to Scotland, than they have hitherto
chosen to show themselves in that no more is required there, for the Empowering
those in the Administration to throw Men into Prison, without their admission
to Bail, or the being brought to Trial, but that they do suspect them to be
Seditious Disloyal or Traitorous.

Likewise, let the King behave himself toward the Subjects of all, or of any
of his Kingdoms, with never so much Condescension, Goodness, and Compassion,
sincerely and joyfully congratulating their Prosperity, and Condoleing and
Simpathizing with them under their Calamities; (as the King with great
Tenderness has lately done toward the Scots Company, through telling them in
his Answer to their Address, that he is sorry for the Damage which they and
their Country have sustained in and by the Loss of their Colony) yet none of
all these things will be found sufficient to preserve him in the hearty
Affections awful Esteem, and firm Confidence of those Subjects of such of his
Dominions, who find their Nation made the object of the scorn, ridicule and
contempt; its welfare the motive of the Envy and hatred; and their misfortune
the matter and ground of the pleasure and delight of those, whom he has
honored with the first places in the Exercise of his Authority, and in the
Administration of the affairs of State in whatsoever Dominion it be under his
Subjection.

However it may not be amiss to observe, that how discontented and clamorous
soever the Spaniards have been, because of the Scots endeavoring to have
settled at Darien; and how unkind, as well as unassistent unto them, (whether
upon imaginary motives of Justice, or real inducements of State, I shall not
determine) such have showed themselves, whose Favor and Protection they
expected in the supporting them in that undertaking, and how great and
Damageable thereupon their Disappointments and Losses have proved, which while
they cause sorrow to them, do administer occasion of Joy to others, whose
characters it does very ill accord with and become; yet that it is some
consolation both to their Company, and their whole Kingdom that the
Representation a Messrs les primieres Ministres d' Angleterre, The memorial or
manifest given into the Lords Justices by the Spanish Ambassador in September
last, was not in the least occasioned by, nor bottomed upon any thing relative
to their Colony upon the American Isthmus. So that whatsoever the Consequences
of that Memorial, and of his Britannick Majesty just Resentment of it may be,
yet none of them, can either now, or hereafter, be said to have sprung and
flowed from any Fact or Enterprise of the Scots.

And though I do not pretend to any knowledge of those Consultations, Treaties
and Stipulations, (save as they are there expressed to have been. Sur la
succession de la couronne d' Espagne, and sa Division and Repartition, about
the Succession to the Crown of Spain, and the Division and Repartition of that
Monarcy) wherein His Majesty having been concerned, gave occasion and
administered ground for that Memorial, which was so displeasing unto Him, that
he thereupon Commanded the Spanish Ambassador, who delivered it, to depart
within Eighteen days out of his Kingdom, and in that time not to go out of his
Gate; yet I hope it will neither be accounted Presumption, nor an Intrusion
upon Secrets and Mysteries of State to say, that nothing could have contributed
so much to the obviating all such misunderstandings between the two Crowns, as
should swell into and terminate in a Rupture, as the having protected the Scots
in their settlement at Darien would have done. For as the having a C^lony
Established in the very Heart and Bosom of the Spanish American Dominions, and
accomodated with a Defenceable Harbor, that is capable of receiving the whole
Naval strength of England, would (unless the Cabinet Resolutions at Madrid, be
the Results of Passion and Haughtiness, rather than of sedate thoughts,
Political Wisdom, and of Debates where arguments derived from safety and
interest cast the scale) effectually check the Spaniards against falling into
rash and hasty Councils, and an infallible motive for restraining the Catholic
King from emarquing in a War with His Britannick Majesty, because of the
unavoidable mischiefs, that upon our being so Circumstanced and Stated through
the possession of that place, would attend it in relation to the many great and
opulent Territories of the Spanish Monarchy in the West Indies, which are both
the sources of all that Wealth and Treasure which enable them to defend their
Kingdoms and Provinces in Europe, and do afford them the means and advantages
of supporting themselves in that veneration and esteem, which are paid them,
and rendered unto that Crown in this part of the World; so it is not to be
doubted, should a War Commence upon any inducements and reasons whatsoever,
whether fancied or real, slight or weighty, between the King of Spain and the
Monarch of Great Britain, but that through our being so Posted in the midst of
their American Plantations, they would soon be made sensible of their betaking
themselves thereby to a course and method that will unavoidable issue in their
Ruin.

For though no Man that pretends to good Sense can have the weakness to
imagine; nor any who are under the Ties of Allegiance and Fealty, can have the
Disloyalty to suspect; that the coldness and indifference of the Court of
England, in reference to the Scots being encouraged and supported at Darien,
(to say nothing of the measures that have been taken and pursued, not only to
the Disheartening and Obstructing them in their Design, but to the defeating
it, through rendering as far as could be effected, without open and direct
hostility, their continuance in that place impracticable) was either in
subserviency to the better concealing and covering those Transactions, which
were then carrying on, and are since discovered and divulged, concerning the
adjusting and determining the Succession to the Crown of Spain, or in order, at
the expense of the Kingdom of Scotland and the Dishonor as well as the Loss
sustained by their African and India Company, to have the more easily
reconciled, what was at that time under Consultation and Treaty toward the
being Concerted and Stipulated, to the Catholic King and his Ministers; yet it
may both with Modesty and Safety be affirmed, that among other means which
would have both Advanced His Majesty above the threats and menaces of the
Spaniards, who endeavor to allarm him, that unless all that he has projected
in the forementioned Affair, be promptement arreste, viendra un Guerre Funeste
and universelle dans toute te Europe, speedily renounced, there will arise a
destructive and general War through all Europe, but enabled him to justify and to
make good by his Power and Force, what he has by his great Prudence and Wisdom
been Adjusting and Contracting with others in reference to the foresaid matter.
It would have also been in some degree useful and subservient thereunto, if
instead of lending his Name and Authority to those who emitted the
Proclamations in the English West India Plantations, See that set forth by the
Earl of Bellamont. June 3. 1699.
prohibiting the holding any Correspondence with, or the giving any Assistance
unto, any Person or Persons, that had been Fitted out in Scotland with Ships of
Force to settle in some part of America, he had vouchsaved unto his Subjects of
Scotland, those Testimonies of his Royal Care and Zeal for their Success in the
expedition they went upon, and for their pr^spering in the design in which they
were Embarked, as might have made them out of Gratitude, Ambitious of
Sacrificing their Lives in his Service.

For as it is a great Satisfaction to a Prince, and that which gives him a
Reputation, and at such a juncture and in those circumstances, renders him
formidable to those who seem inclined, and do only covet a favorable
opportunity of declaring themselves his Enemies, to be universally known to
have a firm Tenure in the Affections and Confidences of all his People, and to
be understood to have their Wealth and Power ready to be surrendered with
readiness and cheerfulness unto his Disposal, and their Lives chiefly valued by
them on the foot of having them to venture at his Command, and for the
exalting, as well as for the maintaining his Honor and Glory; so it cannot but
both extremely disquiet him, and also lessen his Credit and Veneration with
those Potentates, that Envy the greatness of his Undertakings, and who dread
the Wisdom that displayeth it self in his Projections, to find the largest Part
and Proportion of the whole Body of his Subjects in one of his Dominions,
highly discontented with, and clamorously complaining, and as they think not
without just reason, of the Conduct and Behavior of those toward them, who
being in the highest Places of the Exercise and Administration of the
Government, do vouch his Orders and his Authority for those Actions that are so
ill Resented.

And that these Proceedings of the King's English Ministers of State, and of
his Subordinate Governors, toward and against the Scots in their West India
Undertaking, might have been forborne and avoided, without His Majesty's
becoming obnoxious to Detraction and Censure, of having connived at and
countenanced any Fact in them, than can justly be called invasive upon the
Dominions of Spain, and an Infraction of Alliances with that Crown, or that can
reasonably be held prejudicial to the Interest of England, either in their
Manufactures and Commerce at home, or with respect to the Flourishing and
Traffic of their Plantations abroad, being the Subject of the ensuing
Discourse, I do without craving the lenity and favor, or deprecating the
prejudice and severity of any, submit it to the Judgment and Verdict of all
such, who understand the Laws of Nature and Nations, have examined the
Alliances that have been contracted between the Crowns of Great Britain and
Spain, and who are able to judge of what is advantageous to the British
Kingdoms, whether collectively or disjunctively considered.

And I am sure, that whatsoever has been alleged by the Spaniards in the
Memorial presented by the Spanish Ambassador to His Majesty in May last, for
the blackning and aspersing the Design and Attempt of the Scots, with respect
to their Settling a Colony upon the Isthmus of Darien, (all which will in the
following Sheets be brought under Disquisition, and demonstrated to be
Groundless, Frivolous, and Impertinent) yet that it has no Analogy, nor
bears any Proportion with the undecency, severity and defamatoriness of the
Language, which occurreth in the Memorial exhibited by the same Minister to the
Lords Justices in the Month of September. Wherein he upbraids and reproaches a
Great and Wise, as well as an Immediate Personal Transaction of His Majesty, as
if therein he had not only been Emporter a l'ambition d'usurper and bouleverser
les Pais d'autruii, Hurried into the ambition of usurping a Power over, and of
endeavoring to subvert the Dominions of another Prince; and that if such an
Act stand allowed, Il ny auroit ni Statutes ni Loys Municipales, a observer
chez les unes ni chez les autres qui ni fuisse Libres de attentates d'autruii,
There will neither remain Statute nor Municipal Laws observable between
Princes, which will not be liable to be invaded, and freely broken in upon; but
he farther calls it such an Action toward the Catholic King, that by reason
of the influence, which it may have upon his Subjects, Pour tenter la Foy, and
exciter leur Esprits a des soulevements, In tempting them from their
Allegiance, and by exciting them to Mutinies and Insurrections, is not
consistent, a la bon Foy qui se doit observer enter les Chretiens, and a la
plus fort raison enter des Allies and Amiss, With that sincerity which should be
observed among Christians, and much more among those that are Allies and
Friends; being withal such a Practice, that if suffered, Il ny aucoune Nation,
ni Domination en Europe en surete contre les machinations and tromperies de la
plus Fort, ou de la plus malicieux, There will be no Nation or Kingdom in
Europe in safety against the Contrivances and Deceits of such, as are either
Powerful or Malicious.

All which I have therefore called over and mentioned (and would not otherwise
have done it) that they who have appeared unfriendly unto, and offended at the
Scots Undertaking, through the suffering themselves to receive sinistruous
impressions of it, upon its being represented in the forementioned Memorial of
May 3. As an Invasion upon the Dominions of His Catholic Majesty, and an
Infraction of the Alliances between the two Crowns, may from their being made
acquainted with the foulness and undecency of the Terms that are bestowed upon
the Stipulation which the King of Great Britain has been concerting, to the
happiness of the very Spansards themselves, as well as for the future
tranquillity of all the Soveraignties and Principalities of Europe, be from
thence henceforward convinced, that the Credit and Authority of a Spanish
Memorial is too lubricous and sandy a Foundation to build an Opinion upon, of
the Illegality and Injustice of a Transaction, Enterprise and Fact. And as I
hope the having unanswerably proved, that the Spaniards were wonderfully
mistaken in the Appellations which they gave to the Scots Landing and their
beginning to erect a Plantation upon the Isthmus of America; so I doubt not,
but that the Projection, for which His Majesty is so undecently treated, and
dishonourably aspersed, will be both vindicated from all the Obloquies cast
upon and affixed unto him; and also justified to have been the Result and
Effect of a Wisdom, that future Ages, as well as the present, will admire and
magnify him for. Only care in that case must be taken, that they who shall be
honored with the Trust of being employed in such a Noble Work, may not be of
those Persons choosing, who selected and pitched upon the Writers of the
Pamphlets, called, The Defense of the Scots Abdicating Darien; and the Defense
of their Settlement at it Answered, these being with respect to Sense, Truth,
Reason, and good Manners, the most silly, ridiculous, and ignominious
Creatures, that ever the Name of Authors was conferred upon.

And that their Performances in their several and respective ways, which are
such as proclaim the Intellectuals of both of them mean, and the Morals of one
of them very bad, are not arraigned and exposed in the ensuing Discourse, is,
because of its having been fully written and finished, before the Scurrilities
of the one, and the Impertinencies of the other, toward the blackning of the
Conduct of the Scots, or the disproving the Legitimacy of their Undertaking,
were obtruded upon the World; as likewise previously to the Publication of the
Book that is Styled, A Defense of the Scots Settlement at Darien, with an
Answer to the Spanish Memorial against it. And as I have not upon the perusal
of the last either added unto, or subtracted from what I had antecedently
written, which may serve to vindicate me from being accounted a Plagiary, in
case that in our Reasonings upon a Subject that is the same there do here and
there appear, not only an affinity of Style and Language, but a Concidence of
Thoughts, whether in the mentioning of Facts, or in the citing of Authorities;
so I do not think it necessary to Reply any thing to what by some may be held
Argumentative in either of the other two formention'd Pamphlets, as reckoning
that whatsoever occurreth in them of that Nature and Tendency, to be
sufficiently obviated, and in way of Answer fully anticipated, in what is
Represented and Argued in the following Sheets; and much less can I prevail
upon my self, to wast my own time, and give entertainment to the judicious part
of Mankind (whom I do only covet to be the Readers of what I write) in the
detecting the Calumnies and Falsehoods, and in rebuking the Petulancy of a
Mercenary Scribler, that has been bribed with Money to defame a Nation, and to
throw that Dirt upon Persons of Integrity and Honor, which a little scandalous
Fellow, who had been expelled some time ago out of His Majesty's Navy for his
Crimes and Misdemeanors (and who thereupon spoke as scandalously and
revilingly then of the English, as he has lately done of the Scots) had raked
and gathered together. The only thing which I shall therefore say, for
overthrowing the Faith, Reputation and Credit, of that detractive Miscreant in
his many other Fictitious and Romantic Stories, shall be to refer those, who
are not willing to be misled in their Belief of Men and Things by Lies and
Fables imposed with impudence and audacity upon them, to Mr. Wafer, who can and
will assure them, that the Aspersions thrown upon the Scots, in relation to
their Treating of him, are as false, as they are defamatory. So that through the
Fellow's appearing a Liar in one Case, he is to be accounted incapable of
having his Testimony received in all other whatsoever. Nor can any, without the
renouncing of common Sense, believe that the Gentlemen employed by the Company
to Confer and Transact with Mr. Wafer, could be guilty of such Weakness and
Folly, as to reveal and detect unto him their Design upon Darien, in that the
whole Success of that Undertaking, depended entirely upon its being kept and
preserved a Secret.

However it may not be amiss to take notice of a certain Passage in that
Fabulous Book, which is to be met with Page 16. namely, That just as the Scots
Companies Books were opened at Amsterdam, for the Receiving Subscriptions to
their Stock and Capital, the Dutch East and West India Companies run open
mouthed to the Lords of that City, showing what was hatching by the Scots
Commissioners in their Town, to Ruin the Trade of the United Provinces. Which
I have therefore the rather cited, because it is one of the few that have any
Truth in them, and not to administer occasion unto any Men (though I fear many
will be ready to take it from thence without my leave or allowance) for
suspecting, and much less for concluding, that our Councils in England, are too
much under the influence of the Hollanders, and accommodated to such Measures,
as are subservient to a Dutch Interest. For though the unthinking Creature who
communicated the Story to the Writer, and the unwary Statesman and indifferent
Politician, under whose Countenance as well as Connivance it stands published,
might no ways design the begetting and fomenting such an Opinion, yet it is so
adapted to justify an apprehension of that Nature, that not only such who are
disaffected to the Government, but many that place their happiness, and do find
their Profit in being under it, will be ready to fall into the Notion, and to
imbibe the Sentiment. Especially seeing as well the Proceedings here in
discouraging the Scots in their American Design, as what has been done and
practiced in the English West India Plantations by positive Orders and
Injunctions from hence, which have proved very Prejudicial, if not Ruinous unto
them in their Colony, through appearing very little subservient to an English
Interest, either here, or in America, will thereupon be construed by those bold
and critical Men, who do both usurp a Liberty of penetrating into, and a Right
of judging and censuring Resolutions and Actions of State (which ought to be
looked upon with Reverence, and acquiesc'd in with Silence) to have flowed
either from a Wisdom in reference to our Concerns, Welfare and Prosperity, that
is indiscoverable and past finding out; or to have sprung from Reasons relative
to the Satisfaction and Advantage of that Outlandish and Foreign Republic,
which has been named.

And as (...) the other Pamphlet, called, The Defense of the Scots Abdicating
of Darien, Answered Paragraph by Paragraph, whereof the Author has written
with more Modesty, than he did on whom I have been Reflecting, though at the same
time so weakly and triflingly, that I cannot bring my self to think, that it
needs (for I am sure it does not deserve) so much as one Stricture or
Animadversion bestowed upon it, beyond what in the following Discourse will be
found applicable thereunto. And indeed that Gentleman's Design seems (as if
playing Booty) he had intended the getting a Book to pass un^rrested and
current under the Vizor and Mask of being Answered, which through its want of
that Skreen, Cover and Pasport, there were endeavors used to have stifled and
suppressed. Which appears the more evidently to have been the scope of the
Answerer, in that he does not only give us the other Book entirely, so far as
he takes upon him to Reply unto, it which he does in his manner with reference
to the whole that is Argumentative and Discoursive in it; but he annexeth,
without the omission of a word, whatsoever occureth in the Book, against which
he would be thought to set up as an Antagonist, a Sheet and a half giving the
Description of Darien, without the being at the expense of a Syllable to
contradict or disapprove it. Yea, the main Argument upon which he endeavors
to justify the Opposition unto, as well as the Discountenance given by the
Government of England to the Scots, in their American Undertaking, being taken
from a Visionary and Romantic Topic, and superstructed upon a known and
downright Falsehood, it does thereby become manifest to all who are endowed with
any measure of discerning, that his main purport in Writing, was to give a
License for the safe and public Sale of a Book, which crept about, and was
here and there vended abroad, only surreptiously and by stealth before. For
whereas he seeks to have it believed, that all the late English Proceedings in
disfavour and prejudice of the Scots, were in pursuance of and Address
presented by the Parliament to His Majesty, Anno 1695. This is all mere Dream
and Imagination, and no better than a Bantering of Mankind. It being most
certain, that the Parliament never entertained a thought, of having Obstruction
given to the Kingdom of Scotland, as to their Settling a Colony either in the
East or West Indies, provided it were not where they were the previous
Occupiers, and on condition that it proved not in ways, and by means
inconsistent with the Amity that is between the two Kingdoms, as they stand
linked together under one Sovereign. Neither could they so far forget the
boundaries unto which they do at all times circumscribe and confine themselves
in their Parliamentary Actings, as to attempt it in reference to a Nation, over
which they claim no Jurisdiction, but which they do own to be Absolute within
it self, and altogether Independent upon them. But the whole which the
Parliament applied unto the King about at that time, was that he would
interpose and exert his Authority for the hindering of his English Subjects from
becoming Subscribers to the Stock and Capital, which the Scots were about to
make, frame and establish, for the Erection of a West or East India Plantation,
and for the beginning and promoting of a Foreign Trade. Which as they had a
Righ and an Inherent and Legal Power to do, so they showed themselves extremely
Wise and Prudential, in opposing and defeating that part of the Scots
Projection. Seeing should such a Liberty have been either allowed or connived
at in the Subjects of England, much of that Treasure which is employed in their
own Traffic and Commerce, and especially to the Indies, might have been put
into the Scots Bank, upon the Prospect and Motive of the Profit that would
thereby accrue unto them, through the many Privileges and great Immunities, which
were granted unto the Scots Company for and during the Term of 22 Years.

Nor does he show himself very prudent, in Reflecting so severely, as he does,
upon the Behavior of the Scots toward King Charles I. in that the English
themselves were not only as Disloyal as they, but both tempted them unto, and
rewarded them for it. Seeing besides their Troops being paid with English
Money, not a few of their Leading Men bettered their Fortunes, at the expense
of this Kingdom, by their being the Fomenters of the first War, as well as for
being the Instruments of Scotland's joining to support the Parliament against
the King afterward. And whenever it is seasonable, it can be demonstrated
from Authentic Memoirs, and such as deserve to be Credited, that the Scots had
neither Marched into England, Anno 1638, nor in 1643, had they not been
universally Courted, and diverse Persons of the first Rank bribed thereunto. It
being undeniable that the Ship Money and the long Intermission of Parliaments
in England, influenced such as in that Kingdom were styled Patriots (which
whether they were or not I do not enquire) to tempt and draw in the Scots to
that bloody and infamous War, whereas without Encouragements, that I am not
willing to Name from them, the Scots would have upon no Resentments of their
own have run into it, how Bigoted soever some of their Clergy might at that
time have been. And as the Rebellious part fell equally to the share of both
the Nations, so the Treacherous share both toward God and Man does
distinguingly affect England, in that instead of making that King a Glorious
Prince, as they both Swore and Stipulated, provided those things were redressed
which had been complained of as amiss in the Administration, they not only
rejected the Concessions which he made* that were more than a wise People would
have demanded, but they Murdered him. Neither was the Number of those in
England, who persever'd in their Allegiance to that King, and suffered with him
and for him, greater and more numerous, in proportion to the People of the one
Kingdom and the other; then they were, who asserted his Interest in Scotland to
their Ruin. Nor can I imagine for what End, that Author recalls those things
(which ought to be for ever forgotten) in such approbrious and aspersive Terms,
unless it be to fasten an Ignominy and a Reproach upon what has been since
transacted against another Prince, though not carried to the height of the
Original.

Yea, were not that Author prodigiously silly, and altogether unfit for the
Province which he undertook, he would not upbraid him whom he pretends to
Answer, for having showed both Vanity and want of Judgment, because of his
having only said, That Scotland turned the Balance in the late Revolution.
Whereas it is as Demonstrable as any Problem in Euclid, that if the Kingdom of
Scotland had Unanimously Declared against the Abdication (considering the many
thousands in England, who in the justifying thereof would have been ready to
have seconded them) but that both the War in Ireland and that upon the
Continent, would have been carried on with more difficulty than they were, and
probably have terminated more unfortunately, and with less honor, than they
did. Nor is it to be thought impossible, but that upon such a Declaration, the
Scots might have obtained, those Terms with reference to their Laws, Liberties,
Privileges and Religion from King James, and those so secured from Repeal and
Alteration, as that they might have been as happy as either at present they
are, or have reason to hope to be hereafter. For however impossible it was, as
our Author rightly accounts it, for the Scots to have remained Neutral at the
time of the Revolution, considering the Party within their Bowels, that was
headed by Dundee; yet all Men who have not lost their Understandings, must
needs acknowledge, that they might at that juncture have taken other Measures
than they did.

Nor can this Writer be any ways thought a Politician, who seeks to represent
it as a thing too ridiculous to be imagined, That England could be rendered
obnoxious to Dangers, through the Scots running into a Conjunction with France.
For though I do esteem him a very ill Man that wishes it; yet I cannot avoid
reckoning him strangely unacquainted with the State and Balance of Europe,
that does not foresee, how mischievous the Union of these two Nations together
might prove to this Kingdom, notwithstanding both its own great Opulency and
Power, and its having the Dutch for its Allies. Of whose wonderful Friendship
our East India Company has had a late Experiment, through the Holanders both
supplanting them in effect in their whole East India Trade, and in the getting
them to be disgraceful Insulted by the Ministers and Officers of the Mogul.
For whereas that Monarch being provoked by the Hostilities of European Pirates,
would admit no Europeans to Traffic in his Dominions, without their becoming
obliged to cover all his Ships and those of Subjects from those Robbers: The
Dutch in the virtue of Bribes seasonably bestowed, have procured the protection
of the vast Ocean Southward of Surat to be devolved upon the English, (the
performance whereof is altogether impracticable, especially if the Suborners
thereunto, should not only Countenance the Piracy of others, but think it
convenient in order and subserviency to their Interest to practice it on these
Seas themselves) while the whole which the Dutch have thought fit to charge
themselves with, is to protect the Commerce to Mocca, in the Undertaking
whereof, they have also a Prospect of acquiring other advantages over the
English. But to return to the Author of whose Performances I have been
suggesting my Thoughts. Would either my Temper, or my Principles, allow me to
judge of another's Desires by Consequences deducible from hasty and unwary
Expressions, I should be apt to suspect, that the Gentleman would be glad to
see the Experiment of the one and the other that have been mentioned. Whereas I
do heartily pray, that neither the Scots may be so Traitorous as to be guilty
of the first; not the English brought into the Circumstances of being exposed
to the trial of the second.

All that I shall further subjoyn for preparing the Reader to the perusal of
the following Discourse, is briefly to let him know, that I do reckon what will
be there met with, to be no less either Needful or Seasonable, in case the
Scots have forsaken Darien, than if they had continued still in the possession
thereof; or after their having once Abandoned it, had again Re-possess'd it. In
that my business is to Justify and Vindicate the Legality of their Design and
Attempt to Settle there, abstracting from the consideration whether their
Undertaking might be attended with Success or Disappointment. And if what I
have represented and offered on that Head, be Pertinent and Effectual for the
Proving and Establishing of what it is alleged and adduc'd for, it will not
only render their Condition the more Compassionable, on the supposal of their
having been unfortunate; but it will both make their present Clamours and
Resentments for their Loss, Calamity and Disgrace, the less Surprising and the
more Pardonable, provided they carry them no farther, than what is consistent
with their Fealty and Allegiance; and will show the unkindness and neglect of
those to have been the greater, whether in the giving them Opposition, or in
the refusing them Assistance, whose Favor and Aid they might, on many
accounts, have reasonably relied upon with respect to the being Countenanced
and Supported. Not to add, that some will find themselves extremely mistaken in
their Politics, and perceive their having been misled into wrong Measures; if
the Intelligence should prove true, which diverse have received, of the
Spaniards having accepted the Naval Assistance of the French, for Driving the
Scots out of Darien, in case they be still there, and on the supposal of their
having left it, for the Covering all those Parts of America, over which the
Catholic King pretends a Sovereignty, though Unoccupied by any of his Subjects,
from attempts of that Nature upon them for the future by any of the British
Nations, or the Dominions thereunto belonging. Seeing that as Spains complying
to receive the Aid of the Marine Power of France, must argue such an entireness
of Friendship, and firmness of Confidence between them, as can neither be
comfortable nor safe to several Principalities and States in Europe; so besides
the Inconveniences and Damages which may thereupon befall other of His
Majesty's Kingdoms, as well as Scotland; it is not impossible, but that
congruously as well as consequentially to this, the Crown of Spain may be
willing to admit of the Conjunction, Aid, and Assistance, of the French in the
Loan of their Land Forces, for the compassing Ends on the Continent of Europe,
which neither We nor the Dutch will find our Interest and Benefit in. However,
if what I have said and argued in the ensuing Sheets, be pertinently adapted
unto the Question that is Debated, and demonstrative of the Legality and
Justice of the Fact, which I have espoused the defending of; the Scots will
thereby be not only Vindicated from the Clamours that have been raised against
them for what they have done; but they will be also covered from aspersions for
the future of acting invasively upon the Rights, and from being injurious to
any, should they on the supposition of having abandoned that Place, and the
renouncing of all thoughts of re-establishing themselves again in it, apply
their utmost Efforts and Endeavors to the obtaining a Settlement in some other
American Territory, where nothing else can be objected against their Liberty
and Right of Planting, than what having been alleged against their Sitting
down on the Isthmus of Darien, will be found to be impartially examined, and
abundantly refuted, and that with an exact observance of all the Rules of
Modesty, Decency, and good Manners, wherein the Author of the Defense of the
Scots Settlement at Darien is said to have been deficient. Adieu.

The Errata being but few, and such as any Reader may both discern and correct;
the Author has not thought it needful to make a Collection of them.

The Application of the Scots to FOREIGN TRADE, Commended and Encouraged:
And their late Attempt to have Settled at Darien, fully Vindicated from all
that has been Excepted against it.
THE Humane Race being the alone and the only Rank and Species of the whole
Sublunary Creation, that is furnished and endowed with Intellectual Faculties
and Corporeal Organs, by which they stand adapted and qualified for a Mutual
Communication of their several and respective Conceptions and Thoughts; and
thereupon through their very Frame and Constitution rendered Sociable with, and
under all Deficiencies, Exigencies and Infirmities assistant and relieful unto
one an other. The great and wise Creator, who has produced them, enriched and
adorned them with those advantages, and who governs them in proportion to
their Natural aptitudes and capacities, has consequentially thereunto, not
only made several Acts, Offices and Performances, to be, by his engraven, and
by his revealed Laws, the indispensible Duties of men toward each other; and
that both as they stand considered individually and apart, and as they become
assembled, and united into, and do constitute Societies: but he has also in
his admirable Wisdom, so Formed this Terraqueous Globe, and the whole
Elementary World, that by means of the variety and difference of Natural, and
Artificial productions, in suitableness to the distinction and diversity of
Climates and Territories, there should be as well a kind of necessity imposed
upon, as an encouragement given unto all Nations, for the cultivating and
promoting a Correspondence together.

And though the chief and great Ends which the Universal and Sovereign Ruler
designeth, through and by the means of an Intercourse between and amongst people
of all Nations, and which accordingly he makes the pursuing of, to be the
principal part of our Duty, be exceedingly Different from, and are incomparably
more Noble, and Sublime as well as more Subservient, both to his own Glory, and
to the mutual Benefits, which should be Prosecuted, and are attainable, by a
free and unlimited Correspondence, than those, which the generality of men, do
mainly propose, and ultimately acquiesce in; Yet we are not in our desires and
endeavors after Communication and Commerce with others, so precluded from
Acting under the Prospect and Influence of Secular Advantages, in Subordination
to higher aims and Seize; but that it is both Lawful in it self, and may
be Expedient, with respect to the Safety and Prosperity of those Regions, and
Dominions, and political Communities, where we are brought forth, do inhabit,
and into which we are Incorporated, to seek, and pursue such an acquisition of
Opulency and wealth thereby, as may as well advance the respective Nations and
Societies unto which we belong, above the Contempt, and prove Serviceable to
the covering them from the Insults of Neighboring Kingdoms and States, as
recompense and reward the Labors, hazards and expenses of those, who do either
personally, or otherwise engage, associate and venture in the beginning,
promoting and defending a Correspondence and Commerce of this Nature.

For though there have been, and still are here and there, a few that being
formed ex meliore luto, and who through having something distinguishing and
singular in their mechanical Frame, Or through the being imbued with more exalted
and generous Principles either of Nature or of Grace, then it is the Lot and
Portion of many any where to be, have upon Philosophical or upon Religious
motives, become Travelers, and Voyagers into far distant and remote Countries;
yet as the ends under the view, and for the compassing whereof, they have
heretofore undergone, and do hitherto subject themselves to the toil, cost and
dangers, which unavoidably attend and accompany such undertakings, are either
too speculative, and too much abstracted from things and matters, that affect
our Senses, and are beneficent, and gratifying to the Animal life; or are of
too elevated, spiritual and Celestial a Nature and Consideration, to make an
impression upon, and to bias and govern any Large Number of those of great
Political Bodies, and National Societies; So the Embarking thereinto, upon the
forementioned single inducements and prospects, by some Individuals, whose
either natural Genius, or their improvements in Divine Knowledge, and the being
furnished with more Christian zeal, and Supernatural grace, than most have
arrived unto, or are under the power of, does neither amount nor bear
proportion to the Notion and Idea, which an Universal Correspondence between
and amongst those of all Regions signifies and imports. Nor will it answer the
Exigencies and Necessities, which the People of every Nation are less or more
under, of having their Superfluities Exported and of gaining those things to be
Imported, which they do either wholly, or to very prejudicial Measures and
Degrees, want and stand in need of.

So that it is not more obvious, than it may be easily accounted for, how a
Correspondence of this or that State or Kingdom, with other Nations and
Dominions, especially when far distant, and widely disjoined from each other,
comes to be so little minded and practiced, save in order unto, conjunction
with, and in Subserviency to Traffic and Mercantile Commerce. Nor do
remarkable Numbers of any people much love to Travel, or commonly do, out of
their own Native Regions and Territories, though but into Neighboring and
adjoining Provinces, which may be effected with great Safety, and at little
expense, unless upon views either of Subsisting better there, than they did at
home, or of qualifying themselves through an acquisition of Arts and Sciences, or
by the procuring Treasure, and Wealth, by means whereof, they may afterward
make a better Figure, and live more comfortably and opulently in their own
Countries, than they were otherwise likely to have done.

And whosoever allows himself liberty, and vouchsafes to take the pains, of
observing the present State and Balance of Europe, with the various and
different conditions of the several Territories, Jurisdictions and Dominions
thereof, will soon discern and understand, why every People whose Country lies
situated, and whose either Soil or Industry may furnish them with Materials for
Trade, should account it their Interest and make it the Scope and Design of
their Skill and Labor, to cultivate and pursue Navigation and Foreign
Traffic; seeing the great Advantage, whether with respect to Power or to
Wealth, which this or that European Country and Nation have above and beyond
others, is mostly, if not altogether, owing and ascribable unto the extent and
measure of their Navigation and Traffic. For as it is principally this that
attracteth and draws large swarms of Industrious people to Countries and
Territories, where the Natives and such as did Inhabit there before, were but
few; so in proportion to the increase of people, and their application to
Commerce, there do necessarily ensue Enlargement of Agriculture, Augmentation
of Manufacture, the venting of Natural as well as of Artificial productions,
and thereby a growth in Wealth and Treasure, and consequently thereunto, an
advancement in the value and price of Lands.

But because the main design, as well as the necessary brevity of this
Discourse, will not allow place nor room, for the arguing of this according to
the worth, and importance of the Subject, I shall therefore choose at once,
both to prove and to illustrate it from and by uncontrollable matter of Fact.
Nor have we occasion to go far for a convincing Instance and Evidence of it:
Forasmuch as we need no other demonstration of the many Benefits that Naturally
result from Trade, than to consider how our Neighbors, the Dutch, are hereby
become Populous, Wealthy and Powerful. It being apparent, beyond possibility of
being rationally denied, or contradicted, that notwithstanding the
Unhealthfulness of their Air, the Brackishness of their Waters, the Badness of
their Ports, the Scarcity of their Natural Productions, the Narrowness of their
Territories, and the vast Expense, which they are indispensibly obliged unto,
for the covering and defending themselves, and their Country from the
Inundations of the Sea; yet that upon the motive and encouragement of the
Profits and Advantages arising by Trade, they have drawn many of the most
Laborious and Ingenious people of all Neighboring Countries into their
Provinces; so that from a scanty number of Original Natives, and primitive
Inhabitants, they are increased into such a Multitude, that no Nation without
Traffic, and that is confined to there narrow dimensions of Lands and
Territories, makes an approach unto, and much less equalleth. And all these by
accruements from Navigation and Commerce, are not only by reason of their
Riches and Wealth, become the objects of the envy of such as live about them;
but the Heads, Governors and Supreme Rulers of that Republic, are risen from
Poor Weak Supplicant and Despised States, to the making of such a Figure in the
World, that fully and amply answers the Lofty Title, which they have assumed
unto themselves, of High and Mighty.

Nor is it unworthy of remark, that the English, whose Genius disposes and
inclines them, and whose Situation, Ports, Natural Productions, and
Manufactures, give them incomparable Advantages for Foreign Traffic and
Commerce, beyond what the Hollanders, with respect to all and every one of
these recited particulars are possessed of, and furnished with, and that the
said English have for above a Century of Years applied themselves unto Trade,
with Industry, Zeal, and Success, beyond what most of their European Neighbors
can pretend to have done; yet even They are greatly exceeded by the Dutch
(allowing for the dimensions of their Territories) both in Number of People,
and in the Opulency of Private Dealers, as well as of their States. And this
merely by a more intense, and Universal Cultivation of Commerce, and by the
Wise conduct of their Government in the making the Export and Import of their
Goods, and Commodities Moderate and Easy, under all the Exigencies and
Necessities of the State, and a proportionable Imposition upon, and Exaction
from the Subject. For whereas the Dutch (as is well observed by that Excellent
and Sagacious Author of an Essay upon ways and Means) having in all their
Provinces only about Eight Millions of Acres, Essay upon the probable methods
of making a people ^ainers in the balance of Trade. p. 37.
do entertain, employ, and comfortably Subsist near three Millions of People,
yet England notwithstanding all the forementioned Advantages, for Traffic
beyond and above them, and its having in Land more than Thirty Nine Millions of
Acres, is not reckoned to have above Six Millions of People, which upon a
balance, and an adjustment of our extent of Ground and theirs, makes them to
exceed us more than in a Moiety of Inhabitants.

And as they have in the virtue of, Results from, and natural Consequences upon
there application unto, and Cultivation of Trade, attained unto a Naval
strength, which makes them Superior in Marine Power to most Nations, and Rival
Competitors with all for the Sovereignty of the Seas; so they are grown able
through the Treasure, which they have acquired by Traffic and Commerce, to
procure, raise, and muster, such Numerous Forces, out of distant, as well as
out of adjoining Countries (where the want and poverty not only of Subjects,
but of Princes tempts the Latter upon the bait and bribe of Pensions, to
grant and afford them what proportion of Troops they do require, and compels
the former upon the hopes of a Pay, that will hardly yield them Food, to be
willing, and ready to serve under their Banner) as thereby to be in a Condition
to undertake, carry on, and manage both Offensive and Defensive Wars against
the greatest Potentates, and the Powerfullest Nations in Europe. For as it is
with great Judgment, and an accurate regard to Truth, observed by the most
Ingenious Author of an Essay, upon ways and means, that no Sums dug out of
Mines, bear any proportion with what may be made to rise, by the Labor and
Traffic of a Trading and Industrious people: So it is no less Morally and
Politically certain, than any Problem in Euclid is Mathematically, that in
proportion to the Riches and Treasures which a people is possessed of, they may
be powerful (if they please) by Land as well as by Sea. Whereas such Nations,
who do either because of their distance from Navigable Waters stand
Incapacitated and Disabled for all Maritime Traffic, or who by reason of their
Carelessness, and Sloth, do not Apply themselves unto it, with that Industry
which they should, are notwithstanding their larger, as well as their equal
extent of Territories, with them whom we have mentioned, not only unable to
support and sustain a full complement of People, in proportion to the
dimensions of their Land, but though possibly through the Largeness of their
Ground, they be overstockt with Inhabitants, beyond what some Trading Countries
are, nevertheless they are incapable of Maintaining even a Land War (especially
if it be offensive) for so long a time, and with so much Reputation and Honor,
as a Kingdom or State addicted unto Traffic and Commerce, are experimentally
found to be in a condition to do. Whereof I need not assign Instances, there
being several large Dominions, and considerable Republics in Europe, which are
undeniable and convincing proofs of it, and particularly even Germany, as well
as Switzerland: who notwithstanding their great Numbers both of Men and of
Disciplined Troops, and their inclination unto, and Bravour in War, yet through
their being straightened and scanted in Money, which is a Natural and unavoidable
Consequence of their Want of Traffic, they are neither in a condition to bring
such Numerous Armies into the Field, nor for any long time to Maintain them
there, as such Nations who are stored with Treasure, as the result effect and
produce of Trade, easily may and often do.

But that which in a most especial manner, should awaken and oblige every
Nation, that lies Situated, and is provided with Necessaries and conveniences
for Trade, to undertake, cultivate and promote it, is seriously to weigh and
consider, what our Neighbors who have commodious Ports for Navigation, and
Natural and Artificial Productions, to be both the Source Original and
Foundation, and the Nerves and Supports of it, have been of late and are still
industriously doing. Namely that the acquisition and enlargement of Trade, is
the great Study and endeavors of most Princes and States, the adjacency of
whose Territories to the Sea, the growth of their Soil, and the Manufactures of
their Subjects do in any measure make it practicable, and give hopes of
succeeding and prospering in it. Particularly that Powerful and wise Monarch of
France, no less to his own Glory than the Benefit of his Dominions, makes it
the chief business of his Royal care and Authority, to encourage advance and
protect it. Though of all Potentates and people whatsoever, the French King and
his Subjects are in the best condition to subsist comfortably without it. And
that by reason of their enjoying not only within themselves and at home, all
things that are absolutely Necessary and Requisite for the pleasure, as well as
for the Sustentation of life, but because of their having so many and such
Valuable Superfluities, which others do Export from them, for which they do
both furnish them in way of Exchange, with those few conveniences, they do
want, and do enrich them with Treasure, by paying them in Gold and Silver, for
most part of the Goods and Commodities that they purchase of, and import into
their own Countries from them.

And indeed what that Prince, has effected and done within the compass of a
few years, and the narrow Circle of his own Reign, in the encouraging and
promoting Manufactures at Home, the extending and enlarging Traffic into all
Countries, though at never so great a distance Abroad, notwithstanding the
Natural aversion, as well as the long contracted indisposition of his people
thereunto, through Humor, Genius and Custom, and his having raised and furnished
himself with a Naval Power, which for Number and Strength of Ships, is not only
in a Condition to protect his Commerce, and defend his Kingdom against
Invasions by Sea; but to dispute the very Dominion of the Ocean with those, who
have long laid claim unto, and honorably maintained it; I say that the great
encouragement which he has given, and the stupendous advancement that he has
made in all these, do cloth and adorn him with greater Honor while he lives,
and will transmit his Name hereafter to Posterity, with a more dazzling Luster
and Splendor, than either all his Victories and Conquests heretofore, or his
late sustaining so long a War, without any considerable Mortification and
disgrace to himself, or momentons prejudice or damage to his People. And
whosoever will give themselves leave to think, and are withal qualified to
penetrate into the Springs, Reasons, and proper causes of Matters and Affairs
of this nature, will easily find and perceive, that there is nothing has so
much laid the Foundation of his vast Power and Strength of Military Forces at
Land, and of his Ability to maintain and support them, without either their
Deserting or their Mutinying through want of Food, Raiment and Pay; and of all
the Successes which he has attained unto by means of their Bravour and
Discipline, as his Manufactures at home, and his Commerce abroad have done,
from and by which most of that great Wealth and Treasure has flowed in to him,
in the Virtue whereof these things became practicable and have been
accomplished.

For I do reckon there is nothing more demonstrable, than that the French King
is chiefly indebted to the Profits and Emoluments, which have arisen by
Manufacture and Trade, for all that during the late War he has been enabled to
do both offensively and defensively. And while others do amuse and triflingly
employ themselves, and impertinently and uselessly squander away their time, in
loading their Memories with naked and insignificant accounts and Memoirs of the
Military Facts of that Monarch, and of those Confederated against him, which
were transacted here and there, during the late bloody expensive and tedious
War: I am not ashamed to declare my self one, who am rather willing to enquire
into, represent and to recommend, the Springs, Originals and Foundations, upon
which that Potentate was in a condition to support and manage so long a War,
with so much Reputation to himself, and safety to his Territories and People.
And I do presume to affirm, that the main Sources and fundamental means hereof,
were his former acquisition of Wealth, and a continued accession and accruement
of new Treasure by Manufacture and Trade. It being thereby alone, that so large
a Quota and Portion of the Gold and Silver dug out of the Spanish Mines of
America, and of what of the former is gathered in Africa, has either by
shorter and more expeditious steps, or after longer and wider strides flowed
into, France, and thereupon in the Course of Circulation there, has come at
last to be so plentifully lodged in that Princes Exchequer. So that it is into
Trade and the product thereof, that we are principally to resolve the French
King's having been not only able during the last War, to cover and protect
himself from dishonor, and his Kingdom from Ravage and Impoverishment, by the
irruption of the Troops of the Allies into his Provinces, their destruction of
his Cities and Towns, or the pillaging of his Subjects to a measure and degree,
that countervailed the attempting, and executing any thing of that kind, but
his having been victorious in several Battles, successful in the Conquest of
diverse strong Holds and Fortifyed places, that were thought by some to be
impregnable; and the rendering himself Master of large and rich Provinces, whose
Situation and Remoteness, were thought Sufficient to have covered them, from
being insulted, and much more to have made it impossible to have subdued them,
and all this against such a plurality of Confederate Allies, and the greatest,
strongest, most numerous and best disciplined united Forces that were ever
known in this part of the World, to have cemented and Joined against One Prince
and single Kingdom.

Now I have the more particularly mentioned this, not that any should thereby
be provoked to complain of, or to blame that Monarch because of his employing
his Princely solicitude for, and exercising his Royal Authority over his
People, in commanding as well as encouraging their application unto Manufacture
and Trade; but that his example may be both a Pattern and a motive unto every
Nation to enter upon, and, to pursue the same ways and methods, that is any
wise qualified for, and capable of doing it. And especially that they would
engage therein with zeal and Industry, unto whom upon the advantages, which
will redound and accrue to him, through his Subjects improving in Manufactures,
and in the enlargement and increase of their Traffic, he may be reason of his
Neighborhood become hereafter a more dreadful Enemy than ever he yet was. For
though neither our uneasiness, upon the aforementioned Account for the present,
nor our too Just fears of what may overtake and befall us in time to come, can
Justify either our being offended with, or our speaking undecently of the
French King, but will only betray and discover our Folly, Ill nature and want
of Breeding; yet it will both become the Wisdom, and prove the Interest of the
People of England whom He is about Rivalling in Commerce, as well as in Naval
strength, to make it more their care and endeavors to exceed him in each of
those. And it is and will be every day more and more the great concern of the
Scots, to emulate and imitate him in these particulars, as far and as much as
they can. And were He at present in actual Hostility with us, as who knows how
soon he may be, yet fas est ab host doceri, it is both Lawful and commendable
to submit to learn of an Enemy, and to suffer our selves to be taught by him.

Nor can it Justly administer offense to any honest and prudent Englishman, if
I take the Liberty hereupon to subjoyn in a few words, that the more the French
do cultivate and promote Manufacture and Traffic, for which neither his
Majesty nor the Parliament of England can righteously quarrel with them, nor
can attempt to disturb, or to obstruct them in their Commerce without some
previous Infraction on their part of the Treaty of Reswick: The more it should
be the Princely care of the King of Great Britain, and the sedulous and
prudential Study and endeavor of an English Parliament and People, that the
Scots, who being under the same Prince, that they are, and thereupon so
Confederated and linked together, as to have the same Friends and Enemies, may
both have the Advice, Council, and Countenance of England, to encourage them
unto, and the Aid and Assistance of their Treasure, and Strength and Power to
uphold and protect them in Trade. For seeing Traffic is the Spring and
Fountain of Wealth, and that Nations increase in Riches in proportion to the
Kind and Degrees of their Manufacture, and the Quality and Extent of their
Commerce; It naturally follows that it is both the Interest and Duty of these
Kingdoms mutually to further, and support one another, who being Subjects under
one and the same Sovereign, are knit and united together by a stronger Cement,
and by more firm and indissoluble Ties, than Countries under distinct and
different Princes, are capable of being made by Alliances and Leagues, how
publicly soever contracted and stipulated, and solemnly ratified and
confirmed. Nor will it I suppose be denied, but that according to the Share
which England and Scotland shall acquire and obtain of the Trade of the World,
the Less will fall to the Portion of the French, and the Less vent they will
have, as well every where for their own Natural and Artificial productions, as
for what they do Import from Foreign and remote places.

Nor can it be reasonably contradicted, but that Scotland has been exposed and
stood liable to many Inconveniences and Prejudices by it is having so long and
greatly neglected Manufacture and Trade, as it has imprudently and supinely
done. And had not they of that Nation, given undeniable proofs in diverse other
ways and Instances of their being a Sagacious and Wise, and a Laborious and
Industrious people; such of some other Kingdoms who assume a great
Licentiousness in rallying upon the defects and imperfections of those of other
Countries, than their own, might as Justly reflect upon the Laziness of the
Scots, and their deficiency in Prudence, and good Sense, as they do with
insolence and unmannerliness enough, upbraid them with their Poverty. But as
this is a very tender Subject, I shall handle it with such gentleness, that
none of the Kingdom of Scotland, shall have cause to be offended: For as much
as my only design herein is, to represent the Benefits which will arise to
them, by their present undertaking, and to commend their engaging, as well as
to encourage their persevering in it, but not to reflect with any Severity upon
their omissions heretofore in this matter.

And I suppose it will be readily acknowleged, by all Men that are capable of
thinking accurately, and to useful purposes, that it is not the Largeness of
Territory, that makes a Country Strong and Powerful, but the great and
plentiful Number of People, and consequently that the neglecting of such means
and Methods, as would be effectual motives to prevail upon such as are Born and
Bred in a Nation to continue in it, or to go no where but in prospect of, and
in Subserviency unto the prosperity of their Native Land, must unavoidably
cause a Nation to be Weak, notwithstanding the vast Multitudes, that may have
been Born, and for some years brought up in it; which I presume will be
confessed to have been hitherto the case of the Kingdom of Scotland, in that so
large Numbers of people of great Ingenuity of mind, and of bodily strength and
agility, equal to those of any Country about them, have through the
difficulties they were under of living comfortably at home, which proceeded
from Neglect and want of Manufacture and Trade, been Necessitated, as well as
Tempted, to seek their Fortunes, and to endeavor to gain a livelihood
elsewhere.

Whereunto may be added, That as it is not merely because of the having a great
Number of People, that a Nation is rendered Prosperous and Happy, but through the
having them usefully employed, which it is impossible they should be, without
Manufacture and Traffic, and therefore that where there is none or very little
Trade, a Nation is even made Obnoxious, and does become liable to Calamities
and Desolations, by the greater Complement and Number it has of Inhabitants.
Seeing in such years as are not Seasonable for Grain, wherein that of the Poet
obtains of Spem mentita seges, the Corn does not answer the hope and
expectation of the Husbandman; The greater that the Number of the People is,
they must be subject the more to Famine, and Multitudes of them exposed to
Starve. Whereof there needs no other proof, than what that Country has for
these two or three last years afforded us. For though it is by reason of Trade,
being become more diffused and universal in the World, than it Anciently was,
by means whereof the Indigency of one Country, is supplied out of the Abundance
and Plenty of another, that Famines of late Ages are neither so frequent nor so
Fatal as of Old they used to be; yet in proportion to the Scarcity and Want
that there is of Money in any Nation, which must necessarily be answerable to
the littleness of their Manufactures, and the meanness of their Commerce,
Famines will both fall out the oftener there, and prove the more destructive.
Seeing by the same reason, that the Poor in any Country, are in a time of
scarcity more Obnoxious to Starving, than such as are Rich: A Nation that is
Necessitous must be more exposed and subject to Famines and to Devastations by
them, than Kingdoms and Provinces which are Wealthy and Opulent stand liable
unto.

Yea where Trade is not encouraged and promoted, even Agriculture it self will
be much neglected, though it be the chief, if not the only means, whereby the
Inhabitants do Subsist. Because that as through the Scarcity of Money, and the
Poverty thereunto annexed, which as I have often intimated, will always both
accompany, and be proportionable to the want of Manufacture and Commerce, there
will never be a sufficient Complement of People to Cultivate all the Ground,
that is capable of being Manured, but that much of it must be left Barren: So
the price of Grain and of Fatted Cattle, being generally in proportion to the
Wealth, and Treasure that a Nation is possessed of, the Rates of those will run
too low, for Husbandmen to be encouraged and enabled, to make such improvements
even of their Agriculted Lands, as they might by Expense upon them be brought
unto. Which brief hint and suggestion, I do leave and referr unto the
consideration of those who do live in Scotland, who must know better than I
pretend to do, how little their best Lands are improved to what they are
capable of being, and how much Ground does lie wholly barren, by reason of the
want of a sufficient Number of People, and of the deficiency in Riches of those
the Nation is stockt with, to take it in and cultivate it.

Whereas it is obvious what great enlargements are made in the Agriculture, and
Pasturage of England beyond what formerly was, and to what high Prizes in
comparison of that which they bore before, Corn and Cattle are advanced, since
the Application of the English to Trade. Nor is it to be doubted, but that as
they extend their Traffic, and become thereby farther enriched, there will be
a proportionable progress made in the taking in and rendering those Lands
fertile which remain hitherto Barren, and in the increase of the Price of those
which are already cultivated. Nor may it be amiss under this head further to
represent, that it is because of the Scots having neglected Manufactture and
Trade, that the general Rental of that Kingdom, and the Value of Lands when
Farmed, are even for the Dmiension of Territory and Ground, so much
Disproportionable unto, and below what they are in England and Holland. Nor can
any Mathematical proposition be more evident and certain, upon the indubitable
principles of that Science, than it is sure and unquestionable both from Moral
Arguments and Experience, that the current Worth of Land to be Let will be
always according to the Measure of Manufacture and Trade, and in proportion to
the Riches which a Nation by that means becomes possessed of. In confirmation
whereof, it may not be unseasonable to take notice, how that answerably to
England's enlarging its Manufacture, and extending its Trade, the value of
Lands has in equality thereunto gradually risen and swelled. So that from
Twelve years purchase, which was the highest that Land went at about the middle
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when this Nation began first to apply it self
considerably to Commerce, it was risen and advanced some time ago to Twenty
Years Purchase, and in several places of the Kingdom to more. Essay upon
probable Methods of making a people gainers in the Balance of Trade. p. 77.
For as the Admirable Author of an Essay on Ways and Means does most
pertinently observe, and confidently affirm, That there are undeniable reasons
to be given, that the general Rental of England did not in the year 1600 exceed
Six Millions per annum, but that through the help of that Wealth, which had
flowed into the Kingdom by Foreign Trade, it had risen before the commencement
of the late War, to Fourteen Millions Yearly; So none will have the Effrontery
to gainsay, but that the Rental of England, was the year 1600 greatly increased
beyond, what it had been about half a Century before. Which the more it is
seriously weighed, and duly pondred by the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, it
will not only both Justify their Wisdom in procuring an Act of Parliament, for
Trading to Africa and the Indies, and in their having joined so freely, and
contributed so Liberally, for the forming a Stock, and raising a Treasure, that
may be sufficient as well to Uphold, and Promote as to Begin it, but it may
also animate their Zeal, and raise their Courage for the Maintaining and
Protecting of it.

But to shut up this particular, it is to be ascribed to the neglect of Trade,
and their falling below their Neighbors in Riches and Treasure, which is the
Natural effect of that Omission, that Scotland is not only so weak as it is in
a Naval Strength, notwithstanding the variety, goodness and convenience of its
Ports, for the Ocean and Mediterranean, as well as for the Narrow Seas, and the
Baltic, but that the Nation does make so mean and inconsiderable a Figure in
Europe, and that the Scots Nobility and Gentry, who for their Natural and
acquired accomplishments do equal most of any Country that are of their Rank
and Quality, and who for Bravour are Universally acknowledged to Come behind
few or none, are nevertheless so little Valued and Caressed by Princes, and in
Courts, by whom and where persons are chiefly esteemed, according to their
weight in the balance of an Exchequer, and in proportion to their Rental and
Capital.

But the Kingdom of Scotland being at last willing and desirous to redeem it
self from the Opprobry and Reproach, unto which it has so long stood exposed
among its Neighbors, for the having either through Supineness or Pride,
neglected the promoting and pursuing Manufacture and Trade, and being now
Embarked in an Undertaking, that will relieve that Nation against, and rescue
it from the Inconveniences and Damages, which have ensued upon, and
accompanied their Omission of Commerce, it may not be here improper to
represent in a few words the several advantages that Scotland is possessed of,
and does enjoy in equality with most Countries, and above diverse, for its being
qualified and enabled to succeed and prosper in this Design. For the main and
great things that are Antecedently needful, and prerequired, in order to a
peoples engaging in Manufacture at home, and Commerce abroad, being large
Numbers of Men and Women, and a Soil producing variety and plenty of useful
Commodities, and convenient Ports for the Exportation of their own Commodities,
and the Importation of such goods from Foreign parts, as they shall have either
occasion to consume amongst themselves, or which by carrying them forth again,
they can dispose of and vend else where; there are few Nations in Europe, that
are better furnished and accommodated with all those advantages, helps and
Succors than Scotland is. Seeing besides its having diverse Harbors, and those
both safe and conveniently Situated, for Sailing to and from the Eastern,
Southern and Western parts of the World; It has likewise diverse Natural
Productions, and may have a sufficient plenty of Artifici^l, to give an
Original unto, and be both a Foundation and Nourishment for Trade: Nor will any
deny but that it actually does, or may at least speedily so abound with People,
as to yield and afford hands enough for Manufacture and Traffic.

For though I do acknowledge, that Gold and Silver with which the Scots, may
probably be but indifferently and scantily furnished (whereof nevertheless they
may in time by this means acquire more) be the measure of Trade; yet nothing is
more certain, than that the Natural and Artificial Products of a Country are
the Spring and Source of it; and that the Nerves and Sinews thereof are a
Multiplicity of Hands properly and industriously employed. And with these
Scotland does so abound, that many have not only been, and still are through want
of business and labor whereunto to apply themselves, an useless and a grievous
Burden to their Native Country: but great Numbers have by their Necessities
been constrained either to Transport themselves into the Colonies and
Plantations of other Nations, or to serve Foreign Princes and States in the
Wars, which they have been carrying on against one another, in neither of which
ways, has any Benefit accrued to the Kingdom of Scotland, nor is it possible
that it should, unless now and then casually and by accident. But those
Colonies, where they have planted, do carry away and engross the Gains of their
Industry: And the Potentates under whose Banners they bear Arms, do reap the
Glory of their Bravour, and do become possessed of those acquisitions of Towns
and Provinces, which they purchase at the expense of their Blood and Lives,

And may I be permitted, without giving offense, to add, That through the latter
of these Methods, Scotland has had the Misfortune, to have more Thousands of
lusty and valiant Men killed and destroyed in Wars, wherein that Kingdom had no
National concern, that if they had been employed in the gentle and peaceable
Arts of Manufacture and Trade, would have been sufficient to have rendered it a
powerful and opulent Nation. Yea, such has been the guilt, as well as the
unhappiness, of those, who through want of Business, to give them a Subsistence
and Livelihood at Home, have betaken themselves to the carrying Arms under
Foreign Rulers and Potentates; that they have not only been frequently engaged
in the killing of others, and exposed to be killed themselves, when and where
the alone cause of the War, has too often been m^erly, either the
Covetousness, Pride and Ambition of the Aggressors, or the Fraudulencies, and
Injustices of the Aggressed: But, that to the disgrace of the Christian
Religion, and the infamy of their Country, they have, many times, in Opposite
and Hostile Brigades and Battalions, been found Encountering and Slaughtring one
another. So that for the obviating, preventing, and avoiding, that Criminal and
Reproachful Course for the future, if upon no other Prospects and Motives, that
Kingdom ought to apply it self more to Manufacture and Trade than it has
hitherto done.

For which that Nation stands not only exceedingly adapted, by reason both of
the Sagacity of their Nobility and Higher Gentry, for the discerning and
advising unto Means, Ways, and Methods, for the encouraging, increasing, and
maintaining thereof; and of the Mercantile Knowledge, Skill, and Artifice, of
those of the Middle Rank, For adjusting, conducting, and managing, as well what
is to be Fabricked at Home, as what is to be chiefly Regarded and Cultivated
abroad: But especially, because of its having, with respect to the Number of
its People, a vaster Proportion of those that are of the Poorer and Inferior
Sort, than some other Countries are furnished with. Nor is any thing more
demonstrable, than that a multiplicity of Nobility and Gentry, without a very
large Number of Commonalty, and of such as are Necessitous and Indigent to very
considerable measures and degrees, is rather an Obstruction unto, than a
Furtherance of Manufacture and Commerce. Seeing though the former may assist
toward the finding and supplying the Materials, and can alone afford and
advance the Treasure that is necessary to the Managing, Upholding, and the
Enlarging of both; yet it is they of the latter kind that do mainly afford the
Hands, by whose Toil, Labor, and Industry, the Production of the Waters is
gained, the growth of the Land is Fabrick'd and Manufactur'd; and whatsoever
Commodities Colonies and Plantations are capable of yielding, come to be
acquired and improved. For as it is confessed by all, who do exercise their
Thoughts in and about Speculations of this kind. that Multitudes of People are
the most valuable Treasure, as well as the greatest Strength of a Country: So
it is infallibly certain, that the Peasants and ordinary Sort, and such as are
reckoned for the Mobb and Commonalty, provided they be universally and fully
employed, and their Labor and Industry pertinently and usefully applied, are
as serviceable to the Interest of a Community and Republic, and as contributary
to the making a Country Opulent and Wealthy, as those are of any Rank and
Quality whatsoever, if not considerably more. And the more any Nation is
over-stock'd with Poor, it becomes the more signally the Interest of that State
or Kingdom to cultivate Manufacture and Trade, these being the only means of
rendering such steadable to the Commonwealth, who must otherwise be unavoidably
Burdensome. And as Scotland has a large complement and share of very mean and
poor People, that may be made serviceble to the Fabricking Good and Commodities
at Home, the Navigating Ships of Traffic. raising a breed of Seamen for Fleets
of Men of War, and for the Planting of Colonies abroad, and the winning,
extracting, and improving the productions of those Lands and Countries, whither
they are carried, and where they are set'led: So the Scots Peasantry are
accustomed to a Frugal and Parsimonious way of Living; to which those of some
Neighboring Nations, are not, without great difficulty, to be brought, nor
hardly able to bear; which is a farther and a considerable reason, why Scotland
should proceed and persevere in the settling and maintaining a Foreign
Plantation. Nor are they only disposed, as well as capable of living both
healthfully and contentedly upon Viands and Allowances, that would reduce those
of some other Countries, who are as mean as they are, and born as much upon the
Flat, to a weak and languishing, if not to a starving Condition; but they are
by the size and fabric of their Bodies, the Nimbleness and Agility of their
Limbs, and the Natural acuteness of their Understandings, as capable of being
Laborious, Industrious and Ingenious, in whatsoever they are put upon, and made
apply and addict themselves unto, as such of any other Country are.

Finally their great inclination to Marry, because of their Narrow and Frugal
way of Living, and their prolificalness, and aptitude for Generation, and
thereupon, their accustomedness to Increase and Multiply, through the
parsimonious manner, of their Subsisting beyond what is usual in most
Countries, gives another encouragement, as well as administers a further
Inducement; why the Scots should remain steady and unchangable, in their Design
and Undertaking, of establishing Foreign Colonies: Seeing they will upon that
account, and by reason thereof, become the Sooner Peopled, without drawing too
many Swarms from the Hive at home. Of this their needs no other Proof, than
barely to observe, how the Scots in Ireland, from a very inconsiderable Number,
that settled there not long ago, are Multiplied to a very great and large body
of People, whereof that Kingdom receives and enjoys all the Benefits both in
Power and otherwise; and the whole that falls to the share of Scotland, is
merely the Satisfaction and Credit, of having so vast a Colony of their
Countrymen there. And by this blessing and advantage of being more Prolifical
and Fertile, in the Procreating of Children, than those of their strait and
narrow circumstances, are any where else; the Plantation of Calidonia in the
Isthmus of Darien may in a few Years, become equal in Number of People, to some
other Colonies in that part of the World, and Scotland may securely promise to
it self, the escaping of that Mischief, which has befallen the Kingdom of
Spain, in the being almost Depopulated, by the Colonies which it has Planted
in the West Indies. Yea, were there not so much in what I have intimated, as I
do believe there is, for the rendering them suddenly Populous, in any
Plantation, which they shall establish in an entire dependence upon themselves,
and especially Subservient and Conducive to their own Benefit; yet they will
find enough to Transport and Transplant Yearly, into their Plantations without
Draining their Country of its Inhabitants, by merely Inviting and Prevailing
upon such to go thither, whose necessities do either compel them to Travel
abroad, in order to be Soldiers and Servants, in Foreign Countries and
Plantations, or who stand reduced to pinching Wants, if not to be Beggars at
home; which being seconded and accompanied with a thrifty, temperate and
regular Conduct in their Colony, and with the giving due encouragement, through
granting Liberty of Conscience, as well as Secular Privileges both in Scotland
and there, to such strangers as shall come and settle among them, through the
want whereof, Spain is become Dispeopled at home, and their Plantations in
America but slenderly stockt with Inhabitants, they will not only render the
Calidonian Colony, suddenly populous and Flourishing, but they will draw more
people into Scotland it self, than it now has, or can at any time hereafter,
under all the advantages of Commerce an Traffic, be well able to bear. Whereof
England as well as Holland, are evident examples and demonstrative Proofs,
being since their respective and several Plantations, in the East and West
Indies, mightily increased in the Number of their Inhabitants, notwithstanding
the vast Shoals of People, that have from year to year been Transplanted into
those Colonies: For as the incomparable Author of an Essay upon Ways and Means,
does assure us that England since the year 1600, is increased in Number of
Inhabitants about 900000; Whereof I may venture to say the like of Holland in
proportion to the Dimension of their Territories: So it is undeniable, that
within that circle and compass of time, diverse of the English Plantations,
came to be erected and established, and that all of them, as well as those of
the Dutch, have since that term of Years, been enlarged, improved and become
vastly more Peopled than they were before.

So that it appears, from the whole which has been hitherto said, how much
the Scots have of late, discovered their Wisdom and Prudence, and how highly
their care and zeal are to be Commended, in their having made an Essay, and a
Beginning for the encouragement and enlargement of Manufacture at home, and
toward the erection and establishment of a Colony abroad, and by that
Foundation which they have laid, for the settlement and advancement of Trade.
And this unquestionably they have a plenary right to do, as they are a Free and
Independent Nation, without asking the leave, or demanding the concurrence of
any Rulers and Countries whatsoever, provided they be Countenanced and
Authorized thereunto, by their own King; and that they do nothing therein,
which is inconsistent with the Laws of Nations, nor attempt the settling in any
Districts or Provinces, from which they stand prohibited and excluded by
public and solemn Stipulations, between him that now is their Sovereign, or
those that have been so formerly, and other States, Princes, and Potentates.
For that Scotland depends upon, or is a Province Subordinate to any other
Nation, and Subjected to the Ordinances, Constitutions, and Municipal Statutes
thereof, I suppose none will betray the Ignorance or have the Effrontery to
affirm. It being a Kingdom that holds of none Save of God, for their Title
unto and Possession of their Country, and of their own Swords, under his
providential Blessing and Aid, for the Maintaining and Defending of them.

For though there be a very near and close Conjunction and Union, between the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, through their being under one and the same
King, rather than in the virtue, and force of mutual Contracts and Alliances*
which I do heartily wish may always continue, and that all the secret
Caballings and Clandestine endeavors of those, may prove abortive,
unprosperous and miscarry, who either from Ancient Piques, personal Moroseness,
Envy, and ill Nature, or upon any other Motives, Prospects and Designs
whatsoever, shall seek to weaken, interrupt, and especially to dissolve it. Yet
England does not Challenge and lay Claim to the having any Authority over
Scotland, nor pretend to an Imposing of their own Laws upon that Nation, or to
a Supervising of such Parliamentary Bills as are prepared and formed there in
order to the being Enacted into Statutes. But the Scots are absolute within
themselves, and vested with a Power underived from any Nation, and in the
exercise whereof they are accountable unto none, for the making of Laws, and
falling upon, and pursuing all such Ways, Methods, and Means, which are
reconcilable with the Fealty and Loyalty, which they owe unto their Prince,
that may be subservient and useful to their own Safety and Interest. And in
Testimony and Evidence of their being a Free State, and a Kingdom as entirely
Independent upon England, as upon any other Dominion whatsoever; they both can,
and do often lay what Customs and Impositions they please, upon English
Productions and Commodities, when carried and Imported thither, to be vended
and disposed of there. And by a Power Inherent in themselves, which England
cannot reasonably dispute, nor lawfully Control: they sometimes do, and at all
times may, Inhibit and Forbid their own People, the buying, using, and
consuming such Goods as were either Manufactured in England, or brought thither
by the English, from their Plantations and Colonies elsewhere.

And as in the Virtue of this independent Freedom, Liberty, Previlege and Right
under the Authority and Power of their Kings, they have at all times made legal
Provision for the Government of their People at home, and pursued that little
Trade, which they had attained unto with such Nations abroad, as were in Peace
and Amity with their Princes, without their being questioned for, or disturbed
in it by any, save by those that were in Hostility with their Sovereigns, and
that only in Seasons of actual War; so they have by a fresh Exertion of this
innate Freedom, and inherent and independent Right, lately contrived and framed
a Bill, which they have obtained to be passed into an Act, and a Law, wherein
the People and Subjects of that Kingdom, See the Act for a Company Trading to
Africa and the Indies, June 26. 1695.
are empowered to erect Societies and Companies, for the establishment and
carrying on Trade, with whatsoever Nations and Countries, or Places in As^^*,
Africa, Printed at Edinburgh by Andrew Anderson, and reprinted at London, by
John Whitlock.
or America, which are either not Inhabited, or where they have the consent of
the Natives, and Inhabitants thereof, under the Limitation and Restriction,
that such places are not Previously and Antecedently possessed by European
Sovereigns, Potentates, Princes and States. And moreover, that they may provide
and furnish the said Places, Cities Towns and Forts, with Magazines, Ordinance,
Arms, Weapons, Ammunitions and stores of War, and by force of Arms, defend
their Trade, Navigation, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and
their other Effects. As likewise, that it shall be Lawful for them to make
Reprisals, and to seek and take reparation of Damages done unto them by Sea or
Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace and Commerce with the
Sovereign Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governors, and Proprietors of the said
Lands, Islands, Countries or Places in Africa or America.

In relation to which Act, for authorizing the Scots to establish a Foreign
Trade, and their being empowered to settle Plantations in the forementioned
Parts of the World, in order to the better gaining, enlarging, and protecting
of it, the few things which I have to offer under this head, shall be briefly
these. Namely, That as the Design of Erecting such a Trade, and of Planting
Colonies in the Subserviency, to the Maintaining, Improving and Extending
thereof, was not rashly and unthoughtfully Undertaken by those of that Kingdom;
so the Act by which in pursuance of that Projection, they stand warranted to do
whatsoever is before reported, was not surreptitiously obtained of his Majesty,
nor was he by any undue Artifices misled into the Granting of it. For how much
foever that Nation, might be desirous to have a Foreign Settlement, toward the
better enabling them for such a Traffic, and notwithstanding they sufficiently
understood it to be their great and indispensible Interest, to embark
Vigorously both in Manufacture and Commerce, yet their unsuccessfulness
heretofore in some attempts of that Nature, as particularly in the Plantation
of Carolina, which they held of the Crown of England, antecedently to the
English planting there, from which they became expelled by the Spaniards, through
want of that protection, and of those encouragements which were necessary to
the having rendered them safe and Prosperous; made them proceed slowly and with
great Calmness and Discretion, in the Forming, Digesting and Maturating what
they have at last, after an adjusting of all that was Prerequired thereunto,
put in Execution. Nor could the King be Surprised into the giving his Royal
Assent to the Bill for the premised establishment; seeing* as they who served
his Majesty at that time, under the Characters of Commissioner and Secretary of
State, were persons as entirely in his Interest, and zealous for his Honor and
Glory, as ever any have been known to be that filled those Posts; so there was
an interposition of two Years, whereby the King had all the time, an
opportunity desirable, for the consideration of the most Important and Arduous
Affair, in which he might have informed and Satisfied himself of the Justice
and convenience of what was laid before him, and humbly desired of him, between
the passing of the 32 Act of the Parliament, Anno 1693. which invited and
encouraged, persons in general to enter into Societies and Companies, for
carrying on a Trade, in any or in all such parts of the World, as were not in
Hostility with his Majesty, and the enacting of that Statute, which was the 8
Act of the Parliament Anno 1695, whereby that design was Perfected and
Completed, through a Companies becoming settled by Law, vested with the Rights
and Powers forementioned, and favored with such immunities, as were necessary
to encourage so hazardous and expensive an Undertaking, as that was likely to
be, and will infallibly Prove.

And though the Grace and Goodness of his Majesty, appeared very eminently
manifested to the Scots therein, in vouchsafing to have granted them the
privileges, That none of their Stock and Effects, shall be liable unto any
manner of Confiscations, Seisures, Forfeitures, Attachments, Arrests, or
Restraints; that they may Freight Outlandish and hired Ships, for the space of
ten Years, notwithstanding the Act for encouraging Shipping and Navigation.
Anno 1661. And that their Merchandice, See the Act.
goods and effects, shall be free from all manner of Restraints and
Prohibitions, and of all Customs, Taxes, Sesses, Supplies or other Duties
imposed, or to be imposed by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, for and during
the space of 21 years. As likewise, That no Officer, Civil or Military, or
other person whatsoever within that Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or
Detain, any of the Members, Officers or Servants, or others whatsoever, of or
belonging to the said Company; And that all these shall be Free, both in their
Persons, Estates and Goods, employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all
manner of Taxes, Sesses, Supplies, Excises, quartering of Soldiers, transient
or local, or levying of Soldiers, or other Impositions whatsoever for and
during the space of 21 years. Yet it must withal be acknowledged, that his
Majesty's Wisdom and Justice to all the World, as well as to his Allies, and
those that are his own Subjects in his other Territories and Dominions, are no
less singularly, conspicuously and abundantly displayed, through the Providing
expressly and particularly in the said Act, that no Prince, Country, People, or
Colony, shall be Invaded or Molested in what they are rightfully possessed of,
nor disseised of their properties, or of what they can lay Claim unto, by the
Laws either of Nature or Nations. Which shows that what his Majesty did, in
passing the Act, that has been so often mentioned, was the result of great
Judgment, and mature Deliberation. And whosoever will but allow himself time to
read and consider it, will find himself obliged to confess, that in no
Projection whatsoever, toward a settlement of that Nature, nor in any Statutes
or Edicts enacted and emitted, for the authorizing and countenancing of them,
was there ever such a regard had, and expressed to the rights of Foreigners, or
of Planters elsewhere, and of the Natives where that Colony should come to
settle, as is done in the Scots Act of Parliament.

Whereunto I will only further Subjoyn, that the Scots have not only obtained
an Act of Parliament, Empowring them to plant and settle Foreign Colonies
wheresoever they can, without doing Injustice to the Natives, invading the
Territories, and Districts of other Princes, or their being injurious to
previous and antecedent Planters; But they have likewise procured a Patent
under the great Seal of that Kingdom, whereby all and every thing or things,
granted to them in the said Act, stand ratified and confirmed by a Fact and
Deed, that is Personally his Majesty's own, in the most distinguishing manner,
and that by which he Speaks most Vnretractably as well as Sovereignly to his
People. So that his Majesty being a Prince eminent for his Veracity, and his
Constancy to his Royal Word, as well as for his Courage Justice and Honor, He
has made it impracticable, without Sullying and Disparaging his own Glorious
Perfections, which it is Impossible he should have the Weakness, Infirmity and
Imprudence to do, either to depart from, dispense with, or by a subsequent
relaxing Interpretation, to Retract or Supersede what he has granted unto his
Subjects of Scotland, or to avoid the Maintaining and Protecting them in it.
For though diverse Projects, Proposals and Matters, that are in themselves very
Just and Lawful, and which in their effects and consequences would prove
exceeding advantageous and useful, may antecedently to their Establishment by
Laws, and by Royal Facts and Grants be declined and waved, as well as
procrastinated and adjourned, upon the mere foot and the single motive of their
being Inconvenient, either through the Offense or Jealousy that may thereby be
administered to Allies and Princes in Amity; Yet no public and Solemn Laws are
to be violated or Royal Charters and Patents, to be Overruled, Transgressed
against and Vacated upon the Inducement, and because some Potentates with whom
his Majesty is in Leagues, and under Stipulations and Compacts, may show
themselves Peevish, and become Groundlessly* and Causelessly Offended. For as
all the Affairs that fall under the Executive part of the Administration, are
Regulated either by Law or by Convenience: and come to be considered under the
Notion and Views, either of what may be done with Profit to our selves, and
without injustice to any, though possibly not without giving Provocation unto
diverse, and the rendering them Discontented; or what according to the tenor and
Obligation of Laws, and the Sacredness of a Princes Word declared and pledged
in his Charters must and ought to be done; So whatsoever latitude is left and
allowed in reference to matters and things of the first kind, for acting
according to the measures of civil Prudence, and the rules of Politics: Yet in
relation to such matters as are of the latter sort, there is no room or place
left to consult and deliberate what is Fit to be done according to Topics of
Convenience, Maxims of State, and politic Theorems; but there ought to be a
Conscientious observance and a Vigorous pursuance of, as well as a firm and
unchangeable adherence unto what is made Legal, and which by consequence, when
and where the case is important, and the matter is of that concern and value
that the chiefest Interest of a Nation lies in it, can neither be omitted nor
dispensed with, without obnoxiousness to guilt, as well as to clamor and blame.

Nor may it in the next place be unworthy of being represented, with what
Readiness Unanimity and Zeal, the People of Scotland came into this design, of
Erecting Trade, and Establishing a Foreign Plantation upon the passing the
forementioned Act. For the Subscriptions in order to the raising and
constituting a Fund, for the settling a Colony, and thereby for the promoting of
Traffic, for which they were allowed by the Act of Parliament, from the 16 of
June 1695, until the First of August 1696, were not only Filled, Completed
and Perfected, long before the elapse of the time that was prefixed by the
Statute; But whereas it was provided, that it should be held a sufficient
Compliance, with the design and Tenor of that Law, if only half the Money that
should be Subscribed toward the forming a Stock, did Belong unto, and were the
Proper Cash of such as were Scots, and did live within that Kingdom; it
deserves to be observed, that the whole, has been Subscribed, Advanced, and
Paid in by such as are Scots, See the List of the Adventurers, etc. Printed at
Edinb. 1696.
which is not only beyond what could have been expected, but may justly beget
Admiration; considering what in that Intrim, they have been obliged to pay in
Taxes for the Maintenance of Troops: and what they have been necessitated to
carry abroad in specie, of their Cash for the purchasing grain, to live upon in
these late years of extraordinary Scarcity and Dearth; which, at the modestest
Computation, may be reckoned to have exceeded Two hundred thousand pounds
Sterling.

Nor are they merely Persons of the Middle Rank, or of the Mercantile Order,
that have contributed and put in their Money for the framing of a Bank in order
to the forementioned Ends; but they of all Qualities and Degrees have, with
great liberality and cheerfulness, answerable to their several Titles and
Figures, contributed their shares to that Capital; and none with greater
Alacrity and in larger Proportions than they of the Grand, as well as of the
Petite Nobless. For none of the greatest Persons of that Kingdom have had the
Folly and Pride to excuse and cover themselves from becoming Assistants to the
founding and promoting of Trade, by pretending it a disparagement to their
Garters and Coronets, and below the lofty Styles that they have by Parchments,
which give them an ascendency above Gentlemen. These days of Vanity and
Phantasticalness are over; and they of the Sublimest Rank do begin to govern
themselves by principles of Reason and good Sense, and by Maxims of Civil,
Social, and Oeconomical Wisdom; and not by the airy, whimsical and pernicious
Notions of Haughtiness and Luxury.

Yea, even they of the Military order, have such of them, as were in a
condition through having acquired beyond a naked subsistence during the War,
readily subscribed and paid in what they could, and would have done it more
plentifully, had they received all their Arrears; and such of that Tribe as
were only Subordinate-Officers, or private Sentinels, who are now reduced or
disbanded, that could not bring in Gold and Silver to the increasing of the
Fund and the augmenting of the Capital; yet they have with great forwardness
offered their Bodies and their cold Iron to the Corporation and Company, for
the protecting of their Traffic, and the defending of their Plantation against
all such as shall become their Enemies and Assailants. And how dangerous soever
Men of that Praedicament may be to their Country, when kept in too great
Numbers regimented at home; and how altogether useless they are unto it, while
they hear Arms under Foreign Princes and States abroad; yet they are as capable
as any other whatsoever of being serviceable and profitable thereunto, when
employed in the Ways and Methods to which many of them have begun to betake
themselves. Of whom it will be no presumption nor visionary Dream to add, That
as they do account their Wages, Salaries, and Pay, to be their Estates; so they
reckon their Swords and Muskets to be their Title unto it.

In brief, there are few Persons, Families, or Orders of Men, that are of any
Consideration or Esteem, but who are become associated, united, and
confederated, in this Project, Enterprise, and Design. How much distant or
different soever Persons are, either in their Religions or their Political
Principles, yet herein they do all of them amicably agree and combine: Neither
the Bigotry of the Presbyterians, nor the resentments of those of the Diocesan
Persuasion, for the unkind and ill treatment they have met with, do in this
make any variance or discord between them; but herein the Wolf and the Lamb do
tamely meet together, and the Leopard and Kid do peaceably assemble as in one
Field. Nor do those great Animosities, or late Hostilities, which have been
between one another, about Rights and Claims to the Sovereign Authority, and
the Royal Jurisdiction, occasion any misunderstanding or opposite Sentiments in
this, but both the Jacobites and the Williamites do show themselves equally and
alike concerned in the promoting of a National Trade, and the settling of a
Foreign Colony. And, which is of very material consideration, it deserves to be
observed, That besides what several Persons have in their private Capacities
Subscribed toward that Capital, not only most of all the Corporations, but the
Royal Buroughs of the Kingdom, have become sharers therein, and contributed
liberally thereunto, out of their Public Revenues.

From all which I may, with great safety, as well as with decency and modesty,
venture to lay open and infer, how Mortifying, Afflictive and Grievous it will
be to that whole Nation, to be discouraged and frustrated of Protection from
the King, of whom pursuant to the Act and Patent which he has granted them,
they expected to be countenanced, animated and defended. Nor dare they
entertain such disrespectful and undutiful thoughts of His Majesty, as the
Proclamations emitted by His Governors over the English West India Plantations
might seem to give occasion and umbrage for. Seeing as they have not, by their
settling at Darien, invaded the Territories of any European Prince or State
whatsoever, nor have been injurious to the Natives, in Planting there without
their allowance and consent, nor in any one particular or circumstance, have
exceeded the Limits and Regulations prescribed unto them by the Act of
Parliament, and the King's Charter, as shall be fully and uncontroulably
demonstrated in what is to follow: So they have a more engraven and firm belief
of His Majesty's Mercy and Justice, than to give liberty unto themselves to
think, that His Majesty's Subjects in the West India Plantations, depending
upon, and subordinate to England, should by an Order, Command, and Authority
from the King, be charged and required to hold no Correspondence with the
Scots, in their Colony at Darien; nor to give them any assistance with Arms,
Ammunitions, Provisions or any thing else whatsoever. For as much as this is
not only inconsistent with, and irreconcilable to his Majesty's Goodness,
Wisdom and Righteousness; but directly repugnant to the express Words, Terms
and Clauses of the forementioned Statute; by and wherein his Majesty royally
and solemnly promises, If any of the Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons, or
other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the Scots Company, trading to Africa and
the Indies, shall be stopped, detained, embezled, or taken away, or in any sort
prejudiced or damnified; that he will interpose his Authority to have
Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made for the damage done, and that
upon the public charge, which his Majesty shall cause, disburse and lay out
for that effect. So that through what arts, and what means soever, these
Proclamations are come to be emitted and published: Yet the Scots neither do,
will, nor can entertain any other thoughts of his Majesty, than that he will
carefully and powerfully cover and protect them, instead of abandoning them to
the rage and power of such as may become their Enemies, without the giving them
aid, succor and assistance. And in place of giving room to any such sinistrous
opinion, as if either his Majesty could be indifferent, or meanly concerned, in
countenancing of that Nation in an Affair of so great an importance, and that
is so eminently subservient to the prosperity and happiness of that Kingdom, or
become alienated and disinclined from upholding and defending them in the
possession of their Plantation of Darien, they are tempted to give credit to a
passage in the Paris Gazette the first of August, 1699. Namely. On avoit avis,
qu'on envoye des ordres aux Comandants de toutes les Colonies Angloises de L'
Amerique, d' assister l' Escossois d' Arien de tout leur pouvoir, comme estant
sujects du mesme maistre. That the King has sent Orders, to the Governors of
the English Plantations in America to assist the Scots at Darien, with all
their Power, they being no less his Subjects than they are.

Nor can it be unmannerly or unlawful to add, that it is of the last danger to
a Prince, to administer cause and occasion to a whole Kingdom, to grow
estranged in their affections unto him, and to depart from their zeal for his
service. And it may with confidence be affirmed that his Majesty's treating the
Scots in this manner, either unkindly, or unsuitably to the hopes wherewith
they have fed themselves, is like to have those effects and operations upon the
hearts and minds of most of that people. It Is abundantly discovered in Histories
how it has often proved unlucky and of ill consequence to Sovereigns, to have
disobliged and displeased the generality of a Nation, though but in a trifle, and
that it has been very fatal unto them, to discountenance and thwart their
Subjects in that wherein they placed their secular Glory, and their temporal
Happiness. Nor have the Ties and Obligations upon the conscience of Subjects,
been at all times found sufficiently powerful, to preserve them in discharge of
Duties of exact Fealty and Loyalty; but these bonds have been easily broken,
and dissolved, when ground has been given, for the thinking and believing,
that their worldly Interest has not only been neglected, but opposed and
sacrificed. And it is in vain for a Prince to rely upon his Personal merits, or
to trust to his own Conscientiousness, of what he has done in delivering a
People from former distresses: Seeing these will be found to afford him a very
weak and slender security, against the ungrateful and ill natured resentments
of a people, that shall account themselves abandoned, or crossed in what their
present Genius, Humor and Biass, do universally, sway, carry and determine
them unto.

Nor is it credible that his Majesty who is a Prince of great Wisdom and
Justice, would have ordered those who Govern under him, and by his Authority,
in the West Indies, to emitt and publish such Proclamations, without his
vouchsafing to have it told and represented to the person Constituted by
himself, for his Scots Secretary, and who is Resident at his Court under that
Character; seeing as that would have imported such a Contempt, as well as a
Neglect, of his Kingdom of Scotland, that none without rendering themselves
Criminal, can conceive his Majesty capable of being misled into it, so it is
sufficiently obvious to all thinking men, what the Scots Secretary has made
himself obnoxious unto, if in case of his being made acquainted with it, he did
not discharge the duty incumbent upon him by his Post, both toward his Majesty
in endeavoring to divert him from running into such measures and in his
informing those of Scotland (to whom he will deservedly find himself
accountable,) with it, whose concern it was to have it prevented. Yea it is so
inconsistent with all the rules of Prudence and Justice, as well as of Honor,
that nothing in Don Quixot, or Amadis de Gaul can be more Romantic, than that
his Majesty should some Months after the Orders must have been transmitted to
the West Indies, for enjoining and and authorizing the forementioned
Proclamations, have Commanded the Lord President of the Sessions, and my Lord
Advocate to come from Scotland and attend him at his Palace here, in order to
satisfy him of the Legality of the Scots proceedure, had he been conscious in
himself, of having Empowred the English Secretary Mr. Vernon, to convey such
Instructions to the governing Magistrates in the English Plantations, as the
Papers emitted there under the Title of Proclamations, would persuade us they
are warranted by and bottomed upon.

Nor in the case which I have now under consideration, will the Scots reckon
that their Loyalty to his Majesty, and their Zeal for his Interest and Service,
were either esteemed or rewarded, as they flattered themselves they should have
been: For their having not only furnished him, with so many and such brave
Troops, during the War, and for their preserving (now merely to please and
gratify him) such a Number on Foot and in Pay, and that notwithstanding both
the Poverty of the Country, and the great Scarcity that for diverse years it
has groaned under, when their Neighbors have not in proportion to their
extent of Territories, and of their Opulency, thought fit to continue near the
Quota of Forces, which they have done; but especially because of their having,
so readily at first Declared him their King, when the bare delaying, and the
demurring only unto it for a little time, would have gained them such
Concessions from the People of England, that would have made their looking
after a Plantation of their own Needless, or at the least have brought them
into that Conjunction, with the English Nation, as would have engaged the whole
strength of that Powerful, and Wealthy Kingdom, for their defense and support
in the Colony, which they have begun to settle.

Nor can it be undecent or immodest to add, that the Protecting them in this
undertaking, is the rather expected from his Majesty, least otherwise they
should have occasion to complain of the Prejudice, they have received by the
Revolution, with respect to their Trade, instead of reaping the advantages
which they had thereby promised themselves, in that as well as in other things.
It being known to diverse, that a proposal and Plan having by some Scots men
been laid before King James, for the obtaining his Authority, as well as his
countenance, for their settling a Commerce in Africa and the Indies, how kindly
he not only received it, but with what both goodness and readiness, he referred
the consideration of it to my Lord Middleton, my Lord Melford, Mr. Penn and Mr.
Berkley, that upon their opinion of the Justice and Equity of it, (who were all
known to be entire favorers thereof) He might by his Royal Charter and Patent,
have empowered the Scots, to have proceeded in the Establishing of it; and
which nothing could have obstructed, had not the Accession of his Majesty, who
was then Prince of Orange, in (...) England at that time intervened.

But to proceed unto that which does in the course of Method, next offer it
self to be laid open and Discoursed of, namely the Situation, Nature and
Convenience of the Place, where the Scots have pitched their Tents, and are
about establishing there Plantations, which is called the Isthmus of Darien,
and is a Country very fit and proper for that purpose, as well because of the
Richness of the Soil, as by reason of its Situation for Trade. It is the
Narrowest part of America, and lies between the Northern and Southern, or the
Atlantic and Pacifick Oceans, and is Justly called an Isthmus, as
comprehending where it is broadest not above two degrees, (viz.) between eight
and ten N. L. and where it is narrowest about but one degree. And it is in all
probability styled the Ishhmus of Darien, from the great River of that name,
where with the Northern coast is bounded to the East. For beyond that River on
the North side, the land does so spread to the East and the North-East, and on
the South side, to the South and South-East, that it can no farther be called
an Isthmus: But as to the narrowest part of this American Isthmus, which as I
have said, does not extend above one degree, upon which the Scots have Settled
their Colony, and have appointed that the Country shall hereafter be called
Calidonia, and that themselves, Successors and Associates, shall be styled by
the Title of Calidonians: See Wafer's new Voyage and description of the Isthmus
of America. p. 46.
Wafer does assign for its Western limits, from the Mouth of the River Chagre,
where it falls into the North Sea, to the nearest part of the South Sea
Westward of Panama; and for its Eastern boundaries, from point Garachma, or the
South part of the Gulf of St. Michael, directly Eastward, to the forementioned
River Darien: And all do know, that it is circumscribed, limited and bounded,
on the North and South, by the two vast Oceans that are so Denominated. And as
to the particular place, where the Scots have pitched their Tents and raised
Fortifications, it is upon a Harbor, called by the Spaniards Acla, and by the
Natives Schocana, and is one of the most Defensible Ports of the World, and is
Situated about two Leagues from the Golden Island, called by the Spaniards
Guarda, which as it is not further Distanced from the South Sea, than what any
man may Travel in two or three Days, and which the Natives can do in one: So it
lies in a Nearness of Eight or Nine Leagues, both to the River Darien and
Conception, upon which Boats may go to the Southern Ocean. And as the weather
in the place, and on all hands where the Scots are settled is exceeding
temperate, being much the same that is in other places of the Torrid Zone of
that Latitude, but inclining rather, as Wafer says, to the wet extreme, the
Rains beginning usually in April or May, and continuing more or less to the
latter end of August, but with intermixtures even then of fair and dry days for
a week together; So that the Country, is healthful beyond what was commonly
believed, or could have been imagined unless experienced. And though the
Artificial productions of the District and Territory be few by reason of the
sloth and unskilfulness of the Natives to cultivate the Land, and to improve
and fabric what it yields, yet the ground is unconceivably fertile and rich,
and might by being well Manured and Agriculted, afford both as great Variety
and as great Plenty, for the comfort and pleasure, as well as for the
Necessities of Life, as any Land in whatsoever part of the World does. However
the Natural Productions, and what it spontaneously yields, as materials of, and
commodities for Trade, and to enrich such as are, or shall become engaged and
Interessed in the Traffic, are diverse and great, both in the variety of kinds,
and in the Plenty and Quality of them. For besides its being stored with all
sorts of Wood, proper for Building and Wainscotting, and particularly with
Cedar, it has also abundance of white wood, fit for Cabinets, and Interlaying,
and which is more than all the other, it is likewise plentifully furnished with
Logwood, which the English do now cut upon the Bay of Hunderos, not without
being exposed to great hazard and danger; and (if credit may be given to
reports,) it is provided of Nicaragua wood, which is a Commodity for Dying of
that value, as to be reckoned to approach to the worth of Cochenele; and which
is beyond all other productions whatsoever, It affords both Silver and Gold
Mines, as well as large quantities of Gold Dust, that is gathered out of the
Rivers, after that it has been washed from the Mountains by violent Rains. And
then for the People, they are open, frank and good natured, and for many
Leagues round in an entire Friendship with the Scots, having not only received
them in a most obliging manner, at their first arrival into those American
parts, and their Captains, Supreme Leaders, or Caiques, who have neither
dependence upon any other Prince or State, nor upon one another, save by
Leagues for mutual defense, readily and with great cheerfulness, consented and
agreed to permit the Scots to settle among them, and to become Inhabitants in
their Country; but have by stipulations and contracts since, Joined in a
Confederacy with them, for the defense of them and their Colony, against all
such as shall in time to come be their Enemies.

So that for Situation, as the Council constituted by the Indian and African
Company of Scotland, for the Government and direction of their Colonies and
settlements in the Indies, have published in their Declaration bearing date, at
new Edinburg in Calidonia December 28. School; it is a more convenient Place than
any other in all America, to be the Storehouse of the unsearchable Treasures
of the spacious South Seas, the door of Commerce to China and Japan, and the
Emporium and Staple for the Trade of both the Indies. And as it is there that
the Scots have settled a Colony and Plantation, by and with the consent of the
Natives; no European Prince or State being thereof possessed, or having right
of claim thereunto; so they did not offer to enter upon that District and
Territory, without the having a particular and strict regard unto, and
conforming exactly with all the Regulations, Proviso's, and Limitations laid
down and prescribed in the Act of Parliament, and in his Majesty's Patent, and
the having seriously Considered and duly Weighed, whatsoever could be pretended
or alleged against them, upon their proceeding to establish a Colony there.
For the examination whereof, they allowed themselves sufficient time, in that
though their Subscriptions were perfected and completed, about the beginning of
the year 1696; yet they did not send their Ships from Scotland, until the
Month of July School, which arrived not in that place until November following.

And as it is not only hoped, but morally certain, that great advantages of
attaining unto Wealth, Power and Honor, will thereby accrue and be administered
to Scotland; so it might easily be Demonstrated, that very considerable
Benefits, will infallibly Redound from thence unto England, and that both in
times of Peace and of War. Seeing as it will be a means, whereby in a short
time, a compendious Way and Passage for Trade to China, Japan, as well as to
the East Indies, may be obtained and rendered secure, whereby the English, will
become qualified and enabled, not only to outdo the French, who begin to Rival
them in Traffic to the latter, but to equal the Dutch, who do at present far
exceed them in it: So by the convenience of the Scots Caledonian Plantation,
both a great quantity more of the Manufactures of that Kingdom, will come to be
vented in all the East parts of the World, as well as in the Spanish
West-Indian Provinces, and the expense made less, and the returns much Speedier
and Surer, to and from the latter, than they are, or ever can be, by the way of
Cadiz and Malaga. And as for the English Plantations in America, they will not
only have larger and more advantageous occasions, of Trading into the Spanish
American Colonies; but the very Scots of the Calidonian Plantation, will will
take off and consume abundance of their Commodities and Productions, especially
theirs of New York and New England, for which they will pay in Gold and in
Silver, and such valuable Goods, as the Mines, Rivers, and Land of Darien do
yield and furnish. And should a War at any time come to be between the Kings of
Great Britain and of Spain, as who knows what may hereafter fall out,
Calidonia is and will in that case be found, the best Situate place of any in
the World, from whence and by means whereof, to do Hurt and Prejudice to the
Spaniards, and to yield service to his Britannick Majesty, and give his
Subjects opportunities of enriching themselves. Seeing the Scots Colony there,
will prove to be not only Posted, in the middle and bosom of the Spanish
American Ports for Traffic, having Carthagena on the East, Porto Bello on the
West, and Panama on the South; but will be found to stand Situated in the
direct way and passage, that their Flotas, Galleons, Armados and Armadilals
must go and return to and from Mexico and Peru. Nor on the supposition of such
a Hostility arising between these two Crowns, as I have mentioned, will the
English merely have a larger, better and more Fortified Harbor for Ships,
either of War or Commerce, than any of their own West India Plantations do
afford; But they will have one to Receive, Cover and Protect them, that is
nearer and more adjacent by a hundred Leagues to Porto Bello and Panama, than
Jamaica; and by above three hundred than Barbados, which of all the English
American Colonies, are the least distanced from them. But seeing I shall have
occasion to discourse more fully hereafter, of the benefits and advantages,
which will accrue to the Crown and Kingdom of England, by the Scots having
settled in Darien, and how much upon that account, it is both the Interest of
the King, and of the English Nation, that they should be maintained and
defended in the possession of their Plantation at Calidonia; I shall therefore
insist no more upon it under this Head, but adjourn what is to be further
represented, and argued to the foregoing purpose, until it will lie more
naturally before me in some other Paragraph.

That which I am then in the next place to advance unto, is to Justify and
Prove beyond all possibility of any reasonable Reply, that the Scots, by their
establishing a Colony on the Isthmus of Darien, have made no Invasion, upon the
Rights or Dominions, and Territories of the King of Spain, nor have therein
Acted contrary either to the Laws of Nations, or to any Articles of public
Treaties, that have intervened, or have been Conserted, Accorded and
Stipulated, between the Kings of Great Britain, and those of Spain? It Is true
his Spanish Majesty, has by several Memorials delivered by his Ministers to
his Britannick Majesty, or to his Secretaries of State, represented,
remonstrated and complained, as if the Scots, had thereby made an Infraction of
the Peace, between the Crowns, were become guilty of an Insult* and Attempt
against his Catholic Majesty, and that by settling a Plantation in that place,
they have posted themselves, dansles Souverains, and le plus Interieur de ces
Demaines de sa Majeste, In the Sovereign and most Inward Territories of and
belonging to his Spanish Majesty. And as in case that the matter stood as it is
represented, and as the complaint does import, the blame thereof, ought to be
wholly and entirely imputed unto the charged upon the Governors and Directors
of the Company erected for Trading to Africa and the Indies, and no ways either
in the Injury that is done, or in the clamours and accusations which arise by
and from it, to affect his Britannick Majesty in his Justice, Veracity and
Honor; so it would be both requisite and necessary, on the foot of
Righteousness, as well as of Truth, that full reparation should be made to his
Catholic Majesty, if the Fact of the Scots, in planting on the Isthmus of
Darien, were disagreable to Royal and National Treaties, and a forceable
seizure, in times of Amity and Peace of the Lands and Demains of that King. Yet
I hope, it will not be accounted Rudeness or Insolence, in me to say, that it
is both expected and demanded, that none will discover and betray themselves,
to be persons of so little Prudence or Equity, as upon the single credit, and
alone evidence of Memorials to submit unto, and to suffer, their being either
surprised, or wheedled, or menaced and hecto^ed into a belief, that the
settling the aforesaid Colony, in the place abov^^mentioned, is therefore
Injurious and Criminal in the Scots, and to be reckoned an Invasion upon the
Sovereign Rights, and the Lawful Dominions of the King of Spain, merely because
it is alleged and affirmed by his Ministers and in his name to be so.

And I do reckon my self fully warranted, in the requiring and exacting this of
every man, who desires to escape the censure and reproach of being Imprudent,
Partial, and Iniquous; in that it has very often, and upon frequent occasions,
been the custom and practice of States, Princes and Potentates, to remonstrate
and complain of the proceedings of other Rulers, Governors and Sovereigns, and
of their several and respective Subjects; when all that has been offered,
attempted and done by those who have been thus applied and addressed unto, and
complained of, has been Lawful, Friendly, Honorable and Just, and only
accounted inconvenient at the Season, or held to administer ground of Jealousy
and Fear, that it might in the future, be prejudicial unto such who were the
Complainants and Remonstrants. And as no Potentate or Court in the World, has
oftener and more clamorously, betook themselves unto this Method, than they of
Spain have done, in reference unto, and behalf of what they unreasonably
challenge, and would have others be so weak, as to allow them a Right unto the
West Indies; so they have commonly, in the issue and event been made to
understand, that they had no Pleadable, Valuable and Justifiable reasons,
grounds or causes, for their Remonstrances and Complaints. Whereof as the
Histories of all Nations, are full of Examples, and Instances, so our own are
not barren and unprovided of them. Unto which as I shall confine my self, on
the motive of the Brevity, that this discourse is designed to be of; so I shall
only assign a few out of the many that might be enumerated. Whereof, the first
shall be, the Behavior and Answer of Queen Elizabeth, during the time of Amity
with Spain, and before there was any rupture, between her and Philip the
Second, upon a complaint against one Captain Parker, made unto her by the
Spanish Minister, who resided at her Court, under a public Character; which I
do the rather mention, because it relates to something that fell out at Darien,
where the Scots having taken the freedom to settle, and to establish a
Plantation, is made the ground of the Memorials presented lately to his Majesty
by the Spanish Ambassador, in the name of the Catholic King: For Captain
Parker having in the year 1565, Sailed from England to Darien, and begun to
manage a profitable Trade with the Natives, the Spaniards, who have been always
Jealous of, and offended at any other Europeans coming into, and Trafficking in
those parts of America, came with Armed Ships against him, and after having
threatened, to make prize of him, and those that were with him, unless he would
immediately depart, upon his refusal to do so, they attempted it. But Parker
being a gallant man, and being likewise assisted by the Natives, he not only
beat the Spaniards that assaulted him, and took one of their Ships, but also
plundered a place called Castle Dolora, for all which he was both commended and
justified by the Queen, notwithstanding the Complaints and Remonstrances of the
King of Spain, by his Ambassador.

Whereunto may be added, that famous and remarkable transaction, much about the
same Season, between Queen Elizabeth and Philip the Second, in relation to
Captain Drake, who having in a time of Peace, betwixt the two Crowns, been
seized by the Spaniards, for Trading in the Bay of Mexico, and who thereupon,
having been allowed by her Majesty, to make himself reparation and
satisfaction, for the Wrong and Dishonor done to her, as well as for the Loss
and Injury, which he had Sustained, sailed to Boco Fero, where being showed the
South Sea, and also assisted by the Native Indians, who had War with the
Spaniards, he took and plundered some rich Spanish Vessels, at St. Lazarus de
Chagra. Of which Bernardine de Mendoza, who was then Spanish Ambassador at the
Court of England, having by a Memorial which he presented to the Queen,
complained as a great Act of Depredation, committed by Drake upon the Spaniards
in the West Indies, and thereupon demanded reparation of the Loss and Damage,
which his Masters Subjects had thereby undergone, he was answered by the Queen
almost in the very terms, and directly to the purpose following. See Camden' s
Elizabeth lib. 2. p. 255. An. Dom. 1565.
Namely, That as the Spaniards had drawn these Inconveniences and Mischiefs
upon themselves, by their severe and unjust dealing with the English in their
American Commerce, and their Trade there with the Natives, so she did not
understand, why either her Subjects, or those of any other European Princes,
should be debarred from Traffic in the Indies. Unto which as she did not
acknowledge the Spaniards to have any title by the donation of the Bishop of
Rome; so she knew no right they had to any places there, besides those that
they were in actual possession of; Seeing their having touched only here and
there upon those coasts, given names to Rivers, or Capes, and possibly built a
few Cottages, were such insignificant things, as could no ways entitle them to
a Propriety, further than they were actually settled, and continued to inhabit.
And therefore, that as all their claim unto other Parts, Places and Countries
in the West Indies, was only Imaginary and Chimerical; so it was thereupon
Free, for other Princes and States, and their respective Subjects, without the
least Breach, or Violation of the Laws of Nations, both to Trade and Transplant
Colonies, into all such American Districts and Territories, where the Spaniards
did not inhabit. And that as all pretense to a right to any Country there,
otherwise than as they were possessed of it, is nothing but a vain and unjust
Usurpation, which makes no foundation, nor gives any right by and according to
the laws of Nations, for a limited and restrained claim, in and over those
Countries; so it is as lawful for any other Nation, as it is for Spain, to
Navigate that vast Ocean, without being inhibited, obstructed, or therein
Disturbed; in that the use of the Sea and Air is common unto all and every
people whatsoever, neither Nature nor custom having given or allowed,
possession or Propriety thereof, to any one particular Country of the World,
Preclusive of others.

But though this that I have here reported may very reasonably be counted enough
to have been said under this head, as being so full, as well as pertinent, for
showing how little reason and cause there may often be, of Judging hastily,
conclusively and prejudically of the proceedings and Facts of the Subjects of
any State, or Sovereign, merely because of complaints exhibited in Memorials by
the Ambassadors of other Princes, stiling and representing what has been done
by them, under the Characters of being violatious of the Laws of Nations,
Invasions upon the Territories and Jurisdictions of Potentates, and Infractions
of public Treaties and Alliances; yet I shall not reckon it either superfluous
or impertinent, nor will the reader I hope think it tedious, to have one
Instance more subjoyned, that was of a parallel nature, and to the same purpose
and upon the same occasion: which as it refers to a Memorial of the same
importance and kind, with those that have been presented lately to his Majesty;
so it was one delivered into a King of great Britain by an Ambassador of Spain
in the name and in obedience to the Command of his Master. Whereof the Story in
brief is this: Namely that in the year 1629. being after a Rupture, and during
the time of a War, between the Crown of Great Britain, and of Spain, diverse of
the English Nation, finding the Islands of Cateline and Tortuga unpossessed and
empty of Inhabitants, did thereupon seize and begin to plant Colonies, on them,
giving to the former the name of the Island of Providence, and to the latter
the name of the Island of Association. And which they continuing to inhabit,
and occupy after the establishment, of the Peace betwixt his Britannick
Majesty, and the Catholic King, Anno 1630. the Spaniards became thereat
offended, not only because of its being an extending, and an enlargement of
English Settlements in America, but by reason of the nearness of those Islands
to the Spanish West India Colonies, particularly to those of Cuba and
Hispaniola, and accordingly complained thereof to King Charles the First, by
their Ambassador; who though he was a Prince both of those Morals and Politics,
that he would not countenance, the least thing that was unjust, and Illegal
toward and against any, and much less in relation to Sovereigns and
Potentates, with whom he was in Leagues, and Alliances, nevertheless he gave in
Answer to the said Complaint, that his Subjects having found those Islands,
both unpossessed by the Spaniards, and uninhabited by any other people
whatsoever, had thereupon by the Laws of Nature as well as of Nations, a
Liberty and Right to sit down and to plant there. And that they ought not to be
therein Obstructed or hindered, either because of Jealousies, which the
Spaniards might entertain, on the foot of those Islands being so adjacent to
their Territories, or by reason of any apprehensions they might have, that
English Colonies there, would prove afterward inconvenient, and prejudicial
unto them. In which Answer the Spaniards were so far forced to acquiesce at
that time, as not to reckon that Fact of his Britannick Majesty's Subjects to
be any Infraction of Alliances, or a Rupture of the Peace. Though I must withal
add, that upon the arising of misunderstandings between King Charles the First
and his People of England, and upon his Subjects of Scotland running into
Rebellion, the Spaniards made those advantages, of our quarrelling here at home
among our selves, Vid. Scriptum Cromweli, in qu^ R^ipubl. Angliae causa contra
Hispanos justa esse demonstratur: Edit. Land. 1655.
as to assault the English in both the forementioned Islands, and were therein
so successful, as first to drive them out of Tortuga, Anno 1634. and afterward
out of Cateline Anno 1640. In the attempt whereof as they acted against all the
measures of Law and Justice, and to the highest degrees of cruelty and
barbarity in the execution of it, so it is too well known upon whom both the
blame and Infamy are to be charged, that those Invasions of the Spaniards upon
the Rights, Properties and Possessions of the English, were not Revenged as
they deserved, and as they undoubtedly would have been, had not King Charles
been diverted and hindered from it, by the unhappy differences, which sprung up
between him and his People.

Having then done, what I hope will be judged sufficient to obviate and prevent
all misconstructions and sinistrous thoughts, which might otherwise have risen
in the minds of any, by reason of the late Memorial presented to his Majesty, I
do reckon, that I have thereby paved my way, toward an examination of the Fact
of the Scots Company, in their settling at Darien, whether it ought to be
accounted illegal, and unjust, contrary to the Laws of Nature and of Nations,
and to interfer with solemn Regal Stipulations? or whether it may be esteemed
Lawful, Righteous and Agreeable to all the rules and measures of Wisdom, Amity
and Justice? as that I may now apply and address my self directly and closely
to it, without finding the forementioned Remonstrances, to remain an Impediment
and obstruction in my way. And as an Introduction thereunto, I cannot but both
acknowledge and commend, the Fair, Honorable and Friendly proceedure of the
Catholic King, in that he has by Memorials, given in to his Britannick
Majesty, chosen to assert his pretensions and rights in an Amicable way, and so
affords an opportunity, that the whole World may be satisfied, on the Foot and
Topics of Reason, Custom and Law, that neither the Act and Patent, which the
King of Great Britain, has granted to his Subjects in Scotland, are any ways
either disagreeable to Treaties with Spain, or dissonant from the received
Maxims of Equity and Justice, by which States and Princes do govern themselves,
in their Public and Political actions toward one and other; Nor that the
Scots Company, have either exceeded the limits prescribed unto them, in the
Statute and Charter, by which they are authorized to Trade to Africa and the
Indies, and to establish Colonies and Plantations there, or that they have done
any thing prejudicial unto and Invasive upon the Rights of Spain. For hereby
instead of putting the decision of this great and important affair, upon the
Strength Power and Success of Arms, and the verdict that should result from
Hostility and War; it is placed on the amicable foundation of Reason, Alliances
and Laws, and made adjudgeable in the Cabinets, and at the Council Boards of
Princes, and not immediately referred to a determination, by Fleets and Armies
on the Ocean and Continent. And therefore that this matter, may be set and
represented in the best and clearest light, for an amicable adjustment, and
composure of it, between his Brittanick Majesty and the King of Spain, I shall
in order thereunto, propose and lay down, some things in the way of so many
Premises, which which shall carry that intrinsic certainty and evidence in
them, as to resemble and be of the Nature of Postulata in Mathematics, and
which shall be found as undeniable principles, in a discourse that is relative
unto, and concerning right of property in a Country, as the other are
acknowledged by all men to be in Geometry.

Whereof the first is this, namely, that the Original, most Ancient, and that
which is by all Civilians, confessed to be the ground and foundation, of the
uncontrovertible Title and Right of any people, to this or that Country, is
their having been the Primitive Occupiers and Possessors of it. Quod enim est
Nullius, per occupationem acquiritur ejus Dominium, say all Civilians. For
while the greatest, or any part of the World, lay wholly Void and Uninhabited,
and for the Occupation whereof, no formal Division had intervened, and been
agreed upon, by those who emitted Colonies for the possessing and planting such
and such parts of the Earth, assigning to every one of those Colonies, there
several and respective partitions and districts; in that case the right of
Title unto, and of Property in such a Country, and place became, primi
possidentis, Puffend. de Jur. Not. and. Gent. lib. 4. cap. 7. Grot de. Jur.
Bell. and Pac. lib. 2. cap. 2.. 2. de Offic. 3.
his or theirs who were the first occupiers thereof. It Is taken for a dictate
of Nature, and is that which the Universal reason of Mankind conducted them
unto, in the first and separated division, which was made of this habitable
World, so far as it was void and uninhabited, Vt quod quisque occupasset, id
proprium haberet, That whatsoever any came actually to possess and occupy,
thereof they should be acknowledged to have the propriety. And as Cicero long
before our late Civilians expressed it, Quod cuique obtigit, id quisque teneat,
Wheresoever any man's Lot falls to be the first possessor, that he has a Legal
claim thereunto. Which possession or occupation* as they are not accounted to
stand acquired by any mere act of the Mind, whether in way of wish or purpose
of settlement in such a place, but they are only obtained in and by a Bodily
Act, that is quasi positio pedis a placing and fixing there foot upon it; So no
bare transient and vagrant passage, through an empty and uninhabited Country
without settling their abode, and continuing to reside in it, was ever held
sufficient by any Civilian for the giving unto those Itinerant passengers a
claim of Property and Inheritance there. For as Grotius says Desultoria
possessio nihil efficit, An occasional touching at a place without settling and
continuing to inhabit gives no right thereunto in Law. And as Puffendorf
speaks to the same purpose, Occupasse tum demum rem aliquam dicimur quando
possessionem ejus adprehendimus: De jure Not. and Gent. lib. 4. cap. 6.. 8.
ita ut occupatio rerum mobilium fiat manibus, soli pedibus; vidisse autem
tantum, aut scire ubi quid sit, nondum ad possessionem sufficere judicatur.

Whereunto may be added in the second place, That the Spaniards did not find
those Countries, Kingdoms, Isles and Provinces, whereof they are either
possessed, and confessed by all to be so, or those unto which they pretend a
right, though it be not acknowledged by others, void and empty of People, and
uninhabited; but that when they came thither and arrived there, they found them
actually possessed by a large and numerous People that had no knowledge of, nor
dependence upon Spain, nor had derived either their own Original, or their
Title to occupy and inherit those spacious and vast American Territories from
the Spaniard; so that whatsoever Title or Property the Spaniards are come to
have unto, and over those Dominions, it must be derived either from the
Donation of the Pope, or acquired by a Conquest of those, who were the previous
and ancient Proprietors; or it must be obtained by a grant from the Natives, in
the virtue whereof the Spaniards have a right transferred unto them, and are
with and by the consent of the Indians, made the rightful and universal
Proprietors of all those Countries.

And as to their Claim by the Pope's Donation, the very mentioning, and much
more the pleading of it, is a ridiculing, as well as bantring of Mankind;
seeing even on the supposal, that the Roman Pontiffs should be acknowledged the
Successors of St. Peter, which as no Protestants are forward to believe or
confess, so they have never hitherto found, nor do they think they ever shall
find the Pontificians able to prove it: Yet this would invest them with no
right of disposing the Kingdoms of the World as they please, and unto whom they
will. For Peter being clothed with no such Power himself, nor having ever
pretended to exert such a Jurisdictive Authority, as some Popes have had the
Vanity and Pride to do, how could he convey it unto, and entail it upon others,
under the quality and character of being his Successors? Yea our Lord JESUS
Christ was so far from exercising a Power and Authority of divesting Princes of
their Soveraignties, Principalities and Dominions, though all of them were then
gross Idolaters, that he would not be prevailed upon to divide an Inheritance
between two Brethren, when desired by one of them to do it. But as he made it
the duty of all those who should believe in him, and embrace the Christian
Faith, to be conscientious and exact in yielding Obedience to all the Laws and
Commands of Civil Rulers and Magistrates, whether they should be Heathen or
Christians, provided that those Laws and Injunctions were not inconsistent
with, and repugnant to the Laws of God: So he was Himself contented to Pay
Tribute to Tiberius Caesar, who was both an Idolater and a Tyrant. Nay, so far
are the Bishops of Rome from having any Jurisdiction in the quality of St.
Peter's Successors, over the Dominions of any Prince and Potentates whatsoever,
That all the right which they have to their own Temporal and Secular
Possessions, even to that which is vulgarly called the Patrimony of St. Peter,
is by and from the Concession and Grants of Potentates, Kings, and Civil Rulers
(among whom I would not be thought to place Constantine, whose pretended
Donation is a mere Fiction and Chimera, but some that were later than he) who
were more Liberal and Beneficent, than they were Prudent and Wise. Moreover,
though the Spaniards have had sometimes, the weakness as well as the vanity to
Claim a right to the whole West Indies, through and by virtue of the Donation of
Pope Alexander VI. in his Bulls Dated 2d and 3d of May, Anno 1493, yet the very
Spanish Historians do assure us, that Ferdinand and Isabella who were King and
Queen of Castile, See Herrera's Hist. of the West Indies. Dec. Lib. 1. 2. Cap 4.
when Columbus made the first discovery of the West Indies in the year 1492,
having consulted with those who were esteemed the most Learned in the Civil and
Canon Laws, thought it needless to use any such Formality as to desire a Grant
and Donation of those Countries from the Pope; and that the Bulls of Alexander
VI. were obtained, or rather accepted upon some particular Considerations.

Nor have diverse Nations, and those Roman Catholics, as well as Reformed, made
the least scruple of sailing unto, and settling in the Regions and Countries of
America, notwithstanding the Pope's Bulls, by which they are said to have been
granted to the Kings of Spain. Seeing besides what has been done by diverse
Princes and States during this whole present Century, and a good part of the
former, whereof I shall here make little or no mention (it being notoriously
and fully known, not only to every Statesman, Scholar, Merchant, Shopkeeper and
Artificer, but to those who are the meanest Boors, Peasants, and the
ignorantest part of Mankind) there were diverse attempts and endeavors made by
others Trading to America immediately and soon after the emission of those
Bulls, upon which some would found the Spaniard's having a right and claim, and
legitimate Title to those Dominions. For no longer than three years after the
pretended Donation of all the American Territories to Ferdinand and Isabella,
King and Queen of Castile by Alexander VI. did Henry VII. of England (though a
zealous Roman Catholic, and one who by reason of his Domestic Troubles stood
in great need of the Favor of the Sea of Rome, and who no less courted it)
Equip and set forth in the Year 1496, four Ships under the Command of Sir John,
and Sir Sebastian Cabet of Bristol, to discover, enter upon, and take
possession of any place or places of the West Indies, that were not in the
actual possession of the Spaniards, which by his Authority and in his Name they
did from 25 to 26 Degrees of the Northern Latitude; and in two Voyages which
they made to the West Indies, they both established a Friendship and Trade with
the Natives of Florida, Long Island, and of diverse places of those American
Countries. And though Henry VIII. who succeeded him (through his being employed in
Wars with France and Scotland, and taken up about important affairs at home)
could not extend his Empire in the West Indies; nevertheless there were, even
in his Reign, diverse private Persons that voluntarily engaged in the making
discoveries and settling Trade in America: And among others whom we do find
equipped and sent forth upon this Design, were Edward Spurstow, in the 5th and
9th Years of Henry VIII. and Robert Warner in the 12th of the same Reign, who
made rich Voyages thither, and were kindly entertained by the Natives. And
which is of affinity hereunto, and extremely pertinent, for showing the
insignificancy of the forementioned Bulls to the establishing any right in the
Spaniards to any other Parts of America than they are actually in possession
of; it deserves to be observed, how that Vespusius a Florentine by order of
Emanuel King of Portugal, did in the Year 1500, discover all Brasile, which
makes a large part of the American Continent, and that the Portuguese asserted
their right unto it, and preserved a liberty of Trading thither,
notwithstanding all that was objected to the contrary by Ferdinand and Isabella
of Castile. Whereunto should I add what has been done since, and that not only
by the English under Queen Elizabeth, and King James, Charles* I. and II. but
by the French and Dutch, and by diverse other Nations and States, which have all
traded to and settled several Colonies both upon the Terra firma and the
Islands of America, notwithstanding either the Popes Bulls of Donation of those
Countries, and Islands to the Spaniards, or their pretensions unto them, by any
other Right or Title whatsoever; it would evidently and unanswerably appear,
that their Claim to the West Indies was never further allowed and admitted by
any European Potentates and Rulers, than in reference to those Places and
Territories of which they were become actually possessed. Yea the Pope's grant
of the West Indies to the Castilians, having been in order to the propagation
of the Christian Faith among those Infidels, The Sea of Rome challenging no
Power or Authority to dispose of Earthly Dominions, save in relation thereunto,
and neither for destroying the Natives or usurping their Territories, it
naturally follows that the Spaniards having acted so directly contrary to all
this, See De las Casas Account of the first Voyages, Engl. Edit. 1699 p. 184.
both in Massacring above Forty Millions of the Indians, and in the encouraging
them in their Heathenish Idolatry, through selling their Idols unto them for
Money, after the Indians had thrown them away, rather than in seeking and
promoting their Conversion to the Christian Religion, can pretend no claim of
right and title to those Countries and Dominions by the Pope's Bulls, Idem ib.
p. 147. prop. 26.
but as De las Casas expresses it, All their Conquests are to be accounted
Unjust, Tyrannical and Null.

It Is true that the Spaniards have at all times been displeased with, and
opposite unto the Settlement of any Nations in America besides themselves; but
the many rich Colonies, such as Virginia, Barbados, Bermudos, New England, New
York, Carolina, Pensilvania, Jamaica, etc. which the English have there,
besides what places are possessed by others, especially by the French and Dutch
in that part of the World, do abundantly show, that all Nations do account the
Claim of the Spaniards to the whole West Indies to be no better than a weak,
vain and chimerical Imagination, and that the Popes Bulls by which it is
alleged that they are entitled thereunto, are no otherwise esteemed by
European Princes and States, than as a Jest and Banter.

Nor, Finally, have the Spaniards themselves paid that respect to the Bulls of
Alexander VI. which they should, and certainly would have done, had they taken
their right to the American Islands and Dominions to be derived from them:
Seeing whereas the same Pope had in and by these very Bulls, not only confirmed
unto the Portuguese their title to such places, as they were not only possessed
of in the East Indies, but to all other whatsoever in that Eastern quarter of
the World, for the Occupying and Inheriting whereof they had formerly obtained
Bulls of other Pope^, and particularly of Eugenius IV. excluding all others
from trading thither, yet notwithstanding of this, they of Castile laid Claim
to the Moluccao Islands, to which Ferdinand Magelanus had found a passage by
the South-West of America, and continued to assert and defend their Pretensions
to them, until John King of Portugal, by lending the Emperor Charles V. 350000
Ducats, upon condition, that He and his Heirs should forbear trading to the
Molucca's till the Money were repaid; they declined the maintaining their Title
to those Islands, and laid aside their trading to them.

Nor is it unworthy of remark, as well for the chicane as the pleasantry, and
divertisement of it, that the Pope having divided the new World into two
Hemispheres, allotting the Western to the Spaniards, and the Eastern to the
Portuguese, how that they coming to disagree about their respective Shares,
each of them laying claim (as I have said before) to the Molucca Islands, as
falling by that division within their Portion, and the decision of the case,
seeming to depend upon Mathematical Calculations, about which the men of skill
in Geography, being consulted on both sides, the Spaniards and Portuguese did
in reference thereunto, differ from one another almost Forty degrees, in their
fixing of the Longitude, and so dogmatical and obstinate were both in their
accounts, that orders were given by public Edicts, for fixing the Degrees and
Meridians, in their several Charts and Maps, as they had been differently
determined by the two Nations.

Finally that which still shows a further slight put upon those Bulls, by the
very Spaniards themselves is this, namely, that no sooner had Americus
Vespusius discovered the South Sea, and found store of Excellent Timber, for
building of Ships, near to an excellent Port, that was but one league distant
from that Sea, and which Vespusius called Ralio, then that having immediately
built two Ships there, See Mariana's hist. of Spain lib 26. cap. 2. and
Herrera's hist. of the West Indies dec. 2d. lib. 6. a capite 3. ad cap. 9.
he sailed from thence to the Northern parts of the East Indies, and begun in
the Reign of Charles the 5th. to settle a Colony there upon one of those
Islands, which afterward upon the perfecting of that Plantation in the time of
Philip the 2d. came to be called the Philippine Islands, where to this day they
have a Colony, and keep possession of them in scorn and contempt of the Pope's
Bulls, by which all the East Indies were granted to the Portuguese.

The Third and last thing that I would premise upon this occasion, and in order
to the clearer determination of the point in dispute, is, that whatsoever right
of propriety, and dominion the Spaniards may have, by the Title and upon the
foot of Conquest acquired in and over the Empires of Mexico and Peru, and such
Countries and Provinces, that were dependent upon, Subject and Tributary unto
those two Empires, yet they cannot thereby have obtained and Jurisdiction Title
or Claim of possession over, in, and to those regions, districts and places of
America which as they have never Subdued, so they of those places were not nor
at any time had been in Vassallage or Subjection to the Monarchs and Sovereign
Rulers of either of those Empires. I could very justly have laid down the
Postulatum, and proposition more at large, and at the same time been able to
justify it both by Reason and Authority, and to have proved and made it good,
as well by Artificial as Inartificial Arguments: namely that whatsoever Legal
right, the Spaniards may have acquired to those Lands and Territories in
America of which they are possessed, by the claim and upon the foot of
prescription through their having Inhabited, occupied and inherited them for
above 200 years, without interruption, disseisure, or dispossession; yet they
never obtained a Lawful and righteous Title unto, or a Legal Jurisdiction over
them, upon the basis and foundation of having Conquered the Mexican and
Peruvian Emperors and Empires in and by a Just War, but that they rather
subdued, and destroyed those Monarchs, and Possessed themselves of their
Dominions, by Fraud, Violence and Usurpation. Now Puffendorf tells us, and that
agreeably to the opinion of all Civilians, Dissertat academ. Select. p. 293.
that per solam vim injustam, non posse alicui Solidum Jus quaeri, and cui
exadversum, obligatio conscientiam stringens respondeat, nisi vitium
acquisitionis purgatum fuerit per accidentem post novam causam quae per se jus
parere idonea est. No right is acquired, or does arise or accrue to any, by the
alone and single means of unjust Violence and Force; nor do a People become
obliged and bound in conscience to pay Fealty, and Allegiance, and to yield
Obedience to such, as have Unrighteously and without Cause, or Provocation,
Overpowered and Mastered them, unless and until something else does interpose
and intervene, that may create and give a Title, and right of Domination, Rule
and Authority unto the Former and beget ties of legal Subjection and Obedience
in the latter. For as Grotius affirms to the same purpose, That Actus Imperij
invasoris quos exercet, De Jure Bell, and pac. lib. 1. cap. 4.
nullam vim habere possunt ex ipsius Jure, quod nullum est. That no Invader
merely as such, and under that reduplication has a right of exacting Fealty
and Obedience of the Subjects of those Princes, whom they have without Justice
violently and forcibly assaulted. That Quicquid Jure possidetur, injuria
aufertur; What any rightfully possesses, he cannot save injuriously be
disseised of, is engraven upon the minds of all men, as a part of the
Legislation of the Divine Creator, conveyed unto us with our Natures. Nor can
it be denied by any, who do believe that there are such things, as Right and
Wrong among men, and that they are under Laws which enjoin, See de las Casas of
the Voyages, etc. of the Spaniards to the West Indies. p. 147. English
translation, and alibi passim. etc.
what is Just, and prohibit what is unjust; but that the Wars which the
Spaniards made upon the Emperors of Mexico and Peru, See also what Mar. Ginami
has in his Italian translatiof de las Casas Book, particularly in that part
called Conquista dell' Indie.
and upon such Supreme Rulers and Governors of those other American
Territories and Countries whereof they are become possessed, were the most
groundless, unrighteous and unjust, as well as the most bloody inhumane and
barbarous, that ever were either begun, or carried on in any part of the World:
Seeing that though those Potentates, Rulers, and their People and Subjects were
not Christians (and for any thing that we do know, were never provided of means
nor furnished with advantages of being such) yet they were as Lawful Kings,
Princes, and Governors of their several and respective Dominions, Territories,
and Districts in America, and as Legal Proprietors of their Demesns and
Possessions there, as any European Prince or People whatsoever are in reference
either unto the Authority and Jurisdiction, which they have and do exercise in
this part of the Terrestrial Globe, or to the Lands and Goods where they do
here inhabit, and which they do enjoy and possess. For Infidels being rational
Creatures, as well as other men are, they are thereupon Sociable, as well as
they, and consequently capable of entering into Societies, and agreeing upon
Laws for the Government of them; and indeed to have Governors and to be
Governed, are equally common to all sorts of men, whether they Worship God or
Idols, being things that have their foundation in the light of Nature, and not
in Revelation. And therefore, Civil Dominion and Property, being no ways
founded in Grace, or in the Orthodoxy of Faith, but in Principles of Nature
which guide men to provide for their own safety, it is as much a violation of
the Laws of God, and of Nations, to Invade the Countries of those Sovereigns
and to deprive those Potentates of their Dominions, without a previous and
antecedent just reason and cause, and it is as heinous an offense, against the
Laws both of Nature and Revelation to rob and plunder their People of what they
had and enjoyed, as it is for any one King and people in this Christian part of
the World to do the like against and upon any other in this Hemisphere, and who
are of the same belief of the Gospel that they who Invade them are.

Nor have there hitherto been, nor hereafter can, any reasons be produced, for
legitimating and justifying the War of the Spaniards, upon and against the
natural Princes and the Natives of the West Indies, but which do with greater
evidence proclaim, and more singularly aggravate and enhance the guilt of it.
For to allege that they were Idolaters, and that therefore it was lawful, to
make War upon, and to destroy and extirpate them, is directly repugnant to all
the Principles of Humanity, the Maxims of Evangelical Meekness, and the Methods
established by our Lord JESUS Christ for the Propagation of the Christian
Faith; as well as to all the Laws of Nature, Revelation and Nations. And as the
time once was, when all the Nations even of Europe, Asia and Africa, save the
single and l^ttle People of the Jews, were gross and open Idolaters; so I do
not believe that any are so far void of good Sense, and of humane Sentiments,
as to think that the Jews, had they been powerful enough to have attempted it,
stood warranted and authorized to have depopulated the Earth, through destroying
the Inhabitants of it. And considering how the same Character of being
Idolaters is by most of those of all Countries that are styled Reformed
fastened upon the Spaniards themselves, because of diverse Religious Actions in
their Pontifician Worship, it is not therefore to consult well for their own
safety, to invest those who do both believe and call them so, with a right of
Slaughtering and Murdering them upon that account.

And whereas it may possibly be pretended, that the Spaniards had just cause
administered unto them, of making War upon the Indians, even almost to the
extripating of them, in that the Potentates and People of America, would not
admit them to Trade and reside peaceably among them: It is as irrational and
barbarous an Allegation as the former, and is withal uncontroulably false with
respect to matter of Fact, which the other was not. For abstracting from the
question, whether one People may not lawfully exclude and debar another from
Trafficking with them, and settling in their Country, which why it may not be
done in other Cases, besides that of open Hostility, I will not at this time
take upon me to decide; but that which I do affirm, is, That the Spaniards had
no provocation of that kind given them for their making War upon the Natives.
It being declared and recorded by their own Historians and Writers, that the
Indians received them cheerfully, and treated them amicably, and entertained
them according to all the rules of Hospitality and Friendship; yea, both
wellcom'd and esteemed them rather as Gods than as Men, until the Spaniards, by
their Barbarities perpetrated upon the Natives, provoked them to seek and
endeavor, how to preserve and defend themselves from their brutal and hellish
Rage. So that, though there be not the least shadow of truth in that pretense for
the Spaniards having made War for Forty Years successively, used all the Arts
of Fraud, Treachery and Violence, for destroying and exterminating them, which
they so far effected, as to Murder above Forty Millions of Men, Women, and
Children, to the laying waste some of the largest and finest Countries in the
World, and the rendering them in a manner destitute of Inhabitants; yet the
folly and impertinence of those who produce this as a reason, and in
justification of the War that was made upon the Indians, are too obvious and
remarkable to be overlooked, and silently omitted: Seeing by the same reason,
and upon the same motive, that they seek and endeavor, to have the Spaniards
either excused or justified in what they did against the Natives of America; an
European Nation that has Strength and Power enough to fall upon the Spaniards
in their West India Provinces, and is able to drive them thence, becomes
warranted and authorized to do it, in that it is their avowed principle and
practice, to permit none to Plant and Trade there besides themselves.

So that it being apparent from the whole, that has been said under this Head,
that the War which the Spaniards made against the Rulers and Inhabitants of the
West Indies, who were the Ancient Natives, was, upon all accounts, most
unrighteous and unjust, it does from thence unanswerably follow, That no Title
in those Dominions can arise and accrue unto them, from their having been
Victors and Conquerors in that War. It being impossible that what is lawful and
just, should be the natural, proper and immediate effect of what is in it self,
Wicked, Abominable and Villainous. And therefore such of the Spanish Nation as
have been wise and honest, See de las Casas account of the Voyages and
Discoveries of the Spaniards in the West Indies, from p. 136 to 161 of the
English Translation.
they do renounce all claim of Right in the Crown of Spain to a Soveraignity
and Jurisdiction over those Countries, and the having a legal property in them,
on the Foot and Foundation of Conquest, and are willing to place and settle it
on the bottom of their own Occupation and Possession, and quiet acquiescence of
the Natives. And indeed when Columbus had first discovered the West Indies, and
was about to establish Colonies in those Provinces, and being at his second
Voyage to Hispaniola, advised by some of his own People, and particularly by
one Father Boil, to sieze upon Guacanagari, that was an Indian King, and stood
accused for having Murdered some Castilians, whom Columbus had left there upon
his first Voyage thither, he not only refused to do it, but declared that he
came not into those Countries upon a Design of using Force, See Herrera dec. 1.
li^. 2. c. 9.
nor in order to make a Conquest, but in a peaceable and gentle way, and to
settle with the consent of the Natives.

In brief, though neither any crimes against God, wherewith the Indians were
chargeable, nor any undue and inhumane carriages toward the Spaniards, at
their first Landing in America, whereof some have had both the Impudence and
Indiscretion to accuse them, were either just motives according to the Morals
of Heathens or Christians, or allowable by the Laws of Nations, as Lawful
causes for the Spaniards making War upon that People, yet both the occasions of
it on the part of the Natives, and the real Inducements unto it on the side of
the Spaniards, are too obvious and apparent, to escape the Observation and
Notice of any person, that is conversant in History. Namely, that the
Simplicity, Meekness, Patience and Unacquaintedness with Arms, and Martial
Discipline, and their being ill provided of Weapons, either Offensive or
Defensive, together with their abounding with Wealth, and their Countries being
stored with Gold and Silver Mines, were the true occasions of that War, on the
side of the Indians, and an insatiable Avarice, a Brutal Insolence, and
unquenchable thirst after Blood, were the real causes of it, on the part of the
Spaniards; who under all their pretenses, of converting those Infidels to the
Christian Faith and Worship, See De las Casas ubi Supra, through the whole Book.
intended principally if not only, the destroying and extirpating of them, and
converting their Countries and their Treasures to their own use.

Whereunto may be further added under this head, that the Murder of the
Emperors of Mexico and Peru, and the destroying all such as were of the Royal
Lines, of those two great Monarchical Families, which was perpetrated against
all the measures and obligations of Gratitude, Truth, Honor, Equity and
Justice, and with all the Treachery and Inhumanity imaginable, gave no Legal
Jurisdiction to the Spaniards, over such as had been Subjects or Vassals to
those Sovereigns, in that the Spaniards did not set themselves up, and lay
claim to an Authority, in order to Govern the Mexicans and Peruvians, to their
Advantage and Benefit, but that they might extirpate and exterminate them. And
Governments being at first instituted, for the safety of a People and not for
their ruin: Kings being as Aristotle says, ordained for the good of Kingdoms,
and not Kingdoms for the Lust and Pleasure of Kings, to be Tyrannized over as
they will, such can never acquire any right to Rule and Govern a Country, whose
design work and endeavor were to depopulate it. And if on the supposition,
that it were possible for one, that is a Legitimate Sovereign and Monarch, to
entertain a purpose of making an Universal destruction of his People, instead
of Protecting them (which I do really think and believe no Prince whatsoever is
capable of, who is not fitter for Bedlam than a Throne, and who needs not
rather to be Bound in Chains, than to be accounted fit to sway a Scepter, as
being more Mad and Distracted, than any that are kept at Hogsden) it were
Lawful for his very Subjects, without the Violation of their Allegiance, to
restrain and resist him; Surely then it ought much more to be esteemed, not
only Lawful but an indispensible Duty, to withstand and oppose those, to whom
they had never been Subjects, paid Fealty, or yielded Obedience, that should
challenge an Authority and Jurisdiction over them, merely that they might in
the exercise thereof, Massacre and Exterminate them, which was directly the
case of the People of the West Indies, in relation to the Spaniards, both at
their first Landing among them, and for a long series of Years after. So that
this serves to Vindicate from blame, not only all those few and small
Retaliations, which any of the Native Indians were capable of making upon the
Spaniards, in Killing them wheresoever they could conveniently find, and were
strong enough to Master them; but it does abundantly justify the withdrawment
of all those that could, from a dependence upon the Empires of Mexico and Peru,
as they are now become vested in the Kings of Spain, though they had been
anciently either Subjects, or Vassals, or Feudatories unto them, and their
erecting themselves into Free, Absolute and Independent Governments, that
thereby instead of falling under, and being forced to submit to the Spanish
Jurisdiction, they might be the better able to withstand their power, and to
defend themselves against all the pretensions of the Spaniards, in their claim
of Authority over them. And if the length of time, wherein the Spaniards have
not only been in the quiet possession, but in the exercise of Rule and
Government, over such and such West India Provinces, Countries and Districts,
that have, either actively, or passively, submitted to them, gives them a Title
thereunto by Prescription, then certainly by parity of Reason, and on the same
foot of account, are they who (upon the Spaniards getting into Possession of
Mexico and Peru, and there treating of the Natives in the manner above related)
withdrew themselves from any further Dependence on those Empires, and became
erected into distinct, free and independent Governments, made likewise entitled
to there Possessions, and Jurisdictions, by the same tenor and claim of
Prescription. Nor is it to be denied, but that there are several Societies and
bodies of Indians within the ancient Precincts and Limits of the foresaid
Empires, who to this day, instead of submitting to the Jurisdiction of the
Spaniards, are in continual and constant War with them. Whereof though a
Multitude of Instances might be assigned, yet for the sake of Brevity, I shall
only mention two. Of which one shall be the Collection or Herd of Indians,
within the bounds of the Kingdom of Guatimala, See Gage's Survey edi. 1699. p.
160, 161. and 305.
whom the Spaniards have not hitherto Conquered, but would fain subdue, in
order both to the settling a Commerce with some parts of Jucatan, from the doing
whereof they are hindered by those Natives, and for the opening a way, for the
conveying their goods over Land to the Havana, which they reckon would be often
more for their safety, than the venturing them thither by Sea, from the Gulf.
The other which I would mention is, that Sept and Tribe of Indians, who remain
imbodied on the Northern part of the Province of New Mexico, who are both
Valiant, and in implacable Hostility with the Spaniards, and whom they are more
desirous to bring into Subjection, than any other that are unsubdued, because
of the rich Gold and Silver Mines, which they know to lie in the Mountains, and
within the Districts which those Natives possess, where they have hitherto
covered and defended themselves, against the power of the Spaniards.

Finally, if the Crown of Spain, cannot rightfully pretend unto any Sovereignty
over those, whom I have mentioned, it is then Apodictically evident, that through
their having mastered Mexico and Peru, and got into possession of those
Empires, (and by reason of a long and quiet Occupation, are come to be
universally acknowledged to have a Right in them, so far as they are possessed,
and submitted unto by the Natives) they can lay no Claim of Title, Authority or
Jurisdiction whatsoever, unto and over such Places and People, who, as they
never were in any way or manner dependant upon, or Feudatory to the
forementioned Empires; so they were never subdued by, nor yielded any Fealty or
Obedience to the Spaniards; but instead thereof have all along been either in
terms of Hostility, or in actual War with the Spaniards, and have defended
themselves, and preserved their Territories from being overrun, subdued,
occupied, and inhabited by them. Which is the plain and direct Case of those of
that part of the Isthmus of Darien, where the Scots, with consent of the
Natives, and of their Rulers, have Landed, and are about settling a Colony.

And this does both conduct me more nearly, and let me in more closely to the
Matter and Affair, which my design in the writing of this Discourse, is to
vindicate and justify; namely, That the Scots in their endeavoring to
establish their Colony at Caledonia, at the Port, and upon the Harbor Acla in
the Isthmus of Darien; have made no Invasion upon the Dominions, Territories,
or Demesns of His Catholic Majesty, nor have thereby done any thing which may
be called an Infraction of, Treati^^ and Alliances between the Crowns of Great
Britain and of Spain. Now that I may manage this undertaking, both with all the
Perspicuity, and with all the Candor imaginable, I shall freely grant unto the
Spaniards whatsoever in Justice and Reason should not be denied them: That I
may the more methodically, the better, and with the less offense to any
afterward deny unto them such Pretensions and Claims, as they have no grounds,
either in Laws, or in Compacts and Stipulations for the demanding of. I do
therefore willingly and with great readiness allow them to have a Title unto,
and a Propriety in Mexico and Peru, and such other Provinces and Islands in
America, where they have Plantations and Colonies, to such dimensions, so far,
and to that extent of limits and bounds, as they do actually occupy and are in
the possession of. For notwithstanding that their entrance into, and first
settlement in those Countries, was mostly in the way of Force, Violence and
Usurpation, and accompanied with the greatest Barbarities, horridest Cruelties,
and most execrable Massacres which it was possible for Men to practice, commit
and perpetrate; from, and by which no just and legal Title could result and
accrue unto them in and over those Territories, as I have already said, yet
through their having for so long, and for such an uninterrupted series of Years,
peaceaby possessed and inhabited such and such places in the West Indies, there
is from thence, according to the Laws of Nations, a Title risen unto and become
vested in them by Prescription over these Provinces, Isles, and Districts, that
unless in the case of actual War, none may or can disturb, disseize or expel
them, without the doing that which is unlawful, unjust, injurious, and highly
Criminal. For if Prescription should not be acknowledged to create and give
unto a Prince or People a Title to a Country, Province, or Territory, so far as
he or they may have been possessed of them; and if a peaceable and undisturbed
Occupation for an hundred or two hundred Years be not confessed sufficient time
to found Prescription upon, the Right of many Princes, as well as of Common
Men, would be very questionable to what they call their Inheritances, and
Matter and Cause would thereby be administered, of Bloody Wars as well as of
litigious and expensive Suits in Courts of Law, both between Rulers, and
between private Subjects, in most places in the World.

But whereas upon this Concession which I have made, it may possibly be said
and alleged by some, that through the Spaniards having a right of Soveraignity
and Dominion in and over Mexico and Peru, they must consequently be owned to
have a legal Title to all the Provinces, Districts, and Places, that had been
formerly, and particularly at the Castilians landing in America, were parts of,
Feudatory unto, or any ways dependant upon those Empires: It being a Maxim in
the English, as well as in all other Laws, That the Possession of a part in a
Person or Persons that have the Right, gives unto them a just Claim of
Possession to the whole. Whereunto the Answers that may be given are obvious
from what has been offered and laid down in the foregoing Postulata and
Premises; namely, first, That the whole imported in that Maxim, does only refer
unto, and obtain in reference to such, who had been, and were the legal and
rightful, Proprietors of such and such Dominions and Territories, or who had
through a Conquest in a just War, cut out and made a Title to themselves by their
Swords; whereas it signifies nothing, nor is of any validity to the giving a
legal Claim and Title unto, and over any parts of a Country, further than as
they are actually occupied and possessed, to those who neither had ancient
Propriety in and over those Dominions, nor had come to acquire any in way of
Conquest by a just War. Which being the plain and direct case of the Spaniards,
even in relation to the Empires of Mexico and Peru; it may therefore be
affirmed, and that consonantly both to all the Rules of Laws, and the Measures
of Equity and Justice, and that from the Castilians having inhumanely,
savagely, and treacherously Murdered the Emperors of Mexico and Peru, and the
having destroyed all those of each of those Imperial Lines as they could
byfraud or violence get within the circle of their Power, and their having set
themselves to Slaughter, Massacre and Exterminate the Natives, as far as their
might and strength, excited and influenced by Malice, Rage, Avarice, and
insatiable thirst after Blood could extend and reach; I say it may be affirmed,
that from thence and thereupon no Right or Title of Propriety or Dominion did
arise unto the Spaniards in and over those Empires, further than they came
quietly to inhabit, and were submitted unto; but that rather thereupon the
Natives of those two Empires were at liberty to account these two great
Monarchies to be entirely dissolved, and might reckon that they themselves were
in effect reduced back again to the State of Nature, and that whatsoever Power
and Authority had either by primitive Compacts and Agreements, or by tacit
Submissions been vested in those Monarchs, and their Hereditary Successors, was
become wholly vacated and annulled, not only as to them and their legal Heirs,
but to all such who should pretend to arise and set up in their room, in the
virtue of any Claim resulting from their having destroyed and murdered those
Monarchs; and that the Power and Jurisdiction of the ancient Emperors of Mexico
and Peru being altogether extinguished, there was thereby a Right as well as a
Freedom restored unto and divolv'd upon the Natives, of disposing themselves,
how, to whom, and after what manner they pleased, so that they might choose
what Governors, and erect what Government they would, in order to their being
kept in peace and safety among themselves, and be protected and defended from
and against all such as should hostilely invade them.

So that whosoever of those Indians, who had formerly been dependant upon and
subject unto the Empires of Mexico and Peru, did, for the reasons I have
mentioned, withdraw themselves from being for the future any ways under those
Empires, or any parts or branches of them, and became united and confederated
into distinct, separate and independent Communities, erecting Governments, and
choosing Governors of their own; As the Spaniards can lawfully pretend to no
legal Claim of Right and Authority over them; so it is not only free for those
Indians to admit any European or other Nation to come, and to settle, and to
plant among them, but they may upon the motive and guidance of their own
Interest, as well invite as receive any sort of People to plant and reside
among them, that shall show themselves willing, and who may be able to assist
those Natives against the Spaniards who make War upon and seek to oppress them.

For as Civilians do generally agree, Vid. Puffen. de jur. Not. ad Gent. lib.
8. c. 6.. 25, 26.
Si populus vel propriis viribus vel siociorum jugum hostile excusserit, sine
dubio libertatem and statum antiquum recuperat. Whenever a People, that has
been drove out of their Possessions, do either by their own Power, or by the
aid and assistance of their Allies, rescue themselves from the Yoke and
Dominion of their Enemies, they immediately thereupon do legally recover both
their Liberty and Right to whatsoever they were disseized of; and this is
called Jus postliminium quod nascitur ex reditu in limen. To which purpose
Grotius says from Pomponius, Vid. Grot. de Jure Bell. and Pac. lib. 3. c. 9..
13.
Expulsis hostibus ex agris quos ceperant, dominia eorum ad priores dominos
redeunt, Upon the expulsion of Enemies out of such Territories whereof they
were by Invasion and Usurpation become possessed, the Propriety and Dominion of
those Lands do return unto such who had been the first Lords and Owners of
them. Nor is any length of time allowed by some of the best Civilians
sufficient to give a Title, so much as by Prescription unto such who by force
and violence were gotten into the Occupation of Countries and Territories, in
case they whom they had subdued gave no signs of their submission to them, nor
any ways testified their receiving of them for their Rulers and Lords. Nullum
tempus, says one, Vid. Grot. ubi supra, l. 2. c. 4.
sufficit ad acquirendum sum^um imperium, aut partem ejus necessariam, nolente
primo possessore, quod significatur etiam silentio quando loqui non audeat. No
length of time wherein an Usurper possesses, can vest him in a rightful
Jurisdiction and Dominion, while he wants the consent in some manner intimated
of those that were the first legal Inheritors, and that their very silence is
enough to show their refusal of becoming Subjects, when their circumstances are
such, that they dare not express their disclaiming his Soveragnity over them.
For in some cases it is enough that they murmur, though they dare not express
their hatred; seeing that they do not resist, is not because they would not,
but by reason that they cannot; and their being tame and silent under a Force,
which they can neither withstand nor throw off, do no more declare and express
their submission, than a Man approves of his being robbed, when without
contradiction or quarrelling, he delivers his Purse to a Thief whom he knows to
be too strong for him.

Yea, Secondly, it may be farther added in way of answer, That the whole which
can be supposed to follow upon, and to result from the forementioned Maxim in
Law, is only that the Spaniards may thereupon and from thence pretend to a
Title of Right in, and of Dominion over all such Places in America, as had
anciently been either directly and immediately subject to, or by one way or
another dependant upon the forementioned Empires; but it does in no manner
concern or affect the settlement of the Scots on the Isthmus of Darien, nor can
it be pleaded as a reason for giving disturbance to their Caledonian Colony.
Forasmuch as the Country of Darien, had never been any part of, nor any ways
Feudatory or tributary unto, nor in any manner whatsoever dependant upon either
of the foresaid Empires, but was always a distinct, free, and independent
Country, and the Natives and Inhabitants thereof, a distinct, free and
independent People. Nor has the place of that Isthmus, where the Scots are
particularly landed, and have begun to erect Forts, and do purpose to establish
a Colony for Trade and Commerce, been ever subdued or inhabited by the
Spaniards. To which may be further added, That as the District on that Isthmus
where the Scots have begun their settlement was never dependant upon any part
or place, where the Spaniards have their Colonies within the Isthmus, so the
Ruling Natives of that little circuit where the Scots are, and of whom they
have obtained liberty to settle and plant, were never subject to any other
Indian Sovereign or Government within the Precincts of the Isthmus.

Which leads me to a second Concession, that I am obliged to make unto the
Spaniards, but whereof that they can have no advantages, for the weakening or
rendering controvertible a right and legal Power and Liberty in the Scots to
settle on the Isthmus of Darien, I shall give uncontradictable Reasons, and
those such as shall be founded both upon Laws and Facts. That which I do then
further grant unto them, is this, namely, That besides the many large and
numerous Colonies which the Crown of Spain has in diverse other places of
America, they have also several of very great importance and profit, within and
upon the Isthmus of Darien. ^eeing the Spaniards are not only the undoubted
Masters of several places on the Bay of Panama, and of the Coast of the Isthmus
upon and toward the South Sea; but they do likewise possess Carthagena, which
stands on a small Island, and Porto bello which is upon the Continent upon the
North-Sea. Yea, I do moreover acknowledge, that besides their having heretofore
possessed Nombre de Dios, and their having Planted upon some part of the River
Darien it self, which are places nearer and more adjacent to that little
District and spot of Land, where the Scots have begun to settle, than those
already mentioned, but which they have since relinquished, and are wholly
withdrawn from: They have likewise at this very time some small Territories in
their Occupation which are not removed and distanc'd much above ten or twelve
Lagnes from the Caledonian Colony and New Edinburgh, where they are in the
possession of Mines, out of which they dig Gold: In reference to all which
places, as their Title and Right of Propriety is readily confessed by the
Scots, as well as legally asserted by themselves; so neither the Scots nor any
other Nation whatsoever, unless in case of open Hostility in a just War, can
invade them there, or seek to dispossess them from thence, without incurring
the guilt of great Injustice, and becoming violators of the Laws of Nations.
Nevertheless nothing of all this, that I have granted, can or ought to be
reasonably alleged as a legal plea against, a legitimate obstruction unto, or
a lawful hindrance of the Scots establishing a Colony at the Port Acla, or the
rendering it injurious and criminal in them, and an Infraction of Alliances, to
possess, with the consent of the Natives, the Country bordering upon, and
neigbouring unto it. Seeing the Equity and Justice of what they have therein
done, are easy to be demonstrated from and by all the Topics of Law, Reason,
and Fact, upon which the settlement of Colonies by Aliens, Foreigners, or
Strangers, in any parts of the World, have been accounted lawful, and do in the
esteem of Nations stand justified.

In order to the better and fuller clearing whereof, it may not be amiss to
observe, That neither antecedently in the discovery of that part of America by
the Spaniards, and their becoming at first possessors of any places there, nor
at any time since, was the Sovereignty and Dominion of the whole Isthmus of
Darien vested in any one Person whatsoever, as the sole and alone Ruler,
Governor and Prince of it. But it anciently was, and has always hitherto been
divided and distributed into several little Principalities and Jurisdictions,
over which they who bear the supreme Sway, and give Laws unto the rest of the
Natives in their different and respective Precincts, and both had, and still
have, Obedience paid and yielded unto them, by those that were or are the
Indigenae or Natural Inhabitants, deserved rather the Name and Style of
Captains than the Title of Princes and Kings. And who, though they be accordingly
called by the Natives Caciques, which is a much lower appellation than those of
Ingas, and the being the Offspring of the Sun, by which Emperors of Peru and
Mexico were styled; yet they have been at all times both absolute within their
several respective Districts, and altogether independent upon, and
unaccountable to one another, or to any Potentate else whatsoever; and how
contiguous soever their Principalities may be, and though never so small, narrow
and contracted in their Dimensions and Extents; yet further than as they became
confederated and united together by leagues between one another against their
Enemies, and particularly for mutual defense against the Spaniards, whom they
ever did, and still do account their common Enemy, they have at all times had
an independent and absolute Power and Authority within each of their own
particular Bounds, which they have unaccountably to any other Prince, Sovereign
or Monarch whatsoever, exercised over such as did inhabit in their several
distinct Circuits.

Nor is this a thing singular and peculiar to the People on the Isthmus of
Darien, but what has been and still is common upon the Continents and in the
Isles of Asia and Africa as well as in many other Countries, Provinces and
Islands of America, besides that which I have been speaking of. Nor can any
Person that pretends to have been conversant in Geography or Histories be
ignorant of this matter, whereof all the Accounts and Narratives which we have
of those three parts of the World do so fully and particularly instruct us.
Neither ought we to think it strange, that this should be the form, model, and
manner of Government on the foresaid Isthmus, and that the boundaries of
supreme Authority and Jurisdiction there, should be so narrowly limited,
confined and circumscribed, if we do but allow our selves to observe, how that
there is the same Species of Rule and Domination both as to quality and extent,
to be every where found and met with, in Brasile, Chili, Paragua, Florida,
Carolina, Virginia, Malabar, and the Country which is called The Land of the
Amazons, of which it is particularly remarkable, that there are above Fifty
different Indian Nations, or distinct and independent Septs, on the banks of
the River that is so called.

Nor was the like heretofore altogether unusual and unexemplify'd in the
European parts of the World, whereof the several and distinct supreme
Principalities of the ancient Britains in England, See Caesar de Bell. Gall.
lib. 5. and Cambden' s Brit, in Cant.
where in Julius Caesar's time, there were no fewer than four distinct Kings in
Kent alone, namely, Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax; or, as
Cambden calls them Reguli vel melioris Notae Nobiles; Captains or Persons
distinguished from the Vulgar by their Power and Figure, and whose Territories
could not be much larger, if of that extent, as the Districts of the several
Caciques on the Isthmus of Darien are. And the like may be said, only allowing
them greater dimensions of Territory, of the Saxons during the Heptarchy
afterward in the same Country, as well as of the Scots and Picts in the
ancient Caledonia. Yea, and the distinct and different Soveraignties which were
in Spain it self, not only both before and after it was a Roman Province, but
even until less than within these two last Centuries, As Leon, Arragon,
Navarre, Castile and Portugal, under which the Christians in Spain were divided
and those of Cordova, Sivil, Malaga, Granada, and others under the power of the
Moors, not to speak of the several independent and absolute Jurisdictions,
which are at this day both in Italy and some other places, do abundantly
confirm the same. And were not the Bible a Book, that some men are little
conversant in, they would not think it a Banter, to have those styled
Independent, Absolute and Sovereign Rulers, whose Territories are circumscribed
and confined within strait and narrow limits. Seeing besides many Instances of
that kind, which are to be met with in diverse places of the Sacred History,
they would find that Joshua subdued no fewer than 31 Kings in Canaan when he
conquered the Land in order to settle the People of Israel in it, Jos. 12.
though that Country was not much larger in the whole extent and circumference of
it, than some single Counties of England are; not to add that as there were
several Kings more, whom he did neither drive out, nor destroy, so most of the
primitive Governments of the World were of that sort, constitution and
complexion.

But to what has been already said and represented under this head, there is
further to be added, that whatsoever Possessions, the Spaniards have obtained
in that American Strait whether through their having conquered any of the
Caciques, that had their Jurisdictions there, or by their having contracted
Alliances, with those Indian Governors, and by Agreements with them and the
Natives acquired a Liberty to sit down, plant, and to erect Colonies within the
limits and bounds of their little Territories and Principalities; or how much
soever they may have encroached upon any of these Captains whom they have not
wholly subdued, and wrested part of their Lands and Jurisdictions from them;
yet there are still diverse of these Caciques over the Native Indians, who as
neither they, their People, nor their Territories, were ever conquered by the
Spaniards; so they never entered into Agreements and Contracts with them, nor
have at any time granted liberty unto them, to settle within the Precincts of
their Lands, Inheritances, and Demesnes, but have at all times been in terms of
Variance and Hostility with them, and for the most part in a state and
condition of actual War. So that at least within the Boundaries and
Jurisdictions of such Indian Governors, the Spaniards have no just or legal
pretense of Property and Dominion.

For how weak and mean soever those Natives and their Rulers may be esteemed
and represented, yet that does no ways alter the case, or any ways enfeeble
their right unto, and their authority over their own Principalities; but they
do retain an equal Claim and Title unto, and Property in what was anciently and
originally theirs, and what they have defended from the Invasion and Usurpation
of the Spaniards, as if their Dominions were as large, and their Might and
Power as great as those of His Britannick Majesty's are. The little Republic of
Geneva has as good right in Law to a Propriety in what they have immemorially
possessed, as the Great Monarch of France has unto the vast and powerful
Dominions over which he is Hereditarily King and Sovereign. Yea, they of San
Marino in Italy are no less absolute and independent Proprietors and Governors
in and over that poor and despicable Hamlet and Dorp, than those who go by the
Style of High and Mighty are over the Dutch Provinces in reference to those
Things, Matters and Ends for which they became United and Confederated. Nor is
the Duke of Mirandola, whose Territories do not extend themselves to three
Italian Miles, less absolute and independent over his own small Principality,
than the Emperor of Germany is with respect of his Austrian and Hereditary
Countries. For according to the Laws of Nature and of Nations the point of
Right and Property is the same in the Poor that it is in the Rich, and in the
Weak that it is in the Strong. And how impotent and contemptible soever those
unsubdu'd Caciques on the Isthmus of Darien are, in comparison of His Catholic
Majesty; yet it is enough to justify their Propriety and Authority in and over
what they possess, that the Spaniards have not by all their Power and Might
been hitherto able to disseize, subdue, or drive them out; but that all along
since the Castilians first descended upon the Isthmus, and occupy'd several
places within that Straight of Darien, they have been in a condition, either
singly by the forces of some one or other of them alone, or conjunctively by
uniting and joining their several and respective Powers together, to cover,
protect and defend themselves, their Territories and Jurisdictions from being
so Invaded as to be overrun and subdued.

Nor is the extent and dimensions of the Land and Territory so scanty and
small, or the number of those Captains or their People so few, in which, and
over whom the Span^^ards have not hitherto been able to obtain Possession and
Authority, as some who do not give themselves leave to think so closely of thi^
Affair, and to examine it with that accuracy which they ought to do, may be
inclined and ready to imagine; seeing, that upon the whole North-side of the
Isthmus from the River Darien to the Bastimentos, the Spaniards are not in
possession of one foot of Ground, nor ever were, save for a little while at
first of Nombre de Dios, which they soon relinquished. And it is against both
all the Topics of Argumentation, and all the Measures of Law and Justice, that
from the Spaniards having made some Settlements on the South Sea, and their
having, so far as they have obtained possession there, restricted and confined
the Natives to narrow bounds, to infer and conclude from thence, their having a
Propriety in, and a Jurisdiction over all the Northern Coast. And such a
pretense is the more unreasonable and absurd, in that the Isthmus of Darien is
naturally divided by a ridge of Hills that runs from East to West. Nor can
any allegation whatsoever more avowedly offer violence to common Sense, and
more notoriously attempt the putting an Affront upon the Understandings of Men,
than from the Spaniards being possessed of, and having dominion over one part
of Isthmus, to deduce and conclude from thence, that therefore they must have a
Propriety in, and a Sovereign Jurisdiction over the whole: And from their Title
and Right of Prescription upon long Occupation, unto some of the Southern
Boundaries of that Straight, to infer and plead their having in the virtue of
that, a Title to the Northern parts thereof, of which as they were never in
possession: so the People of the latter are wholly independent upon them of the
former, and the Rulers of the one altogether Absolute within themselves,
without deriving the least Authority from, or paying any kind or degree of
Subjection and Obedience unto the other.

And for the Spaniards to pretend, that through their possessing Porto Bello on
the South of Darien, and Carthagena in a small Island on the North-side of it,
that therefore, and by consequence, they ought to be acknowledged to have a
right of Propriety in, and of Jurisdiction over all the adjacent Country, which
is between two and three hundred English Miles in Dimension and Extent, is not
to Argue, but to Banter, and to Ridicule and Lampoon Mankind, instead of
endeavoring to instruct, satisfy and convince them. Especially seeing that as
all the Settlements and Plantations which the Spaniards have upon, or near unto
that Isthmus, whether upon the Southern, or the Northern Oceans, were all
obtained without the consent of the Natives, so the Indians who live and
inhabit in the interjacent and intervening Countries, between the Spaniards
Plantations, on the South and North-Seas, have still preserved the possession
of those Territories, without the having ever become subject unto, or the
having any ways acknowledged the Sovereignty and Dominion of the Spaniards over
them. And should we submit to that Way and Method of Reasoning, what a Claim
would the Kings of France have had long ago, to all the Countries, Provinces,
and Dominions, which the Catholic King does possess and bear Sovereignty over
in Europe; in that all the Spanish Provinces are situated and do lie between
the Countries which the French King possesses upon the Ocean, and those which
he has right unto, and Soveraignity over on the Mediterranean. Nor can any
thing carry more intrinsic and self-evidence along with it, than that when a
People were not the first Occupiers, and the original Inhabitants, their Title
unto, and their Tenure and Property in that case in a Country can extend and
reach no farther, than as they are got into possession of it, either by the
consent of the Natives, or by conquest in a lawful War, or by Prescription,
through long Occupation, upon an unjust one. None of all which do in any manner
obtain or hold, or can any ways be pleaded by the Spaniards in reference to the
Peninsula on the Isthmus of Darien, where the Scots are settling and
establishing a Colony.

Moreover, to all that is already said under this Head, let me further subjoin,
that no Nations being merely in actual possession of part of a Country that had
not been originally their own, has been accounted sufficient in Equity, Law or
Justice, to preclude and debar others from seeking to settle themselves in such
places as those Strangers who had come first to plant there were not in actual
possession of; whereof it were easy to assign many Instances, but it being a
matter whereof none that are acquainted with Books of Voyages, and Navigations,
can be ignorant, I shall content my self with the mentioning of a few; but in
the mean time shall be careful, that they may be adapted to the case that is
under present debate. Let it then be observed in the first place, That
notwithstanding the English had planted upon the Continent, as well as in
several Islands of America, and did particularly possess upon the Terra firma
from New England to Carolina, without the interposition of Colonies belonging
to any European Princes or States whatsoever, nevertheless the Dutch finding
Long Island, that is since come to be called New York, and which lies within
the forementioned Limits unoccupy'd, yet environed and surrounded on all hands
by English Plantations, they did in a time of full and entire Peace betwixt the
Crown of Great Britain and the Belgick-States, sit down and establish a
Plantation upon it; which without any disturbance from the English, or their
quarrelling with them upon that account, they continued to possess until the
Year 1667, when after a Treaty of Peace between King Charles II. and the States
General, for the putting an end to that War, which had commenced between those
two Ruling Powers, Anno 1665, Long Island was exchanged by the Dutch for
Surinam.

Moreover whereas the Spanish Plate Fleet must of necessity pass between
Florida, and the Bahama Islands, unto both which the Spaniards do likewise lay
claim by challenging a property in and a dominion over them; yet notwithstaning
of this, the English possessed themselves of the said Islands, and though the
Spaniards both complained and did highly resent it, and so far as they had
strength and power, did as well Barbarously as Injuriously treat those English,
whom they found settled there; nevertheless the Spaniards being no ways able to
Justify their Right and Title to those Islands, the English continued to
assert and maintain the Possession, which they had acquired, as long as they
themselves found there Intrest in it, and thought it convenient so to do.

Yea notwithstanding that the Spaniards plead a right unto, and a propriety in
Jucatan, and if the having overrun a great part of a Country, which is above
300 Leagues in compass, and the having Massacred a prodigious Number of the
Native Indians, give them a legal Title unto, and a Dominion over all the
Territories and Districts of it, It must be acknowledged that they had them.
Nevertheless, the English have not only Sailed frequently thither, and Landed
without asking leave of the Spaniards, but they did appropriate unto themselves
the Logwood in Cape Cato, which belongs thereunto, until it was so exhausted,
that it could no longer answer the Charge of sending Ships thither. Yea King
Charles the Second in time of Peace granted a patent to Dr. Cox to settle in
the Bay of Mexico, which the Spaniards never questioned, nor complained of. And
that the Doctors project did not succeed, proceeded from the inability or the
backwardness of the Undertakers to carry it on, and not from the Illegality or
Invalidity of that Princes Patent to have Authorized and Justified it.

Further though the Bay of Campechay, which lies in the Gulf of Mexico, must be
confessed to be Situate in a Country, over which the Spaniards pretend to have
the sole Sovereignty and Jurisdiction, yet the English have accounted this to
be no Obstruction in way of Law and Justice, to their settling at Port Royal in
the said Bay, and their carrying on there the same Trade, of cutting and
providing themselves of Logwood, which they formerly did at Cape Cato. Whereof
as I never heard of any complaint made by the Spaniards; So we may believe that
it would not have been regarded if there had, but that the English would have
pursued and persevered in the same Course and Method, of settling, removing,
and resettling there again, all which they did as they thought convenient, and
for their Advantage.

Moreover though all men know, that the Spaniards have not only many great
Plantations and Colonies in Hispaniola, but challenge a Peculiar right to that
Country, as having conquered it, or rather got Treacherously, Violently and
Barbarously, into the possession of it, and whereof their Massacring some
Millions of the Natives, may be admitted as a crying and execrable, as well as
a sufficient and undeniable Proof; yet the French upon their finding Pettit
Guaves, which lies and is Situated in Hispaniola, Unoccupied and Unpossessed,
they have without paying any respect to the pretensions of the Spaniards, taken
the liberty to settle there, and to establish a Colony, and to cultivate a
Trade. And likewise notwithstanding the claim of an Universal Right and
Jurisdiction, which the Spaniards (as I have often said) do challenge unto, and
over the whole Empire of Mexico, yet the French have not only once and again
endeavored to settle upon the River de Spiritu Sancto, which is in the Bay of
Mexico, and are at this time studying how to settle at the disemboging of the
River Messisipi which is in the Gulf of Mexico, but they have actually settled
in Guiana, that is Situated upon the Terra firma of the Mexican Continent.

Yea moreover still, namely that though the Spaniards have great Possessions and
many Plantations, on the Isthmus of Darien toward the South Sea, and do
pretend a right of Dominion and Sovereignty over that whole Country, yet the
French have been endeavoring to settle on the Sambolas Islands, which lie much
nearer to Porto bello, and other Spanish Plantations on that Isthmus, toward
the Northern Sea than Port A^la does, where the Scots have begun to Fix and
Establish a Colony; in order whereunto, they do greatly caress and court a
certain Indian Cacique, called Captain Corbelo, whose Territories lie from the
Sambola's to that River of Conception, as hoping by his Favor and Assistance
to succeed and prosper in their design; nor are they wanting in their addresses
to Captain Ambrosio, whose Jurisdiction extends from the River Pinas to the
Sambol^s, and we may be sure upon the same prospect, if not also on the design
of settling within the Isthmus it self, whose Friendship they have in a great
measure acquired, partly by means of his mortal enmity to the Spaniards, and
partly by the intercession of a Brother in Law of his called Don Pedro, who
having been taken by the Spaniards, and kept for some time by them at Panama as
a Slave, does therefore irreconcilably hate them.

Whereunto indeed much more might be added, and largely insisted upon in
reference to such Countries Islands and Districts, which the French are become
possessed of in those parts of America where the Spaniards pretend to have a
Soveraignity and Jurisdiction exclusive of all other European Nations, but that
it is wholly needless, and would be accounted to be done in design to weary the
reader, rather than to inform and convince him, and which would also be an
increasing this discourse into a length and bulk beyond what the question in
debate does any wise require, though it be both very important in it self, and
the desires and expectation of men at this time more than ordinarily excited
and raised, for the having it fully cleared and decided. And therefore all that
I will add further, concerning the rest of the Plantations which the French
have in those American Territories and places, where the Spaniards do allege
their obtaining a peculiar property, and right of Dominion* shall be barely to
mention them. Namely that they have not only Colonies in Martinigo, St.
Christopher's, Guardulupa, and diverse of the Charibbes as well as other
Islands, to the number at least of twelve or thirteen, and all these within the
Limits and Boundaries unto, and over which the Spaniards do claim a Right
preclusive of all others; but that they also have and do possess several Forts
on the Coast of Caribana, that lies in the very Heart and Bosom of Mexico, and
which is not many Leagues distant from the Isthmus of Darien, or may be rather
said to join upon it.

And upon the some Motive of my designing to be short, and not to load and cloy
the Reader with more Examples and Instances of the foregoing nature, than are
either indispensibly necessary, or which at least may be such, as they who are
impartial Inquirers into the legality of the Fact of the Scots Indian and
African Company, will not be displeased to be made acquainted with. I say that
I shall therefore upon that inducement, only briefly intimate what Colonies the
Dutch have settled and established within those American Territories, unto
which (besides the Title that the Spaniards pretend to the whole Continent and
all the Islands of America on the Foot of the Pop's Bull which has been
already disproved and manifested to be vain and ridiculous) they plead a
particular Right, either through their having been parts of the Empires,
Kingdoms, and Countries, of which they became possessed, or else that they had
been some way or another, dependent upon, or tributary unto them. For the Dutch
knowing all these Pretensions and Claims of the Spaniards to be groundless,
vain, and ridiculous, and accordingly slighting and despising them, are not
only settled in Surinam, and have several Forces on the Coasts of Guayane, and
are Masters of the City Coro, which are all upon the Terra firma, but they have
likewise possessed themselves both of the Island Curasoa, that lies not above
seven Leagues from the Main, near unto Cape Roman, and of the Islands Araba and
Bonary which are not far distant from that, and had also planted in the Island
Tabago until driven thence by the French, Anno 1677; during the time of that
War which commenced 1672, between France and Holland.

By all which many and various Instances of diverse European Nations settling
within those Provinces, Islands, and Places of America, which they found
unoccupy'd by any other European Princes or States, and whereof several more
examples might be assigned (but that it is needless and would be superfluous)
of other Potentates and Republics in Europe that have done the like,
notwithstanding any Claim of Property, Right and Title which the Spaniards
pretend to have in, and unto them, and which they have with great confidence
heretofore asserted, though without any foundation either in Reason or Law. I
say, that I hope it will indisputably appear by these Instances and Examples,
that what the Scots have lately done in the establishing a Colony with the
consent of the Natives at Acla on the Isthmus of Darien, which was a place
never possessed nor occupy'd by the Spaniards, is, according to the same
measures of Equity and Justice, undeniably lawful, and demonstratively
justifiable; and that all who are impartial and unprejudiced will acknowledge
it to be so.

And whatsoever has been said in defense and justification of any European
Nation's having a right to settle in such parts of America as were never
occupy'd and possessed by the Spaniards, it is of equal validity and force to
authorize and warrant the sitting down and planting in any place, or places
there, that may heretofore have been possessed by the Spaniards, but which they
have since voluntarily relinquished; as they are known to have done in the
abandoning several places both on the Continent and in the Islands of America,
where they had formerly settled and established Colonies, as well as in their
forsaking Nombre de Dios, and a Plantation which they once had on the River
Darien, which they left and withdrew from; after that they became possessed of
Porto Bello and Carthagena. For though it has been always acknowledged, as being
grounded upon the Laws of Nature and Nations, that they who are the original,
lawful and uncontroverted Possessors of a Country or Land, and have been once
in the occupation of it by acts of the Body, may and do retain a Right and
Title unto it by acts of the Mind, after their having Corporally forsaken and
left it; yet it is far otherwise with respect to a People who are come into a
Country, not only as Aliens and Strangers, but as Invaders and Usurpers, which
is the case of the Spaniards in relation to those places on the Isthmus of
Darien, as well as elsewhere in America where they had at any time heretofore
set down and planted, but have since departed and withdrawn. For being neither
the primitive Inhabitants, nor having settled there with the leave and consent
of the Natives, they can stand no otherwise entit'led to any right in, and over
those places, than as they have the actual possession, and are Occupiers in
Fact. Seeing as their forceable and violent entrance into, and their sitting
down in them, by, and in the mere virtue of Power and Strength, neither did,
nor could defeat and extinguish the right of those that had been the Indigenae
and original Inhabitants; so immediately upon their withdrawing from, and their
relinquishing of those places, the Title of the Natives unto them does revive
and take place, and becomes again as effectual, both for the justifying their
own Reassumption, and Re-occupation of them, and for their granting a liberty,
freedom and right, to any other Foreigners to settle in those places, as shall
come among them, and desire it, as if they had never been at any time, either
disseized or driven from, or disquieted, interrupted and rendered unsafe in
their occupation of them.

And how easy were it to multiply Examples and Instances even in Europe, where
they of one Nation having by Violence, obtained Possession of some of the
Cities, Towns, Lands and Territories of another, so as either directly to expel
and drive away those, who had been the Rightful Inhabitants and Proprietors, or
to beget that fear in them, as to cause them to choose of themselves, either to
depart and fly from their Possessions, in order to escape the rage of those
that had invaded them, than by continuing in their legal inheritances, to
become exposed to the Lustful Pleasure, and cruelty of their Enemies; Yet no
man ever thought, that the Title of such, who upon the foregoing Motive, had
abandoned, or who in the forementioned manner, had been thrust out and forced
away, became thereby Annulled and Extinguished. But all do confess, and the
practice has been every where, and at all times accordingly, that upon the
withdrawment, and departure of them who had been the Invaders and Usurpers, the
other might in the virtue of their Antecedent and Ancient Title, reasume the
possession of what they had been either driven from, or had abandoned.

But not to trouble my Readers with Memoirs of that Nature, relating to Europe,
I shall at once evidence and confirm what I have said by two Instances, whereof
the First shall be in reference to a Country, upon the continent of America,
that was once in the Possession of another European Power, than that of Spain,
and the Second shall be concerning a noted Island in the West Indies, that was
heretofore possessed by the Spaniards, but both which are now in the rightful
occupation of the English. The former in brief is this; Namely, that the French
in the Reign of Charles the Ninth and by his Authority, as well as by his
encouragement, having in the Year 1569; Transported 1200 Families together with
300 Soldiers, to the Northern part of Florida, and having there established a
Colony, between 32 and 33 degrees N. Lat. which after that Kings name they
styled Carolina, but who upon their treating the Natives injuriously, and through
their having settled at places so remote and distant from one another, that the
dispersed and scattred Planters, could neither give nor receive mutual Relief
nor Support, were in the Year 1573, assaulted and all cut off by the Indians,
save one Monsieur Chaplain, and about 35 more, who got timely into a small Ship
that lay close by a Fort, and therein escaped to the Island Anticosty, in the
mouth of the River Canada, yet that notwithstanding of the settlement there of
the French, and their having been once possessed of that place, the English are
now gotten into Possession of it, and have erected there a Noble and
Flourishing Colony, the propriety whereof, was in the Year 1661 granted by
Charles the Second, King of England, to several men of Quality and their
Associates, and whereof the French have never complained as of a wrong and
Injustice done unto them. And indeed they are a wiser People, than to be guilty
of so great an Absurdity, and they do very well know, that such a Complaint
would by the English have been counted ridiculous, in that through their having
been the first Europeans that settled there, but expelled thence by the
Natives, on whom they had intruded, there neither does arise nor remain unto
them any Right of claim unto that Country, nor any exception against the Title
of the English thereunto, who are become possessed thereof with the liking and
consent of the Natives.

The Second is that of Barbados, which the Spaniards having for some time
settled upon, left and forsook, in order to their planting in other places in
that Hemisphere, which they hoped would turn to better account, and prove more
to their Advantage; as they did upon the like motive abandon many other places,
where they had at first Sit down, which Island the English having found
Unoccupied, either by them, or any other Europeans, and nothing left upon it,
that could denominate the Spaniards to be Residential, or entitle them to the
possession and propriety of it, save a few Hogs, that were never by any Laws
whatsoever, reckoned proper and valuable Representatives, Substitutes and
Deputies, for the keeping possession in the name and behalf of a people; the
English thereupon entered into the Island, and made settlements there, which how
displeasing and offensive soever it was to the Spaniards at first, and how
ready soever they were to have Quarrelled with their Successors upon that head,
had their Power been answerable to their Resentment; Yet they have by a solemn
Treaty since, renounced all pretensions of Claim and Title unto it, and have
acknowleged the English to be the Lawful Rightful Proprietors of Barbados. But
I will insist no longer, nor add any more on this head, all that has been
already said upon it, having been done ex Abundanti, in order merely to render
this discourse, as particular and clear as I can; not that it was absolutely
and indispensably needful toward the Justification, of the Scots Calidonian
Colony, seeing that place was never in the possession of the Spaniards; But
has always continued in the possession of the Natives.

The point then that is next to be more narrowly enquired into, and to be
discoursed with greater application, than it has hitherto been, is to search
out, assign and show the strength of the reasons, upon which the Scots sitting
down erecting Forts, and planting a Colony, in the place abovementioned is
founded and done. And I shall endeavor to give that detale, and to make such
an enumeration and deduction of them, as shall convince the unbiassed part of
Mankind, that it is both Lawfully and Legally done by them, and without wrong,
Injury or Injustice to the Spaniards. It is true that I might supersede the
giving my self this trouble, in that through the Spaniards charging the Scots, to
have therein Invaded their Territories and Demesus; and the Scots positively
denying it, the proof of the Charge and Accusation should be wholly devolved
upon the Spaniards, for that being the affirmative part of the Controversy and
Question, which is that alone in any matter of debate, which is accounted
capable of admitting probation, it belongs therefore unto them to make it good:
Whereas the Scots by insisting and standing altogether upon that which is the
Negative part, are both by all the Logical Rules of Argumentation, and by all
the Methods, Measures and Standards, allowed as well as required in judicial
Proceedings, excused from proving of their Right any otherwise, than by
answering the Allegations and Exceptions which the Spaniards do advance against
it: For the Company denying that ever the Spaniards had any possession of the
place where they have planted, or the least legal Right unto, or Property in
it; and the Spaniards alleging that they had, it does in Law and Reason,
belong unto the Spaniards to instruct and prove what they pretend unto, and
challenge. Nevertheless, for the obviating of all Clamours, and extinguishing
of all Suspicions against, and in reference to the Legality, Equity, and
Justice of what the Scots have done, I shall put this Matter into such a shape
and mould, as that the probation of it may be devolved and made incumbent upon
the Scots, and the proofs thereof expected from them. That which I do therefore
say and affirm, is, That the Scots are become rightful Proprietors of that part
of the Isthmus of Darien where they are Settled, and that they have a good
legitimate and legal Title to that portion of that American Straight, whereof
they have taken possession, and are become Occupiers; and that therein they
have done no wrong to the Spaniards, but that they are upon a better, and a
more just, righteous, and legal Bottom, in reference to their Caledonian Colony
and Plantations, than the Spaniards themselves are, either in relation to those
Settlements, which they have upon that Isthmus, or with respect to such
Colonies which they have in any other parts of America. And that which I have
here asserted, and with the highest confidence adhere unto my affirmation of,
bears upon these Three following Things, which are all of them uncontestably
True, demonstratively Evident, and as infallibly Certain, according to the
received Maxims of Law, by which Titles, Rights and Properties are defined,
decided and determined, as those Principles of Science are confessed to be, of
the whole's being greater than a part; and that where two Propositions are
directly contradictory, the one of them unto the other, they cannot both of
them be true.

The first is, that the Natives were not only originally the rightful
Possessors of that place, but that they were actually in the Possession and
Occupation of it, when the Scots landed and sat down there. And hereof there
are Five undeniable proofs.

(1.) Their inhabiting in that part of the Isthmus, not only independent upon
the Spaniards, and without their leave, but against their will, and in defiance
of their Power: Nor did they only continue to dwell there, without the
demanding liberty of the Spaniards so to do; but they had always debarred and
shut out, nor had ever received or suffered the Spaniards to dwell amongst
them. And if any thing be sufficient to declare a People to be the rightful and
actual Possessors of a Country; surely the possessing it both Hereditarily from
the primitive Occupiers and Proprietors of it, and preclusively of all others
whatsoever, must be held and esteemed enough to do it.

(2.) That the Native Indians were at the time of the Scots landing, and of
their beginning to settle, the lawful, actual, and sole Possessors of that part
of the Isthmus, where the Scots have erected Forts, and built themselves
Dwellings, does uncontrolably appear, from their having received and welcomed
them, without the having had any Communication with the Spaniards about it, and
in order thereunto, or the having asked liberty of them for the doing of it:
For it is not only dissonant from the Custom and Practice of all People and
Nations whatsoever, who are either Subjects or Tributary to others, whom they
acknowledge for their Rulers and Sovereigns, to admit and receive Aliens and
Foreigners calmly and tamely among them, without first sending to their
Superiors, and their rightful Governors, to understand their pleasure, and to
obtain their Instructions and Commands concerning, and how to behave themselves
in it: But it is likewise Treason by the Laws of all Constitutions and
Governments, and a Fact that is capitally punishable to do otherwise. And
consequently the Indians on that part of the Isthmus, having done nothing of
all this in reference to the Spaniards, but on the contrary, having by a Right,
Power and Authority inherently lodged in themselves, received and welcomed the
Scots into their Country, conversed with them in a friendly and peaceable
manner, given them all the hospitable Entertainment, and kind liberal Supplies,
Relief and Succor, which their Condition and Circumstances enabled them to
render, is a proof beyond the being reasonably controlled, of their being the
Proprietors as well as the Possessors of those Territories and Districts in
Darien, where the Scots are settled.

(3.) There may be subjoyned hereunto, in further confirmation that the Native
Indians, by the confession and acknowledgment even of the Spaniards themselves,
were the unquestioned and undoubted Possessors and Occupiers of that part of
the Isthmus, where the Scots have established their Plantation and Colony, and
of the Country neighboring upon and adjacent unto it, in that the Spaniards
have at several times treated with them, as with a free and independent People,
and by Agreements, Contracts and Stipulations, have, upon certain Conditions
and Terms, obtained and procured liberty of them, to settle Colonies within
their Circuits and Precincts, and to employ People to work in such Gold and
Silver Mines, as do lie within the Compass of their Jurisdictions. Whereof to
omit other examples, I shall assign one known and public Instance, and I shall
the rather do it, because it respects the nearest possession of Mines which
have been wrought in by the Spaniards to the place where the Scots are planted,
of any which they can pretend to have upon the Isthmus. The instance and case
then, in brief, is this; namely, That there being within 12 or 13 Leagues of
the Caledonian Colony, certain Gold and Silver Mines, which are esteemed as
rich as are either in that or any other parts of America, the Spaniards
therefore, to get into the Possession, and to reap the Benefit of them, instead
of attempting by Power and Force, and in the way of Conquest to do it, they
amicably addressed the Cacique, in whose Territories and within whose
Jurisdiction they lay, who was called Captain Diego, and by a Treaty and
Stipulation with him, that he should have a share of what Gold should be
obtained, procured leave upon that condition to enter upon the Occupation of
those Mines; which as it is an undeniable evidence, in the Opinion and Judgment
of the very Spaniards themselves, that Diego and his People were both the
rightful and legal Possessors and Proprietors of that Territory and District;
so the liberty that was granted unto the Spaniards by that Cacique, and the
People that were under him, did no ways desseize him of, or eject him out of
his Right, nor change, and much less extinguish his Property in that Territory
where the Mines were. They being rather admitted as Tenants and Laborers who
were to pay him a Rent in allowing him such a proportion of their gains, than
as Proprietors that had a legal Right and Title in them. And accordingly when
the same Captain Diego found that the Spaniards had not only violated the
Conditions upon which he had given them permission to work in those Mines, by
refusing to grant him his Tribute or Share when it was sent for and demanded,
but that they were contriving, plotting and conspiring how to destroy and
exterminate, or at least to enslave him and his People, he thereupon forcibly
fell upon them, and drove them from thence. Which as it was done some little
time before the Scots came to settle on the Isthmus, so at their arrival there,
they found that place, as well as all other that lay near to the spot where
they have established their Colony (...) Europeans and particularly altogether
Unpossessed and Unoccupied by the Spaniards.

(4.) There may yet be annexed, as a further proof of the Native Indians, being
the rightful owners, proprietors and possessors of that part of the Isthmus,
that they have successively since the Castilians first discovery of that
Country, and their Landing in it, been in terms of Hostility as well as of
distance with them, who as they were never subdued, nor brought into that
Subjection, as either Formally or Tacitly, Explicitly, or Implicitly to
acknowledge the Spaniards, having a Dominion or Sovereignty over them, or to
confess their being become Subjects, or Vassals to the Spaniards; So the
hostile oppositions, which they have in all times continued to make against
them, cannot be said to have been a Rebellious, but Just and Lawful Wars. It
being the highest of Nonsense to style them Rebels, who were never Subjects.
Yea it is to ridicule as well as to endeavor to mislead, and impose upon
Mankind, to bestow that Title and Epithete, upon the Martial actions against
the Spaniards, of those Darien Indians, of whom I have been speaking; it being
a perversion of Words, from their proper and allowed Signification, and the
fastening a sense and meaning upon them, which they were never invented,
instituted, nor agreed to bear, which is worse than the speaking unto them in a
Language that is wholly unknown. In that by the latter we are only left under
Ignorance, of what an other intends to say unto us; but in the way of the
former, there is a plain design to cozen and cheat us. Nor is it unworthy of
remark, that of all the Natives of America, whom the Spaniards have for their
enemies, they have none that are more inveterately and mortally so, than the
unsubdued Indians on the Isthmus of Darien, as does not only appear by what
they themselves have done, and continue to do against them; but by the
encouragement and assistance, which they have at all times been ready to give,
See Hack's collect. of Voyages, and the Hist. of the Buccaners Vol. 2.
unto the Privateers, Piccaroons and Buccaneers of all Nations, that have
within their circle ever come to assault and prey upon them. Witness what they
did in the case of Captain Sharp, who having Landed at Golden Island with 330
men, and being Joined by two Darien Caciques, with a good body of Indians, took
Sancta Maria, and made prize of several Spanish Ships; It being also upon the
Invitation, and with the aid of those Indian Rulers, that Captain Sawking
assaulted Panama, the Legality and Justice whereof as founded upon the
Authority of those Caciques, whose commission he had obtained, he avowed and
asserted in a Letter to the Governor of that place.

(5.) There remains one thing yet further to be added, in demonstration that
the Indian Natives are not only the True, Rightful and Undoubted proprietors
and possessors of those Territories upon the Isthmus of Darien, of which the
Spaniards are not become Masters, nor have planted Colonies in them; but that
they have been Openly, Solemnly and Avowedly owned and acknowledged to be such,
both by the Courts and Civil Judicatures of England. Now the case which I have
my eye upon, and do refer unto for the support of this assertion, being
signally remarkable in it self, as well as wonderfully Pertinent, Suited and
Adapted to the matter in hand, I shall therefore both give a brief detale of
it, and endeavor to set in the true and best light that I can. The case in
short then was this; namely that the same Bartholomew Sharp, whom I have just
now mentioned, being an English man, and consequently a Natural Subject of his
Majesty of Great Britain, was by a Memorial given in by the Spanish Ambassador
to King Charles the Second, complained of, for having in the time of Peace
between the two Crowns, committed Acts of Hostility and Piracy upon the
Spaniards in the West Indies, and thereby taken great Treasure and Booty from
them, of which Restitution and Reparation was demanded. Nor was it deniable but
that the said Sharp, having Joined with the Dariens, who were then in War with
the Spaniards, as indeed they always in effect are, did both invade the Spanish
Territories, and attack their Ships and Vessels on the Coasts of America, and
commit several acts of Force and Hostility upon them, to their very great
Damage and Loss. For which being here in Custody, and thereupon Indicted,
Arraigned and Judicially tried, the whole he had to plead for his
Justification, as well as in his Defense, was that he had therein Acted upon,
and in the Virtue and by the Authority of a Commission granted unto him, by
some of the Caciques of Darien, who were absolute Rulers, and altogether
Independent upon the Spaniards. Upon which Plea, after a fair and full Hearing
and Trial, and a due consideration of their intrinsic Power, and independent
Jurisdiction and Authority, in whose name and by whose Commission, he had made
War, and committed ravage upon the Spaniards, he was acquitted from the
criminal charge of that, whereof he had been indicted and Arraigned, and was
declared not Guilty of the Pyracy, whereof the Spaniards had accused him, and
complained to the King.

And for any to say, that the alleging of Sharp's having been acquitted, upon
the ground of his having acted by a Commission from the Dariens, is a mere
Jest, as some have been reported to have expressed themselves; I shall only in
reference to that Term and Phrase modestly observe, that as the matter of Fact
in his being Acquitted, is certain, and that no other reason was then given, or
has since been assigned of it, save his having acted by a Commission of a
People that were absolute within such and such Territories, and districts, and
altogether independent upon the Spaniards; It is too great a reflection upon
the Honor and Justice of the Nation, the Integrity and Uprightness of our
Judicial Courts, and upon our sincerity in the observation of Alliances, to
style a Juridical Verdict and Sentence, a Jest, in that which was the sole and
the alone legal Foundation of and Motive unto it. And what an Idea would the
belief of this give both Heathen and Christian Nations of the World of us, and
what an opinion must they of all Countries, where a regard to Truth and Justice
is maintained, conceive and entertain of the English, if in legal Trials
wherein Right is to be done to Princes in Alliance with them, Reparation to be
made unto those, who have been unjustly and injuriously, as well as
egregiously, wronged; and wherein Crimes of the highest Nature and of most
pernicious Consequence to Mankind ought to meet with their demerit; I say that
if in trials of that kind and importance, a sham, whim or jest, must overruled
Proceedings, and be the ground of the Juridical Decision; all which must be
acknowledged to have obtained in Sharp's Acquittal, if he came otherwise to be
brought in Not Guilty, and to be Discharged, than by reason of his having Acted
upon a Commission received from the Dariens, as legal, supreme, and independent
Rulers over that part of the Isthmus, where they have their Territories, and
are in Possession.

So that having dispatched the first and the chief Proposition, and the main
Particular, upon which the legitimacy of the Settlement of the Scots Company on
the Isthmus of Darien is legally founded; I do in the next place proceed to the
second Proposition, which I promised to lay down, as a further ground of their
having righteously become Planters, and begun the establishment of a Colony in
the place abovementioned. And of this I shall give an account with more speed
and ease, than I did of the former; namely, That the true Proprietors and
lawful Possessors of a Country are vested with a Power inherent in themselves,
by which they may rightfully and authoritatively, without being accountable to
any other, admit and receive Strangers, Foreigners, Aliens, and others, into
their Territories, and within their own proper and peculiar Jurisdictions, and
allow them the Freedom Privilege and Right of Settling, Inhabiting, and Trading
among them. For it is one of the first Principles both of the Laws of Nature
and Nations, that they who are the original and primitive Proprietors,
Inheritors, Possessors, and Occupyers of a Country and Soil, may admit, welcome,
and take in others, into the Inhabiting, Planting, Cultivating, and Improving
such places and parts of it, as does neither thrust out and dispossess
themselves of what is either necessary or convenient to their living safely
after their wonted manner, of Plenty and Pleasure, nor which will incommodate,
hurt, or endanger them in the enjoyment of what they do retain. For though no Man
can give, dispose and alienate to another, that which he neither has in
possession, nor can pretend any legal Claim of Title and Right unto, which the
Pope both betrayed his Pride and Folly in doing, when he took upon him the
granting of all the West Indies to the King of Spain, being therein
ridiculously liberal of that which did no ways appertain to him: Yet every one
has a right of bestowing upon another, what is indisputably his own, provided
it be Sine damno tertii, without the wronging or the prejudicing a third
Person, or a Party, upon whom he either depends as his Superior, or of whose
convenience he is previously obliged, either by the Laws of Nature or of
Nations, or by antecedent Agreements, Contracts, and Stipulations, to take care.

Nor is this any personal or private Notion of mine, but the uniform and
universal Judgment of all Civilians, out of whose Writings it were easy to
cite many Testimonies, were it not in a manner wholly superfluous, through the
intrinsic evidence which shine in the matter and case it self. So that I shall
content my self with one or two from Puffendorf, who is one of the most
Judicious and Learned, as well as of the latest Authors that have written of
the Right and Laws of Nature and Nations, Ea est, says he, vis Dominii, ut de
rebus quae tanquam propriae and in solidum ad nos pertinent, pro Arbitrio
nostro disponere possimus: It is a necessary appendent unto Dominion, that he
or they unto whom it does properly and entirely belong, may dispose of all and
every thing or things, De Jure Not. and Gent. l. 4. c. 4.. 2. and c. 6.. 14.
which do fall within the compass and circle of it, to whom, after what manner,
and upon what terms they please: And as he further says, Vt quis rem suam
possit alienare, seu in alterum transfer, id ipsum ex Dominii pleni natura
resultat. Cum enim hoc Domino det facultatem de re pro Arbitrio disponendi,
utique vel praecipua ejus facultatis pars videtur, si ita placeat, eam in
alterum posse transfer: It belongs as an essential property unto Dominion,
and follows from the nature of it, that he or they unto whomsoever it does
appertain, do thereby, from thence, and thereupon stand possessed of and vested
with a Right and Power of disposing, transferring, and of alienating those
things they have a Right unto, and Propriety in, to what Person or Persons they
shall think meet and convenient so to do. De Jure B. and P. l. 2. c. 4.. 4.
To which might be added that of Grotius, who very well says, That Non venit
ex Jure Civili, sed ex Jure Naturali, quo quisque suum potest abdicare: It is
from the Laws of Nature, rather than that of Nations, that every Man may
dispose of his own as he pleases.

Nor do the diversity of Forms and Modes of Government in and over Countries
and Societies of People, any ways change and alter the case in this particular.
For be the supreme Authority placed in One Person, or in a Plurality; and be
the exercise and administration of it, either circumscribed or confined by
Laws, or left to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of him that governs, it is
the same thing with respect to that which I am discoursing of: Seeing what the
latter is enabled to do, by an individual and despotical Right, in the
execution whereof he acts always unaccountably, though possibly not at all times
so wisely; the other may do the same, under the direction of the Laws, and with
the consent of the People. And how much soever they who are clothed with the
supreme ruling Power may be limited and restrained, either by the Maxims of
Wisdom and Honesty, and by the Natural and Unwritten Laws of Humanity,
Gratitude and Justice, or by Political Compacts, and Municipal Ordinances and
Constitutions, from acting against the good Welfare and Interest of their
Countries and People; yet all do acknowledge, that both they of the one Form
and Rank, and of the other, have not only a wonderful Latitude and Liberty
vouchsafed them in whatsoever is for the advantage of themselves, and of those
over whom they are set, but that they stand indispensably obliged (though the
omission of it is with impunity) to pursue and fall in with every thing that is
for the security and universal Interest of themselves, their Subjects, their
Territories and Districts.

All which do obtain and hold in relation to the Caciques and Native Indians on
the Isthmus of Darien, who as they have an absolute, independent and plenary
Power, to receive, give Freedom unto, and authorize such Strangers and
Foreigners, to Settle, Inhabit, and Traffic among them, as they shall think
meet and judge it convenient to entertain and endue with those privileges; so
in no one thing whatsoever could they have more consulted their advantage, and
have acted more subserviently to their own Interest, than in the receiving the
Scots to settle among them, and to erect Forts and establish Colonies. For
besides the Benefits which may thereby accrue to them, whereof they probably
may be neither thoughtful nor solicitous, of being rendered a more civilized
People, and of enjoying means and helps for the arrival at the knowledge of the
true God, and of our Lord JESUS Christ, and of all annexed thereunto, depending
thereupon, and resulting from thence, There are many great Secular advantages,
which they will thereby become furnished with, and attain unto. For it is
evident, how that by this means, the Gold and Silver which lies hid and buried
in their Mines, and the several sorts of Dying Woods which grow in their
Fields, as well as many more Natural Productions, which their Lands do afford,
besides such Goods and Commodities, as their Grounds may, by Art and Industry,
be brought to yield and bear, will through Labor and Cultivation, be gained and
improved both to their own benefit, and that of European Nations, and
particularly of Great Britain, and the rest of His Majesty's Dominions, which
are all at present of little or no use, service of advantage, either to the
Natives or to the rest of Mankind; and that partly by reason of the laziness,
ignorance and unskilfulness of those Indians, and partly because of the want of
a sufficient number of fit and proper Hands, to turn all these and more both of
like and of other kind of Productions, which that Country either actually does,
or by Manuring may be improved to afford, to a beneficialness either unto
themselves or unto others.

Moreover, by the Indians having admitted the Scots to sit down and to
establish Colonies within their Territories, they will become strengthened to
defend themselves and their possessions, against those who have always been
their Enemies; and who have pursued all the ways and means, and have improved
all the advantages, which they could arrive at, either by fraud and force, for
the encroaching upon their Demesnes, and the wresting them from them, and for
the subduing and enslaving their Persons. For though the Scots are desirous to
live neighbourly, peaceably, and amicably with the Spaniards, and will be far
from either committing any acts of Hostility upon them, unless they be first
attacked and assaulted by them (in which case they will be justifiable by the
Laws of God and Nations to withstand and oppose force with force) or from the
countenancing, encouraging, and aiding of those Natives who have received them,
and with whom they are entered into Alliances, in any offensive Wars against
the Spaniards within the Spanish Colonies and Settlements, yet the Scots will
account themselves obliged in Gratitude and Justice, as well as by Virtue of
the Covenants and Stipulations, which they have made and contracted with the
Indians, within whose Jurisdictions, and near unto whose Territories, there
Calidonian Colony lies, to cover and protect those Natives against all the
violences, which the Spaniards shall causelessly and injuriously offer them.
Which as it will be of wonderful Defense and Security to the Natives, amongst
whom they are received to dwell and to trade, against their Ancient, Constant
and Irreconcilable Enemies, so it was an Act of great Discretion and Prudence,
in those Indians, that they have upon the said prospect and motive, welcomed
the Scots into their Country, and admitted them to Plant, and to erect Forts
within their precincts.

Hereunto may be added, that it is upon the Foundation and Basis of the Native
Americans, having an Intrinsic and Legal power of receiving Foreigners and
Aliens among them, and an indubitable and unquestionable right of allowing them
a freedom, to settle in their Countries and within their Territories, either
upon the Continent, or in Islands, that all the Plantations of the Europeans,
and particularly of the English in the West Indies, are rendered Lawful and Just
in the sight of God and of men.

For whereas the English were not the primitive Inhabitants, nor the Original
possessors of those American Provinces, nor of several of the Islands, where
they have now many and large Colonies and Plantations; they must either be
accounted violent Invaders, and unrighteous Usurpers of those Territories where
they have settled and Planted, or they must derive their Right and Title to
their being there, from some Act of the Natives importing their Consent to
receive them; which the Indians cannot be allowed to have been capable of
giving, without a previous supposed right in them so to do. Yea, the very
Spaniards upon their first discovery of America, pretended no otherwise to
settle there, than with the Allowance and Consent of the Natives, as I have
intimated before in and from the acknowledgement of Columbus, who was the
discoverer of the West Indies, as it is recorded by ^^errera, the Spanish
Historian: Though it must withal be confessed, that they did not proceed upon
that principle; but that into whatsoever places they were suffered to come, and
were received by the Indians, they did there establish themselves by Violence,
and through unjust Wars, and upon the Enslaving, Massacring and Exterminating of
the Natives.

There remains yet one Proposition more, which is the third that I Promised to
lay down, in order both to the representing within a narrow view and compass,
the whole legal ground and foundation, upon which the Scots settlement is
Superstructed and Built, and for the demonstrating that their Planting in that
place of the Isthmus of Darien, is according and agreeable to the Laws of
Nations, and consequently Lawful, Just and Blameless, unless vitiated and
rendered Illegitimate, and Culpable through the Violation of some Articles of
Alliances, between the Crowns of Great Britain and of Spain, which I shall
afterward invincibly show that it is not. The proposition then, (and without
which, the two former would be of no significancy nor service, to the decision
of the Question under debate) is, that the Scots have had the Leave and Consent
of the Natives for their Setting down and Planting in the place
abovementioned, and that they have neither forcibly Invaded those Indians, nor
by Fraud or Power wrested that part of their Territory from them; but that
whatsoever they are become possessed of, was by a Grant and Concession of it
from those Natives within whose Jurisdiction it lies. For whereas the Scots
did not find the place void, but that it was preoccupy'd by the Natives, who
were the true Proprietors of it, as well as of the Country adjacent thereunto,
it is impossible that the Scots should have any Right and Title, for Sitting
down and erecting Forts there, unless in the way of Conquest, Surrender, or
Consent of those who were the antecedent Inhabitants and Owners, these being
the all and the only ways met with and known in Laws, whereby the subsequent
Comers into a Country already possessed and occupy'd, can acquire a Right and
Title for Sitting down and becoming Residents. And as the Scots do wholly
renounce all pretense and claim of Conquest, as the Ground and Foundation of
their Settlement there; so they do not challenge a Possession, either of that
particular place, where they have erected their Works and made themselves
Dwellings, or of any part of the Country that neighboureth unto it, by and upon
a plenary and full Surrender of it to the Calidonian Company, and exclusive of
the Natives retaining any Right in the place, save as the Scots shall amicably
indulge and gratuitously allow them; but the whole which they plead, is a Grant
from, and Consent of those Indians, who were the primitive and rightful
Proprietors, for their sitting down in that part of the Country, and for the
cultivating and improving it to their own use and benefit, and for the taking
in such other places within their Territories as they shall judge meet, and
find themselves in a condition to dilate, stretch and extend their Colony unto.
And the present Natives of that place, and ^f the Districts about it, being as
free from any subjection unto, or dependence upon the Spaniards who do at this
time possess and occupy and Colonies upon the Isthmus, as the Ancestors and
Predecessors of the former were at any season heretofore from and upon those of
the latter, it does by a necessary consequence follow, and become naturally
deducible from thence, that the Scots coming to settle with the consent of the
Caciques, and of the Indian People under them, must thereupon be in the like
condition with the Natives, and no ways liable to any claim of the Spaniards,
more than the Indians were and are, and therefore not to be held concerned in,
or made censurable upon any complaints from the Court of Madrid.

And that the Scots have the consent of the Natives, for whatsoever they have
done in that part of America, I suppose no Man will betray such reproachful
Ignorance of the present transactions of the World, or show so much impudent
effrontery, as to deny it: Nevertheless I shall so far supererrogate, as to
give some demonstrative and undeniable proofs of it. For so prudent and
discreet, as well as calm and temperate were they, who Commanded the Ships that
Sailed thither, and arrived on that Coast about the beginning of November,
School; and particularly they who were sent along in them to have authority over
such as were to land, and to be directors of the Colony that was to be
established, in case they were received and welcomed, that notwithstanding of
Distempers, that were among them, as well as of several other inconveniences,
under which they labored, as also notwithstanding their having both a good
Naval and a Land Force, they would not so much as enter into the Port or Haven,
or attempt to set any Body of Men on shore, until they were encouraged
thereunto by the Natives, and having had some of them on board their Ships,
were invited by them to do it, and withal told that they were very welcome, and
that they had long expected them.

Yea, such was their care, circumspection and tenderness of escaping the very
suspicion of Invading that part of the Isthmus, to which they had directed
their course, and upon the particular Coast whereof they fell in, that they
would not disembark any of their Military Forces, and Companies of Soldiers,
until by some of the Principal among them, who went on shore with the Indians,
that had visited them on board their Ships, they had obtained a Meeting and
Congress with the Cacique in whose Territory the Port lay, and had both
received his Consent for their landing within his District, and had concerted
the terms for their Settlement within the bounds of his Precincts; which
Cacique, being one called Captain Andreas, did upon the second Meeting and
Congress between the Scots and Him, not only agree to receive them into any
part of his Country they would choose to settle in; but took a Commission from
them, promising that both himself, and those under his Authority would assist
and defend them with the hazard and at the expense of their Lives.

To which may be added, how that besides their daily and friendly Coversation
and Intercourse together, both at first and all along since testified on the
part of the Scots, by their presenting the Natives with such things, as might
be most acceptable and pleasing unto them, and witnessed on the part of the
Indians, by their supplying the Scots with such Provisions and Eatables as they
either bred or could catch in Hunting, which they could spare out of their bare
and daily Livelihood and Subsistence; I say that over and above all this, though
a sufficient indication and proof of the Natives receiving them into their
Country, and of their giving their consent to the Scots landing and settling
among them; There was a formal Compact and Stipulation transacted in the most
solemn manner, between Captain Andreas and them, and which was ratified on the
part of the Scots, by their giving unto Captain Andreas a Sword and a pair of
Pistols, and confirmed on his part and that of the Indians, by their delivering
a piece of Turf and Twigg unto the Scots, in token of the Grant which the
Natives had made unto the Scots of a liberty to settle and establish a Colony
in their Country.

Moreover in further evidence, that the Scots have Erected Forts, and Planted
their Calidonian Colony with the consent of the Natives, I shall finally
observe, how that upon the approach of the Spaniards with some Military Forces,
to have either surprised the Scots, or in a fair encounter to have beaten and
drove them from thence, the Indians in that district were unanimously ready to
have Joined them against the Spaniards, and actually did so with such a Number
of their best men, as the Scots out of a great Multitude that offered
themselves, Judged convenient to entertain and receive. Among whom as there was
the Cacique's own Son; so both he and all the rest of the Indians, that marched
in conjunction with the Scots against the Spaniards, behaved themselves with
great Fidelity, and with as much Bravour, as the sudden flight of the
Spaniards, would allow them occasion and opportunity of Manifesting.

So that upon the whole, I may now venture to conclude, that the settlement of
the Scots on the Isthmus of Darien, is not only according to the Laws of
Nations Just and Lawful, and no ways Injurious to the rights of any, and that
they have in all the steps which they have therein taken, proceeded according
to the Rules and Measures, by which all the European Nations, who have
established Plantations in any parts of the World, do both Vindicate themselves
from obnoxiousness to blame in what they did, and do Justify their claim of
Right and Title unto them, and for the defending and upholding of them: but I
may presume with Modesty, as well as with Truth, further to affirm, that there
never was a Plantation or Colony settled by any Nation whatsoever, or in any
part of the World whatsoever upon Juster principles, or whose establishment
has been transacted, with more Fairness and Candor, and with all due respect
to the reasonable pretenses of every one that had but a shadow or seemingness
of claim, as well as with a tender and full regard to the property and right of
the Natives, whose both consent and entreaty they have for authorizing them in
what they have done.

Having then fully both declared and demonstrated the legality of the Scots,
having Planted a Colony on the Isthmus of Darien, and given a deduction of the
grounds of Law and Justice, upon which that establishment is Founded and Built,
and by which it is evidently vindicated, from all the exceptions and complaints
that are or can be made against it by the Spaniards, or by any others charging
it as unlawful, invasive and criminal: It may possibly be said in favor of the
Spaniards, that though there be no Usurpation made thereby upon their Rights, yet
through the Adjacency and Nearness of that Plantation, to the Colonies which the
Spaniards are allowed to be rightfully possessed of, upon the Isthmus, the
Scots have not acted so Kindly and Amicably, as might have been expected from
the subjects of a Prince and Potentate, who is in a firm Alliance, and under
all the bonds and measures of Friendship, with his Catholic Majesty. And
therefore that though that Settlement, be neither against the Laws, nor the Rules
of Justice, yet it is a Violation of those terms of Decency, and of Bienseance,
which ought to be observed among Monarchs, that are so cordially United in
Royal and Brotherly Correspondence and Amity, as his Britannick Majesty and the
King of Spain are known to be. But in reference to that allegation, there are
several things which lie obvious to be offered.

Namely, That by this exception, the Scots are only censurable for having
trespassed against the Ceremonies and Punctilio's of what is called Genteel and
good Breeding: But not for having offended against the Rules of Justice, or for
having violated the Laws of Property. So that though they may not have acted so
mannerly as some People would have had them, yet they have done nothing that is
unlawful and unrighteous. Nor was it hitherto ever expected, and much less
required, that a Nation, rather than to be deficient in a Complement, should
both neglect and abandon their Interest. Moreover, whatsoever respect the
Subjects of any Sovereign ought to have unto the Rules of complacence, and the
ceremonies of Royal Courtships, by and according to which Crowned Heads do
conduct and govern themselves toward one another, while Matters regarding the
Benefit and Prosperity of a Kingdom do fall within the compass of the personal
transactions of a few, or do lie under private debates, and antecedently to
their being digested and concerted into Parliamentary Bills, and before those
Bills be ratified into Laws, and passed into Acts; yet there is no deference of
that Nature payable, nor any observance to be had of mere ceremonies of
Courtship, after they are dispensed with, and superceded by a Statute, and the
affair wherein they were to have been practiced, is become authorized by a
Municipal Law.

Further it must necessarily also be granted, that the place where the
Caldionian Colony is established, is no nearer to the Spanish Plantations, by
its being in the Hands of the Scots, than it was while in the alone and sole
Possession of the Natives. Nor is there so much reason or cause, why the
Spaniards should fear the meeting with any thing that may be uncivil or hurtful
from the Scots, as they had reason to apprehend and dread from the Indians, in
that the latter are not only a rude and barbarous People, but their ancient,
inveterate, implacable and mortal Enemies; whereas the former, are both a
civil, generous, and Christian People, trained up in all the measures of
Humanity, good Breeding, Morality, and Religion, and governing themselves by
the Laws of Revelation, as well as of Nations, and who withal have never been
in War, nor are desirous to have any Hostility with them.

Yea, the Alliances between the Crowns of Great Britain and of Spain ought to
obviate all Jealousy in the Spaniards, of their having any thing that is
either undecent or injurious offered unto them by the Scots, who are Subjects
under a Monarch that is in affinity with His Catholic Majesty. Whereas through
want of Leagues and Stipulations between the Spaniards and those Indians, into
whose Territories the Scots are received, they had ground of being always and
justly suspicious, that such mischiefs would be done them, as the power of
those Natives could enable them to attempt and execute.

Further, if the adjacency and nearness of the Scots Plantation unto the
Spanish Colonies prove matter of offense unto the latter, and of complaint
against the former, the fault thereof is wholly to be lodged upon the
Spaniards, and therefore the blame ought entirely to fall upon them. Seeing
whatsoever the Scots are come into the possession and occupation of, they have
a just and legal Right thereunto, from the grant and consent of the Natives,
who were the undoubted and true Proprietors thereof; whereas the whole which
the Spaniards do there possess, and all the Colonies which they have settled,
has not only been done without the leave, but against the will of the ancient
and rightful Owners. So that by reason of the badness of their Title, which
flows from Usurpation, and is built upon their having unjustly invaded what
belonged unto others; the whole of a reasonable Accusation, and of a just
Complaint, does lie against them, and their Plantations; whereas the Title of
the Scots proving legal and good, through their having come to inhabit and settle
with the allowance, and upon the invitation of the Indians, the nearness of
their Colony to those of the Spaniards, does not make them or it obnoxious to
any just and rational Expostulations or Remonstrances.

Nor is the case of the Spaniards made better because of their Colonies being
established long ago, or the condition of the Scots rendered worse, by reason
of their having but lately begun to sit down, and to plant; in that the Title
of the one is good from the first moment; whereas no length of time can ever
make the claim of the other justifiable: For as all Lawyers do say, and
particularly Grotius, That tempus in se nullam habet vim effectricem, that a
possession which is acquired unjustly at first, can never be rendered just by a
continuance in the long occupation of it: So a Title unto a Place, and a Right
in a Settlement, by the grant and with the consent of the true Proprietors, is
equally good, just and valid in Law the first day, as it will be after the
having been inherited a Thousand Years.

Moreover, there is not that nearness of the Calidonian Colony to the
Plantations which the Spaniards have upon the Isthmus of Darien, as some through
ignorance of Maps and unacquaintedness with Journals, may, upon a general noise
and clamor, be inclined to imagine; seeing none of the Settlements, which the
Spaniards have, and whereof they are in the actual possession and occupation,
are within less distance than fifteen or sixteen Leagues of the Scots
Plantation, which is enough not only to silence the report, and to put an end
to the pretense of the adjacency between the Colonies of the one and the other,
but for the giving large bounds for determining between their Properties and
Jurisdiction, and for chalking out limits of division and separation betwixt
what can any time resonably arise, and come to be their several and respective
Claims. And as they who would extend their pretense of Right and Jurisdiction
fifteen or sixteen Leagues beyond what they are actually possessed of, may as
well enlarge it to a thousand; so neither do the Titles of Princes unto their
various and different Dominions and Territories depend upon the nearness unto,
or the remoteness of their Lands from each others, but upon the legal Property
which they have, and their being either in the actual possession of them, or of
Countries, Cities, Towns, or Places, upon which they do depend, or upon the
retaining a claim by virtue of an hereditary Right which they have not
renounced. But they must not only be strangely unacquainted with Histories as
well as with Maps, but stand ignorant of what every Traveller can inform them,
who do not know that even in Europe there are Sovereign Jurisdictions and
Principalities, surrounded by and enclosed within the Dominions of other
Princes, whereof among many others, Orange and Avignion are undeniable
Instances. Nor is it possible to be avoided, but the Lands and Territories of
all Neighboring Princes whatsoever, who do live upon Continents, must be
Contiguous in some one place or another. And though the limits of some Princes
Countries, may in some places be divided from those of other Potentates by
ridges of Mountains, or by considerable Rivers; yet for the most part they are
no otherwise distinguished and separated, than by a road, a hedge, a brook, or
by erected Pillars of wood, or by stones which are set up here and there.

Finally that wherewith the Scots stand charged, and whereof they are in this
particular accused* is no more than what is practiced by all European Princes,
and States in most parts or the World, where they have settled Colonies and
Plantations, and that without the Infraction of the bonds of Amity and
Alliances between them, or the being thought to trespass against the rules of
Decency and Respect, which the Rulers of Kingdoms and Republics, are
accustomed to render to each other, of which it were easy to assign many
undeniable instances, but I shall confine my self to a few. It Is sufficiently
known, that all along on the Coast of Africa, and particularly on the River
Gambe, the English, French, and other Europeans, have their settlements
intermixed and contiguous, without clamouring against or Impeaching of one an
other, on the score of Adjacency. Nor is it to be denied, but that as Ceuta,
Tangier and Mamora, do lie in the bosom of the Empire of Morocco; so that they
have been possessed by, and have belonged to different European Potentates,
without their complaining of one another upon that Motive. Neither is it to be
in the least contradicted, but that the English and French have their several
and respective Plantations, on the Island of Newfoundland, where, save in the
time of actual War, between these two Crowns, they live in all friendliness
together, each of them following, carrying on, and promoting their several
Fisheries, in and by which as many Seamen are bred as well as employed, and
Navigation greatly increased, and Multitudes of Ships advantageously used; so
with a little cost that is disbursed on Nets, and on Diet for Sailors, (which
also turns to a National benefit and gain) there is more Wealth flows
annually into the Kingdom, or at least might, if that Trade were encouraged,
and cultivated as it deserves and ought to be, than by any one branch of our
Manufacture whatsoever, to the Fabricking whereof to make it Mercantile, there
is so much previous expense required. The same might be instanced with respect
of the Island of St. Christopher's, which belongs half no the English, and
half to the French, though neither of their shares be well peopled or Cultivated.

Whereunto may be also added, that the Dutch and Portuguese have their
different and respective Plantations, on the coast of Brasile, without any
misunderstanding or quarrel between them on that account, and to which the
Spaniards do pretend as much Right, as they do to the Isthmus of Darien. Yea
the Island of St. Thomas, which is Possessed by the Danes, is not far distant
from Porto Rico, which is in the occupation of the Spaniards; as also very near
unto St. Thomas, lies the Crab Island, which is pretended unto not only by the
Spaniards, and the French, and particularly by the Danes, but likewise by the
English, who were once Possessed of it, and which I do wonder they endeavor
not to repossess themselves of, seeing as it is now void, so it is of very
great importance in it self, and would be of wonderful usefulness to their
Plantations, were it in the English hands, and secured by a good Military
force, without which they well be sure to be Murderd in, or soon drove out of
it by the Spaniards, that inhabit Porto-Rico.

And to conclude this Paragraph with one instance more, it is observable that
whereas the English (as I intimated before upon another occasion) were in
actual Possession of all the places adjacent to, and Snrrounding the Mouhados,
which lies betwixt long Island and the Main, and is sometimes reckoned a part
of long Island, the Dutch finding it unoccupied either by the English, or by
any other Europeans, sat down and settled a Colony upon it, in a time of Peace
between his Britannick Majesty and the States of Holland, and called their
chief Seat and Fortification there, by the name of New Amsterdam, though it was
wholly encompassed by, and in some places immediately bordered upon the English
Colonies, without so much as the interposure of a River. Whereof the English
were so far from complaining, and much more from making it a matter, and cause
of Hostility between the English Crown, and the Belgic Republic, that even
upon breaking out of the War 1672, when all things were alleged, that could
administer the least shadow for Justifying the commencement of it, on the part
of the English who were the Aggressors, that of the Dutch having settled on the
Mouhados, was not so much as once mentioned, nor in the Treaty of Peace in the
year 1677, was it ever brought under Debate, in the Congress between the
Plenipotentiaries of England and Holland. But after the re-entrance of those
two powers again into terms of Amity, it was by a private capitulation at
London in the end of that year, exchanged (as I have already said) for Surinam.

Now the foregoing Exception made by the Spaniards, in relation to the Scots,
having acted, if not unjustly, at least very disingenuously, and unkindly in
the settling of a Colony so near unto there Plantations, having been fully
considered in the last Paragraph, and the weakness and vanity of it so
abundantly laid open and Manifested, that no man will offer to revive and
insist upon it for the future, without incurring the forfeiture of his
reputation, I shall now proceed to examine the Pretension and Allegation, of
its being an Infraction of the Treaties and Alliances between the Crowns of
Great Britain and of Spain; for the Scots to have Landed and begun to establish
a Colony, upon any part of the Isthmus of Darien. And I shall the rather bring
this to an exact Scrutiny, and under a particular and accurate disquisition, in
that it has been distinguishingly mentioned, and positively asserted in the
Memorial that was presented to his Majesty, by the command and in the name of
the King of Spain. In which that Fact of the Scots is styled La rupture de
L'alliance qui a este toujours enter ces deux Couronnes, Laquelle sa Majeste
d'Espagne a observee jusques icy, and observe tousjours fort Religieusement, An
Infraction of the Alliance which is between the two Crowns, which His Spanish
Majesty has hitherto observed, and will Religiously do so. Which Resolution of
His Catholic Majesty to keep and withal sacredness to observe the Alliances
which he or his Predecessors have made with the Kings of Great Britain, as it
is Noble, Princely and Christian (and which I wish the Crown of Spain had
better attended, and acted more consonantly unto in their proc^edings since in
relation to this affair, but which hereafter we shall show that they have not)
so it deserves to be corresponded with, and answered in the same manner, and
with the like measures of Friendship, Honor, Veracity and Religion. Nor is
there any thing more disgraceful and ignominious in the esteem of Men, as well
as sinful and criminal in the sight and account of God, than for Monarchs to
violate their Royal Compacts and Agreements, whether with one another, or with
their own Subjects, without provocations administered to them, whereby the
Confederacies and Covenants do become causally and morally dissolved. And if it
be universally acknowledged, that Potentates having made Compacts with their
own Subjects are bound in Justice, as well as in Truth and Honor, to perform
them; much more must it be confessed, that they are obliged to keep and observe
the Agreements which they have made with Princes and States that have no
dependence upon them, but are upon an equal foot with themselves. Yea, if a
King cannot without Iniquity violate an Agreement which he has made, with
Subjects that had been Rebels, so as afterward to punish them for that
Rebellion, in reference to which the Stipulation was, as being pardoned by the
Tenor, and in the virtue of the Treaty; much less can he break the Articles of
an Alliance with Sovereign. Rulers, who though they may have been Enemies unto
him, could never have been Rebels.

Nor are any Persons whatsoever, so much concerned to be exact and punctual in
keeping their Faith and in performing of their Promises as Princes are, and
that upon the Motive of Credit and Reputation, as well as by reason of the
obligation of Conscience: For as Padre Paolo says (alluding to a passage of
Livy) That a Prince who violates his Word, His Opinion to the Venetian
Inquisitors of State, p. 24 Eng. Edit.
must invent a new Religion to make himself believed another time, seeing the
Oaths he made in the Religion he professed, have not been able to bind him; so
there is more in that of Tacitus, than many are aware of, namely, Caeteris
mortalibus in eo stare concilia, Annal. lib. 4. n. 40.
quid conducere sibi putent principum diversam esse sortem, quibus praecipua
rerum ad famam dirigenda: That while all others may adapt their Projections and
Conduct to their Interest, it behooves Princes to calculate their Designs, and
to manage all their Transactions and Administrations in subserviency to their
Honor and Glory.

And as both a German Emperor, and a King of France are reported to have said,
That if Faith and Truth were lost in the World, they ought to be found in the
words of Kings; so whatsoever Stipulations have been made with the Crown of
Spain, by His Majesty's Predecessors, as they were the Governors of these
Kingdoms, and the Rectors of the People; they do no less oblige him who sits
upon the Throne, than if they had been first stipulated, and immediately
contracted by himself. And as all the Leagues which are by Civilians styled
Real, do not only oblige the Contractors, but those who succeed unto them in
the governing Power, unless it be otherwise provided in the Articles of the
Alliance, so all such Treaties ought to be even observed by them that are their
Subjects, and that upon the Motives and Obligations of Conscience, as well as
upon the Foundation and Reason of their Civil and Political Obedience, which
they are to render unto his Commands in the virtue of his Authority. For such
Treaties and Alliances being transacted in the force of that political Power
wherewith Rulers are vested over their Subjects, and being concerted and made,
with respect to the benefit and advantage of their People, they are, in the
construction of the Laws, and in the opinion of Nations, the acts of the People
themselves, no less than they are the deeds of those who are their Sovereigns.
And indeed that is rightfully supposed to be the Fact of the Community, which
is done by the Supreme Ruler in the virtue of the Authority that is stated in
him by the Laws, and consequentially to that Trust which the Subjects have
reposed in him. So that should the Scots, through their Settling at Darien,
appear to be guilty of having violated any Articles of solemn Treaties, and of
having acted contrary to any Clauses in public Leagues, they would therein not
only have done what was injurious to the Crown of Spain, but that which was
both disloyal and dishonorable to their own King. And as the Fact in the
criminalness of it, does originally and immediately only affect the Scots, and
is no ways imputable unto His Majesty, save as he should, in case it be a
trespass against Treaties, support and protect them in it; so they are bound
both out of the Duty which they owe to His Majesty as their Sovereign, and in
Equity as well as in Deference to the King of Spain, either to return home from
Darien, and abandon their Design, or else to vindicate themselves from having
done any thing in that matter, whereby Treaties and Alliances are violated. And
if they cannot do the latter nor will do the former, His Majesty will not only
be highly justifiable in the disclaiming to countenance and defend them, but he
will be obliged in Truth, Honor and Justice, to exert that Authority and Power
which are placed in him over his People, for to see right done unto the King of
Spain, and reparation made unto the Spaniards.

But that His Majesty, instead of falling under the necessity of doing a thing
of that nature, which will both so much injure, disoblige and disgust the Scots
Nation, I shall endeavor to make it evidently appear, that he may not only
uphold and protect them, without either prejudice to his own Reputation and
Glory, or any wrong done to the King of Spain, who is his Allie, but that he is
indispensably obliged as he is their King, as well as in pursuance of an Act of
Parliament, and of his own Royal Grant, to cover them from all the violences
which shall be offered unto them. And this I shall do by demonstrating that the
Fact of the Scots, in their Landing and Settling at Darien, is no ways
inconsistent with, nor done in violation of any Leagues, Treaties and Alliances
betwixt the Crowns of Great Britain and of Spain. And here I must challenge the
taking it for granted, that there are no Treaties between the Kings of England
and of Spain, but what are public, and which all Men are or may be acquainted
with. For if Laws themselves, in the judgment of all Mankind, do not bind and
oblige, antecedently to their being promulgated and published; much less are
Subjects concerned in the observation and keeping of Treaties, unless they have
had due information and notice given of them. And should it be granted, that
such Federal Contracts which Civilians style Personal, and which do only
respect the particular benefit of those Princes who do contract them, and do
terminate in their single and personal Interests, without either affecting
their People, or their Heirs or Successors, I say should be it allowed, that
there is no necessity why these Stipulations should be promulgated and made
publicly known; yet it is absolutely requisite, that such Agreements and
Compacts should be so divulged as that they may be generally understood,
wherein the several respective Interests of many and various Kingdoms and
Dominions, and of different and distinct Sovereigns are both involved and
adjusted, and whereby the carriage and behavior of their People and Subjects
stand regulated toward one another in such and such parts of the World; and
such are the Leagues and Alliances pretended and referred unto in the case
before us.

Now the only Treaties between the Kings of Great Britain and those of Spain,
by which both their own, and their Peoples respective concerns in America are
adjusted and regulated, and the carriage of their Britannick Majesty's Subjects
toward the Subjects of their Catholic Majesty, and reciprocally of the
Subjects of the Spanish Manarchy toward them of Great Britain, and of the
Dominions thereunto belonging, stand directed and are made governable, are the
Treaties of May 13. 1667, and of July 8. 1670. Which as they are the only
regulating Treaties between the two formention'd Monarchs in relation to their
several Dominions, Provinces and Possessions in America, so it is by applying
unto and consulting those Two Treaties, that we are to examine and decide,
whether the Scots in their having landed and begun to establish a Colony upon
the Isthmus of Darien, have made themselves guilty of the Infraction of
Alliances, which I do psitively affirm, and shall demonstratively prove, that
by those Facts they have not done, nor ought to be so represented or esteemed.
Seeing it will uncontrolably appear unto every one that will afford himself
time and leisure to view the Treaties, and to peruse the Articles concerted and
agreed in them, that they were merely declarative of what was confessed to be
in the legitimate and rightful Possession of those two Kings, and regulative of
what should be the behavior of their several and respective Subjects toward
each other in America, as also restrictive with reference to their Claims of
any Title or Right to the Provinces, Islands and Territories, which either of
them were in the possession and occupation of; but that they were in no ways or
manner exceptive of, or preclusive from their settling Plantations in such
other Conutries, Districts and Places, as were neither possessed and occupy'd
by them, nor by any other European Princes or States.

And whereas the Treaty of 1670, is that whereby the mutual Interests and
Possessions of the Kings of Great Britain and of Spain are provided for and
adjusted, it may not be amiss to intimate, the occasion and reason of those
Regulations, which were concerted and made by that Alliance. Namely that the
Crown of Spain having antecedently thereunto laid Claim to all America, as of
right belonging unto His Catholic Majesty, and having accounted all the
Settlements of every one else, and particularly of the English within that vast
Continent, as likewise in the American Islands, to have been so many Invasions
upon their Right, it was concerted and agreed by that Treaty, that this
universal claim and pretense of Title of the Spaniards should be renounced and
disclaimed. And that the possession of the Crown of England in such Territories
and Places where the English had planted, should be confessed and acknowledged
to be legal, rightful and good. Which was the sole and alone business that was
designed and compassed in the forementioned Treaty. For whereas by the Treaty
of 1667, there was only a general and perpetual Peace concluded and established
between the Dominions and Territories of Great Britain and those of Spain,
without the particularizing of any thing that respected their several
Plantations in America. And whereas the Kings of Spain had always questioned
the Right of the Kings of England to their American Plantations; upon the
ground of an universal Title, which they claimed to all the West Indies, and
had particularly controverted the Right of their Britannick Majesty's to
several Plantations which had been made by the English in the American part of
the World, upon pretenses and allegations, that the English had forceably drove
out the Spaniards, and thereupon gotten into possession of several places that
had formerly been enjoyed and occupy'd by them; therefore it was that upon
these considerations, that whole matter came under particular Regulation and
Adjustment in the Treaty of 1670; in and by which the Right and Dominion of the
King of Spain in those Countries, Islands, Provinces and Territories, whereof
he was possessed, and so far as they were in the actual occupation of the
Spaniards, being confessed, and provision made for their quiet and peaceable
enjoyment of them: There was likewise a formal and explicit Renunciation of
all Claim made by the Spaniards to whatsoever was in the English possession;
but not one word or syllable, so much as once mentioned in that whole Treaty,
concerning and relative to such parts and places, as were not at that season in
the occupation of the one or of the other.

Nor can it, in consistency with good Sense and Reason, be imagined, But that
if the Right of the King of Spain to all those Territories and Districts in
America, which were neither in the actual occupation of the Spaniards, nor of
any other European Princes and States, should by that Treaty have been
acknowledged to appertain and belong to the Crown of Spain, their Title
thereunto would have been specially inserted and declared, with an express
exclusion of all others, that should afterward desing to be Planters in those
void places of the Continent and Islands of America. Nor is it to be doubted,
that if the Right of the Spaniards had been to be confessed and owned in that
Treaty to all the parts of the Continent and Islands that were not possessed by
Europeans, but that the landing and settling there, in order to plant, without
freedom and liberty previously granted by the Crown of Spain, would have been
specified as an act of Hostility and Infraction of the Alliances. So that there
having been no such care taken, nor provision made in the forementioned Treaty,
it is an indispensible evidence, that the whole which was thereby designed, was
only to adjust and settle Matters, in relation to what each of those two Crowns
were actually in possession of. And that they were left still under an equal
freedom of settling in any new Places that were void and unoccupy'd, and no
more in the hands of the one than of the other.

Nor can it fall into the thoughts of any, who have not lost their
Understandings, that the English who are a trading People, and who finding
their Interest and Profit in their West India Plantations, designed to extend
and enlarge them in whatsoever other parts of America they could, where
Settlements might be made, without Invasion upon the Rights of Europeans,
should by that Treaty be concluded and staked down to plant in no other places
of the West Indies, save in those, where they had Colonies at that time. So
that the whole which was decided, adjusted and stipulated in and by that
Treaty, amounted only to these two things: First, That by the 7th Article, The
King of Great Britain and his Heirs and Successors, shall have, hold, and
possess, with full Right of Empire, Property, and Possession, all Lands,
Regions, Isles, Colonies, and Lordships, situated in the West Indies, or in any
part of America, which His Majesty King Charles II. did then hold, or which His
Subjects did then possess; so that no Controversy whatsoever was afterward to
be raised or moved in reference to that Matter. And, 2dly, That by the 8th
Article, The Subjects of the said King should abstain from all Commerce and
Navigation in the Ports, Havens, and Places, having Forts, Castles, or Staples
for Commerce, that is, That the Subjects of Great Britain shall not Trade nor
Sail into the Ports and Places which the King of Spain has in the West Indies,
nor the Subjects of the King of Spain Trade or Sail to the places which the
King of Great Britain does there possess, without Licenses mutually and
reciprocally given in the words and terms, which were specified and set down in
a Schedule annexed to the Articles of the Treaty.

From both which it does demonstratively appear, that all stipulated about and
agreed unto in that Treaty, was, and is, that the said Kings and their
Subjects, shall not only severally and respectively forbear the Invading of
such others Territories, and the injuring of one another, but that they shall
not Navigate, nor Trade in the Ports and Staples that do belong unto either,
save under such provisions, limitations and terms as are agreed upon and
expressed. By neither of which are the Kings of Great Britain, or their
Subjects shut out, debarred or excluded, from Sailing into such Ports, Havens
and places of America, and setthing Plantations any where there, as either are
not inhabited, or where the King of Spain is not in possession and occupation.

But to set this matter yet further in such a clear and distinct light, as that
they who are the most Prepossessed and Prejudiced, may see, and be obliged to
confess, that the Scots have proceeded in the whole affair of their Calidonian
Settlement and Plantation, both according to the measures of Law, Justice and
Equity, and with a full deference and respect unto, and an entire compliance
with the Articles of the public Treaties, and particularly of that of 1670: I
shall call over the Heads of some of the Articles of that Treaty, and make
those reflection upon them, which they do Naturally suggest and offer.

Whereas then it is Stipulated, agreed and provided by the Second Article, that
there shall be a Firm and Universal Peace in America, as well as in other parts
of the World, between the Kings of Great Britain and Spain, and between the
Kingdoms, States, Plantations, Colonies, Forts, Cities and Dominions which do
belong to either of them, and between the People and Inhabitants under their
respective Obedience, it does from thence undeniably appear, that as both the
Kings were set upon an equal foot, and did treat for themselves, and for the
people, and Inhabitants that were under their respective Obedience, and no
further nor for any other, so it is from thence no less evident, that all
matters and things were left untouched, and undetermined, that did concern and
relate unto such places and parts of America, as were either wholly void and
not at all Inhabited, or that were inhabited only by the Native Indians, which
as that part of the Isthmus of Darien was, where the Scots have Landed, and are
now begun to settle; so it does in the way of necessary consequence from thence
undeniably follow, that by the said Article, it remained Free and Lawful,
either for them, or for any other of his Britannick Majesty's Subjects, so to
do, and therefore that there neither is, nor can thereby any Violation, or
Infraction be made of the Alliances, between the Crowns of Great Britain and of
Spain. For in that the Right, Titles and Claims, of the Kings of Great Britain
and Spain, are defined by and circumscribed unto such Regions, Territories,
Plantations, Colonies, etc. as do severally and respectively, belong to either
of them, it is thereby made uncontrolably Manifest, that neither of them, by
that Treaty had any Rights and Claims granted, and allowed unto them in
reference to any places in America, further than as they were possessed of
them, and save as those places were in and under their actual occupation. And
consequently that by the chief purport and design, and by the whole Tenor of
the Treaty, it was left free for each, or either of them, to make new
acquisitions, and to establish new Plantations in such parts and places of the
West Indies, whether upon the Continent, or in Islands, as were inhabited by
the subjects of neither of the two Kings, but were either (as I have said)
wholly void, or possessed by the Native Indians.

Moreover whereas it is Covenanted, adjusted and provided by the Eighth
Article, that the subjects of their Britannick Majesty's, shall not Sail into,
nor Trade in such Ports, Havens, etc. as do belong unto the Catholic King,
unless with leave, and upon the terms which are there specified; it does from
thence evidently and unquestionably follow, that they are left at liberty to
Sail into, and Trade in such other Ports and Places, as are not the King of
Spain's. And therefore that the Port into which the Scots Sailed, and where
they are establishing a Colony, being neither then, nor having been at any time
since, in the possession of the Spaniards, they are in their having so done,
altogether unaccusable of the being guilty of any crime or misdemeanor, or of
having in the least transgressed against public and solemn Treaties.

Further whereas it is concerted, and agreed by the same Article, that the
Subjects of the King of England should not Sail into any Ports or Havens, that
had Fortifications, Magazins, or Warehouses possessed by the King of Spain, it
may from thence be Apodictically Inferred and Concluded, that it continued Free
and Lawful for them, to Sail into Ports, and to Trade, where there were no
Fortifications, Magazins nor Warehouses at all, and much less any appertaining
unto, or in the Possession of the King of Spain. Both which being
unquestionable with reference to Acla, and the Creeks, Ports, Harbors and
Places adjacent thereunto, it may thereupon be Justly affirmed, and solidly
concluded, that neither the Scots, nor any other of his Britannick Majesty's
Subjects, were by that Treaty precluded and debarred from Landing, Trading and
Settling there, and that the Scots through their having sit down, and become
Planters in that place, are altogether innocent of the Infraction of any such
Alliances.

Moreover, whereas it is agreed and provided by the tenth Article, that in case
the Ships that do belong to either of those Kings, or to the Subjects of either
of them, shall by stress of Weather, or otherwise be forced into the Rivers,
Creeks, Bays, or Ports belonging to the other in America, that thereupon they
shall be received kindly, harbor safely, and be treated with all Humanity and
Friendship; it may from thence be inferred and deduced, that as both the Kings
are thereby stated upon an equal bottom and foot, and the rights of both, and
of each of them respectively are restricted and determined to particular
Rivers, Creeks, Bays, etc. so it is also thereby mutually confessed and
acknowledged, that there are other and of all those several Kinds, in which
neither of them have any Property, Interest or Concernment, and that it might
be free for the Ships of either of them to Sail into such, and there to Anchor,
and to furnish themselves with what they wanted, and the places afforded, and
to continue there during their own Pleasure, and to do in such places,
whatsoever they should judge to be for their Advantage and Interest, without
incurring the imputation of being accounted injurious to one another, or of
becoming liable to a charge and complaint against them, of having Violated
Alliances. And by consequence, that the Port Acla being such, the Scots might
Sail thither, land and settle there, without either asking leave of the
Spaniards, or of becoming thereupon censurable by them, of having therein done
any thing, that is either against the Laws of Nations, or an Infraction of
Alliances and Treaties between the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain.

Again whereas it is Concerted and Stipulated in the Fifteenth Article, that
Nothing in the said Treaty shall derogate from any Pre-eminence Right and
Dominion of any of the Confederates in the American Seas, Channels or Waters,
but that they shall have and retain the same in as full and ample manner, as
may of right belong to them, with and under the provision, that Navigation
shall not be disturbed; I desire in reference to that Article that it may be
observed, how though the Crown of Spain having made a claim of Privilege,
Pre-eminence and Jurisdiction in and over the American-Seas, which was no ways
granted and yielded unto them by the Crown of England, but the right in and
over those Seas left in the same state that it was before; yet neither in that
Article, nor in any other of the said Treaty, is there any claim of
Jurisdiction, Sovereignty or Dominion, made by the Spaniards, either over such
parts of the Continent or of Islands, whereof neither they themselves were
possessed, nor a right of Property and Dominion in and over them, had been
claimed by and granted to the English, of which omission of the Spaniards,
there can be no other reason assigned, but that they knew no claim of that
Nature would have been allowed them; and that the very mentioning of it, would
have occasioned a formal, explicit, and stipulated Reduction and Restriction
of the pretensions of Title and Right in America to the bounds and limits of
what is actually occupy'd by them, which they were not willing to have decided
and determined by an express Contract and Stipulation to the making and
rectifying whereof there was their own concurrence and consent. Though in Fact no
Nation will grant them a right of Property and Jurisdiction in and over more,
nor have any European Princes whatsoever hitherto done it. I do the rather make
this observation, in that a Claim of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty over Seas and
Oceans, is more liable to exceptions, than a claim of Dominion over Lands,
either upon Continents or Islands, in that it is universally granted, that
Princes are capable of having their several just, supreme and divided
Properties in and over Lands, and withal as generally denied, that any
Potentate whatsoever can rightfully claim a sole Property in and Jurisdiction
over Seas, preclusive of the Rights of other Princes to Sail and Navigate upon
them.

Finally, there may be this one thing yet added, as an indisputable evidence,
and a full confirmation, that there was no right of Property and Jurisdiction
in and over any Lands, Territories or Districts, in America, granted in the
Treaties either of 1667, or of 1670, by the King of Great Britain unto the
Crown of Spain, save so far as the Spaniards were in actual Possession, in that
the English have since those Treaties sit down upon that part of America which
is come to be called Pensilvania, and have there established large and
flourishing Colonies, and that without the Spaniards having once offered to
complain of it as a violation of Treaties and Alliances* between the two Crowns.

Having fully vindicated the Scots Settlement at Darien, from the being either
against the Laws of Nations, or in opposition to public Treaties and
Alliances, and having withal justified them both as to the Fact, and with
respect to the Steps and Methods, in which they begun and have promoted it, I
know but of one thing, besides what has been already considered, that can be
reasonably alleged, against either the Justice or the Equity of it. Namely
that the Spaniards have not only been esteemed the Proprietors of that Isthmus
by diverse European Nations, but that they have been declared, as well as
accounted, so by the English in two remarkable Instances. Whereof the First is,
That several English Merchants, having agreed upon, and provided a Fund of
settling a Plantation at Port Royal in the Bay of Mexico, in order to the
cutting of Logwood, were refused the support and protection of the Government
for carrying it on, and only permitted to manage a Trade there at their own
hazard and peril. And as for the Second, which comes closer to the Question
which we have been debating, It is said that certain Englishmen having
undertaken to settle in Darien, and brought the proposal of it before the
Council of Trade of England, by whom it was laid before the Lords Justices in
His Majesty's absence, and by them transmitted to the King Himself, how that
after a mature consideration, it was judged and pronounced to be a Design and
Project, that would be an encroachment upon Spain, and therefore let fall and
abandoned. And that the case of the Scots being parallel to that it ought to
meet with the like censure, and be judged invasive upon the Rights of the
Spaniards.

All which though it has been sufficiently both obviated and answered in what
has been already said, yet in compassion as well as in condescension to the
Infirmities and Weaknesses of the greatest part of Mankind, who suffer
themselves to be imposed upon and misled in their Opinions and Judgments, of
Actions and Matters of all kinds, by trifling Reasons and Considerations of
very little moment, especially when their Understandings have received a wrong
bias, and are previously too much overruled by prepossessions and prejudices
arising from National Pique, or particular Envy; I shall offer several things
in way of Reply to what is alleged, and bestow several Reflections upon it.
Whereof some of them shall be more general respecting both the cases, and the
rest particular relative unto each of them singly and apart. And though I shall
behave my self in the whole with that Modesty and Deference toward His Majesty
and them that have either had the universal Administration, or any part of it,
as not to give the least occasion for censure or blame; yet I hope I may expect
to be so far both indulged and justified in the Vindication of the legal and
righteous Fact of a whole Kindom, as not from too much Pusilanimity on the one
hand, or Sycophancy on the other, to suffer that Nation to lie under causeless
suspicion of Injustice.

In the way therefore of a general Reply, I desire it may be observed, that as
the sentiments and opinions of no Body of Men whatsoever, and much less of a
few Individuals, are the Measures and Standards of Moral Right and Wrong, but
that the Laws of Nature and Nations are; so the Acts and Proceedings of the
People of Great Britain are not to be finally decided and determined, with
respect to their legality, or their illegality, and their being judged lawful
or unlawful, before Civil Tribunals, and at Humane Benches, save by the
acknowledged Laws of Nations and the respective Municipal Laws of the Kingdoms.
For though the projecting or the acting disagreably to the Opinion of this or
that Board, may in some cases prejudice the Undertakers and Doers; yet that
singly, precisely, and abstractedly, does neither render the Design nor the
Execution of it, at all times, unwise, and much less at any time unlawful and
unjust.

Nor is it moreover unworthy the being taken notice of, That there is a great
difference to be made between the discouraging a Projection, while it is only
in proposal and in Embryo, and the condemning and rescinding it, after it has
been put in Execution. Seeing by the first the Undertakers are only advised and
cautioned, whereas by the last, they are not only disobliged and disgusted, but
really prejudiced and injured.

Further, There is likewise a great discrimination to be made between what is
advisable at one season, and what is justifiable as well as prudential at
another. For the exigencies which at one time we may be under, of having the
favor and assistance of a neighboring Nation, may render it impolitick to
countenance that, which at another time, when we stand rescued from attendance
to any other Measures, save those of Law, Justice and Truth, it* were both to
abandon and sacrifice our Interest to neglect it.

Further, The inhibiting of the Subjects of England, from proceeding in the
forementioned Designs, may have been founded upon such Motives and Reasons, as
do no ways affect that, which the Scots have undertaken. Nor can the cases
therefore be rendered parallel, unless the circumstances could be made appear
to be equal: So that the Kingdom of Scotland, being altogether ignorant of the
Inducements upon which the Resolutions were taken in the cases of those
Englishmen, it is not to be expected, that their Cases should have been looked
upon by the Scots as presidents for their conduct, or that they should have
governed themselves by any rules, save those of their own Interest and Profit,
in subordination to the Laws of Nations, public Alliances, and the Municipal
Statutes of that Kingdom.

Moreover, there is a great difference to be made between checking the
Inclinations of a few private Men, who possibly might be rather designing their
own personal advantage, than a National good; and the crossing the unanimous
Desires of a whole Kingdom, who as they knew the thing to be lawful in which
they were engaged, so they did believe, that the pursuing it was indispensably
needful, in order to their Welfare and Prosperity.

Finally, whatsoever Authority His Majesty stands vested with, or whatsoever
liberty his Ministers are allowed to have in reference to affairs previously to
Acts of Parliament concerning them, or in relation to Matters that do not
directly fall under the Regulation of Laws and Statutes; yet they do become not
only uncontrolable by them, but even are not to be superceded by His Majesty,
after that they are once established by Laws, and confirmed by Charters. For
such things as are once made lawful by Acts of Parliament, are put out of the
reach both of the King and of his Council, as to their considering afterward
whether they be convenient. But having upon anotoer occasion mentioned this
before, I will not here insist upon it again.

And as for the particular Reflections, which I intend to make upon each of the
Cases apart, I shall dispatch them with what expedition I can, and in the order
that the Cases are laid down. In reference therefore to the first, which was
the Council of England's discouraging such English Merchants, as had designed
to have settled at Port Royal in the bottom of the Bay of Campeachy; I do say
that there is no likeness, alliance or affinity, between what was intended to
have been done by some English there, and what is done by the Scots in the
Isthmus of Darien. In that the Bay of Campeachy, lying in the Province of
Nicaragua, within the Diocese of Stiapa; which Dominion and Bishopric, being
part of the ancient Empire of Mexico, which the Spaniards conquered after their
usual way of Killing the Inhabitants, and converting the Land to their own use,
and unto which they have been confessed to have a right by Prescription, can be
no parallel unto, nor bear any similitude with that of the Isthmus of Darien,
where the Scots have established their Colony of Calidonia; seeing as the
Isthmus was never any part either of the Mexican or the Peruvian Empires; so
that particular District of the Isthmus, where the Scots have begun to settle a
Plantation, was never subdued by the Spaniards, nor did the Natives at any time
acknowldege their having Jurisdiction over them. So that though for the English
to have settled in the Bay of Mexico, might be accounted an Encroachment upon
the Right of the Spaniards, yet it can no ways from thence follow, that for the
Scots to settle at Acla, which had never been subdued or possessed by the
Spaniards, is to be held an Invasion upon any of the Territories, or an
Encroachment upon the Rights of the Spanish Crown.

Moreover, for the Council of England to have given permission to the English
Subjects to Sail unto, and to stay and cut Logwood in the Bay of Campeachy,
without the leave and consent of the Spaniards, was a greater encroachment upon
the Rights of His Catholic Majesty, than it would be to have the Scots
authorized and justified in their erecting a Colony on that part of the Isthmus
where they landed and are sit down. Seeing it is contrary to all the Measures
both of Justice and Amity, for a Government to connive at an Invasion upon the
Dominions of a Prince, in whom a Title, Jurisdiction and Property are allowed
to stand vested in and over those Territories; whereas it interferes with no
rules of Law, Equity or Friendship, for a Government to authorize and empower
its Subjects to plant in a place where that Prince was never acknowledged (nor
justly could be) to have a Sovereignty or Right.

Further, whatsoever the opinion of the Court and Council of England may have
been as to the Spaniards having such a Right to the Bay of Campeachy, as does
debar and preclude all others from coming thither, without obtaining of leave
from the Spaniards; yet there are other Courts in the World, who have thought
that it was free for them to settle in that Bay, without a Grant and Concession
from the Crown of Spain, whereof there needed no other instances to be
assigned, but that of the French, who have several times been endeavoring to
have settled on the River de Spiritu Sancto in that Bay, and who are at this
time designing to establish a Colony on the River Mischasipe upon the Mexican
Gulf.

Finally whatsoever the Council of England, might have said to those English
Merchants, for discouraging their settling at Port Royal in the Bay of Mexico;
yet it is unquestionably certain, that the project of the English for settling
and cutting Logwood there, obtained and took effect, in that they have had for
several years, Logwood in that place appropriated unto them, which they have
cut and brought home for the accommodating of English Dyers.

And as to the Second Case, concerning the Prohibition of those English
Merchants and Traders, to settle in Darien, whose Proposals for the
establishing a Plantation in that part of America, had been laid before the
King, as well as the Lords Justices, I shall in the first place declare, that
the circumstances of that being wholly unknown to me, I shall not assume the
Confidence, to pronounce any thing positively in reference to the particular
grounds and reasons, of the Opinion and Judgment of his Majesty, the Lords
Justices, and the Council about it, only it may not only be conjectured, but
affirmed with Confidence, that the forbidding all proceedings in that
enterprise, was upon Motives of State, rather than of Justice, and that it was
done because of the Inconveniences, which at that Juncture might have ensued;
and not by reason of the illegality of it. For as the Proposal was made at a
time, when we were in Confederacy with the Crown of Spain, for the carrying on
a War against a Great and Powerful Monarch, and as the Spanish Dominions were
the chief seats of the War, and the Ports and Havens of Spain absolutely
needful, as well as extremely useful, for the management of our Commerce in the
Mediteranean and Levant, so the preserving of Spain firmly in the Alliance, was
upon many other accounts, (which I shall not enumerate) indispensably
necessary, both for the upholding of the War, and in order to the success of
it, in favor of the Allies in general, and particularly of Great Britain. So
that upon whatsoever political Inducements, that proposal was discountenanced,
and rejected, yet I may venture to affirm, that it was not upon the foot and
motive of the Spaniards having a right and property in, and a Sovereignty and
Jurisdiction over, the whole Isthmus of Darien.

For as that would have been an acting in direct opposition, to the general
Foundation and Principle, which both the English and all European Nations
proceed upon, in their establishing of Colonies in the West Indies, and in
Justification of the rightful and legal Dominion, that they have over the
Lands, Territories, Provinces, Islands, which they have acquired there: Namely
that no ones right in that part of the World, does extend beyond possession and
occupation; so it were to have debarred and shut out, the English as well as
all other Europeans, not only from erecting new Colonies in those places of
America, where the Spaniards are in the possession, and have the Dominion; but
from settling any New Plantations in such parts of the West Indies, where the
Natives are the sole Sovereigns and Occupiers. Which is a thing both so absurd
in it self, and so directly opposite to the Interest, Prosperity and Honor of
England, that it were to entertain an opinion inconsistent with good Manners,
so much as once to imagine, that either the King, the Lords Justices, or any
English Ministers of State, should be so weak and imprudent, and so neglectful
of the Welfare and Glory of Great Britain, as either to fall into such a
pernicious measure of themselves, or to be dup'd into it by others.

Moreover to have been influenced to reject the foresaid Proposal, upon the
reasons and motives of the Spaniards, having an Universal and a Sole Right in
the Isthmus, would have been to have acted in the highest way of Injustice to
the Natives, through the ejecting them out of their Property and Jurisdiction in
and over those Lands and Territories, whereof they are both the legal and
rightful owners, and the alone occupiers and possessors, to a great extent of
ground upon that Straight, and through the vesting the Property and Dominion in
the Spaniards, who have no Title or Claim to a great part of those Territories,
either by conquest or the consent of the Indians. Nor can any thing more
disgraceful and unrighteous, as well as undecent and unmannerly be conceived of
his Majesty, and of those that are in the Administration, than that they should
act upon an Inducement, that would import a robbing of the rightful Proprietosr
of their Inheritances, and a deposing of hereditary and legal Governors, from
their Lordships and Jurisdictions, to place; and settle them in others to whom
they do no ways appertain.

Finally, should we suppose his Majesty, and the Lords Justices to have
Prohibited the foresaid English Merchants and Traders to settle upon the
Isthmus of Darien, because it would have been an encroachment upon the rights
of the King of Spain; we must be obliged to add, that they therein acted
incongruously to the measures of other Princes and civil Ministers, who have
been both encouraging and endeavoring the Planting of Colonies upon or near to
that Isthmus, with the consent of the Natives, without the least respect had to
the Claim and Title of his Catholic Majesty, whereof having given an instance
before, I shall not here repeat it.

So that having represented and finished, whatsoever I account needful to be
said for Justifying the Scots Settling a Colony at Darien to be according to
the Laws of Nations, and agreeable to all the measures of Justice and
Friendship, and not to be an Usurpation upon the right of the King of Spain nor
to interfer with any Alliances between his Britannick Majesty's, and the
Catholic King; and having vinvicated that Fact of theirs, from all the
exceptions which are made either against the lawfulness, or the friendliness of
it; It will now be a piece of prudence, as well as of decency to bespeak the
favor and assistance of the Parliament and People of England, for their being
supported and protected in that undertaking. Nor shall I so much endeavor to
persuade and influence them thereunto upon the Motives of generosity and
Kindness, as upon the Inducements that they will find the doing it, to be
greatly for the advantage of the Crown and Subjects of England. For as much
might be expected to be done in behalf of the Scots by that powerful and
opulent Nation, upon the reason of their being not only Neighbors to one
another upon the same Island, and under the Sovereignty and Government of one
and the same Monarch; but because of the many Offices of Council and Aid, which
they have since the Union of the two Crowns, mutually rendered to one another;
and that the Kingdom of Scotland in particular, has espoused the concerns of
England in a way of Singular Amity and with extraordinary fidelity and zeal,
whenever they have seen them involved under difficulties and dangers; so that
which is now desired from the English toward the Scots is not near what the
Ancestors of the former have rendered unto those of the latter heretofore, In
that besides their having had the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, and
Westmorland several times granted and confirmed unto them, to be held in Fee of
the Crown of England, in recompense for the Services and assistances which they
had yielded unto the English, in their distresses: We are assured by an English
Writer, that it was provided for in a course of Law under the Reign of Edward
the Confessor, that the Scots should be held Denizons of England and enjoy the
same privileges with themselves, because of the Aid which they had rendered to
that Kingdom against the Danes and Norwegians. But I shall choose to wave the
laying the recollection and consideration of all or of any of these before
them, which touch upon the head of gratitude, and shall think it more advisable
to address them by other Topics, namely by those that shall refer to the
Benefits of Strength, Riches, and Honor, which will thereby accrue, and
redound unto the Kingdom of England.

For how mighty and wealthy soever, the Nation must in truth stand acknowledged
to be, yet it must also be confessed, that under the great variety and plenty
of Natural and Artificial productions, which their own Country and the
Dominions thereunto belonging do afford, they have not the advantage of being
furnished with Gold and Silver Mines, which yield the Metal and Bullion that
make the Funds of Trade, raise the Bulworks of safety, administer the Supplies
of plenty and pleasure in peace, and enableth to muster Armies, and equip
Fleets in times of War. And though it is not to be denied, but that by means of
their Manufactures, and by reason of their Industry and their application unto,
and skill in the management of a large and universal Commerce, they have a
great Share of the Treasures of the Spanish West Indies flowing annually unto
them; yet it is with great hazard, at much expense, and after having been long
out of their principal, that they become possessed of it in those methods. And it
is also demonstrable, that a much greater proportion of Gold and Silver will
both come into private Banks, and into the public Exchequer of England, by the
Scots having such Mines within the bounds of their Colony of Darien, than
hitherto has, or ever can, in the ways of mere Commerce with the Spaniards.

Nor ought it here to be omitted, that the Mines in the occupation of the
Spaniards in that part of Darien, which lie nearest, to the plantation of
Caledonia, and in which they work at present, do so abound in the very Oar of
Gold, that every Negro whom they employ, is bound to gain daily to his Master,
See Dalby Thomas' s Historical account of the West-Indie Colonies p. 17. and 18.
as much as does amount after it is refined to thirty Lewis d'ors: whereas such
as are employed in the English American Sugar Plantations, which are reckoned
to be the most profitable of any they have, do not after all the expense upon
them in their food, clothes, and other accommodations, earn above one hundred
pound Sterling gain a head per annum to their Master, which is not near so much
in a whole year, as the other brings in per week.

And as the Goods and Commodities sent out of England to Spain, which bring
them returns in Gold and Silver, will be transmitted immediately to Darien with
more speed, and at less expense, as well as hazard, than they go now to the
Spanish Colonies in America, by making the Tower of Cadiz, Malaga and Sevil;
and the profit thereupon be much the greater to the English Merchants; so a
good part of the Treasure which comes directly into Scotland, upon the alone
and single account of the Caledonian Company, will in diverse ways so circulate,
as to come at last to center in England. Seeing besides what must necessarily
flow in thither in payments, both for what of their own productions, and what
of Foreign goods that have been first imported to England, will be called for
and purchased by the Scots, it is not to be imagined how much will come to be
brought in, and spent there in ways of Diversion and Pleasures by all sorts of
people of Scotland, and especially by the Nobility and Gentry.

For as it is too well Known, that the generality of the Scots, whose
circumstances do quality them for and allow it, have much in them of the humor
and even Vanity of Traveling, and are inclinable enough to spend in proportion
to the quantity of their Cash; so through London's being the Metropolitical Seat
of the Government, and the place where the King has his residence, the Court is
kept, and all grand Affairs of State, as well as many of the most important
concerns of particular men are transacted, they will be certain to come thither
in far greater Numbers than they now do; some out of Courtship, and others in
compliance with the exigency of their affairs, and all of them maintain a Port,
and live at a Charge answerable to the weight and depth of their pockets. Which
will not only be of great profit and advantage to the Northern roads, through
which they must go and return, and of diverse other parts of the Kingdom to
which their Pleasure, Health or Curiosity may tempt them, but especially it
will be of great advantage to London, seeing besides what they will spend
during their Residence, and in the making a figure, while they are there, they
will also furnish themselves in that Metropolis with such accoutrements of
State, and provisions of household furniture, as they shall esteem to be needful
either for their grandeur, or their convenience when they go home.

Moreover it is not to be questioned, but that the English, upon very easy and
Honorable terms and conditions, may be admitted into a Partnership in the
Plantation, and into a share of Trade with the Scots. Which as it will draw a
considerable part of all that is either Dug out of Mines, or that is otherwise
produced within the District of that Colony, as well as of whatsoever shall
accrue to the Company, by a Traffic drove at Darien, directly and immediately
into England; so it will both greatly enlarge the Trade and Commerce of
England, and mightily increase their Wealth. For as the Scots were so
neighbourly and kind upon the enacting of the Law, for the establishment of a
Company, for Trading to Africa and the Indies, as to make the first Offer to
the English of Joining in the Subscriptions to a Stock and Fund, so as to
become Partners with them in any Plantation they should settle, and in
whatsoever they should acquire; so it may not only be hoped, but confidently
affirmed, that they will not now be opposite, nor averse, to the receiving them
upon such terms, as may be safe and creditable to both Kingdoms. Nor can the
Parliament of England, in their approaching Session, fall upon any matter, that
will be of more National concernment, or from which more benefit will arise to
the Government and people of England, than to consider and advise, how the
Kingdoms may become so Incorporated with respect to that Colony, as that upon a
congress between Commissioners, authorized respectively by both Nations to
treat and agree about it, the terms upon which the English shall be admitted
sharers in it, as well as the degree measure and proportion of Interest in it,
which they shall be received into, may be Adjusted, Defined and Stipulated.

Further it is not unworthy to be observed that the French, as well as the
Dutch, being grown mighty in Naval Power, and both of them, but especially the
latter, the Rivals of England, not only in Traffic and Commerce, but with
respect to the prescribing unto others, what shall be the terms of Navigating
the Seas, and what Ceremonies of respect, Ships of War, as well as of Trade,
shall pay to one another wheresoever they come to encounter in Sailing; how
that thereupon it is become the true Interest of England, to have Scotland
advanced into such a state and condition, as that it may be able to provide,
Equip and Maintain, good Squadrons of Men of War. Which as it cannot be done
without their attainment unto a considerable Foreign Trade; so they may be
enabled speedily to effect it, by means of their Colony at Darien, provided
they be supported in it. And as Scotland, upon their being in a condition to
send out a Warlike Fleet of their own, will in case of a War against Great
Britain, save England the trouble and charge of maintaining Men of War on the
Coast of Scotland, for covering that Nation from Invasion, as it has several
times both lately, and more Anciently been forced to do; so it may with
confidence be affirmed, that neither France nor Holland will be very forward to
quarrel with England, when beside their own great Naval Power, they will have a
considerable Marine Strength from Scotland, ready at all times to join and
assist them. And should it so fall out, that a War is not with Honor and
Safety to be avoided between Great Britain and either of those Nations, which
is so far from being impossible, that it lies within a probable view, Scotland
through having a potent Naval Power of its own, will upon a conjunction in that
case of its Strength with England, give the King of Great Britain such a
Superiority over his Enemies in Number and Force of Ships, as may in the
ordinary course of Providence, render him unquestionably victorious, which will
redound chiefly to the Profit and Glory of England.

Nor will they only in such case be in a condition both to protect their own
Trade, and to assist the English with a Squadron of Stout Men of War toward
the increasing of the Royal Navy; but they will by reason of the Situation of
their Country, and the convenience of their Ports, be able to cover and defend
the trading Ships of England toward the East, and to secure their Navigation
to Hamburgh, Swedeland, Denmark, Poland, Muscow, Greenland, etc. which is very
needful to be kept safe, because of the Pitch, Tarr, Canvass, Timber, as well
as of diverse other Commodities, which are brought from those Parts, whereof
several, if not most of them, are indispensibly necessary for the building,
repairing, and equipping of Ships of all sorts, and cannot be so well had in
other places.

Further, The more Rich and Opulent that the Scots do grow, which they will
speedily do, by the Gold and Silver which will be dug out of the Mines of
Darien, and by the Profits that will accrue from such other Productions, as
that Territory where they are so planted does afford, they will thereby be in
the better State and Condition for granting larger supplies to the Crown, than
they hitherto could; and thereupon administer ground, as well as occasion, for
greatly lessening and moderating the Charge, which England, even in times of
Peace, but especially of War, has heretofore been necessitated unto.

And whereas the Scots have been at all times able, and thereof given abundant
proof during the late War, to raise and muster great Numbers of as brave and
well-disciplin'd Forces, as any Nation of the World can afford; yet by reason
of their Penury, which is a consequence and effect of their want of Foreign
Trade, and of Colonies in those parts of the Earth, from which the great Wealth
does arise and flow into European Countries, which their Plantation at Darien
will soon cure, remedy and relieve them against, they could not grant Taxes,
nor advance Money that would have been sufficient for the Maintaining and
Paying of their Troops, but there was a necessity of putting them upon the
English Establishment, which was in part an occasion, both of those excessive
impositions of all kinds, which England became indispensibly obliged to fall
into the projection and enacting of; and of those incredible Debts which it
has contracted, does lie under, and cannot speedily redeem it self from. For
seeing the Kingdom of England, how plentifully soever it be furnished with Men,
and able to bring into the Field very numerous, as well as admirable Forces,
could not have raised within it self that vast proportion of Military Troops,
which were thought needful to be kept on foot during the late War, which made
it to receive and maintain so many thousand of Scots Forces; will it not
therefore be of great advantage upon any Stress or Exigency of the like Nature
hereafter, to have the same or a greater proportion of Scots Forces to join
them, and to come in to their assistance, without England's becoming obliged
either to subsist or to pay them? and instead of having them upon Loan, and at
a great expense of English Treasure, to obtain them as a Quota, which their
Neighbors and Friends will not only at all times be ready to grant and
advance, but to maintain at their own charges. And as it may be affirmed under
all the moral certainty imaginable, that the Scots through their being upheld and
defended in their Calidonian Colony, will, in a few years, be rendered able,
and will be found ready and forward to come into those Measures of Conjunction
and Union of Forces with England, in all such Foreign Wars wherein they shall
at any time embark; so it may from thence be inferred, that it is the true
Interest of the Parliament and People of England, to have the Scots not only
preserved and protected in the enjoyment of their Plantation in Darien, but to
give them all the countenance and aid which they can, against such, whosoever
they be, that shall attempt either the troubling of them there, or the driving
them from thence.

Moreover, it might be represented and showed at large, how much it will be to
the advantage of England, both with respect to their Plantations in the
West Indies, and their own general growth and increase in Trade, and the
rendering their whole Traffic and Commerce more secure and profitable than it
has been, to have the Scots upheld in the possession which they have obtained
upon the forementioned American Isthmus, and that they be successful and
prosperous in the improvement and further extension of their Colony. But having
said enough in a former Paragraph, for the demonstrating of that beyond the
being either denied or contradicted, and the matter being obvious to all Men,
who are capable of thinking rationally and to any useful purposes, and it being
withal a Topic, which every little and common Writer upon this Subject, will
not fail (through inability to enlarge and employ their Conceptions about other
things relative hereunto) to make their best and utmost of; I shall therefore
decline the re-assuming the consideration of that Head again here, and shall
address to the representation of one Medium of Argumentation, whereby it will
apodictically appear to be the Interest of England, to have the Scots preserved
and defended in their Settlement at Darien.

Namely, That the convenience of that place for an European Plantation, being
now better understood than it was before, and the wonderful Profits and
Advantages that will flow from and accrue by it, being more fully apprehended
and more clearly discerned, than ever they were; it will thereupon follow and
ensue, That should the Scots be drove from thence, the Subjects of some other
Prince or State, besides the Spaniards will possess themselves of it. Which
whosoever it be, will be of fatal consequence to England, as well as ruinous to
Scotland. Nor dare I entertain so unworthy and dishonorable an Opinion of the
English Nation, nor show my self so ungrateful to a Kingdom, unto which I owe
more Thankfulness, Service and Duty, than ever I can be capable of paying, as
once to imagine, that they themselves will be so unjust, as well as unkind,
either clandestinely and by connivance, to be accessory to the wresting of that
Plantation out of the possession of the Scots; or so ungentile as well as
unfriendly, as singly and alone, or in conjunction and confederacy with others,
to drive and compel them from thence by force. Seeing as endeavors and
attempts of those kinds, would not only appear so shamefully scandalous to all
the sober, wise and righteous part of Mankind, that the greatest part of the
World would reproach them for the Treachery and Wickedness, as well as for the
Imprudence and Folly of it, but it would beget that bitter and implacable
hatred in the Scots Nation against England, as would excite and kindle those
Desires and Flames of Revenge, as no length of time will ever allay, nor the
Authority of any Prince entit'led to both the Crowns, be able to extinguish or
to prevent the fatal consequences of.

And though the Power and Strength of Scotland may be looked upon with Derision
and Contempt, when compared with the Force and Might of England; yet should
first Wrath, and then War arise between these two Nations, it may be easily
foretold, without pretending to a Spirit of Prophecy, that it will be
mischievous beyond expression to both, though in the issue it may prove more
ruinous to the one than to the other. Nor is it possible to be avoided, but
that a quarrel raised between the Kingdoms upon that motive and account, will
produce the like, if not more dismal effects, than the War in the Reign of
Edward I. Vid. Buch. Hist. lib. 8.
did, whereof a judicious Historian has left this wise and memorable
Observation, that Angliam vehementer concussit, and Scotorum nomen fere
delevit; It wonderfully shook and weakened England, and almost exterminated the
very Name of the Scots.

And this is so obvious to be foreseen and discerned by any Man, that gives
himself the freedom of thinking, especially considering the present
circumstances of England, with respect to its no less potent than envious
Enemies about it, as well as upon other accounts, which I decline the
mentioning of, that it will neither be undecent, nor savor of undue boldness,
to say that whosoever shall advise the application of the power of England for
driving the Scots out of Darien, can design no less, than either the ruin of
the Nations by one another, or the making them when divided and weakened a prey
unto those who long to subdue and destroy both. But as England is a Nation of
more Honor and Justice, than from their own inclination and choice, to come
into to such a design against the Scots; so they are a more sagacious and wise
People, than either to consent unto, or to connive at their being wheedled and
drawn into it by others.

So that the Scots having no ground or reason for apprehensions and fears, that
the English will directly or indirectly concur and assist to their being
expelled from thence, nor I hope supinely and tamely look on until it be
effected: All the jealousy and dread is, that either the French or the Dutch
may cooperate and contribute toward it; or at least that in case the
Spaniards alone should be in a condition to accomplish it, through the Scots
wanting, and being refused sufficient and seasonable support, one of these
Nations, who are both so potent in Land Forces and Fleets of War; should by way
of after game, make it their business to get into possession of it. And under
the power of which of these two Nations soever it shall chance to fall, it will
be of equal, but of very fatal consequence, even to England.

For suppose that the Dutch, who are a People that do extraordinarily well
understand their Interest, and who never miss the going into all the Measures
and Methods whereby they may promote it; (witness their Conduct and Management
not many years ago at Bantam, and if we will believe a sort of ill-natured Men
among our selves, their coming thereupon into the late Revolution here in
England, not so much out of kindness either to our Religion or Laws, as to
prevent King James's revenging that action upon them,) I say suppose that they
upon the Scots being expelled from Darien, should find themselves able, as
undoubtedly they are willing, to settle a Colony there, the consequences
thereof toward England are at present as obvious, as they will hereafter be
infallibly fatal and ruinous.

For besides the advantage that such a Plantation will give them, of engrossing
and monopolizing in a little time unto themselves the whole Trade of the
East Indies, China, and Japan, as well as most of the American Traffic,
especially that which is mainly profitable of it: they will moreover by that
addition of Wealth to the Treasure, which they have already, which the Gold and
Silver Mines of Darien will inconceivably and speedily yield them, be not only
in a condition to give Laws to all Europe, and become the sole Arbiters of
Affairs in these parts of the World, but they will be able, if they have a mind
to it, and it is neither wise, nor will it be safe to lie at their discretion,
to rob England both of the the Sovereignty of the Narrow-Seas, and of the
freedom of Navigation into any places of the Baltic, the Mediterranean, or
elsewhere, save as they shall be pleased to permit and license them. But though
this be a Subject worthy to be enlarged upon, and that deserves to have an
ample detale given of it, and which withal it were not difficult to do in a
manner that might awaken England out of its drousie and lethargical Temper, yet
for reasons which need not to be told, but may readily be guessed at, I shall
not at this time, nor in this place, prosecute it any further.

However should the Dutch, upon Motives which may lie before them, and whereof
we can have no information, decline interposing in that affair, either as to
the encouraging of the Spaniards to drive the Scots out of Darien, or the
endeavoring to establish a Colony there themselves, in case they should be
expelled; yet who knows but that the French may cooperate toward the first
in order to their obtaining and compassing of the latter; which will be as
mischievous, if not much more, in the effects and consequences of it to
England, than if it should fall under the power, and come into the possession
of the Hollanders. And we have the more reason to be apprehensive, that the
French have some such design, if we do but observe how jealous and importunate
they have been and still are in their offers of assistance to the Spaniards,
for the dislodging of the Scots; which every wise and thinking Man must believe
to be done in prospect of advantage to accrue unto themselves, rather than of
any benefit which they intend shall result thereby to the Spaniards. Nor do I
think it needful to give along deduction of the mischiefs that may, and which
in all probability will ensue, upon the Settlement of a Colony on the Isthmus
of Darien by the French, to the affecting of all Europe, and particularly the
Kingdom of England, they being so obvious that they cannot escape the views of
any who have Eyes to see, and will but vouchsafe to open them. Nevertheless in
order to the awakening thoughts in such, who do not exercise themselves in
Speculations of this kind, I shall very briefly intimate a few things, which
carry their own evidence along with them.

Namely, that should the French become possessed of any part of Darien, and
especially of that where the Scots have erected their Calidonian Colony, they
would thereby be wonderfully enabled, both to disturb the Trade of England in
all their West India Plantations, and for making encroachments upon them, in
their best and most profitable Colonies. And if what the Author of an Essay
upon ways and means, See Discourses on the public Revenues p. 116, 117.
does say of the danger and damage that by the French settling at Meschasipi,
will arise to England, with respect to their American Traffic and Plantations,
deserves serious consideration, as undoubtedly it does; much more is their
establishing themselves upon the Isthmus, to be for the same motives and
reasons seasonably thought of and prevented.

Moreover it may be very rationally affirmed, that were the French once
possessed of such a considerable Port in Darien as Port Acla is, they would not
long continue contented with that, but would be endeavoring to enlarge their
Acquisition and Jurisdiction over the whole Ishhmus, which as it would lay the
Foundation of their becoming Powerful over the Northern Ocean, and afford them
wonderful means and opportunities of extending their Trade, to the East Indies,
China and Japan, and of getting in a great measure to be Masters of the rich
and beneficial Commerce, that is carried on and managed by Europeans in those
parts of the World; so it would infallibly put them into a capacity and
condition, of gaining in a very little time the Sovereignty both of Mexico and
Peru. It being both certain and evident beyond all denial, that with fewer than
ten Thousand well disciplined Troops, they may wrest both those Empires from
the Crown of Spain, as also whatsoever they do Possess besides upon the
American Continent. Seeing as the apparent weakness of the Spaniards there is
such, that they will not be able to withstand the Impression, and attacks of a
few Battallions of good Military and Regular Forces; See Gage's new Survey of
the West Indies of the Edition 1699. p. 20.
so it is Morally certain, that they will have the aid and assistance of the
Criolians (who are such as are born in America of Spanish Parents) as well as
of those, who are of the race of the old Native Indians, to rescue those
Countries and Provinces from under the Power and Dominion of the Crown of
Spain. Which how fatal it would be to the European Princes and States, as well
as ruinous to the Spanish Monarchy, I need not be at the pains to represent and
prove.

Further should the French become once possessed of any part of Darien, and
obtain the occupation of the Gold and Silver Mines which are there, it would
after that be in vain to contest or withstand their Pretension of succeeding to
the Crown of Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging. For as the House
of Bourbon, has a great deal to allege in Justification of its Right and
Title, of Succession to that Monarchy, should his present Catholic Majesty
die, without Issue, as he is like to do, and as they have already powerful
Forces for the seconding and making good their Claim, so it is beyond
contradiction that were they once Masters of those Mines, which lie within the
District where the Scots have their Calidonian Colony, it would after that be
impossible to defeat and prevent them in their pretensions, seeing they would
not only thereby be in a condition to possess themselves with ease of the many
and Rich Provinces which the Spanish Crown has in America; but they would be
furnished with a Fund of Treasure for the payment of all those numerous Troops
without burden to their Subjects, which they shall think needful to keep on
foot in Europe, for the asserting of their Right of succession to that
Monarchy. And I may Justly as well as boldly say, that the single supporting of
the Scots in their settlement at Darien, will be more subservient and effectual
for the obstructing of the French in that design, than all the Alliances that
can be made in Europe against it, will in the Issue and Event signify, without
the preservation of that Colony. And indeed God in his wise Providence, seems
to have adjusted the Scots settling there at this Juncture, in order to be a
means and expedient of obstructing the French from succeeding in their
pretension, if others will have but eyes to see it, and prudence to make use of
it.

Finally it is not unworthy the being considered, what Jealousies all Nations
in this European part of the World have of late entertained, and what a general
belief they have imbibed, as if the French were aspiring after an Universal
Monarchy. And was not the fear of this on the one hand, and the obviating it on
the the other, the pretended reasons of the late Confederacy, and of the War that
proved so Bloody and Expensive, which though they may be thought to have given
some check and interruption unto it, yet they are far from having either made
the French deposite the thoughts of it, or from having so weakened and disabled
them, as to render the prosecution and compassing thereof Impracticable. Yea I
may venture upon all the Topics of Reason, and Politics, to pronounce that it
is Impossible to hinder and disappoint it, may they be but connived at, in the
obtaining the possession of the Gold and Silver Mines, which lie in the
Neighborhood, and within the District of the Calidonian Colony. Whereas if the
Scots be protected and upheld in it, there will those Treasures flow from
thence into Britain, as will so enrich his Majesty's Exchequer, that he may not
only make his own Dominion the happiest and most opulent in the World, and put
the balance of the Trade of the whole Universe into their hands; but render
himself and his Successors, the unquestionable Arbiters of all affairs and
transactions, within the limits of the European Dominions, and give him the
glory of saving all Europe, from the Deluge and Inundation of a French Conquest.

Whereunto let me in the next place be allowed to subjoin, that in case
Scotland should be able of it self to defend and maintain their Colony against
the machinations and assaults of the Spaniards, without the assistance and
support of England, as it is hoped they may, that the English will not only
lose the Honor and Thanks of it, with all the Privileges and Advantages which
through countenancing and aiding of them they might have been partakers of, as
well as have been secured of the perpetual Friendship of that Nation, and upon
all occasions experienced the happy effects of it; so it can give no just
offense to such of the Kingdom of England as are endowed with Wisdom and
Understanding to have it plainly laid before them, that if Scotland find it
self too weak to withstand the Forces of the Crown of Spain, and of such as may
join their Power with that of the Catholic King for dislodging of them, and in
the mean time find themselves abandoned by England, how that in such a case, it
is greatly to be feared that they may call in some Neighboring Monarch or
State to their Succor and Support, though the doing it will infallibly be
reckoned, and deservedly too, a trespass against their Allegiance, Fealty and
Loyalty. And the Scots being naturally a warm People, too much verifying the
Proverb, that Scotorum ingenia sunt fervida, which vulgarly goes of them, they
may the sooner be hurried into such an irregular and unlawful course, by
reflecting, that since both the Nations came under one Sovereign, they are both
much less esteemed by the English, and enjoy fewer Privileges in England, than
in times of Peace between the Crowns they did before. Whereof the reason is
obvious; namely, that England being the powerful and opulent Nation, and having
the King Resident among them, they do thereby the more easily influence him to
be kinder to them than to the Scots. For though I hope that they will never be
tempted to run into such a Method, and do also heartily wish, that no
provocations may force them upon it, yet whosoever will either consider, the
Nature and Temper of Mankind, and make reflections upon Late, as well as upon
more Ancient Precedents, may find matter of apprehension and jealousy
administered unto them, that it is so far from being impossible they should do
so, that it rather looks like a moral certainty, that it will come to pass.
There being nothing more natural, as well as usual, than for Communities and
Nations, as well as for individual and particular Men, when either unkindly
treated by their Friends, or distressed by their Enemies, to seek for succor
and relief wheresoever they can obtain it. And to cite the Testimonies and
Examples that do aver and confirm this, would be both to transcribe a
considerable part of the Histories of all Ages, and to give the Detale and
Memoirs of the behavior of vast numbers of private Persons. Nor does it in
such a case come much under Peoples consideration how far such a procedure will
be accounted Criminal, and the Authors of it held impeachable; Interest in such
circumstances out balancing Duty, and present inconveniences stifling Fears,
with respect to what may be future. Nor is it unworthy of remark what Mr.
Littleton, Brother to this present Speaker, broadly insinuates concerning
Barbados, See the Groans of the Plantations.
when he, as well as that whole Plantation, thought themselves severely dealt
with by the Government and Kingdom of England; namely, that it was to be
dreaded, least under such discouragements, they should be tempted to run into
Merthods, that would be as irreconcilable to their Loyalty, as they would be
contrary to their Inclinations, unless they were forced upon them.

And as it is firmly to be believed, that the Dutch, or any of the Northern
Crowns, if applied unto by the Scots, and their aid craved, would be ready to
own and espouse their concern; so it is to be apprehended and feared in more
special manner, least under such melancholy menacing and distressful
circumstances, they should not make their address unto, and put themselves
under the protection of France. Seeing besides the agreeableness in temper and
humor, between the Scots and the French, more than between any two Nations in
Europe, the old Affinity that was betwixt them, and the benefits which
redounded mutually to each of them by it, are not wholly forgotten. For as the
Ancient Alliance of Scotland with France, and the many brave Troops wherewith
upon all occasions they supplied the French, were the unhappy means of the
English losing all those Noble Provinces, and vast Territories, whereof they
were once rightfully possessed in France, so the Scots are upon every unkind
carriage of England toward them, but too apt to remember the Honors and
opulent Fortunes, which diverse of them attained unto during their long and
faithful league with the French. Nor have they reason much to question, but
should they renew their old Confederacy with France, and call for assistance
from thence, the whole Kingdom of Scotland, would be soon reinstated there in
all the ancient Privileges and Immunities, which were enjoyed by them
heretofore, and not only such who are chiefly concerned in the business of
Darien, become liberally rewarded and recompensed for throwing themselves into
the arms of the French; but such as are of the chief and first Rank of their
Nobility, would be courted to accept General-Commands, Mareschal-Staffs,
Ducal-Coronets, and Annual Pensions, answerable to those of Princes of the
Blood, which their Ancestors formerly had.

Nor ought it to be overlooked, how the Scots even since their Union with
England under one and the same King, have without the knowledge of His
Britannick Majesty, sought the Protection of France, when they conceived
themselves in danger of being Invaded by England. It being too well known to
admit of contradiction, that when King Charles I. was advised and influenced to
make War upon them, for their withstanding what they called Invasion upon
Church and State, how they applied themselves unto France for assistance;
inscribing their Petition and Memorial to Lewis XIII. Au Roy. For which, though
they were charged both with Treachery and Rebellion by the Court Party, yet
that Act of the Scots was not so heinously resented by the English, as to
deserve to be taken notice of and upbraided at the Treaty at Rippon. Nor will
the Zeal, or rather Biggotry of the present French King be of much
signification for diverting them from begging his protection, in case they see
themselves likely to be ruined in their present design, through their being
assaulted by Spain and abandoned by England. As knowing that the State Wisdom
of Lewis XIV. will as much overruled his warmth for the Faith and Worship of
the Romish Church, as it did that of Henry II. of France, when the Protestants
in Scotland resisted such as they said would Persecute them in the Reign of
Queen Mary his Daughter-in-law. That King being recorded to have said upon that
occasion, We must commit the Souls of Scots-men to God, for we have difficulty
enough to rule the Consciences of such as are French. Neither ought it to be
passed over without observation, that the application which the Scots under the
Reign of Charles I. made to Lewis XIII. was not very long after his having
subdued his Subjects at Rochel, and wrested the Cautionary Towns out of the
hands of his Reformed Subjects. Which opened the way to all the Mischief and
Ruin that have overtaken them since. Nevertheless this must be said in favor
of the Scots, that it was upon the Motive of Religion, and from Indignation
against France, because of the late and present Persecution of the Protestants
there, that they did not carry their Resentments higher for the affront put
upon His Majesty, and the Parliament of Scotland, with respect to their Act for
a Company to Trade in India and Africa, and that they did not warmly express
their displeasure in relation to the interposure of His Majesty's Envoy at the
Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Resident at Hamburgh, who by menaces, as well as
by gentler Methods, both detered and discouraged the Hamburghers from
contributing to their Stock and Capital, and from joining in the establishment
and promotion of the Plantation and Trade, which the Scots were about to Settle
and Embark in. For as it would not but wonderfully surprise the Scots to find
their Undertaking, and particularly their transaction with the Hamburghers for
Subscriptions and Aid, not only styled The Action of some private Men, who
neither had Credentials, nor were any other ways authorized by His Majesty,
when they stood warranted in the one and the other by the King's Charter, as well
as by an Act of Parliament, but to have it represented to the Magistrates and
Governors of that Free City, That His Majesty would regard all Proceedings with
the Scots in that affair, as an affront to his Royal Authority, and that he
would not fail to revenge himself of it; so it was matter of the greatest
astonishment to the People of Scotland, that the said Envoy and Resident,
persevered to oppose them in all their transactions at Hamburgh, until they had
frustrated and defeated them in what they were about, notwithstanding that
Tullibarding and Ogilvis, His Majesty's Two Scotch Secretaries, had declared in
a Letter to the Council general of the Company, that they stood empowered by
the King to signify unto them, See their Letter of August 2. 1697.
that His Majesty would give order to the said Envoy and Resident, not to make
use of His Majesty's Name and Authority for obstructing the Scots Company in
the prosecution of their Trade with the Inhabitants of Hamburgh.

Nor ought it to give offense unto any, though it may possibly alarm a great
number of judicious and thinking People, to have it represented and published,
that all the opposition made and given by His Majesty's said Envoy and Resident
to the Scots, transacting with the Hamburghers, was previous and antecedent
unto any knowledge they had received, or could possibly attain unto, of the
Place, Territory, or Country, where the Scots had designed to Land, and to
endeavor the establishment of a Colony. For as none of the very Directors of
the Company had, until a long time after, come to any fixed Resolution where
they should attempt the beginning and carrying on a Plantation; so posteriorly
to its having been agreed upon and concerted by those few of them, to whom the
determination thereof was referred by the rest, it was so secretly concealed
and kept faithfully undiscovered, that neither His Majesty, nor any of his
Ministers, were in the least made acquainted with it. And consequently that the
foresaid Envoy and Resident, being altogether ignorant in what part of the
World, the Company intended to seek and pursue a Foreign Settlement for Trade
and Commerce; and whether it might not be in some Region or Province, that
would be both agreeable to the humor of the Spaniards, and subservient to the
Interest of England, their interposing so zealously and industriously with the
Hamburghers against the Scots, could neither be upon motives of Love and
Kindness to the English, or of respect and deference to the King of Spain, but
out of mere disaffection to the Kingdom of Scotland, and from an aversion to
the welfare and prosperity of that People. So that it may be worth those
Gentlemen's recollecting, what heretofore befell Archbishop Laud and the Earl of
Strafford, for having meddled in Scots affairs beyond their Posts, though with the
Countenance and by the Authority of King Charles I. Who notwithstanding their
being Persons of incomparable Talents, as well as of the most elevated Stations
and illustrious Characters of any of the Kingdom of England, yet upon the
arising of a misunderstanding between that Prince and his English Parliament,
and through the necessity that the latter stood in of having the favor of the
Kingdom of Scotland in the difference that sprung up between them and their
Sovereign, were sacrificed in order to appease and gratify the Scots, rather
than for any treasonable Crimes that they were guilty of.

I do foresee that it will be here objected, that for the English to
countenance and uphold the Scots in what they have done, will be to enter into
a Conspiracy against themselves, and a concurring in what will be highly
prejudicial, not only to the Traffic of the English American Plantations, but
to the Trade and Commerce of England it self. And that not only by reason of
the general Share in Trade which the Scots by reason of that Calidonian Company
may speedily grow up unto; but because of the great Immunities in Freedom from
Taxes, Customs, and all manner of Impositions whatsoever, which are granted
unto their Company for 21 Years, while the English Traffic is by so many Laws
and Statutes clogged and over-loaded with them. To which Exception I shall
endeavor to give such a full and sufficient Reply in the few following
Reflections, that I hope both the frivolousness and indiscretion of it will be
made obvious, and rendered apparent to every Man, that has but judgment and
temper enough to weigh things in equal and just Scales.

The first thing therefore which I would offer to be considered is this,
namely, That the hazard of succeeding in the founding and establishing of a New
Colony is so great, and the Treasure that must inevitably be expended in order
thereunto so large, before any considerable reimbursements can be hoped for,
that it is extremely difficult by any proposed Immunities and Privileges
whatsoever, to gain those that have Money, and who know how to make other
improvements of it, to be forward, liberal, and zealous of entering into and
promoting such a Design. And if we will but cast our Eye beyond Sea, and look
at present into Germany, and observe the encouragements proposed to the
Vaudois, and the French Refugees, in case they will settle in such and such
places, where they are sure to be protected, and at a season, when they neither
know how to be harbored, nor to subsist, any where else; we shall not wonder
that His Majesty, and the Parliament of Scotland, thought the granting of all
those Privileges and Immunities needful for the prevailing upon the Subjects of
that Kingdom, to engage in a design, the Scene whereof lay so remote, and the
Difficulties and Charges would be so great and large toward the bringing it to
perfection. Yea, does not every Inheritor and Landlord in England allow large
favors and advantages, both to such as will come and cultivate their waste
Lands, and to those who will lay out their Money in the building Houses upon
their Grounds where there were no Dwellings before? And ought it then to be
complained of, that a Nation in order to the extending the Empire and Dominion
of their Sovereign, and the contributing thereby to the enriching, in a little
time, of all his Kingdoms and Subjects, as well as his own Exchequer, should
have Immunities and Privileges granted unto them for a few years, and whereof
several were expired, before they actually entered upon the execution of their
Design.

Whereunto may be added, that the advantage which will both accrue unto the
Government at all times hereafter by an increase of Customs, and an ability
acquired unto Scotland, of being more liberal in the Taxes, which they shall
grant unto His Britannick Majesty, than heretofore their Poverty,
notwithstanding their Zeal for His Majesty's Service, would allow them to be;
and likewise the many benefits which will arise to England, in the several
particulars whereof I have already given the Detale, and which I shall not here
repeat, will abundantly compensate for the Immunities and Privileges which are
vouchsafed the Scots Company for 21 Years, whereof Four are already elapsed,
wherein they have been at great expenses, without any return in way of
Principal or Interest. And it being the daily practice of the English
themselves, and indeed of all Mankind, to venture upon Designs and to run into
Disbursements, where the gains are too often only chimerical, and at most times
but merely conjectural, and very seldom are morally certain; should the People
of England then, make it a matter of quarrel with the Scots that they are
embarked in a design without the English coming into any part of the charge of
it, from which if it do succeed, it is Mathematically demonstrable, that the
English Nation will obtain great Glory, Power and Wealth.

Moreover it is demonstrable, that the Benefits which will redound to the
English in the Interim, and within that circle of time, will greatly
overbalance any damages, or inconveniences that can be supposed to arise unto
them in their Traffic and Commerce, by that short Indulgence granted unto the
Scots, of being free from Customs and Impositions in relation to their exports
unto, and Imports from their Colony. Seeing besides the Emoluments that will
accrue to England, and to their American Plantations, by the opening unto them
a vast Trade unto places where they had none, or very little before, and by
that Necessity, as well as occasion, which the Scots cannot avoid, of taking
more off from them both of their Natural and Artificial productions, than they
could formerly use, or know how to dispose of them; I say besides this, it is
provided for, and ordained in the very Act, by which their Company is
established, that their Colony shall be a free Port and Market, so that the
English may carry thither, whatsoever they judge vendible either to the Scots,
or the Natives, for which they are like to be paid in Gold and Silver, and they
may also Traffic there, and bring from thence whatsoever is produced within
the District, where the Calidonian Colony lies, and in the Territories occupied
by the Indians, which are adjoining unto it, all which will greatly Countervail
and and Outbalance, the few supposed inconveniences, that are discoursed by
unthinking men, as likely to arise unto England, and their West India
settlements, by the Immunities granted to the Scots, for the short
forementioned term of years.

Further that as all the Commodities importable by the Company which are not of
the growth of that Country, are all excepted from being Custom-free, and are
made liable to all legal Impositions; so nothing of the very productions of
that place, can be imported by the Scots into England, but what they stand
bound to pay customs for, and are ready in compliance with the Laws of England
so to do. Yea the Navigation Acts made in England being still in force, and
never like to be repealed, and whereof the conniving at the violation and
breach, would be of fatal consequence to the English in their Shiping, no goods
can be imported from Darien directly into England save in English Vessels, and
thither it is that most of the Dying Wood, as well as of Diverse other
Commodities, which the Directors of the Plantation can procure on the Isthmus,
must be immediately carried and disposed of. So that from the whole which I
have laid down in way of reply to the foregoing objection, it appears to be
made without any solid ground, and to proceed from people, that neither have,
nor can take a full survey of this affair, nor look round it, rather than from
persons of any great penetration, or who are conversant either in the
Philosophy, or in the praxis and Mechanism of Trade in the full compass and
extent of it.

The only thing further that I imagine to be alledgable against the English
giving countenance and encouragement to the Scots in their present undertaking,
and to hinder their Joining in the protection and defense of them, is that it
may prove prejudicial to the Church of England, through the giving way unto, and
concurring to promote the settlement of the Presbyterian Form and Model in that
part of the World; the Church of England having found trouble and
inconveniences enough from that Scheme of Ecclesiastical Government in the
Scots frame and Edition of it, while it has been confined within their own
Kingdom.

This looks so much like Bantering instead of Reasoning, that it may be
construed for a reproach put upon the Understandings and good Sense of the
greater part of mankind to vouchsafe an answer unto it, especially in a
Kingdom, as well as an Age, wherein the Jus divinum of this or that Form of
Church Government, obtains a very slender room in most men's Belief. And it were
well, if all those who are reckoned to have the best natural and acquired
parts, could be brought to agree in the Essentials of Christianity, though they
continued to differ in Disciplinary points. Yea it is to be feared, that the
Dogmaticalness and the Intemperate zeal of some, for things vastly removed from
being Fundamentals in our Religion, have rendered too many persons Skeptical in
the Material Articles of it. And if we could better bear with one another, and
agree to differ in Religious Matters of less Importance, we might thereupon
possibly better accord, and more second each others endeavors in the defense
of the Apostolical and Athanasian Creeds.

But how strangely are the Scots circumstanced and stated, with respect to
their Darien Undertaking, when those of the Romish Communion, are alarmed at,
and incensed against it, upon the Foot, that it will be an Introducing of the
Reformed Religion into those parts of America where it never was; and at the
same time, some Protestants are the less favorable unto it, because it may be
attended with the Erection of a Form of Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline there, different from those of the Church of England. Whereas we
should be thankful to God, that the Reformed Religion is like to obtain some
footing where it never had any. And we ought certainly to acknowledge and
reckon, that this will abundantly compensate for the Inconvenience of
Presbyteries going along with it.

And how much sorry soever I am, that there should be so much of what is
properly Popery spread among, and received by the American Indians, within the
Spanish Dominions and Provinces in the West Indies; yet I cannot but declare my
Joy, that the Christian Religion, how much soever Sophisticated and Embased as
well as Emasculated, with and by Romish Errors and Superstitions, is
nevertheless come to be conveyed unto, and planted among them in any Measure
and Degree. Seeing though Popery can save no man, yet the Christianity that is in
the Papal Religion, (in that the Church of Rome believes whatsoever we do
believe) may be a means of saving every man that is upright and sincere, and
whose Mistakes, Errors and Superstitions, are not the Effects either of
Wilfulness or of Negligence, but of insuperable Ignorance. Which as it does at
the least wonderfully extenuate their Crimes and Guilt before God, and renders
them prepared and qualified Subjects for the Divine Compassion, so it should
awaken Zeal in such as have love for Souls, and are concerned to have the
Kingdom of our Lord JESUS Christ enlarged, both for the rectifying the
Judgments of those poor Indians, which have been woefully misled in matters of
the Christian Faith and Worship by the Spaniards, and for having the Gospel
Preached in the purity and simplicity of it, among those Native Americans who
knew Nothing of it. And it is no small disgrace unto Protestant Kingdoms,
States and Churches, that while they of the Romish Church have showed
themselves so forward and industrious, and have been at such vast expenses, to
send and maintain Missioners in those parts, and in Mohammedan Countries, for
the publishing of the Christian Religion, though woefully corrupted by superadded
Doctrines and Superstitions of their own; that none of those styled Reformed,
have concerned themselves therein to any purpose, save where they have
Plantations, that will without their Aid, subsist and maintain Preachers, and
these also very poorly supplied and provided with pious and able Ministers.

And indeed one would wonder, that after the Laws in England, for giving
Liberty to such there, as are Dissenters from the Diocesan Jurisdiction, and
from the Rites, Ceremonies and Modes of Worship of the Episcopal Church, it
should raise Jealousy, Envy and Pique of and against the Caledonian Colony,
upon the motive that the great body of the Planters, and the Governors and
Directors of that settlement, will be of the Presbyterian persuasion in those
Extraessentials of Christianity. Whereas for my part, were I a Zealot for the
English Episcopacy and Liturgy, neither of which in my opinion, ought to give
that offense to Wise, Learned and Good men, which some pretending to all those
Characters, have conceived against them; yet I should not be sorry, to see some
of the bigoted Scots Presbyterians to transport themselves thither, where I am
sure they will do less harm to the Church of England, and may be to Religion it
self, than they have done, and still are like to do nearer at hand. Though even
what they are in the very Neighborhood able to do, against the Diocesan
Government, and the Liturgical Worship, will not without a stock of men of more
Learning and discreeter Conduct, than those men the Church of Scotland is at
present furnished with, signify much to the disparaging or supplanting of
either, further than as Law and Force do interpose. And against that Vltima
Ratio Ecclesiae, as well as Aulae I know no methods that can be lawfully run
into, save those of Patience and Humility, under Violence and Severity from
them, accompanied with Integrity and Moderation, in the firmly keeping and
modestly asserting of Episcopal Principles.

Nor are the Scots at Caledonia like to be so bigoted, narrow and peevish with
referrence to the extraessentials and circumstantials of Religion, as they have
been found in Scotland; in that the Directors and Overseers of that Plantation,
have emitted a Declaration, wherein they grant Liberty of Conscience to all
that will come and settle among them. Which as it plainly shows, that the
denying of it at home, is not upon the foot of Conscience, seeing on that
Foundation they should allow it no where; but that the refusing it in Scotland,
is upon the motive of Domination, and worldly Policy; so who knows, but that
this Precedent of theirs in America, may prove a leading case to their being
more indulgent that way in Europe, than hitherto they could be prevailed upon
to be. And that being no longer restrained by Principles, which guide and
overruled Conscience from granting Liberty to such as Dissent from them in
lesser matters of Religion; the Interest of the Kingdom may in time oversway
the peevishness of their Clergy. For though I do readily acknowledge, that no
Liberty upon whatsoever pretense of Conscience, is to be granted unto any,
whose principles do not only Authorize them to the disturbing and overturning
of Civil Governments; but do make the Blaspheming God, and the ridiculing of
all revealed Religion venial, and the living brutishly and sensually Lawful;
yet in matters that are purely Religious, wherein too much rigor and severity
have been commonly exerted, I do take it to be our Duty to bear with, and
forbear one another in Love and Peace. For I do really believe it to be one of
the first Truths dictated to us by Nature, that whereupon a person is to
venture his Eternal State, that therein he should be allowed the liberty and
freedom of choosing for himself

Finally this exception will prove the more vain, as well as surprising, if it
be but observed that the Form of Church Government, and the Modes of Christian
Worship, even in some of the English American Plantations, are no less
dissonant from, and may be of worse consequence to the Church of England, than
what the Scots are supposed resolved to set up, and to be in the Practice of in
their Colony at Darien, of which if I mistake not, New England and Pensilvania,
are undeniable Instances. In that Independancy, which sufficiently strikes at
Episcopacy, and all the Ceremonies of Prelatical worship, obtains as the legal
Form of Government, Discipline and Worship in the first, and Quakerism, which
is a collection and system of very dangerous errors, both in Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline, is the Christianity that prevails, and is countenanced in the
latter.

Having now fully represented the whole, that I Judge either needful, or
convenient to be said, not only for the Justification of the Scots, with
respect to their present Undertaking, and the Vindicating them therein, from
whatsoever with any shadow of reason can be excepted against it; but toward
the clearing and demonstrating how subservient their being Countenanced,
Protected and Assisted in it, will be to the Interest of England, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, as well as to Scotland; all that does further
remain to be added, ere I put an end to this discourse, is to acquit my self of
a promise made in one of the foregoing sheets. Namely that were I inclinable to
recriminate, it were easy to fasten some of the worst of those imputations upon
the Spaniards, whereof themselves have been so hasty to accuse the Scots. And
that as the ways of Force, which they have run into, do not correspond with the
Alliances between the Crowns of Great Britain and of Spain; So that through
having betaken themselves to those methods, they have altogether acquitted and
absolved his Majesty, from having that amicable and friendly regard to the
Memorial presented unto him, in the name and by the Authority of the King of
Spain, that had they persevered in the ways of mildness, might have been
expected from him. It being unquestionable, that upon their persevering in
those measures, his Majesty would have complied as far with their desires, as
either in Justice he should have found himself obliged, or as his Royal care
for the Interest of his Kingdom of Scotland, or the trust reposed in him by
that Nation (for the discharge whereof he is sacredly and solemnly bound by
Oath) would have allowed. Nor can it be a trespass against that profound
respect, which is payable to every Crowned head, even by such as are the
Subjects of other Princes, to intimate in Terms of Deference and Modesty, that
the Spaniards, through having betaken themselves to ways of Force and violence
against the Scots, and that not only posteriorly, but antecedently, to the
presenting the Memorial, they have transformed that into a Jest, if not an
Affront, which might otherwise have been interpreted an Act of esteem and
kindness for his Britannick Majesty. For whereas the Memorial was not delivered
unto the King, until the 3d. of May, 1699 they had above Seven weeks before
that, not only detained such of the Scots Prisoners, who by Storm and stress of
weather had been cast upon the Coast where they have their Colonies and
Fortifications; but they had likewise Invaded and assaulted the Scots, within
their own Territory and District, with an armed and military Power.

By which, the Actings of the Spanish Governors in America, are not only
wholly incongruous and inconsistent; and altogether irreconcilable with the
proceeding of his Catholic Majesty' s Ambassador at London; but the Crown of
Spain is become apparently guilty of the Infraction of the Alliances between
his Majesty of Great Britain, and that King: For whereas it is provided by the
Third Article of the Treaty 1667, and by the Fourteenth Article of the Treaty
1670, That if any Injury shall be done by either of the said Kings, or by the
Subjects of either of them, against the Articles of those Alliances, or against
common Right, there shall not therefore be given Letters of Reprisal, Marque,
or Countermarque, by any of the Confederates, until such time as Justice is
followed in the ordinary course of Law, and unless upon a denial or an
unreasonable delaying of Justice. Yet not only while the case is depending, and
notwithstanding the assurance given by his Britannick Majesty to the Catholic
King. That he will cause examine the Justice or Injustice of this Fact of the
Scots, and thereupon act toward the Crown of Spain, according to the measures
of Law and Equity, and the tenor of his Alliances; but even previously to
their representation of that matter unto his Majesty, the Spaniards have
actually fallen upon the Scots, in the ways above mentioned. And whereas it is
Concerted and Stipulated by the Tenth Article of the Treaty 1670, That if the
Ships which do belong to either of these Kings, or the Subjects of either of
them, shall by stress of weather, or otherwise, be forced into the Rivers,
Bays, Ports, etc. belonging to the other in America, that they shall be
received kindly, and treated with all Humanity and Friendship, Yet nevertheless
the Spaniards have in direct Violation of that Article, apprehended and kept
such of the Scots Prisoners, as were forced a Shore at Carthagena by the
Violence of a Storm.

By which as they have plainly made themselves guilty of an Infraction of
Alliances between the two Crowns; so they are become the Aggressors in a War,
which neither his Majesty nor his Scots Subjects have given any Just cause for,
or provocation unto. And as they have thereby rendered it Lawful for the King to
oppose Force against Force, Vid. Grot de Jur. Bell. and Pac. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and Pufend. de jur. Not and Gent. lib. 8. ap. 6.
it being received as a Theoreme of what is Just and Right by all Nations, that
Iniquitas partis adversae, justa bella ingerit, that the doing of wrong by one
Party, gives foundation of a righteous War on their side against whom it is
committed; and that of all Wars they are the Justest, quae ulciscantur
injurias, which are undertaken for the avenging of Injuries, so the Spaniards
have made his Majesty's entering into War against them (in case they persevere
in that Method) indispensably necessary, unless he should at once both
Sacrifice his own Glory and Honor, and abandon his people for a prey to such
as are causelessly their Enemies. The great Duty of every supreme Ruler being
to protect his subjects, from receiving of Injuries, or to revenge them when
done. And for this end it is, that people becoming united into Societies, chose
and elected such and such to be their Sovereigns, that they might as well
defend as govern them; and protect them against wrongs from others, as well as
take care for the administering of Justice among themselves. Vbi sup. lib. 2
cap. 25.
Yea this every King owes to his People, as they are a part of himself pars
Rectoris, as Grotius expresses it; He and they making one Political Body,
whereof as he is the Head, so they are the Limbs and Members.

And that the aggressed may at all times endeavor, not only to defend
themselves against, but that they may also Lawfully attack the Aggressor, while
he continues to pursue his Hostility, seems one of the first dictates of the
Law of Nature, being a sentiment wherein all Mankind are agred: Yea it is the
only remedy and relief left by God, and agreed upon by Nations, for the
Obviating, Withstanding and Punishing of those, who upon the motives of
Ambition, Covetousness, or of any Lust else whatsoever, do seek to Disturb and
Injure others. (For as Puffendorf says, Vbi sup. lib. 3. cap. 1.. 2.
Vanum fuisset praecepisse ne alter ladatur, si ub de facto is laesus fuerit,
damnum ipsi gratis sit devorandum, and qui laesit, fructu suae injuriae secure,
and citra refusionem gaudere queat, It were a vain thing to have prohibited the
doing wrong by one to another, if he who suffers the Injury, shall be obliged
tamely and remidilesly to bear it, and he who commits it, shall without
reprisal made upon, and reparation exacted of him, be allowed in Quietness and
Safety to enjoy the fruits of his Violence and Rapine. Nor have the most
civilized Nations, accounted any provocations whatsoever to be a Juster cause,
for their making War, Orat. ad Quirites.
than their having Injuries done to their people. Majores Nostri, says Cicero,
saepe Mercatoribus and Naviculariis injuriosius tractatis bella gesserunt, Our
Ancestors denounced and commenced Wars, in case their Merchants, or their
Mariners, were wrongfully and abusively dealt with, which he repeats again
elsewhere, Orat. 2. cont. Ver. 2.
saying, Quot bella Majores nostri susceperunt, quod cives Romani injuria
affecti, Navicularii retenti, Mercatores spoliati dicerentur; how many Wars
have our Forefathers undertaken and pursued, because of Roman Citizens being
Injured, their Subjects made Prisoners, and their Merchants pillaged.

But I hope as well as desire, that the Spaniards will so far bethink and
recollect themselves, as not to prosecute a War against those, that have
neither wronged them, nor are willing to be their Enemies, and that they will
not only forbear all further Hostility, but make Satisfaction for any Injury
they have done. Toward the effecting whereof, little more will be demanded,
than the releasing of those, whom they illegally and unrighteously detained as
Prisoners, when thrown upon their shore by the Violence of a Storm; and for the
restoring of whom, they may have also such of their own in exchange, who became
lawful Prisoners to the Scots; through being taken in actual Hostility, and in
the Field of Battle. And that the Spaniards may be brought to calm thoughts,
and to a cool temper, it may not be amiss to offer to their consideration, that
the stakes for which the Scots and they are about to quarrel, are so far from
being equal, that what the Spaniards are ready to hazard, and going to put upon
the Dice of War, is vastly beyond what the Scots can be exposed to the Risk of.
It being plain that the whole which they are capable of losing is a little spot
of ground upon the Isthmus, and a few men; whereas the Spaniards, are about to
venture no less than all their Colonies there, and some of the Richest
Provinces which they have in America, together with greater proportions of men,
whom they are not so over stocked with, as to choose to be prodigal in hazarding
them. And as the Spaniards ought seriously to ponder, how uncertain the Issue
of the War may prove, so they cannot be ignorant, if success should attend the
Scots, what they will rightfully thereupon become entitled unto. It being
settled as a rule among all Nations, that in such a case, Omnia bona quae
Victus habuit victoris fieri, Vid. Grot. ubi sup. lib. 3. cap. 6.
whatsoever was his, or theirs, who are conquered, does in right become theirs
who Conquer them. Et quae ex hostibus capiuntur, statim capientium fiunt, And
that all that is taken from Enemies, does by the Laws of Nations, fall under
the legal Property, as well as the possession of those that subdued them and
took it. But this being a Subject that I have no call to Meddle with, as being
neither framed for the Cabinet, nor the Tent, I shall both decline it, and put
an end to this Discourse.

FINIS.

