A LETTER TO Mr. Secretary TRENCHARD, Discovering a Conspiracy against the Laws
and ancient Constitution of England: With Reflections on the present Pretended
PLOT.
SIR.
AS the Character you are clothed with entitleth you to all Informations, both
of what may preserve the Government, and of what is contrived and carried on
for the Subversion of it; So the Employ you have taken upon you, in reference
to the present Pretended PLOT, tho neither agreeable to your Office, nor to the
Title of a Man of Honor, gives you an indisputable Right to the Discovery I am
about to make: And being indebted to you for the share you have been pleased to
vouchsafe me in your la^e Administration, I can think of no better a way of
making my Acknowledgments and of testifying my Gratitude, than of rendering you
a piece of Service, which every one at your Devotion is not qualified for, and
very few have the Integrity and Fortitude either to undertake or perform. And
seeing neither the Honor of having been Secretary of State, nor the wife and
just Discharge of that Office are like to give you that Name in History which
you deserve, nor to perpetuate your Fame to the extent and measure of your
Vanity and Ambition; Permi^ me to try whether I can enable fu^ure Wr(...)rs to
e(...)ze your Memory in the Registers of T^me, by han^ing to them brief Memoirs
of some Actions peculiar to your Self, and to a few more of your Elevation in
Virtue and Poli^icks: And which none, but one as much distinguished as you are
from the Rank of Common State^men, as well as the several Tribes of Christians,
would have had the Artifice mixed with Malice to have undertaken.

And that you may engross to your Self the whole benefit of this Discovery, and
not be obliged, as in other Cases, where you have shared between You and the
Informer the Salaries and Pensions applied to the forging and inventing
Conspiracies against the State, tho set apart and issued out by the Dispen^ers
of the Public Treasure only for detecting them: I do freely and entirely
resign to You all my Part and Portion of it, whether arising from the
Generosity of the Ministers, or due from their Justice, which I hope will not
be ^^welcome to you, nor come unseasonably toward the completing your Twenty
Thousand Pounds Purchase. For as it is impossible (that confining your self to
what either righteously or legally accrueth from the Place and Office of
Secretary) you should have heaped together so large a Sum in the Circle o^
little more than a Year, so it is a Charity to help to advance you above the
mean tempta^ion of de(...)nding those (...) Creatures, who selling their Souls
at easy Rates, to support forged Accusations by Perjury can (...) (...)th ^one
so sneaking and ignoble as (...) thing from the Pri^^, except (...) ^ho having
(...) a lo(...) (...) upon(...) (...) (...), d^ value o^^er Me(...)
accordingly. A(...) Gain therefore and Advantage which this Informa^ion can
produce, I do cheerfully consign and bequeath unto you, wishing that besides
the Prosi^ of ^^at kind which it is calcul^ted to yield you, i may serve to
raise your Reputa^ion in the World, by giving ^he Nation more general (...)
understan^ (the old Innocent Ways o^ Administra^ion b^ S^ate-Affairs being
unadapted and insuffic^ent to (...)e durable upholding of what was
prec^pi^ately (...) ^umultuous^ raised) how (...) hi^ W^do^ hat^ been
(...)laced who recommended you to the Po^t you fill, being ^o admirably
qualifi^d ^o support the Government (...) Trick^ (...) (...)shoods of the ^^me
K(...)ded and (...)ce with those by which the Revolu(...)on was carr^ed on and
effected You are ^oo c^nver^ant ^o T^citus to ^eed my (...) (...)ng to you
(...) Saying of his, Nemo imperium flagitio quesitum bonis (...) exercuit,
N(...) (...) (...) legally and we(...) that arrived at the Government by Fraud
and Injustice Yet suffer m^ ^o (...) in (...)e ^ (...)ging of a French League
and Supposititio (...) (...) W^les, lawful as well a^ n^cessa^y ^or (...)e
promo(...)g ^he Designs in agi^ation Anno (...) cannot ^e thought ^o scrupulous
(...) (...)ct disc(...)bly (...), ^f (...) (...) Exige(...), ^tuey (...)
(...)is tim^ (...) Compr^^cy against ^^e Government, and charge (...) up(...)
inn^cent M^n, who are willing to live peacea^ly if you would permit them. And
as you know your own accession to the First, and have had the Fortune o^ ^e
^etter rewa^d^d tha(...) others that joined with you in that Treachery and
Fraud, so I hope that the vn^ica^ing to you ^he glory of the Latter, wherein
you have had so^e (...) i(...)pe upon and share with you, ^^ll have a endency
to your being exalted high^r than you (...), and quicken your receiving the
Recompenses you have not yet attained, tho long ago so much your (...)e*

But is it not to ^eg (...) into a despicable M^anness, an to make your^elf
contemp(...)bly little, after you had been engaged for so many Years in forming
Plo^s against Kings, Princes, and States you should at ^ast dwindle (...) a
Consp^r^tor against Mechanics, reduced Office^s, ^is^^n^e Ce(...)ls, and
private (...)lemen That from enrolling Troops at Ta^nton and elsewhere, as your
Interest ^ay, and your Province was allotted, for dethroning Monarchs, and
altering the legal Course of the Royal Succession, you should shrink to the
mustering mercenary Rascals, for whom you have rak^d Go^ls and Kennels, to
destroy a Comp^ny of Persons who neither could endanger you, by perverting Laws
or altering their F^ame, nor ^us^^ve you ^y Armed Guards ^n^ M^li^ary Power.
(...)o have undertaken to curb and bridl^ Sovereigns, and (...) dissolve and
break the Chain which the Constitution as well as the Statu^es of the Real* had
made for regulating the com^ng to inherit Crowns was (...) and (...) (...) at
the (...) crim^nal and (...): Bu^ to hou^d o^ Messenge^s, b^ck'd with Tro^p as
well as fortifi^d with A^thority to (...) the Dwellings of (...) (...) (...)
innocent and naked, and upon (...) (...) su^orn'd (...) (...) to seize
G^n^l^m^n i^ their Houses, where he Laws should (...) special manner pro^ect
them; and ^o (...)ad them Cap^ives through a gre(...) part of ^he Kingdom,
under the Power of O(...)landish Troopers, to ^ur^ish na^^er for a Dutch
Tri(...)h, was sneak^ng and m^an as well as illegal and impious But i^ is
natural to those that have (...) ^ra^ned u^ an^ habituated to any Course, to
play at low Game, rather than stand ou^ from pract^sing what they have ^een
in(...)d (...). H^wever, no Man will suspect either your Disposition or
Qualification, to be^parter, accuse and arraign little People, having been bred
and accustomed to (...) and impeach P^inces: For they that could forge
G(...)vances in Governments, where ^here were (...) bu^ what their own Luxury,
Covetou^ness (...) Am^i^ion made, and who could tran^plant the Gui^ean League
from France to England, and mak^ a Prince's Religion a Crime, incapac(...)ng
and disenabling him to enj^y his Civil Right can easily, either upon the
Suggestions of their Fea^ and Coward^^e, or I^ci^^ men's of Pr^de and Avarice,
invent Conspi^^cies against Governments (in the upholding whereof their
Hon^urs, ^ortunes and Prospect he) and lodge them on whom they will, especia^ly
upon such against whom they entertain an inveterate Malice, and seem furnished
with Probabilities and specious P^^tences of gaining Credit ^o tha^ wherewith
they ch^rge them. But I find that as Men grow in Years they increase in Craft,
tho they decay in Bravour; and that while they persevere in the like Criminal
Methods they learn to lay ^he Scene where there is le^s Dan(...), alb^^
parallel Gu^^t (...) (...)rly they made themselves ob^^xious unto: And no Man
knows better than you, that it is much safer, as well as mo^e beneficial to take
upon you the uphol(...) and serving a Governmen^ by involving (...) P^^ple in a
forged (...), against it, than to be in a real one your self for subver^ing it;
e^p^cially if the Consp^racy must be ex^cu^ed by F^r^e and Arms, and not to be
conspas(...) and made effectual by Tr^ac^ery, Lies an^ Calumnies. For tho in
^^e fo^me Cas^ you have the ^ea^ Law with ^he S^ncti^n of a feeble P^nalty
against you; yet it is too likely that you will have the liv^^g Au^hority (...)
and vigorous for you: An^ should your Crime be made as evi^en^ as it is
heinous, ye^ considering with wh^m the execu^ive P(...)r of ^^e Law is lodged^
you may reas^na^ly (...) to be covered from (...) Punishment and public
Disg^^ce and only to (...), have the ^^ct (...) just (...), an^ you^ sel^
p^blickly rewarded. But ^n the latter Case, y^u are, besides (...) ^^^ams ^ha^
at(...) the Off^nce sure to have Law bac^'d with Power, and Might autho^^z'd
by Law, t^ destroy you, and impoverish you^ Posterity So that the H^zar^ is
much le^s t^o (...) D^^grace be not, in persui^g that wherein (...) are now
embarked than in prosecuting the Plot wherein you were engaged, Anno^ 82 For
tho you had been not only a wa^m F^m^nter, but a principal Author of that
Con^pir^cy ag^^nst the then King and Government, yet when your Assistance wa^
required, upon its com^ng to have been ex^cute^ in November, your Fear being
awakened and ^^crea^ed, by the approach of the Danger and your Courage not
b^ing answer^ble to your D^sl^yalty, you excu^ed h^th appearing your sel^ and
^he giving the Aid you had pr^mised, upon Pretense of a Disease that had
over^aken you by an ^mor^us M(...) venture: Which having been (...) by the Duke
of Monmou^h to some assembled for fixing (...) Day, and for determining the
Places and Manner of the Insurrection, after they had thereupon agreed to
a^j^urn the Execution of the Design, it was pleasantly said by one of the
Number, that he foun^ Dr. Parker understood that Mala^y better th^n was
^magined, and that he had not misnamed it in stiling it a lazy Distemper. Nor
is the discovery of this (...) (...) (...) b^trayi^g of Secrets, (...) (...)
(...) Obl^ga^^or upon (...) to observe measu^es of Decency with one, who,
instead of attacking (...) Neighbors either by the allowed and (...) M(...)ds
of Law an^ Justice, (...) (...) persuing them by an honour^ble and ^ai^ (...)
(...) murder ^h^m by Assassinates and Banditti: (...) (...) and worse I (...)le
(...) and (...) W^^nesses. And Sir, you must blam^ your (...) and no^ me, if I
know n^ L^ws of Decorum ^o b^ ob^erved in treating of you. You are ou^ of ^he
Purli^us of all that i^ due in the way o^ Beins^ance, in that no^ be^n^
sa^^^fied ^o ^e^ loo^^ upon us ^uch in amou^ Mi^crean^s as you^ Bak^rs your
King(...) your Lunis and Brereton etc* you have (...) (...) your brother Hugh
Speak to inv^lv^ us under all the G^ilt th^^ (...) Madness and Folly can
invent, ^or his Impudence fasten upon us either by himself o^ others.

Howev^r, I will always (...) my sel^ and Mankin^ that Righ^, as ^o say nothing
of you bu^ what is ^rue and necessary (as you have flag^o your sel^.) ^or (...)
World to know, and an honest Man t^ publish: Though I will not und^r^^ke, that
all I ^eclare will (...) of the g(...) ^^^eding, and have that Stamp of
C^vility upon it. which I am known to exerci^^ toward others. And till we can
la^ your un^^ghteous P^oceedings, and the unjust Sufferings of those you have
caused ^o apprehend and imprison, before a Parli^ment, i^ it is become
ab^^lutely ne^dful, in order to the preserving the Lives of the Guiltless, and
the Vindication of their Innocence, that we make our Appeal to the K^ng^^m, and
proclaim your Administ^ation to (...) and Country.

Nor does the apprehending so many Gentlemen, and confining them to Prisons, or
the fur^ous and general Hunting after more, conduce in the ^east to the Support
of the Government, or to the Pr^serva^ion of the Pu^lick Pe^ce. I do know these
are the Ends you would be thought to a^m at, in your unrighteo^s, irregular and
illegal Proceedings; and would have the persuit of them to legitimate (...)
(...) M^ans by which you are in hopes (...)mpass and a(...) them. But a^ you
are both m^rally and politically a bad Man, and an ^ll Member of the
Commonwealth, and a worse Christian, to prosecute the best Ends by any other
Means than what are just and legal; so you are a very hallow and weak
S^ates-ma^, if you reckon those Methods ad^pted to what you calculate and
design them for: Seeing all to be expected from the Paths you walk in, is not
only to render those revengeful and desperate, who were before quiet and
peaceable; but, through your injuring so many of the Subjects, to alarm all.
For if Innocence be not enough to protect and cover every (...), it will not be
long judged sufficient to preserve and skreen any. And when all Persons find,
that they possess their Liberties and Lives by no other Title than your
Pleasure, and the Courtesy of your mercenary Witnesses, they will be sure to
endeavor all they can to ch^nge and m^nd the Tenure: And the impoverishing or
destroying one whom you either call or believe an Enemy to the present
Constitution, upon the Deposition of Suborned Rascals, will change and
transform all your Friends that have Wisdom or Virtue into Enemies, and thereby
raise and creare you Thousands, when formerly you had not Scores. But though
this be a Topic proper enough to be inculcated and insisted upon, and on which
it were easy so to enlarge as to expose your Conduct and Management, and make
them ridiculous; yet there are others, and those less thought of, to the
displaying and enforcement of which I intend to confine my self, and I do not
doubt but before I have gone through them I shall demonstrate, from your
Administration, that you are both a Traitor, either through Ignorance or
Design, to K. William, whom you pretend to serve, and a Subvertor of the
Government, which you take those impious and illegal Courses to uphold. In
order to which I premise three Things, or rather propose them as Postulata,
which command an assent as soon as men^ioned.

The First is, That whatever ^here was of an Original Contract between former
Kings and the free People of these Kingdoms, yet it is undeniable, there is a
very fo^mal and ex^li cite One between K. Willi^m and them. And, to declare any
Opinion freely, without Reserve or Disguise, I do know o^ none before, besides
that which was couched and im^lied in the Constitution. And as it is
impossi(...)e to produce or show any other, so the very Supposition of one, is
not only inconsistent with the Doctrine both of our Churchmen and Lawyers, but
re^ugnant to ^he Drift and Tenure of all our Laws, and directly opposite to the
express Words as well as the Sense of a great many Statutes. For what can be
more irreconcilable than a Contract by which Kings are made deposible, or an^
way, judicially censurable for Miscarriages in their Governmen^: And those
several Acts o^ Parliament that do not only declare our Pr^nces to be
unaccountable to their People, whether taken collectiv^ly, distributively or
repesen^atively; but which do make it Treason To take up Arms against them, on
any Pretense whatsoever: And to imagine it either lawful or practicable to
Abdicate, forfeit or Depose Kings, without a Liberty allowed of taking up Arms
against them, is a Contradiction that none will pretend to reconcile, but they
who are either Lunatic or deeply Hypocondriacal. And as for that Contract (if
it might be called one) which was involved and ^^citly wrapped up in the
Constitution, the whole Import of it was, to declare the Ends for which our
Princes were to rule, namely, the Safety, Peace and Prosperity of their People,
and to teach and instruct them, that they were to govern us by Laws; but it no
ways provided, that they should be accountable unto, or arraignable by their
Subjects, if they did not; leaving them for that only responsible to God, and
no ways punishable here, saving by the Stings and Twinges of their own
Consciences. But the Case is much other wise between K. William and U^: For as
by his countenancing the Abdication, and laying aside of K. James, upon
pretended Miscarriages in his Government, he declared upon what Terms he was
willing to succeed him, and that he was contented to be accordingly dealt with
if he should prove guilty either of those or the like; so there wa^, upon his
Admission to the Crown, both an Enumeration made of Grievances by those tha^
con^erred it, which they demanded that he would redress; and a D^linca^^on of
Measures in and by which they did, as it were, stipulate how he should be bound
to govern, It Is true, that they in Scotland were more explici^ and formal in
what they did in this matter and k^nd than we were: Yet there was enough done
here to instruct him, that he is no otherwise King, than as he is upon his
Behavior: And that he holds the Crown, as the Judges do their Places, Quam diu
benese gesserit. And he may be ^ure, that they who could extort and wrest from
the Constitution, which gave no such Allowance, and much less Authority, a
Power and Right to dethrone K. James, and transfer their own and the Peoples
Allegiance from him, upon Allegations which were never examined as to their
Weight and Importance, nor proved as to their Reality and Truth, will be ready
and forward enough when the Humor and Caprice takes them, to treat him in case
of Miscarriages after the same Rate; and will have that, both to warrant the
doing of it, and to justify it when it is done, which they wanted before. For
besides the Precedent they have made with his Allowance, and by which he has
taught them, that it is lawful as well as practicable, it is but for the People,
when ^^etted and ^nraged by disappointment of their Hopes, loss of their
Estates, invasion upon their Liberties and Rights, and their having their Lives
brought into hazard without leg^l cause and provoca^ion, to have ^ecour^e to
^he Contract and Stipulation between him and them, and thence to furnish
themselves with Reasons, upon those F^uls in the Administration, which you,
Sir, more than any other, make it your Business daily to commit, both for
legitimating and authorizing another Revolution.

The Second is this, That through the not punishing any of the Ministers of the
late Reign, who were by Law the only Persons accountable for Mi^carriages in
the Government, you have made K W. and him alone, responsible for the pol^tical
Crimes of his Civil Officers. The Wisdom of our Ancestors made it an Axiom of
our Gove^^ment and State, That the King could do no Wrong; and that therefore
no Accusation^ of him could be justified, and much less any Force against him
lawful. And indeed, this was the Basis of our Constitution, and the chief
Source of Peace between the Sovereign and the Subjects, That the King, th^ugh
clothed with the supreme Authori^y, and vested with all the executive Power of
the Government, yet that doing all Things by his Ministers, he could thereupon
himself do no Inj^oy, but that they whom the Law had entrusted with the
Execution of Matters under him, were to answer and be liable to Punishment for
all that was illegal and oppressive. It was upon this weighty Ground and
Foundation, that Sir John Markham told Edward the 4th (as is reported by Judge
Huss^y, who was Chief-Justce under Hen. 7th) That he (...) not arrest a Man
either for Treason or Felon) as a Subject might, because if the Party so
arrested had thereby Injury done him, he could have no Satisfaction against
him. To which I might add many other Authorities as that 16. H. 6. Tit. 1.
Jurans de suite. and 22 H. 6. Naton, when it was solemnly adjudged, That the
King cannot command any one to be arrested, but an Action of false Imprisonment
lies against him that arrests him. For hence it is that the King is said to do
no Wrong, because he does nothing immediately himself, but does every Thing by
his Officers of Justice, State or War. And therefore, tho it never be allowed
either to Officers or People to resist, be the King'^ Commands what they will,
ye they are permitted, and it is a Duty they owe both to God and to him, in
some Cases to refute to obey: For when the thing required of Ministers is
either immoral or illegal, it is not only extremely laudable in it self, but
the best Service they can render their Master, both as to his Honor and
Interest, modestly to excuse themselves from executing what either through
Passion, Misleading, Ignorance, of his Duty, or by mistaking wherein his own
Glory, and his Peoples Happiness consists, he was pleased to enjoin: For as a
Prince's Salvation hereafter, as well as Great and Honorable Fame here, depend
more upon his wise Administration and good Government, than upon his private
Morals and good Life; so the goodness of his Government depends exceeding much
upon those that advise him, and those that execute under him; tho they are
always to yield unto their Prince all the Reputation arising from their wisest
Councels and best Performances, and never to intercept the Credit and Honor of
them from him. Nor is there a more infallible Maxim than this, namely, That he
is not the worst King, who is the worst Man; but he who has the worst
Counselors about him and Instruments under him. Now (...). James's Ministers
having escaped all public Accusation and Chastisement, whom the Law made the
only Persons obnoxious to be arraigned and punished, there is thereby another
very unfavourable, and, as it may prove, a pernicious Precedent made and
established for K. W. For wherei^ they in K. James's Confidence, and at the
Head of his Affairs, should have been only pitched upon to answer criminally
for all those Things that were called Miscariages during his Reign; he whom
both the Constitution, and all the Laws of the Land made not only impunible but
innocent, was (as a learned and most worthy M^n expressed it once in a
Coffee-House selected as the Se^pe-Goat, to have all the Off n^es of the
Ministers, and of the subordin^te Tools of the Government, transferred and said
upon him and drove away, un^er the Guilt and Weigh^ of them, into a Wilderness
and Land of O^livion: Which Original, should it come to be copied, would too
late, but unhappily to your Master, show what a bad Minister you are to him. In
contracting Guilt which he may be made a Sacrifice to expiate, and committing
Crimes misbecoming your Character, and contrary to the Duty of your Office,
that K. William may undergo the Reproach, and bear the Punishment of them. But
to decline the persuing this Head any fur^her, I shall only take notice how the
subjecting King James to suffer in the stead and room of his Ministers, when
the Law had only marked them out as Off^rings of Atonement for his Faults (had
he been guilty of any) as well as their own, has exposed K. (...). to some very
ill-natured Reflections, but it is hoped they are not so true, as they are
Piquant. One is, That notwithstanding all the glorious Promises made to the
Nation in the Prince of Orange's Declaration, Dated at the Hag^^, Anno 1688,
and all the Accusarions therein fastened upon, and Menaces denounced against K.
James's Ministers, that yet it appears by the Events, and the whol^ Tenor of
Transactions since, how neither the chastising of those ill Men, nor the
relieving the Kingdom from Pressures and Oppressions, or the redressing what
was called Grievances, were the Ends of the P. of O's coming hither, but that
his main, if not whole Design was to supplant his Father-in-Law and Uncle, and
to get the Crown. To which they add another, name(...) that K. W. having been
mainly instrumental in saving and protecting the former Ministers, who ought to
have been punished, and not their Master, was not only to prevent the
discouraging, but to embolden those whom he employs himself under the like
Character to be the more willing to venture upon illegal Things, and the less
to hesitate at the executing of his own Arbitrary Commands. Nor do they forbear
to subjoin a Third, viz. That those ill Men came therefore to be overlooked and
covered, because they were the Prince's Pensioners and Tools, while by their
Oaths and Places they were K. James's Ministers; and that they were hired and
instructed from abroad to betray and disserve their Master at (...)ome, that
the might serve and furnish Pretenses for the Prince's Invasion.

But I hasten to my Third Postulatum, which is, That most of those who serve
this Government, as well as all those who refuse Allegiance to it, believe him
on the Throne to be only King de facto, but not de jure: Not (...) this merely
the Opinion of your Non-S(...) and those called Jacobites, but it is the (...)
belief of Two parts in Three of your S(...), who are vulgarly styled
Williamites: For the utmost that either Law or Religion will allow them to
acknowledge, is, That he is a King by Exercise, but not by Right. It Is in this
that Sherlock has many more Followers than Johnson; the Rich, Great, Learned
being of the Sentiments of the former, whereas few but) our unthinking Mob and
downright Republicans are of the belief of the latter. Now all that this
Principle can carry any unto, when most under the Impression and Influence of
it, is to serve the Government upon the Motives of Convenience, but no^ upon
Inducements of Conscience. And to submit to it, and exteriorly own it, upon the
foot of Safety and Interest, but not on the S^ore of Duty and internal
Reverence. And those men being uneasy through the Reproach that attends their
Inconsistency with themselves, and through the Lashes which they receive from
their own Minds, for owning that, the Righteousness whereof they do not
approve, and swearing to uphold a Constitution, which they believe to be not
only illegal, but morally unlawful, they are thereupon both weary of the
Government, and would be rid of it. And all that hinders their cooperating
openly to it is Subversion, is an Apprehension, that it cannot be effected
without too much private and public Damage; which restraining Thought, in the
Opinion of some, though it may argue the Goodness of their natural Temper, yet
it speaks a mean and ungenerous Understanding. Now all these, who are indeed
the Bulk of the Nation, are extremely pleased at the Irtegularities, illegal
Excesses, and Miscarriages of the Ministerial Conduct and Management; there
being nothing that they do more cover, than to see the Government loaded with
Infamy, and rendered odlous, as reckoning it a m^e^ Usurpation, and not a lawful
Establishment. So that, Sir, your Administration gratifies many Thousands whom
you call your Friends, as well as It does all your Enemies, because the
Iniquity and Badness of it gives the one and the other prospect and hopes of
seeing the Government pulled down, with more Facility and Resistance than it
was set up: But how Loyal you are to your Master in the mean time, we shall
discourse anon.

And therefore having discharged the foregoing Postulata, with all the Brevity
that the Matter would admit, I shall now proceed to a more particular
Recapitulation of the Miscarriages in the Conduct of K. W's Ministers, and
chiefly of yours, which have far exceeded that of others in Illegality,
Inhumamanities and barbarous Practices: And I do challenge all Mankind, ere I
advance any further, to name so much as one Thing called a Grievance under the
Reign of K. James, that has not been repeated or out-gone since the Reign of K.
W. May be we have not had all the same things over again in Specie, but we have
had them to the full in the Value and Equivalent. And for those we have not had
specifically repeated, it is not because they have been thought unlawful, but
because the Passions and Inclinations of K W, and hi^ Ministers are of a
disti^ct kind from those of K. James, and travel in a different Road from what
his did. But if the former King did in some things exceed the Bounds which the
Law had chalked out as the Measures of his Government, that he might thereby
have brought all his People to stand upon ^he same level of Capaci^y, in
reference to civil and military Employs, and in order to putting a Period to
Persecutions for matters of mere Conscience and revealed Religion, without
damage to the Church by Law established, either in it is Dignities, Properties
or Jurisdictions, they were so Noble and Royal Ends, as might have served to
excuse, if not to justify, the little irregular Excesses taken and persued for
compassing of them: Whereas we have since the Revolution, not only seen the
principal Offices of Honor and Trust, rightfully due only to natural Subjects,
conferred and bestowed chiefly upon Foreigners, but have had the Misfortune to
be often arbitrarily robbed of our Liberties, which is both the leaving us no
legal bottom at all to stand upon, and infinitely worse in it self, than the
having our Countrymen, Fellow Christians and Neighbors brought, in the things
forementioned and practiced under K. James's Reign, to live upon the square
with our selves. And the Invasion upon our most essential Right, as well as the
first and most inseparable and valuable Property, which is that of the Freedom
of our Persons, and Safety of our Mansion-Houses, has been so daring, notorious
and often repeated, that the Ministers of K. W. have been forced to solicit and
procure diverse Acts of Parliament sometimes, to legitimate them beforehand to
commit Rapine upon ou^ Liberties; as in the dispensing oftener than once with
the Habeas Corpus Act, and at other times to indemnify them for the Violences
they had perpetrated without a previous Allowance. And as we have had the same
or the like Oppressions and Grievances renewed, which we pretended to be under,
and so much complained of before; so there are two very ill-favored
Aggravations attend the latter, wherewith the former were no ways accompanied.
One is, That we have increased our Disease, where we expected our Remedy; and
that those who set up for our Physicians, have enlarged our Wounds, in the
stead of curing them, and that we have Poison administered to us in the room of
healing Medicines. All Men know with what different preapprehensions in many of
the People K. James and K. W. came to the Crown, and the first as much exceeded
our hopes, as the last has disappointed them. The other is, That whereas K.
James erred upon Example in most Things, without seasonable and temperate
Caution given him in any, and upon the Authority of the Judges (whose Office it
was to expound the Laws to him) in some: The Illegallties of this Reign, are,
in Contradiction to Promises, in violation of Stipulations, in defiance of
Warnings, without the Countenance and Concurrence of the Judges, and with the
Improbation of the Parliament, registered in diverse of their Addresses: From
which it is very obvious for peevish People to draw a couple of unfriendly but
very natural Consequences; namely, that as by repeating the worst of Things
chargeable upon King James's Government, as well as by perpetrating those, of a
more mischievous nature, than any it could be accused of, you have ridiculed
all the Motives of his Abdication, and made it an Act of insolent Disloyalty,
and perverseness of Will, and not of Zeal to preserve our Laws, and vindicate
our Liberties; tho had that been as real is it was pretended, it would not have
justified the doing of it: So the Ministers of K. W. by doing both the one and
the other, have not only given occasion for, and provocation unto another
Revolution, but have made it vastly more needful, as well as more vindicable
than that which was before.

Now tho the Illegalities and Miscarriages, whereof you are guilty in your
Ministerial Administration and Conduct, do ex^end to all the Parts and Branches
of your Office, both as you are a Privy Councellor, and a Secretary of State,
and be of no less compass than the vast Latitude of Affairs, wherein you have
occasion to interpose, under the one Capacity as well as the other; yet I shall
not only confine my self at present to those Offenses, Transgressions and
Crimes, whereof you are accusable as Secretary of State, but even narrow them
to such as merely relate to your seizing, detaining, treating Men while in
hold, and prosecuting of them upon pretended criminal Allegations of Treason or
Misdemeanor against the Government: And these are so variou for their Quality,
and many for their Number, that I shall have both sufficiently represented you,
and done what becomes me to awaken and alarm the Kingdom, before I have gone
through them; which I purpose to do with all the Brevity imaginable. And the
First of this Sort whereof I not only accuse and publish you Guilty, but
consign you over to the Parliament to be impeached and prosecuted for it, is
your hounding out the Messengers of the Government, armed with Blank-Warrants,
by which they take upon them to apprehend and make a Prey of whom rhey will;
which is in effect to furnish them with a Pretense, if not to cloth them with
an Authority to bid every one Stand, and Deliver, whom they meet with. And were
not the Jacobites more tame, as well as peaceable, than you would have them be
believed to be, they would long e're this, without becoming guilty by Law,
either of Manslaughter or Murder. have stab^'d or pistoled some of your
Officers, who have assaulted and hall'd them to Prison, under the Countenance
of your Hand and Seal, without the least mention of Names, by which they ought
to have been individually pointed forth as the Person is to be apprehended. For
what is this but to commissionate your Officers to go a Mucking, which
au^ho^zeth those that first can to knock them on the Head, in order to secure
the public Peace, and to prevent their going about as privileged Assassinates
of out Laws and Freedom. For a Badge and Blank-Warrant do, according to our
Laws and those of all Nations besides, no more restrain me from resisting, and
thereby defending and vindicating the Liberty of my Person, than the Blew Cloak
and Case of Pistols of a Dutch Trooper do forbid my drawing upon him, when he
violently assaults me in the Street or Road. Nor does the issuing out of such
Warrants import any thing less than the furnishing Fellows with a License to
rob Men; seeing those whom they once seize, must before they recover their
Liberty pay down a Ransom for it: Which, to express it with all the Modesty I
can, is the transforming the Office of a Secretary of State, into that of
Licenser for Picking of Pockets. And as it is a Rule among a certain Tribe of
Men, that the Holder and Receiver is to have Shares with the Diver and Taker;
so it gives too much ground for a Suspicion, that either you or your Clerks
find your Interest and Advantage in this Pillage. But to wave the giving this
Practice any further the Character which it justly deserves, I shall only say
that as it is highly illegal, so it is extremely inhumane and barbarous.

A Second Contempt of the Law, as well as neglect of, and deviation from it, in
the Execution of your Place, is, That tho you insert the Names of those in your
Warrants whom you would have seized, yet you do not always express and specify
the Crimes, for which you require them to be apprehended. Nor is this Method of
your Administration less arbitrary and criminal than the former was: For as no
Title you bear, or Character you are clothed with, empowers you to deseize any
Man of his Liberty, but whom the Law deseizeth, nor for any Offense (how much
soever it may provoke and enrage Mr. Secretary Trenchard) but that which the
Law has made thereunto obnoxious; so the Commanding to apprehend Men without
mentioning their Crimes, is the acting despotically, and the advancing your
Will and Passions into the place and room of Laws. It is an Axiom in our
Constitution, That Corpus and Causa must go together, and where there is not
that which the Law accounts the last, no man, be his Title what it will, is
legally empowered to lay hands upon the other. The Monarchy of England is not
Seignioral, but Royal; being a Government under which we are Freemen, having
Rights and Properties; not Villains and Slaves, who have neither Right nor
Property in any thing: And therefore whatsoever the Subject has a Right in, he
must both be entitled peaceably and securely to enjoy it, and have a Remedy
for the recovering it, if disseized and dispossessed. And without these, it is
in vain to talk of being governed by Laws, all we are and have being subjected
to Will and Pleasure. But so provident is the Law in this matter, that the
King's Writ under his Great Seal cannot imprison a Subject, unless it shows a
Cause: And were a Writ of that nature sent to a Sheriff to be executed, he may
return it without doing what is required, and he is no ways punishable for his
Disobedience or Neglect, the Writ having been void in Law. And can we imagine,
that the King's Warrants, issued out by a Secretary ought to have more power
and efficacy by the Law, than his Writ under his Brood Seal has? Surely, we
must renounce Sense and Understanding ere we sink into such a Belief. And if
the Law does not give you a Power over our Lands and Goods, nor any Prerogative
wherewith the Kings of England are vested allows you to meddle with any Man's
Estate or Chattels; much less can you in their Name, and by their Authority,
imprison our Persons, seeing Scripture as well as Reason do assure us, That the
Body is more worth than Raiment, where, by Raiment, according to all Expositors
as well as the Canonists, every thing that is outward is meant, to distinguish
it from Corporal. For the Common Law has so adjusted and circumscribed the
King's Prerogative, as that he cannot prejudice any Man in his Inheritance, and
the greatest Inheritance a man has, is the Liberty of his Person, all other
things being subordinate and subservient to that. Yea, so tender is the Law of
our Liberty, that if a Wrong be done to a Man's Person, it does not oblige him
to sustain it, and afterward accept a Remedy; This being a Rule in Law, That
Corporalis Injuria non receipt Estimationeme futuro, that no Damages recovered
by the Injured Person are a sufficient Recompense for a Wrong that is Corporal.
And therefore, where the Law does not deseize a Man of his Liberty, and render
him imprisonable, it makes many things lawful in Defense of it, which otherwise
would in some particulars be Trespasses, and in others very heinous Offenses.
Accordingly, it is a Maxim in the Law, Quod quis ob^tutelam Corporis sui
fecerit, id jure fecisse existimatur, That whatsoever a Man does in the
necessary Defense of his Person, he is to be esteemed to have done it
rightfully. Nor can any man be innocent, that you from Pique, Revenge or
Avarice have a mind to make guilty, if your bare voting and pronouncing him so
in a Paper with your Hand and Seal to it shall subject him to be treated as if
he really were. How often does it come to pass, that a Matter which the Law
makes no Offense, may give more Provocation to a Minister of State, than that
which it declares and publishes a heinous Crime? Must he therefore be allowed
to wreck his Spleen in punishing the former, more than he does employ his
Justice in chastising the latter? For example, Should any one write a Satyr on
the present Government, with the Wit and Acrimony that Petronius Arbiter writ
one upon Nero's Court, there are few Punishments so severe but the Law would
adjudge the Author to them. Whereas should the History of the last five or six
Years Transactions be writ with the Truth that becomes an honest Man, and with
that seasoning which may make it palatable to the Age, the Law would render
this no Crime, nor subject the Writer to any Penalty; and yet some think, that
such a History would more provoke and enrage the Government, as well as render
it more ridiculous and contemptible, than all the Satyrs in the World would. So
that when your Ministers are most angry, there is not always the most legal
cause for it. And therefore, if the reasons of every Apprehension and
Commitment be not declared in the Warrant, a Man may be treated as a Traitor
against K. William, and a Conspirator to overthrow the Government, when at the
bottom all that the Gentleman is taken up and thrown into Prison for, may be
only a piece of Banter upon the Green-Ribbon Secretary, or a Lampoon upon the
mighty Statesman, perfected in the Politics by the Degrees he took at the
Rose-Club. For it is not your knowing my Name, and the inserting it into a
Warrant, that gives you a Right over my Person and Freedom, but my being
chatged with some Offense, for which the Law has made me forfeit my Freedom,
and rendered me imprisonable. And if my Offense were not to be expressed in the
Warrant, I might come to lose my Liberty, though innocent of any Crime against
the State, merely for being thought to know too much of the Treachery and
Bribery of certain Ministers, which an observing Person must shut his Eyes, and
stop his Ears, as well as avoid all Conversation, to remain long a stranger
unto. In a Word, we hold not our Liberties by Law, but precariously, and at the
Discretion of our Enemies, and are no more Freemen but Slaves, if we were not
to be told why we were stripped and divested of them.

A Third Thing whereof you are accusable, as departing from and transgressing
the Law, In the execution of your Office, i^, That tho you both specify Persons
and Crimes in your Warrants, yet you order the apprehending Men for those
Crimes, upon bare and naked Suspicion, without any Proof or Deposition upon
Oath before you of their being guilty of them. The common Tenor of the
Warrants for a long time used to be, The empower^ng the taking up such and
such, upon Suspicion of Treason and High Misdemeanour against the Government;
till this Form of Commitment coming to be argued at the King's Bench Bar, Anno
1690. such Persons were declared to be taken into Durance contra Legem
Terr(...). For though according to Law a Person may be taken up upon Suspicion,
yet he cannot be legally detained and imprisoned upon Suspicion, but where
there appears no more against him, he is to be discharged, or at least admitted
to Bail: There being this Difference between Discharging and Bailing, that the
last is a kind of Imprisonment, where^s the first is a total Delivery: In the
one Case the Man walks abroad, dragging his Chains after him, and as a Prisoner
upon Parole to his Sureties: In the other he is a perfect Freeman, and may
dispose of himself (so as it is without Injury to any) as he will. But neither
the Illegality of the thing in it self, nor the Declaration of the Judges that
it is so, has been sufficient to deter you from proceeding sometimes in the
same Method and Course. Nor will it sail sooner or later to rise in Judgment
against you, that having committed Col. Parker to the Tower for High Treason,
as you pretended, yet you told my L. Lucas, that you had not Witnesses against
him, but were resolved to keep him in hold, till you could procure some: Which
that noble Lord imparting to the Colonel, either out of Friendship or th^o
Indiscretion, he thereupon contrived and made his Escape. For what less was
this than to tell him, that how innocent soever he might be, yet he was to be
destroyed, and made a Sacrifice to Malice and Revenge, when he could not be to
Justice; and that though he was not guilty, yet it was designed and concluded he
should be made so: Nor can any Thing be more arbitrary and illegal, than
without Information upon Oath to apprehend and commit Men, and because you are
pleased to suspect them to be guilty, to treat them therefore as if they were.
Surely, If Suspicion be sufficient to render Persons guilty, and subject them
to be proceeded against as if they were, very few will be long safe, or
accounted innocent. And as your most timourous Creatures are always the most
suspicious, which makes the Ape and Baboo^ to fear and flee from the Snail; so,
of all Persons that ever exercised the Office, which you are now honored to
do, you are the best qualified, through constitutional Cowardice and Fear, to
entertain treasonable Suspicions of all such whom you hate, and do therefore
dread. But pray Sir, How would you have styled such a Proceeding heretofore
against your self? Seeing your Memory cannot be so weak and treacherous, as
that you should have forgotten, how during the several Years that you were
really guil^y of plotting and conspiring against King Charles the Second, you
were nevertheless permitted to live at Ease and Peace, because the Ministers of
that Government had not positive Evidence against you: though they had all the
while both Suspicion enough, and too much Ground for it. And is this the best
Return you make the Nation for having been released and discharged out of the
Tower, after a short and gentle Confinement, An. 1683. when Hundreds, as well
as your self, knew you were guilty to the highest Degree, and yet discharged
because there did not appear sufficient and credible Evidence against you? Is
this the blessed Advantage we have attained unto by the laying aside those whom
we styled Tori^s, to introduce and employ such who gloried in the Name of
Whigs? And are these the Felicities we are to reap by a Government under which
all the Grievances of former Reigns were both promised and expected to be
redressed, to find the Fingers of the Ministers of this, heavier than the Loins
of the worst of those that were employed under the two last? Tho the Woman that
had been in the Oven, might be excused for looking for her Daughter there, yet
it would have been unkind, as well as unn^tural and unjust, when she did not
find her, to have accounted her guilty, and to have treated her accordingly,
merely upon the remembrance of her own Crime. However, it is from this illegal
and villainous Practice of apprehending and imprisoning Persons upon naked
Suspicions, that you are forced to hawk after, bribe and suborn Witnesses
against them after you have taken them into Custody, For this is that which you
become in a manner necessitated unto, for the Vindication of your Wisdom and
Justice in having committed them, And they had need have a great deal of
Virtue, as well as Honor, to enable them to escape the Temptation to such
Villainies, who have run themselves into Circumstances, that they must either
get those destroyed, or be disgraced and punished themselves. Is it not enough
that your imprisoning any one for Treason is equivalent to a Si quis against
him, to invite and allure all that can to come in and depose; but that you must
send through the 3 Kingdoms, as well as the several Coun^ies of England, to
enroll and muster Witnesses, and to allow more for levying one qualified for
Villainy and Impudence to do you Service at the Old Bailey and Westminster Hall,
than for listing a whole Foot-Company to fight in Flanders. And by setting a
Price upon the Lives of innocent Men, but whom you are pleased to suspect as
criminal, you draw in the necessitous and mercenary to drag them by Perjuries
to Scaffolds and Gibbets. But to conclude this Head, Festus the Heathen Roman
was better instructed in this Matter, than some of our Christian Secretaries
are under all their Advantages of Revelation, seeing he could say, as we have
it recorded in the most infallible History, namely, Acts the 25. ver. the last,
That it was without Reason to send a Man to Prison without Cause.

But I proceed to a Fourth Instance of your violation of the Laws in the
Administration of your Office, which is, That when you humble your self to
assign the Offenses for which you order Men to be apprehended, you frequently
allege and insert in your Warrants, those Matters for Crimes which the Law
does no way account sufficient either for the seizing or detaining any. Actions
are stubborn and unpliable Things, which it is in the Power of none to alter or
raise the value of beyond what the Law has set them at, and stamped them for. So
that tho you may make Dutch Skillings, which are not intrinsically worth Two
Pence, to pass for an English Six Pence, yet you must not think of doing so by
Actions, tho really offensive; and render that Treasonable, which is but an
Undecency or at the most a Misdemeanour. To piss at White-Hall-Gate may draw
the Guard upon one till he has paid his Sixpence, which tho he be not obliged
to do, yet he is willing to bestow, rather than draw a Crowd about him and be
houted at; but it were to push such a matter too far, to send the Man to
Newgate or to the Gate House for it: And yet I am very apt to believe, that
should you produce it as an Overt Act, whereby to prove the Person guilty of
having designed to murder K. W, or to blow up the Tower, you might have some
London Juries that would both find the Bill and convict him upon it. Tho you be
priviledg'd to bestow upon your own Children (whether begotten in Wedlock or
out of it) what Names you please, yet you are vested with no Right of giving
other Titles to Men's Actions than what the Law has conferred and fastened upon
them. And to speak plainly, your committing Persons (as the usual Tenor of
your Warrants run) upon pretense of their having been Aiding and Assisting to
K. William's Enemies, without the condescending to mention the Particulars
wherein, which you seldom vouchsafe to do, are no legal Commitments, but highly
Arbitrary. For besides, That the Law admits no Man to be divested and deseiz'd
of his Freedom upon general and indefinite Allegations, without mentioning at
the least the Species of the Crime, if not the individual Act; so there are
innumerable Cases, wherein a Person very Loyal to this Government may be aiding
and assisting to K. W's Enemies, and in the mean time be neither guilty of
Treason nor Misdemeanour. For suppose I were indebted to a Banker or a Merchant
in Paris the Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds for redeeming my Wife and Children, and
ransoming four or five Ships from Jamaica or Barbados, on which my whole
Estate and Fortune had been imbarqued, which through the Neglect of the
Government to protect our Navigation and Commerce, had been taken by French
Privateers, whilst our Fleet was fooling away a Campaign, and squandring the
Treasure of the Nation upon the impracticable Expeditions of Bombing Breast and
Callice, and blowing up Dunkirk by your Machine Vessels; this were an aiding K.
W's Enemies, as well as a relieving my self: And yet it would be so far from
being any sort of Crime, that it were a Duty I owed my Family, as well as a
Justice to my Creditor. Or suppose, that a General Officer in our Army, through
staying too long in the Field to cover the Escape of K. W. and to facilitate
the Flight or Retreat of our Troops at the Battle of Landen, and thereby coming
to be wounded, made Prisoner, and carried to Namure, where, by Luxemburg's
Order, he was better treated than he would have been at Brussels, should, in
Recognition of the generous Care that was taken of him, and in gratitude for
the noble Entertainment he had received, send to the Marshall, at the
beginning of this Campaign, 2 or 3 of the best Horses he could purchase for
Money; this were certainly to be aiding and assisting to the King's Enemies,
and yet none will believe it criminal, and much less a treasonable Offense,
unless they be both furnished with your Morals, and enriched with your Law and
Politics. Let us put the Case, That one of the French King's Physicians, or
some other near his Person and extremely in his Confidence, should offer to
poison him, provided K. W. or the Commissioners of the Treasury, would promise
to pay them a Sum of Money; most Insallibly, the discovering this to Lewis Le
Grand, would be an aiding and assisting the only Person in the World whom K. W.
thinks most his Enemy: And yet no Man of Sense, Honor or Virtue, would account
it a Crime; seeing the Roman Consuls detecting the like to Pyrrhus, when in
actual War against the Romans, in the very Bowels of their Country, was so far
from being esteemed an Offense against the Senate and Commonwealth of Rome,
that it had both the Praise of that People then, and the Commendation of all
Nations and Ages since, of being a noble, brave and virtuous Action. Or
suppose, That some of our almost ruined Merchants, and particularly Mr. -- who
lost Shares and Cargoes in 23 several Ships, which the French have taken,
notwithstanding the utmost Care both of our Royal Navy, and our three and forty
Cruisers, appointed by Act of Parliament to secure and preserve our Trade, I
say, suppose that such Persons shall (after the Pattern of the Merchants of
Amsterdam and Rotterdam) make themselves Freemen and Burgesses of Stockholen or
Copenhagen, and in that Quality freely and boldly trade with France, this would
not only be an aiding and assisting of the King's Enemies, but the running
counter to an express Act of Parliament, that makes it highly criminal; yet I
do not think that the Government would do wisely to call it Treason, and to
prosecute it as any manner of Crime: Unless our Ministers have a Mind to
sacrifice the whole Nation to the Interest of the Dutch, and be embarked in a
design of breaking the Exchange of London to enrich those of the Seven
Provinces. For whatsoever our Law does make it, yet you cannot be ignorant,
that it was within those few Years accounted to be in the power of British
Subjects to transfer their Allegiance to Foreign States, this having been not
only done, but justified in Print by an Eminent Divine, and as Famous a Man,
now dignified at Salisbury, who under that Plea, Covert and Protection, not
only corresponded with the Enemies of his natural Prince, but plotted and
conspired the highest and barest-fac'd Treasons against him. And it were worth
our knowing, whether he were not preferred to a Bishopric upon the Merit of
being subject to the States General; and whether he does not sit in the House
of Lords (where he pretends to have a mighty Influence over Debates) under the
Qualification of the Allegiance he swore to those High and Mighty. But may be
he has a peculiar Privilege, which other People claim not, of renouncing and
re-assuming his Allegiance as his Interest guides him; and that our Laws are as
pliable to that learned Man's Conveniences as his own Conscience is. For quo
te(...)am vultum. And before I dismiss this Head of your apprehending and
imprisoning Men, for what the Law does not hold and account a sufficient Cause
for either; I shall remind you of your late Methods of Procedure against Col.
Parker, and Mr. Crosby, who being committed the one to the Tower, the other to
Newgate: And having an assurance of their own Innocence, and that you could
legally charge them with no treasonable Crime, did thereupon severally move by
their Council, the last Trinity-Term, for their Habeas Corpus, and obtained it;
but when they expected and should have enjoyed the benefit of it the last Day
of the said Term, you took care to deprive them of that Favor, by causing to
exhibit, and obtaining to have found two Bills of High Treason against them,
upon their having been in Arms in Ireland, for, and under K. James, which could
be no legal ground for an Indictment; all such Things (if ever they were
Crimes) having been pardoned by the Articles of Limerick, and by a Treaty
ratified and exchanged, made impunible: And accordingly you never durst since
venture to try them upon those Indictments, as knowing that they must have been
acquitted, and the Government have undergone the Infamy of all the Trouble and
Hazard which those Gentlemen had been brought unto. So that instead of
discharging your Duty and Office in this matter according to Law, you set up to
play tricks, in order to clude the Laws, illude the Nation, and oppress
freeborn Subjects, and that of equal Quality and Education with your self; for
which it is hoped, both You, and such of K. W's Council at Law as were
concerned in it, as well as Mr. Aaron Smith, will ere long be made accountable.
And the Parliament having, in their former Meeting, begun to take notice of
this irregular and illegal committing of Persons, upon Pretenses of having
aided and assisted the Enemies of the Government, when the Practice neither
reached to so many as it now does, nor was accompanied with so much
Scandalousness; I shall therefore refer both the further Enquiry into it, and
the inflicting those suitable Punishments for it which it deserves, to the next
Session of the Two Houses; where it is little to be doubted, but that the
Dishonor and Misery which the Kingdom is sunk into, will in despite of your
Rich's and Clarks, awaken them to be more careful of our Lives and Liberties,
as well as of the old English Constitution, than their giddy Zeal, or at least
an intemperate and Mobbish Noise, have allowed them hitherto to rhink of, with
the Circumspection and Prudence which become them, in reference to themselves,
their Country and Posterity.

And therefore I advance to a Fifth irregular and arbitrary thing, in the
manner of your seizing and committing the freeborn People of England, which
is, That when you have both published the Names of the Persons whom you would
have taken, and specified the Crimes for which you authorize your Messengers to
apprehend them, yet you do not always declare, as you ought, that the legal
Transgressions for which you make them imprisonable were sworn and deposed upon
Oath before you. For it is not enough, that such and such things are sworn, but
it ought to be expressed in the Warrant, that they are so. And be your personal
belief of their Guiltiness of such and such Facts never so well grounded, and
be your Credit as good as any can imagine or desire, to reconcile the Faith of
others to what you say, yet the Rule, Method and Prescription of the Law are to
be obeyed and attended to; and the Law expressly requires, that you should not
only mention in your Warrants, that you are informed of such a Persons having
committed those and those criminal Offenses; but that you have the whole
Matter, with the enhauncing Circumstances of it, deposed upon Oath before you,
For so tender is the Law of the Subject's Liberty, that it will not have it
depend upon, or be forfeltable upon the most credible Man's Accusation, tho of
never so heinous a Crime, unless he both can and do actually swear to it. Nay
further, Our Freedom is of that preciousness, value and esteem in the eye of
the Law, that it will not allow a Person's being diseized and divested of it
upon the single Oath of any one, tho never so great and honorable; but it
expressly requires that there should be more, and that at the least there should
be Two. It Is true, that a Man is liable to be taken up and brought before a
Secretary of State, or any other Officer of Justice, upon one Oath; but there
must be no less than Two, in order to confine and imprison him, and to preclude
him from the Benefit of Bail: Yea, Treason it self, and the highest that can be
imagined, sinks into bare Misdemeanour, when there is but one Testimony upon
Oath against the Offender; and that which is in it self Capital, becomes in
such a ease obnoxious only to lesser and and more trivial Punishments. I do
mention this, because of what was perpetrated by the Ministers of the present
Government, An. 1692. when so many Persons of all Ranks and Degrees in the
Nation were apprehended and committed without any Deposition upon Oath against
them, or at the most upon a single one. And when some of the first Quality of
England, after they had made their Application to the Court of King's Bench in
order to be Bailed, were remanded back to Prison upon Mr. Aaron Smith's
deposing that he had Evidence against them; whereas it appeared by the Issue
afterward, that the most he had (if that) against any one of them, was a
single and individual Witness; which is no evidence for the detaining of Men,
and precluding of them from the Habeas Corpus Act, because not legal and
according to what the Laws of the Land do require. And it has very much
detracted from the Reputation, Justice and Honor of the House of Lords, that
they tamely connived at such an Injury done unto, and Affront put upon their
Honorable Fellow Members, and that they did not both imprison the presumptuous
and daring Deposer, and order him to be prosecuted according to the utmost
Rigor of the Law, or at the least, that they voted him not to be for ever
incapable of serving the Government in any Place or Capacity whatsoever. But we
hope they are by this time grown more sensible of their own Dignity and
Jurisdiction, as well as what they owe to the Kingdom, the ancient English
Constitution, and Generations to come: So that they will treat him otherwise
the next time he is handed unto and staged before them, which will speedily be
done, if for nothing else, yet for the Bills he preferred to the Grand-Iury
against Colonel Parker and Mr. Crosby, in direct Contempt and Defiance of the
Articles of Limerick, which had anull'd and superceeded all Prosecutions of
that kind, as well as in a visible subserviency both to involve Ireland in a
new War, and to shake the Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom. Seeing, if
Stipulations and Agreements be not so duly observed, as that People may rely
upon them for their Safety, they will think of finding better Security, tho
they must come to be indebted for it to their Swords. However, so it is, that
through the Parliaments over-looking the Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings of the
Ministers, An. 1692. you, Sir, have been encouraged and emboldened to revive
and repeat the same unjust Practices in the Year 1694. But we would humbly
presume to expect that both the Houses will think of hitting that Blow now,
which they took not that Notice of then, which they ought. And it is in order
thereunto, that we without Doors publish our Complaints in this manner to those
wit^in; that if they will not vouchsafe to hear and relieve, the whole Kingdom
may understand, both how precariously every Man possesses all that is valuable
unto him, and how little care, particularly their Representatives take of them.

But I hasten to another Grievance which the Subject groaneth under in
reference to his Liberty, and which makes the Sixth Illegality in the
execution of your Office, and in your Administration of the Affairs of the
Government, and this is, That your Messengers do often search Houses, and that
by Night as well as by Day, without the Presence and Company of a Constable or
a Headborough. So careful is the Law, in relation to our Liberty, and
preservation of the Freehold that every one has in it, that as it will not
suffer the House of a Peer to be searched, nor his Person there apprehended,
without the Presence of a Justice of Peace; so it does not allow the breaking
into, and searching the House of the meanest Commoner, without the Aid and
Assistance of a Constable, or one of parallel Character, tho in some places
otherwise styled. Those whom the Court calls Messengers are no civil Officers,
nor does our Law know them by any Title that empowereth them to meddle with
Men's Persons or Goods, farther than as they are Secretary-Office and
Council Chamger Porters, to carry Warrants and Orders from thence to the
Justices of Peace or Constables, to get them executed. Neither have the very
Secretaries any Authority or Jurisdiction over the Liberty of the Subject, in
the Quality and under the Figure of Secretaries, but merely as they are
themselves Justices of the Peace: Tho I know that in their own single Persons,
as well as toward others, Mr. Secretary does often supplant Mr. Justice, and
usurp over him. Yet this I do affirm, that, according to our Laws, all that
they can pretend unto and claim under that Character, is to write Letters, hand
the Peoples Petitions to their Master, and his Answers to them, and the like;
but they have no power to diseize Men of their Liberties, or take away their
Papers, etc. otherwise than as being Justices of the Peace. It Is true, there is
another Thing very much in Fashion, which, for what I pretend to understand
either of Matters of Law or State, their Jurisdiction may extend unto; and I am
sure that some of them, through the Profit they make by it, find their Interest in
it, and that is the supplying your Gazetteers and Writers of News-Letters with
Cargo of Intelligence; the Honor whereof I do no wise envy those that practice
it, being in my Opinion no better, nor other, than the furnishing Wind at a
certain Price to the Speaking-Trumpets and Cra^k-Farts of the Nation. But, Sir,
besides the Tyranny you exercise over us, by authorizing or by countenancing
your Messengers, to break into and search our Houses, without their being
accompanied with a Legal and Civil Officer (for all Power that the Law allows
not, is tyrannous and usurped;) how many particular Mischiefs are we subjected
and enslaved unto by this one Method of your administering your Office. For your
Messengers being Fellows that most People are wholly Strangers unto, and whom
very few know by Face, and least of all they whom they are usually heunded out
upon, how liable are we to be robbed by such as they may either in Friendship
lend their Badges unto, or by those that may counterfeit them, that being every
way as feasible as counterfeiting the public Coin is, which is every day
practiced. Nor while this Course is allowed, are we out of danger of being
murdered by Ruffians, charactering themselves Messengers, and furnished with
the Passport of a Badge. And this is the more easily practicable, because those
who are real Messengers carry many times only Blank Warrants, and at other
times (especially toward meaner People) refuse to produce and show any at all.
But let us suppose, that none do come to our Houses, but such who truly are
what they vouch themselves (tho we can never be sure of it, while the Method I
have been mentioning is allowed or connived at) yet if they exceed their
Bounds, and copy Sir W. Waller's Originals, Pray, in that case, how shall we be
redressed, or whom shall we attach for Reparations? For it is upon that
account, as well as to keep the Peace, that the Law ordains and requires the
Presence of a Constable, and of such a one as is of the Neighborhood; that if
we be either pillaged or otherways injured, we may know whom to sue and make
responsible. And I am very suspicious what your Messengers may do, in fingering
and detaining what they ought not to meddle with, unless they be under the
Inspection and Restraint of a Civil Officer, since the time that I heard a very
odd and ungentile Story of your self, which I have made that just Inquiry into,
that I undertake for the Truth of it; Namely, That upon your being informed,
that a certain Gentleman about this Town had the Picture of the Prince of Wales
(which certainly is as lawful for any one to buy and keep, as it is the
Pictures of the Emperor Leopol^ and K. William,) you sent for him, I suppose:
by that Authority which you conceive vested in you as Secretary, and having
questioned him about it, and demanding a sight of it, upon his obeying your
Command, and gratifying your Request, you put it immediately into your Pocket,
and have not to this Day restored it again. Now, pray, what is this but to rob
by virtue of the Seals of your Office, and to teach those under you to do the
like by your Example: But it may be it was designed for you as a Pledge of K.
James's Grace and Favor, and of your own Reconcillation to him, and that the
manner of your getting into Possession of it, was only Artifice to conceal the
Mystery of your having made your Peace with that Exiled Prince, and to cover
your remaining in the Post you are, about K. W. in order to betray him, of
which your whole Administration seems strongly to smell.

But I hasten to another Miscarriage in your Management, which as much declares
your acting with Arbitrariness and Illegality, as any of those can do which I
have mentioned already; and that is, while you pretend to seize Papers of
Treasonable and Seditious Importance, your Officers take and carry with them
the Deeds of Men's Estates, their Books of Accounts relative to Trade, and
their Letters of private Conversation with their Friends. All which, as they
ought to be preserved Secrets which none should presume to pry into, without
Consent of the Owners; so the Law allows no Man a Right and Authority to meddle
with them. The disordering Men's Letters, in reference to common and private
Business, may sometimes be an Inconveniency not easy to be redressed; and the
penetrating into the State and Condition of their Civil and Secular Affairs,
may come so to affect their Credits that the Wrong is for ever Irreparable.
There are several, since this Revolution, that will never emerge from under the
Inconveniences and Difficulties which were brought upon them, by the seizing
and detaining their Books and Papers, till the Attorney General, and Mr. Aaron
Smith, would be at leisure to look them over. I am far from complaining of any
Governments seizing Asseciations against the State; or Letters of treasonable
Correspondence; but it is illegal as well as rude, to heap a Gentleman's Papers
together promiscuously, and to carry them away in the Bulk. And as none of the
Messengers are qualified to distinguish those of dangerous Importance from such
as are not; so they are commonly so hasty to be upon the Scent of fresh Game,
that they will not allow themselves time to do it, if they could. And in the
paraphrazing what passes in Writing between Friends, there ought to be the
largest Allowances granted imaginable: For how many Words and Sentences may
there be, in familiar Letters, between intimate and ingenious Acquaintance,
that were very innocently intended, and yet by a malicious Interpretation may
be easily transformed into Libels? The Earl of Shaftsbury's Catalogue of Men
Worthy, and Worthy Men, imported no legal Offense, and yet what a Noise was
made of it, even to an Essay of grafting a Plot upon it heretofore. There are
few in the Kingdom, of Genteel Learning, Political Observations, or of a large
Converse, but, were their Studies ransacked and pillaged, there would be
something met with that would displease a peevish and Hypocondrycal Statesman;
and yet they with whom they were found, may, notwithstanding that, be Loyal
even to Bigottry. And, as if it were not highly illegal, as well as extremely
damageable to the Person concerned, to have all his Papers seized
promiscuously, and in the gross, There is another Thing commonly practiced in
these Cases by your Messengers, which is of most threatening, and may be of
fatal Consequence; and that is their neither numbering nor marking them
themselves, nor allowing those concerned and from whom they seize them to do
it; which is to expose and make obnoxious those, with whom they were taken, to
have others shuffied in among them that were not there before. And this is
practicable so many ways, that, where this previous Security is not vouchsafed,
the Prisoner is by the Civil Law, which is the Law of Nations, made
unaccountable even for those very Papers which were taken with him: For the
Law, that always favors the Accused, will suppose that to be done by them
who prosecute, which they have furnished themselves with so fair an occasion
for the doing of. This preserved Monsieur Fouquett, when the late Colbert, who
was at that time the chief Favorite of France, prosecuted him with all the Art
as well as all the Malice he could. And while we not only prefer out own Laws
so much above theirs, but so infinitely extol the Justice and Mercy of K. W.
beyond those of K. Lewis, we might very well expect (tho I cannot tell whether
we may hope for it, if some Ministers be hearkened unto) that we may have the
same equal dealing at London and Westminster, which are met with at Paris. For
how easy is it for some (where the forementioned Care is not had and observed)
by the Aid and Assistance of their Old Friend Parson Young, both to counterfeit
what Hands and forge what Treasonable Papers they please, and then to have it
sworn by their bribed Mercenaries, that they are the Handwriting of such or
such a one, and taken in the Custody of this or that Man, whom they have a mind
to have destroyed. So that upon this account, as well as that there were no
Papers taken about him, all the Treasonable Writings and Correspondencies, with
which Mr. Crosby is loaded, signify no more, in Law to affect him, than if they
were Old Almanacks; and the Crimes pretended to be witnessable by those Papers,
can, according to Law, (may he be but allowed the benefit of it) no more hurt
or prejudice him, than if they were Bagatelles or Stories of Robin Hood and
Little John. And our Ministers, were they not in a Conspiracy to waste the
Treasure of the Nation, as ridiculously as well as uselessly, as Mine Here
Meesters does it upon Machines, might have spared the Expense of bringing
People from Ireland to swear to the Similitude of his Hand, seeing while the
Kingdom remembers what a late Favorite Young was with some of our Statesmen,
and the Service he employed himself about; nothing like the Similitude of Hands
can influence the Belief of any Man, that is not on the Score of Distraction
and Folly fit for Bedlam, or upon the account of Villainy for Bridewell. Nor
will it be very grateful to the Nation, instead of better Divertisement given
unto them, to have the Tragedy of Colonel Algernoon Sidney reacted before them.
To which I shall subjoyn, under this Head, That as several Papers relating to
Men's Trade and Estates, etc. have been lost and embezled, before the
Secretaries could fall into the good Humor, or so far recover the Sense of
Justice and Honor, as to order them to be returned; so sometimes they have
been wholly detained, and refused upon any Terms to be restored. Of this I have
an Instance in a particular Friend, who having all his Papers taken by a
Messenger, and carried to the Secretary's Office, he could never recover one of
them, tho there was not a Script among them of a treasonable or seditious
Importance: And the loss of them was not only an Injury to the Gentleman, as it
was a robbing him of his Goods and Property, but as it was a depriving him of
the means of getting Bread to himself and Family: There having been several of
them prepared for the Press, in order to convey to Posterity the remembrance of
Actions that are past, and to remain as Memoirs to assist such as may write the
History of the two late Reigns. And since they were withheld from the Author,
after they had been several times demanded, they have been either hired out for
Money, or lent abroad in Courtesy to diverse to be perused: But he from whom
they were plundered has this to comfort him, that the Minister of State by
whose Order and Authority they were taken, it a Person sufficiently
responsible; and he may assure himself that the Sufferer is not of that tame
and pusillanimous Temper, but that he will sooner or later make him account for
them: And if he cannot obtain Satisfaction by Legal Methods, he will make
Reprizals in the best ways he can, but in such as shall be always honorable
and just. Yea I may hereunto add, That your Messengers, and those other Persons
whom you employ upon these Errands, don't only carry away Papers with them,
which they have no right to meddle with, but they rob Men of their Money, as if
it were Treason for such as you style Jacobites to have Silver or Gold by them.
Of this we have a late as well as a famous Instance, in that Harry Baker,
accompanied with the Dutch Conservators of our Liberties, did either
feloniously rob, or militarily plunder Mr. Tildsley of a Purse full of old
Gold, while they were ransacking his Closet, in search (as they pretended) of
treasonable and seditious Papers. And these are the blessed Fruits we reap, by
retaining and luxurlously feeding these Mirmidons in England, while our
British Troops are near starving in Flanders, and dropping into another World
by Hundreds and Thousands in defending the Barrier of the Seven Previnees. But
tho those Holland Troopers may be above the Cognizance and Animadversion of our
Laws, in Compensation for their having r^s^ued and preserved them unto us, at a
time when we were in as full and quiet enjoyment o^ our Properties as ever we
were, save that in D^f^ren^e to the Declaration dated at the H(...) (...) 168^,
we were bound in defiance of Sense and Experience to believe them to have been
trampled upon and annulled: Yet we hope that neither Harry Baker, nor you who
commissionated him down to La^cahire and (...) are above being made responsible
for this and diverse other Criminal Injuries there perpetrated.

The next Illegality which makes the Eighth, whereof I accuse you in the
execution of your Office, is the detaining those whom your Messengers have
taken for a long time in Custody, without vouchsafing to call for and examine
them. You ought to know (having been bred to the Gown) that every Hours
Restraint, when there is no legal Cause for it, is false Imprisonment, which
fastens a high Trespass and Misdemeanor upon the Actor, and rendereth him
obnoxious ^o Punishment. Nor is it enough to plead want of Leisure to send for
and question them (which is your common Excuse when addressed unto about it)
seeing he who is not at Leisure to discharge the Duty of his Place, ought not
to be allowed the Privilege to hold it for a Day. And it is strange that you
should have always time enough for issuing our your Warrants to apprehend Men,
which is for the most part the doing them Injustice, and you should want it for
Weeks and Months, when you should not only do them and their Families Right,
but the Kingdom likewise. For tho the immediate Wrong be done to particular
Persons, yet both the Constitution comes thereby to be reproached, and the
whole Community suffere^h in that pernicious Example. And I cannot omi^ both
the (...)g you, and the advertising the Kingdom, that when you have l^^st
wherewith to ^ha^g^ the Prisoner, you usually delay the l^nger (...) (...)
condescend to ^x^m^ne him: W(...) (...) ^ff^^t to say, Th(...) (...) are
resolved (...) pu(...)h ^^m out (...) M(...), when you suffice(...) un(...)and
that if you would al(...) him (...) of b^ing heard, you (...) d(...) (...). How
Criminal do you render your (...) before God, and punishable as well as
reproachable by Men, by suffering a Freeborn Subject to lie three or four
Months unheard at a Messengers; and at last when you condescend to examine him,
to find your self under a Necessity sometimes of discharging him immediately,
and at other times of admitting him to Bail: Which is plainly to acknowledge
that he was wrongfully kept in Custody during all the time he was held in
Durance. And in the Interi^, while he is thus illegally and unjustly treated;
if he was a Tradesman he has lost his Customers; if a Physician his Patients;
if a Lawyer his Clients; and is extremely prejudiced, if not wholly ruined, of
whatsoever Course of Life he was. And if I do not mistake, no Man tho never so
legally seized is to be sent to Prison, until he has been brought before some
proper and competent Magistrate, and has been there examined. And I am sure
that whatsoever the Law prescribes in this Matter, Reason tells us it should be
so; seeing it is possible that a Person may be taken up upon Mistake, which his
being examined may easily rectify. Nor do we want Examples, how sometimes, through
Similitude, and at other times through Identity of Names, a very innocent Person
has been apprehended in the stead of one that was Criminal. And of this both
the Popish Plot, and the Consplracy in 1682, have furnished us with several
Instances. Which as nothing could adjust but an Appearance before a Magistrate,
so it is absolutel^ needful, in order to show the Equity and Righteousness of
your Proceedings. And this is yet more indispensably necessary, when Persons
are seized upon blank Warrants, where the Envy or Covetuousness of the
Messenger do more govern him in whom he apprehends, than the Paper with a Hand
and Seal annexed unto it, which you arbitrarily and illegally gave him. Nay, It
is possible that when there is no mistake committed in the Person that is taken
up, that yet he may be able so fully to convince you of your having been
misinformed in the Matters for which he was se^zed, that the bare examining of
him will both vindicate his Innoc^ncy, and prevent your dishonouring the
Government, and the making your self punishable for keeping a guiltless Person
in durance. Of this I could give you many Inst^nces; (...) I shall only assign
that of Mr. Matthew M^^d the Minister, who was taken up in the Year 1683, not
only upon grounds of just Suspicion, but upon positive Information given in
against him. And yet through obtaining the Justice as well as Favor of being
examined before the King in Council, he did so well justify himself, and with
that Wit and presence of Mind, that he was immediately discharged and dismissed
home to his Family. Nor is it for the Credit of King W's Reign, under which we
expected more Fairness and Generosity, as well as more Justice, than were said
by you and some others to be exercised under that of King Charles, that the
Subjects should meet with harder Measure in 94, than they did in 83; and be
worse treated now than they were th^n. But it seems we are disappointed of our
Expectations in this, as well as in most Things else; which makes some think
that we are sunk back into the Times of (...) (...), when all the Laws in
reference to the Liberty of the Subject were superceded and trampled upon, as
well as those which related to the rightful Enjoyment to the Grown. And some do
not forbear to (...). That there was more deco^um as well as Justice observed
under that Usurpation, than there is under this Conventional constituted
Gover(...)t. To which may be added, That the old (...)y Secretary Sir Lionel
I^nk^ns, had more Sense, Uprightness and Honor, then to be guilty of those
Illegalities and Oppressions, which his (...)g Successor Secretary (...)
commits without Shame or Remorse.

But I advance to a Ninth Particular in your daily Practice, whereof I do both
accuse yo^, and do affirm it to be one of the ^ig^est Oppressi^ns and greatest
Illegalities imaginable; and that is your co^^^ning Men to (...) Houses, which
neither are, nor never ^ere, accounted legal Prisons. And what is this, but to
make your Messengers such (...) Creatures, as that we cannot ^ell of what
Species they are* Surely it is needful that you should define (...), that we
may know (...) they are G(...) or Mess^^gers, for ac(...)ing to L(...) they
cannot be (...). For tho our La^^ ^^^not prevent N(...)ral, yet they do (...):
no Court (...): N^^ are two S^xes twisted into o^e individ(...) so om(...) in
the Elementary World, (...) s^c^ (...) in Nations as Messenger and Jailer
brought to c(...)r in one Person are in Civil and Political States-For besides
other Mischiefs that may attend this common practice, there at Three that are
inseparable from it, and all of them inconsistent with, and destructive of, the
Subjects right unto his Liberty. One is, that by this Method of confining Men,
the Judges, who by their Places, Employs and Characters, are the Guardians of
every Man's Freedom, and the Guarantees between King and People, are precluded
from all regular ways of knowing who are taken into and kept under Custody.
Whereas were all Prisoners committed to Legal Goals, they could not miss having
cognizance of them at the respective Sessions here in Town, and at the (...) in
the Country. For the Goalers being obliged at those Times to give in a
K(...)dar or Li^t of all they have under their Custody, it cannot then escape
arriving at their Knowledge who they are. And, as many are kept in Captivity for
Months and Years without the Judges receiving any Intelligence of them; so if
at any time they come to attain it, by the Reports of those that visit them,
and as a part of the Common News, as I do not know they can judicially take
notice of it, so I believe they are not by their Duty obliged to it: And for
them to meddle beyond that would be to have their Sallaries paid worse than
they are, which they are already ill enough. For tho they hold their Places
(...) (...) been s^ g^ss^^int, yet as to the time of being paid their
Sallaries, they are under a (...). Nor could an Act be obtained to rectify
this, and relieve them from a precarious Dependence, tho a Bill had past both
Houses, and was offered to King W. in order to the obtaining the Royal As^ent
for it: But he preferred his own Interest to that of his People, and refused
it. For among the many other Blessings which we have attained by the late
Revolution that of having more Negatives given to public ^ills in five years,
than had been given in thirty eight before, may be reck(...) for one, and that
not of the smallest Size. Another Mischief accompanying this Practice of
committing Prisoners to Messengers Hou(...)s, is the robbing them of the
Privilege and Benefit of being delivered out of their Thraldom and restored to
their Liberty with that Convenience and Speed as otherwise they might: For
those Houses being out of the Circle of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer at
the Old Baily, such as are coopt up in them do sue in vain for Remedy at the
Sessions. Of this we have had the Misfortune to see many doleful Instances, and
some very lately. And Applications of this nature being usually made the last
Day of the Sessions, and after the Dispatch of all the Trials, when the Judges
are seldom on the Bench, Honest Salathiel, whose Learning, Wisdom and Justice
are all of a Size, does not only reject them with Scorn and Contempt, but
treats those who make the Motions, with the Pride and Insolence which supply
the room of other Qualifications requisite for his Place. Nor can any give the
Dimensions of this Grievance, but they who having been thrown into the Dens of
Lions at the beginning of a long Vacation, have been forced to continue under
their Paws and Teeth as well as remain deprived of their Liberties, withheld
from their Familles, and shut out from all their Business, till the last Day of
Michaelmas Term. To which I subjoin a Third Plague that inseparably cleaves to
this way of Commitment, namely, That it tempts the Messengers to suborn
Rascally Fellows in Town and Country to inform and depose against Honest and
Quiet Men, that they may have an Opportunity administered of preying upon and
fleecing of them. And considering the Morals of most of them, it is more than
probable in reference to many, and proof can be made of it in relation to some,
how they employ Setters to entangle Persons into their Clutches, and have their
Spaniels to start Game for them to worry. Nor is it much to be wondered at,
that having purchased their Places at dear Rates, they should sell the Devil as
well as they had bought him. And their customary Salaries being but ill paid,
the Government being usually a Year or two in Arrear to them, while German
Troops Abroad, and Dutch Projectors, under the Notion of Incompatable Artifis
and Ingeniers at Home, swallow up our Money even to the starving almost King
IV's Household; few People will think it strange, if those Blades, who have
neither Honor nor Conscience to restrain them, should purvey for a Subsistence
in all the ways they possibly can, without regard to the Justice of them. And I
will further add upon this Head, That if those who are forcibly detained in
such Hands and Places shall make their Escapes, the Law neither does nor can
make any Crime of it: For whatsoever Cognizance it takes of Escapes out of
Legal Prisons, and whatsoever Punishment it makes the Officer in that Case
obnoxious unto; yet it can annex no Penalties where it has made no
Establishments, nor inflict Chastisement for not remaining, where it is so far
from requiring, that it does not allow that any Man should be. And if the Law
of 1 Ed. 2. de frangentibus Prisonam, does neither make (...) Person that
breaks Prison, nor the Jailer that consents to it, (tho he whom he had in
Custody were guilty of High Treason) corporally punishable, and much less with
death, unless the Warrant by which the said Person was committed express and
declare the Cause of his Commitment: By parity of Reason, an Escape out of an
illegal Prison, is as little punishable. Seeing the Law that has ordered it to
be always specified and declared for what Cause Men are taken into Custody,
has taken no less care in providing whither they are to be sent, and in what
Places they are to be detained.

But I hasten to a Tenth Grievance, under which the Subject groans through your
illegal execution of your Office toward those you apprehend and commit, and
that is in the suffering if not encouraging and authorizing those called
Prisoners of State to be treated both in Goals and in Messengers Houses with
the utmost Barbarity, Rudeness and Insolency. For whatsoever you do not either
prevent or remedy, when you both ought and may, you must be thought to justify
and allow, and ought accordingly to be made responsible for it. Prisons are not
by the Law intended for Punishments, but only for the detaining Persons accused
in safe Custody till they come to be tried, and do either vindicate their
Innocence, or be convicted of their Guilt. And as it is to be supposed in
Justice as well as Charity, that every Man, notwithstanding what is informed
and deposed against him, may be innocent till he be proved and found guilty; so
he ought in the mean time to be treated with all the humanity and fairness that
are consistent with the preserving him safe, and forthcoming to a Trial. But
that it is wholly otherwise I shall endeavor to lay before the Nation, in
several Particulars, that if they have any Sense left of the Rights of
Englishmen, or any Bowels toward their oppressed Countrymen and Brethren, or
any Apprehension or Prospect of what may be their own Portion and Lot, they may
resent the Injuries answerable to the Weight and Importance of them; and by
application to their Representatives in Parliament endeavor to get them both
Revenged and Remedied. Nor will I insist upon the little and mean Injury, tho
it be heinous enough to many in some Circumstances, that is commonly practiced
in all your Goals, and particularly in Newgate toward Prisoners; which is the
denying them the Liberty to purchase their Bread and Beer from abroad, but
forcing them to buy them in the Goal at those scanty and stinted Measures which
the Goalers think fit to allow. And the Sutier giving several hundreds of
Pounds for his Place has no other way to reimburse himself, and make provision
for his Family and Posterity, than by abridging Prisoners in the Quantity, as
well as by defrauding them in the Kind of what they ought to have. But I shall
reduce all I have to say on this Head to the following Particulars, and branch
this one general Grievance into Five kinds of Tyranny and Oppression exercised
over the Subject in this Matter; whereof the First is the shutting up Men
without regard to their Age, Quality, natural or adventitious Infirmities, or
to the former method of their Living, under close Confinement, neither allowing
them the Freedom of the respective Prisons, nor the benefit of that little Air
which those Places afford. I do know that the Law speaks of arcta Custodia as
well as Libera, but as it is only either for some infamous Facts, or for
Persons from whose ill Character some attempt may be justly feared of making
their Escape, that the first is ordained; so it is not intended by it, that Men
should be locked up Weeks and Months within narrow, moist, and dark Rooms,
with Warders lying in their Chambers all Night, as well as Sentinels constantly
at their Doors, which is the Method of your Lieutenant of the Tower toward his
Prisoners; who tho he be a Peer, may be said to be a Stranger to the Breeding
and Civility of an ordinary Gentleman; and of whom it may be affirmed without
Scandalum, That of the whole Bench, whether Earls or Barons, he is worthiest
for the Character he bears, and the best adapted to it, having more of the true
and proper Qualities of a Jailer ^hin others are ambitious of being endued
with, or capable of attaining unto. And to convince all Mankind that this is a
Piece of despotical Tyranny, and not what the Law requires, or whereunto the
Goalers duty obliges him, they both can and do dispense with much of this
Severity, and practice more Humanity and Gentleness, when they are liberally
bribed to it; which proclaims them either barbarous Oppressors in the one case,
or treacherous Rogues in the other. For as upon the one hand, if the Law
restrains them from using that Moderation, they are Villains and Traitors to
those that trust them in exercising of it; so upon the other, if the Law
exacteth all that Civility and Fairness of Demeanor from them toward those
who are their Prisoners, which is consistent with the keeping them safe, then
they are brutal Tyranes, and worse than Bashaws in refusing it. But besides
this, there is a Second Sort of Oppression practiced upon all your Prisoners of
State in whatsoever Places they come to be confined; and that is, The demanding
and exacting from them illegal and exorbitant Fees. I do not deny but the Law
allows some small Thing, by way of Fee, to the Keepers of City and County
Goals, but it bears no proportion to what they require, and you Sir, as
Secretary of State, countenance them to take. But for your Messengers I do know
no Law that allows one Farthing to them from the Prisoner by way of Fee: For
being the immediate Servants of the Court, they are to expect their Wages from
those that set them at work, and whose Drudgery they do. Nor is it possible
that according to Law they can challenge any Thing from those they detain in
Custody, seeing our Laws know none bearing those Names for Goalers, nor
acknowledge any such Houses as theirs for Prisons. As for your Lieutenant of the
Tower, I am told that there is only a Groat legally due to him; and that if
more be given him, it is mere Gratuity, for which, tho never so little, he
ought to make a Leg, and be thankful. By what Name then shall we call that
Exaction of exorbitant and illegal Fees from Prisoners of Sta^e, which has
been more practiced since the late Revolution than ever it was before, and
under your Ministry than that of any other? For Extortion is too diminitive a
Title for it; nor can it be otherwise accounted of, than as a higher Degree of
Oppression than any perpetrated in the Dominions of the Grand Seignior and
Great Mogul. And it would seem that some of you Ministers do reckon that you
are in a State of War with the English at Home, as well as with the French
Abroad; and that you may treat the Prisoners you make in the same manner as the
Soldiers do those of the Enemies they take in the Field, where all they find
upon the Captive is held lawful Plunder. So excessive are the Fees which are
every where exacted of those called Prisoners of State, that a very great Fine
inflicted for a High Misdemeanour against the Government, would not amount to
so much, nor be so grievous, were the Prisoners tried and convicted
immediately, as the lying Five or Six Months in a Messenger's hands, or in Goal
at Newgate, arises unto in bare and naked Fees. Yea many, who when admitted to
Trial are found innocent and acquitted, find themselves so impoverished through
paying for so long time the large Fees that have been exacted of them, that
they are for ever after disabled from getting Bread for themselves and
Families. Nor is the suffering and allowing this Extortion any ways serviceable
to the Government, which you pretend to preserve and uphold; seeing more are of
the Humor of the Gascoign than you imagine, who told one of the Kings of
France, that tho the whole Treasure of the Kingdom could not bribe him to be
Disloyal, yet he did not know but that an Affront or Oppression might provoke
him to turn Rebel. For many will choose rather to ^un the hazard of dying by the
Swords of ^our armed Troops than to be eat up piece. (...) and Limb after Limb
by your Messe^gers and G^^lers, which is like the being gnawn by (...) and
^^^^s, instead of being devoured by (...) ^ut you know in whose Reign, and by
whom it was said, sentiant se mori, let the^ (...)e; and that he was not so
much in favor wi^h ^^ose he either feared or hated, as to ^^ow them the
Privilege of expiring spe(...)y. A (...) barbarous (...) exer^ised toward
those you have in Custody, is, The refusing their nearest Relations, and most
necessary Friends, admission to them; whose Company, if needful and comfortable
at any time, is while they are in such Circumstances more especially so. This
was a Hardship seldom practiced heretofore, tho grown much into Fashion since
the late Revolution: Nor was either the Earl of Shaftsbury or the Earl of Essex
denied the attendance of their own Servants, under the severe Reign of King
Charles, and those we called his Despotical Ministers, as my Lord Molineux and
the Lancashire Ge^tlemen are, under the Gracious Reign of K. (...). and easy
Administration of those he employs in the Head of his Civil Affairs. For since
the Exchange was made of Princes, some have stood confined for many Months, if
not Years, and none suffered to go near them besides Goalers. I do acknowledge
that in some Cases, and toward some Prisoners, it may not be convenient that
any should have the Liberty of access to them, save in the Presence of a
Keeper; but with that Proviso and that Circumspection, there cannot be the
least danger of giving their Friends and Relations admission to them at
seasonable Hours. For whatsoever can be vouchsafed a Prisoner, without Danger
to the Government, or in Subserviency to the making an Escape, the Law
requires that it should not be denied him. And that it is not from any care of
preserving the Government, or apprehension of the Prisoners contriving an
Escape, that this Privilege is withheld from them, but from Covetuousness to
squeeze Money out of them, is apparent from hence, that upon Application for
leave and paying down so much for an Order of Admi^tance from the Secretary,
the Liberty which was before refused is then granted. But then the Mischief is,
that this Order will for the most part give only a Freedom of Access to the
Prisoner for once, and that whosoever would go again ^ust pay down t^other Fee
to get it renewed: And this Method is held, till you and your Clerks have
levied so many duyly or weekly Taxes on the Subject as satisfy your Avarice,
and then a general one is vouchsafed, by which either any Person is allowed to
see the Prisoner, or at least that such and such may do it, as are therein
mentioned and expressed. And this customary Practice of some Secretaries in
oppressing the Subject, encourages Goalers to do the like, which tho they
cannot exemplify in the same manner, yet they imitate it as well as they can.
So that even when the Secretary does no way intend by his Form of Commitment,
that the Prisoner should be debarred the sight of his Relations and Friends,
yet the Jailer will not admit them, unless they make their Address by Guineas,
and seek his Favor by the Intercession of Angels, and then the Doors fly open,
and the Prisoner may be seen and conversed with. To which may be added as a
Fourth Illegal Severity used toward Prisoners under their Confinements, that
they are refused the having their Counselors and Sollicitors admitted to them,
when they need and desire them. For as if their Conditions were not distressful
enough, through a shameful defect in our Laws, in not allowing them the Assistance
of Council at and upon their Trials for Treasonable Offenses, which no Laws in
the World besides ours but allow. You, Sir, render it more deplorable and worse
by denying them to speak with their Council freely, and as often as they please
before, which is the robbing them of a Right, which the Law under all its other
Deficiencies in this matter grants unto them. For a Counselor at Law is the
same thing to a Person confined, and to be arraigned for a Conspiracy against
the Government, that a Physician is to one sick of a dangerous and malignant
Distemper; nor ought the First be refused the coming to his Client with the
same Freedom that the Latter goes to his Patient. I do the rather insist upon
this, because of the unpresidented Barbarity used toward Mr. Crosly, even
after he had warning given him by Mr. Aaron Smith to provide for his Trial. For
tho Mr. Momp^sson, who is his Council, and Mr. Barleigh, who is his Solicitor,
had admission to see him, yet they neither were, nor yet are permitted to speak
with him, but in the Presence of a Keeper. Which is not only all one, but much
worse than if they were not suffered to come near him at all; so it does put
him only to the expense of so many Fees, without leaving him in a Condition
either to declare with Safety his own Case, or to receive their Advice. And the
Fellows fastened upon him at those Seasons are only so many Spies, whose
Business is to observe what he does say, that so if he discover the least
Thing, which being known may do him hurt, they may be ready as Witnesses and
depose against him, and thereby supply the want that the Government still
labors under in that matter, after they have hunted through the three
Kingdoms to procure such as with any probability may swear him out of his Life.
And through this Severity put upon Prisoners for High Treason, which most in
both Houses of Parliament, as well as the generality of the Kingdom, and even
Mr. Secretary Trenchard oftener than the rest have been guilty of, they are
worse treated than Felons, Murderers, and Highway-men are; that being never
denied to the latter, which is thus scandalously refused the former. To which I
subjoyn in the fifth and last place, as another heinous and intolerable
Grievance put upon State Prisoners in some Goals, and that this is the
subjecting them to wear Irons, unless they redeem themselves from the Barbarity
by Money. For tho I cannot tell whether this Inhumanity be exercised toward
Prisoners by your Authority, or merely by your Conniance; yet this I am sure
of, that exercised it is, and that upon Persons whose Quality, Education and
Character, equal them to your self in every thing, save that they are not
advanced to the Honor by being vested with the Seals of the Office. Nor is
this only a punishing of Men before they be convicted, or proved guilty of the
least Crime (seeing none will deny, but that the wearing Irons is a Punishment,
and that as Grievous as it is Ignominious) but it is a Treating them as if they
were actually Sentenced and Condemned to Gallys, and not as such as are merely
put under Confinement to be kept in safe Custody until they can be brought to
undergo a Legal Trial. Now this is so commonly practiced upon all that are
committed to Newgate upon pretense of having conspired against the Government,
that I need not assign particular Instances of it, tho diverse very late ones
are produceable; and for which, if reparation cannot legally be obtained
against Tell the Keeper, Gentlemen will be tempted whenever they recover
their Liberty to vindicate themselves by a Cane, if not by a Sword, from the
dishonor that has been done them: However I do both lay this Earbarity at your
Door unless remedied; and offer It to the Cognizance and Animadversion of the
Parliament the next Sessions. If they be not either so employed about Ways and
Means for carrying on a vigorous War against France, that they cannot find
leisure for what concerns the preserving our Rights and Liberties at home; or
that some of them have a mind to suffer poor Jacobites to remain unrelieved in
this particular, till some of the Advocates for the Merc^ of this Government,
and who have labored so strenuously for the Redress of those Grievances which
we complained of under former, may come themselves to fall under this
Barbarity, which it is not impossible but that sooner or later they may.
However this ignominious Severity is not inflicted upon State Prisoners in
persuance either of Common or Statute Law, seeing by bestowing a few Guineas on
the Keeper they may either prevent it, or rescue themselves from it, when they
please. But in the mean time I would desire to know, by what Act of Parliament,
either Fell, or any other Jailer, becomes authorized to levy arbitrary and
exorbitant Taxes upon any of the People of England, and how our Ministers
either of Justice or State can answer the conniving at it under a Government
that is Legal, and not Dispotical?

But it is now time to advance to the next Grievance under which Prisoners of
State do suffer, which makes the Eleventh Illegality, which in the Course of
your Administration you exercise toward them; and that is, The refusing to
admit them to Bail in Cases that are by Law bailable, and the allowing none for
sufficient Bail, but such as Mr. Aaron Smith thinks fit to approve of. It would
extend this Paper to an undue length, to call over and enlarge upon all the
Cases according as the Weight and Importance of them do require, in which you
refuse to admit Persons to bail, when you not only may, but ought to do it. As
when Men are taken up upon bare Suspicion; when the Suggestions and
Informations made against them are ^rifling and frivolous; when the Depositions
before you are not upon Oath; when there is only one Witness that swears to
what is deposed; when such as swear, tho never so many are to your own knowledge
suborned and infamous Fellows; or when the Informations are not made to your
self, but handed to you from a Scotch Secretary, who is allowed by our Law to
take no further cognizance of English Affairs than as he sends those whom he
finds capable to inform, either to your self, or to some other Officer of
Justice, whom the Laws have authorized to receive Depositions against
Englishmen. In all these Cases, to mention to more, you are bound by the Duty
of your Place to admit such as are apprehended to Bail. But your practice in
all of them is much otherwise; yea, so little do you either value the Liberty
of your Fellow Subjects, o^ regard the Authority of the Laws of England, or are
apprehensive of the Justice of a Parliament, that when applied unto upon such
Occasions, you do with a scornful Smile, which is as the oyling of your Hone,
bid them go and seek their Relief at the Old Bailey, or at Westminster Hall.
But as every one you send to Prison is not so well furnished in the Pocket as
to be at the Charges of obtaining Remedy in those Places; so for any to remain
arbitrarily robbed of their Liberty till opportunities offer there of
recovering it, is a Scandal to the Government, and a high Oppression of the
Subject. Nor needs ther^ more to unfold and display your Guilt in this matter,
and to apparel it with the most aggravating Circumstances, than that after you
have kept Men many Months in Prison for High Treason, but are at last forced to
prosecute and bring them to a Trial, you do then either discharge them without
the preferring of Bills of any kind against them, or at most do dwindle them
into Bills for Misdemeanor, or may be try them for drinking King James's
Health. Whereas instead of making that a Crime, it would become the Wisdom of
the Government upon the Score of Interest, to get a Prayer inserted into the
Lit^^gy for it, and to enjoin it as a part of every Man's daily Devotion; seeing
it is not from any Satisfaction that the People have in the Government, and
much less from any Love they bear to it, that under so many Disappointments,
such vast Charges and inconceivable Losses, they so quietly and with that
tameness submit unto it. But it is from a vain dread of King James, through an
unjust as well as uncharitable Apprehension, that his Revenge will be
proportionable to their Guilt; whereas whosoever allows himself Liberty to
think, will find that King James is no less calumniated in being represented
revengeful in order to hinder and prevent his Restoration, than he was here
ofore in the matter of a French League, and a Supposititious Prince of Wales,
in the Subserviency to the driving him from his Throne. Nor can that Prince who
was enriched with Mercy to pardon Mr. John Trenchard, who had not only brought
into the House of Commons the Bill by which he was to have been excluded from
Succession to the Crown, but who had been involved in the Duke of Monmouth's
Invasion, An. 1685, as well as in the Plot about an Insurrection (...) 1682; I
say, that Prince cannot be imagined to labor under deficiencies of Grace and
Mercy for pardoning any of his People, even the most heinous Offenders, that by
returning to their Duty will make themselves capable Objects of it. But as your
refusing to admit Prisoners to Bail, in Cases that are by Law Bailable, is a
great Injustice in you, and a high Oppression upon them; so the allowing none
to stand for Bail in behalf of Prisoners, (...) such as Mr. Aaron Smith will
accept and recommend unto you, is an Act of that Tyranny and Arbitrariness,
that our Language is too penurious to furnish Words sufficient to express it.
And I would here know on what Law that Office is founded, which he enricheth
himself and oppresses others in the Execution of; seeing by what I have either
read, or could be in informed of, it was never heard of until the Reign of King
Charles the Second, that it had its first Rise and Original in Mr. B^rton and
Mr. Graham. And the Season when it began, as well as the first Essays of
exercising it, being in Reference to the Sham Plot wherein so many Protestants
were to have been involved, An. 1681, might have served to have gotten it
damned and suppressed under this Reign, that was Established to suppress
Grievances, if it had been but for the Infamy of its Original, and the
Sanguinary Ends it was erected for. But it is too probable that this is what
does recommend it to some People, and keeps them extremely in love with it, and
preserves it among the utili(...) inventa, instead of suffering it to sink down
among the deperdita during this Government, at least while your Administration
lasts. And yet it was executed by those two Gentlemen with greater Temper and
Moderation, as well as with more regard to Laws, and all the Rules of good
Breeding, than it has been since, or ever will be, by Mr. Smith. For whatsoever
was complained of then, remains not only still repeated, but accompanied with
fresh and formerly unheard of Injuries, to cause us both to renew our
Complaints, and to proclaim them louder: And indeed in hoc uno Mario multi
Scill^^, we have many Burtons and Grahams in this one Mr. Aaron Smith. And
whosoever considers how he thrust himself into the Office, by threatening the
Commissioners of the Treasury, will not wonder if the Man be not yet recovered
of the Rage and Madness which had then overtaken him: For when Mr. Hambden, and
some others who had been made Commissioners of that Board upon the Revolution,
demurred about electing him into the Place, because of his insolent Pride, and
the Brutalness of his Humor, as well as by reason of some other Qualities with
which he is too well furnished, that sufficiently discouraged them; he menaced
them; and particularly the Gentleman that I have mentioned, ratisying his
Threatening with an Oath, That in Case he obtained It not, he would Stab or
Pistol them; being at the same time provided with Instruments for doing it. Nor
is the Truth of what I have here related to be questioned, there being so many
about the Town ready to attest it upon the Authority of his own Testimony; who
as he gloried in telling of it, so it has taught others a very probable Method,
in case those fail which favor of more Humanity and better Education, of
gaining the Kindness and Favor of some cowardly Ministers. But Sir, what is
this of your accepting or refusing Persons for Bail according as Mr. Aaren
Smith shall be pleased to character them, but the constituting him a Sovereign
Judge of the Reputations, Fortunes and Qualities, of the generality of the most
valuable part of Mankind: Seeing they are not of the Mob, but those of a higher
Rank in the World, that appear in the nature of Sureties in behalf of their
suffering Acquaintance and Friends. So that Persons distinguished from the
Vulgar, must pass for Poor or Rich, for those of a Fair or those of a Sul^ied
Esteem, not according to what they are really and in themselves, but according
to the Representation that Mr. Smith is in the Humor to give of them. This is
such an unlimitted Jurisdiction and Power, as no Judge in Westminster Hall is
vested with an Authority to parallel it. And to allow him this uncontrollable
Right which he usurps of determining concerning the Credits of Men, as well as
their Estates, is more than the Clothing him with an Arbitrary Power over
their Lives, and subjecting them to dye by every passionate P^ff of his
venomous and fiery Breath: Seeing the former are much dearer to all that are
framed of a better Mold, than the latter are. Nor is any thing more notorious,
because customarily practiced, than his blasting the Credits of very
substantial Persons, through refusing them for Bail, when the Sums in which they
are to be bound, amount not to above Two or Three hundred Pounds, and thereby
(at least so far as falls within his Power) diminishing their Esteem in the
Places where they live, and draw their Creditors every where upon them. For
which as by Law they have very good Actions against him, so it is hoped that
sooner or later they may recover lusty Damages. Yea, when the Ill-natured Man
cannot except against Persons upon the foot of their Inability, he refuses to
admit them upon Pretense of their being Disloyal, and brandeth whomsoever he
bears a Spleen unto, with the Name of Jacobites; which besides the Prejudice
that it may do to the Person that offers to be Surety, and stands excluded
upon this Allegation, it may often leave the Prisoner under a Necessity of
remaining confined for want of Bail; seeing his Acquaintance and Interest may
lie among no other but those whom Aaron thus Charactereth. Nor is this an
Exception that a Court ought to admit; seeing all that the Law prescribes and
requires in such a Case, is, only th(...) the Person be truly responsible to
the Government for so much as he is to be bound in, and not what his Opinion is
about the Rights and Ti^les of Princes. And yet how often does this lofty Man,
who alone and single is a whole Court of Inquisition, treat Men in reference to
the Politics, with no less Rigor and Uamercifulness in his way, than the
great Body of inq^isit^rs at Rome and Madrid handle those under their
Jurisdiction on the Motive of what they style Heresy. But is it not to expose
the Government, to the utmost reproach, and that when a Man of Quality and
Condition is to appear at the Secretary's Office, and I am sorry I have
occasion to say it, even at the King's Bench, accompanied with Knights,
Gentlemen, and Citizens of the best Figure, to stand Bail for him, he must
antecedently to his Appearance, and to obviate his being remanded to Prison,
through Mr. Smith's reprobating those as insufficient whom he brings along with
him for Sureties, be obliged to convey their Nam^s to Aaron; and to understand
his Pleasure, whether he will admit them to pass muster, or nor. Surely our
Ancestors have not been so careless, nor are our Laws so defective, as to leave
Magistrates unprovided of Rules for their Conduct in this part of their
Administration? No; For the Law in this Case still is, and the Method
heretofore practiced always was, That if the Court of Judicature, or Justice of
Peace, did suspect any of those offered for Sureties not to be responsible for
so much as they were to become bound, they were in that Case to be upon their
Oaths that they were really worth so much, all that they were at that time
Debtors for being paid. Nor does it look favorably upon those trusted now with
the Guardianship of our Laws, and the Administration of Justice; nor does it
prognosticate well to the Ancient English Conssitution, That so horrid and
injurious an Innovation, in a Matter of so unconceivable Moment and
Consequence, should be so tamely overlookt and connived at, and all for the
gratifying a peevish Man, and for the advancing him to Wealth and Opulency, who
knows not what it is to be Loyal from Principle, but merely out of Interest; as
he was not formerly Rebellious upon Motives of Reason, or out of Zeal to
preserve the Constitution, but from Discontent with his own Condition, and
Revenge that he was not Preferred and Employed. And by this Privilege granted
unto him of passing Sentence on the Sufficiency or Insufficiency of all that
are to be admitted for Bail in behalf of Prisoners of State, he raises
annually such a Tax upon all that have occasion to sue for a Habeas Corpus, or
are vouchsafed the Favor to recover their Liberty upon giving Sureties for
being forth coming to answer what they are charged with, as is not easily to be
imagined or computed. And it is pity that we have not Commissioners appointed
to enquire after illegal Exactions of this kind, as we have Commissioners of
Accounts for examining how the Public Moneys are issued out: Se^ing I am very
sure, That were there a Report to be made of the first, as by Virtue of an Act
of Parliament there ought to be of the later, the one would be no less
surprising than the other, and administer equal occasion of Melancholy. For as
the least that the Prisoner is forced to give upon this occasion is two
Guineas; so if he does suspect the Passableness of any of those he has been
able to procure to be bound for him, he must in that Case advance five or
t(...); and then be their Condition never so Mean, yet Aaron can recommend them
as Able and Sufficient Sureties. For what his Namesake the Ordinary of Newgate
does in the Case of Felons admitted to the Benefit of their Clergy, the same
will this Gentleman do in relation to those about whom his Concerns lie, and
that upon the like Motive and Inducement. Nor is the First more Arbitrary in
pronouncing that such or such a one, Legit or not Legit ut Clericus, than the
Latter is in legitimating or disclaiming Persons for Bail, according to the
manner he has been addressed. There are many other Things that might be
offered in reference to this Matter; as that Mr. Smith's Office is a plain
Usurp^ion upon that of the Attorney General, and that his Province, as he
manageth his Employ, is to be a Tutor to the Secretaries of State, and a
Superintendant and Guide to Judicial Courts. But let them either choose to bear,
or take courage to rescue and emancipate themselves from the Slavery: It is
enough for me to have said open the Injury done by it to the Free People of
England, and to have detected the Illegality and Injustice of such an Office,
in relation to the Community and Body of the Kingdom; especially as it still
is, and has been all along executed by Mr. Aaron Smith.

So that from this I proceed to another Grievance, which makes the Twelfth that
the Subject has reason extremely to complain of, in the way that you
administer your Place; and that is, Your employing and ho^nding forth Trepans,
to decoy, entangle and ensnare, indiscreet but wellmeaning People into Crimes,
which they would not otherwise have entertained a Thought of. I do acknowledge
that Spies may be sometimes used by a very wise and temperate Government, tho
the Employ be attended with that deserved Ignominy, that a Man of Honor would
choose sooner to die than to undertake it. But for T^^pans, they are Tools
only-for a malicious Government to make use of; and the employing, of them is
an infallible Argument, that the Government which ^^eth them, judges it self
either Illegal and Unrighteous, or Unsteady and Weak; and that being sensible
of the badness of its Title, or through not knowing how to subsist by Innocent,
Noble and Generous Methods, it applies to base Artifice and Tricks for its
support. Accordingly, the first Time they were known and made use of in
England, was under and during Oliver's Usurpation: And it is not for the Honor
of the present Government to borrow from the Precedents which that Usurper
made, Rules for the Ministers of this Reign to act by. I confess their first
Original to be as ancient as the Reign of Tiberius, but it is little for the
Reputation of the Ministers of K. W. to revive an Institution, which the
Historian Tacitus brands with so indelible a Reproach, in saying, Delatores
genus hominum publico exitio repertum, and paenis nunquam satis exercitum,
perpraemia elici^bantur; That Trepans and Informers which were at all Times a
Plague and public Mischief to a governed Community, and whom Punishments at
any Time could hardly prevent and restrain, were then tempted and encouraged by
Sallaries and Rewards. And it must be confessed, that you who are the Ministers
of this present Reign, have those Advantages for the inflaming and enraging the
People to Discontented, Seditious and Treasonable Expressions, which those who
served under former Reigns were very much at a loss for, if not wholly
destitute of. For without having recourse to Lies, Fictions and maliciously
invented Stories, whereby to run People not only upon Raileries, but the most
venomous and disloyal Speeches: You need only give and recount to them the true
and impartial History of Transactions since the late Revolution. So that
instead of a League with France for extirpating the Protestant Religion, and
the enslaving these Kingdoms; of a Supposititiovs Prince of Wales, and several
other Things of the same Complexion, which were the forged Calumnies to
undermine King James in the Affections of his People, and to dispose them to
receive and succor an invading Prince, whose Errand, as appears by the Event,
was to drive that Monarch frum his Throne: You need only tell them of Thirty
Millions, as uselesly expended as if it had been thrown away at Ducks and
Drakes; of above Four or Five Thousand Ships, several of them of War, and the
rest of Traffic, lost by us and taken by the French; of the trifling away a
Marine Campaign in the Mediterranian, with a vast loss of our Seamen, without
gaining either Honor or Profit; of being busied to little purpose in Flanders,
tho furnished with an Army of One Hundred and Thirty Thousand Men, and neither
able to beat the French nor yet to get into the Bowels of France; of the Dutch
being countenanced and encouraged to supplant us every where in our Trade; o^
the total Decay of all our profitable as well as honorable Commerce; and of
the Ruin of the greatest of our Substantial Merchants: In all which, as there
is not one Word of Falsehood, so there is not the least Exaggeration. And all
this being fresh in your Remembrance, you can neither be unprovided of Topics
of Discourse, wherewith to furnish your Trepanning Emissaries, nor they of
means both of insinuating themselves into the Fellowship and Confidence of
weak, credulous and oppressed People, and of haranguing them not only into
Shame and Remorse for the Change they were accessory to; but into the cursing
K. W. at least his Ministers, and wishing a speedy Deliverance from those, if
not from him. Nor is it improbable, but that some of the Ministers contribute
what they can to Miscarriages in the Government, that the Informations of their
Witnesses may be the more easily believed, in Reference to the scandalous,
seditious and treasonable Discourses of those whom they would have destroyed.
For we cannot forget that of Tacitus; ^^evitabile ^rimen cum ex moribus
Principis (...)dissima quaeque deligeret accusator, object aretque (...), nam
quia v^ra erant etiam dicta credebantur: Men are then deprived of all means of
defense, when accused of having spoken those Things of which a Government is
guilty; seeing there being true makes it the more ^redite^ that they were ^^id.
But by those Methods which your Trepans pursue, and you authorize, you may come
to kindle a Fire, that neither they nor you can quench; and raise such a Devil
in the Nation, as all the Power of Whitehall will not be able to lay again.
Sir, let me tell you, That the sending Trepanning Villains through the Kingdom,
fraught with such Heads of Discourse, thereby to ensnare poor People, who tho
they be not fully satisfied in your Conduct, yet are willing to live quietly,
is not very prudently done in reference to the Government, and carries a great
deal of Malice in it toward those whom you seek to entangle. Which brings to
my remembrance another Passage of Tacitus, who complaining of the Reign of
Tiberius says, Multitudo periclitantium glisc^bat, cum omnis domus delatorum
interpretationibus subverteretur; That therefore such a Multitude was brought
into danger, because all M^n lay at the Mercy, and stood obnoxious to the
slanderous Reports and Informations of Trepans. Does it savor of any deep
Policy (for of Virtue, Religion and Honor, it does not) to send your Kingston
now into one County, and then into another; and sometimes in the Habit of a
Parson, and assuming his Character; at another time in a lay Garb, and
personating in one place a Phisician, and in another a discarded Jacobite
Officer; and all to try whether he can decoy any into a complacential Hearing
of a Conspiracy against the Government, and thereupon to speak favorably of
it, and wish success to it, that you may thereby support the sinking Reputation
of your Plot. But you have bubbled the Nation so long with Falsehoods, that you
have very near attained the Reward and Recompense of Liars; which is not to be
believed should you speak Truth. Nor is the licensing your Emissaries to
declaim against the Government, the only Method you confine your selves unto,
in order to trepan and inveagle Men to own and acknowledge something that may
involve either themselves, or others, in a Plot: But there are diverse other
Artifices which you use, as accounting your selves of the number of those pro^i
viri, who are privileged mentiri Reipublicae causa. For sometimes you tell
those whom you accost, that the Persons whom you would have them accuse have
themselves owned what you desire to have deposed against them. Thus, you
endeavored to dec^y and trepan ^^me whom you had under Examination before you,
as to (...). (...) having been in France at such a time as might both have
brought him within the compass of the Statute that makes it Death to come out
of France without leave, and have given Umbrage to his having been engaged with
the French Chevalier for assassinating King William; and to oblige them to own
and depose it, you had the Confidence to tell them that Col. Parker had himself
acknowleged it, which provoked one of them to reply, (tho then before you under
the Hardship of a Charge of High Treason) that if the Colonel had said so, he
had standered and belied himself, seeing to his Knowledge he was not then in
France. At other Times the Course you take with those whom you attack, is to
study to obtrude upon their Belief, that you are fully appriced of the Plot, in
all the Parts and Dimensions of it, but that out of Friendship and Compassion
to them, you have a great desire to preserve them from the Punishment that is
ready to overwhelm them; and that you may be capable of doing them that
Service, your Advice is that they would confess only in general, that there is
a Conspiracy carrying on against the present Government: And that you will have
that Tenderness for their Reputations, as not to require them to conde(...)d
upon Particulars, and much less expect from them so ignominious a Thing, as
that they should be Witnesses against any Man. This, Sir, is the way, wherein
some have been, and still are, very industrious, in assaulting a certain
Gentleman that is now in ^lose Custody. For you know that as the obtaining
Credit to a Plot in general, would in great measure enable you to fasten it
upon such particular Persons afterward, as you apprehend the most Danger from,
and bear the greatest Malice unto (...) ^o it would serve both to amuse a great
many in the Nation, and to (...) some, till you should w(...)le and bubble the
Kingdom out of (...) or Si^ Millions the next sessions of Parliament.

^o that I do now proceed to the last Thing, which I have (...) (...) Ti^^
(...) ^a^^en upon you in the (...) of your Place, and in the Administration of
Affairs of State: and that (...), your (...)ing and ^b^t^ing the (...) of
^^^^mous (...), for t^^ir per(...)y ^^earing ^^^ocent and (...) M^n out of
their L(...)s: And though this Villainy has been already in some Measure said
(...), and represented to the World in a Letter to my Lord Chief Justice Holt;
yet the Trouble and Danger which diverse Gentlemen are brought into, arising
from and being caused by those Miscreants, I shall endeavor to pursue and
detect that Matter a little farther, but without quoting or borrowing any Thing
from the forementioned Paper. And I shall use the same Method which that Author
has done; namely, To give an Account First of a Suborner and Manager of
Evidence that was not there mentioned, and then to Character some more of the
bribed Witnesses; that the (...)tion may fully understand upon the Oaths of
what Sort of Rake-bells there is a Design carried on for the Destruction of
honest Gentlemen. And to begin with one, who tho he has not hitherto set up
for (...) Witness, yet valueth himself extremely upon the having procured and
brought in those th(...) are the Name, that neither this Age no^ those that are
to come may be ignorant of him, is Alexander Johnstone, Brother to the Scotch
S^^retary Mr. James JohnstoSpan^. For these Brothers, and Brothers in Law of
Secretarie^ (...) ways of getting into Employs, which s(...)e h^ve Honor
enough to ^corn and refuse as others want interest to attain u(...). Of which
(...) ^peak^, and the Person whom I have just now mentioned, are very
remarkable Inst(...). And it is fit that each of the two British (...) should
furnish their respective Quota's for the Support and Maintenance of the
Government. And tho England has the (...) of supplying the State with most of
(...) T(...) of this Kind, yet Scotland is (...)th to ^y^ under the Disgrace of
not being ^^le to ob^ige the Court with some qualified for this ^^ploy. And the
Reputation of doing the Ministers, and in them the Government, this piece of
Service (...)eth to the ^hare (...) Mr. Alexand^^ (...); who (...) his
(...)ation Office at the (...) (...) bel^^ ^ha^ing (...), w^^re having (...)
and w(...)d th^se h^ de(...) to make impress(...) upon with Plenty of W(...),
he (...) in the (...) Place (...) them with the (...) of (...); and with (...)
either of ^^vil or ^ilitary Employ^, if they will under (...) (...) Swear such
and such out of their Lives. And it is to his Art and Industry, if we may
believe himself, that the Government is indebted for most of the Scotch
Witnesses. For your Bruces and Seatons are said to be of his Mustering, and so
are your Martins and Sommerils; the last of which decoyed Mr. Chambers into his
Company, and then betrayed him. And having mentioned Mr. Chambers, it were
worth the knowing upon what Mystery of State he should be refused the small
Allowance of Four Penee a day, which the other Prisoners in the Marshalsea with
him have afforded them. But to return to Mr. Alexander Johnstone, who lies
under this Prejudice, that all whom he enrols for this Service will be thought
allied to him in one Quality, which all that know him affirm his being endowed
with in so great a Measure, that no Man believes a Word he says. For as his
Character among all his Acquaintance is that of False and Lying Sandy; so it
passes for the Badg of a weak Man to give Credit to any thing that Mr.
Alexander Johnstone declares, tho he swear to it. But albeit the Court has
been a Sanctuary to him, all along since the Revolution, to cover him from his
Creditors; and Whitehall has been to him in the quality of a White-fryars; yet
it is hoped that no Place will long shelter him from the Punishments due to him
as a Suborner. Nor is this Trade of his of Suborning Witnesses to to swear to
Falsehoods, and to depose Perjuriously, an Employment with him of a late date,
seeing he set up the Practice of it many Years ago. So that whosoever will but
take the Pains to go to Doctors Commons, will find a large Catalogue registered
there of those he had Bribed to Swear to his Marriage with one Mr. Perrier's
Daughter, and to many Familiarities with her, which I shall not mention, of
which that Court after great Enquiry, and a Suit long depending, did not
believe one word to be true. Yea, the Subornations whereof he had been in that
Case guilty, were so numerous, notorious and gross, that they not only
determined it against him, but both then, and ever since whenever he is named
in presence of any who belong to that Society, they brand him with the
Character of the boldest and most Impudent Sub(...)r that ever commenced or
pursued a Suit in that Place. And the Perjurles he had been accessory unto,
were so many and apparent; and the Defamations he had fastened upon the young
Gentlewoman so scandalous and gross, that had he not withdrawn first for
Scotland, and then to Ireland, he had been prosecuted in the Courts at
Westminster, and brought to undergo an ignominious and corporal Punishment. It
is unwillingly, and with regret, that I do either call these Things to
remembrance, or publish them to the World; but when the Man is not satisfied in
the Enjoyment of a Credit which he does not deserve, but will upon a Reputation
that is only charitably connived at, set up to destroy innocent Persons upon
the Testimony of bribed and perjured Witnesses; it is then indispensably
incumbent upon such as know those Things, to strip him of his Mask and
Disguise, and to present him to the World in his natural Image, and expose him
to view in the best Light they can. Especially when he is growu up to that
Impudence, upon a Presumption of Merit by the many Services of this kind which
he has done the Government, as to tell Sir George Maxwell that he was to dye
as (...) Traitor, and that his Estate was offered to him; which, by the way, is
a much better Estate than ever was forfelted from him, and the rest of his
Family by his Father's Attainder. And that it may appear with what
Intemperance, Temerity and Malice, Mr. Secretary Johnstone has engaged
himself, if not in the Forgery, yet at least in the Support of this Sham Plot
upon the Credit (as I am willing to believe) of his Brother, I shall lay before
the Kingdom one Instance of it among many, and that a very late one; namely,
That the said Mr. Secretary being informed, or at least pretending to be so, by
that Suborned and Mercenary Fellow Seoton, how one Lieutenant Drumond, who
serves King William in one of the Regiments in Flanders, could be an Evidence
against Colonel Fountain, he not only writ to have the said Drumond sent
immediately over from thence hither; which King William (whom you Ministers
have drawn into the Belief of a Conspiracy against him) accordingly did, and
that under a Comm^^d of making so much haste to be here, that the Gentleman had
not so much time allowed him, as to fetch his Linen and Clothes from the Place
where they lay: But upon his arrival the said Secretary would have at first
wheedled, and at last endeavored to huff him to appear as an Evidence against
the forementioned Colonel Fountain. And tho Drumond averred to him upon the
Word of a Gentleman, that he was so far from understanding any thing whereof
the Colonel was accused, that he did not so much as know him, nor was ever in
his Company, to the best of his remembrance; yet the forenamed Secretary
continued not only to rail against Colonel Fountain as a heinous Traitor that
must dye, but both to in^inuate and affirm that Drumond must know a great deal
against him. Which so provoked the Gentleman upon the finding himself tempted
and importuned to murder an innocent Man, by a false and perjurious
Deposition; that he told the said Secretary, That as he neither could nor would
be an Evidence in that Matter, so the Secretary needed not be so earnest to
suborn and debauch him, seeing he might easily furnish himself with enough of
such Witnesses about the Town as he looked after for half a Guinea a Man. Which
as it declares how large and deep this Conspiracy is, of those that serve the
Government, against the Lives of gui^less Persons; so it both shows the hazard
that Colonel Fountain is in, upon no other foot save that of mere Malice; and
unfolds unto us the Methods taken and persued to draw in and muster Witnesses.
Nor is it improbable but that Drumond upon declining to forswear himself, to
destroy both an innocent Person, and one whom he does no ways know, may not
only have his Commission taken from him, but be refused the Payment of his
Arrears; whereas had he complied to do what was required of him, he might have
reckoned upon the being speedily preferred to a very considerable Command, and
that upon the score of the highest Merit that is now in Fashion. But can there
need more to supplant the Belief, and eternally to blast the Credit of the
present pretended Plot, than that Harry Baker and Alexander Johnston are the
Procurers and Managers of Witnesses for the support of it. And I have been the
rather obliged to give the Character of this Gentleman, because that as Mr.
Secretary Trenchard declares he knows very little more of this Plot, than what
Mr. Secretary Johnston conveyed unto him, either immediately by himself, or by
such Witnesses as he sent him, so it is not improbable but that Mr. Secretary
Johnston had the Intelligence of it from his Brother Alexander, and those whom
he handed to him; having first suborned them. So that this whole Conspiracy,
for which so many have been taken into Custody, and more have been looked
after, seems to have been first minted by Harry Baker, Alexander Johnston and
Hugh Speak, and afterward made current through the Kingdom, by the Credit which
the two Secretaries Johnston and Trenchard have stamped upon it. For that Noble
and very Honorable Person, who fills the Place and bears the Title of
English Secretary, in Conjunction with Trenchard, is a perfect Stranger to this
whole Plot; farther than as they have involved him in the Ignominious Drudgery
of pursuing it, by imperiously as well as craftily playing their Witnesses upon
him: And considering his great Sense and Honor, he cannot but resent the great
Affront and Indignity done him by Mr. Secretary Trenchard, in turning all the
Witnesses upon him to clamor Men out of their Lives, while he withdrew into
the Country to observe, at a distance, how the Mine should spring which he and
some others have been so long in digging and working at in Powis House. Or if
it should reverberate on those that gave Fire unto and stand near it, he might
be out of the reach of the Disaster, and have the pleasure of seeing the
Honorable Person, whom he left here covered with the Dirt and Dust which it
raises, if not buried under the Ruins of it. However this Trade of Suborning
Witnesses is become so common, (which it could not be were their not too much
countenance given unto it by those in Authority) that every pitiful Fellow that
has a Mind to ingratiate himself into Court-Favour, and to obtain a Pension,
dare Openly and with Boldness venture uponit. For it is not long since that two
Bailiffs took the Confidence to accost a Third, and to tempt him to come in as
an Evidence against Mr. Tildsley, and another Gentleman, and depose his having
heard them speak treasonable Words against their Queen, and about the Murder of
her: Tho the Person thus accosted (as he confessed to a Friend whom he
consulted about the Matter) never knew Mr. Tildsley nor (...)her Gentleman, and
much less heard them speak the Words, or any like unto them, which the two
Suborners would have had him to have sworn against them. Nor is it to be
questioned, but that those two Rascals, who endeavored to inveagle their
Companion to be a false Witness, will appear as Evidences both against the two
Gentlemen I have mentioned, and against all such as they shall be hounded at.
But tho Secretaries may take up and imprison Men, upon such Testimony, yet I
cannot apprehend (albeit I have a very slender Opinion of the Sense, Virtue and
Fortitude of many that are admitted upon Pannels) that any Jury will give the
least Faith or Credit to what such Villains shall have the Impudence to swear.
Yea this Practice of Subornation is grown so much into Fashion, and receives
such Encouragement, that even those who are upon the List, and have the Sallary
of standing Witnesses for the Government, are not contented with the single
Province of being Whitehall Evidences, and to perjure themselves, but they
interlope likewise upon Alexander Johnston and Harry Baker, and turn Suborners
of others to come in and forswear themselves; whereof we have a remarkable
Instance in Lunt, the much celebrated Witness concerning the present ^lot, in
his endeavoring to suborn those Gentlemen, whom Taffe had introduced into his
Company, For tho Mr. Bagshaw, of whom I made lately mention, declined meeting
with Lunt, from an Apprehension of the dangerous Consequences that might at^end
the having been in the Company of a Person of his Character, yet Mr. Bancks and
Mr. Beresford ventured to me^^ both Lunt and Taffe, at the Ship Alehouse, in
Butcher-Ro^, by Temple-^ar, on ^ryday the ^8th of September last, about Three
of the Clock in the Afternoon: At which Yime and Place, Lunt upon the
encouragement of Taffe, taking those two Gentlemen to be Persons very proper
for his Purpose, told them without much Ceremony or Compliment, that he wanted
some Gentlemen of ^eputation to support his Design, and that if they would be
serviceable unto him, they should be plentifully provided for, seeing that for
want of Men of Credi^, he was for^^d to maintain some s^^^d^lous Fellows to
keep his Plot on (...): After which having produced a Paper he called (...)
Narrative of his Plot, and caused (...) to ^ead it unto them, Lunt began to be
very frank, and to declare how zealous he was to perfect the Plot, relating
withal how dextrous he had hitherto been in the managing of it. Adding that as
Mr. Lee of Lime had a vast Estate, so his Business must be done; and that he
designed those two Gentlemen Mr. Bancks and Mr. Beresford to do a particular
Service in that matter. In brief, he attempted to suborn them to be Witnesses
in Relation to Commissions granted by the late King James, for raising Troop^
to subvert the present Government: Telling them that the Commissions must be
wrote very plain and legible, and that he would take care to have them signed
with King James's Hand, as he usually wrote it. All this is deposed upon Oath
by the two forementioned Gentlemen, and was not only showed and imparted to my
Lord Chief Justice Holt, but was likewise offered to be sworn before him. And
if it be true, that any of the Judges (as is commonly sald of some of them, and
fully known of my Lord Keeper) have both perused the Depositions against the
Gentlemen that are to be tried, and discoursed with the Witnesses, which I am
sure by Law they ought not to have done, b(...) have as well avoided all
Cognizance of the matte^, till it appear before them in Court, (...) all
talking with the Witnesses till they are produced at the Bar: I will say that
they might with as much Honor and Justice, yea, that they should in Duty have
been as ready antecedently to hear what can be said and sworn in Favor and
Behalf of the accused, and for invalidating the Testimonies of the Villains
that come in Witnesses against them, However, this that I have recounted being
insallibly true, it shows both how pretended Commissions from King James come
to be charged upon several Gentlemen now in Custody: And that there is no Man
in England can ^^y he is (...) if this Practice he not ^^eedily suppressed, and
all those who are either directly gu^^ty of it, or have the least (...)
thereunto, (...) (...) punished with the utmost Rigor that according to Law
can be inflicted upon them. Nor are these the only Persons whom Lunt has been
endeavoring to (...), but he ^ade (...) like attempt upon one who was of the
^umbe^ of those Persons carried to (...). (...), and importuned him under
promise of (...) Rewards, to swear that he had received Money of Mr. Walmesley
for the carrying on and promoting the Service of King James; and upon that
Persons answering that he had never seen Mr. Walmesley, the Miscreant had
nevertheless the Impudence to tempt and entice him to own what was delivered to
him the said Lunt, and another, and that then they Two would swear to it, and
excuse the Person whom they accosted from being an Evidence. Which the poor Man
likewise refusing, Lunt thereupon grew enraged, and threatened him both with
abridging the mean Commons that were allowed him in Prison, and with the
greatest Severities that could be inflicted in a Goal. And as if the execution
of all this to the full at Chester had not been Injustice and Barbarity enough,
they have haled the poor Man hither to Town, and thrown him with Two other
Persons more into Messengers hands, to be there wrought over and trained up for
Evidences; which that they may the more easily and better Effect, the Messenger
not only resuseth to admit any to come to them, but disowneth the having them
in Custody. Which serves farther to instruct us of the Mischiefs that attend
the Confinement of Prisoners to other Places than Legal Goals. And it would
seem that there are Privileges belonging to the Ministers of this Government,
that were never allowed to those of the former; namely, That as they may
without being made accountable press Men for Soldiers, when they will not of
their own accord list themselves; so they may torture Men into the becoming
Witnesses, when they can neither wheedle nor bribe them to it. For I do account
such a Confinement as I have recounted, and the Starving them through not allowing
them a Sixth part of what their Appetites crave, to be a torturing of them. Nor
do the Scotch Boots, which are the Disgrace of that Nation and the Scorn of
this, affect Men in so sensible Parts as the pinching them for Weeks and Months
in their Bellies does. Which will make me always dread the hearing some People
threaten to touch their Enemies in the most sensible part; and the rather, when
I find it executed upon such as they call so at home, instead of falling upon
those that are so abroad. And we may easily imagine how admirably qualified
some of your Messengers are for to rack and torture poor Men when they have
taken them in Custody, by the hostile and violent Methods which they practice,
and seem to be licensed to use, in their apprehending them. Of which I crave
leave to refresh. your Memory with one remarkable Example, whereof not having
had seasonable Intelligence. I could not insert it in its proper Place, as
otherwise I should; namely, How that Kitson breaking into a House in Scroops
Court near S. Andrew's Church, where some quiet People were peaceably assembled
to worship God, on the 30th of September last, and having seized several
without either producing or having any Warrant, and demanding the Key of Mr.
Grascom's Closet to rifle for Papers, which the said Mr. Grascom refusing to
deliver, unless he might see his Warrant, and know by what Authority he stood
empowered so to act; the forementioned Kitson, pointing to his Badge as his
sole and sufficient Warrant, pulled a Pistol out of his Pocket, and swore by
God that he would shoot Mr. Grascom (who is a Learned and Holy Minister) through
the Head, unless he immediately surrendered the Key of his Study. Hear O
Heavens! and be astonished O Earth! That England, under Pretense of having its
Rights and Liberties rescued and vindicated, should be reduced into this worse
than Turkish Bondage and Slavery. And that under One whom a deluded Nation
entertained as a Moses to redeem them out of a mere fancied Egypt, they should
be translated out of a Ca^aan, where only too much Safety, Ease and Plenty,
made them complain, and brought into an unpresidented and intolerable Thraldom.
As if those Things were again to be re-acted which made Tacitus say, Quantoque
majore libertatis imagine tegebantur, tanto eruptura ad intensius servitium;
That the great Pretense of the restoring us to Liberty, was only that with the
more Facility we might be made the greater Slaves. But it is worth enquiring,
Whether Self-Defence, in all the ways God and Nature have enabled us, be not in
such a Case, as that of Mr. Grascom's, both lawful and necessary? And whether I
ought not in Duty to God and my Country, as well as I may by the Law of the
Land, slab such a Fellow as Kitson who thus hastily assaults me? And for the
being resolved about it I do recommend all true Englishmen to (...) very
Eminent Divines, and as singular Casuists. Namely, to the Author of the
Measures of Obedience that lives at Salisbury, who has told us that when the
Laws of a Constitution are publicly violated, how we may have recourse to the
Laws of Nature, which put us upon a common Level with those that were
antecedently our Rulers, and give us Liberty to oppose them, and defend our
selves and our Government by Laws established: To the celebrated Inventor of
that needful Distinction of Swearing to this Government to hinder the growth of
Popery, and of not Swearing to it to prevent a Deluge of Atheism, who resideth
at Litchfield: And to that great Man who dwells on the other Side of the
River, whose Divinity in 88 stood in direct Contradiction to his Theology in
83; as appears by comparing his admirable Letter to the late Lord Russel with
his many Loyal and (...)ing S(...)s since the Revolution.

Nor shall I at present insist further upon your Suborners, being resolved to
keep something in reserve undiscovered till this Matter come to lie before a
Parliament; and shall therefore proceed to the charactering some other of your
Witnesses that have not been hitherto staged and detected in any Paper already
in Print. And had your self, and the rest of the Cabal a^ Pawis House, been so
prudent as to grow temperate in your Conduct upon the Advertisements published
in the Letter addressed to the Right Honorable My Lord Chief Justice Holt, you
had prevented my falling under a Necessity of exposing those that you seem to
have an Esteem for; and thereby of bringing both your Judgment, In(...)ty and
Honor into qu(...)n. And the (...) (...) I shall unvail and de(...) and a(...)
Nation the Diversion of viewing (...) (...) than the Grand J(...)y a^ Hi(...)
Hall, (...) Advantage o^ (...)ing (...) (...) a (...) of High, (...)son ag(...)
(...), is one B(...) or B(...) (...) (...) of whose (...) (...) (...) only give
a few Y(...) A(...) (...), w(...) (...) (...) wonder, that he (...) (...) (...)
(...) the T(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Astonishment (...) (...) (...) (...)
his rep(...) (...) (...) have the (...)ing Impudence (...) (...) as a Witness
(...) a Court of Judicature. For not to speak of his B^^king most, if not all,
the Persons in whose Houses he had the Favor to lodge, and running away by
stealth without giving them Notice, or paying what he had contracted for:
Seeing, whosoever has a desire to be satisfied in this, need only go and
enquire at Mr. Toor^s next Door to the Sun Tavern in the Strand; at Mr. Terry's
a Tailor in Holtford's Alley in Wildstreet; or at Mr. Salisbury's a Hosier near
Kingsgate in Holbourn: From all whose Houses he went away clandestinely,
without paying a Farthing of what he was indebted un^o them for the Rent of his
Chamber. I shall insist (...) a little more particularly on his being guilty of
a Crime of a higher Nature, and for which as the Law makes him obnoxious to
Corporal Punishment, so no Man, even not Mr. Aaron Smith, can have the Face,
after I have represented it, to judge him fit to be allowed for a Legal and
Credible Witness. In brief then, this Captain Brereton or Brewerton, being
entertained as a Lodger at one Mrs. Cottons, that lives in New-Court near
Holbourn-Bars, he not only inveigled a Servant Maid into such wicked and
unclean Commerce, that the Mistress detecting it turned them both ^ut of Doors;
but he was Accessory in a little time after to the robbing of the said Mrs.
Cotton of Fifty Guineas, (...) Gold Watch, and of several other Goods; or
rather of perpetrating the Fact himself, which is the more probable: For Search
being made after the forementioned Goods, upon the loss of them, they were
found in this Brereton or Brewerton's Chamber yea in his Pocket, at the Sign of
the Three Herrings in Red-Cross-sire^t. And the Fellow being sensible of his
Guilt, and knowing the Punishment he was liable unto, for so reproachful as
well as heinous a Crime, he fell upon his Knees and begged of the Gentlewoman
that she would not prosecute him, seeing his Reputation would be thereby
ruined; that is, as I suppose, he would be incapacitated to be a Witness, which
it is very probable he had then in prospect, as the last Shift and Trade to
subsist by. It were superfluous after this to tell you, how that upon
cl^ndestinely abandonning his Lodging once in France, he left a Trunk behind
him filled with Stones, hoping thereby to have imposed upon his Landlord, as if
he had not only left behind him above the Value of what he owed, but that he
intended to come again. But the Frenchman breaking open the Trunk sooner than
Brereton conceived he would, and finding what Treasure it was furnished with,
immediately pursued, took, and carried him back; and besides the treating him
with the Severity he deserved, he forced him to borrow Money, and to pay his
Debt, before he let him go. Nor need I assure you that he went under such an
infamous Character at St. G(...)ains, that when after his departure from
thence, he was seized and stopped at Lis^e, till some Account could be had of him
from King James's Ministers; who thereupon gave such a Representation of him to
those who had stopped and detained him, that he was upon the Receipt of it thrust
out of Lis^e, with the Drum beating after him, as a Mark of Disgrace. Yet this
is the credible Person upon whose Testimony principally a Bill of High Treason
was found at Hi^k's Hall the last Sessions against Cap^. William(...)n, and
upon whose Deposition he is to be tried (...) the Old Bail^y the next Sessions.
For the Question properly is not whether Capt. Williamson was in France, but
whether it Legally appears that he was there within the time expressed, and
limited by the Act? And whether this Brereton have the Qualifications required
by the Law to render him capable and fit to testify it? For according both to
Law, and all other Sciences, De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est
ratio, Things that app^er not are to be accounted of as if they were not (...)
all. And suffer me to add upon this Occasion, That I can never believe that the
Design of the Parliament was to make it Capital to go for F(...)e, when the
Errand thither might be both Lawful and Necessary. For that were to suppose the
Members of both Houses (or at least the Majority) to be in a Combination to
sacrifice the People, and Interest of England, to our Foreign and Co(...)erate
Neig(...): Seeing nothing is more certain than that the Su^jects both of the
Se(...) P(...) and of the Spanish N(...)s, have a dail (...)ercourse with
(...), by g(...)g and return(...)g; and that not only by Connivance, but by the
Authority of public (...) whenever they (...)e demanded. And f^r these that
D(...)n to go from hence (...) ^er upon any Treasonable Account, it were easy
to effect it, without the Governments being able to make it punishable, tho
they should come to know of their having been there. For it is only to acquaint
some of the French Privateers before hand, that you are to embark on such a
Vessel for R(...)rdam, or Ostend, and to desire them to intercept the Ship. But
this carrying with it an Injustice to others, which few of those s^il^d (...)
are capable of being guilty of, there is a Genteeler as well as more Innocent
way of going thither, and that is by your own Pass. And you may be sure more
have gone thither by the S(...) Pass. than ever went elandestinely. For as you
will not deny a Pass to the Hague, upon having so much Money for it; so it is
eas^ to obtain one from thence to Brussels, and from Brussels to Li^le, at less
charge than I can purchase one at Whitehall for going from London to Edenbrugh.

But to return to the giving an Account of some more of your Witnesses, and of
what Reputation they ought to be esteemed by a Court of Judicature, and a Jury.
In the pursu^t of this I shall therefore, in the next Place, give the World a
Representation of Mr. Slings^y, whom the Ministers have brought out of Ireland
to be a Witness against Mr. Crosby, and do extremely value themselves upon the
having one called a Gentleman, and of some Fortune in the World, to appear in
the Figure of an Evidence: But by that time I have presented him by another
handle than that of Birth, and Estate, by which the Ministers lead him forth,
and show him; I am much mistaken if they be not ashamed of sending for him upon
such an Account, and if he does not wish he had frayed where he was, and not
come hither upon so ignominious an Employ. And it extremely detracts from the
Credibility of (...)ever he deposes, that he comes over Hired and Bribed to do
it. For his telling Mr. (...), that one of the Lords Justices of (...) had
promised (...) should be provided for all his Life, in ca^e he (...) ^e a
Witness against Mr. Cros^y, a nount(...)h to ^o less, b^^h in Law and common
Sense, than that he (...) scanda^ously hired to be an Evidence. Nor is his an
unsuitable Employ ^o a Person who has in many Instar(...) discovered himself a
common Cheat. Yea, so natural is a Couzenage unto him, that he could not
forbear practicing it even upon those in whose Power he knew it was to crush
him. Witness his defrauding my Lord Renelaugh of Sixty Pounds, for which that
Lord treated him to his Face, in the Hearing of diverse Persons of Condition,
with no better Titles than those of Rogue and Rascal. And it is notoriously
known, that about the time of King James's withdrawing, he cheared the Regiment
(to which he stood then in the Relation of Agent) of several Hundred Pounds, as
is ready to be attested by several Officers, as well as private Sentinels, that
suffered by his Knavery. But that which brands him with indelible Infamy, and
ought to incapacitate him from being esteemed a Credible and Legal Witness, is,
his having fastened upon a Gentleman a Sham Bill of Fifty Pounds, and of which
he received Fifteen before the Cheat was detected. But the Couzenage, and
Falsification, being discovered, e're he had received the rest, he was arrested
and thrown into the Counter; from whence he got out upon Sham Bail, and so
having escaped the Punishment of one Crime, by perpetrating another, he fled
into Ireland, whither it was not worth the while, nor at that time easy to
pursue him. Neither can any thing be so Infamous, which this Man will not
commit; seeing in Contempt both of the Laws of Nature and Revelation, and in
Violation of the Duty and Affection of a Brother, he has thrown his Eldest
Brother into Prison in order to defraud him of an Estate. To which I crave
leave to add, That having been bred a Protestant, and continued so till of late
years, he then turned Papist; tho as he declared to several at that time, and
has often repeated it since, that he did it not upon any Conviction of Mind,
but merely to comply with the Desires, and to gratify the Importunity of his
Relations: Which speaks him to be a worse Man, than if he were an avowed and
downright Atheist. Because while the one denies that there is a God, he does
in effect renounce him, at the same time that he pretended to believe there is
one. For whosoever departs from a Religion that he Judges to be true, to
embrace one of the Truth whereof he has no Conviction upon his Mind, does no
less than both despise, and implicitly disclaim that God whom he owneth and
pretends to worship. Nor is such a Man's Oath to be more valued, or what he
declares upon it to be more credited, than one would rely upon the Oath of a
professed Atheist, or believe him that ridicules a Deity in what he swears. So
that leaving this Gentleman clothed with Infamy, and the Court covered with
Dishonor, in offering to use him in the Quality of a Witness; I shall advance
to the Representation of another of your Powis House Evidences.

And that shall be Lunt, whom I cannot overlook, without giving some additional
and farther account of him than what the World is already furnished with;
either in the Latter to my Lord Chief Justice Holt, which has been so often
mentioned, or in any former Paragraph of these Sheets. And it is a very shrewd
Presumption that he is Bribed (...) Suborned, in that he who a few years (...)
wrought as a day Labourer at Highgate, (...) cleansing the Ponds for Twelve
Pence a day, can now pull Sixty or Seventy Guineas at a time out of his Pocket,
as he lately did; and that for no other end than to publish his Vanity, and
show how well he is Stockt with Money out of the Exchequer. However as it
proclaims him a great Villain to be so well Furnished, and yet to suffer his
first Wise, (...) the two Children he has by her, to be ready to Starve in St.
Alban's street in St. I(...)s's Parish, and who would infallibly be Famished,
if the Parish did not keep and maintain one of them; so it declares what a
profitable Trade it is to swear Men perjuriously out of their Lives in favor
of the Government. Nor can any thing more detect the Villainy of the Rascal,
than that being asked by a poor Man for a Debt which he owed him, and which the
Creditor said he hoped he would pay him having gotten Plenty of Money; he
instead of that caused him to be apprehended as a Traitor: So that he is now a
close Prisoner in a Messengers, where none are allowed to speak with him, but
they who have him in Custody: And in the mean time, under this unmerciful and
illegal Restraint, all the Methods of Caress and Menace are used toward him to
gain him to be a Witness. Neither is that poor Man the only Person among his
Benefactors and Creditors whom he has thus unthankfully and villainously
rewarded: For Mr. Noel of Dover having in December 93, not only relieved him
and his Wife, at their Landing there from Flanders, in their passing through which
they said they had been robbed of 50 l. but having withal lent him 5 l. and
given him 20 s. gratis to enable him to defray his own and Wives Charges to
London; the Rog^e, in requital thereof, has accused the said N(...)l of High
Treason; and by swearing that he intended to murder King William, has caused
him to be turned out of a Place which he enjoyed under the Government, and to
be taken into Custody. Yea, the Miscreant having been recommended by the said
Mr. Noel to Mr. Shelton at Canterbury, and to Mr. Cross at Rochester, for their
affording him and his Wife Lodging and Entertainment in their traveling
hither, he borrowed of Mr. Shelton 50 s. and of Mr. Cross 20 s. and instead of
repaying them has sworn them both into the Plot. And whereas there was but one
Man in the World, namely, Mr. Whitfield, at the Knave of Diamonds near
Leicester Fields, that had taken Compassion upon him at all times under his
Poverty, and who at several Seasons had lent him to the Sum of 40 l. for which
he has his Bond; the ungrateful and barbarous Rascal has, in return for his
Money and manifold Kindnesses, given an Information of High Treason against him,
and caused him to be apprehended. But that which most signally discovers both
the Infamy of the Miscreant, and the Combination which some of the Ministers
and other Inferior Officers of the Government are confederated in for
destroying Innocent Men, is, That the Rogue standing indicted for Felony for
marrying a Second wife, while the First by whom he has two Children is still
alive, and for which being apprehended the 2d of this present October, by a
Legal and Bench-Warrant, granted under the Hands and Seals of Mr. Prideau^ and
Mr. Eyton, two Justices of Peace; Aaron Smith did so hector both my Lord Mayor
and the Recorder, by telling them what a necessary and useful Instrument this
Rascal was of the State, and how much they wanted him to support the Belief of
the Plot, and for the Conviction of those Prisoners that were to be tried for
High Treason; that those two Magistrates suffered themselves against all Law
and Justice to be huffed into a Compliance of admitting him to Bail. And
because none, who had any Reputation to Iose, could be found to be Sureties for
a Fellow that is perjuriously engaged in making a Plot, where all wife and
dise^rning Men (save those of the Sanguinary Club at Powis House) both know and
acknowledge that there is none. Aaron himself, who is sufficiently dipped in all
the parts of that Villainy, together with one C^lliford (who waits constantly
upon Aaron in the Quality of his Follower, and whom he employs to run into all
Companies to know what is said of him) became Bail for the Rascal. And because
the Title of Labourer or the Style of Victualles, by which Lunt designs himself
in a Judgment granted under his Hand and Seal, were too mean for one of King
W's Witnesses to go by, and too contemptible for a Person of Aaron's Degree and
Haughtiness to own under either of those Characters; he caused insert him into
the Bail Bond by the Title of Gentleman. And undoubtedly Mr. Smith who acts
as invested with a power to dispose of men's Lives at he pleases, may conser
Honors on whom he will. And having made a Gentleman of a Rogueish Peasant he
may in a little time challenge the creating whom he thinks meet Barons and
Earls: Seeing these are more indebted to Inclination and Humor for their
Creation, than any are or can be in their being made or rendered Gentlemen. For
as King James the First said pleasantly enough to a certain Person that had
desired to be made a Gentleman; Friend, I can make you a Knight, but it is not
in my Power to make you a Gentleman. But no Behavior of Aaron's can be thought
undecent, and much less insolent toward my Lord Mayor and the Recorder, if we
do but observe with what imperiousness at the end of a Sessions, after the
Judges are withdrawn, he not only dictates unto them the Fines they are to
impose upon such as are convicted of Misdemeanor; but how they must over and
above at his Pleasure and Back, bind such to their good Behavior as he thinks
^it. In a Word, there was never such packing of Juries, obstructing and
perverting of Justice, obliging Persons both to High and Supreamary Bail, as
since the Nation fell under the Grand Vistership of Mr. Aaron Smith. So that
under Burton and Graham we may be said (notwithstanding all our Complaints) to
have lived in Republica Platonis; whereas the best we can now pretend unto is
to be in faece Romuli. But in the mean time, where is Law, Government and
Justice, that a Criminal indicted of Felony, and taken into Custody, should be
thus rescued out of the Hands of Magistrates, and from under the power of the
Law, to be made use of as a Witness to destroy those that are Guiltless? And
this at such a Season when the Felon was to have come upon his own Trial, to
receive the Punishment due to his Crime: With this further Aggravation, that
this was done by the imperious Interposition of Aaron Smith, who being an
Officer under the Government, should for the Honor of K W. and Credit of the
Court, have not only permitted the Law to have its Course, but ought to have
assisted in preventing all Obstructions in the Execution of Justice. But Aaron
knows where his Interest lies, and that he gains more by the Tryai of
State-Prisoners, than by the Prosecution of Felons. For the heaping up of Money
justly or unjustly, is what Smith principally aims at; and not being contented
with Sixteen Thousand Pounds payable into the Treasury, which he has gotten
into his Hands, and not paid one Thousand of it (being resolved as it seems to
cheat the Government of the rest;) he endeavors to give all the Countenance he
can to Sham-Plots, as finding them so subservient to his Profit. And while he
grows Rich by other Men's being suspected and taken up as guilty of Treason
(every pretended Plot being worth unto him some Thousands of Pounds) he does
all that Craft and Malice can suggest, for the forging of Conspiracies, and the
pointing out such for Criminals whom his Covetousness makes him desirous to
have believed Traitors. And there is enough to be laid before the Parliament to
convince the most Incredulous and Obstinate, that he has been a wilful and
malicious Encourager of this Sham-Conspiracy, as he is known to be the
principal Countenancer of Suborners, and the chief Supporter of perjured
Witnesses. But what can be expected that is either Legal or Righteous, from a
Man that makes it his Business against the time of any Trials for State-Crimes,
to get the Undersheriff to return what Grand and Petty Juries he pleases: And
if his Blood-thirsty desires be not readily complied with, he complains to the
Upper-Sheriff, and never leaves swaggering and threatening till he gets it done.
And as if this were not enough toward the compassing his Sanguinary and Cruel
Ends, he frequently sends for the Lists of those that are to be returned upon
the Pannels, and strikes out and puts in whom he thinks meet. Yea, he is risen
to that height of unpresidented Barbarity, as to take upon him to dictate to
Grand Juries, when sworn and sitting, how they are to find the Bills that lie
before them, imposing upon them with an Insolence peculiar to himself, that
such and such both ought and must be made Examples. Nor will any Man wonder at
Aaron's haughty Impudence toward Juries, that observes how he treats the very
Judges in his Application unto them, as if he were in the Place and had the
Authority of Dictat^, and they only to be the Executioners of his Pleasure,
with as implicit a Faith as an Obedience. Nor does any one give that check to
his Imperiousness, Pride and Insolence, as the Attorney General does; who
finding of what Profit and Advantage it is to be as much as he can at the head
of all Treasonable Causes, and to keep Prosecutions of that nature under his
own Conduct, does therefore whatsoever lies in his Power to confine Aaron to a
shorter Tender than he is willing to be staked down unto: for which he talks of
Mr. Attorney with the utmost Contempt, detracting both from his Knowledge and
Integrity in all Companies. Which Misunderstanding I leave to be arbitrated
between themselves, as being best acquainted with each others Intellectual and
Moral Qualifications.

But why do I insist so much upon the unpresidented Illegalities of Aaron
Smith, when the very Secretaries of State themselves, without regard to Law,
Honor, Justice or Humanity, cause seize and apprehend both Men and Women, for
no other Offense alleged against them, but that they disc^ver what they know of
the Infamy of the Witnesses, and take the Methods which the Laws have provided
and chalked forth for bringing them to an accountableness for their Crimes. And
as the like was never practiced under any of those Reigns of which we did most
complain, and as it appears since very unjustly; so it is worthy of our
Observation, that when a Pack of Scandalous Rascals had combined in the Year
1681, to involve a great many Protestants in a Conspiracy of seizing King
Charles, and for altering the Government, yet no one was molested either for
detecting the Forgery of that Plot, or for laying open and exposing the Crimes,
Villainies and Perjuries of those who were then styled the King's Evidences.
Yea, when three several Discourses, all of them bearing the Title of No
Protestant Plot, were printed and published in Vindication of the Innocence of
those that were suspected, as well as of those that were apprehended and
imprisoned, and for detecting the Scandalousness and Legal Improbity of the
Evidences, and withal the Picquancy which the Author of those Discourses had
either Spirit or Language to season them with; yet they were not only read by
every Man with Safety, but openly sold by most Stationers about London, without
Animadversion or Control. Nor can any Age parallel such a Commitment, or
furnish us with a Warrant of the Tenor of that issued out by the present
Secretaries upon this occasion; whereof I shall subjoin a Copy, that this
Generation may see their Misery, and the next laugh at our Folly. Namely
(afterward of course in all Warrants) That they should apprehend and bring
before them the Persons of -- -- together with their Papers, for conspiring and
endeavoring to suborn Witnesses against the Lives and Credit of several
witnesses for their Majesty's, against Persons charged with High Treason, etc.
Which looks like a summoning all the Malefactors in the several Goals of the
Kingdom, to come in and list themselves Witnesses for the Government, with
assurance not only of Protections and Rewards, but that they shall have the
Satisfaction and Pleasure to see those imprisoned and punished, that shall dare
to prosecute them for their Crimes, tho they should be Murders and Burglaries
as well as Felonies. Were not the matter before me too open to be exposed, as
well as it is tempting to render me severe beyond my Temper and Inclinations, I
would add more upon this Theme. But tho nothing can be rude, and much less
picquant enough against those that have had the Indiscretion, if not the Malice
to issue out a Warrant of this Nature, yet I will so far both retain my
Passions, and regulate my Heat, as only calmly to expostulate the matter in one
Word: Is the rescuing our Laws, and the vindicating our Liberties, which were
the Pretenses for the Prince of Orange's Descent into England, and the great
Motives to the late Revolution, issued in this? That we have neither Laws nor
Liberties left us, but that we must stand with our Mouths shut, and our Hands
bound, till our Lives be destroyed and our Estates forfeited, upon the
Perjuries of the most Notorious as well as Heinous Villains that that ever the
Earth bare. And let me tell you, That we think it much more eligible, that you
should command your Dutch Dragoons to cut our Throats (if they can) than that a
Design should be carried on, and thus countenanced, by Authority of murdering
us by Forms of Law. For as in the one Case, we should be sure to sell our Lives
e're we lost them, and should we miscarry in our own defense, would hope to dye
not only pitied, but expect to have our Deaths revenged; whereas in the other,
we fall with Disgrace; and there are few have the Honor, Zeal and Generosity,
to resent the Wrong and Injustice that are done us. Yet it may be that when
proximus ardet Utalegon, every Man will be alarmed; and that the Methods which
render quilibet homo reus, may in a little time make omnis homo miles. And as I
am very well assured, That by the Course you take to destroy some, all Men are
threatened; so I do not know, but that the common hazard, may run the Nation
upon a Defense as universal as the Danger is.

But I return to a Representation of some more of your Witnesses; and he whom I
shall next unmask is Wilson, who was formerly a Chamberlain at the Bear Inn in
Smithfield, but who I do suppose is by this time commenced Gentleman, through the
Grace and Favor of Aaron Smith, who takes upon him to be the Fountain of
Honors. But this Fellow Wilson having within these Two years been tried and
convicted of Felony before Mr. Baron Turton for stealing Four Bullocks, and
having thereupon been sentenced to be burnt in the hand, which was accordingly
executed: I shall need to say no more to render him Infamous to all the sober
and impartial part of Mankind. Only I am sorry, Sir, that that you, and the
rest of the Powis-house Cabal, should make it your Business so effectually to
disgrace the Government whereof you are Ministers, as you apparently do in
using, encouraging, and maintaining such a Rascal for a Witness, to destroy
those whose Persons you hate, and whose Estates you covet. And as you cannot be
ignorant of what I have now related concerning him; so you might easily inform
your selves, if you preserved any respect to Justice, that at those Seasons
which Wilson swears he was in Lancashire, and upon the treasonable Secrets of
those Gentlemen against whom he has deposed, that he was at those times in
Lo(...)on In a very mean and servile Employ. But I will say no more of him,
seeing if what I have reported does not render him infamous nothing will. I
shall therefore proceed to the Representation of a young Sprig of an Evideace,
but who being placed for a few years under the Cultivation of Harry Baker may
grow up into an unquestionable Witness for the State; if Treachery and Forgery
can make him so. His Name that it may not be forgotten, when you, and Ministers
of your Complexion, have occasion to make use of him, is, Stephen Chazall; who
having been formerly Servant to Mr. Berionde, and dismissed by him about Two
years ago for Fraud and Infidellty, has been ever since endeavoring to
qualify himself to be an Evidence: For soon after he was discharged from his
Masters' Service, he made his first Essay of Roguery in breaking open a Trunk
at the Black Swan Tavern in Bartholomew-Lane, where being taken in the Fact of
robbing it, he had been prosecuted by the People of the House for Felony, if
Mr. Berionde had not by earnest Intercession prevailed with them to overlook
the Crime, and to let him alone: But the Graceless Youth, instead of being
thankful to Mr. (...)ionde for saving him from the Pillory. or the Carts Tail,
did soon after forge his Hand to two Notes upon Goldsmiths, the one upon Mr.
Richard Pierson for 25 l. the other upon Mr. ^alg^ave for 50 l. which by good
Fortune, no^ being immediately paid, the Forgery came to be detected e're he
could receive the Money. Yet instead of being discouraged by the repeated
Discoveries of his Villainles, from attempting the like, he grew more
emboldened to proceed in his Criminal Practices; and thereupon he not only
again counterfeited Mr. ^erionde's hand to Two other Notes, one to Mr. Poiterme
at the George in Pall Mall, and the other to Mr. Pawlet at the ^^ew Posts in
the Hay market, and both of them for Wine; but he likewise forged Mr.
L'Espine's hand to a Note to Mr. Bancks the Draper for Cloth: Which Bills and
Notes tho preserved, and ready to be produced, yet through the too much Compassion
and Humanity of those whom he would have cheared and defrauded, he escaped
being prosecuted, and had only a Reprimand given him, seconded with good
Counsel and Advice. But according to the Proverb, Save a Rogue from the
Gallows, and he will cut your Throat; so this young Villain, advanced from
Forgery in order to rob and defraud them, to Perjury in order to murder and
destroy them. For hearing how tenderly those were cherished, and how
ple^tifully they were maintained, that had set up to be Witnesses in reference
to a Sham Plot, he resolved to try whether he could not raise a Fortune, or at
least gain a Subsistence by coining Falsehoods, and deposing them upon Oath for
Truths, as well as your Breretons and Lunts have done. In order whereunto he
gave an Information of High Treason upon Oath against Mr. B(...)d, Mr. De
Hersee, and Mr. Sentiman; on which they were all Three taken up, had their
Papers and Books seized, and were committed Prisoners to a Messenger's. Nor
will the Secretaries want business (how honorable let them and the World
judge;) nor quiet and peaceable People trouble, so long as Subornations are
countenanced, and Perjuries rewarded. For who is there that Lunt (to mention
one in the room of all) will not swear against, rather than b^ d^graded from a
Gentleman such as (...) (...) has made him, to be a Victu^ller at (...), or a
Labourer at Highgate; or to be reduced from swaggering with Sixty or Seventy
Guineas in his Pocket, to wo^k servile labor for 1 s. a day, as he was
formerly accustomed to do.

But being wearied as well as ashamed in sweeping Kennels, and in ^aking thus
long in Dungh(...), I shall therefore discharge my self from this Drudgery,
after I have given an Account of one celebrated Witness more, whom you, Sir,
have taken into your special Care, Favor, and Protection, and are indebted to
N^wgate for him. The Person whom I mean, is, your Friend and Darling, William
A^^lock; who lived heretofore with Dr. Oats, that was of all Mankind the
fittest to instruct him in the Forging of Plots, and how to support the Belief
of them with unparalleled Impudence and Perjuries. Now the Dr. having having no
farther occasion for this Ashlock, since he got a Female Bedfellow, the Blade
became Servant to one Mr. Freeman, a Barber, in Throgmorton-street near the
Royal Exchange: And having brought several good Qualities along with him from
the Drs. the first Proof he gave of the Improvement he had made by the Example
and Doctrine of his old Master, was to rob Freeman in Hair and Money to the
Value of about 30 l. And tho the Fact was clandestinely committed, yet knowing
where A^^lock had been formerly Entertained and Disciplined, he had a Suspicion
that he must be the Thief that had robbed him: And therefore causing him to be
apprehended, and carried before a Justice of the Peace, some of the Money
(which his Master could distinguish from all other) was found about him, and
the Fellow thereupon committed by the Justice to Newgate, a little before
Whitsunday last: Where he had not lain long, e're he gave a new Testimony where
he had been Educated, and that he had been a very teachable Scholar under so
expert and famous a Tutor. So that he took upon him to discover a Plot, whereof
he could not miss the making this the chief part, namely, That there was a
Design to kill Her whom they call the Queen. For the Burden of the Doctor's
Discovery heretofore being a Conspiracy to Murder King Charles, he would Copy
his Master's Draught as near as he could, with the single change of a Princess
to be assassinated, instead of a Prince. And to tread as much as possible in
the Steps of the first grand Architect of Forged Conspiracies, having coined
and framed a Plot in his Head, he in the next place wrote a Narrative of it,
and took care to have it sent to my Lord Mayor, Sir William Ashurst. Which he
not being so forward to give credit unto as Ashlock expected, and who having
sucked in a liberal Share of the Insolence and Impudence of the Doctor, and
being willing it should appear how well he had profited under him, he sent to
my Lord Mayor to know what he had done with his Discovery and Narrative; which
my Lord being allarmed at, as foreseeing the Consequences that might ensue upon
it, he returned it unto him with a command, That he should attest before
Witnesses what he had writ, or else that his Lordship would not farther meddle
with it. And that being done by the Rascal with all readiness; my Lord, to
deliver himself both from the trouble and reproach of it, caused conveigh and
deliver it to Mr Secretary Trenchard, whom I take to be you, Sir. Nor did you
think it enough to receive it (as may be your Place did oblige you) but you had
the Indiscretion to entertain it with a great deal of Fondness, and to say, he
was a Person might do you a great deal of Service. And as a Testimony both of
your Esteem of the Fellow, for the good Qualities I have mentioned, and of your
being engaged in a Design of murdering Men by the worst and most infamous
Means and Instruments imaginable, you gave Order that he should not be
prosecuted the Sessions following for his Felony. For to obstruct Justice, and
to pervert it, are the usual Methods with you of Administering your Office. But
Mr. Freeman having upon that Disappointment consulted with a Friend what he
should do, being very desirous to recover his Money, he was adviced to
prosecute the Rascal the next Sessions that should ensue, and to complain in
Court if the Law were not allowed its free course. Upon which, Sir, you began
to think, That you should make a cheap Purchase of a Witness at the Price of 30
l. and a w^ekly Allowance ever since; and therefore you took care to have
Freeman paid half his Money before that Sessions, and the other half within a
little time after it. Nor can it be but from a malicious Design, that tho this
Fellow has not hitherto been prosecuted, nor likely to be by Freeman, yet you
keep him still in Newgate. However in this, as in other Things, you do but
dance in a Net; seeing we plainly discern you, notwithstanding your Cover. In
brief, he is detained there not only as a Spy, but to acquire some umbrage of
Credibility in what he is to be brought forth to swear against such there, as
you have a mind to destroy. For tho he be admitted into Conversation with none
of the Prisoners of State; yet you hope that his walking in the Press-yard
among them, may give some Reputation to what he shall perjuriously Depose. And
that you may supply that defect of Evidence you labored under when you sent
several Gentlemen thither into Custody, by having one ready to swear that they
are become guilty of Treason since they were in hold. Nor can I compare this
Discovery of Ashlock's, after he was in Newgate in danger of being hanged, to
any thing more properly than to the Detection which Whitney pretended to make
of a Conspiracy for murdering King William; in hopes, after all his Crimes,
and the Sentence of Death which he lay under, to have thereby escaped the
Gallows. And I tremble to think how many, and of what Quality, that Fellow
offered to depose against; and with what Leachery his Information was
entertained, till my Lord Chief Justice Holt, from a Horror of the Villainy he
saw projected by Whitney, and cherished by others, interposed with the Zeal,
Justice and Courage, that are natural to him, and got him hanged. And thanks be
to God, that how ill natured so ever some of them were, who then filled the
chief Places of the Ministry, yet we knew nothing at that time of a Powis-house
Juncto, nor of a Cabal instituted to form Treasons, and who sit brooding to
shed innocent Blood. But surely we might have expected, that after the ignominy
which the Government fell under, for hearkening so far as they did to Whitney
about Discovery of a Plot, we should not have heard of another Detection of a
Conspiracy from Criminals and Malefactors in Newgate; but some Men when they
cannot flectere Superos, they will movere Acheronta; and apply to Hell for
support, when they despair, and that very justly, of the farther favor of
Heaven.

And Goals being the properest Places to yield agreeable Tools to the
Exigencies of the Government, and most fertile of those of a Virtue and Credit
proportionable to the good Qualities of such as need and employ them; and all
the Prisons of England not furnishing Rogues enough of a Character becoming
Royal Evidences, the Goals of other Nations have been searched and ransacked in
order to the obtaining a Supply of Witnesses, fit to pass muster against
Jacobites at the Old Baily, and to he credited by London Juries. Of which I
shall recount one Remarkable Instance; namely, That one Bateman, and his Wife,
having perpetrated Sac^i^ege, and Theft, by robbing a Church in Flanders, and
being thereupon apprehended and committed to Prison, in order to be boiled to
death according to the demerit of their Crime, they were rescued thence, and
transformed from being the worst of Criminals there, to appear in the Quality,
and make the Figure of good and legal Witnesses here. For these two Miscreants
being sensible, that there was no way of escape for them, but by the
Intercession of King William, and knowing how to recommend themselves to his
favor, and to merit a Share in all the Interest he had in the Duke of Bavaria,
took care to get him informed, what mighty Discoveries they were able and ready
to make of a Plot here in England against his Person and Government; whereupon
he immediately interposed with the Elector, for their Pardon; and ordered their
being defrayed and conveyed hither, to pass as Witnesses against the Lives of
those, whom Aaron Smith, and others, should think fit to mark out to be
murdered. And being consigned over to you, Sir, it is known with what fondness
you received them, and how you committed them to Cook the Messenger, to be
preserved fo^^hcoming as Royal Evidences upon all Occasions; and in the Interim
to be treated gently, and entertained with Civility and Friendship. But the
Wretches having compassed their End, thought fit to frustrate and disappoint
you and Aaron of yours. For finding an Opportunity of robbing Cook, and his
Wife, of Money and Goods to a considerable Value, they made their Escape, to
the Sorrow and Grief of some of you Ministers, that reckoned upon mighty
Services from them.

So that having dispatched all that I intend at present upon this Subject,
instead of a Compliment before we do now part, I will ^ay before you Three
short Remarks, and all of them suggested to me by Tacitus; for to a Statesman,
as you pretend to be, I will quote no other Author. The first is in Reference
to King William who does entrust and employ you, and who has thereby given
matter of great Suspicion to the Kingdom, of his being of the Humor and Genius
both of a certain Emperor, and of one that was for a long time his chief
Favorite. For as the Emperor in choosing his Ministers, and principal Officers
of all Kinds, was careful, and made it the Masterpiece of his Politics, never
to prefer Men of the most Virtue and Zeal for the Liberties of their Country:
Quia ex optimis peri^^l^m metueba^; Because he apprehended such would (...) him
in his arbitrary Designs, and not be the ready Tools of his Craft and Tyranny:
So his Favorite was endowed even so long ago with those modern Qualities, That
ejus voluntas nunquam nisi scelere quaerebatur; No Man could acquire his Favor
and Confidence but by being Villainous. And let me tell you, Sir, That as the
Grand Seignior has no better Instruments of his Dispoticalness, than a
Renegado Christian turned Turk: So the fittest Tools a Prince can use that
would enslave England and Scotland, are such of the Whigs as have neither
Honor nor Probity. And that the Whig Faction is not barren in yielding enough
of those Characters for all kind of Employs, is evident beyond Contradiction by
the Practices of most of that Denomination, who have been advanced to Places
since the Revolution. And among whom should any Prince that would be a Sultan
look for M^stys and Bashaws, but among those where Oliver Cromwell found his
C^aplains and Major Generals. The Second is in order to instruct the People of
England (if they have not outlived their Wits, as well as their Loyalty and
Estates) how to form a Character of your self, out of two Passages of the same
Author; whereof the one is, That there were some, Qui gaudebant caedibus,
tanquam s^met absolverent; Who took Pleasure in the Destruction and Murder of
others, that they might thereby appear Loyal, which in truth they w(...) not.
For when I call to mind the Aspersions which heretofore you used to throw upon
the Prince of Orange in relation to the Murder of the De Wits; I can hardly
forbear thinking, but that in order to your promoting a Republican Design, and
the changing the Monarchy into a Commonwealth, you have concurred with others,
that were always known unfriendly to Kingship, in the contriving and persuing
this Plot against the Lives of so many innocent Men in England, that you may
the better infect the Minds of the People of these Nation, with an Opinion and
Belief of the Prince's Guilt in the Assassination of those Dutch Gentlemen. And
I do assure you, That the many Sham Plots since the Revolution for murdering
even by Forms of Law those that are guiltless, do not only leave very undecent
Impressions upon the Spirits of all that give themselves leave to think, in
relation to the forementioned Massacre perpetrated at the Hague, but awaken
strange Jealousies in them in reference to every Man's Safety in Britain that
will not come into the Politics of the Court. And when I reflect upon the
barbarous Design of attempting to have procured not only all the Papists, but
all those Protestants who were most remarkable, and steady in their Loyalty to
the King, to have been massacred by the Mob, An. 1688, upon spreading and
diffusing through the whole Nation in one Night, how the I ish were burning Houses
and cutting Throats in all Quarte^s and Places of the Kingdom; I cannot avoid
thinking, but that those Persons who were capable of being accessory to so from
less a Lie, and of giving countenance to a Contrivance that might have cost the
Lives of so many Thousand Innocents, will be always ready and disposed to
authorize, as well as encourage, either private and personal Assassinations, or
more general and public Murders, by Forms of Law, whenever they find the
one or the other subservient to their Interest. Nor am I surprised to find the
brainless and unthinking Universality of the Kingdom, disposed to believe and
swallow all that has been lately noised of a Plot against the Government; when
I consider how forward they were to receive that hellish, impudent, and
self-contradictious Lie, of a few disarmed, disbanded, frightened, and
intimidated Irish, being firing and murdering in all Places. And the barbarous
Massacre committed at Glen^o, in the murdering a whole Clan of Scotch
Highlanders, without regard to Age or Sex, in one Night, An. 1691, except a
very few, to whom the Darkness of the Night, the Deepness of the Snow, and the
Tempestuousness of the Weather, afforded means of escaping, the being brutally
as well as inhumanely Slaughtered; and this perpe^^ated not only upon naked and
unarmed Men, but upon such as had both taken the Protection of the Government,
and with whom their bloody Murderers had been conversing as Friends, and
entertained by those poor Souls, void of Fear and Jealousy, with all the
Frankness and Plenty that the kindest Guests could expect. I say, this
barbarous Massacre shows what some Persons are capable of commanding, (...)
well as of countenancing; and what others who serve this Government are ready,
and have the Villainy to execute. For as I have seen an authentic Copy of the
Orders under a great Man's hand, requiring it to be done; so I have heard those
that perpetrated the bloody Crime, justify the doing of it; upon their having
the command of their Master for it, whom they declared themselves resolved in
all Things to obey, without respect to Religion, Law, Justice, Honor or
Humanity. But I advance to the other Passage afforded me by Tacitus, for the
framing of your Character, which is this, That Reperies qui ob similitudinem
morum aliena facta sibi objectari putent, etiam gloria and virtus intensos
habent, ut nimis ex propinquo diversa arguens: There are some who having been
often Traitors themselves, do therefore think that they can pay an Allegiance
to none, unto whom such as have been of a different Party from them are not
Disloyal; and that when they can find nothing else to ^ate Men for, they abhor
them for their Virtue, Honor and Probity, as reckoning their own Crimes
detected and exposed by the Laudible Qualities which others are possessed of.
And as I am, my self, obliged to the Author I have quoted, for sending me his
Pensil and Colors to draw your Picture, tho in little, yet so much to the
Life; so I heartly wish it may serve to represent your Interior longer to
Posterity, than any Piece painted by the best Master, can your External
Lineaments and Figure. There is yet a Third Remark suggeste to me by Tacitus,
which I convey to you by way of Advice, if you be capable of taking it; which
is, That Levi post admissum sc^lus gratia, dein graviore odio, quia malorum
facinorum. Ministri quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Tho for a while you may be
in Favor, for involving Innocent Men under the Guilt of a Plot, yet you will
i^ a little time be the more detested, even by (...) whom you have been
endeavoring to serv^; it being natural to Princes to esteem themselves (...)
reproached, whenever they look upon those (...) either in Compliance with
their Secret Des^^es, (...) in Obedience to their Public Commands, have (...)
their Instruments and Tools in Criminal and Villainous Things. To which I will
subjoin (...) Word more of the same Author, speaking of Tiberius, That tho
Scelerum Ministros (...) ab aliis nolebat, ita plerumque satiatus, and (...) in
eandem operam recentibus, veter^s and (...) ad^^ixit.

I kiss your Hand, and am.

October the 9th, 1694. SIR, The most Faithful of all your Serv^nts, As being
as much above Flattering as Fearing of you. A. B.


