R. Fergusson's APOLOGY, For his Transactions these last Ten Years, both in
England and Foreign Parts.
SINCE through Prejudice, Misapprehension, or other Weakness (sometimes or
other the Fate of all Mankind, I have incurred the Censure of many; it is but
reason I should let them know, that my more Enlightened Understanding has
sufficiently convinced me of my overhasty and prejudicial censure of the
Discipline of the Church of England, as it stands now by Law Established; and
since of late by many worthy Champions for the Protestant Religion, the Church
of England has been sufficiently vindicated from the least Aspersion, her
malicious Adversaries the Romanists, especially the Priests, could against her
Reputation suggest: So I my ^elf (for some time past) have not to my poor
Ability been wanting in my care and endeavors to support Her Honor and
Credit, and free Her from the least Imputation of ill whatsoever: And though my
Misfor^une meeting with an unhappy Juncture of time, may have rendered me
Obnoxious to the Censure even of some good men; yet since the Effects of those
Designs which England has by sad Experience seen levelled against even the
foundation of Protestant Interest, have been both Public and Answerable to the
Conjectures of every wise man, that at that time took any Obervation of them; I
have no reason to Despair now at last of Reconciling my Self again to their
good Opinion, and truly, though I am sufficiently satisfied of my Error (or my
Crime) in adhering to a Party, or Person (whose Title to the Office he then
took upon him was every way Questionable) yet they that will without prejudice
consider the great Dangers at that time threatening the Protestant Churches and
State of this Kingdom, will I believe, be easily induced to lay aside all
Animosities conceived against me, and conclude, that I rather mistook the
manner and methood of Curing, than that I was any ways Ignorant of the
malignity of the Distemper; however, His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange
has already dissipated all our Fears as to this Point, who as he seems by a
peculiar Providence: to have been marked out for the Work he has now
Undertaken, so besides the Justice of his Claim to the Protection of our
Religion and Laws, has by all the Actions of his Life, demonstrated that Pity
and Piety, Religion and Justice, more than any other Consideration whatsoever,
has prompted him to this glorious Undertaking: and though the Glory of the best
and greatest Action in the World, like the Sun, may meet with some cloudy
Obstruction and Interpretation, in the Hearts of some few prejudiced, I will
not say ignorant men, yet does the general Joy that has, and yet fill the
Hearts of the Nobility, and Commons of these Kingdoms, does evidently
demonstrate, that all his Royal Highnesses proceedings, before, and since his
Arrival, tend to no other thing, nor the least point deviate from fulfilling
the utmost expectation and desires of this Nation: We are not now (having by
woeful Experience, bought our Knowledge) ignorant of the crafty Divices, and
Arts of the Romish Priests, to divide and disturb the Hearts of the People of
England; by insinuating and suggesting to them his Royal Highnesses
inclination, to alter or restrain any part of the Service of the Church of
England, as by Law Established; but as the Objection to any that have the
Honor, to know the Prince is frivolous and groundless; so a very little time
will repose these false Dreamers, to the unavoidable necessity of being found
in a Lie: and though it has been the Opinion of many pious and zealous
Assertors of the Interest of the Church of England, as it now stands, Establish
that with all submission, some Regulations in the the Divine Service, might be
offered for the better Accommodating and Uniting some small differences which
by the malicious Fomentations of our common Adversaries have proved fatal to
this Nation. Yet it has ever been his Royal Highnesses Resolution, to leave
them the open Consideration, and final Determination of a Free Parliament; it is
rather likely than impossible, that this Innocent, though Hearts Vindication of
my Self; (for he must be over grown with prejudice that can misdoubt the rest)
may meet with a reception very unsuitable to the design it is writ with, for
such is our vicious Nature, that we much rather strive to lash past
miscarriages, than encourage good Resolutions; and as I can appeal to the
Natural, and consequently necessary infirmities of all which Nature, for
Favor, if not Pardon for my past Errors; so my Experience of the Fatigue and
Vanity of all Worldly business, with the assistance of God, which I heartily
pray for; has reduced me to fix my Resolution of setting my self apart, wholly
for the Service of God, before whose Alter I shall by his Grace to endeavor to
present my self an Holy, Pure, and Unspottted Sacrifice for ever.

London, Printed for John Cox, And Reprinted in Edinburgh, 1689.


