THE Design of Enslaving ENGLAND DISCOVERED,

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE Design of Enslaving ENGLAND DISCOVERED In the Encroachments upon the
Powers and Privileges of Parliament, by K. Charles II. BEING A New corrected
Impression of that Excellent Piece, ENTITLED, A Just and Modest VINDICATION of
the PROCEEDINGS OF THE Two Last Parliaments OF King CHARLES the Second.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

A Just and Modest Vindication of the Proceedings of the two last PARLIAMENTS
of K. CHARLES the Second.
THE Amazement which seized every good Man upon the unlook'd-for Dissolution of
two Parliaments, within three Months, was not greater than at the sight of a
Declaration pretending to justify, and give Reasons for such extraordinary
Proceedings.

It is not to be denied, but that our Kings have in a great measure been
entrusted by the Kingdom with the appointment of the Times of Parliaments
Sitting, and declaring their Dissolutions. But lest through defect of Age,
Experience, or Understanding, they should at any time forget, or mistake our
Constitution; or by Passion, private Interest, or the Influence of ill
Counselors, be so far misled as not to Assemble Parliaments when the Public
Affairs require it; or to declare them Dissolved, before the Ends of their
Meeting were accomplished: The Wisdom of our Ancestors has provided, 4 Edw. 3.
c. 14.36 Ed. 3. c. 10. See the Parliament Roll, 2 Ric. 2. number. 28. See the
Antiq. modo tenend. Parliament.
by diverse Statutes, both for the holding Parliaments annually, and oftener if
need be; and that they should not be Prorogued or Dissolved till all the
Petitions and Bills before them were answered and redressed.

The Constitution had been equally imperfect and destructive of it self, had it
been left to the Will and Choice of the Prince whether he would ever summon a
Parliament, or put into his Power to dismiss them Arbitrarily at his pleasure.

That Parliaments should be called, and sit, according to the Laws, is secured
to us by the same Sacred Tie, by which the King at his Coronation obliges
himself, to let his Judges sit to distribute Justice every Term, and to
preserve inviolably all other Rights and Liberties of his Subjects. Therefore
abruptly to Dissolve Parliaments at such a Time, when nothing but the
Legislative Power, and the united Wisdom of the Kingdom could relieve us from
our Just Fears, or secure us from our certain Dangers, is very unsuitable to
the great Trust reposed in the Prince, and seems to express but little of tha
tffection which we will always hope his Majesty bears toward his People and
the Protestant Religion.

But it is not only of the Disolution it self that we complain; the manner of
doing it, is unwarranted by the Precedents of former Times, and full of
dangerous Consequents. We are taught by the Writ of Summons, that Parliaments
are never called without the Advice of the Council; and the Usage of all Ages
has been never to send them away without the same Advice. To forsake this safe
Method, is to expose the King personally to the Reflections and Censures of the
whole Nation for so ungrateful an Action.

Our Laws have taken care to make the King always dear to his People, and to
preserve his Person Sacred in their Esteem, by wisely preventing him from
appearing as Author of any thing which may be unacceptable to them. It Is
therefore that he does not Execute any considerable Act of Regal Power, till it
be first debated and resolved in Council, because then it is the Counselors
must answer for the Advice they give, and are punishable for such Orders as are
Irregular and Illegal.

Nor can his Ministers justify any unlawful Action under the color of the
King's Commands, since all his Commands that are contrary to Law, are void;
(which is the true Reason of that well-known Maxim, That the King can do no
Wrong). A Maxim just in it self, and alike safe for the Prince, and for the
Subject, there being nothing more absurd, than that a Favorite should excuse
his enormous Actings by a pretended Command, which we may reasonably suppose he
first procured to be laid upon himself: But we know not whom to charge with
Advising this last Dissolution: It was a Work of Darkness; and if we are not
misinformed, the Privy Council was as much surpised at it as the Nation.

Nor will a future Parliament be able to charge any Body, as the Author or
Adviser of the late printed Paper, which bears the Title of His Majesty's
Declaration, though every good Subject ought to be careful how he calls it so.
For his Majesty never speaks to his People as a King, but either personally in
his Parliament, or at other times under his Seal, for which the Chancellor, or
other Officers are responsible, if what passes them be not warranted by Law.
Nor can the Direction of the Privy Council, enforce any thing upon the People,
unless that Royal and Legal Stamp gives it an Authority. But this Declaration
comes abroad without any such Sanction, and there is no other Ground to ascribe
it to his Majesty, than the uncertain Credit of the Printer, whom we will
easily suspect of an Imposture, rather than think the King would deviate from
the approved course of his Illustrious Ancestors, to pursue a New and
Unsuccesful Method.

The first Declaration of this sort which I ever met with, being that which was
published in the Year 1628; which was so far from answering the Ends of its
coming out, that it filled the whole Kingdom with Jealousies, and was one of
the first sad Causes of the ensuing unhappy War.

The Truth is, Declarations to justify what Princes do, must always be either
needless or ineffectual. Their Actions ought to be such as may recommend
themselves to the World, and carry their own Evidence along with them of their
usefulness to the Public; and then no Arts to justify them will be necessary.
When a Prince descends so low as to give his Subjects Reasons for what he has
done, he not only makes them Judges whether there be any weight in those
Reasons, but by so unusual a submission gives cause to suspect, that he is
conscious to himself that his Actions want an Apology. And if they are indeed
unjustifiable, if they are opposite to the Inclinations, and apparently
destructive of the Interest of his Subjects, it will be very difficult for the
most Eloquent or Insinuating Declaration, to make them in love with such
things. And therefore they did certainly undertake no easy Task in pretending
to persuade Men who see themselves exposed to the restless Malice of their
Enemies, who observe the languishing Condition of the Nation, and that nothing
but a Parliament can provide Remedies for the great Evils which they Feel and
Fear; that two several Parliaments, upon whom they had placed all their hopes,
were so suddenly broken, out of kindness to them, or with any regared to their
Advantage. It was generally believed, that this Age would not have seen another
Declaration, since See the Declaration prepared by Coleman, by the Advice of
the French King's Confessor, for dissolving the Parliament to prepare for
Popery.
Coleman's was so unluckily published before its time: Not only because thereby
the World was taught how little they ought to rely upon the sincerity of such
kind of Writings; but because that was a Masterpiece which could hardly be
equaled, and our present Ministers may well be out of Countenance, to see
their Copy fall so very much short of the Original.

But should this Declaration be suffered to go abroad any longer, under the
Royal Name, yet it will never be thought to have proceeded from his Majesty's
Inclination, or his Judgment, but to be gained from him by the Artifices of the
same ill Men, who not being content to have prevailed with him to Dissolve two
Parliaments, only to protect them from public Justice, do now hope to excuse
themselves from being thought the Authors of that Counsel, by making him openly
to avow it. But they have discovered themselves to the Kingdom, and have told
their own Names, when they number amongst the great Crimes of the House of
Commons, their having Declared diverse Eminent Persons to be Enemies to the King
and Kingdom.

It Is our happiness that the Cunning of these Eminent Persons is not equal to
their Malice, in that they should thus unwarily make themselves known when they
had so secretly, and with so much Caution, given the pernicious Advice. None
could be offended at the proceedings of the Parliaments, but they who were
obnoxious; none could be concerned to vindicate the Dissolution, but they who
had advised it. But they have performed this last Undertaking after such a
sort, that they have left themselves not only without Justification, but
without all pretense hereafter. The People were willing to think it the
Unfortunate Effect of some sudden and precipitate Resolution; but since they
have now publicly assured us, that it was the Result of Counsel and
Deliberation, they cannot blame us for hoping one day to see Justice done upon
such Counselors.

But though to the Dishonor of our Country it does appear, that some
Englishmen were concerned in the unhappy Advice of breaking the two last
Parliaments, and setting up this pretended Defense of it; yet the Galliscims
which are found in the Paper, show the Writer to have been of another Nation,
or at least to have had his Thoughts so much taken up for the Interests of
France (whilst he was laboring this way to heighten and perpetuate the
Differences between the King and his People) that he could not express himself
in any other Idiom than theirs, he would not otherwise have introduced the
King, saying, That it was a Matter extremely sensible to Us; a Form of Speech
peculiar to the French, and unknown to any other Nation. The Reader (who
understands that Language) will observe so many more of this kind, as will give
him just cause to doubt, whether the whole Paper was not a Translation, and
whether the English one, or that which was published in French, was the
Original?

Let us then no longer wonder, that the time of Dissolving our Parliaments, is
known at Paris sooner than at London, since it is probable, the Reasons now
given for it, were formed there too. The Peers at Oxford were so totally
ignorant of the Council, that they never once thought of a Dissolution till
they heard it pronounced; but the Duchess of Mazarine had better Intelligence,
and published the News at St. James's many hours before it was done. The
Declaration was not communicated to the Privy Council, till Friday the 8th. of
April, when his Majesty (according to the late Method) did graciously declare
to them his pleasure, to set it forth, without desiring from them any Advice in
the matter; but Monsieur Barillon, the French Ambassador, did not only read it
to a Gentleman the fifth of April, but advised with him about it, and demanded
his Opinion of it, which his Excellency will the better remember, because of
the great Liberty which the Person took in ridiculing it to his Face. Good God!
to what a Condition is this Kingdom reduced, when the Ministers and Agents of
the only Prince in the World, who can have Designs against, or of whom we ought
to be afraid, are not only made acquainted with the most secret Passages of
State, but are made our Chief Ministers too, and have the principal Conduct of
our Affairs. And let the World judge if the Commons had not reason for their
Vote, when they declared those Eminent Persons, who manage things at this rate,
To be the Enemies to the King and Kingdom, and Promoters of the French Interest.

Whosoever considers the Actions of our Great Men, will not think it strange
that they should be hard put to it to find out Reasons which they might give
for any of them, and they have had very ill luck whenever they went about it.
That Reason which they had given for Dissolving three several Parliaments
successively, is now grown ridiculous, That the King was resolved to meet his
People, and to have their Advice in frequent Parliaments, since every Man took
notice, that as soon as the Ministers began to suspect that his Majesty was
inclined to hearken to, and pursue their Advice; those very Parliaments were
presently Dissolved. This was all the Ground and Cause, which was thought of
for breaking the last Parliament at Westminster, when the Proclamation of the
18 th of January, 1680, was published; but they have now considerred better,
and have found out faults enough to swell into a Declaration; and yet as much
offended as they are with this Parliament, they seem more highly angry with
that which followed at Oxford.

Nor is it at all strange that it should fall out so: For the Court never did
yet Dissolve a Parliament abruptly, and in a Heat, but they found the next
Parliament more averse, and to insist upon the same things with greater
eagerness than the former. English Spirits resent no Affronts so highly as
those which are done to their Representatives; and the Court will be sure to
find the Effects of that Resentment in the next Election. A Parliament does
ever participate of the present Temper of the People. Never were Parliaments of
more different Complexions than that of 1640, and that of 1661. Yet they both
exactly answered the Humors which were predominant in the Nation, when they
were respectively chosen. And therefore while the People do so universally hate
and fear France and Popery, and do so well understand who they are who promote
the French and Popish Interests, the Favorites do but cozen themselves to
think that they will ever send up Representatives less zealous to bring them to
Justice, than those against whom this Declaration is published. For surely this
Declaration (what great things soever may be expected from it) will make but
very few Converts, not only because it represents things as high Crimes, which
the whole Kingdom has been celebrating as meritorious Actions, but because the
People have been so often deceived by former Declarations, that whatsoever
carries that Name, will have no Credit with them for the future. They have not
yet forgetten the Declaration from Breda, though others forgot it so soon, and
do not spare to say, that if the same Diligence, the same earnest Solicitation,
had been made use of in that Affair, which have been since exercised directly
contrary to the Design of it, there is no doubt but every part of it would have
had the desired Success, and all his Majesty's Subjects would have enjoined the
Fruits of it, and have now been extolling a Prince so careful to keep sacred
his Promises to the People.

If we did take notice of the several Declarations, published since that which
we have last mentioned, we shall find they signify as little; and therefore we
will only remember the last, made the 20 th of April 1679, and declared in
Council and in Parliament, and after published to the whole Nation: Wherein his
Majesty owns that he is sensible of the ill posture of his Affairs, and the
great Jealousies and Dissatisfaction of his good Subjects, whereby the Crown
and Government was become too weak to preserve it self, which proceeded from
his use of a single Ministry, and of private Advices; and therefore professes
his Resolution, to lay them wholly aside for the future, and to be advised by
those able and worthy Persons, whom he had then chosen for his Council, in all
his weighty and important Affairs. But every Man must acknowledge that either
his Majesty has utterly forgotten this public and solemn Promise, or else that
nothing weighty and important has happened from that time to this very day.

As for the Declaration read in our Churches the other day, there needs no
other Argument to make us doubt of the reality of the Promises which it makes,
then to consider how partially, and with how little sincerity the things which
it pretends to relate, are therein represented. It begins with telling us in
His Majesty's Name, That it was with exceeding great Trouble that he was
brought to Dissolve the two last Parliaments, without more benefit to the
People by the calling of them. We should question his Majesty's Wisdom, did we
not believe him to have understood, that never Parliaments had greater
Opportunities of doing good to himself and to his People. He could not but be
sensible of the Dangers, and of the Necessities of his Kingdom; and therefore
could not without exceeding great Trouble, be prevailed upon for the sake of a
few desperate Men (whom he thought himself concerned to love now, only because
he had loved them too well, and trusted them too much before;) not only to
disappoint the Hopes and Expectations of his own People, but of almost Europe.
His Majesty did indeed do his part, so far, in giving Opportunities of
providing for our Good, as the calling of Parliaments does amount to, and it is
to be imputed to the Ministers only, that the success of them did not answer
His and Our Expectations.

It Is certain it cannot be imputed to any of the Proceedings of either of those
Parliament; which were composed of Men of as good Sense and Quality as any in
the Nation, and proceeded with as great Moderation and managed their Debates
with as much temper as was ever known in any Parliament. If they seemed to go
too far in any thing, His Majesty's Speeches or Declarations had misled them,
by some of which they had been invited to enter into every one of those
Debates, to which so much Exception has been since taken.

Did he not frequently recommend the Prosecution of the Plot to them, Speech
21. October. 1680.
with a strict and impartial Inquiry? Did he not tell them, That he neither
thought himself nor them safe, till that matter was gone through with?

Did he not in his Speech of the 30 th of April 1679, Speech 30. Apr. 1679.
assure them, that it was his constant Care to secure our Religion for the
future in all Events, and that in all things which cencern'd the public
Security, he would not follow their Zeal but lead it? Has he not often wished,
that he might be able to exercise a Power of Dispensation in reference to those
Protestants, who through Tenderness of misguided Conscience did not conform to
the Ceremonies, Speech 26. Dec. 1662.
Discipline and Government of the Church? And promised that he would make it
his special Care to incline the Wisdom of the Parliament to concur with him, in
making an Act to that purpose?

And lest the Malice of ill Men might object, that these Gracious Inclinations
of his continued no longer, than while there was a possibility of giving the
Papists equal benefit of a Toleration; Has not his Majesty, since the Discovery
of the Plot, since there was no hopes of getting so much as a Convenience for
them, Speech 6. March 1679.
in his Speech of the 6 th of March 1679, expressed his Zeal not only for the
Protestant Religion in general, but for an Union amongst all sorts of
Protestants? And did he not command my Lord Chancellor at the same time to tell
them, that it was necessary to distinguish between Popish and other Recusants,
between them that would destroy the whole Flock, and them that only wander from
it?

These things considered, we should not think the Parliament went too far, but
rather that they did not follow his Majesty's Zeal with an equal pace. The
Truth is, if we observe the daily provocations of the Popish Faction, whose
Rage and Insolence were only increased by the Discovery of the Plot; so that
they seemed to defy Parliaments, as well as Inferior Courts of Justice, under
the Protection of the Duke, (their publicly avowed Head); who still carried on
their Designs by new and more detestable Methods than ever, and were
continually busy, by Perjuries and Subornations, to charge the best and most
considerable Protestants in the Kingdom with Treasons, as black as those of
which themselves were guilty. If we observe what vile Arts were used to hinder
the further Discovery, what Liberty was given to reproach the Discoverers, what
Means used to destroy or to corrupt them; how the very Criminals were
encouraged and allowed to be good Witnesses against their Accusers: We should
easily excuse any English Parliament thus beset, if they had been carried to
some little Excesses. But yet all this could not provoke them to do any thing
not justifiable by the Laws of Parliament, or unbecoming the Wisdom and Gravity
of an English Senate.

But we are told, That his Majesty Opened the last Parliament, which was held
at Westminster, with as Gracious Expressions of His Readiness to satisfy the
Desires of his Subjects, and to secure them against all their just Fears, as
the Weighty Consideration, either of preserving the Established Religion and
Property of his Subjects at Home, or of supporting his Neighbors and Allies
Abroad, could fill his Heart with. We must own that his Majesty has Opened all
his Parliaments at Westminster, with very Gracious Expressions: Nor have wanted
that Evidence of His Readiness to satisfy the Desires of his Subjects; but that
sort of Evidence will soon lose its Force, if it be never followed by Actions
correspondent, by which only the World can judge of the sincerity of Expressions
or Intentions. And therefore the Favorites did little consult his Majesty's
Honor, when they bring him in solemnly declaring to his Subjects, That his
Intentions were as far as would have consisted with the very Being of the
Government, to have complied with any thing that could have been proposed to
him to accomplish those Ends; when they are not able to produce an Instance
wherein they suffered him to comply in any one Thing. Whatsoever the House of
Commons Addressed for, was certainly denied, though it was only for that
Reason; and there was no surer way of Intituling ones self to the Favor of the
Court, than to receive a Censure from the Representative Body of the People.

Let it for the present be admitted, that some of the things desired by that
Parliament were exorbitant, and (because we will put the Objection as strong as
is possible) inconsistent with the very being of the Government; yet at least,
some of their Petitions were more reasonable. The Government might have
subsisted, tho the Gentlemen, put out of the Commission of the Peace, for their
zealous acting against the Papists, had been restored; nor would a final
Dissolution of all things have ensued, tho Sir George Jefferies had been
removed out of public Office, or my Lord Hallifax himself from his Majesty's
Presence and Councils. Had the Statute of the 35 Eliz. (which had justly slept
for Eighty Years, and of late, unseasonably revived) been repealed, surely the
Government might still have been safe. And tho the Fanatics perhaps had not
deserved so well as that in favor to them, his Majesty should have passed that
Bill; yet since the Repeal might hereafter be of so great use to those of the
Church of England, in case of a Popish Successor, (which Blessing his Majesty
seems resolved to bequeath to his People); one would have thought he might have
complied with the Parliament in that Proposal. At least, we should have had
less reason to complain of the Refusal, if the King would have been but
graciously pleased to have done it in the ordinary way.

But the Ministers thought they had not sufficiently triumphed over the
Parliament, by getting the Bill rejected, unless it were done in such a manner
as that the President might be more pernicious to Posterity, by introducing a
new Negative in the making of Laws, than the losing of any Bill, how useful
soever, could be to the present Age. This we may affirm, that if the Success of
this Parliament did not answer Expectation, whoever was guilty of it, the House
of Commons did not fail of doing their Part. Never did Men husband their time
to more Advantage. They opened the Eyes of the Nation; They showed them their
Danger, with a Freedom becoming Englishmen. They asserted the Peoples Right of
Petitioning: They proceeded vigorously against the Conspirators Discovered, and
heartily endeavored to take away the very Root of the Conspiracy: They had
before them as many great and useful Bills as had been seen in any Parliament,
and it is not to be laid at their doors that they proved Abortive. This Age
will never fail to give them their grateful Acknowledgments, and Posterity will
remember that House of Commons with Honor.

We come now to the particular enumeration of those gracious Things which were
said to the Parliament at Westminster. His Majesty asked of them the supporting
the Alliances he had made for the Preservation of the general Peace in
Christendom. It Is to be wished his Majesty had added to this gracious Asking of
Money, a gracious Communication of those Alliances, and that such blind
Obedience had not been exacted from them, as to contribute to the Support of
they knew not what themselves; nor before they had considered whether those
Alliances which were made, were truly designed for that End which was
pretended, or any way likely to prove effectual to it. Since no Precedent can
be shown, that ever a Parliament (not even the late Long Parliament, though
filled with Danby's Pensioners) did give Money for maintaining any Leagues, till
they were first made acquainted with the particulars of them.

But besides this, the Parliament had reason to consider well of the general
Peace it self, and the Influence it might have, and had upon our Affairs,
before they came to any Resolution, or so much as to a Debate about preserving
it; since so wise a Minister as my Lord Chancellor had so lately told us, Lord
Chancellor's Speech, 23 May, 1678.
That it was fitter for Meditation than Discourse. He informed us in the same
Speech, That the Peace then was but the Effect of Despair in the Confederates;
and we have since learned by whose means they were reduced to that Despair; and
what Price was demanded of the French King for so great a Service. And we
cannot but be sadly sensible how by this Peace, that Monarch has not only quite
Dissolved the Confederacy formed against him, enlarged his Dominions, gained
time to refresh his Soldiers harassed with long Service, settled and composed
his Subjects at home, increased his Fleet, and replenished his Exchequer for
new and greater Designs; but his Pensioners at our Court have grown insolent
upon it, and presuming that now he may be at leisure to assist them in ruining
England, and the Protestant Religion together, have shaken off all dread of
Parliaments, and have prevailed with his Majesty to use them with as little
respect, and to disperse them with as great Contempt, as if they had been a
Conventicle, and not the great Representative of the Nation, whose Power and
Wisdom only could save him and us, in our present Exigencies.

But whatever the Design of them was, or the Effect of them is like to be, yet
Alliances have a very good sound, and a Nation so encompassed with Enemies
abroad, and Traitors and Pensioners to those Enemies at home, must needs be
glad to hear of any new Friends. But alas, if we look into the Speech made at
the Opening of that Parliament, we shall find no mention of any new Ally except
the Spaniard, whose Affairs at that time, through the Defects of his own
Government, and the Treachery of our Ministers, were reduced to so desperate a
State, that he might well be a Burden to us; but there was little to be hoped
from a Friendship with him, unless by the name of a League, to recommend our
Ministers to a new Parliament, and cozen Country Gentlemen out of their Money.
But upon perusal of that League, it appears by the Third, Fourth and Fifth
Articles, that it was like to create us Trouble enough; for it engages us
indefinitely to enter into all the Quarrels of the Spaniards, though they
happened in the West Indies, or the Philipine Islands, or were drawn upon
himself by his own Injustice or causeless Provocations. By this we shall be
obliged to espouse his difference with the Duke of Brandeuburgh, though all
that Duke did, was according to the Law of Nations, to Reprize Spanish Ships
for a just Debt frequently demanded in vain. By this we shall be obliged to
engage in his present War with the Portuguese, though he by his violent seizing
of the Island of St. Gabriel, which had long been in their peaceable
possession, without once demanding it of them, has most justly provoked the
Portuguese to invade Spain. Nor are we bound only to assist him in case of an
Invasion; but in case of any Disturbance whatsoever, which must be intended of
intestine Troubles, (and it is so directly explained in the secret Article,
which all Europe says was signed at the same time.) So that if the present King
of Spain should imitate his Great Grandfather, Philip the Second, and oppress
any of his Subjects, as cruelly as he did those of the Low Countries, and so
force them to a necessary Self-Defence, we have renounced the policy of our
Ancestors, who thought it their Interest as well as their Duty to succor the
distressed, and must not only aid him with 8000 Men for three Months, to make
those People Slaves, but if the matter cannot be composed in that time, make
War upon them, with our whole Force both by Land and Sea. But that which
concerns us yet nearer in this League, is, that this Obligation of assistance
was mutual, so that if a Disturbance should happen hereafter in England, upon
any attempt to change our Religion or our Government, though it was in the time
of his Majesty's Successors, the Most Catholic King is obliged by this League,
(which we are still to believe was entered into, for the security of the
Protestant Religion, and the good of the Nation) to give Aid to so Pious a
Design, and to make War upon the People with all his Forces both by Land and
Sea. And therefore it was no wonder that the Ministers were not forward in
showing this League to the Parliament, who would soon have observed all these
Inconveniences, and have seen how little such a League could contribute to the
preserving the General Peace, or to the Securing of Flanders, since the French
King may within one months time possess himself of it, and we by the League are
not obliged to send our Succors till Three Months after the Invasion. So that
they would upon the whole matter, have been inclined to suspect, that the main
End of this League was only to serve for a handsome pretense to raise an Army in
England, and if the people here should grow discontented at it, and any little
Disorders should ensue, the Spaniard is thereby obliged to send over Forces to
suppress them.

The next thing recommended to them, was the farther Examination of the Plot,
and every one who has observed what has passed for more than two years
together, cannot doubt that this was sincerely desired by such as are most in
Credit with his Majesty; and then surely the Parliament deserved not to be
censured upon this Account, since the Examination of so many new Witnesses, the
Trial of the Lord Stafford, the great Preparations for the Trials of the rest
of the Lords, and their diligent Enquiry into the Horrid Irish Treasons, show
that the Parliament wanted no Diligence to pursue his Majesty's good Intentions
in that Affair.

And when His Majesty desired from the Parliament their Advice and Assistance
concerning the Preservation of Tangier; Address presented 21 Dec. 1680. Address
presented 29 Nov. 1680.
the Commons did not neglect to give it its due Consideration. They truly
represented to Him how that important place came to be brought into such
Exigencies, after so vast a Treasure expended to make it useful; and that
nothing better could be expected of a Town, for the most part put under Popish
Governors, and always filled with a Popish Garrison. These were Evils in his
Majesty's own Power to redress, and they advised him to it; nor did they rest
there, but promise to assist him in defense of it, as soon as ever they could
be reasonably secured, that any Supply which they gave for that purpose, should
not be used to augment the Strength of our Popish Adversaries, and to increase
our Dangers at Home. They had more than once seen Money employed directly
contrary to the end for which it was given by Parliament, and they had too
great cause of Fear it might be so again; and they knew that such a
Misimployment would have been fatal at that Time. But above all, they
considered the imminent Danger which threatened them with certain Ruin at Home,
and therefore justly thought that to leave the Consideration of England to
provide for Tangier, would be to act like a Man that should send his Servants
to mend a Gap in his Hedge when he saw his House on Fire, and his Family like to
be consumed in it.

We are next told, that His Majesty offered to concur in any Remedies that
could be proposed for the Security of the Protestant Religion; and we must own
that he did indeed make such an Offer; but he was pleased to go no farther, For
those Remedies which the Commons tendered were rejected, and those which they
were preparing, were prevented by a Dissolution.

We have seen the great Things which the King did on his part; let us now
reflect on those Instances which are singled out as so many unsuitable Returns
of the Commons. They are complained of for presenting Addresses in the nature
of Remonstrances rather than Answers. Under what unhappy Circumstances do we
find our selves, when our Representatives can never behave themselves with that
Caution, but they will be mis-interpreted at Court? If the Commons had returned
Answer to his Majesty's Messages, without showing upon what Grounds they
proceeded, they had then been accused as Men acting peremptorily, and without
reason; if they modestly express the Reasons of their Resolutions, they are
then said to Remonstrate. But what the Ministers would have this word
Remonstrance signify, what Crime it is they mean thereby, to charge the Commons
with, is unknown to an English Reader. Perhaps they who are better Critics,
and more French men, know some pernicious thing which it imports. If they mean
by a Remonstrance, a declaring the Causes and Reasons of what they do, it will
not surely be imputed as a Fault in them, since it is a way of proceeding which
His Majesty's Ministers have justified by their own Example, having in His
Majesty's Name vouchsafed to declare the Causes and Reasons of his Actions to
his People.

But the Commons made Arbitrary Orders for taking Persons into Custody, for
matters that had no Relation to Privileges of Parliament. The Contrivers of
this Declaration, who are so particular in other things, would have done well
to have given some instances of these Orders.

If they intend by these General Words, to reflect on the Orders made to take
those degenerate Wretches into Custody, who published under their Hands their
Abhorrence of Parliaments, and of those who in an humble and lawful manner
Petitioned for their Sitting, in a time of such extreme necessity. Surely they
are not in good earnest, they cannot believe themselves, when they say, that
these Matters had no Relation to Privileges of Parliament. If the Privilege
of Parliament be concerned when an injury is done to any particular Member, how
much more is it touched when Men strike at Parliaments themselves, and
endeavor to wound the very Constitution? If this be said with Relation to
Sheridon, who has since troubled the World with so many idle impudent Pamphlets
upon that account, it is plain that his Commitment was only in order to examine
him about the Popish Plot, and his Endeavors to stifle it, (though his
contemptuous Behavior to the House, deserved a much longer Confinement) and
'twas Insolence in him to Arraign their Justice, because they did not instantly
leave all their great Debates to dispatch the business relating to him.

Thompson of Bristol, was Guilty of diverse great Breaches of Privilege; but
yet his Commitment was only in order to an Impeachment; and as soon as they had
gone through with his Examination, they ordered him to be set at Liberty,
giving Security to answer the Impeachment which they had voted against him. But
is it a thing so strange and new to the Authors of the Declaration, that the
House of Commons should Order Men to be taken into Custody for matters not
relating to Privilege? Have they not heard, that in the 4 Edw. 6. Cricketost
was Committed for Confedertaing in an Escape; that 18 Jac. Sir Francis Mitchel
was Committed for Misdemeanors, in procuring a Patent for the Forfeitures of
Recognizances, together with Fowls Gerrard, and diverse others, (none of which
were Members of Parliament) that 20 Jac. Dr. Harris was taken into Custody for
misbehaving himself in Preaching; and that 3 Car. Burgess was Committed for
Faults in Catechizing, and Levet for presuming to exercise a Patent, which had
been adjudged a Grievance by a Committee of the Commons in a former Parliament.

There would be no end of giving Instances of those Commitments, which may be
observed in almost every Parliament, so that the House of Commons did but tread
in the Steps of their Predecessors, and these sorts of Orders were not new,
though the Declaration takes the Liberty to call them Arbitrary. The Commons
had betrayed their Trust, if they had not asserted the Right of Petitioning,
which had been just before shaken by such a strange Illegal and Arbitrary
Proclamation.

But now we come to the Transcendent monstrous Crimes, which can never be
forgiven by the Ministers, the giving them their due Character, which every Man
of Understanding had fixed upon them long before: the whole Current of their
Counsels being a full Proof of the Truth of the Charge. But what color is
there for calling these Votes illegal? Is it illegal for the Commons to impeach
persons, whom they have good reason to judge Enemies to the King and Kingdom? Is
it Illegal to determine by a Vote (which is the only way of finding the Sense of
the House) who are Wicked Counselors, and deserve to be impeached? Could the
Commons have called the Parties accused to make their Answer before themselves?
Had they not a proper time for their Defense when they came to their Trials?
and might they not have cleared their Innocence much better, if they durst have
put that in Issue) by a Trial, than a Dissolution of the Parliament? But should
we grant that these Votes were not made in Order to an Impeachment, yet still
there is nothing Illegal, nothing extraordinary in them. For the Commons in
Parliament, have ever used two ways in delivering their Country from pernicious
and powerful Favorites, the one is in a Parliamentary Course of Justice by
Impeaching them, which is used when they judge it needful to make them public
Examples, by Capital, or other high Punishments, for the terror of others: The
other is by immediate Address to the King to remove them as unfaithful or
unprofitable Servants. Their Lives their Liberties or Estates are never
endangered, but when they are proceeded against in the former of these ways.
Then legal evidence of their Guilt is necessary, then there must be a proper
time allowed for their defense. In the other way the Parliament act as the
Kings great Council, and when either House observe that Affairs are ill
administered, that the advice of Parliaments is rejected or slighted, the Course
of Justice perverted, our Councels betrayed, Grievances multiplied, and the
Government weakly and disorderly managed, (of all which our Laws have made it
impossible for the King to be guilty). They necessarily must, and always have
charged those who had the Administration of Affairs, and the Kings Ear, as the
Authors of these mischiefs, and have from time to time applied themselves to
him by Addresses for their Removal from his Presence and Councils. There be
many things plain and evident beyond the Testimony of any Witnesses, which yet
can never be proved in a legal way. If the King will hearken to none but two or
three of his Minions, must we not conclude that every thing that is done comes
from their Advice? And yet, if this way of representing things to the King were
not allowed, they might easily frustrate the enquiries of a Parliament. It is
but to whisper their Counsels, and they are safe. The Parliament may be busied
in such great Affairs, as will not suffer them to pursue every Offender through
a long Process; and besides there may be many reasons why a man should be
turned out of a service, which perhaps would not extend to subject him to
punishment. The People themselves are highly concerned in the great Officers
and Ministers of State, who are Servants to the Kingdom as well as to the King.
And the Representatives of the People, the Commons, whose business it is to
present all Grievances, as they are most likely to observe soonest the Folly
and Treachery of those public Servants, (the greatest of all Grievances) so
this Representation ought to have no little weight with the Prince. Rot. Parl.
5 H. 4. Nu. 6.
This was understood so well by H. 4. a wise and brave Prince, that when the
Commons complained against four of his Servants, and Counselors, desiring they
might be removed, he came into Parliament and there declared openly that though
he knew nothing against them in particular, yet he was assured that what the
Lords and Commons desired of him, was for the good of himself and his Kingdom;
and therefore he did comply with them, and banished those four Persons from his
Presence and Councils, declaring at the same time, that he would do so by any
others who should be near His Royal Person, if they were so unhappy to fall
under the Hatred and Indignation of his People. The Records and Histories of
the Reigns of Edward the first, Edw. II. Edw. III. and indeed of all other
succeeding Kings are full of such Addresses as these; but no History or Record
can show that ever they were called illegal or Un-Parliamentary till now.

Then the Ministers durst not appeal to the People against their own
Representatives, but ours at present have either got some new Law in the point,
or have attained to a greater degree of Confidence, then any that went before
them. The best of our Princes have with thanks acknowledged the Care and Duty
of their Parliaments, in telling them of the Corruption and Folly of their
Favorites. Ed. I. Ed. III. Hen. V. and Q. El. never failed to do it, and no
Names are remembered with greater Honor in the English Annals. Whilst the
disorderly, the Troublesome and Unfortunate Reigns of H. III. Ed. II. R. II.
and H. the VI. ought to serve as Landmarks to warn succeeding Kings from
preferring secret Councels to the Wisdom of their Parliaments.

But none of the Proceedings of the House of Commons, have been more censured
at Court, and with less Justice, than their Vote about the Anticipation of
several Branches of the Revenue. An objection which could proceed from nothing,
but a total ignorance of the Nature of Public Treasure in our own, and all
other Nations, which was ever esteemed Sacred and Un-alienable. All the Acts of
resumption in the times of H. IV. H. VI. and other of our Kings were founded
upon this Maxim, otherwise there could not be conceived any grosser injustice,
than to declare Alienations to be void, which Kings had lawful power to make.
It was upon this Maxim that the Parliament declared the Grant to the Pope of
the yearly sum of 1000 marks, wherewith K. John had charged the Inheritance of
the Crown, to be Null. It was for this cause that in the year 1670. His Majesty
procured, an Act of Parliament, to enable him to sell the Fee Farm Rents, and
it is the best excuse that can be made for those Ministers who in the year
1672. advised the postponing of all payments to the Bankers out of the
Exchequer, that they judged all securities by way of Anticipation of the
Revenue, illegal and void in themselves.

Resumptions have been frequent in every Kingdom, the King of Sweden within
these few Months, has, by the Advice of the States, resumed all the Lands which
His Predecessors had in many years before granted from the Crown. No Country
did ever believe the Prince, how absolute soever in other things, had power to
sell or give away the Revenue of the Kingdom, and leave his Successor a Beggar.
All those Acts of the Roman Emperors, whereby they wasted the Treasure of the
Empire, were rescinded by their Successors; and Tacitus observes, that the
first of them that looked upon the public Treasure as his own, was Claudius
the weakest and most sottish of them all. The present King of France did within
these twelve years, by the consent of his several Parliaments, resume all the
Demesness of the Crown which had been Granted away by himself or his
Predecessors. That haughty Monarch, as much power as he pretends to, not being
ashamed to own that he wanted power to make such Alienations, and that Kings
had that happy inability, Traitte des droits de la Reine. Ont cette bien
beu^euse impuissance de ne pouvoir rie^ fair contre les Loys de leur Pais.
Postelius de Rebus Turcicis.
that they could do nothing contrary to the Laws of their Country. This notion
seems founded in the reason of mankind, since Barbarism it self cannot efface
it. The Ottoman Emperors dispose Arbitrarily of the Lives and Estates of their
Subjects, but yet they esteem it the most detestable wickedness, to employ the
Tributes and Growing Revenues of the Provinces, (which they call the Sacred
blood of the People;) upon any other than public occasions. And our Kings H.
IV. and H. VII, understood so well the different power they had in using their
private Inheritances and those of the Crown, that they took care, by Authority
of Parliament, to separate the Duchy of Lancaster from the Crown, and to keep
the descent of it distinct. But our present Courtiers are quite of another
Opinion, who speak of the Revenue of the Crown as if it were a private
Patrimony, and designed only for domestic uses, and for the Pleasures of the
Prince.

The Revenues of the Crown of England are their own nature approriated to
Public Service, and therefore cannot without injustice be diverted or
Anticipated. For either the Public Revenue is sufficient to answer the
necessary Occasions of the Government, and then there is no color for
Anticipations, or else by some extraordinary accident the K. is reduced to want
an extraordinary supply, and then he ought to resort to his Parliament. Thus
wisely did our Ancestors provide, that the K. and His People should have
frequent need of one another, and by having frequent opportunities of mutually
relieving one another wants, be sure ever to preserve a dutiful affection in
the Subject, and a fartherly tenderness in the Prince. When the King had
occasion for the Liberality of his People, he would be well inclined to hear
and redress their Grievances, and when they wanted ease from Oppressions they
would not fail with alacrity to supply the occasions of the Crown. And
therefore it has ever been esteemed a crime in Counselors who persuaded the
King to Anticipate his Revenue, and a Crime in those who furnished Money upon
such Anticipations in an Extraordinary way, however extraordinary the Occasion
might be. For this cause it was that the Parliament in the 35th. of H. 8. did
not only discharge all those debts which the K. had contracted, but enacted
that those Lenders who had been before paid again by the King, should refund
all those sums into the Exchequer, as Judging it a reasonable punishment, to
make them forfeit the Money they lent, since they had gone about to introduce
so dangerous a Precedent.

The true way to put the King out of a possibility of supporting the
Government, is to let him wast in one year that Money, which ought to bear the
charge of the Government for seven. This is the direct method to destroy the
Credit of the Crown both Abroad and at Home. If the King resolve never to pay
the Money which he Borrows, what Faith will be given to Royal Promises, and the
Honor of the Nation will suffer in that of the Prince, and if it must be put
upon the People to repay it, this would be a way to impose a necessity of
giving Taxes without end, whether they would or no. And therefore (as Mercenary
as they were) the Pensioners would never discharge the Revenue of the
Anticipations to the Bankers. Now the Commons having the inconvenience of this
before their Eyes in so fresh an instance, and having their Ears filled with
the daily cries of so many Widows and Orphans; were obliged in duty to give a
Public Caution to the People, that they should not run agan into the same
Error. Not only because they judged all Securities of that kind absolutely
void, but because they knew no future Parliament could without breach of Trust
repay that Money which was at first borrowed only to prevent the Sitting of a
Parliament, and which could never be paid without Countenancing a Method so
destructive to our Constitution. Nor have former Parliaments been less careful
and nice in giving the least allowance to any unusual ways of taking up Money,
without common Consent, having so very often declared, that the King cannot
supply his most pressing Necessities, either by Loans, or by the Benevolence of
his Subjects, 1 R. 3. cap. 2.
which by the express words of the Statute, are damned and annulled for ever.
But the House of Commons were so cautious of giving any just occasion of Cavil,
that they restrained their Votes much more than they needed to have done: For
they extended them only to three Branches of the Revenue, all which were by
several Acts of Parliament given to his present Majesty. And surely every one
will agree, that when the King receives a Gift from his People, he takes it
under such Conditions, and ought to employ it in such a manner, and for such
purposes as they direct. We must therefore consult the several Acts by which
those Branches were settled; if we would judge rightly whether the Commons had
not particular Reasons for what they did. The Statute 12 Car. 2. c. 4. says, 12
Car. 2. c. 4.4. confirmed 31 Car. c. 7.
That the Commons reposing Trust in his Majesty for guarding the Seas against
all Persons intending the Disturbance of Trade, and the invading of the Realm,
to that intent do give him the Tonnage and Poundage, etc. This is as direct an
Appropriation as Words can make, and therefore as it is manifest wrong to the
Subject, to divert any part of this Branch to other uses; so for the King to
anticipate it, is plainly to disable himself to perform the Trust reposed in
Him. And the late long Parliament thought this matter so clear, that about two
years before their Dissolution, they passed a Vote with Relation to the
Customs, in almost the same Words. 12 Car. 2. c. 23, an,
The Parliament which gave the Excise were so far from thinking that the King
had power to charge or dispose of it as his own, that by a special Clause in
the Act, whereby they give it, they were careful to empower him to dispose of
it, or any part of it by way of Farm, and to Enact that such Contracts shall be
effectual in Law, so as they be not for a longer time than three years. The
Act, whereby the Hearth-money was given, declares that it was done to the end,
33 and 14 Car. c. 10.
that the public Revenue might be proportioned to the public Charge; and it is
impossible that should ever be, whilst it is liable to be pre-ingaged and
anticipated. And the Parliament were so careful to preserve this Tax always
clear and uncharg'd, that they made it penal for any one so much as to accept
of any Pension or Grant for years, or any other Estate, or any Sum of Money
out of the Revenue arising by virtue of that Act, from the King, his Heirs or
Successors. Surely if the Penners of this Declaration had not been altogether
ignorant of our own Laws, and of the Policy of all other Countries and Ages,
they would never have printed those Votes, in hopes thereby to have exposed the
Commons to the World. They would not have had the face to say, that thereby the
King was exposed to Danger, deprived of a possibility of supporting the
Government, and reduced to a more helpless Condition than the meanest of His
Subjects. This we are sure of, that the inviolable observing of these Statutes,
will be so far from reducing His Majesty to a more helpless Condition than the
meanest of his Subjects, that it will still leave him in a better condition
than the richest and greatest of his Ancestors, none of which were ever Masters
of such a Revenue.

The H. of Commons are in the next place accused of a very high Crime, the
assuming to themselves a power of suspending Acts of Parliament, because they
declared that it was their opinion, That the Prosecution of Protestant
Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weakening of the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous
to the Peace of the Kingdom. The Ministers remembered that not many years ago,
the whole Nation was justly alarmed upon the assuming an Arbitrary Power of
suspending Penal Laws, and therefore they thought it would be very popular to
accuse the Commons of such an attempt. But how they could possible misinterpret
a Vote at that rate, how they could say the Commons pretended to a Power of
repealing Laws, when they only declare their Opinion of the inconveniency of
them, will never be understood till the Authors of this are pleased to show
their Causes and Reasons for it in a second Declaration. Every impartial man
will own, that the Commons had reason for this Opinion of theirs. They had with
great anxiety observed that the present design of the Papists was not against
any one sort of Protestants, but universal, and for extirpating the Reformed
Religion. They saw what advantages these Enemies made of our Divisions, and how
cunningly they diverted us from prosecuting them, by fomenting our jealousies
of one another. They saw the strength and nearness of the King of France, and
judged of his Inclinations by his usage of his own Protestant Subjects. They
considered the number, and the bloody Principles of the Irish, and what
Conspiracies were formed there, and even ripe for Execution; and that Scotland
was already delivered into the hands of a Prince, the known head of the Papists
in these Kingdoms, and the occasion of all their Plots and Insolences, as more
than one Parliament had declared. They could not but take notice into what
hands the most considerable Trusts both Civil and Military were put, and that
notwithstanding all Addresses, and all Proclamations for a strict Execution of
the Penal Laws against Papists, yet their Faction so far prevailed, that they
were eluded, and only the dissenting Protestants smarted under the edge of
them. In the midst of such Circumstances was there not cause to think an Union
of all Protestants necessary, and could they have any just ground to believe
that the Dissenters, whilst they lay under the Pressures of severe Laws, should
with such Alacrity and Courage as was requisite, undertake the defense of a
Country where they were so ill treated? A long and sad Experience had showed
how vain the Endeavors of former Parliaments had been to force us to be all of
one Opinion, and therefore the House of Commons resolved to take a sure way to
make us of one Affection. They knew that some busy men would be striking
whilst there were Weapons at hand; and therefore to make us live at peace, they
meant to take away all occasions of provoking, or being provoked. In order to a
general Repeal of these Laws, they first came to a Vote declaring the necessity
of it, to which there was not one Negative in the House: A Vote of this nature
does for the most part precede the bringing in of a Bill for the Repeal of any
General Law. And it had been a great presumption in a particular Member to have
asked leave to have brought in a Bill for repealing so many Laws together, till
the House had first declared, that in their opinion they were grievous and
inconvenient. No English man could be so ignorant of our Laws, none but a
Frenchman could have confidence to declaim against a proceeding so regular and
Parliamentary as this. Where was the disregard to the Laws Established, for the
Commons to attempt the abrogating of a Law that is grievous to the Subject, and
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom? Is it a suspending Acts of Parliament,
if they declare a Law to be grievous and dangerous in their Opinion, before
they set about the Repeal of it? And is there any ground to doubt but that a
Bill would have passed that House, pursuant to this Vote, had it not been
prevented by a Dissolution? Nor was there the least direction or signification
to the Judges, which might give any occasion for the Reflection which follows
in the Declaration. The due and impartial Execution of the Laws, is the
unquestionable Duty of the Judges, and we hope they will always remember that
duty so well, as not to necessitate a H. of Commons to do theirs, by calling
them to account for making private Instructions the Rule of their Judgments,
and acting as men who have more regard to their Places than their Oaths. It Is
too well known who it is that sollicites and manages in favor of Judges, when
a H. of Commons does demand Justice against them, for breaking their Oaths. And
therefore the Publishers of this Declaration had said something well, if when
they tell us the Judges ought not to break their Oaths in Reverence to the
Votes of either H. they had been pleased to add, not in respect of any Command
from the K. or Favorites. Then we should have no more Letters from Secretaries
of State to Judges sitting upon the Bench. Then we should have no more
Proclamations like that of the 14th Oct. 1662. forbidding the Execution of the
Laws concerning Highways. Nor that of the 10th of May, 1672. dispensing with
diverse Clauses in the Acts of Parliament for increase of Shipping. Nor any more
Declarations like that of the 15. of March, 1672. suspending the Penal Laws in
matters Ecclesiastical.

But the Judges are sworn to execute all Laws, yet there is no obligation upon
any man to inform against another. And therefore though the Ministers prevented
the Repeal of those Laws, it is to be hoped that this Vote will restrain every
Englishman from prosecuting Protestants, when so wise and great a body have
declared the pernicious effects of such a Prosecution. It Is most true, that in
England no Law is abrogated by desuetude, but it is no less true, that there
are many Laws still unrepeal'd which are never Executed, nor can be without
public detriment. The Judges know of many such dormant Laws, and yet they do
not quicken the People to put them in Execution, nor think themselves Guilty of
Perjury that they do not: such are the Laws for wearing Caps, for keeping Lent,
those concerning Bows and Arrows, about killing Calves, and Lambs, and many
others. And those who vex men by Information on such antiquated Laws, have been
ever looked upon as Infamous, and Disturbers of the public quiet. Hence it is
that there are no Names remembered with greater detestation than those of Empson
and Dudley, the whole Kingdom abhorred them as Monsters in the time of H. VII.
and they were punished as Traitors in the Reign of his Son.

The alteration of the circumstances whereupon a Law was made, or if it be
against the genius of the People, or have effects contrary to the intent of the
Makers, will soon cause any Law to be disused, and after a little disuse, the
reviving of it will be thought Oppression. Especially if experience has shown,
that by the non-execution, the quiet, the safety, and Trade of the Nation have
been promoted; of all which the Commons, who are sent from every part of the
Kingdom, are able to make the clearest Judgment. Therefore after they have
declared their Opinions of the Inconvenience of reviving the Execution of these
Laws, which have lain asleep for diverse years, though the Judges must proceed, if
any forward Informers should give them the trouble, yet they would not act
wisely or honestly if they should Encourage Informers, or quicken Juries by
strict and severe charges. Especially if it be considered, that the Lords also
were preparing Bills in favor of Dissenters, and that the King has wished often
it was in his power to ease them. So that though there be no Act of Repeal
formerly passed, we have the consent and desire of all who have any share in
making Acts. But let this Vote have what consequence it will, yet sure the
Ministers had forgot that the Black Rod was at the door of the House, to
require them to attend His Majesty at the very time when it was made, otherwise
they would not have numbered it amongst the causes which occasioned the King to
part with that Parliament. And those that knew His Majesty was putting on his
Robes before that Vote passed, might imagine a Dissolution thus foreseen, might
occasion it, but cannot be brought to believe, that the Vote which was not in
being, could occasion the Dissolution. These are the proceedings which the
Ministers judge unwarrantable in the Parliament at Westminster, and for which
they prevailed with His Majesty to part with it. But since it is evident upon
Examination, that the principles of our Constitution, the method of
Parliaments, and the precedents of every Age, were their Guide and Warrant in
all those things; surely the K. must needs be alike offended with the Men about
him, for persuading him to Dissolve that Parliament without any cause; and for
setting forth in his Name a Declaration of such pretended cause as every man
almost sees through, and contrived only to cover those Reasons which they durst
not own. But with what face can they object to the House of Commons their
strange Illegal Votes declaring diverse Eminent Persons to be Enemies to the
King and Kingdom, when at the same time they arrogate to themselves an unheard
of Authority to Arraign one of the three Estates in the face of the World, for
usurping power over the Laws, Imprisoning their fellow Subjects Arbitrarily,
exposing the Kingdom to the greatest dangers, and endeavoring to deprive the
King of all possibility of supporting the Government, and all this without any
order or process of Law, without hearing of their defense, and as much without
any reason, as Precedent. We have had Ministers heretofore so bold, (yet ever
with ill success) as to accuse a pretended Factious party in the House, but
never did any go so high as openly to Represent the whole H. of Commons as a
Faction, much less, to cause them to be denounced in all the Churches of the
Kingdom, that so the People might look upon it as a kind of Excommunication.
But if they erred in the things they judged rightly in the choice of the
Persons who were to publish it. Blind Obedience was requisite, where such
unjustifiable things were imposed, and that could be no where so entire, as
amongst those Clergymen whose preferment depended upon it. Therefore it was
ordered that this Declaration should be read by them, being pretty well assured
that they would not unwillingly read in the Desk, a Paper so suitable to the
Doctrine which some of them had often declared in the Pulpit. It did not become
them to enquire whether they had sufficient Authority for what they did; since
the Printer called it the K's. Declaration, and whether they might not one day
be called to account for publishing it; nor once to ask if what His Majesty
singly ordered when he sat in Council, and came forth without the stamp of the
great Seal, gave them a sufficient warrant to read it publicly.

Clergymen seldom make Reflections of this kind, least they should be thought
to dispute the commands of their Superiors. It has been observed, that they
who allow unto themselves the liberty of doubting, advance their fortunes very
slowly, whilst such who obey without scruple, go on with a success equal to
their ambition. And this carries them on without fear or shame, and as little
thought of a Parliament, as the Court Favorites who took care to Dissolve that
at Oxford, before they durst tell us the faults of that at Westminster.

We have already answered the miscarriages objected to the first, and may now
take a view of those imputed to the other, which they say was Assembled as soon
as that was Dissolved, and might have added Dissolved as soon as Assembled. The
Ministers having employed the People forty days in choosing Knights and
Burgesses, to be sent home in eight, with a Declaration after them, as if they
had been called together only to be affronted. The Declaration does not tell us
of any gracious expressions used at the opening of that Parliament, perhaps
because the store was exhausted by the abundance which His Majesty was pleased
to bestow on them in his former Speeches. But we ought to believe that His
Majesty's Heart was as full of them as ever, and if he did not express them, it
is to be imputed unto the Ministers, who diverted him from his own
inclinations, and brought him to use a language until that day unknown unto
Parliaments. The Gracious Speech then made, and the Gracious Declaration that
followed, are so much or a piece, that we may justly conclude the same Persons
to have been Authors of both. However His Majesty failed not to give good
advice unto them, who were called together to advise him. The Parliament had so
much respect for their K. as not particularly to complain of the great
invasion, that was made upon their liberty of proposing and debating Laws, by
his telling them before hand what things they should meddle with, and what
things, no reasons they could offer, should persuade him to consent unto.

But every man must be moved to hear it charged upon them as an unpardonable
disobedience, that they did nor obsequiously submit to that irregular Command,
of not touching on the business of the Succession. Shall two or three unknown
Minions take upon them, like the Lords of the Articles of Scotland, to
prescribe unto an English Parliament what things they shall treat of? Do they
intend to have Parliaments inter instrumenta servitutis, as the Romans had
Kings in our Country? This would quickly be, if what was then attempted had
succeeded, and should be so pursued hereafter, that Parliaments should be
directed what they were to meddle with, and threatened if they do any other
thing. For the loss of Freedom of debate in Parliament, will soon and certainly
be followed by a general loss of Liberty. Without failing in the respect which
all good Subjects owe unto the King, it may be said, that His Majesty ought to
divest himself of all private inclinations, and force his own Affections to
yield unto the public concernments: And therefore His Parliaments ought to
inform him impartially, of that which tends to the good of those they
represent, without regard of personal passions, and might worthily be blamed,
if they did not believe, that be would for go them all for the safety of his
people. Therefore if in it self it was lawful to propose a Bill for excluding
the Duke of York from the Crown, the doing it after such an unwarrantable
signification of his pleasure would not make it otherwise. And the unusual
stiffness which the King has shown upon this occasion, begins to be suspected
not to proceed from any fondness to the Person of his Brother, much less from
any thonght of danger to the English Monarchy by such a Law, but from the
influence of some few ill men upon his Royal Mind, who being Creatures to the
Duke, or Pensioners to France, are restless to prevent a good understanding
between the King and his people; justly fearing, that if ever he comes to have
a true sense of their affections to him, he would deliver up to Justice these
wicked wretches, who have infected him with the fatal notion, That the
interests of his people are not only distinct, but opposite to his.

His Majesty does not seem to doubt of his power in conjunction with his
Parliament, to exclude his Brother. He very well know's this power has been
often exerted in the time of his Predecessors. But the reason given for his
refusal to comply with the interests and desires of his Subjects is, because it
was a point which concerned him so near in Honor, Justice and Conscience. Is
it not honorable for a Prince, to be True and Faithful to his Word and Oath?
to keep and maintain the Religion and Laws established? Nay, can it be thought
dishonorable unto him, to love the safety and welfare of his People, and the
true Religion established among them, above the temporal Glory and Greatness of
his personal Relations? Is it not just, in conjunction with his Parliament, for
his Peoples safety, to make use of a power warranted by our English Laws, and
the Examples of former Ages? Or is it just for the Father of his Country to
expose all his Children to ruin, out of fondness unto a Brother? May it not
rather be thought unjust to abandon the Religion, Laws and Liberties of his
People, which he is sworn to maintain and defend, and expose them to the
Ambition and Rage of one that thinks himself bound in Conscience to subvert
them? If his Majesty is pleased to remember what Religion the Duke professes,
can he think himself obliged in Conscience to suffer him to ascend the Throne,
who will certainly endeavor to overthrow the established Religion, and set up
the worst of Superstitions and Idolatry in the room of it? Or if it be true,
that all obligations of Honor, Justice and Conscience, are comprehended in a
grateful return of such benefits as have been received, can his Majesty believe
that he does duly repay unto his Protestant Subjects the kindness they showed
him, when they recalled him from a miserable helpless banishment, and with so
much dutiful affection placed him in the Throne, enlarged his Rvenue above what
any of his Predecessors had enjoyed, and gave him vaster Sums of Money in
twenty years, than had been bestowed upon all the Kings since William the
first; should he after all this deliver them up to be ruined by his Brother? It
cannot be said that he had therein more regard unto the Government than to the
Person, seeing it is evident the Bill of Exclusion had no ways prejudiced the
legal Monarchy, which his Majesty does now enjoy with all the Rights and Powers
which his wise and brave Ancestors did ever claim, because many Acts of the
like nature have passed heretofore upon less necessary occasions.

The preservation of every Government depends upon an exact adherence unto its
Principles, and the essential Principle of the English Monarchy, being that
well proportioned distribution of Powers, whereby the Law does at once provide
for the greatness of the King, and the safety of the People, the Government can
subsist no longer, than whilst the Monarch enjoying the Power which the Law
does give him, is enabled to perform the part it allows unto him, and the
People are duly protected in their Rights and Liberties. For this reason our
Ancestors have been always more careful to preserve the Government inviolable,
than to favor any personal Pretenses, and have therein conformed themselves to
the practice of all other Nations, whose examples deserve to be followed. Nay,
we know of none so slavishly addicted unto any Person or Family, as for any
reason whatsoever, to admit of a Prince who openly professed a Religion
contrary to that which was established amongst them. It were easy to allege
multitude of Examples of those who have rejected Princes for reasons of far
less weight than difference in Religion, as Robert of Normandy, Charles of
Lorrain, Alphonso a Desperadado of Spain; but those of a latter date, against
whom there was no other exception than for their Religion, suteth better with
our occasion. Among whom it is needless to name Henry of Bourbon, who though
accomplished in all the virtues required in a Prince, was by the general
Assembly of the Estate at Blois declared incapable of Succession to the Crown
of France, for being a Protestant. And notwithstanding his Valor, Industry,
Reputation and Power, increased by gaining four great Battles, yet he could
never be admitted King, till he had renounced the Religion that was his
obstacle. And Sigismund, Son of John of Sweden, King of that Country by
Inheritance, and of Poland by Election, was deprived of his Hereditary Crown,
and his Children disinherited only for being a Papist, and acting conformably
to the Principles of that Religion, though in all other respects he deserved to
be a King, and was most acceptable unto the Nation.

But if ever this Maxim deserved to be considered, surely it was in the case of
the Duke of York. The violence of his natural temper is sufficiently known: His
vehemence in exalting the Prerogative (in his Brothers time) beyond its due
bounds, and the Principles of his Religion, which carry him to all imaginable
excesses of cruelty, have convinced all mankind that he must be excluded, or
the Name of King being left unto him, the power put into the hands of another.
The Parliament therefore considering this, and observing the Precedents of
former Ages, did wisely choose rather to exclude him, than to leave him the
Name, and place the Power in a Regent. For they could not but look upon it as
Folly, to expect that one of his temper, bred up in such Principles in
Politics, as made him in love with Arbitrary Power, and bigoted in that
Religion, which always propagates it self by Blood, would patiently bear these
shackles, which would be very disgustful unto a Prince of the most meek
disposition. And would he not thereby have been provoked to the utmost Fury and
Revenge against those who ^id them upon him? This would certainly have bred a
Contest, and these limitations of Power proposed to keep up the Government,
must unavoidably have destroyed it, or the Nation (which necessity would have
forced into a War in its own natural defense) must have perished either by it,
or with it. The Success of such Controversies are in the hand of God, but they
are undertaken upon too unequal terms, when the People by Victory can gain no
more, than what without hazard may be done by Law, and would be ruined if it
should fall out otherwise. The Duke with Papists might then make such a Peace,
as the Romans are said to have made once in our desolated Country, by the
slaughter of all the Inhabitants able to make War, and ubi solitudinem faciunt,
pacem appellant. Tacit.
This is the happy state they present unto us, who condemn the Parliament for
bringing in a Bill of Exclusion. This is the way to have such a Peace as the
Spaniards, for the propagation of the Gospel, made in the West Indies, at the
instigation of the Jesuits, who governed their Councils. And seeing they have
the Duke no less under their power and directions, we may easily believe they
would put him upon the same Methods. But as it is not to be imagined, that any
Nation that has virtue, courage and strength equal unto the English, will so
tamely expect their ruin; so the passing a Bill to exclude him, may avoid, but
cannot (as the Declaration phraseth it) establish a War. But if there must be a
War, let it be under the Authority of Law, let it be against a banished,
excluded Pretender. There is no fear of the consequence of such a War: No true
Englishman can join with him, or countenance his Usurpation after this Act; and
for his Popish and foreign Adherents, they will neither be more provoked, nor
more powerful by the passing of it. Nor will his Exclusion make it at all
necessary to maintain a standing Force for preserving the Government, and the
Peace of the Kingdom. The whole People will be an Army for that purpose, and
every Heart and Hand, will be prepared to maintain that so necessary, so much
desired Law: A Law for which three Parliaments have been so earnest with his
Majesty, not only in pursuance of their own Judgments, but by the direction, of
those that sent them. It was the universal opinion of the Papists, that Mary
Queen of Scots was excluded only by an Act of Parliament, and yet we see Queen
Elizabeth reigned gloriously and peaceably forty years without any standing
force. But our Ministers do but dissemble with us, when they pretend to be so
much afraid of a standing Army. We know how eagerly, they have desired, and how
often they attempted to establish one. We have seen two Armies raised with no
other design, as has been since undeniably proved; and one of those they were
so loath to part with, that more than one Act of Parliament was necessary to get
it disbanded. And since that, they have increased the Guards to such a degree,
that they are become a formidable standing Force. A thing so odious to a free
People, that the raising of one single Regiment in Spain, within these six
years, under color of being a Guard for the King's Person, so inflamed the
Nation, that a Rebellion had ensued, if they had not been disbanded speedily.
The Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom looking upon themselves, as their Kings
natural Guard, scorned that so honorable a Name should be given to Mercenaries.

But as His Majesty was persuaded to resolve against the expedient proposed, to
secure our Peace by excluding the Duke, so it is evident, that nothing was
intended by those other ways which were darkly and dubiously intimated in His
Majesty's Speech unto the Parliament at Oxford, and repeated in the
Declaration; and His Majesty in his Wisdom could not but know that they
signified nothing. And those who spoke more plainly, in proposing a Regency as
an Expedient, did in public and private declare, they believed the Duke would
not consent unto it, nor unto any unusual restriction of the Royal Power. So
that they could have no other design therein, than a plausible pretense to
delude the Parliament and People. Some such consideration induced them to
revive the distinction between the King's personal and politic capacity, by
separating the power from the person, which we have reason to believe they
esteemed unseasable. However, it is more than probable that the Jesuits,
Casuists, and Popish Lawyers would reject it, as well as any thing else that
might preserve us from falling under his power. And the Pope, who could absolve
King John, Henry the third and others, from the Oaths they had taken, to
preserve the Rights and Liberties of their Subjects, might with the same
facility dissolve any that the Duke would take. And as our Histories testify
what bloody Wars were thereby brought upon the Nation, we have reason to
believe, that if the like should again happen, it would be more fatal unto us,
when Religion is concerned, which was not then in question. Would not his
Confessor soon convince him, that all Laws made in favor of Heresy are void?
And would he not be liable to the heaviest Curses, if be suffered his Power to
be used against his Religion? The little regard be has to Laws whilst a
Subject, is enough to instruct us what respect he would bear to them if he
should be King. Shall we therefore suffer the Royal Dignity to descend on him,
who has made use of all the Power he has been entrusted with hitherto, for our
destruction? And who shall execute this great Trust? The next Heir may be an
Infant, or one willing to surrender it into hands. But should it be otherwise,
yet still there is no hope of having any fruit of this Expedient without a War,
and to be obliged to swear Allegiance to a Popish Prince, to own his Title, to
acknowledge him Supreme Head of the Church, and Defender of the Faith, seems a
very strange way of entitling our selves to fight against him.

The two Reasons which the Declaration pretends to give against the Exclusion,
are certainly of more force against the Expedient. A standing Force would have
been absolutely necessary, to have placed and kept the Administration in
Protestant hands; and the Monarchy it self had been destroyed by a Law, which
was to have taken all sorts of Power from the King, and made him not so much as
a Duke of Venice. How absurdly and incoherently do these men discourse!
Sometimes the Government is so Divine a thing, that no human Law can lessen or
take away his Right, who only pretends in Succession, and is at present but a
Subject: But at other times they tell us of Acts of Parliament to banish him
out of his own Dominions, to deprive him of all Power, of his whole Kingship
after he shall be in possession of the Throne. The cheat of this Expedient
appeared so gross in the House of Commons, that one of the Dukes professed
Vassals, who had a little more Honor than the rest, was ashamed of it, and
openly renounced the Project which they had been forming so long, and thought
they had so artificially disguised. But though it was so well exposed in the
House, yet the Ministers thought the men without doors might be still deceived,
and therefore they do not blush to value themselves again upon it in their
Declaration.

As for the Insinuation which follows, That there was reason to believe that
the Parliament would have passed further to attempt other great and important
Changes at present: If it be meant any Change of the Constitution of the
Government, it is a malicious suggestion of those men, who are ever instilling
into His Majesty's mind ill thoughts of his Parliament, since no Vote nor
Proposition in either House could give any ground for such suspicion, and
therefore in this matter the people may justly accuse the Court, (who so often
cry out against them for it) of being moved, by causeless Fears and Jealousies.
And for His Majesty to be persuaded to arraign the whole Body of his People,
upon the ill-grounded surmises, or malicious and false suggestions of evil and
corrupt men about him, does neither well become the Justice of a Prince, nor is
agreeable to the measures of Wisdom, which be should Govern Himself, as well as
Rule his People by. And if an attendance to the slandrous Accusations of
persons, who hate Parliaments, because their Crimes are such that they have
reason to fear them, govern and sway his Royal Mind, there can never want
grounds for the Dissolution of any Parliaments, But if they mean by attempting
great and important Changes, that they would have besought his Majesty that the
Duke might no longer have the Government in his hands, that his Dependents
should no longer preside in his Councils, no longer possess all the great
Trusts and Offices in the Kingdom; that our Ports, out Garrisons, and our
Fleets, should be no longer governed by such as are at his Devotion, that
Characters of Honor and Favor should be no longer placed on men that the
Wisdom of the Nation has judged to be Favorers of Popery, or Pensioriers of
Erance. These were indeed great and important Changes, but such as it becomes
English men to believe were designed by that Parliament; such as will be
designed and pressed for by every Parliament, and such as the people will ever
pray may at last find success with the King. Without these Charges, the Bill of
Exclusion would only provoke, not disarm our Enemies, nay the very Money which
we must have paid for it, would have been made use of to secure and hasten the
Dukes return upon us.

We are now come to the Consideration of that only fault which was peculiar to
the Parliament at Oxford, and that was their behavior in Relation to the
business of Fitz-Harris. The Declaration says, he was impeached of High Treason
by the Commons, and they had cause to think his Treasons to be of such an
extraordinary Nature, that they well deserved an Examination in Parliament. For
Fitz-Harris, a known Irish Papist, appeared by the Informations given in the
House, to be made use of by some very great Persons to set up a counterfeit
Protestant Conspiracy, and thereby not only to drown the noise of the Popish
Plot, but to take off the Heads of the most eminent of those, who still refused
to bow their Knees to Baal. There had been diverse such honest Contrivances
before, which had unluckily failed, but the principal Contrivers avoided the
Discovery, as the others did the Punishment; in what manner, and by what helps,
the whole Nation is now pretty sensible. Being warned by this experience, they
grew more Cautious than ever, and therefore that the Treason which they were to
set on Foot, might look as unlike a Popish design as was possible, they framed
a Libel full of the most bitter Invictives against Popery and the Duke of York.
It carried as much seeming zeal for the Protestant Religion, as Coleman's
Declaration, and as much care and concern for our Laws, as the Penners of this
Declaration would seem to have. But it was also filled with the most subtle
Insinuations, and the sharpest Expressions against His Majesty that could be
invented, and with direct and passionate Incitements to Rebellion. This Paper
was to be conveyed by unknown Messengers, to their hands who were to be
betrayed, and then they were to be seized upon, and those Libels found about
tham, were to be a Confirmation of the Truth of a Rebellion, which they had
provided Witnesses to Swear was designed by the Protestants, and had before
prepared Men to believe by private Whispers. And the credit of this Plot should
no doubt have been soon confirmed, by speedy Justice done upon the pretended
Criminals. But as well laid as this Contrivance seem to be, yet it spoke it
self to be of a Popish Extraction. It Is a policy the Jesuits have often used,
to divert a storm which was falling upon themselves. Accordingly heretofore
they had prepared both Papers and Witnesses, to have made the Puritans guilty
of the Gunpowder Treason, had it succeeded as they hoped for.

The heinous Nature of the Crime, and the greatness of the Persons supposed to
be concerned, deserved an extraordinary Examination, with a Jury, who were only
to enquire whether Fitz-Harris was guilty of framing that Libel, he could never
make; and the Commons believed none but the Parliament was big enough to go
through with. They took notice that the Zeal and Courage of inferior Courts was
abated, and that the Judges at the Trial of Wakeman and Gascoign (however it
came to pass) behaved themselves very unlike the same Men they were, when
others of the Plotters had been Tried. They had not forgot another Plot of this
Nature discovered by Dangerfield, which tho plainly proved to the Council, yet
was quite stifled by the great Diligence of the Kings Bench, which rendered him
as an incompetent Witness. Nor did they only fear the perversion of Justice,
but the Misapplication of Mercy too. For they had seen that the Mouths of
Gadbury and others, as soon as they began to confess, were suddenly stopped by a
gracious Pardon. And they were more Jealous than ordinary in this case, because
when Fitz-Harris was inclined to Repentance, and had begun a Confession, to the
surprise of the whole Kingdom, without any visible cause, he was taken out of
the lawful Custody of the Sheriffs, and shut up a close Prisoner in the Tower.
The Commons therefore had no other way to be secure that the Prosecution should
be effectual, the Judgment indifferent, and the Criminal out of all hopes of a
Pardon (unless by an ingenuous Confession he could engage both Houses in a
powerful Mediation to His Majesty in his behalf) but by impeaching of him. They
were sure no Pardon could stop their Suit, tho the King might release his own
Prosecution by his Pardon.

Hitherto the Proceedings of the Commons in this Business could not be liable
to Exception, for that they might lawfully Impeach any Commoner before the
Lords, was yet never doubted. The Lords themselves had agreed that point, when
the day before they had sent down the Plea of Sir William Scroggs to an
Impeachment of Treason, then depending before them. And they are men of strange
confidence, who at this time of day take upon them to deny a Jurisdiction of
the Lords, which has been practiced in all times without control, and such a
fundamental of the Government, that there could be no security without it. Were
it otherwise, it would be in the power of the King, by making Commoners
Ministers of State, to subvert the Government by their Contrivances when he
pleased: Their Greatness would keep them out of the reach of ordinary Courts of
Justice, and their Treasons might not perhaps be within the Statutes, but such
as fall under the cognizance of no other Court than the Parliament; and if the
People might not of Right demand Justice there, they might without fear of
punishment, act the most destructive Villainies against the Kingdom.

As a Remedy against this Evil, the Mirror of justice tell us, Cap. 1. Sect.
2. page 9.
that Parliaments were ordained to hear and determine all Complaints of
wrongful Acts, done by the King, Queen, or their Children, and such others
against whom common Right cannot be had elsewhere. Which as to the King, is no
otherwise to be understood, than that it he err by Illegal Personal Commands or
Orders, he is to be admonished by Parliament, and addressed unto for Remedy;
but all others being but Subjects, are to be punished by Parliaments, according
to the Laws of Parliaments.

If the ends were well considered for which Parliaments were ordained, as they
are declared in the Statute; Item for maintenance of the said Articles and
Statutes, ( viz. Magna Charta, etc.) a Parliament shall be holden every year,
by them as well as by the foregoing ancient Authority, none could be deceived
by the Parliament Roll. of 4 Ed. 3. 36 Ed. 3.10. Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. 3. Nu 6.
where it is mentioned as accorded between the King and his Grands, (that is,
his Lords) that Judgment of Death, given by the Peers against Sir Simon de
Beresford, Matrever, and others, upon the Murder of King Ed. 2. and his Uncle,
should not be drawn into Example, whereby the Peers might be charged to judge
others than their Peers, contrary to the Law of the Land, if such a Case should
happen. For whereas from this Record some would persuade us that the Lords are
discharged from judging Commoners, and that our ancient Government is altered
in this Case by that Record, which they say is act of Parliament. The style and
form of it is so different from that which is used in Acts of Parliament, that
many are inclined to believe it to be no other thing, than an agreement between
the King and the Lords. But to remove all future scruples in the Case, let it
be admitted to be an Act of Parliament, and if there be nothing accorded in it,
to acquit the Lords from trying Commoners Impeached before them by the Commons
in Parliament, then we hope that shame will stop their mouths, who have made
such a noise against the Commons with this Record. First, It is evident from
the Roll it self, with other Records, that the Lords did judge those Commoners
contrary to the Law of the Land, that is, at the instance of the King, and the
Prosecution of their Enemies, without the due course of the Law; or calling
them to make their Defense, and (for ought appears) without legal Testimony.
Secondly, It is evident, that they were driven upon this illegal Proceeding, by
the Power and Authority of the King, and some Prosecutors, who earnestly
pressed the Lords thereunto, upon pretense of speedily avenging the Blood of
the former King and his Uncle. So that the Judgment was given at the Kings
Suit, in a way not warranted by the Law and Custom of Parliament, or any other
Law of the Kingdom. Surely when the Lords blood was suffered to cool, they had
reason to desire something might be left upon Record, to preserve them for the
future from being put upon such shameful Work, tho such a case as the Murder of
a King should again happen, as it seems they did not fear to be pressed in any
other, so to violate the Laws. But Thirdly, There is not a word in the Record,
that imports a restriction of that lawful Jurisdiction, which our Constitution
places in the Lords to try Commoners, when their Cases should come before them
lawfully, at the Suit of the Commons by Impeachment. There is no mark of an
Intention to change any part of the Ancient Government, but to provide against
the Violation of it, and that the Law might stand as before notwithstanding the
unlawful Judgment they had lately given. So that the question is still the
same, Whether by the Law of the Land, that is the Law and Custom of Parliament,
or any other Law, the Lords ought to try Commoners Impeached by the Commons in
Parliament, as if that Record had never been. And we cannot think that any man
of Sense, will from that Record make an argument in this point, since it could
be no better than to infer, that because the Lords are no more to be pressed by
the King, or at his Suit, to give Judgment against Commoners contrary to the
Law of the Land, when they are not Impeached in Parliament, therefore they must
give no Judgment against them at the Suit of the Commons in Parliament, when
they are by them Impeached, according to the Laws and Customs of Parliament.
But if such as delight in these Cavils had searched into all the Records
relating unto that of the 4 Ed. 3. Rot. Parl. 19* Ed. 3. M. 18.
they might have found in the 19th of the same King a Writ issued out to
suspend the Execution of the Judgment against Matrevers, because it had been
illegally passed. And the chief reason therein given is, that he had not been
Impeached, and suffered to make his Defense. But it was never suggested nor
imagined that the Lords that judged him, had no Jurisdiction over him because
he was a Commoner, or ought not to have exercised it, if he had been Impeached;
nor was it pretended that by Magna Charta he ought to have been tried only by
his Peers; the Laws of the Land therein mentioned, and the Laws and Customs of
Parliaments, being better known and more reverenced in these days, than to give
way to such a mistake. They might also have found by another Record of the 26th
of the same King, Rot. Parl. 26 Ed. 3. M. 25.
that by undoubted Act of Parliament, Matrevers was pardoned, and the Judgment
is therein agreed by the Lords and Commons to have been illegal, and unjustly
passed, by the violent Prosecution of his Enemies; but it is not alleged that
it was coram non judice, as if the Lords might not have judged him, if the
proceedings before them had been legal. But as the sense and proceedings of all
Parliaments have ever been best known by their practice, the Objectors might
have found by all the Records since the 4 Ed. 3. that Commoners as well as
Lords might be, and have been, Impeached before Lords, and judged by them to
Capital or other Punishments, as appears undeniably to every man that has read
our Histories or Records. And verily the concurrent sense and practice of
Parliaments for so many Ages, will be admitted to be a better interpretation of
their own Acts, than the sense that these men have lately put upon them to
increase our Disorders. But to silence the most malicious in this point, let
the famous. Act of the 25 of Ed. 3. be considered, which has ever since
limited all inferior Courts in their Jurisdiction, unto the Trial of such
Treasons only as are therein particularly specified, and reserved all other
Treasons to the Trial and Judgment of Parliament. So that if any such be
committed by Commoners, they must be so Tried, or not at all. And if the last
should be allowed, it will follow, that the same fact which in a Peer is
Treason, and punishable with Death, in a Commoner is no Crime, and subject to
no punishment.

Nor does Magna Charta confine all Trials to common Juries, for it ordains that
they should be tried by the Judgment of Peers, or by the Law of the Land. And
will any man say the Law of Parliament is not the Law of the Land? Nor are
these words in Magna Charta superfluous or insignificant, for then there would
be no Trial before the Constable or Marshal, where there is no Jury at all;
there could be no Trial of a Peer of the Realm upon an Appeal of Murder, Co.
2. Inst. 29.
who according to the Law ought in such cases to be tried by a common Jury, and
not by his Peers. And since the Records of Parliaments are full of Impeachment
of Commons, and no instance can be given of the rejection of any such
Impeachment, it is the Commons who have reason to cite Magna Charta upon this
occasion, which provides expressly against the denial of Justice. And indeed it
looks like a denial of Justice, when a Court that has undoubted cognizance of
a Cause regularly brought before them, shall refuse to hear it: but most
especially when (as in this case) the Prosecutors could not be so in any other
Court, so as a final stop was put to their Suit, though the Lords could not
judicially know whether any body else would prosecute elsewhere.

This Proceeding of the Lords looks the more odly, because they rejected the
Cause, before they knew as Judges what it was, and referred it to the ordinary
course of Law, without staying to hear whether it were a matter whereof an
inferior Court could take cognizance. There are Treasons which can only be
adjudged in Parliament, and if we may collect the sense of the House of Commons
from their Debates, they thought there was a mixture of those kind of Treasons
in Fitz-Harris's Case. And therefore there was little reason for that severe
suggestion, that the Impeachment was only designed to delay a Trial, since a
complete Examination of his Crime could be had no where but in Parliament. But
it seems somewhat strange, that the delaying of a Trial, and that against a
professed Papist charged with Treason, should be a matter so extremely
sensible: For might it not be well retorted by ^^e people, That it had been
long a matter extremely sensible to them, that so many Prorogations, so many
Dissolutions, so many other Arts had been used to delay the Trials, which his
Majesty had often desired, and the Parliament prepared for, against Five
professed Popish Lords charged with Treasons of an extraordinary nature. But
above all, that it was a matter extremely sensible to the whole Kingdom, to see
such Unparliamentary and mean solicitations, used to promote this pretended
Rejection of the Commons Accusation, as are not fit to be remembered. It Is there
that the delay of the Trials is to be laid; for had the Impeachment been
proceeded upon, and the Parliament suffered to sit, Fitz-Harris had been long
since Executed, or deserved Mercy by a full Discovery of the secret Authors of
these malicious Designs against the King and People. For though the Declaration
says a Trial was directed, yet we are sure nothing was done in order to it,
till above a month after the Dissolution. And it has since raised such
Questions, as we may venture to say were never talked of before in
Westminster Hall; Questions which touch the Judicature of the Lords, and the
Privileges of the Commons in such a degree, that they will never be determined
by the decision of any inferior Court, but will assuredly at one time or other
have a farther Examination.

We have seen now that the Commons did it not without some ground, when they
Voted the refusal of the Lords to proceed upon an Impeachment, to be a denial
of Justice, and a violation of the Constitution of Parliaments; and the second
Vote was but an application of this Opinion to the present Case. The third Vote
made upon that occcasion was no more than what the King himself had allowed,
and all the Judges of England had agreed to be Law, in the Case of the Five
Impeached Lords, who were only generally impeached, and the Parliament
dissolved, before any Articles were sent up against them. Yet they had been
first indicted in an inferior Court, and preparations made for their Trial; but
the Judges thought at that time, that a Prosecution of all the Commons was
enough to stop all Prosecutions of an inferior nature. The Commons had not
impeached Fitz-Harris, but that they judged his Case required so public an
Examination; and for any other Court to go about to Try and Condemn him, though
it should be granted to be for another Crime, is as far as in them lies to
stifle that Examination.

By this time every man will begin to question, whether the Lords did
Themselves or the Commons Righ^^ (...) the refusing to countenance such a
Proceeding? But one of the Penmen of this Declaration has done Himself and the
Nation Right, and has discovered himself by using his ordinary phrase upon this
occasion. The Person is well known without naming him, who always tells men
they have done themselves no Right, when he is resolved to do them none. As for
the Commons, nothing was carried on to extremity by them, nothing done but what
was Parliamentary: They could not desire a Conference, till they had first
stated their own Case, and asserted by Votes the matter which they were to
maintain at a Conference. And so far were those Votes from putting the Two
Houses beyond a possibility of Reconciliation, that they were made in order to
it, and there was no other way to attain it. And so far was the House of
Commons from thinking themselves to be out of a capacity of transacting with
the Lords any farther, that they were preparing to send a Message for a
Conference to accomodate this Difference, at the very instant that the Black
Rod called them to their Dissolution. If every difference in Opinion or Vote
should be said to put the Two Houses out of capacity of transacting business
together, every Parliament almost must be dissolved as soon as called. However
our Ministers might know well enough, that there was no possibility of
reconciling the Two Houses, because they had before resolved to put them out of
a capacity of transacting together, by a sudden Dissolution. But that very
thing justifies the Commons to the World, who cannot but perceive that there
was solemn and good ground for them to desire an enquiry into Fitz-Harris's
Treason, since they who influence our Affairs were so startled at it, that, in
order to prevent it, they first promoted this Difference between the Two
Houses, and then broke the Parliament left it should be composed.

There is another thing which must not be past over without Observation, That
the Ministers in this Paper take upon them to decide this great Dispute between
the Two Houses, and to give judgment on the side of the Lords. We may well
demand what person is by our Law constituted a Judge of their Privileges, or
has Authority to censure the Votes of one House, made with reference to
matters wherein they were contesting with the other House, as the greatest
violation of the Constitution of Parliaments? They ought certainly to have
excepted the power which is here assumed of giving such a Judgment, and
publishing such a Charge, as being not only the highest Violation of the
Constitution, but directly tending to the destruction of it.

This was the Case, and a few days continuance being like to produce a good
understanding between the Two Houses, to the advancing all those great and
public ends, for which the Nation hoped they were called, the Ministers found
it necessary to put an end to that Parliament likewise.

We have followed the Writers of the Declaration through the several parts of
it, wherein the House of Commons are Reproached with any particular
Miscarriages, and now they come to speak more at large, and to give Caution
against two sorts of ill Men. One sort they say, Are men fond of their old
beloved Commonwealth Principles; and others are angry at being disappointed in
designs they had for accomplishing their own Ambition and Greatness. Surely, if
they know any such Persons, the only way to have prevented the mischiefs which
they pretend to fear from them, had been to have discovered them, and suffered
the Parliament to Sit to provide against the Evils they would bring upon the
Nation, by prosecuting of them. But if they mean by these lovers of
Commonwealth Principles, men passionately devoted to the Public good, and to
the common Service of their Country, who believe that Kings were instituted for
the good of the People, and Government ordained for the sake of those that are
to be governed, and therefore complain or grieve when it is used to contrary
ends, every Wise and Honest man will be proud to be ranked in that number. And
if Commonwealth signifies the common Good, in which sense it has in all Ages
been used by all good Authors, and which Bodin puts upon it, when he speaks of
the Government of France, which he calls a Republic, no good man will be
ashamed of it. Our own Authors, The Mirror of Justice, Bracton, Fleta,
Fortescue, and others in former times. And of latter years, Sir Thomas Smith,
Secretary of State in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in his Discourses of the
Commonwealth of England, Sir Francis Bacon, Cook, and others, take it in the
same Sense. And not only diverse of our Statutes use the Word, but even King
James in his first Speech unto the Parliament, acknowledges himself to be the
Servant of the Commonwealth; and King Charles the I. both before and in the
time of the War, never expresses himself otherwise. To be fond therefore of
such Commonwealth Principles, becomes every Englishman; and the whole Kingdom
did hope, and were afterward glad to find, they had sent such Men to
Parliament. But if the Declaration would intimate, that there had been any
design of setting up a Democratial Government, in Opposition to our legal
Monarchy, it is a Calumny just of a piece with the other things which the
penners of this Declaration have vented, in order to the laying upon others the
blame of a design to overthrow the Government, which only belongs unto
themselves.

It is strange how this Word, should so change its signification, with us in
the space of twenty years. All Monarchies in the World, that are not purely
Barbarous and Tyrannical, have ever been called Commonwealths. Rome it self
altered not that Name, when it fell under the Sword of the Caesar's. The
proudest and cruellest of Emperors disdained it not. And in our days, it does
not only belong to Venice, Genoua, Switzerland, and the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, but to Germany, Spain, France, Sweden, Poland, and all the
Kingdoms of Europe. May it not therefore be apprehended that our present
Ministers, who have so much decried this Word so well known to our Laws, so
often used by our best Writers, and by all our Kings until this day, are
Enemies to the thing? And that they who make it a brand of Infamy to be of
Commonwealth Principles, that is, devoted to the good of the People, do intend
no other than the hurt and mischief of that People? Can they in plainer terms
declare their fondness of their beloved Arbitrary Power, and their design to
set it up, by subverting our Ancient Legal Monarchy, instituted for the benefit
of the Commonwealth, than by thus casting reproach upon those who endeavor to
uphold it?

Let the Nation then to whom the Appeal is made, judge who are the men that
endeavor to Poison the People, and who they are who are guilty of designing
Innovations. Bracton, tells us, that potestas Regis, is potestas Legis: It is
from the Law that he has his Power; it is by the Law that he is King, and for
the good of the People by whose consent it is made. The Liberty and welfare of
a great Nation, was of too much importance to be suffered to depend upon the
will of one Man. The best and wisest might be transported by an excess of Power
trusted with them; and the experience of all times shows, that Princes, as
men, are subject to Errors, and might be misled. Therefore (as far as man's Wit
could foresee) our Constitution has provided by annual Parliaments, 36 Edw. 3.
cap. 10. that the Commonwealth might receive no hurt; and it is the Parliament,
that must from time to time correct the mischiefs which daily creep in upon us.
Let us then no longer wonder, when we see such frequent Prorogations and
Dissolutions of Parliaments; nor stand amazed at this last unparalleled effort
of the Ministers, by this Declaration to render two Parliaments odious unto the
people. They well know that Parliaments were ordained to prevent such mischiefs
as they designed, and if they were suffered to pursue the ends of their
Institution, would endeavor to preserve all things in their due order. To
unite the King unto his People, and the hearts of the People unto the King; to
keep the Regal Authority within the bounds of Law, and persuade his Majesty to
direct it to the public Good, which the Law intends. But as this is repugnant
to the introduction of Arbitrary Power and Popery, they who delight in both
cannot but hate it, and choose rather to bring matters into such a state as may
suit with their private Interests, than suffer it to continue in its right
Channel. They love to fish in troubled Waters, and they find all Disorders
profitable unto themselves. They can flatter the humor of a misguided Prince,
and increase their Fortunes by the excesses of a wastful Prodigal; the frenzy
of an imperious Woman is easily rendered propitious unto them, and they can turn
the Zeal of a violent Bigot to their advantage; the Treacheries of false Allies
agree with their own corruptions; and as they fear nothing so much as that the
King should return unto his People, and keep all things quiet, they almost-ever
render themselves subservient to such as would disturb them. And if these two
last Parliaments, according to their Duty, and the Trust reposed in them, have
more steddily than any other before them persisted in the pious and just
endeavors of easing the Nation of any of its Grievances, the Authors of the
Declaration found it was their best course, by false colors put upon things,
and subtle misrepresentations of their actings, to delude the People into an
abhorrence of their own Representatives; but with what candor and ingenuity
they have attempted it, is already sufficiently made known. And if we look
about us, we shall find those who design a Change on either hand fomenting a
misunderstanding between the King, his Parliament and People, whilst persons
who love the legal Monarchy both out of choice and conscience, are they who
desire the frequent and successful meetings of the Great Council of the Nation*

As for the other sort of peevish men, of whom the Declaration gives us
warning, who are angry at the disappointment of their ambitious Designs; if
these words are intended to reflect on those men of Honor and Conscience, who
being qualified for the highest employments of State, have either left, or
refused, or been removed from them, because they would not accept or retain
them at the price of selling their Country, and Enslaving posterity: And who
are content to Sacrifice their safety as well as their interest for the
public, and expose themselves to the malice of the men in power, and to the
daily Plots, Perjuries, and Subornations of the Papists. I say, if these be the
ambitious men spoken of, the people will have consideration for what they say,
and therefore it will be wisdom, to give such men as these no occasion to say,
that they intend to lay aside the use of Parliaments.

In good earnest, the behavior of the Ministers of late, gives but too just
occasion to say, that the use of Parliaments is already laid aside. For tho His
Majesty has owned in so many of His Speeches and Declarations, the great danger
of the Kingdom, and the necessity of the Aid and Counsel of Parliaments, he
has nevertheless been prevailed upon to Dissolve four in the space of 26
Months, without making provision by their advice suitable to our dangers or
wants. Nor can we hope the Court will ever love any Parliament better, than the
first of those four, wherein they had so dearly purchased such a number of fast
Friends; Men who having first sold themselves, would not stick to fell any
thing after. And we may well suspect they mean very ill at Court, when their
designs shock't such a Parliament. For that very Favorite Parliament no sooner
began in good earnest to examine what had been done, and what was doing, but
they were sent away in haste, and in a fright, though the Ministers know they
lost thereby a constant Revenue of extraordinary Supplies. And are the
Ministers at present more innocent, than at that time? The same interest has
the ascendant at Court still, and they have heightened the Resentments of the
Nation, by repeated affronts; and can we believe them that they dare suffer a
Parliament now to Sit?

But we have gained at least this one Point by the Declaration, that it is
owned to us, that Parliaments are the best Method, for healing the distempers
of the Kingdom, and the only means to preserve the Monarchy in credit both at
home and abroad. Owned by these very men who have so maliciously rendered many
former Parliaments ineffectual, and by this Declaration have done their utmost,
to make those which are to come as fruitless, and thereby have confessed that
they have no concern for healing the distempers of the Kingdom, and preserving
the credit of the Monarchy; which is in effect to acknowledge themselves, to be
what the Commons called them, Enemies to the King and Kingdom. Nothing can be
more true, than that the Kingdom can never recover its strength and reputation
abroad, or its ancient Peace and Settlement at home, His Majesty can never be
relieved from his fears and his domestic wants, nor secure from the Affronts
which he daily suffers from abroad, till he resolves not only to call
Parliaments, but to Hearken to them when they are called. For without that, it
is not a Declaration, it is not repeated promises, nay it is not the frequent
calling of Parliaments which will convince the world, that the use of them is
not intended to be laid aside.

However we rejoice, that his Majesty seems resolved to have frequent
Parliaments, and hope he will be just to Himself, and us, by continuing
constant to this Resolution. Yet we cannot but doubt in some degree, when we
remember the Speech made 26 Jan. 1679. to both Houses, wherein he told them,
that he was Unalterably of an Opinion, that long intervals of Parliaments were
absolutely necessary* for composing and quieting the minds of the People.
Therefore which ought we rather to believe, the Speech or the Declaration? or
which is likely to last longest a Resolution or an unalterable opinion, is a
matter too Nice for any but Court-Criticks to Decide. The effectual performance
of the last part of the promise, will give us assurance of the first. When we
see the real fruits of these utmost endeavors to extirpate Popery out of
Parliament; when we see the D. of York no longer first Minister, or rather
protector of these Kingdoms, and his Creatures no longer to have the whole
direction of Affairs; when we see that Love to our Religion and Laws is no
longer a crime at Court; no longer a certain forerunner of being Disgraced and
Removed from all Offices and Employments in their Power; when the word Loyal
(which is faithful to the Law,) shall be restored to its old meaning, and no
longer signify one who is for subverting the Laws; When we see the Commissions
filled with hearty Protestants, and the Laws executed in good earnest against
the Papists; the Discoverers of the Plot countenanced, or at least heard, and
suffered to give their Evidence; the Courts of Justice steady, and not Avowing
a Jurisdiction one day, which they disown the next; no more Grand Juries
discharged, lest they should hear Witnesses; nor Witnesses hurried away, lest
they should inform Grand Juries; when we see no more Instruments from Court
laboring to raise Jealousies of Protestants at home, and some regard had to
Protestants abroad; when we observe somewhat else to be meant by Governing
according to Law, than barely to put in Execution against Dissenters, the Laws
made against Papists; then we shall promise our selves not only frequent
Parliaments, but all the blessed effects of pursuing Parliamentary Councels,
the Extripation of Popery, the Redress of Grievances, the flourishing of Law^,
and the perfect Restoring the Monarchy to the Credit, which it ought to have
(but which the Authors of the Declaration confess it wants) both at Home and
Abroad. There needs no time to open the Eyes of His Majesty's good Subjects,
and their Hearts are ready prepared to meet him in Parliament, in order to
perfect all the good Settlement and Peace, wanting in Church and State.

But whilst there are so many little Emissaries employed to sow and increase
Divisions in the Nation, as if the Ministers had a mind to make His Majesty the
Head of a Faction, and join himself to one Party in the Kingdom, who has a just
right of Governing all (which Thuanus lib. 28. says, was the notorious folly,
and occasioned the Destruction of his great Grand Mother Mary Queen of Scots)
whilst we see the same Differences promoted industriously by the Court, which
gave the rise and progress to the late troubles, and which were once thought
fit to be buried in an Act of Oblivion. Whilst we see the Popish Interest so
plainly Countenanced, which was then done with Caution; when every pretense of
Prerogative is strained to the utmost Height; when Parliaments are used with
contempt and indignity, and their judicature, and all their highest Privileges
brought in question in Inferior Courts, we have but too good cause to believe,
that tho every Loyal and Good Man does, yet the Ministers and Favorites, do
but little consider the Rise and Progress of the late Troubles, and have little
desire or care to preserve their Country from a Relapse. And who as they never
yet showed regard to Religion, Liberty or Property, so they would be little
concerned to see the Monarchy shaken off, if they might escape the Vengeance of
public Justice, due to them for so long a Course of pernicious Counsels, and
for Crowning all the rest of their faults by thus Reflecting upon that High
Court, before which we do not doubt but we shall see them one day brought to
Judgment.

Thus have we with an English plainness, expressed our thoughts of the late
Parliaments and their Proceedings, as well as of the Court in Relation to them,
and hope this Freedom will offend no man. The Ministers, who may be concerned
through their appealing unto the People, cannot in Justice deny unto any one of
them the Liberty of weighing the Reasons which they thought fit to publish in
Vindication of their Actions. But if it should prove otherwise, and these few
Sheets be thought as weak and full of Errors, as those we endeavor to confute,
or be held injurious unto them, we desire only to know in what we transgress,
and that the Press may be open for our Justification: Let the People to whom
the Appeal is made, judge then between them and us; and let Reason and the Law
be the Rules, according unto which the Controversy may be decided. But if by
denying this, they shall like Beasts recur to force; they will thereby
acknowledge that they want the Arms which belong to rational Creatures. Whereas
if the Liberty of Answering be left us, we will give up the Cause, and confess,
that both Reason and Law are wanting unto us, if we do not in our Reply satisfy
all reasonable and impartial men, that nothing is said by us, but what is just
and necessary, to preserve the Interests of the King and his People. Nor can
there be any thing more to the Honor of His Majesty; than to give the Nations
round about us to understand, that the King of England, does neither Reign over
a Base, Servile People, who hearing themselves Arraigned and Condemned, dare
not speak in their own Defense and Vindication; nor over so silly, foolish and
weak a People, as that ill designed, and worse supported Paper might occasion
the World to think, but that there are some Persons in his Dominions, not only
of true English Courage, but of greater intellectuals as well as better Morals,
than the Advisers unto, and Penners of the Declaration have manifested
themselves to be.

FINIS.

