A brief Account of some of the late Encroachments and Depredations of the
Dutch upon the English; and of a few of those many Advantages which by Fraud
and Violence they have made of the British Nations since the Revolution, and
of the Means enabling them thereunto.
IT may justly astonish, as well as Surprise those who give themselves liberty
to think, that a Nation pretending to so much Wit, and good Sense (and that
very rightfully) as the English do, should suffer themselves both in the view,
and to the amazement of the world, to be Tricked, Cheated, and Bubbled to the
degree they are by the Dutch, who were never much esteemed for the Greatness
and Transendency of their Understandings, though they have been so well known for
Treachery and Fraud, as the peculiar qualities they excel in, and which they
have never failed to exercise, and display themselves by, when and where they
have had opportunity. For though now and then a few Individuals may have been
found, and still are among them, who for Probity and Intellectuals, have been,
and are secured against this Imputation and Charge, yet these are the
characters, which they have commonly lain under as a State* and to which the
generality of that People, have been as Meritoriously as Commonly entitled. And
which though most Nations have in some measure Experienced, who have either had
the misfortune to need, or the folly to Confide in them; yet none have so often
and so sensibly felt the Effects both of their Ingratitude and Deceit, as we of
Great Britain have done: Whereof it were eas^e to give Innumerable Instances,
since the very first Moment, that by a friendly and vast, if not too lavish and
improvident an expense of our Blood and Treasure, they became rescued from the
Jaws of ruin, vindicated into Freedom, and established into a^ Republic. But
that I intend for reasons which any man may penetrate into, to confine the
account I am now to give of their fraudulent and rapacious behavior toward,
and the Gains they have made of us by tricks and violence, only to that circle
and period of time which has elapsed since the Commencement and Consummation
of the late Revolution. And besides all the other Influence, this is as well
proper as designed to have upon us, if we have not both renounced common
Reason, and our Native Country, It may serve not only to awaken us, to a
perusal of those many former Relations of their Treacherous Supplanting, and
their hostile Usurpations, but to give a fresh and raised credit to all those
antecedent detections of their Villainies, which either through a strange Oscitancy
we were willing to forget, or through the Inhumanity of them, too much disinclined
to believe.

I suppose it is needless now to tell any man that is not qualified for Bedlam,
tho he be one that has renounced all Revealed Religion and moral Honesty, and
ridiculeth every thing that is superstructed on, or which fasteneth obligation
and duty upon us in the virtue of the acknowledgment of those Fundamentals:
That it was not out of any love to these Kingdoms, or for any real concern for
what we value and challenge a property in, either as Protestants or Englishmen,
that the States of Holland lent their Men and Ships to the Prince of Orange,
and encouraged his coming with an Army into England. Alas! both his Conduct and
theirs since, do so interfere with those pretenses, that it were as easy to
reconcile Contradictions, as to resolve that Undertaking into those Motives.
And tho I cannot deny it to be very natural to all true Hollanders to be
furnished with a great deal of assurance, and to claim it as a Prerogative
entailed upon their Country not to blush, as those other Climes retain the
modesty to do, when they obtrude the most notorious falshhoods upon the faith
of Mankind; yet the present tottering and precarious state of the Church of
England, and the little room it has in their thoughts, unless it be how to
subvert it, as well as the many Invasions made upon our Laws, Rights, and Civil
Liberties, besides the Rapines committed upon our Trade, and the many guileful
Arts that have been practiced to enslave and impoverish us since the beginning
of 1689. have not only refuted, but exposed these State pretenses of rescuing
us from Popery and Thraldom, which had been made use of to wheedle us into
those Crimes, whereof we became guilty through their Delusions, and to prepare us
to entertain, and tamely to undergo and suffer the Miseries which they had
projected to bring upon us. And as the transporting our Coin; the having our
Seas and Merchant Ships unprotected; and the many Sham plots upon our lives, as
well as the various arts, methods and projects, of worming us out of our
Estates, show what we are to expect from Dutch-Councils, in relation to our
Persons, Property and Wealth; So the cold and disdainful Reception commonly
reported to have been given lately to those of the Conformable Clergy at
Al^hrope, when they went thither to pay their Complements, and make their
Addresses, and where they were not accounted worthy either of a word or a
salute, no more than any of those common Decencies, which have been customarily
vouchsafed to persons of their Order, Habit and Communion, while the Dissenters
were at the same place, not only Welcomed with Hat in Hand, and entertained
with the respect of standing up to them, during the whole time they were
attending, but Caressed with the tenderest expressions declarative of his love
unto, care of and confidence in them, and afterward treated in an Appartment
by themselves, with Wine and Tobacco, and other civilities of the house, with
an allotment of some Noblemen to bear them Company, and to bubble them into
Court-Measures, do more than abundantly testify under what contempt the
Established and National Church is, through the Influence of Belgic Advice, and
in complacency to the Hogen Mogen Constitution abroad. Which tho it be but the
beginning of a Just Recompense of Reward upon your Episcopal men for their
Apostasy, from the Doctrine of their Church in Reference to civil Government,
and legal Governors, yet it both sufficiently proclaims some Peoples
Ingratiude, and intimates what those deluded, credulous, missed; and revolting
Clergymen are to expect, in relation to all those Dignities and Emoluments
they have been advanced unto, and hitherto kept in possession of, by standing
Laws in preference unto, and contradistinction of all other Protestants. And
should not that story be so Authentic, as it is universally vouched to be; yet
his behavior upon all occasions toward those of the Established Church, is so
scornful as well as unkind, as abundantly testifies, not only his Distrust and
Hatred of them upon the motives of Dutch Counsels; but a design to mortify
their persons, and to alter and subvert the Establishment, which our Laws do at
present give them: Nor are the late Caballings, Animosities and Prosecutions
against a certain Person Orn^mented with a George, and a blue Ribbon, owing to
any other Motives, than that he both understands and asserteth the Interest of
his Country, without Justifying of, or conniving at Dutch Encroachments; and
that he has the Fortitude to avow himself the Advocate and Patron of the
Established Ecclesiastical Constitution, and who will not be brought to
sacrifice at once both our Legal Worship, and Discipline, and the Commerce, and
Treasure of the Kingdom, to the Pleasure and Appetite of our Outlandish
Neighbors; nor be gained to betray our Church and State, to the lust and
humor of those Court Minions, who are gained by Bribes and Pensions to be
Brokers and Factors for our Rivals and Underminers, tho at present through a
Solecism in Speech as well as in Politics, they be styled our assured and good
Allies. Nor need we any other evidence of the Commencement and Continuance of
the Quarrel against the tacitly formentioned Nobleman, than the Proposals that
were made to him by a person of his own Order and Dignity, about stifling the
Enmity against him, and that those who are his boldest Accusers, and most
passionate Antagonists, should depart from and deposite their Accusations of
him, and not only enter into a Truce, but into an united and firm Friendship
with him, provided he would abandon the defense of the Church, and Join with
them in promoting an Oath of Abjuration, both which are the Contrivances of the
Dutch, and the Results of Councils given at the Hague, partly to obviate the
revenge they know themselves Justly obnoxious unto from King James, should he
at any time come to be reestablished; and partly to kindle a Civil War amongst
our selves, by which we may be both diverted and disabled from inflicting those
Punishments upon them hereafter, which they so much deserve, or at least to
turn and inflame the King's wrath (in case he return) against his own Subjects,
in hopes thereby to prevent the effects of his Resentment against them. And
that the quarrel which I have intimated to be raised against this Honorable
Person, is the product of Foreign Councels, appears not only from the Tools,
and Instruments emba^ked in pursuing of it, who are all of them Favorites and
Partisans of the Court, but is made evident beyond all control from hence;
That when the said Noble Peer, told his Master for news at Burford the
application that had been made to him, and by whom, and the tenor of it, he
found that he was antecedently acquainted with, and possessed of the whole;
which well he might as being in the quality of Executioner of Belgic Advice
and Measures, both the Author and Fomenter of the (...), and the Projector and
Instigator of the Accommodation and the terms of it. However, we may easily
dis^rn from hence, what the whole Nation, as well as single Individuals may
Expect from a Dutch King influenced by Dutch Councils; when the only Person in
the Kingdom to whom He and They stand most indebted for Promoting the
Revolution, as well as for former and subsequent Favors of the greatest
Dimensions and Importance, is thus singled out to be hunted and run down by
Clamor and Obloquy; and this not for his Crimes against the Crown, or for his
being the Principal Person in Abdicating of the King, Altering the Succession,
and Subverting our Hereditary Monarchy; but because that after He had brought
us to the Altar, he should now Demur as to the letting the Church annd Nation
fall Victims to Dutch Malice and Avarice.

And if we had not been Infatuated by Bigotry, and made Insolently Wanton by
too much Prosperity: And had our Intellectual Faculties Distorted by Disloyal
Malice, we might have easily Foreseen and Prognosticated, what the Infidelity
of the Dutch would be to the Kingdom, by their more than Heathenish Treachery
to the Late King; in that notwithstanding the Alliance Solemnly Contracted and
Ratified by Oath, in which they stood Sacredly Engaged to observe all terms of
Amity and Friendship with him, yet whilst his Majesty relied upon the Assurance
of that Compact and Stipulatior; they did under the Cloak and Vail of being His
Confederates, Clandestinly contrive the Subversion of the Throne. And tho they
neither then could, nor have had the (...) Impudence to this day (albeit not a
People Accusable for unseasonable Modesty, when they can either recurr to weak
Pretenses, or probable Fictions for Justifying their Conduct) to alledg any
matter of Just Complaint he had given them, and much less any cause of Hostile
Quarrel. Yet by a Treachery customary to Them, but which neither Turks nor
Pagans would have been guilty of; They both gave Eencouragement to the Prince
of Orange, to Invade his Dominions: and Commissioned, and Authorized their
Fleet and Troops to Support and Assist him in doing it. Nor did they only
Perpetrate this Treachery toward his Majesty in Defiance of Vengance from
Heaven, and in Contempt of every thing that has been held Sacred amongst Men,
as well as in Derision of all those Pacts, and Agreements upon which the
intercourse and Peace of Nations, and the Tranquillity of Societies do depend;
But at the same Juncture of time in which they were Plotting his Ruin, and had
entered into Correspondency and Combination with his Disloyal Subjects, for
driving Him from his Kindoms; they gave him all the assurance which any Prince
could desire or expect from a Neighboring State, that they Prized his
Friendship; and did and would Persevere in Amity with him; and that the Ships
and Forces whch they had in a readiness to make a Descent into his Territories
were Designed for, and to be Employed in Affairs wherein he had no Concern, and
that he neither should nor could receive any Prejudice from them, and therefore
was not to be allarmed at those Preparations: Which Barbarous as well as
guileful Behavior of theirs, though we have hitherto overlook't, and not
received that Warning and Instruction from it that such a Procedure toward a
Crowned Head, and one to whom by Stipulation they were bound to be Friends and
Allies, and who then Actually was and still rightfully is the only Legal
Monarch of these Kingdoms was Adapted, and should have have had Efficacy in it
to give: Yet it is Now Hoped that the Lessons, which Experience that is the
School-Mistress of Fools, has refreshed our Memory with, of their Inveterate
Malice to these Kingdoms, and of their Fraudulent Methods to render us Poor,
Impotent and Contemptible, will at last awaken us, if not to seek and pursue
revenge, at least to lay aside our Confidence in them, and to give over the
Wasting our Men and Treasure, in Defense of a Perfidious People, who are
endeavoring our Ruin, as the Recompense of all the Services we have had, the
Simplicity, Inadvertency and Folly, to be rendering them, and in the doing
whereof we have made our selves Knaves to our Country, as well as Persevered in
Obstinate Rebellion against the King. Nor is it to be doubted, but that after
they have seen us, who are their chief and envied Rivals in Trade Impoverished
and Weakened in the Management of this War, into which, in order to those Ends
they have Wheedled and Invegled us, under the Pretense of Humbling Curbing and
Reducing France, they will be the first both to abandon the Confederacy, and to
Unite their Forces with those of that Monarch, for the Consummating of our
Ruin by Power which they have begun and so far Promoted by Fraud. And that I
may not reflect too far backward, nor put my (...) upon Examining their
Practices Forty or Fifty Years since; their Behavior about seventeen years ago
toward the Emperor, and the King of Spain, but especially toward the King of
Denmark, and the la^e ^^ector of Brandenburgh, who had Embarked in their
Assistance, and come to their Succor, when they were likely to be totally
Subdued in that War which they had provoked the French King to enter into
against them, Anno. 1672. May teach all that help and relieve them, under the
firmest and most Sacred Confederacy, and the high^st assurances of their
Stedfastness and Fidelity in their Alliances, what they are to expect from that
faithless People, who do always consult and prefer their Interest before all
the Obligations they can be brought under to God or Men. The truth whereof,
though the Remonstrances of all those Princes do abundantly manifest, which they
made unto the States General; and Published to the World, upon the Separate
Peace which the Dutch Concluded with the King of France, at the Treaty of
Nimeguen, Anno. 1678. yet I shall in Confirmation of what I have suggested,
Transcribe and Exhibit some part of a Pathetick Letter written upon that
Occasion to the said States by the Elector of Brandenburgh bearing date at
Postdam, July, 11. 1679. Namely, That in the Deplorable Condition his Countries
were then in, It is easy to Judge (says the Elector) whether we have more
reason to Complain of those who are Enemies, and had fallen thus upon him, or
of those for whose sake all this happened to him, who instead of giving him the
assistance required by Treaty, have neglected them and made a separate Peace,
thereby abandoning as well his as their own Affairs, and laying upon him the
whole burden of the War, in which he should have had no part had it not been
for his desire to help his friends in their Misfortunes, as if it were a
Consolation to their High and Mightinesses to see him (who had endeavored with
all his Might to save them from Destruction) as a Recompense totally Ruined.
Adding that he had expected an answer to his former Letters, and to those
Memorials given into them by his Ministers, in which he had advized them of the
dangers that threatened him, and desired their Assistance, that so at least, he
might have had the Comfort to see the Concern they had for his Misfortune,
which he had the more reason to expect, for that it must be fresh in their
Memories, how in their greatest necessity he hazarded All for them, and
preferred their Friendship before all the advantageous conditions that were
offered him. And therefore that he writes to their High and Mightynesses this
Letter, That they may not think that he tamely Digested their Unjust
Proceedings, or quitted the Obligation which his Alliance with them laid upon
them; but, that as on his part he had always performed his Promises and
Engagements, so he requires the like from them, or in default thereof,
Satisfaction for the same, and reserveth to himself and his Posterity, all the
Right thereunto belonging. And indeed such has been their Perfidiousness, as to
the O^sevation of most of ^he Treaties wherein they have been Engaged; That
should the several Princes of Europe be provoked at last to resent their
Infidelity, according to the Demerit of it; They would, instead of choosing to
be their Allies or Confederates, associate and unite to be their revengefull
and implacable Enemies, Nor, till they be Condignly Punished, for the many
repeated Violations of their most solemn Stipulations, will it prove Wise or
Safe to Trust them upon the most Sacred Security that they can give to Kings
and Nations, by concerted and sworn Contracts. For, until then, it will be but
a necessary Prudence in all those, with whom they seek and endeavor to be in a
Foederal Amity, To ask them as Livy tells us the Roman Senator did the
Carthaginian Ambassadors at the end of the second Punick War, when they came to
Supplicate for a Peace, Per quos Deos Foe dus icturi essent; cum eos per quos
ante ictum esset fefellissent? By what Gods they would confirm and ratify
their Stipulations; seeing they had despised the Omniscience Power and Justice
of those Deities by the Invocation of and Appeal to whom they stood obliged to
the Observation of former Contracts. But, when they are once so sufficiently
Chastised for their Treacheries and Infidelites of this kind, That they can
reply as Asdrubal at that time did, namely, Per eosdem qui tam Infesti sunt
Faedera violantibus. That they will swear their Leagues, by the same God who
has taken Vengeance of them for their Perjury, and their Fraudulent Violations
of former Agreements; Then and not before, are they to be Trusted and Relied
upon, by reason and in the Virtue of any Compacts, Covenants and Alliances, how
Solemnly soever Sworn and Ratified by them.

Nor, will it be improper or unseasonable for me here, considering the present
Juncture, and the Circumstances We of Great Britain are now Reduced unto, to
put my Country Men in remembrance that among other of the Motives upon which
the Dutch Contrived and Promoted the Revolution, how that their Obviating and
Preventing the Reckoning and Account, which King James was about calling them
unto, for their Wresting Bantam by Fraud and Violence from the English
East India Company, was not only One, but that which most Influenced that
Avarous and Rapacious Republic thereun^o. For, having during our Convulsions
here, and the many Jealousies and Misunderstandings which had arisen between
the late King Charles and his People (to the begetting and fomenting whereof
they had contributed all they could) Guilfuly and Ho^tilely wormed us out of,
and Drove us from thence, where of a large and Beneficial Trade, therefore to
Anticipate their being forced to restore what they had unrighteously Usurped by
Deceit and Power; and to avoid making Satisfaction for the Dishonor they had
therein done unto the Crown; as well as to decline repairing the Injury they
had done to the East India Company and to the whole Kingdom; They came with
Warmth and Readiness into the Design of Invading these Kingdoms, and of
Supplanting his Majesty's Throne. I suppose it needless to repeat, how they
had elu^ded all the Applications made unto them by King Charles his Ministers,
in reference to that Affair; and how they delayed and evaded giving
Satisfaction to the East India Company, during the time that remained of his
Reign, after that Usurpation, tho often required and demanded of them, both by
his Majesty's Envoys, and by the Deputies and Agents of the Company. Nor will I
so far Reflect upon the Memory of that Prince, as to assign the Reasons why
they came to Treat him with so much Superciliousness and Neglect, in that and
other Concerns as they did; Seeing, besides the too great Encouragement they
had to it from something in his own Constitution and Temper, they were
Embold'ned thereunto by the mutinous Humor, that was then Predominant in many
of his Subjects; and by the great and unaccountable Divisions which were arisen
between those who were Styled the Court and Country Factions. But, finding that
his Royal Brother King James, who, on his Decease Rightfully Ascended the
Throne was not a Prince that bore that careless respect to his own Honor, to
the Reputation of his Kingdoms, and to the Prosperity of his Subjects; as to
digest the aforementioned Affront, Injustice and Injury, with the Tameness that
King Charles had done; and that he Carried not that Indifferency to his Peoples
Welfare, and to the Traffic of the Nation; as for a private Gratuity, either
to Connive at, or to Forgive a Wrong done to the Meanest of those under his
Protection and Government; And much less an O^fence of so heinous a Nature,
Committed not only against the Chief Trading Society of the Kingdom; but to the
Obstruction and Loss of a Commerce, by which all his People received
considerable Profit and Advantage: They thereupon, by a Violation and Contempt
of the Obligatoriness and Sacredness of Leagues, both Encouraged all the
Seditious and Disloyal here; as well to Rebel against, and Revol^ from the King,
as by Clamou^s and Ryots to Disturb the Tranquillity of his Reign: And they
took Hold of, and Encouraged the Prince of Orange's, Ambition, whom Pride had
disposed and prepared to despise and transgress all the Laws of God, and to
Trample upon all the Constitutions of Nations for the Gaining of a Crown; whose
aspiring Haughtiness they resolved, in that Matter to Gratify, in order to the
Supporting themselves in the quiet Enjoyment, of what they had Treacherously,
Unjustly and Rapaciously Seized. And, accordingly they Lent unto, and Furnished
him with a great part of their Army and Navy to Enable him, in Conjunction with
the Traitors that were here at Home, to drive the King both from his Throne and
Dominions. And, had not the People of England been at that Time strangely
Infatuated by Bigottry, and made Incapable by their Disloyalty, of all just and
rational Thinking and Arguing; they might from the forementioned Depradation of
the Dutch upon Us in the Business of Bantam, have very easily Foreseen and have
naturally Concluded, how far they would Usurp upon Cheat and Rob us afterward,
when they should come to obtain one of their own Complexion and Mould, as well
as of Belgic Birth, Education, Authority and Inheritance, to be chosen and
Advanced to Reign over us. Nor is it unworthy of Remark, how far in this very
matter his being a Dutchman, has made him for these Seven Years last past,
live in a continual forgetfulness of the Justice he owes to the Nation, upon
the Foot and Foundation of being Styled our King. For whereas both the Belgic
East-Endia Companies, and the States General had before the Revolution made and
sent Overtures of giving Satisfaction, and had offered a Vast Sum of Money, in
Expiation of that Crime, and for repairation of the Injury they had done us in
the Case so often mentioned, we have not dared since to Pretend unto, or Claim
the least Compensation for that Wrong, and much less to be so Presumptuous, as
to Require to be Re-established there again; Tho according to the Modern
Methods of Merit, and the ways and means which recommended People most
Distinctively to the New Monarch; This Kingdom has deserved as much of his
Highness for Perjuring themselves, in order to Serve and Oblige him, as the
Dutch have done by the Violation of their Treaties. Nay! whereas they broke
their Alliances, upon the Motives of In^erest, and have found their Advantage
in their Perjurious Treacheries: We by rendering our selves Forsworn, in
departing from our Allegi^^^^, have only gained the being wholly shut out from
that which we had both so good a Right unto, and were in so near and assured
Prospect of recovering. So that all which, by Cooperating unto, and Concurring
in the Revolution falls to Our Share, is the acquiring the Pre-eminence of a
Double Character, Namely that of Fools, as much as that of Knaves, whilst our
Belgic Neighbors are content to acquiesce in the single one of being
Villains, and that chosen and submitted unto for their Gain, and not for their
Loss. But the English being esteemed naturally a generous sort of People, may
possibly think it but Congruous to that Opinion which Men have commonly had of
them, that when they have so wilfully done all they can by their late Practices
to forfeit Heaven, to Part with, Resign and Contemn the World also, and not to
be like the Avaritious, Covetous Dutch, who are indeed willing enough to
Renounce and Disclaim their Portion in the former, but then it is with a
Proviso of Bartering it away for the later, which they take to be a Cunning and
Wise Exchange.

And, all Men must Grant that more is to be said in their Favor and for the
Extenuation of their Folly, who would not choose Damnation, but for the
Obtaining of Wealth, than can be reasonably said of those, that not only give
themselves over to Eternal Wrath, gratis; but, who choose to Pay Dear for, it
and to be Robbed of their Liberties and Estates, that they may Superarrogate
for Hell; and be the better Entitled and have the more deserving Right to
future Vengeance. Yet, I ought not to omit mentioning one thing which falls to
our Lot even in this World; as the Reward of having Purchased the Name, Guilt
and Infamy of Rebels, at the Expense of our Wealth and Traffic, and of all we
were happy for at Home, and Reputable for Abroad; namely, That the Cap and
Coat, which were heretofore only the Enclosure and Peculiar of a few; ought now
and henceforward, to be the common Badges, Habit and Dress of most of the
Kingdom, and especially of our Westminster Senators.

To what I have already said, I will add in the next Place, that our Electing
the Prince of Orange King, has not only Emboldned the Dutch both to Detain
from us what they formerly Usurped, and to make fresh Encroachments upon us in
all parts of the World, as well as in all things; but they plead^^ it as a
ground Authorizing them so to do, and Improve it as a Mean to Facilitate
Countenance and Promote the Depradations, which they do since Commit upon us.
For not to look nearer home. Asia and Africa can witness how they Triumph over
and Insult us, in those Remote parts of the Universe; Representing us a Poor,
Feeble and Dastardly People, over whom they have Constituted their Servant a
Monarch, and thereby reduced us unto the Condition of a Province, Tributary
unto and Depending on the Hollanders. Now the Material part of this Harangue
being too true, tho not in all the formal Circumstances in which they relate
it, they thereupon not only themselves Hector us, and Withdraw and Alienate the
Natives of those Countries from Valuing us as they were formerly wont to do;
but having Diminished our Esteem and Reputation among them; they do
consequently, Baffle and Worm us out of our Trade in all those Parts. And, as
the taking one from among them to be our King, who had no rightful Title to be
so; and his having been their, and still being no more than an honorable a
Servant and dignified Minister of that Republic; gives a Speciousness to what
they say and alle^dg of this kind, among illiterate and credulous People: So,
his having made a Descent into this Kingdom with a war like Fleet and military
Land Power of their Preparation and Supply; and having since his Election to
the Thrones of these Kingdoms, assumed the confidence to Publish by his
Mercenary Scriblers, as well as to assert by several others of his Sychophant
Pensioners, that his Title over us is founded and Established in Conquest; and
That he has a Right to rule over us, as so many subdued Vassals, gives a kind
of moral Certainty to Language of that Nature; where the Methods, Arts and
Tricks of his coming to the Imperial Crown of these Kingdoms are not known and
understood. For tho under the Influence and Conduct of Madness, Distraction and
Folly, We have Invited and Advanced a Dutch Prince to be our King. Antecedently
to our waiting the Time he might possibly in Right have come to have been so:
Yet, it deserves our warmest and most angry Resentments, to hear that the
Hollanders boast and glory in their having Imposed such a one upon us. Nor can
we Vindicate our Selves from the Disgrace and Reproach, until We have both
Renounced Him, and severely Chastised Them, for the Insolency of pretending to
have done it. But alas! Should we Overlook this Allegation, which proceeds
merely from Boorish Pride: And their being bred in Mosses and Quagmires, there
are many other Advantages accruing unto them, by the Establishment of the
Prince of Orange upon the English Throne, that both Heartned them unto, and
Afforded them proper and natural Means of Encroaching upon, Impoverishing and
Supplanting us: Which they neither do, nor will ever fail Effectually to
Improve, according to those respective Tendencies that they lie in to our
Damage and to their Profit. Whereof the first that I shall name is this. That
Whereas the sole Power of Issuing out Edicts and Plac^ats, is entirely Lodged
in the States General, without their being either Obliged to Consult their
Stadtholder, or his being Vested with any Power to Control them in what they
Publish: The only Authority of Ordaining and Emitting Declarations and
Proclamations, is placed in this Dutch Prince and Belgic Stadtholder, by
virtue of the Right made Inherent in him, on the Foot of our having Elected him
King. For, as all the Priveledg appertaining to our Privy Council is only to
Advise him; but not to Club with him in an Authoritative Power; so it Appears
by too many modern Presidents, that few of those that are Members there, have
the Integrity and Fortitude to Contradict him in what he has a Mind to Publish;
and that his Pleasure is sufficient Reason with most of them to Concur, and
with others not to be so rude and unmanderly as to Oppose him, but silently to
Acquiesce. And should some be so Bold, as at any time to Express their Dissent;
the most Part have that Dependence upon him, in respect of Pensions, Offices
and other gainful Places, that he is always sure to have the Majority of the
Board to join with him in what he would have done. So that whenever the Dutch
do emit what Edicts they please, in Subserviency to the Interest of their
Provinces, Preclusive of any Consideration of these Kingdoms, and to their
sensible Prejudice: Our Monarch by his Interest in, and Oath and Obligation
unto them as their Stadtholder, must not only Approve as well as Connive at
what is prejudicial to great Britain Ireland; and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; but must Concur and Co^operate in the Execution of what their High
and Mightinesses have thought fit to Ordain. To which, should I under this Head
subjoin, how that while the States of the United Netherlands, do Retain fully
and wholly in themselves, the Right of making Peace and War; The Jurisdiction of
Constituting Ministers to foreign Princes and States; the Power of Repealing
old, and the enacting new Laws etc. And this Exclusively of the Prince of
Orange's having the least Authoritative Concernment in any of these Matters: At
the same time, this Gentle man has under the Notion and Quality of being our
King, not only a Negative upon all Parliamentary Bills; but the sole Power of
nominating and appointing Ambassadors and Envoys etc. and the whole Right and
Jurisdiction of making War or Peace: On which respective Differences of his
Power there and here; should I insist and enlarge, answerable to the Weight and
Merit of those Particulars; it might be made appear what vast Advantages the
Dutch have of and over us upon all these Accounts; and how they became thence
furnished with means of Ruining, as well as of Weakening and Supplanting us in
all wherein we are Interested, either at Home or Abroad. Not that I would have
the forementioned Prerogatives, which by our Constitution and Laws, stand
Vested in our Monarchs, withdrawn and pillaged from the Crown. Seeing not only
without them our Supreme Rulers would immediately cease to be Kings, and be
reduced to no better Condition than that of Doges of Venice; but because it is
necessary for the good and safety of the Subjects, as well as for the Strength
and Glory of the Government, that they should remain inseparably Settled where
they are. But all that I would insinuate is, that it is Inconsistent with the
Prosperity of these Nations, to have one and the same Person allowed and
continued to be our King, and yet to remain at the same time Stadtholder of the
Belgic Provinces. Nor do I need to Enumerate, much less to Demonstrate the
many Prejudices and Mischiefs, which must unavoidably attend our being thus
postur'd and stated; in that they not only lie obvious to Persons of the
meanest Understandings, who give themselves liberty to think; but, because we
have already Felt and Experience^d many of them in diverse and repeated
Instances. And therefore, I shall only make this Reflection upon, and Deduction
from what has been Suggested; namely, that the Dutch and We being so
differently Circumstanced, by reason of the discrepant Relations which the
Prince of Orange stands in to us and to them, there an absolute and
indispensible Necessity, that he Renounce being their Stadtholder, or cease to
be our King. It being impossible for him, with Justice and Equality, to
discharge the Duties of both, to Nations whose Interests are so Irreconcilable,
as well as Different, a^ ours and theirs are known to be. And seeing his first
and natural, a^ well as legitimate Ties are to them, and that their Humors are
agreeable, and their Concernments interwoven: It will be the Wisdom as much as
it is the Duty of these Nations to Return and Remit him back to them, to whom
we have found him so partially linked in his Affections, and so entirely
swallowed up, in Promoting their separate and particular Designs, as in
Recompense of the Honor we have bestowed upon him; the Services which we have
done, and the Treasure we have Wasted to Support his Ambition, and Gratify him
in the Upholding and Carrying on an unjust and destructive War; to Sacrifice
and Offer Us up as Victims to their Insolency and Covetousness. For it is
Apodictically Evident; that through his having so much Power here, and so little
there, we are only Properties and a Prey to the Hollanders; and that it lies
within their Circle to Encroach upon us, as much as they please, and to
undermine and Baffle us what they will in all our Concerns; So it is no less
Apparent that by his Countenancing, Encouraging and protecting of them in their
Treacheries, Rapines, and Depradations, we both are, and must be left without
Relief, Shelter and Defense, while we remain so Stupid and Sottish as to
continue him on the Throne.

Nor are they merely accommodated with Means of impoverishing, depopulating and
ruining us, by having through English Folly and Dutch Wheedle, obtained their
Belgic Stadtholder to be elected and advanced to Sit upon our Throne; but they
are farther Empowered to accomplish all those Ends upon us, through having so many
of their Countrymen Received into our Councils, Established over our Troops
Employed by the Crown of England into foreign Courts, and Dignified with those
Titles and Honors in Virtue whereof they sit in the Supreme Court of
Parliament, and have a Vote both in the Enacting and Repealing our Laws, and in
Adjudging Causes which arrive before that High Court of Judicature en dernier
Resort. It would afford too much matter for Satyr, as well as for Piquancy, to
find the chief Honors and Dignities of the Kingdom so ignominiously debased
and prostituted, as to be lavishly bestowed upon Outlandish Men, who have
neither Birth nor Merit to Entitle them thereunto; but who receive them as the
Compensations of their Master's Gratitude for Qualities and Meannesses in them,
and Services performed to him, which it would be offensive to persons either of
Religion or of moral Virtue, to have them mentioned. And the conferring English
Grandeurs upon so worthless People; and that upon so Vile Motives as these have
been granted, will in a little time render those Titles and Dignities, which
used heretofore to be the Rewards of distinguishing Worth and Virtue, and the
Signatures of the innocent and just Favor of our Princes to those that
deserved meritoriously of them and of their Country, to be more scorned and
despised than the Order of the Star is now in France, where it is become a
Disgrace to receive it, and is wholly grown obsolete and disused, since Lewis
the XI. splitting the Collar, which was the Mark of, and gave Investiture in it
about the Neck of the Captain of the Night-watch or of the Constable, who is
therefore called Chevalier du Guet. Nor can any acquainted either with our own,
or with foreign Histories, be ignorant how unacceptable and disgustful
Outlandish Men have been to Natives and what fatal Mischiefs they have brought
first upon the People, then upon the Prince, and at last upon themselves, where
they have been raised to Superlative Dignities, and placed at the head of
Affairs. Which, without traveling Abroad for Examples to Confirm, we may find
sadly verified in the Lives of Henry III. and Edward II. And it would be
prudent in Benting, if he would Consider the Fate and Destiny of Gaveston and
Spencer whereof our Histories can inform him; as likewise of the Monopoly which
they made of the Ears and Authority of our Princes; and of the Mischiefs which
they occasioned to the People.

And then for Dutch and Outlandish Officers, as the advancing them over the
English Troops is a Disgrace to the Kingdom, and the Diminution of the Honor
that belongs to the Crown of England, and gives general Dissatisfaction to
the Subjects; so it is an Affront put upon the Parliament, and a Ridiculing as
well as a Despising of the Address made to the Prince of Orange, Feb. 18, 1692.
by the House of Lords, wherein they desire, That the Chief Commander of the
English Forces under His Majesty, should be a subject Born in his Majesty's
Dominions, to which he gave answer, That he would Consider of it, but has all
along since done in this, as in every thing else, Namely, treated the Council
of Peers, with Neglect and Scorn, and left the British Soldiers not only under
the Command of Foreigners as their Supreme Officers, but to be Insolently
Insulted over by them* But, to wave many Reflections, which the particulars now
mentioned, are liable to have made upon them, I shall only observe in what
Subse^viency these things ly to our being Ruined by the Dutch, and what
Improvement they have already made of them to that Purpose. For by having
Batavians in our Councils, they are not only made acquainted with all the
Secrets of the Board, relating either to State or Trafick, but they have those
present there, who will Countermine as well as Betray them, if they be not
Calculated and Adapted to a Dutch Interest and Design. And whence was it that
our East India Company came to be so long neglected in all the Applications
they made to the great Man at Kensington, but that the Hollanders were to be
Encou^aged and Assisted in the supplanting and and worming them them out of
that opulent Trade, and have Time vouchsafed them for doing of it. Yea, the
late Seizure of so many of their Ships, which were the richest that ever were
Fraught from thence to England; by which both the Nation is so much
impoverished as well as deprived and pillaged of those Commodities which it
stood so greatly in need of, and that Society vastly sunk in their Stock as
well as Reputation, if it were pursued to the Original and true Source of it,
will be found to have proceeded from the Treachery of Dutch Ministers in our
Councils, and from their hired and bribed Pensioners, who gave Information to
Holland, whence it became Betrayed and Discovered to the French, at what Ports
in Ireland the Company had Ordered their Ships to put in, till they might be
furnished with a Convoy to protect them home. And that Passage in the late
Speech to both Houses, November. 23. That they would have a Regard to the East
India Trade, least it should be lost to the Nation; was only to Cover the
Treachery, and to prevent its being enquired into. And it lies so much under
every ones Prospect, that it needs only be pointed at and not insisted upon,
how much the Dutch stand advantaged to Endamage us by their having the same
Benting qualified to sit in the House of Lords, under the Character of an
English Peer* In which Capacity, abstracting from the Influence he has over his
Master, to Sway and Determine him to put a Negative upon such Bills as may be
prepared there and in the House of Commons to Skreen us from Belgic
Encroachments and Rapines, he is Capable sometimes by his own single Vote, and
often so by the many Proxies, which some ^hro Fear, others through Flattery and
many in order to Court a place and Preferment, do lodge with him to get those
Bills thrown out, which were either Introduced there by some generous Peer that
loves his Country; or framed and sent up thither by the House of Commons for
their Lordships Concurrence, in order to protect our Trade, preserve our
Constitution, and to prevent the Slavery, as well as the Poverty which the
Dutch seek to have Overthrown, and wish and endeavor to have us reduced unto.
Nor was there ever a good Bill formed upon the Design of being a Fence about
our Lives, Liberties and Estates, whether it began in the Upper House, or came
conveyed thither from the Lower since the Revolution, which this Gentleman
raised to the Honor of Peerage, by a Merit singular and peculiar to himself,
has not both given his own Vote, and if Occasion was applied, all the Right,
Authority and Power vested in him by Proxies, for the casting it out and the
rejecting of it. To which, under this Head I shall only briefly add: That it is
no less than an avowed and visible Betraying both of the Honor and Interest of
England to the Dutch, to employ a Batavian under a Character derived from the
Crown of England, to any Foreign King or State about British Affairs and
Concerns. And for any one stiling himself King of England, to appoint a Dutch
Man Amhassador or Envoy to any Court in Europe, can be upon no other Motive
than of Sarificing the Concernments of England, in that Court and Country, to
the Pleasure and Profit of the Hollanders; seeing we want not Men of Quality,
Sense and Merit of our own, to be sent Abroad under those Characters. And yet
this Belgic Prince, now set over us, and whom our wise Senators have
accustomed themselves to call their and our most Gracious King, Values himself
upon Treating us after this rate, as appears by his Interposing in the
Vindicating, Justifying and Protecting of Mine Here Schonenberg at Madrid, whom
in his Letters to the King and Court of Spain, he calls his Ambassador. And
according Resents the Driving him out of that City, as a Violation of the
Rights and Laws of Nations; tho it was for Crimes that any other Prince besides
ours, would have Chastised and not have Defended him. Nor does the Privelege
belonging to the Character he bears, give him Security by any Laws in reference
to the Cause for which he was Insulted, from being as justly as he was
ignominiously Dealt with. Nevertheless, this Belgic Prince has espoused and
pushed the Vindication and Defense of this Dutch Here so far, as to have Forbid
the Spanish Ambassador to present any Memorial, or to Appear at Court, till he
have Satisfaction given him in Reference to that Batavian, whom he has the
Indiscretion and Confidence, in the View and Face of the World, to style an
Ambassador from the Crown of England. And, were the Wheedle of Rescuing Nations
from Popery and Slavery, as proper to Influence the Subjects of his Catholic
Majesty; and to Pervert them from the Allegience to their Monarch, as they did
the weak and credulous People of these Kingdoms; This Prince Errant, who not
only Fancieth himself another Hercules, born and raised up to tame Monsters;
but one Divinely Commissioned to give Laws to all Nations, and to Trample on
Crowned Heads, and wrest Sc^ptres out of the Hands of Kings; he would Embark
speedily with his Dutch Janissaries for Cadiz, to Drive his Catholic Majesty
out of Spain, as he did the King of Great Britain from his Dominions* In the
mean time, the Fraud to which this Schonenberg was accessory, and the Insolence
he was guilty of toward the King of Spain, shows the Prince of Orange's Skill
in the choice of his Ministers to be Employed Abroad under public Characters;
and how well Qualified this Dutch Man was for being Constituted the Ambassador
of the King of England: Seeing it is most certain, that as Dutch Stadtholder,
he could not give that Title, nor the Powers belonging to it. But is not
England in the mean time, in a safe and fine Condition, to have all the Affairs
of the Kingdom, that are to be Transacted by a Person vested with that
Character, in the only Nation and Court of Europe where we have now most to do,
and are most embarkt in Commerce and Traffic, and where our Concernments do
chiefly lie* to be not only Trusted in the Hands, and put under the Care and
Conduct of a Dutch Man; but of one whom the Hollanders themselves have given
the same Style and appendant Powers unto, for the Management of what appertains
to them both in the way of State and Trade? To whom we may be not only sure
that he will be Truer than to Us, but that it was intended by the Prince of
Orange, he should be so. And should any be so foolishly Favorable as to
Entertain a better Construction of his Highness's Intentions; Yet it is
Demonstrable that Nature and Interest will be prevalent in most Men, especially
in a Hollander, above Duty and Obligation. Accordingly, Mr. Stanhop who is both
an English Man and sent from hence to Reside there in the quality of William's
Envoy, is not only sensible of the Affront done to himself, through a Dutch Man's
being Authorized under a higher Cha, racter, to meddle at that Court in
British Concerns; but of the Injury done to the Kingdom by reason of that
Hollander's Sacrificing them to a Belgic Interest. So that by this Conduct of
the Gentleman at Kensington, the Sheep are committed to the Wolves to keep; and
the Guards allotted for our Defense, are Placed upon us in Order to Assassinate
Us. Nay, at other Courts, and particularly at the Hague, where he pretends to
Employ English Men, under the Character of Envoys and Ambassadors from this
Kingdom: He Trusts none of them in the great Affairs and Concerns of State
which are Transacted in that Court; but Uses them only in Complements, Trifles
and Baggatells; or at most, in receiving and delivering such Letters as are of
no Importance. Witness, among others, my Lord Dursly, whom I do therefore name,
because, he is both a Person, who for Honor, Prudence and good Sense, is
qualified to discharge the Duties of a Public Minister in any Court
whatsoever; and is one who preserves that Regard to his Country and to his own
Dignity and Reputation, that he would neither be accessory to see the Nation
Betrayed, nor Silently Connive at it, and whom therefore tho the Prince of
Orange kept a great while at the Hague, under a Public Character from hence,
yet he was let into none of the Secrets, nor trusted in the Management of the
Weighty Affairs of State; which were Agitated and Adjusted between our Belgic
King, and those who have assumed to themselves the Haughty Style of High and
Mighty Lords, and in whose hands is the Administration of the Government of the
Seven Provinces, in all things relative to Peace, War, Traffic and Commerce.
Nor, is it matter of Wonder or Surprise, that he Treats those English with
Disdain as well as Reservedness, whom he pretends to Employ under Public
Characters Abroad, seeing the Ministers who are supposed to be at the Head of
Affairs at Home, and who are believed to be admitted into all the Secrets of
the Government, are made acquainted with very little, Previous to it is coming
to be (...), but then they whom he did not think worthy to be his Counselors,
tho they bear the Name, are called upon and set at work as his Tools, to see
that performed which only himself and his Minion Benting, and may be one
certain Person more, who is in credit with him for having formerly betrayed
unto him both his Master and the Kingdom, had Debated and Resolved upon. Yet
those whom he calls his Principal Secretaries of State, signify no more, nor
make no better Figure in the most important and weighty Matters, than that of
little and Servile Commis; which one of these so Resented heretofore, that he
Surrendered his Post and withdrew from business, but being Tempted with the
Profits, Salaries and Perquisites of the Place, and Allured by a Lofty Title,
and a Blew Ribon, and likewise Flattered with the Hopes that were given him of
being otherwise, and more Honorably dealt with for the future, he has
reassumed it again, but meets with the same Reasons, and has the same Cause
given him of Abandoning it afresh, as he Pretended to have for his Deserting it
before.

But moreover, besides all these Advantages; the Dutch are possessed for the
Undoing us, through the Interest they have in their Stadtholder, and our British
King; or by reason of the Services which a Hollander can do them to our
Prejudice by being Constituted Ambassador o^ Envoy from the Crown of England to
foreign Courts; or, by virtue of the Capacity that Benting is in to Betray us,
and to be useful unto them and promote their separate Designs and Undertakings,
by the Room he fills both in our Council and Senate House; as well as by the
Post of special Access and Favor which he enjoys about his Master: This same
Gentleman, Benting, who is the Minion and Darling of our Monarch for
Familiarities and Privacies which I blush to mention, has Granted unto him as
well as Assumed the whole Superintendency of the Kingdom of Scotland and
Governs it entirely by his Creatures, who are the only Persons there Trusted
with the Administration, and to whom he gives such Measures, in Reference both
to the Legislative and to the Executive Part of the Government in that Kingdom,
as may best Quadrate with the Benefit of Holland, and prove most Disserviceable
to the Prosperity of England. Witness among many other Things, the New Erecting
of a Scotch East India Company, and the Terms and Immunities upon which it is
Established, whreof I shall discourse hereafter

Having now briefly Detected and Declared the known perfidious and encroaching
Temper of the Dutch Nation; what awak'ning Examples and Premonitions we had
antecedently to the Revolution, to Fear and Expect their dealing Treacherously
and Rapaciously with us, should we have the Folly and Madness as to Trust them,
and of which Means and Advantages they became thereby possessed, for
Encroaching upon and Undermining us in all our Concernments. I shall proceed in
the next Place to Discover and lay Open, some of those many Methods, Ways and
Instances wherein since that time, they have Committed Depradations upon us,
and made us both the Tools of their Sel^ish and Ambitious Designs, and the
Prey of their Malice, Craft and Avarice. And the Granting away such large
Estates* and the Settleing such ample Inheritances upon some Individuals of the
Dutch Nation, may be just^y accounted a Robbery Perpetrated upon the Kingdom,
and a Plundering of the Crown and People, to Enrich both those Persons upon
whom those Lands are bestowed, and the whole Belgic Republic, which is not
only made Opulent, by this Accruing Wea^th of its particular Subjects, but
whither the Profits and Emoluments of those Estates are Carried and
Transported. For not to insist upon the vast Sums of Money which many of that
People have Acquired Here, in the way of Salaries, Gifts and Bribes since the
Prince of Orange made a Descent into this Kingdom, and which they have Conveyed
and Transmitted thither, to the Enriching that Commonwealth as well as
themselves; how many Noble Real Estates have been Conferred upon and Vested in
them. And to omit the many other Alienations of Lands from the Crown; and the
Ravishment of Ancient Freeholds and Inheritances from diverse of of the Subjects
of these Dominions that have been lavishly bestowed upon your Ginkles and your
Rovignies, the later of whom besides the Grant of the Title and Honor of Lord
Viscount Galloway, has the Estate of Sir Patrick Trant given unto him, which
has been represented and is held worth Three Thousand Pounds Sterling.
Annually; and the Former is not only Created Earl of Athlone, but has the
Estate of the Earl of Limerick, as likewise that of the Lord Baron of Stone
Conferred upon him, of which the Last, is reckoned to be, at least, worth Two
Thousand Five Hundred Pounds per Ann. and the First, Three Thousand Pounds
Yearly. But, I shall only take Notice, and think it Proof enough of what I have
Suggested, of the Large Grants made to Benting of the Lands at Theobalds, and
of the Lordships of Denbigh Land, Bromfield and Yale in the County of Denbigh:
And which a^e not only Given unto Him from the Crown for a certain Term of
Years, or merely during his Master's Life; but are Disposed aw^y and Alienated
for Ever to Him and his Heirs. For the Dutch Gentleman knowing his own
Invaluable, tho Secret Merits; and how and in what Manner he had Debased and
Prostituted himself to Deserve of his Highness, by Accommodating and Serving
him in his unnatural Pleasures, thought that if Mrs. Villars, for Gratifying
him in his Lusts in a more natural Way albeit not a lawful, has Merited the
Gift of the King's Lands in Ireland, which without another Revolution, or a
Resumption of them by Act of Parliament, will come at last to be worth Twenty
Thousand Pounds per Ann. to her and her Posterity: He might well Pretend unto,
and Claim something more Considerable, as having Contracted a higher Guilt, and
Submitted to a worse Infamy for the Purchasing of it, than She is believed to
have done. And therefore not being Contented with Lands of Theobalds, which
were bestowed upon him soon after the Prince of Orange was Advanced into a
Condition and Capacity of making Grants and Alienations of that Kind; and of
which he has made large Improvements, and Raised vast Sums from thence by
Sales and otherwise, to the wonderful Wrong and Damage of all those that had
Leases of and Tenant Right in them, from and under the late Duke of Albemarle,
to whose Father they were Judged a very Royal and Valuable Recompense, for the
Noble Service He did, in Retrieving and Re-establishing the Government upon its
Ancient Legal Bottom; the Restoring the late King Charles to his Rightful and
Hereditary Soveraignity, and for Re-estating these Kingdoms in the peaceable
Possession of their Laws and Liberties: I say. that not being Satisfied with
this ample Donative and Gift, He has lately Begged of King William the other
Lands I have Mentioned, and has had them Granted unto Him without the least
Regard to the Right of the Crown, the Property of the Prince of Wales, the Laws
of this Kingdom, or to the Interest which some Hundreds of Persons have more or
less in them, Of which Acquisition on Benting's part and Alienation on
William's, it will not be amiss to enlarge a little, that we may the better
Discern, and come the more Sensibly under the Impression, both of the
Despotical and Unlimimited Absoluteness which the Usurper and his Minions
Challenge over us; and of the Slavish State and Tenure we are Reduced unto, of
having our Estates wrested from us and given away, to what Degree, Measure and
Proportion one Dutch Man shall have the Impudence to Demand, and the other the
Insolency and Tyranny to Grant. For, if we look into the Extent and Largeness
of this Grant; it is the Giving away no less than the Dominion and Property of
Five Parts of Six of one Entire County; which as it is too great a Power and
Inheritance for any Foreign Subject to Possess and Inherit: So it may hereafter
prove Unsafe for the Government, to have so Numerous a People made Subject
unto, and Dependant on Him: Seeing it is of that vast Dimension, and ample
Jurisdiction, that near Fifty Mean Lordships Hold of those Manors, and above
Fifteen Hundred Freeholders are Tenants there to the King, and thereby Obliged
unto Him under a particular Allegiance, besides that which they ow him in the
Quality, and on the Foot of their being his Subjects. And it is so particular a
Revenue Anciently Vested in the Prince of Wales, that it cannot Legally, and
according to the Customs, Constitution and Laws of England be Alienated from
him. And therefore, upon the Creation of a Prince of Wales, there are upon the
Right of Tenure under him, and of Tenancy unto him, Mises of Eight Hundred
Pounds payable to the said Prince. Nor is it unworthy of Remark, that in the
Preamble of the Statute of the 21. Jac. Cap. 29, it was brought into Doubt and
questioned, whether Charles the First that was then Prince of Wales and Duke of
Cornwall, whom the Statute Declares to have an Inheritance in both, tho under
special Limitation, could Let or Rent Leases for Three Lives or any longer than
his Own: And it is there Declared that he could not unless such Leases were
Confirmed in Parliament. And the Reason is, Because upon want of a Prince of
Wales, that Inheritance becomes immediately Vested in the Crown. So that if the
Prince of Wales himself, who has an Inheritance in that Revenue, cannot Grant
Estates out of it for any longer than his own Life, without the Consent and
Authority of Parliament; it demonstratively Follows, that the Prince of Orange,
who by the very Title that he possesses the Crown, has at most, only an
Estate in it for his own Life; cannot Grant away and Alienate it, without the
Consent of both Houses of Parliament Declared in and by a formal and express
Statute. To which I will presume to add, that in Case of a Failure of a Prince
of Wales, it does not settle in the Crown as a Propriety* but as an
Usufructuary* till a Prince of Wales be Created, to whose Creation that Revenue
is Annexed, by those words in our Law, To him and his Heirs who shall be Kings
of England. Nor was there ever a Disposal or Alienation of that Estate from the
Crown, save when Queen Elizabeth who was as much the Idol as she was called the
Protectoress of her People, ventured to grant it unto and bestow it upon the
Earl of Leicester; but that both occasioned such an Insurrection and Rebellion
and was likely to raise and continue such a Civil War in the Kingdom, that
Leicester was glad both to depart from all Pretense of Claim that was made unto
him by that Grant, and quietly to Resign it; and the Queen, who wanted neither
Spirit to Assert her legal Rights and Prerogatives, nor Interest in the
Affections of her Subjects, for Support and Justification of them, was joyful
to put an End to those Intestine Divisions and Troubles, b^ Reassuming those
Lands to the Crown, where they have ever since continued. Nor can a rightful
and heredita^y King of England even in the Case, and on the S^pposal that there
were no Prince of Wales, legally Alienate and Give away those Lands from the
Crown; seeing they are no otherwise Vested in it, than in Trust to be Preserved
forth coming to the Use, Profit and Honor of such a Prince when there comes to
be One, and at what time he is Created and Declared. And therefore in and by
the very Statute of Charles II. which gave Power as well as Liberty for the
Sale and Disposal of the Fee Farm Rents, there is a particular and express
Exception of the forementioned Welsh Rents, tho there was then no Prince of
Wales, nor any Prospect that there would be one of that King's Body: which
plainly Imported, that the Parliament took the Welsh Revenue nor to be
Alienable. Much less then can the Prince of Orange, that has no hereditary
Right to the Crown, but has only Obtained it by the illegal and merely
pretended Choice of the People, which is in other Terms, to have Usurped it;
and who by the very Act of Settlement, has but an Estate for Life in the
Possession of it, Grant away the Inheritance and absolute Fee of the
Principality of Wales. For, it is no less an Absurdity in Law to say that a
Tenant for Life can Grant a Fee, than to say, that a Tenant in Fee can Grant no
more than for a Life. But it appears that that tho the Power of a lawful King,
and of a legitimate Prince of Wales, be Limited and Restrained within the
Precincts of Law; yet that the Power of an Usurper is boundless and unconfined.
However, it is no way incongruous, that he who has violently Snatched his
Father in Law and Uncle's Crown from his Head, and Drove him from his
Dominions, should also take upon himself to Grant away and Alienate the
Inheritance of his Cousin, and to Disinherit him of it. But why does he not as
well make Benting Prince of Wales, as to give him the Revenue of that
Principality? Seeing he may as lawfully, and by the same Measures of Justice do
the First, as he has done the Last.

And no doubt but that as he has Inclination to it, we may also live to see it
done, if he can but once Emerge out of the present War, and thereupon bring
over from the Continent, a numerous and triumphant Outlandish Army to support
and protect him in his Usurpation and Tyranny, and make us with Tameness and
Decency wear our Chains. In the mean time, considering the Depopulaation and
Poverty which through a long and costly War, the Nation is already reduced unto,
we may make this Reflection upon, and this Inference from the Prodigality of
our Belgic King to his Dutch Minion and to his Outlandish Janissaries, viz.
that it can be done upon upon no other Design than to gratify the
Commo-nwealth of Holland, and to raise them to an Ascendency of Wealth and
Power over us. For had he the least Rega^d to the Welfare of England, he would
blush to ask such immense Sums of the Parliament, when he is alienating and
disposing away the standing Revenues of the Crown to his Whores and Burda^^^^
For how can we imagine that any thing should be held needful to be Levied of the
People, if it were not in Subse^viency to an Outlandish Interest; when we see
not only those Lands that are pretended to be forfeited, but those Ancient
Inheritances that the Sovereign and Royal Family should Subsist upon,
squandered away upon little Foreigners, which were bred and heretofore
accustomed to live upon the Fragments of their Master's Table. Surely we may
expect from the Justice and Wisdom of this Parliament; That before they Empty
the Purses of those they Represent, they will enquire how the Revenues vested
in the Crown are bestowed and applied. For whatsoever Usurpers may dare to do,
in wasting the Treasure and Inheritance of the Throne by Buildng Palaces, and
furnishing them splendidly at Loo, and for making Indorsements on the
posteriour Parchments of those I have mentioned. Our Natural and Lawful Kings
never used to demand Succors of their Subjects, till they had Exhausted
themselves, and Disbursed their whole Revenue in the Service, and for the
Protection of their People. Nor is there any thing more frequently met with,
and better known in our Law, than that there have been Acts of Resumption of
former Grants and Donations from the Crown, whenever the Nation has been
Engaged in an expensive War, and the People have Groaned under large Taxes. And
as this is the first Original of the Kind, that ever we had Experience of in
this Kingdom, and for which we are indebted to Holland; so I hope, that after
our Deliverance from a Belgic Prince. we shall have no Copy of it; or that any
King hereafter will make Alienations of Lands from the Crown, when he is under
Necessities of demanding Aids of his People, for his Support and Assistance in
Wars wherein he may come to be engaged, To which I will only add, that under
all those lavish and squandring Wastes and Consumptions of our Prince upon
Dutch, for Closet and Chamber Services; he has not only been Narrow and
Parcimonious enough, but Niggardly and highly Ungrateful to the English;
because it could not benefit Holland. Whereof among others, Talmash that is
Dead, and old Danby who is Alive* are known Instances; tho they Served him both
in Policy and War, and Contributed farther to his Exaltation to the Throne, and
to the keeping him in it, than Thousands of his Countrymen were capable of
doing; and especially beyond what the Chocolate and Carpet Gentleman I have
been speaking of had either Courage or Brain to Attempt. In recompense whereof,
instead of any Lands, and much less those of the Crown; the one was sent and
abandoned to be Killed by the French, but Murdered by the English abroad; and
the other is Forsaken, Given up and Sacrificed at ^^me, to the old Envy and
bigoted Rage of his Enemies.

But whereas what I have now Represented may seem to Issue only in the
Enriching a few Hollanders, at our Loss and Expense; and not to amount to the
Benefit and Advantage either of the Community of that People, or of those
States, unless Secondarily and after several Removes; I shall therefore advance
to the laying open and displaying, wherein to our Vast and infinite Damage we
are Bubbled out of our Money and Treasure, and made a Prey to that Republic,
through the large Sums daily Allotted and Paid them out of our Exchequer. Nor is
the way wherein it is done such a Mystery as needs Accuracy of Parts, and great
Penetration to Comprehend it, seeing it cannot escape Proving Demonstratively
Obvious to every One, who will give himself leave to Consider how many of the
Dutch Troops, and of those that Constitute their Particular Quota, are upon the
English Establishment, and Paid with English Money: For as if it had not been
enough to have been Guilty both of that Prodigal Folly, and that Treasonable
Crime of giving them at one time Six Hundred Thousand Pounds, as a pretended
Re-imbursment of the Charge and Expense they Alleged they had been at in
sending their Fleet and Army hither, upon the Motives as they had the Hypocrisy
and Impudence to say, and We the Simplicity and Lunatism to believe, of
Rescuing Us from Popery and Slavery, but as appears by the Event, for
Introducing Atheism, Thraldom and Poverty; We did not only over and above that,
Maintain and Pay their Whole Army here for a Considerable time, but have had
ever since Six or Seven Holland Regiments upon English Establishment, and both
Maintained with good English Money, and at the Proportion of our Pay, which is
larger then they allow to those Troops which remain under their own
Establishment. Sure it might have been thought sufficient, and would be so by
any Prince, save this Dutch one, who inwardly hates Us, and by all the Methods
of his Administration seeks and Pursues our Ruin, that besides the Raising
and Maintaining the largest Body of British Troops, that has for many Ages
been Employed upon the Continent, and over and above the Charges we are at in
Assisting and Relieving the Duke of Savoy, and on those particular Forces,
which are on English Pay in Piedmont, We should be at the Expense of
Purchasing, Subsisting and Paying all the Danes, most of the Hess, many of the
Lunenburgh, and diverse of the Swiss, and some of the Brandenburgh Forces that
are now in the Confederate Army in Flanders; but that after all this Prodigal*
Expense, which tho it may possibly give us the Reputation of a Rich, yet will
not even with our Allies themselves acquire us the Credit of a Wise Nation; We
should be so Ridiculously silly as to Bear and Defray the whole charge of so
many Regiments belonging directly to the Dutch, and who being entirely under
the Authority and Command of the States General, and of the Belgic Provinces,
will in Reward of our Indiscreet and Wastful Liberality to them, be ready to
Invade Us and to Cut our Throats whenever their Masters the High and Mighty
Lords, and their Dutch Stadtholder shall require them to do it. And tho it may
seem a Paradox to Soft-headed Unthinking People, yet it is a Measured and
Certain Truth* that as all the Confederates give not one Moiety of what is both
necessary, and applied to the upholding and carrying on of this War; so
scarcely a Moiety of that which is granted and raised as the Share and Quota of
England is disbursed and laid out upon our Troops. But it is either bestowed in
the Hireing Foreign Princes to continue in this united and conjunct Alliance;
or in the paying Outlandish Forces, who being ready to Starve in their own
Countries, will serve the Devil, or the Mogull for Money; or it is lavished away
in reproachful Gratuities upon Minions under the Notion of being expended for
private Service, as indeed it is, tho for a Criminal and Villainous one; or it
is disposed in the bribing Members of Parliament to betray the Trust reposed in
them, by those that have Chosen them, and to Sell their Country; or it is
consumed in the making and keeping up of Sham Plots, and upon Scoundrels and
Varle^s to Swear peaceable Men falsely out of their Lives and Estates. And least
it should remain any longer a Mystery, why William is so fond of Foreign
Soldiers as to receive them in those vast Numbers he does into English Pay;
when the Natives of these three Kingdoms, do not only equal those of all
Nations in Valor and Bravery, and without being thought a Disparagement to
those of other Countries, are acknowledged to excel those of most; and who have
at all times been forward and ready to take Arms, when the Cause has been just
and honorable, and where their Treatment has been humane, compassionate and
good. I shall therefore resolve this Riddle, and detect both upon what Motives
and Prospects he does so; which accordingly in brief are these, namely, That
having formed Designs both of Enslaving us to Himself, and of making us Vassals
and Tributaries to his beloved Dutch, whenever he can Emerge out of the War:
And being apprehensive that Native and British Subjects will be so far from
being his Tools to Enthrall themselves and their Off spring, as well as their
Countrymen and their Posterity; That they will both abandon and withstand Him
in the Attempt, and be provoked to revenge the Affront and Injustice which
shall be offered of this Kind, to these Kingdoms, and the People of them: And
the^eupon that he may be in a Condition to Execute hereafter without hazard
what his Soul, through Pride and Malice, is now in Travail with; he both secretly
Lists and Armeth the French Hugonots here, and draws what Outlandish Troops he
can, into his immediate Pay and Service from Abroad. Nay, in subserviency to
this Projection, he not only puts Foreigners into the supreme Command over all
the English and Scotch Forces, tho contrary to an Address of Parliament; but
there is not one British Regiment in the whole Army in the Low Countries, into
which he has not by his despotick Power and absolute Authority introduced
Aliens both as Commission Officers and Subalterns. Which being done in
Contempt, as well as Neglect of an Address of the House of Peers, that I have
formerly mentioned, their Lordships do now seem sensible of the Affront put
upon themselves, as they are not only the Consiliarii nati of our Princes; but
as they are the chiefest and noblest part of the Great Council of the Kingdom.
And therefore like unto what the Peers of England used to be, and as becomes
the Patriots of their Country, they have demanded a List of all the Officers
that Command our British Troops, and of what Country they individually are.
Which if King William cause to be Presented to them with that Truth and
Sincerity, which ought to be the inseparable Qualities of a Prince, both their
Lordships and all the World will have Reason to be Astonished at the Wrong and
Dishonor done to these Nations, in the setting so many Foreigners over our
Forces to Command them. Whereof we have already seen and felt the fatal
Effects, in the late Count Solme's Abandoning so many of our Men to be
Butchered at the Battle of Steinkerk; when instead of supporting them as he
ought, and as they expected, he lay at distance Covered and never Advanced
toward their Relief. And where our Men behaving themselves with that wonderful
Bravour that is natural to them, it is Commonly believed, even by our Enemies
as well as by others, that a Defeat might have been given the French, if those
British Troops, which were so shamefully Deserted and treacherously
Sacrificed, had been reinforced and succored as they should have been. But as
to the List which the House of Peers have demanded; it is too probable that
King William will with the same Regardlesness both to Truth and to his Honor,
endeavor to Sham them off with a false and imperfect Account of those
Officers, as he has ventured to do the House of Commons, in the State of the
War he has caused lay before them of the Quota's of the several Confederates
for the Year 1696. if their Lordships will have the Tameness to sit down with,
and acquiesce in it, without farther Examination and Enquiry. But to proceed;
It may not be amiss to observe, how that in order that none of those whom he
has already Mustered, in order to this future Design; or of whose Service he
thinks himself sure, when the time arrives of Accomplishing it, may in the
Interim languish and decay in their Zeal toward the Enterprise, he loses no
opportuni^y of placing Marks of his Favor and Kindness upon them; tho it be
sometimes to the Forfeiture of his Discretion, and prove the giving too early
an Alarm to England, of the lurking and malicious Intentions which he
entertains for us. So that when he Addressed his Parliament on Nov. 23. last,
he could not omit Recommending his Mustered and Regimented Hugonots to their
Care and Supply; tho he did not think those many Thousands of Starving Widows
and Orphans, whose Husbands and Fathers perished in his Service, worth the
being mentioned to them for Relief. And much less had he the Justice and
Goodness to desire their Aids and Supplies, in behalf of those many once
Wealthy and Trading Families, that are since the Revolution reduced to extreme
Poverty, by his pursuing his concerted Measures with Holland, for the ruining
of our Trade; and through the Treachery as well as Neglect of the Commissioners of
the Admiralty, who Act by his Order and Instructions; and rather choose to
Sacrifice the Kingdom, than in any thing to Control his pleasure. Of whom, if
the Parliament requires not an exact and severe Account of all our Losses by
Sea, and make both their Lives and Estates responsible for their Sloth and
Infidelity in protecting our Commerce and Traffic, we shall have reason to
think both the Houses, as well as the Gentlemen of that Commission; engaged
equally to hasten and see the Ruin of the Kingdom. Nor can any other Reason be
given, save that which I have assigned, why King William should Address his
Parliament, with that Concernedness he did, for a Benevolence to be granted to
the Hugonots, at a time when the other Supplies he demanded will arise to m^re
in case they be Granted, than all the Circulating, and very probably, more than
all the Real Money in the Kingdom will amount unto. Moreover, the Condition of
the French Refugees, is not only infinitely better here, than ever it was in
their own Country, but exceeds as well as equalleth the State of our own
People of Rank and Quality with them. For instead of Canvas and Sabotts, which
used to be the Habit and Dress of many of them in France, they are now both
Shod and Clad as decently and richly as the best of the English are; upon, as
well as among whom they do Subsist. And in the place of feeding commonly upon
Herbs, and only now and then upon Flesh, and that the Refuse of Markets, which
was their Custom; nothing will now content them but the choicest Provisions
that Butchers and Poulterers can Furnish them with, and that in large
Proportions also: Which also shows that while our Purses are almost emptied,
theirs are become well filled since their Arrival hither, that they can be able
to bear the Charges of living so splendidly, as they are now known to do.

But it shows the Mean and Contemptible Opinion this Dutch Prince has of the
Understanding and Wisdom of an English Parliament, otherwise he would not in
the forementioned Particular have Treat-them as so many Fops, that are to be
Bubbled and Cullyed out of their Own, and the Nations Money: And indeed he has
had Just cause given him to account the Generality of the People of England, to
be no less Fools than in Subserviency to his Ambition they have discovered
themselves to be Knaves. And it is but Just, that upon his finding them to be
People of so little Conscience toward King James, he should in Reference to
his own Concernments, Esteem and Treat them as People both of as little Wit and
Honesty. And this I dare Avouch, as having had it from those that are
Conversant with his Privadoes, and with such as are upon his Secrets, Namely,
that he looks upon most of the English as no better than Rogues and Traitors;
and as he knows no difference in this Point betwixt Whig and Tory, so he
Resolves to Treat them all equally and alike, if he can but once put an end to
this Present War. And what we may then Expect from him answerable to those fine
Characters he is pleased to give Us, may be easily guessed by the Murder of
Glenco, and so many other Innocents as were there Massacred by his Express
Order and Command, after having had all Assurances given them by those in
Commission under him of their Protection. Nor can we after that Treacherous and
Bloody President question the Entertainment we are to meet with from this Dutch
Prince's Cruelty and Malice, as soon as he has his Hugonots here, and his
Outlandish Janissaries from Abroad in a readiness, and all Mustered together
upon the Spot to Execute his Commands. And as his Outlandish Troops Abroad have
such Officers Commanding them, who will as readily put in Execution all his
Barbarous and Inhumane Orders, as well as those Degenenerate Natives, Hill,
Hamilton and Glenlion, etc. Did that which was sent down to Require and
Authorize the Massacre in Scotland, Anno 1691. So We have little reason to
believe otherwise, than that the French and pretended Hugonot Schombergh, whom
in derision of the Nation and in Contempt of the House of Peers, he has
Advanced to be General over all the Forces in England, will be forward enough
both to employ such of them as he can Debauch to Perpetrate a Cruelty, and to
Instigate and to make use of his Refugee Countrymen, to Concur and Assist in
Inslaving Us, and to Cut our Throats, if we will not Tamely Submit whenever
the time comes, that such a Work is Seasonable to be put in Execution. And the
late Insolence, as well as Illegality Committed by the Hugonots, who live
within the Precincts of Westminster, in the not only daring to pretend to have
a Vote in the Election of Members and Burgesses for that place to serve in
Parliament, and in having the Impudence to come Four or Five several Persons
out of one House upon that Errand, where they live crowded together, or rather
as Soldiers disposed in Baracks and quartered upon the Kingdom, than as Tenants
or Inmates; but their Hectoring, Insulting and ^rudely Attacking those English,
who were disposed to give their Votes for others than they had received their
Cue from Whitehall and Kensington, may teach us what they are capable of
attempting for the Subversion of our Laws and Liberties, and what we may justly
look for at their hands, when they have an opportunity, and the Word is given
them. For it is an Affront to our Laws, and a Banter put upon our
Understandings, to say that Aliens who remain under the Character and Quality
of such, and who neither can Purchase nor Inherit Lands should have the Right
and Priveledg to Vote in the Choice of Members of Parliament. And we shall
deserve that all Mischiefs should Ove^take ^us, which he Designs to bring upon
us, if the De-Witting in Holland, the Gaffnying in Ireland, the Glencoing in
Scotland, do not Warn us to provide for our Safety, which we can never have
Assurance of, if this Man continue in the Authority and Power he has; and much
less can we ^ope for it, if he Arrive at more.

But, to advance a Step farther in an Enquiry after and into the Spoils and
Depradations, as well as the Gains and Advantages, which the Dutch have made,
and continue to make of these Nations since the Revolution, and that their
Belgic S^adtholder became Seated in the Throne of England: Besides the
Obt^ining so many of their own Troops, to be brought upon an English
Establishment, and to be paid with our Money, as has been already declared;
have also made a vast and unconceivable Profit by the Money that has been
Allowed and Transmitted for the Payment of our own Troops. For, as in order
thereunto, much of the ready Cash of the Nation has been Exported from hence;
so most of that Money has come to Circulate in Holland and a great part of it
to Center there* And surely it must be a great Damage to us, and an answerable
Gain to them, to have Two Hundred Thousand Pound^; or at least Fifteen Hundred
Thousand Pounds, Carried yearly in Specie from hence, and all to come either
first or last into the hands of the Dutch, and Annually to increase their
Treasure in that proportion* To which let this be subjoyned; That besides the
Money remitted to Pay our Army; there has been a great deal of Silver carried
over Year after Year in the King's Yatchts, as well as in other Vessels; Partly
to be distributed among several Princes of Europe, to keep them in the
Confederacy, and to gain Men from them for the Upholding the War; and partly to
be squandered away among the Ministers in those Courts to Counsel and Advise
their Masters, suitably to the Instructions which King William should give them
and partly for the Bribing of the Burgher-masters and Pensioners of the most
considerable Cities of the Seven Provincs, to be Zealous in Moulding and
Influencing their respective Towns to to persevere in the Interest of their
Stadtholder, and to support him in all the Designs, in which his Ambition
should engage him, as being contrived and adapted to their Advantage. But that
which is more to be adverted under this head is, that all or much the greatest
part of this Silver thus Transported, whether in order to the paying our Army,
or for other Ends and Designs, has been the^e melted down and Coined into
Skillings, that are not worth half the Int^insick Value of what they are either
Current for there, or paid to our Soldiers for their Salaries and to Subsist
upon, or made passable in the procuration of the whole Equivalent in Bills, of
what they go at in Holland to be Conveyed and made Solvable elsewhere. By which
means alone, the Dutch have since the Revolution* made an Advantage to
themselves of many Millions. And therefore when the Society styled the Bank of
England, which was Establisted by the late Parliament, and to whom upon their
Undertaking for the Remission of Money for the payment of our Army, or to any
other, in order thereunto; there was Liberty granted by a particular Statute
for Conveying over so much as is there limited, either in Bullion or in Specie
Coined. I say, when the forenamed Company would have Erected a Mint on the
other Side, in order to have Melted down and Re-coyned, what they had
Transported in such embased Money, as was there current and passable, the Dutch
not only refused the suffering it to be done in their own Provinces; but by the
Interest they have among, and Authority they bear over their bordering
Neighbors in Flanders, did obstruct our obtaining of that Freedom and
Privilege, and thereby did wholly frustrate and defeat that Project and Design;
so that by this single, fraudulent and avaritious Trick and Artifice, they do
to this day make Cent. per Cent. of all the Money that is remitted to Holland,
either for the payment of our Army, or for other uses and ends. Nor is it
unworthy of Remark; that whereas whilst they were drawing our Bullion and Coin
from us, and in order to get most of the Treasure and Silver of England into
their possession, and have it lodged in their Country, they willingly paid and
allowed Three and Forty of their Skillings as the Equivalent of one Pound
Sterling of ours, and gave our Soldiers so much readily in Exchange for it;
that now having gained and engrossed the greatest part of our Money, and finding
that what we continue to remit in Specie at present, is not out of Choice but
upon Necessity, they have sunk the value of our Money to Eight and Twenty of
their base Skillings, which is the most they have given of late, and will give
no more at present for One Round Sterling of ours. Which being less by near a
third part than what they gave in exchange for it before, is an incredible
Damage to us, and a vast Gain to them at our Loss and Expense. And which
villainous Depradation of theirs upon us, cannot without our utter
Impoverishment and Ruin be much longer suffered or connived at. To which may be
added, that since the Diminishing and Clipping of our Silver Coin which we are
indebted to the Revolution for, and which had never befaln us in the degree it
has, but through the ill Administration of our Dutch Prince, who is glad of and
encourages all the Methods, that may render us poor and make us despicable:
The Hollanders will either receive none of our clipped Money, tho it is in a
manner all that is left current in the Kingdom; or if they do receive any of
it, it is only in proportion to the intrinsic Value, and not according to the
Rate that it does pass for here, and has done for a great while; So that if
any of that Money be sent over, either in payment to our Soldiers, or come to be
carried abroad upon other occasions, the Dutch will take it but for a Moiety of
what it commonly and universally goes for here. And yet in this very Interim,
while they either wholly refuse the taking our clipped Money, or depress the Value
of it to half what it now passes for in England; our poor Soldiers beyond Sea,
are forced to take their base Skillings, and other of their debased Money, at
what Rates they are pleased to make them current, tho not worth half of it with
respect to their intrinsic Value. And all these things are some of the
Felicities which we enjoy du^ing this Reign of Restoration to our Liberties,
and of Exaltation to greater Wealth, Prosperity and Happiness, than our Belgic
Prince will, by his Outlandish Logic, allow us to have known heretofore. Yea,
besides the fore meant ioned Spoils and Rapines which they have Committed upon
us in the Methods that I have Detected, to the enriching themselves, and the
imyoverishing us in our Silver Coin. I might also upon very good Authorities,
Charge them with the fraudulent Importation both of light and false Money,
bearing the Stamp and Impression of our own, but Minted in Holland, and then
Vended among us at the Rates which our best and weightiest Silver Pieces of
such and such Denominations have used to go. Nor will any Man who knows the
Morals of the Dutch, and the Practices of the same kind, whereof they have been
Guilty in most parts of the World to which they have had Access; or who has
observed in what other ways of Cozenage and Deceit they have bubbled and
injured us in the matter of our Silver, judge it unlikely that they should first
Mint abroad and then palm upon us both false and light Money; seeing the much
counterfeit Metal, and the great quantites of true Money, only with a^atements
of Weight which have been Coined and Stamped by Villains among our selves, do
afford the Dutch so plausible a Cover and obvious a Ma^k and Disguise for
Cheating us in this way and manner that I have suggeffed* and whereof the
Nation has been and still is so full of Clamor against them. But which being
so agreeable to the Inclinations and Designs which our Belgic Prince
entertains toward this Kingdom, and being so much to the Advantage of his
beloved Countrymen, he has neither taken care to have it enquired into as it
ought to be, nor has he used proper and effectual means to obviate it.

And then as for our Gold, whereof we are next to speak, whatsoever of it has
been at any time sent over thither, either for the Subsistence and Payment of
our Troops, or for any of the other forementioned Ends, they have for some
Years wholly refused it, except upon the Terms of Half a Crown, less in the
Guinea than it readily went for in England; So that by the Remission of it
again hither, and the Transmitting it back to them, which has been done at
least Four times in the Year, they have clearly Gained of us Fifty per Cent
Annually by that sole Species of our English Coin; but more especially since
the rise of Guineas here to Thirty Shillings a Guinea, (that has been
occasioned by the scarcity of Silver, which the Transporting it hither and
their Melting it down has proved the cause of) it is incredible what a
Prodigous Profit they have made to themselves, and what proportionable Damage
and loss they have brought upon us, in bringing over not only all the Guineas
can be found in their own Provinces, but all they could Procure and Purchase in
other Places on the Continent, and which they have put Off and Vended here at
that Excessive Rate which they do now go at, and have done so some time;
Whereas they went both from us heretofore to Holland, and ^^re lately bought up
by the Dutch from other Foreigners, at a Price and Value not exceeding Nineteen
or Twenty Shillings of our Money. To which I may Subjoyn that the Value of all
other Gold being risen in England, in Proportion to the growth of the Value of
Guineas, they have thereupon brought over as much Foreign Gold as they saw any
likelihood of Buying up our Grain, Manufactures and the other Productions of
our Country with, and have thereby both made Vast Depradations upon us, and
suitable Gains to themselves through their vending that Gold here at high and
exorbitant Rates, which they before Possessed or had lately Procured at the
moderate and intrinsic Value of it. Whence upon a little Consideration and
less Arithmetic, we may easily Calculate how great by this means alone, their
Gain and our Loss have been in that by all the Guineas, and Proportionally by
other Gold (...) they have brought over and put off to us, they have m^de of
every Two Pounds above Three. Nor is this all the Damage that thereby arises
to Us; but there are Worse and more Fatal Mischiefs that must unavoidably
overtake us very Speedily, in that all our Productions and Manufactures which
from Year to Year, have been Transported into the Seven Provinces, either to
serve them or the Neighboring parts of the Continent about them, have been
Bought up in Extraordinary portions and Measures, through their vent of their
Guineas at so high a value, and for as much as they can neither Consume
themselves, nor Dispose to others with whom they drive a Commerce, what of our
Productions and Manufactures they have bought in the Way, and and on the Terms
I have mentioned; it will be therefore impossible for them, and is beyond their
intention to transport from us, for these several Years to come, what this
Kingdom fabricketh and yields. So that by a necessary Consequence thereupon,
there must very soon ensue an extraordinary Decay in Trade, to the starving
both most of our Manufacturers, and all others who gain their Subsistence, and
have heretofore lived plentifully, by carrying out and vending abroad the
Productions and Superfluities of our Country. For as the Dutch, who for several
Years to come will need none of them; so by reason of the large Stores of all
kinds of English Commodities and Goods, with which they have furnished
themselves, will be able to forestal and undersel us in all the Markets of
Europe. Moreover, to all the forementioned ways of their making their excessive
Advantages by, and criminal Depradations upon us, through and by reason of the
Money that has been exported hence in Specie for the payment of our Troops,
they do also gain an incredible and vast Profit to themselves, and cause
proportionable Loss and Damage to us, by those immense Sums which have not
been remitted in Specie, but returned beyond Sea by Bills, for the use and ends
which have been specified, which they effect and accomplish by skrewing up and
raising the Exchange in profit to themselves, and sinking it in loss to us
Twenty and Thirty per Cent, For no less at present is the difference of
Exchange, not only on all the Goods and Commodities which we either buy of or
sell unto them; but upon all the Money which upon whatsoever Funds we draw and
transfer thither by Bills. And the extraordinary g^in accruing by this means to
the Dutch, was one of the principal Reasons why they would not suffer those of
the Bank of England to erect a Mint on their side, for the Coining our Silver
into such mixed and embased Money as goes current in Holland and Flanders. And it
was likewise the grand Motive why they refus^d to lend the Two Hundred Thousand
Pounds to the said Bank, which they would have borrowed of them the last Summer
toward the paying our Army; and for which they offered Five per Cent.
Interest, and not only to give their own Obligations for the Security of the
said Principal and Interest, and which (...) should be Assignable from one
person to another, as those of the States of Holland are; but that King William
himself should, through a Mortgage of his Revenue and hereditary Lands to the
States, become Surety for the payment of the said sum and the Interest of it.
Which tho it would have been not only very profitable* but highly reputable to
the Dutch, and disgraceful to King William and the Kingdom of England, yet upon
the score and Motive of their making a much larger Profit, than that would have
amounted unto on the Remission of Money from hence thither by Bills of Exchange,
they Laughed at the Overture, and scornfully rejected the Proposal. Nor can any
Man be so void of Sense, as not to discern, had all but so much M^ral Honesty
and love to their Country left as to acknowledge it, that this exorbitant
growth of Exchange between England and Holland must speedily perfect and
Consummate our Ruin, considering the Poverty to which we are already reduced,
and the scarcity of Money, under which we labor. All which we are indebted for
to our Belgic King, and to his Treacherous as well as Improvident Conduct
toward England, in his Management of the War, which to gratify his Ambition
we were easily brought to embark in.

But before I shall dispatch the Topic I am upon, I cannot omit the
representing one Method more, by which they bec^me greatly Enriched, and we as
much Impoverished, through the Money either Conveyed from us, or from any of the
Confederates to the Army in Flanders, and that is, by Furnishing most, if not
all the Stores and Provisions, upon which the Army does Live and Subsist. And
the Manner as well as the Reason is obvious, to any one that can think two
Thoughts Coherently, Namely, that all of one kind or another which they need,
is Conveyed to them by the Dutch, and carried out of the Seven Provinces into
the Spanish Netherlands, where all things are put off and disposed to the
respective Troops, and to Ours especially at their own Rates; So that they
carry back into their own Country all or most of the Money: which is laid out in
favor of, and upon our own Troops, as well as that which is Expended upon the
several Materials which are Necessary to the Support and Maintenance of the
War. which Circulating backward and forward every Week, as well as every Month,
and Centring at last in Holland, they are rendered Rich by the War, which makes
us so Poor, and has reduced us to the Indigent and Dep^orable Estate that we
are now in. Yea, the burning and bombing Cities and Towns by the French, and
their Seizing and Destroying the Forage, and the Magazines, upon which the
Confederate Army should Subsist, turns all to the profit and account of the
Dutch, and is improved by them to their Gain and Advantage. Because both the
Materials for the rebuilding ruined Cities, and the Stores required to supply
and fill wasted and destroyed Magazin^s, do in a manner come all from Holland,
and from other of the Belgic Provinces, whither they carry back the value in
Current Money, to the enriching of their Bank, the increasing of their Stock,
and the enlarging of their Trade. And as they make a large gain by the Spoils,
Losses and Deva^tations, which their Confederates suffer and undergo, so they
make no less Profit by their Victories and Successes, even to the preclusion of
their Allies, and especially the English from all advantage and benefit by
them. For as Namur is the only Conquest since the Commencement of this War in
Flanders, that has been obtained over the French, so it is but a recovery of
what the Confederates had lost during the present War, and not a new
Acquisition. And as it has cost infinitely more in Men and Treasure, than it
and all the dependencies upon it are worth; so these three Kingdoms who
contributed most to the taking of it, and had more of the Blood of their Men
spilt and more of their Treasure and Ammunition expended and wasted in the
Winning of that City, than any one of all the Confederates, have Reapt nothing
by it but the enlarging the Barrier of the Dutch, and the putting a strong and
well fortified City into their power and possession, to make them more Insolent
unto and Encroaching upon their Allies. And when I Consider the Customs of the
Spartans who had an Order that when any of their Generals compassed his Designs
by Policy and Treaty, he should Sacrifice an Ox; but when by Force and
Bloodshed, only a Cock. I think that our many late Bonfires and Illuminations,
and especially our prodigal and foolish Expenses in St. James's Square, were
ridiculous as well as wastful Consumptions. For as the distinct Values of those
Oblations of the Lacedaemonians, do show us (according to the Judgment of
Plutarch) how much they preferred the Successes of calm and sober Councils,
before those of Force and Strength, so there was more cause for Lamentations
for the many and brave Men that had been lost before the Town and Castle of
Namur, ever they fell into our hands, (and which in all probability, will with
less Cost be speedily Snatched from us again) than of vain, childish and
expensive Triumphs for the gaining them. But to omit this, that which I am to
represent and display is, that the City Castle which were gained at the Price
and Cost of so much English Blood and Treasure, are now Consigned over to the
Dutch, and stand Mortgaged to them for the Repayment of what they have laid out
and disbursed in this War; which seeing there is no likelihood that ^ver the
Spaniards will be in a condition to Reimburse them; that Town is consequently
become a part as well as an enlargement of their Territories and is the
Addition of an Eighth Province to the former Seven. Yea out of Kindness to the
Dutch, and Disaffection to us; our Belgic Prince is so frugal of their
Treasure, and so prodigal of that of this Kingdom, that much of the Charges
necessary for Repairing the Fortifications of Namur is born by us, and our Money
remitted and transported to Defray them. Which is such a bubbling of this
Kingdom; that those most engaged in King William's Interest, cannot avoid
Resenting it with Indignation. And as this new Acquisition which our Dutch King
has gained them, at the price of our blood and bones, as well as of our Money,
gives them a stronger Barrier than they had, and a new and large Jurisdiction,
so it not only opens a Traffic to them with France, in time of War as well as
of Peace; but delivers the Hollanders from a Necessity of depending upon
Brussels, or upon any Spanish Towns, for the Management of their Trade: Seeing
by being possessed of Namur, they can supply both Flanders and France, and
carry home what they want from thence, without being under the necessity of
allowing the Intervention of others in the management of their Trade, or of
suffering others either to intercept them in it, or to make profit by it through
Exchange: So that while the English and others Fight, they do only Win; and the
Lives of our Men are no farther valuable with our Belgic King, than as they
serve to purchase Power and Opulency to the Dutch. For tho we be made use of as
the Jackall to hunt the Prey; yet we are not permitted to have the least Share
in it. And therefore whosoever have cause to be weary of the War, and to groan
under the Consumptions and Desolations that attend it, they have not; and
thence it is that in kindness to them, but in hatred to us, our Belgic King
labors all he can, both by persuasions and by Authority to foment and keep it
up, and resolves to do so until he has rendered them so opulent and powerful,
and us so necessitous, despicable and weak, that we must be contented (because
we will not remain in a Condition to hinder it) to be Slaves to him, and
Tributaries to the Hollanders.

And the tyrannous Projects and Designs which K. W. has contrived and
harbors in relation to these Kingdoms, as well as our own Madness and Folly
in concurring and cooperating to promote them, are equally manifest, and both
of them apparently evident by this; namely, That even upon the Supposition that
it was needful and just to begin, continue, and uphold this War: Yet much of
that Money which has been sent abroad from hence, to subsist and pay our
Troops, might, through a very small Care, and friendly Conduct of the Prince of
Orange in our behalf, and through the least measure of Discretion, Wisdom,
Justice, Equity and Compassion of those Assemblies styled our Parliaments to
the Kingdom, have been preserved in the Nation, and have remained to circulate
among our selves for the support and increase of our Manufacture, and for the
protection and enlargement of our Trade and Navigation. And the Ways, Means,
and Methods in and by which it might have been done, are both so various and
plain, That had there not been a Conjunction of Malice in King William, and of
Treachery in our Senators toward England, it would not have escaped the being
undertaken, persued and effected long ago. For why might not we with as much
Ease, and with more Justice, have carried all the Provisions from hence for the
subsisting the Confederate Army, or at least our own Troops, and those of other
Nations under our pay, as that the Dutch should have the Privilege of
furnishing it, and to be encouraged as well as suffered to go away with the
Gain? Nor can any other Reason be assigned of the Conduct we have been under in
this matter, but that William intends to bring us first to Beggary, and then
into Thraldom; and that too many among our selves are through Folly and Knavery
willing both to assist and justify him in the effecting of it. Had we not Ships
enough (as I am sure we had before we lost so many Thousands of them, as we
have done since the Revolution, and the Commencement of this War which was the
unhappy Offspring of it) to have carried over to Flanders our Grain, Butter and
Cheese, Iron, Bread, and all things else that are necessary unto, or consumable
by an Army, but that the buying of all those here, and the transporting them
thither, should in a manner be given up and entirely consigned into the hands
of the Dutch? Whence we are justly become the Derision and Contempt of the
World, that being stored and furnished (without purchasing of other Nations)
with all the Productions either of Art or Nature that an Army can need or use,
and the Dutch having scarce any thing of their own Growth, and little of their
own Manufactures, to answer the Occasions and Exigences of so vast a military
Body; yet that they should engross to themselves the supplying them with all
they want, and we not only tamely connive at it, but like People who have lost
their Senses, and forfeited their Understandings, as well as abandoned the Care
of their Country do approve it. With what facility might it have been
stipulated and provided for at our first entrance into the Confederacy, or
retrieved and recovered to us since, upon renewing of Alliances with those whom
we are become engaged to assist in this War, that all those Supplies necessary
for Troops which England could afford should be applied to that end; and that
as they should be transported by none but our selves, so they should be
expended and laid out not only upon our own Troops, toward the saving the
Remission of Money, but taken off from us, and accepted by our Allies in lieu
of those vast Sums we have disbursed upon them. Nor will ever England vindicate
it self from the Dishonor and Ignominy brought upon it, in that during all
this time wherein we have been wasting our Men and Treasure to defend the Dutch
Barrier, and protect the Provinces of others, and to make Conquests for them,
we should never have contracted for a Port, where we might unload what we
pleased toward the premised Uses and Ends, without being liable to the Payment
of Customs, or any other Duties of that kind which use to be exacted. Which the
present House of Commons seems to be sensible of (though it is now too late)
and have therefore declared in their Vote of December. 10. That it is the Opinion
of that House, that all Commodities and Provisions that shall be transported
from England, for the use of the Forces in his Majesty's pay abroad, be
exempted from any Duty and Excise throughout the Spanish and United
Netherlands. But though this Vote does sufficiently intimate their Sense of
King William's Infidelity, as to the trust reposed in him under the Quality and
Style of King of England, and of his Treachery to this Nation, in not having
contracted and stipulated with those Allies for the forementioned Privilege and
Immunity: Yet the Treaties between him and these Confederates being already
concerted and ratified, without the mention or specification of any such
Freedom and Advantage to be allowed us; all the Effect and Operation which this
Vote of the House of Commons can have, is to proclaim them to be pragmatical,
weak and insolent, in assuming a Power and Authority over the Rights of foreign
Princes and States; and that contrary unto, as well as without regard to
Articles, adjusted between King William and those States in the fresh Alliances
which have been lately renewed, made, and ratified. Nor can any thing now,
after the aforesaid Vote, preserve the House of Commons from the Derision,
Scorn and Contempt of Mankind, but their declaring those Alliances to have been
contracted and confirmed to the prejudice of England, and therefore not to be
supported by any Taxes to be levied upon the Subjects of this Kingdom: And that
the said House will grant no Money toward the Confederacy, till such other
Agreements are made and entered into between this Crown, and those neighboring
States, which may correspond with, and come up to the Opinion of the said
House, as they have declared it in the foresaid Vote; and by the Printing
whereof they have published it to the World, as the unanimous Opinion and
Judgment of the Representative Body of the whole Commons of England. And may
not this Treachery in the present Administration, so openly reflected upon by
the foresaid Vote, cause us remember both the Memory of Queen Elizabeth and of
Oliver Cromwell, with Commendations and Praises of their Conduct, while in the
mean time we must convey down to our Offspring the Name of the Prince of
Orange loaded with all the Obloquies, Imprecations and Curses, that a People
impoverished and ruined, by his contrived and chosen ill Conduct toward these
Kingdoms, can entail upon it. For as that great Heroine, Queen Elizabeth did,
upon her assisting the Dutch with a very few Troops in comparison of what we
now do, covenant with and obtain of them the Brill, Flushing and Ramekins, to
be put into her hands as Cautionary Towns, not only that she might thereby
oblige them to a more firm dependency upon her, and tie them to the better
observation of their Alliances, and secure unto herself the Reimbursment of
some part of the Treasure which she expended in protecting them; but that she
might always be in a Condition, and have it in her own Power, to reinforce,
relieve, succor and supply, those Troops that she sent them for their aid and
defense, according as their should be occasion, and as she should judge to be at
any time needful for the Honor of the Crown of England, and for the Safety,
Commerce and Reputation of her Subjects. So Oliver Cromwell, upon the Assistance
of Six thousand Men which he gave the present King of France, An. 1657. did not
only by a ratified Treaty take care and provide that what Ports and maritime
Towns should be won from the Spaniards, by the joint and confederate Forces of
France and England, should be resigned unto him, and given up to the Possession
of the English; but in pursuance of that Stipulation he had Dunkirk, upon its
being taken from the King of Spain, put into his hands. Yea, the late King
Charles, who in the Alliances he made, was not thought by many to be so
regardful of the Interest of his Kingdoms as he might have been, did in the
Treaty he entered into with France against the Dutch, An. 1671. Provide and
Stipulate by an express Article, That what Marine Towns on Ports should be
taken from the common Enemy, should be resigned up and delivered over to him in
Compensation and Recompense for the Share and Charge he was to bear in that
War. Whereas this Dutch Prince, whom we have been so unkind to our selves, as
well as disloyal to the King, as to set over us, has not in all the many
Alliances which he has entered into with foreign Monarchs and States,
notwithstanding the numerous Troops and vast Treasure supplied by us to their
Aid and Defense, made the least Provision for any one Advantage to accrue to
these Kingdoms, should the War wherein we are united and embarked prove
successful. And much less has he by Agreement and Contract obtained for us
either any Cautionary Town, which may prevent our being abandoned and lurch'd
by the Dutch and other Foreigners; and left alone to encounter the Power, annd
suffer the Revenge of France: Or gained so much as a free Port, wherein we
might send, and where we may lay up and lodge such Stores of all kinds, as would
at least serve to supply our own Forces, if not those of the Confederates,
without being kept under a necessity of remitting Month after Month such vast
Sums of Money as we have done, and still continue doing, to the Robbing and
Emptying of the Kingdom of all its Treasure. Yea, as if he did not treat us
scornfully enough, and sufficiently betray us to the Dutch and others, by the
Neglect he has shown both of the Honor and Profit of these Kingdoms, in all
the Treaties he has made, and all the Alliances he has Contracted since with
the Connivance of all, and the Assistance of many, he Usurped the Throne of
England, he has not esteemed either Parliaments or Privy Councils worthy to be
Consulted with beforehand, about the Terms, Conditions and Articles fit to be
demanded and insisted upon, with reference to our Credit and Interest in the
Compacts and Agreements he had made with those that he styles his Allies; but
whom through this Deficiency we have found to be our Underminers and Supplanters.
Nay, he disdains to acquaint the two Houses of Parliament with those Treaties,
when they humbly Address him concerning the doing it: And instead of laying
those Alliances before them in the plain and ratified Draughts, he either Shams
them off with general, imperfect and blind Accounts; and that done with the
unsincerity and regardlesness of Truth, natural to a Dutch man, of which the
whole course of his transactions with, and toward this People, since he became
unrighteously possessed of his Father in Law and Uncles Crown, is one
uninterrupted and continued Evidence; or else he ridicules and bubbles them
with false and counterfeit Copies; in which as some things are disguised so
others are not expressed, though he has concerted them formally with his
Confederates, and especially with the Dutch. And I dare affirm, That of all the
Branches of the State of War in reference to the Year 1696. which he has
caused to be delivered into them, there is none of them true, genuine and just.
So that from thence the Two Houses, and in them all the People of England, may
have a Specimen of his Honor and Integrity without traveling farther for
Evidences of them. But if he do treat thus not only those he calls the Body of
his Subjects with Treachery in relation to their Interest, as well as with
Carelessness and Neglect of them in all their Concerns and Safety, but the
Houses of Parliament (who ought to be his grand Council) with superciliousness
and contempt, and all this while he is yet unfledged, what will he do when his
Wings are grown? For if he do thus strut, as to monopolize all Things to his
own sole cognizance, and to manage them to the visible Prejudice of these
Kingdoms, and to the apparent Benefit of the Dutch, while he only stands and is
upheld by leading Strings, and walks in a Go-cart, and cannot manage the War he
is engaged in, but as he is aided by Parliamentary Grants: What Tyranny may not
the People fear, and what Insolency and Scorn should not our Senates expect to
meet with, if he live to arrive at virile Strength, and through putting an end
to the War, can come to stand and go alone? For it is only the indispensable
need he stands in of the continual Aid of the People of England, and the fear
he is under of being baffled and routed by the French, which make him now and
then appear in the dress and posture of Modesty, and to put on a dissembled
Humility, Meekness and Compassion, while in reality in respect to Ambition,
Despoticalness and Tyranny, he carries Ten Sultans, Twenty Moguls, and Forty
Czars in his Belly. And could he but once prescribe terms to the Monarch of
France, he would soon trample upon all the Laws of these Kingdoms, and tread
upon our Necks: And instead of the Shapes and Figure of sometimes an Almansor,
and sometimes a Gusman, that he now puts on and seeks to appear in, he would
then manifest himself a Caligula, a Nero, or according to the Title lately
bestowed upon him a Galienus Redivivus, having already furnished himself with
more than one Verianus. But having said enough upon the Head of which I have
been discoursing, it is now time to advance to another.

In the next Place then I shall proceed to a more particular review and
representation of their Invasions, Rapines and Depradations committed upon our
Trade, than those I have hitherto unfolded and laid open. Nor will it require
any great Enlargement, seeing all Men do experience and feel it, though some
may not understand the several and particular Ways and Methods in which it has
been done. Nor shall I here repeat what I have already both insinuated and
detected concerning the Decay that is brought upon our Trade, and the final
Destruction that threatens it, as well through the Clipping and Embasement as
through the Transportation of our Coin to other Ends and Uses then those of
Commerce, and in much greater Quantities than Traffic could have ever required
its being carried abroad for. Though all the Misery and Mischief that do by
these means befall and overtake us, are all chargeable upon, and to be laid at
the Door of our Dutch King: Seeing that of transporting it has been the natural
and unavoidable effect of his ascent to the Throne, and of the War that
thereupon he engaged us in, and especially of those ways which he has
designedly chosen and persued in support of it. And then as to the Clipping and
Embasing our Money, none can be reasonably accused either of causing or
conniving at it but the Prince of Orange, who has occasioned and encouraged it
by his weak and improvident Administration. For both these Practices, which do
eventually and in the Effects of them prove so ruinous to the Kingdom, having
obtained in no other Reigns in any proportion and degree to what they have done
in his, as it is commonly styled, they must consequently be resolved into some
Neglect, Weakness or Treachery in his Admin^stration, whereof no other Reigns
were guilty or accusable. Nor will it excuse him to have it alleged, That more
have been executed for those Crimes, since his usurping of the Throne, than
were in an Age before: Seeing though some of the little and indigent Creatures,
whom necessity tempted to it, and which necessity he brought upon them, have
been condemned and executed; yet your Goldsmiths and Refiners, who both bought
the Clippings, and who at mighty Gain furnished them with broad Money for
continuing the Crime, have not only escaped Prosecutions, which by Law they
deserved; but diverse of them have been the special Favorites and Confidents of
the Government. And to mention but one of many, I will be bold to say the
hanging of Evans the Goldsmith, who infinitely more deserves it, for melting
down and carrying abroad our Coin to satisfy his Covetousness, and make Profit
by what was our milled Money, than any of the Clippers and false Minters have
done, would have given greater check unto, and have been a more effectual
Remedy, even of the Crimes of these later, than all the Convictions and
Executions for Offenses of that kind since the Revolution, which we have seen
but have found no benefit by. But instead of that, he has been honored and
preferred by our Dutch Bestower of Titles, and Disposer of Places, to be both a
Knight and a Commissioner of the Excise; though a Fellow void of all Merit, and
destitute of good Sense, and whom only Knavery, Impudence, and the Emptying the
Kingdom of our Silver, by carrying it to Holland to enrich the Dutch, have
entitled to his Master's Favor. And I crave Liberty to say en passant, though
it may seem alien to the subject, That I have often wondered why our Kings and
Parliaments should fall upon so ineffectual a Remedy of those Crimes, as the
making them Capital will continue to prove in a Nation, where Men are sunk into
so much Irreligion and Atheism; and which the many Villanes attending and wrapped
up in the Revolution have increased and strengthened as to dread Death less than
Poverty, and to choose Damnation as well as Hanging and Quartering rather than
want Supplies for the Feeding and for the Maintenance of their Lasciviousness
and Luxury. Seeing when our Money was both Pure and Sterling, and of full
Weight, as it was generally at the Revolution, the bare imposing and exacting
of a Mulct of Five or Ten Pounds upon every one that should have been found
offering either Clipped or False Money to another, would have deterred all Men
from venturing upon it, and obviated both the forementioned Crimes, and
likewise the woeful Effects of them. And possibly it would be no ill Policy to
do in this Case as the Lacedaemonians did in that of Theft, which when they
thought not fit to prevent and hinder by punishing the Thieves, they
effectually suppressed it, by rendering those liable to a considerable Penalty
that should have any Thing stolen from them. So may be the inflicting of a
Mulct upon every one that should take either light or base Money, would soon
cause that there would be no Offerers of it, by reason there would be none
found so unkind and unjust to themselves as to receive it. But to return from
this Digression; I do say that the Dutch, besides all the Injuries they have
done us, and the Spoils they have committed upon us, with respect to our Trade
in the forementioned Methods which I have been displaying, they have also in
diverse other Ways, and in several Instances, either craftily supplanted, or
directly invaded, and forceably assaulted us in our Commerce and Traffic since
the late Revolution; which I shall presume now to lay open, as far as the
brevity of this Discourse will allow, and shall discover how and wherein they
have done so. And I shall begin with the Advantage they have had of protecting
their own Trade, and of exposing and leaving ours open to be ruined, by reason
of that small and unequal Quota and Proportion of Ships of War, that in respect
of our much greater Number of Ships of that kind they supply and furnish to the
forming and constituting the Confederate and United Fleet of both Nations;
which is the more remarkable in that their Number of Land Forces is not much
increased toward the support of the present War, above what it use to be in
time of Peace. Yea, it is hardly so great now as then, if we consider that all
the Contributions raised in the Province of Namur, and on the French Conquests,
go for the Ease of their Establishment; and that the vast Sums spent in
Flanders by the whole Confederate Army become^ theirs, and Center^ in Holland.
However it bears no proportion with ours, according to the State of the War for
the Year 1696. which as the Earl of Renelagh by King William's Order gave it
into the House of Commons, December. 3. amounts to 87440 Men; whereas if it were
not to defend the Provinces of these, styled our Allies, a very few Forces
would be sufficient for our Occasions at home, if it should not be found
needless to have any at all: Whereas they in the times of the profoundest Peace
are seldom without Fifty thousand Men, to which their supernumerary Addition
now is but inconsiderable, if what I have said be well considered; and provided
that we also observe, that diverse of those Troops reckoned into their Quota are
upon English Establishment, and paid with our Money. Indeed if we had charged
our selves with furnishing the whole marine Power, both for us and them, and
stood thereby excused for affording any Land Forces to be employed in Flanders,
or elsewhere, upon any part of the Continent, I should not have blamed the
Conduct of requiring a few Men of War from them, yea should not have much
complained if they had been acquitted from the yielding any: Seeing such a
Stipulation and Agreement between us and them could not have been much to the
Prejudice either of the Kingdom or of Trade, farther than as it involved us in
an unnecessary and unjust War, merely to gratify the Ambition of our Dutch
King, and to hinder the Return of our Legal and Rightful Sovereign. Because
otherwise, as it would have been agreeable to our Interest, both as we are an
Island and a Trading Nation; so it would not only have proved a means of
keeping all our Money at home, and of the having had it to circulate among our
selves, but we should thereby had Treasure enough to have rigged out a Royal
Navy superior to the marine Power of France, and to have equipped and
maintained more than a sufficient Number of Men of War as Cruisers and Convoys
to have protected our Trade. But to be first at the vast Expense we have been
in raising and maintaining so great an Army on the Continent, merely for the
Benefit of others and not our own, and then to equip and set out double the
Quota that the Dutch have toward the c^nstituting the Confederate Fleet of
both Nations, was plainly to disable our selves from having that Number of
Cruisers and Convoys as is necessary to be kept at Sea during the present War,
against so potent an Enemy as the King of France and his Subjects are upon that
Element. Nor was this concerted between our Belgic Prince, and his beloved
Dutch, upon any other Motives, or to other Ends, but that we might be put out
of Capacity of safe-guarding our Coasts, and protecting our trading Vessels;
whilst the Dutch, through furnishing a small Quota to the the General Fleet,
are left in a Condition to employ the rest of their marine and naval Strength
in securing and protecting their Traffic. And the Event has fully answered
the Design, in that while we, by furnishing so many Ships of War to the Royal
Navy, did leave our selves destitute of such a Number of Ships of War, as might
in the Quality of Cruisers and Convoys in all Seas as well as in the Chanel
have covered and defended our trafficking Vessels; and as we have in
consequence thereof lost above 4000 trading Ships to the empoverishing of the
Kingdom, as well as of many Families that were before the Revolution opulent
and rich, while the Dutch in the mean time, through their furnishing so small a
Proportion of Men of War to the General Fleet, and being thereby provided of
the larger number of Men of War, as well to defend their Merchant Ships as to
guard their Coasts, have not s^stained the Third, nay nor the Fourth part of
the Loss of Vessels and Cargoes that we have done, Not but that our Channels
might have been better guarded, and our trading Ships more protected than they
have been by those Convoys and Cruisers that were appointed and ordained by
Parliament, had not our Commissioners of the Admiralty been treacherous and
slothful, as well as blockish and ignorant in the Service, Duty and Province
which they undertook. So that if the Parliament (as I have formerly hinted) do
not make those Persons accountable for the Losses at Sea, which Merchants and
in and through them the Kingdom has sustained, all thinking Men will have
reason to believe, That those they have chosen to be their Representatives do
take pleasure in the^r Empoverishment, Misery and Ruin; and will be provoked to
judge them in a Conspiracy with those Gentlemen to promote all those
Desolations and Mischiefs: Seeing the Parliaments over looking the Crimes of
those Commissioners, or their conniving at their Conduct, will more than
intimate that they are so. And indeed, by the whole Management of public
Affairs for near these Seven Years, both in Parliament and out of it, those
called to sit in the Senate, as well as those employed in civil Offices, have
been doing to the Nation, as the Daughters of Peleus did by the Advice of Medea
to their aged Father, whom they hackt in pieces, in hopes that by her Magic
they should have restored him both to Life and Youth again. For through the
Influence of Dutch Councils, and the Administration of a Belgic King, and by
this wheedle, and under pretense of rescuing us from Popery and Slavery, of
banishing Tyranny, securing Liberty, and of making us an opulent and glorious
Nation, they have impoverished us beyond Remedy and Retrieve; and have brought
us so near to the brink of Vassalage and Thraldom, that it will require more
Virtue and Courage to prevent it, than we have much ground of hoping to find
the generality of this debauched, rebellious and disloyal Generation endowed
with. And if some of those that have been principally Accessory to our Misery
and Ruin be not speedily made Examples of Parliamentary Justice, who knows but
upon the late President of making a King accountable for the Offenses of his
Ministers, whether the Body of the People from Wapping to Westminster may not
assault Kensington and Whitehall, as well as the Admiralty Office, if not
instead of it? For as Pleb^ non Judicium, so furiosis nulla voluntas; as the
Populace and Mob is commonly void both of Judgment and Equity, so they do not
act when provoked under the Guidance of Reason, but under the Agitations of
intemperate Rage. Nor will your Dutch Ingineers brought lately over (if we may
believe the Paper called the Post man from December the 10th to December the
12th St. vet. who tells, That by Letters from Brussels of December the 14th St.
N. there were diverse Ingineers ordered from Maestricht to London) to deter an
injured and thereupon an enraged People from attempting more than I will say,
and (...) call it the doing themselves Right, and the Nation Justice. And
having mentioned those outlandish Ingineers, I crave leave to recommend it to
the Parliament to enquire into their Business, and what they come hither to be
employed about; seeing there are no French Garrisons in England to be besieged
and bombed. But if it be in order to King William's erecting a Citadel for
enslaving London and Westminster, it is to be hoped that the terror of Bombs
and Carcasses will not frighten Englishmen quietly to surrender their
Liberties and Properties, and tamely to put on and wear Chains. To all which
might be further added the very small Quota which they furnish the Confederate
Fleet are not only many times subsisted upon our Provisions and Stores instead
of their own, and supplied with our naval Preparations, but in the Place of
attending constantly upon the Flag, as they ought, many of those Ships of War
are detached from the Fleet, and employed as Convoys to their trading Vessels:
Which as it may at some time or other prove of fatal consequence to the Royal
Fleet of England, and the whole Kingdom, so in the mean time they make their
Profit by it, through the enlarging and securing their Traffic, while ours is
narrowed and crippled for want of Cruisers and Convoys, and while such Merchant
Ships as will venture upon Voyages are left exposed to be seized by French
Privateers. But this being so warmly and judiciously represented by the
ingenious Author of a Letter to a Gentleman elected a Knight of the Shire to
serve in the present Parliament, I shall not farther enlarge upon it;
especially, seeing Admiral Russel, who is now a Member of the House of Commons,
is able to give an ample and particular Account of it, and who for resenting it
as became him, when lately Admiral in the Mediterranean, has been coldly
received by his Master since his return. But to advance a step further on the
Point and Head whereon I am discoursing; Can there be a greater Invasion upon
our Trade, or any thing committed more to the Diminution and Ruin of it, than
the Dutch assuming the Boldness, and King William countenancing them in it, to
despise and violate both our Act of Navigation of the 12 Car. 2. and diverse
other Statutes made during his Reign; all which were providently and wisely
enacted for the Encouragement of the Increase of Shipping and Navigation, and
for the Promotion and Enlargement of our home Manufactures? For as few can be
ignorant, especially of Gentlemen and Merchants, both of the Occasion and
Design of these several Laws; so the whole Nation has abundantly experienced
all along since the making of them, what Profit and Advantage have thereby
accrued, first to Trade, and then to the Kingdom. ^ut now, by the Insolency of
the Dutch, and the Treachery of King William to this Nation, all those Laws
have been slighted and violated by them, and the Care of having them observed
and put in execution to us been neglected by him; which both on his part, and
theirs, is in direct subserviency to make them powerful in Shipping and opulent
in Wealth, and to render us Poor, Feeble and Weak. And as there is not one
Branch of all these Laws, the transgression of which has not been practiced by
them, and connived at by their Country man on the English Throne; so they are,
through his Encouragement and Protection, grown at last to that Impudence, and
arose to that Defiance of English Laws and common Justice, That Coffee house
Tables have been furnished with printed and public Advertisements of such and
such Dutch Productions and Manufactures that were to be vended at Places there
named in and about the City of London, notwithstanding of their being expressly
prohibited by those Laws to be either imported into or sold in this Kingdom.
But whereas neither of the Two Houses of Parliament, upon the present
Inspection they are making into the decay of Trade, and their calling Merchants
before them to instruct them therein, can want information from those they
examine of the truth of what I have suggested, and in what Particulars and
Branches all those Laws are violated by the Dutch* and suffered to grow
obsolete, and to remain unexecuted by the Prince of Orange. I shall supercede
the saying more on this Head, because I cannot enlarge upon it as I ought, and
as it deserves, without writing a Volume instead of a few Sheets of Paper. And
therefore the next Attempt I charge them with is still more heinous, and done
infinitely more to our disgrace, being not only an Invasion upon our Trade, but
upon the Liberty of our Persons. For by an unpresidented and unparalelled
In^olency, the like whereof no Nation did ever pretend to exercise toward, and
over the Subjects of this Kingdom, they demand and exact a Tenth Man out of
every Ship of ours that goes into their Ports, for and toward the manning of
their Fleet; and to justify themselves in the doing hereof, they pretend to be
authorized by King William's Order. This they have practiced for these Two
Years past, only they are grown more rampant, tyrannous and oppressive this
last than they were the former. For whereas in the Year 1694. they were
contented with One Man out of Ten, or 15 Guilders in lieu thereof, and for his
Ransom, they have in the Year 1695. required and taken a Man out of every Ship
of ours that went into their Ports, though the Sailors were never so few, or
else they have exacted 25 Guilders for the excusing and redeeming him from
their Service. So that if it be but a Hoy, which is sailed with a Master, one
Man, and two Boys, yet they demand One; and upon its being replied that the
Vessel cannot be sailed if One be taken out, they pretend it a Condescension
and Favor to compound at 25 Guilders for his being excused, which is Fifty
Shillings of English Money. Nor do any Ships escape without doing the one or the
other, and for which they alledg their having King William's Authority. And
these Things they are so far from concealing, or seeking to extenuate the
Injustice and Criminalness of, by the necessity of their Condition, That they
glory in it both in their Trackschuytes, and in all Places of Society and
Concourse, as the Badg of their Exaltation and Triumph over us, and of our
Subjection to them. The Method in which this Force and Hostility over us is
practiced is this, namely, before any Ship can be cleared at their Custom-house
the Master must go to the Lords of the Admiralty, and bring from thence a
Certificate to the Custom-house of having given a Man out of the Vessels Crew
to their Service, or of having compounded at the Value I have mentioned for his
Redemption. Surely it will not be unseasonable now to ask, whether we be in
terms of Hostility with the Dutch, or of Alliance? Seeing we are not treated by
them in this as Friends, but as Enemies: Nay, it will be needful that we
consult both our Understandings and Memories, whether England be not Tributary
to Holland, and when and how it came to be so? For as much as they deal not
with us as with a free and independent Nation, but as with a Province which
they have subdued and brought into Vassalage. And if we be not Slaves, but
remain yet a free People, this Hostility in them ought to be hostily repelled
by us: And in the Place of accounting them any longer our Confederates, we
ought to esteem and take them for our Enemies, and every where to assault them
accordingly. And for our Belgic King to authorize the Dutch to do what I have
mentioned, is to assume a Power over the Liberties and Persons of the People of
England, which no Rightful King did ever pretend unto. For our Persons and
Liberties being under the Custody of the Laws, no King can claim a larger
Jurisdiction over them than what the Laws give him; unless he will renounce to
govern by Law, and take upon him to rule Despotically. And the Prince of Orange
may with as good Right transplant all the People of England to the Deserts of
Arabia, or send them to work in the Mines of Peru and Mexico, as to authorize
the Dutch to seize upon one Man that is either a native Subject here, or under
the Protection of English Laws, to navigate either their Ships of War, or their
Vessels of Commerce and Traffic. Nor has he any more Right to deprive me of my
Liberty, save when, where, and in what Cases the Laws have declared me to have
forfeited it, than I have to break into the Prince of Orange's Closet at
Kensington, and to snatch from thence the Testimonials of his Reconciliation to
the Church of Rome. But by these little sportful Preludiums of the young Cub,
we may guess what we are to expect from the Animal when grown up to the full
strength and vigor of a Tiger, or a Lion.

But the next Depradation and Invasion committed upon our Trade is more
vilanous, and ought to be more provoking, as well as surprising, than any of
the former; seeing it was neither compassed nor executed by mere Cunning and
Fraud, nor upon Pretenses of avowed Authority derived and received from King
William, but which they perpetrated by open Force and direct Violence. Whereof
though there may possibly be found diverse Instances, yet I shall only assign
one, but which shall be of that heinous Nature, that we need require no more,
and ought henceforth to think how to do our selves Right, and take our Revenge
upon them. The Hostility and Violence which I mean is that committed by the
Dutch upon the African Company of England, in driving them by armed Force out
of two Factories in Africa; the one whereof brought the Company Forty Marks of
Gold per Mensem, and the other not much less, besides other Commodities. For
the said Company having, among other Factories which they had erected and
quietly held in Africa, established one at a Place called Commenda, and which
they stood possessed of, and had furnished with all Things necessary for the
defense and protection of their Servants, and for the management of their
Trade, both in the Sale of what they transported thither from hence, and for
the obtaining and securing whatsoever the adjacent Coast, and the neighboring
Ports on that Continent afforded fit to be brought hither; the Dutch having a
Factory adjoining thereunto did, about Two years ago, instigate and stir up the
Natives against the English Factory, by telling them that the English were a
conquered Nation, and not able any longer to help and assist, or to trade with
them, in that they had subdued the Kingdom of England, and made their
Stadtholder, who was but their Servant, King and Monarch of it. By which
fraudulent Means, and Language as reproachful of us, as it was false in it
self, the Natives who are all a kind of unthinking Mob, and easily misled, as
well through the Habitude and Dullness of their Understandings, as through the
little Acquaintance and Knowledge which they have of the European Parts of the
World, made an Insurrection against the English, and in Multitudes assaulted
and attacked their Factory. But the Africans being no better than an
undisciplined Rout, and not well furnished with the Materials and Utensils of
War, and especially being unprovided with great Artillery, were easily repelled
and beaten off by those of the English Factory; which the Dutch observing, and
being sensible that time would both assuage the mutinous Passions of the
Natives, and discover the Fraud by which they had hur^ied them into that hasty
and intemperate Rage against the Factory, there having been no^ just Cause
administered by the English, whereby the Natives might be provoked to fall upon
them; thereupon the Dutch did not only make fresh Applications unto, and renew
their Instigations of the Africans to persevere in and pursue the Design of
expelling the English out of the forementioned Factory; but these treacherous
Hollanders did hostily turn and fire the Guns of their own Fort against the
English Factory that stood near unto it, and by armed Violence drove them from
thence, and forced them to leave and abandon it. And as these are some of the
blessed Fruits and Effects of the Revolution, so having by our departure from
our Loyalty, lost together with our Virtue, our Honor, and our Concerns for
the safety and welfare of our Country, these Encroachments, Rapines, and
Robberies of the Dutch, are not only overlookt by most, tamely digested by all,
but have a Merit and Sanctity ascribed to them by some of our Sycophant and
Mercenary Clergy, under the Notion of the Tributes of our Gratitude paid to the
Hollanders as our Deliverers from Popery and Slavery. And it is but Reason,
That owing our Lives, Liberties and Estates to the Friendship and Bounty of
their Assistance, when the Gospel and every Thing that is valuable in it self
and dear to us was at Stake, they should at pleasure claim and exercise a
Jurisdiction over them, and we be contented with a precarious Right in all that
we are and have. For through the Bigottry of most, and the Treachery of a great
many, it is now arrived at this, That even for a House of Peers to take upon
them the representing the Decays and Sufferings of the Nation in point of
Trade, is by your Salisbury Burnet thought worthy of being branded with the
alarming and ignominious Name of Remonstrating against the Government. But I
will venture to say, That if speedy Remedies be not fallen upon and used by the
Senate of the Kingdom, for the relieving us from our Distresses and Miseries of
that kind, that the forenamed mi^red Gentleman will soon find the Heats of the
Nation to rise beyond the Remedy of his Vinegar-bottle; how effectual soever he
may have found that Liquor to have been to check and allay warm and ^ustful
Insurrections in himself. Yea, in vain do both Houses of Parliament labor to
help and relieve us in this matter, while we have a King so linked and united
to the Dutch, by manifold ties of Interest and Affection, and who thinks
himself no otherwise obliged by the Title and Authority we have given him over
this Nation, than to sacrifice us to their Safety and Prosperity, and to raise
them to Greatness, Power and Wealth, upon our Poverty, Thraldom and Ruin: So
that the only mean of Deliverance and Rescue is to dissolve the Bonds between
him and us, and to return and leave him where we found him in the separate and
amorous Embraces of his darling and beloved Hollanders.

All I have further to add in reference to the damage done to the Trade of this
Nation by the Dutch, and of the Design which King William out of kindness to
them has been promoting for the Ruin and Subversion of our Traffic, shall be
briefly to take notice of, and to reflect a little upon his erection of a
Scotch African and East India Company, with such Immunities and Privileges as
will prove destructive of the Trade of England to those Parts. Which Scotch
Company, as it is established by a late Act of Parliament of that Kingdom, to
which King William gave the enacting Fiat and Royal Sanction; so he did it
without giving his English Privy Council, or any other of this Nation, the
least antecedent Notice of it, and much more without asking or taking their
Advice about it, though a matter both of great Importance in it self, and of
vast Consequence to the Trade of this Kingdom. Nor can it be imagined that the
said Act for erecting of a Scotch Company was surreptitiously obtained, or
precipitately passed, without his Knowledge and Information of the Tenor of it:
Seeing the Instructions were formed and digested here, and signed by him; which
upon being sent down thither, gave occasion and encouragement there to make and
enact such a Statute at this Juncture. And it is highly worthy of remark, That
this Scotch Law, containing so many unusual Privileges, and beneficial
Concessions, as were never granted heretofore by any King of Great Britain,
should be made at a Season when the Trade of England is so loaded and depressed
by late grievous Impositions and Taxes laid upon It, by several Laws since the
Revolution, in order to the carrying on of the present War, and for the
defraying the Charges of it. Nor is it conceivable, how after so many
Discouragements given to the English East India Company, not only in refusing
them an Establishment by Law, but in Delaying for several Years to grant them a
Confirmation of their Charter; and thereby putting them both to vast Expenses,
through their being so long in soliciting of it, and the leaving them all that
while naked and exposed to be undermined and supplanted by Interlopers, that
this unwonted and exuberant Grace should be exercised to the Kingdom of
Scotland, were it not done upon the Influence of Dutch Councils, and in
pursuance of Measures from Holland for the ruining the Trade of England. And
whosoever considers the little respect, and the less affection which King
William has for the Scots Nation, and with what disdain and contempt he speaks
o^ that whole Kingdom, and treats those of the first Quality of it, will easily
believe, That he did not authorize the Establishment of the forementioned
Company out of kindness unto, or concern for the Prosperity of that Nation; but
that it was done upon the Motives, and in pursuance of foreign Councils. Not
that I do envy the Scots any Favor that is showed them, upon whatsoever
Inducements it be done; or that I blame the Parliament of Scotland for what
they have done in this particular, toward the raising of the Genius, and
encouraging the Industry of their People, to the pursuit of Trade; but what I
would say is, That as King William's Kindness to the Scots in this matter is to
the apparent and visible Damage of the English, so it is morally certain, that
both the first overture of such an Establishment sprung from Belgic Councils,
and that the Prince of Orange's Instructions, which led that Parliament to such
a Bill, and the Royal Assent given thereunto by his Commissioner, upon which it
is become a Law and Statute, is all in order to increase the Trade, and raise
the Grandeur of the Dutch, and to depress and lessen the Trade of England, and
thereby to weaken and impoverish the Kingdom. For as the Author of a Paper
called, Some Considerations upon the late Act of the Parliament of Scotland for
constituting an Indian Company, has with Candor and Ingenuity told us, Page 4.
That the Original of that Design of settling a Company of Commerce for
Strangers as well as for Scotch-men was not from Scotland, nor from hence, but
altogether from foreign Parts; which, as he there tells us, he had from good
hands. So we have reason upon his Testimony to receive what he says, being so
avowed a Patron of the Wisdom, Justice and Equity of the said Act. However it
will not be amiss to unfold a little more distinctly, what he has only
obscurely and briefly insinuated. In the doing whereof I must crave pardon for
revealing a Secret committed to me in a private Conversation, and the rather
because I have always valued my self upon an inviolable Fidelity toward all
that have trusted me, and upon a tenacious Retentiveness and steady Secrecy in
reference to such Things as have been privately, and under the Notion of
friendship conveyed to me. But where my Discretion has only been confided in,
but neither my Honor nor my Conscience have been engaged, I do judge that I not
only may, but that in Duty I ought to disclose what has been, and is contrived
and machinated, in order to divide and separate these two Kingdoms, and thereby
to weaken if not ruin both of them: namely, That the Dutch^ being afraid that
either through the Prince of Orange's Death, or through King James's
Restoration, these Nations may be awakened to consider how they have been
first deluded and misled, and then wronged and injured by the Hollanders; and
thereupon may be provoked to demand Reparation, and grow enraged to pursue
Revenge, they have therefore studied and concerted how to separate the Kingdoms
of England and Scotland the one from the other: And have proceeded so far
therein, as in either of the foregoing Cases to have allowance for it from
Willam's Dutch Minions and Confidents, which is equivalent to the having it
from himself. And accordingly they have treated with some of the Scotch Nation
about it, whom they have not only gratified with Money to make them pliable, but
have given them assurance, That there shall be Three or Four hundred thousand
Pound ready, to bribe and gain the chief and most leading Men of that Kingdom
to comply with this Design, at what time it may be needful for the Dutch to
have it put in execution. In pursuance whereof they have started the Project of
a Scotch East India Company, which that Nation had all the reason in the World
to take hold of, and they will be thought not only kind but just to themselves
in gaining this Grant and Concession from the Crown, for their coming into the
Interest of this Man at a Season when their adhering to their Rightful King, as
was their Duty to have done, would have made this Man's Title very uncertain
and precarious, and would have rendered his Abode in, and Reign over these
Kingdoms of a very short Duration and Continuance. Nor will it escape the
recommending the Wisdom of the Scots Nation to Posterity, That whilst the
English, who have lavished away and wasted near 40 Millions sterling. upon their
Dutch King, have not obtained one Beneficial National Act or Law in recompense
of all that they have so foolishly and prodigally bestowed for the support of
his Government; the Scots, by taking the Benefit of his foreign Inclinations
and Affections, have gained something that may be useful to them and their
Offspring. It were high Presumption in me to undertake to declare how far the
Scots Act is directly calculated and adapted to the Prejudice of England,
seeing that were to invade the Province, and to break into the Rights of both
Houses of the Parliament of England, who being extremely sensible of, and
having maturely weighed it, have not only the Integrity and Fortitude to
represent it by a solemn Address to King William, but who in their profound
Wisdom are considering both how to obviate the Evils which that Law threatens
to the Traffic of the Kingdom, and how to settle the Trade of the Nation upon
such a Foot and Bottom as may give Encouragements to it, and make it revive and
flourish. I do know that all which the two Houses are to expect from their
Belgic King in answer to their Address is, That he was surprised into the
passing of the Scotch Act, which I hope all Men will believe he as truly was,
as he pretends to have been into the Massacre of Glenco, for the perpetration
whereof he gave several positive and reiterated Orders: For Fides Belgica, and
Fides Punica, are equivalent; and the Word of a Carthagenian Senator or
General, and that of a Dutch Prince, are of the same alloy and stamp. But as
the Scots are a wiser Nation, having obtained the passing of such a Law, than
upon any Consideration whatsoever to be prevailed upon to repeal or to part
with it, either to gratify King William, or to humor and accommodate this
Kingdom; so no Man in the present Circumstances in which England is, will judge
it the Interest of this Nation to quarrel with Scotland, or too much to rally
and vex the Scots upon this Account. Not but that there are many ways and means
within the Circle and under the Power of the Parliament of England, by which
they may not only vent their Anger against those English that have subscribed
to the Scots East India Stock, but make Scotland it self first uneasy and then
enraged. But as this were to spend their Resentment and Anger where they ought
not, seeing all their Indignation ought in Justice and Equity to fall no where
but upon Kensington and Holland; so it were to make themselves Tools in
promoting the Design of separating these two Kingdoms, which the Dutch
contrived this Act for the Establishment of the forementioned Company as a
Foundation of, and a Path unto. For should they at Westminster, as they easily
may, make all those English that have put in their Shares into the Scots Stock
pay quadruple Taxes to the War, which they are upon Ways and Means to support;
this would but make many wealthy and industrious Merchants to forsake England,
and retreat to Scotland, where they will be heartily welcomed, and effectually
protected against all the Operation of such a stingy Law. Or should the
Parliament of England enjoin these English that have subscribed to the Scots
Stock to abandon and renounce their Membership in that Company, this would not
only entitle the Scots to so much Money as was the Quota of their first Payment,
which having already received, they are not so silly as to refund; but it would
also occasion those that have ventured so much in that Bottom rather to carry
their whole Capital after it, than to be both shut out from the Benefit of such
a Proportion of their own Estates, and likewise to forfeit so much of their
very Principal. Nor would the Parliament of England act with less imprudence,
and in greater inconsistency with their own Interest, should they suffer
themselves to be provoked to turn the Payment of all the Scots Regiments in
Flanders off from the English Establishment, and cast it upon the Scots as the
equivalent of the Customs which they are excused from by the forementioned
Statute; but which they would be obliged to pay to the Government, were they to
trade to Africa and the East Indies upon the like bottom and terms which the
English do. But as this were to enfeeble the Confederate Army, by robbing it of
Seventeen thousand as good Men as any it is constituted of, or else to
necessitate England to hire and pay so many Foreigners in their room, which
they cannot in that Method of acting avoid doing toward the completing of the
Eighty seven thousand four hundred and forty Men, which the House of Commons by
their Vote of December the 14th have declared necessary for the Year 1696. So
such a Procedure of this Kingdom toward Scotland would enforce the Scots both
to call home their Troops, and to employ them where England will not find any
Advantage in giving them Provocation as well as Occasion to do it. So that in a
Word, all the Anger that boileth in English Breasts upon the Account of this
Scots Act ought to vent it self upon the Dutch who gave the Advice, and upon
our Belgic King who gave it the legislative Stamp, and ratified it into an
Act, by what he calls his Royal Authority. And to show that all his little
Excuses, and particularly what he gave in answer to the Address of the Two
Houses when presented to him October. 17. viz. That he had been ill served in
Scotland, is all Cheat, pure Grimace, in that he has not in Evidence of his
being imposed upon and misled, turned out or laid aside one of those Ministers
of State whom he would have this credulous Nation believe to have deluded him
to it. Which were it true, as it no wise is, it ought not to vindicate him from
being accountable for the wrong he has therein done to the Kingdom of England;
seeing he who drove away King James by a President of his own making, merely
for the Offenses of that King's Ministers, and which Ministers he has not only
taken into his Friendship and Confidence, but made some of them the chief
Superintendants of all his Affairs, must not think to Sham the World off with
Pretenses that the Ministers are only guilty, whilst he is to be looked upon as
one as innocent as the Child unborn. Yea I will presume to add, That whereas K.
James was not by any Laws of the Kingdom responsable for the Transgressions of
his Councillors and Off^cers, but his Person and Royal Dignity were in all
Cases to remain Sacred and Safe, K. W. is justly and legally Arraignable for
all the Crimes of his Ministers, as well as for his own; and that both by his
authorizing that unjust and barbarous Fact of abdicating his Uncle and Father
in Law, and also by virtue of the Stipulation, Contract and Term upon which he
accepted the Crown. But if nothing else will serve and content the Parliament
of England, save the making Reprisals, and taking Revenge upon the Scots, for
their establishing an East India Company with so many ample Privileges and
Immunities, the way of doing it is open and easy, without their committing any
thing that the Scots can call unjust, or which they themselves may either
repent or be ashamed of: namely, To grant unto their own trading Company,
especially to those of Africa and the East Indies, such an Establishment by
Law, with ease from Custom and Impositions, at least with such an Abatement and
Moderation of them as caeteris paribus may be an Equivalent to all the
Privileges and Immunities in the Scots Act, and thereby discourage and cripple,
if not stifle and smother their Undertaking. And it is a surprise to all
thinking disinterested Men, that Trade being the Source and Fountain of the
Wealth, Strength and Populace of a Nation; and that this Kingdom being more
adapted for it by its Situation, Harbors, and the Genius of its People, than
any other Country whatsoever, that yet it should be so far from being
encouraged in the way, manner and degrees it ought, that the Trade of England
is more Clogged, Loaded, and has greater Burdens laid upon it, than that of
any other Nation. But if this Method of counteracting the Scots should not be
thought convenient, when the Kingdom is to be charged with so many and large
Grants of Money to the Government for the upholding and carrying on the present
War, there is still another way of obviating all the Evils we are apprehensive
of from the Scots Act, and from the old East India Company; yea and not only of
defeating the Design of the Dutch, who were the first and underhand Advisers
to it, but of improving it into an Occation of strengthening our selves to
chastise the Hollanders, and to exact Reparations from them for all the
Injuries of one kind and ^^other which they have done us: And that is the
bringing these two Kingdoms into an Union of Councils, Laws and Privileges of
all Sorts, as they are already united under one Monarch, encompassed by the
same Seas, Inhabitants upon one Island, and not differing in Language farther
than in tone and dialect. Which as it would be to the mutual Safety and
Prosperity of both Nations, so it is not to be questioned but that the Scots,
in consideration and acknowledgment of the Benefit that would accrue to them by
an Incorporation with England, would cheerfully surrender their late Act, and
be as forward as we can wish to repeal it. Nor would it be sound so difficult
as some do imagine it, to effect, compass and perfect such an Union upon Terms
that both Kingdoms may think equal, could we on each side renounce national
Piques, and give up little private Interests, in order to the obtaining a
general common Good.

I am told that some are so ignorant, and others so impudent, as say, That King
William in virtue of that Sovereign Power which that Kingdom has granted him,
may, by his own personal and immediate Authority, without the concurrence of a
Parliament, or the Prescription of a Law, impose upon Trade what Duty, Customs
or Taxes he pleases; and this they alledg to stand vested in him as a part of
his Prerogative, by the Gift and Concession of an Act of Parliament made in one
of those Sessions when Launderdale was King Charles the Second's High
Commissioner. To which I reply three Things: 1. That such a Supposition were to
put all Traders of the Kingdom of Scotland into the state and condition of
Slaves, by making their whole Property acquirable by the way of Traffic to be
under the protection of no Law, but to be s^isable and disposable at the
arbitrary Will and despotical Pleasure of the King; which I think that Nation
which justly boasts it self a free Kingdom, as much as any other whatsoever,
will not easily acquiesce in, and submit unto from any King: But especially not
from one of their own making, who being as the Clay in their hands, of which
they have made a Vessel of Honor, they may either break it or mould it again
when the Humor takes them into a Vessel of Dishonor. 2. Whatsoever
Prerogative this Man, under the Notion of being their King, may have as to the
laying Impositions upon Goods and Merchandise, where no Law does preclude and
bar him from doing it, and where the Concession, Liberty and Right for them to
trade to such and such Places, and in such and such Commodities, proceed and
are derived mee^ly from his personal Grant and Charter, which gives them all
their Title so to do; yet it is most absurd to imagine that he can have any
such Prerogative or Power where a public Law has given them both a Right and
Authority to trade, and an Immunity from all Impositions whatsoever in
reference to such Places, and the Productions and Superfluities thereof; and it
is also Tyranny in him to challenge it. For by this means no Laws can be a
Fence about Men's Estates and Properties, nor give them the Security which they
both promise, and were made and enacted for the ensuring to them. And for King
William to claim and exercise such a Jurisdiction and Authority were to usurp a
dispensing Power that is both infinitely worse in it self, and more fatal in
its consequences, than that for which we so much blamed, and have hostily
treated King James: Seeing all the dispensing Power King James challenged was
only in reference to penal Laws, and those also relative merely to Religious
Matters; as to both which the King has a greater extent and latitude of
Jurisdiction inherent in him by reason of his Sovereign Power, than he has in
reference to other Laws. But should King William take upon him to dispense with
the Act we are speaking of, it were to usurp a dispensing Power both in
reference to beneficial Laws, and those made for the protection of our Civil
Rights, Properties and Estates, which all Men who have common Sense know to be
more out of the verge and reach of Kings to supercede and control, than those
are which refer to Ecclesiastical Officers, and which are likewise of a penal
Nature. 3. Should it be admitted that by that Act of Lauderdale's Parliament an
absolute, unlimitted and despotical Authority became vested in King Charles,
and stood conveyed to King James, in relation to this laying Taxes and
Impositions on Trade; yet no Power of this kind accrues by this Act to King
William, in that it was complained of as one of the Grievances which were
presented to him antecedently to his having Crown conferred upon him, and
whereof Redress only was demanded: But it was stipulated, and made a part of
the Original Contract, betwixt the Kingdom of Scotland and Him, That no such
Power as Lauderdale's Act imported should ever be claimed, or exercised over
them. And for King William now to pretend to it, were not only to violate his
Coronation Oath, and proclaim himself perjured to all the World; but it were to
discharge that Nation from all Obligation of Fealty to him, and to give them a
legal Right as well as Cause to proceed to the deposing and abdicating him.

Before I shut up this Discourse, which the variety and importance of the
matter has already made longer than I at first designed it, though I hope it
will not be found tedious, I shall for the sake of many Thousands; as well as
my own, humbly applying my self to the Senate of the Kingdom, to the Members of
the Privy Council, and to the Gentlemen of both the Gowns, for their resolving
me Two or Three Questions; which it is of great Concernment with respect to our
Constitution, our Laws, our Relig^on, and our Consciences to have
Satisfactorily answered. The first is, That they would tell us what the meaning
of a King de facto is, and how such a One differs from a King de jure? For I
find that many both of the Lawyers, Gentry, as well as of the Clergy, who do
wholly disbelieve, and in their Minds disclaim the Prince of Orange's Right to
the Sovereignty, do yet allow themselves to swear Allegiance to him, and do pay
him the Duty of Subjects, merely because he is got into Possession of the
Throne and Royal Title, and de facto has assumed the exercise of the Kingly
Power. Nor am I ignorant that the pedant Writers of Politics do speak of a
King de facto, as well as of a King de jure; but so far as I am capable of
understanding Reason or good Sense, no Man can be called a King de facto, who
is not either antecedently or concomitantly a King also de jure: Seei^g he that
is styled a King, but who is not rightfully so, is by all the Laws of God and
Man a Robber and an Usurper; but a King he is not, nor can he be. A Thief may
as well be called a legal Proprietor of what he has stolen from his Neighbor,
and he that Pads upon the Road may have as just a Claim to the Purse he has
forcibly taken from a Traveller, though the Law makes both the one and the
other obnoxious to be hanged, and that very justly too, as he can have either
Right or Pretense to the Regal Title and Power, who attains not to them by the
Methods, Rules and Measures, and in the Virtue, Force and Efficacy of the
Constitution. And as the Names of Intruder, Usurper and Robber, and not those
of Prince, Sovereign and King, are which such a one ought only to be called by;
so instead of Allegiance due unto him, or of our being under the Obligation
either of divine or human Laws to render unto that Person the Duties of
Subjects, we are bound both in Law and Conscience to raise Hue and Cry after
him, and to pursue him, and make him accountable for the Crimes which have
entitled him to the Names of Robber of his Neighbors Crown, and Intruder into
and Usurper of another Man's Throne. Things are stubborn and inflexible, and
will not change their Natures, because of the complemental soft Words that are
fastened upon them. Theft, Robbery and Usurpation, will not cease to be the same
evil and abominable Crimes which God has denounced Curses against, and which
Men in all Ages have annexed Punishments unto, notwithstanding the smooth
Whitehall and Kensington Language with which we varnish them over. And whereas
the Word and Name King has been hitherto taken for a fair, honest, and
honorable Word and Name, and held no ways reproachful for a virtuous Man to
have it ascribed unto him, and to be denominated by it; I will venture to say
that it is one of the worst and most scandalous Words in the World, and the
most disgraceful and injurious Title that a Person is capable of having given
him; if it be allowed to express an Usurper by, and used of one that has no
Right to a Crown, but merely the Possession of it. But whereas there are some
who through want of Sense, and others who through Ignorance of the Law, may
take the Prince of Orange to be a King de jure, and may thereby hope both to
save their Consciences and their Credits, and think to justify themselves from
Treason and Disloyalty in their swearing Allegiance to him, and yielding him
the Fealty due from Subjects; I desire therefore in the second Place to ask our
Senators of Wisdom, and our Gentlemen of the Gowns, how this Right to be King
accrues to the Prince of Orange, and from what Sources of Law and Justice the
Royal Style and Authority come to be derived unto and vested in him, and by
what Tenure he bears the Royal Name, and exercises the Sovereign Power? For as
there are but Three ways in any Nation of arriving lawfully at the Supreme
Authority, and of coming legitimately and honestly to be a King, namely, either
by the Right of hereditary Succession, or by the Right of just and lawful
Conquest, or by the Right of Election, where through the known Laws, and the
fundamental Provisions of the Constitution, there is upon every Vacancy of the
Throne a Privilege vested in the People, or in their Representatives, or in
some select Number of the most honorable and qualified Persons, to choose one
to fill it. And as none can have the Impudence to say, either that the Prince
of Orange is King of England by the Right of hereditary Succession, seeing
there are diverse Persons who have an hereditary Right of inheriting the Crown
antecedently to him. Or that he attained to be King by a lawful Conquest in a
just War; seeing that is not only disclaimed by himself, and repr^bated by the
Parliament, but because the offering to establish his Title upon that
Foundation, and to justify it by that Plea, were to put us into the State of
Slaves instead of Subjects, and to make us enjoy all we are and have by his
Pleasure and Will, and not to have any Property in them by our ancient Laws. So
in the third Place none who have the least Acquaintance with the Nature of our
Constitution, the Frame of our Government, or the many Laws of the Land
relative to the Right and Manner of Succession in the Sovereignty, will dare to
pretend that upon a Demise of the Crown the People, or any certain Number of
Persons whatsoever, stand legally vested with a Power of choosing who shall
succeed: And the reason is obvious, because our Monarch is and has been always
an hereditary Monarch, and not an elective. Wherefore though there have been
sometimes Interruptions in the Rightful Succession, and Translations of the
Crown from one Family to another, yet save in the Cases of direct Usurpation,
such as Oliver Cromwell's, it was never attempted on the Foot and Principle of
the Peoples having a Power resident in them by Law to elect their King; but it
was always on the Motive and Foundation of doubtful and controverted Titles.
Which Claim, though in some it was very weak, yet it was always insisted upon;
and what their Title wanted in legal Goodness, they endeavored to make out by
military Power. I might add, That there was no Demise here, neither by Death
nor by Resignation, and much less were there any vested with a Regal Power of
abdicating, deposing, and driving away King James. So that upon the whole, the
Prince of Orange can upon ^o Foundation whatsoever, nor in any Sense received,
among Men of coming Lawfully to a Crown, be King of England de jure, and by
consequence he must be contented to be held for no other than an Usurper, and
as such ought all Men to account him, who according to the Laws of Revelation,
and of the Kingdom, would either approve themselves to God, or have peace in
their own Minds. But then thirdly, admitting the Prince of Orange to be King of
England, (whether de Jure or de Facto I further enquire not*) I desire to ask
the Two Houses of Parliament, as well as our Lawyers and Divines, of what
Signification and Importance in their Judgments and Opinions the Word King is,
that the People may the better know the Nature, Extent and Bounds of their
Allegiance, that being on their part Reciprocal and Corrolate to Kingship on
the Sovereigns? And this Question is the more necessary to be resolved, in that
the Notion and Idea of King is much different in the present Estimate of the
Generality of Men, as well within the Houses of Parliament as without them,
from what it is represented and found to be in our Laws, and from what it has
been always heretofore taken and acknowledged to be. That therefore which with
reference to my self, as well as to many Thousands besides, I would earnestly
beg to know, is, Whether by King they mean a Sovereign Prince, whose Person (by
virtue of the Authority lodged in him, and by reason that the Peace and Welfare
of the whole Society depends upon his Safety) is Sacred and Inviolable; who
cannot legally be resisted, opposed or withstood, and much less be judged,
deposed and abdicated by any Power on Earth, on any Pretense whatsoever, and
one without whose Call and Authority all Meetings, Assemblies and Consultations
about Matters of Government and State are Treason and Rebellion? Or whether by
King they do intend only a Person that is merely in the Quality of a Trustee,
entrusted by and accountable to the People as his Principals, and who being
only vested with a delegated Power, may therefore be resisted, arraigned,
judged, abdicated, and drove away, if he offend those over whom he is advanced
to rule, and act dissonantly from and contrary to the Laws, of all which his
Subjects are to be Judges? For if King be taken in the first Sense, to signify
one that is unaccusable, irresistible and unabdicable; than we of this Nation
neither have, nor lawfully can have, any other King than King James while he
lives, and has not renounced and disclaimed his Right: And by consequence the
Prince of Orange is no other than an Usurper. And we out of our own Mouths, and
by our own Sentence, no better than Rebels in abdicating the former, and in
submitting unto and owning the later. And indeed the Principles upon which the
Salisbury Dictator of Measures of Obedience, Dr. Burnet (who out of disloyal
Malice to us endeavored to subvert our ancient Government, and to battle all
our Laws, by his modern and treasonable Politics) striveth to justify the
Abdication in a Book he has lately published, called, Reflections on a
Pamphlet entitled Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson, occasioned
by the Funeral Sermon of the former upon the later, plainly show both how self
condemned the Author is, and what Rebellion he and the Nation are, according to
the Laws of God and Men, become guilty by that Transaction. For whereas he
owns, That illegal Acts, and Acts of Tyranny, and the remote Consequences of
them, do not justify the resisting of Princes; and that they can be then only
lawfully withstood, when their going about to subvert totally the Constitution
shall be plainly apparent, P. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. there is no more needful
to be said for the loading of him, and for the branding the Nation with the
just Imputation of the highest and most detestable Treason committed in the
Abdication of the King, and in the Choice and Exaltation of the Prince of
Orange to his Throne. Seeing whatsoever illegal Acts (which were not many, nor
of any menacing Importance to the Kingdom) the King might be misled and hurried
into by treacherous Councillors; yet it is so far from being plainly apparent
that he designed to subvert the Constitution, that the contrary is
demonstratively evident; and that no Prince ever bore greater regard to the
Laws, Liberties and Prosperity of England than he did. And as his Majesty's
sending an Ambassador to Rome, his appointing Popish Bishops, and his claiming
a dispensing Power in reference to penal Laws about Religion, are all the
Instances which that traitorous Doctor gives of the King's being embarked in
such an Attempt; so they are such weak and impertinent Proofs of such a Design,
that it is to banter Mankind, to raise a Suspicion of it upon them, and much
more to style them plain and apparent Evidences of it. Nor needs there any more
to show that the Constitution was in no danger of being totally subverted by
those Means and Overt Acts of Government, than that neither the noble Person
that went to Rome, nor those that were constituted Popish Bishops, nor any of
them that gave Advice for the dispensing Power, have been so much as arraigned,
and much less capitally punished, as they would and deserved to have been, if
those Things had been of a direct and immediate Tendency to destroy totally the
Constitution. Nor would any Man have betrayed at once the Weakness and the
Impudence as to have assigned those Acts of Administration, and no other, as
convictive Proofs of an apparent Design in King James to subvert totally the
Constitution; but this noisy, treacherous and disloyal Doctor, who like to him
that fired Diana's Temple to protect himself from Oblivion, has been studying
to raise himself a Monument upon the Banishment of his Sovereign, the Ruin of
our Ancient Government, and the Involving of these Kingdoms in a bloody and
destructive War. But then on the other had, if King be taken in the second
Sense, for one that may be resisted, arraigned, deposed and drove away from his
Throne and Kingdom; then as the Prince of Orange has but a flippery Seat of
it, and a thorny Crown, so no Man can be lawfully required to take an Oath of
Allegiance to him, and much less justly punished by double Taxes, or otherwise
for refusing it: Seeing if that be the Signification and Importance of King, it
may be every Man's Duty to assist in deposing and dethroning him. And upon what
I have said of his Miscarriages in Government, and the Designs he is carrying
on to the Ruin as well as Impoverishment of the Kingdom, there is nothing
remains to be added or adviced, But to your Tents O Israel, for this Man ought
no longer to be suffered to pretend to reign over us. For as he has in many
Instances apparently attempted the total Subversion of the Constitution, (which
even by our Salisbury Doctor's Principles of Politics, justifies the deposing
him) and particularly both in the commanding a whole Tribe of Men that were
under the Protection of the Laws to be massacred, without any previous Trial or
Conviction; and in his taking the Earl of Bredalbin by mere arbitrary Power,
not only out of the hands of Justice, when he stood impeached by Parliament
(which whether he was justly or unjustly makes no Change in the Nature of what
the Prince of Orange has therein done) but in putting him into the
Administration of the Government as a Privy Councellor: So he has likewise in
effect destroyed the very Kingdom, and has brought us into those Circumstances
of Confusion, Misery and Want, out of which it is impossible to recover and
deliver us, while he is permitted to sit at the Helm. And which, if we be so
sortish, and so much Enemies to our selves and to our Posterity as to connive
at any longer, it will be out of the reach and power both of our Rightful King,
and of a well constituted Parliament ever to redeem us; or either to retrieve
the Nation from final Ruin, or to save us from being Conquered by any potent
Neighbor that may have a mind to invade us.

Nor will I enlarge this Discourse any further, save to tell those who out of
rebellious Enmity to a Rightful King, and Idolatry of an Usurper, may complain
of the Acrfmony of some Expressions which will be found to occur in the
foregoing Leaves, That all the Language I have used is either consecrated by
the Tongues or Pens of your Williamite Divines, in their Pulpit Invectives
against King James, and the King of France; or else it is all authorized by the
Licenced Pamphlets, published in way of Elog^e upon the present Government, and
Satyr upon the last. And whosoever will waste so much time as to peruse a Paper
styled, A Dialogue between the King of France and the late King James,
occasioned by the Death of the Queen, will justify me in the Reprisals and
Retaliations I have made. Only whereas little is to be met with in these
Sermons and Pamphlets but ridiculous Fiction, and impudent Slander, as well as
dull Malice; there will nothing be found in these Sheets but weighed and
measured Truth, though sometimes a little piquantly expressed.

December. 20. 1695.
ERRATA.
Page 2, line 30. before other read of, ibid. l. 38. for sta^e r. state. p. 4.
l. ult. for stuff r. strife, p. 5. l. 25. dele same, p. 6. l. 36. for Redress
r. Readers, p. 9. l. 1. r. where we had for a great while been in the quiet and
peaceable Possession, p. 11. l. 37. r. plead, p. 12. l. 15. dele a before
Servant, p. 13. l. 8. r. Placat's, ibid. l. 20. r. Rude, ibid. l. ult. for
their r. these, p. 14. l. 8. r. become, ibid. l. 20. for th r. to, p. 15. l. 7.
before it r. as, ibid. l. 13. for were r. we, p. 16. l. 3, 4. r. putting, ibid.
l. 6. r. Guet, p. 20. l. 21. r. executed, ibid. l. 27. for yet r. yea, p. 22.
l. 35. after with r. the, p. 23. l. 8. r. Donative, p. 25. l. 38. r.
Bordacho's, p. 32. l. 33. before Mischiefs r. the, p. 33. l. 6. before have r.
they, ibid. l. 12. two Millions, p. 34. l. 7. after transported put, p. 35. l.
33. for mark r. mask, p. 36. l. 12. r. thither, ibid. l. 19. for so r. for,
ibid. l. 20. for more r. were, ibid. l. 33. r. they thus, p. 37. l. ult. dele
they, p. 38. l. 8. after unto put, ibid. l. 21. r. become, p. 43. l. 14. r.
whereof, p. 47. l. 28. r. Villainies, p. 48. l. 28. r. become, ibid. l. 29. r.
Center, p. 50. l. 25. r. Officers, ibid. l. 30. r. the, p. 51. l. 3. r. Plebi,
ibid. l. 11. dele to, ibid. l. 22. before the r. that, p. 55. l. 32. r. no.


