A Letter to a Person of Honor, concerning the BLACK BOX.
My Lord,
YOu are pleased to command me to give you some account of the Foundation of
that Report which has arrived with you concerning a Black Box; and withal to
let you know how Sir Gilbert Gerard acquitted himself at his appearance before
the King and Council in reference to that affair. As to the first, I must crave
leave to distinguish betwixt what is material in that business, and what is
merely circumstantial, and serves only by way of purad. Your Lordship, whose
conversation has given you great advantages of knowing the reports of the
World in relation to the Kings Marriage with the Duke of Monmouths Mother, can
easily recollect that there was never so much as a suggestion given out, till
of late, of any such thing as a Black Box, nor of a Writing importing a
Contract consigned by the late Lord of Durham to the Custody of Sir Gilbert
Gerard. And had there been any thing of that consequence committed to and
entrusted with him, he is both a person of that Honor and Courage as to have
dared to have owned and justified it; and a Gentleman of that discretion and
wisdom that he would ere this have acquainted the Parliament with it, to whom
both the Cognizance and Decision of a matter of so grand importance do properly
belong. But in truth, the whole referring to the Black Box, is a mere Romance,
purposely invented to sham and ridicule the business of the Marriage, which
indeed has no relation to it. For they who judged it conducible to their
present Interest to have the D. of M's. Title to the Crown not only discredited
but exposed, thought it necessary, instead of nakedly enquiring whether he be
the Kings Legitimate or only Natural Son; to bring upon the Stage a
circumstance no way annexed with it, supposing that this being found a Fable,
the Marriage it self of the K. with the said Ds. Mother, would have undergone
the same Censure. But by what I do perceive they were mistaken in their
measures; seeing most men know how to separate what they endeavored so
artificially to have interwoven. And all that I can apprehend they are like to
get by it is, the raising a Devil they will not easily lay.

For, My Lord it is in the first place apparent, that the starting of this
business is to be wholly ascribed to the Duke of York, and those under whose
Conduct he regulates himself and his concerns. Had any others been the first
movers in it, you may be sure they would never have ventured it before the
Council, as it is now influenced and molded; but they would have waited till
the sitting of the Parliament, where they might expect nothing but Impartiality
and Justice.

In the second Place, The very intimation that any besides the D. of Y. does so
much as pretend a Title to the Crown, will operate with many to a belief, that
it is not without reason that he does so. For the only way to undeceive men in
a matter of vain and groundless credulity, is to neglect and despise them;
whereas all endeavors to convince them, do but contribute to the strengthening
them in their faith. What will the People say? But that if the D. of M. were
not Legitimate Heir would the Papists, by whose Inspirations the D. of Y.
governs himself, so effectually bestir themselves as to desire that an affair
of so vast importance, and wherein the whole Kingdom is conerned, should be
judged of by twenty or thirty persons, who have neither Legislative nor
Judicial power.

And in the third Place, Should they compass all that they can propose to
themselves from the Board, yet it would no way advantage the D. of Y. nor give
the least prejudice to the D. of M. providing his Claim be just, and can be
evidenced o be so before the great Representative of the Nation. For beyond all
peradventure, these things howsoever resolved upon and determined at the
Council, will be called over again by the Parliament. Nor will the Opinion of
the Table, balance that great and wise Body to judge otherwise, than as their
Consciences, upon a hearing of the whole matter, shall oblige them. And of what
little significancy the Resolves of the Council, though stamped and enforced
with the Authority of a King, are to the imposing a Supreme Ruler upon the
Nation, when a Legal Claim lies in Opposition, we are sufficiently instructed
by the Instance of Jane Gray, though a Lady of those Endowments which few of
either sex ever paralleled, and recommended at that time to the Nation by many
Enducements and Motives.

In the fourth Place, The method of mannaging this Affair gives us more
surprise than all the rest, and seems wholly Calculated, to Intricate matters,
rather than clear them. For your Lordship and all others, who are Masters of
that sense which you possess, would be ready to conceive that the main, if not
the only thing inquired into, should be, Whether the King was really Married
unto Madam Walters, and whether the D. of M. was Born in lawful Wedlock? But in
stead of this, all the mighty Inquisition has been, Whether this or that
person hard of a Black Box, or of a Contract referring to the Kings Marriage
with that Lady, committed to the keeping of Sir Gilbert Gerard. Now what is all
this to the reality of the Marriage, seeing it might be transacted, as most
other Marriages are, In verbis de presenti, and of which no other Proof can be
expected besides the Testimony of such as were personally present.

Fifthly, The persons whom they have in this whole matter summoned before them
and examined, adds to the suspicion and increases the astonishment. For People
who think congruously to the subject before them, had conceived, That the main
Scrutiny would have been either in reference to the Assurances given to the
Countess of Weems concerning the Legitimacy of the D. of M. before she disposed
her Daughter in Marriage to him, or else that all the Examinations relating to
this business would have been principally confined to those who were beyond Sea
with the King when this Marriage is supposed to have happened. But all this
seems to have been industriously waved, and in the room of these, a few persons
have been brought before, and Interrogated by the Counsel, who could never be
supposed to have heard otherwise of it than by way of vulgar tattle. And as I
dare boldly affirm, that there is no one person who is accustomed to the
fellowship of the Town, who has not heard of such a Marriage; so it is
uncontroulably known, That there was in Olivers time, a Letter intercepted from
the King to the said Lady, then in the Tower, superscribed, to his Wife. Nor is
it unknown with what homage the Kings party in England, at that time paid their
Devotion and testified their Obedience to her. For as they addressed her upon
the Knee, so by that and many other Symbols, they declared that they esteemed
her for no less than the lawful Wife of their King and Master.

Sixthly, It Is of no great concernment, who is the immediate apparent Heir in
the Regal Line, if we do but consider that the Parliament of England has often
provided a Successor to the Government, when the Interest of the Public has
required it, without the least regard to such Punctilio's. They who preferred
William Rufus, and Henry the 1st. to Robert, though Eldest Son of William the
Conqueror, what can they not do when weighty Reasons and Causes influence them
unto it? And they who advanced Stephen before Maud, and John before his Eldest
Brothers Son, can they not, when the Safety of the Kingdom requires it, put
the Scepter into whose hands they please. Nor has Bastardy it self been an
Obstruction to the confering of the Crown upon a person, provided all things
else have corresponded with the desires and Humors of the People. For not only
Athelstan, the Great Saxon King, was such, but Q. Mary or Q. Elizabeth, must be
so Blazoned, and yet all three were Exalted to the Regal Throne. And two of
them, not only approved themselves worthy of the Trust reposed in them, but
have consigned down that stock of Fame and Credit, which few attaining unto,
has left a Reproach upon most Princes who have succeeded them. Even Henry the
7th. (from whom our King derives his Title and Right of Succession) sprung from
a Bastard, who had nothing to render him capable to conveigh a Claim to his
Posterity, but that he was made Legitimate by Parliament.

Seventhly, The Council had done a thing grateful to the Nation, and consonant
to their Oaths and Duty, if in stead of attempting to establish the Duke of
York as Heir apparent, they had examined, Whether, notwithstanding his Affinity
to the King, he has not by manifold Treasons against the Person of his
Majesty, as well as against the Government, forfeited his Life to Justice, and
made himself obnoxious to a Scaffold, while he is pretending to a Thorn. He is
yet a Subject, and accountable for the Breach of the Laws, and why his Crimes
should find shelter in his Greatness, I know not. It Is in vain to pretend to
the Right of Succession, when his Treasons were a Self Deposition, were he
actually Regnant. Whosoever Conspires against any one part of the Constitution,
forfeits all he can Claim by any other branch of it. To be accessory to a Plot
for the destruction of the People, is to abdicate himself from all Legal
pretenses of Reigning over them. Now the being seduced, and seducing so many of
his Majesty's Subjects from the established Religion, to that of Popery, is
Treason by two Statutes, viz. Eliz 22 1. Jam. 3. 4. And for which (say the
words of the Stat.) They shall forfit as in cases of High Treason As the late
Proclamation by King and Council has also fiignifieantly declared. The
countenancing the Burning of London, the endeavoring to alter the limited
Monarchy into a Despotick Rule, and the combining with the Papists in all the
parts of the Late Plot, make him liable to the Ax, while he is aspiring to a
Scepter.

Eighthly, A more unaccountable thing yet than all the former is, to see the
King so far concern himself in having the Succession declared and determined.
For it is not usual to find a Prince appear in favor of a Brother, when so
many are in the Belief, that he has a Legitimate Son of his own. Many Kings
have endeavored the advancement of their Bastard Children, to the exclusion of
their nearest Relations of the right Blood; Only Charles the 2d. will be the
first on the File of History, that when nothing but his bare Word was needful
to the settling his Dominions on his Son as Legitimately born, He alone, and in
the face of strong suspicions to the contrary, would insinuate him to be only
his Natural Son, and for no other reason but that he would gratify his greatest
Enemies. I Am sure we read of few Kings that ever gave any great Countenance to
their Brethren, when they were their presumptive Heirs, though in the mean time
they would not deprive them of their Legal Rights, providing they came to
outlive them. Yea there are not many Ages past since the Heir apparent's being
only attended by a greater Train than the King then reigning over these
Kingdoms used to be accompanied with, is theught to have given that jealousy to
the Father as cost the young Gentleman his Life. Surely considering the present
posture of affairs, and the obnoxiousness of the Papists to the Law, for their
many and continued Conspiracies against his Majesty's Person, the Lives of the
People, the Protestant Religion, and the Peace and Safety of the Government, it
were the King and Kingdoms Interest to have the D. of Y 's. Title (as to his
Succeeding to the Crown) to be left undetermined and doubtful. Nor can any
thing so effectually conduce both to the Kings own Security, and that of his
Protestant Subjects, as to leave the D. of Is. under a Belief, that should the
King be taken away, there is one still behind, that can dispute the Crown with
him. Nor can the D. of Y. pursuing the having the Right of Succession at this
time settled, intimate less to considering persons, but that the Papists
entertain new Designs against his Majesty's Life, and that only they want such
a Declaration for the hastening of the Execution of them. Your Lordship knows
that Q. Elizabeth would never positively name her Succes^our, though often
importtned by Parliaments so to do; for she very well understood, that if this
had been once done, she should afterward Reign only by his courtesy, and owe
the remain of her Life, and the Peace of the Government to his Grace and Favor
whom she had published for presumptive Heir. And truly the Kings falling so
immedia^ely ill after the D. of Y. had so errnestly solicited for a formal
Declaration of his being next Heir to the Crown, occasioned some men's grounds
of Fear, that his dispatch is not only resolved, but the Springs and Causes of
it disposed before, and that all things being ripe, this was merely contrived
to facilitate the Dukes Entrance upon the Government.

In brief matters are arrived at that pass, that the Papists cannot suffer the
King to continue, and the Duke and they long escape the demerit of their
actions. For as his Majesty cannot subsist nor preserve the Reputation of his
Crown and Government, many months longer without a Parliament, no more can
they, through the number, quality and palpableness of their Crimes bear one. So
that the necessity of their Affairs, as well as their Inclinations, seconded
by their Principles, oblige them by one means or another to remove him. Wherein
if they succeed, as I see no rational foundation of Judging but that they will,
there is nothing remains toward the preserving our Religion, Lives and
Liberties, but to endeavor according to the Vote and Resolve of the last
Parliament, to revenge his Death upon the Papists. It Is true the King would not
be prevailed upon by any Importunities (though frequently made by the D. at the
Board on Wednesday last) to order a Councel-Table Declaration in favor of
Yorks right to Succeed in case His Majesty should dye before him, yet the
business would appear to be so far gone, and all things so disposed already in
prospect of what they in end, that they cannot without hazarding their whole
concernements recall th^mselves from the purpose of murdering him. Yea the
Kings not gratifying the Dake in his so often repeated suit, will now serve
only to possess them with apprehensions of jealousy and make them accelerate
rather than delay the wickedness. It Is possible they may foresee that it will
be accompanied with greater hazards than it would have been, could they have
compassed that Business. But they are gone past reteat, and must either perish
by the Sword of Justice, or seek to protect themselves, by destroying the King.
And though this failure give them greater apprehensions that they must seek
their safety by recourse to force, than there would have been cause for, had
the Duke obtained such a Declaration; yet men in their circumstances, and where
there is no Medium, will choose rather to venture the being slain in the field,
than hanged on a Gibbet, or to have their Heads cut off upon a Block.

Ninethly, As I know not who dare proclaim the D. of Y. should the K depart
this life before him, seeing the House of Commons, in a Bill, twice read and
past, have made it not only Capital, but Treasonable to do it; So if my
Information do not greatly deceive me. The D. of M. before he was taken rom his
Mother in Holland and carried to Paris, went for, and was acknowledged as
Prince of Wales. And consequently to undermine this Title, if in the issue he
should prove so, is not less than Trea on by the Statute. And your Honor
knows, that though the King's Affirmative might be of some significancy,
toward the Declaration of his Legittimacy, and corroberation of his Right to
the Imperial Crown, yet his Negative imports just nothing, when confronted with
positive Evidence to the contrary.

Lastly, Whereas the Partisans and Parasites of the D. of Y. would have it
judged too great a reproach upon the King, that ever he should be thought to
have married a person of so low a quality as Madam Walters; they do but in that
discover at once their small acquaintance with History, and either their want
of memory or ingenuity in what concerns his R H. Your Lordship does very well
know, that Edw. 4. though actually in the Throne, and withal a Magnanimous and
Victorious Prince; yet he Married an ordinary Gentlewoman, and she not only one
of his own Subjects, but the Relict of a former Husband, and the Widow of an
Enemy to his Crown and Family. Whereas the King when supposed to have married
the D. of M's. Mother was actually in Exile; the utmost of his Possessions
lying in some saint hopes, which his Right to the English Throne administered
unto him. And as it is not improbable but that he found it necessary to marry
rather than by taking another course to alienate the minds of those further
from him, whose love it was his Interest to recover; So the deplorableness of
his condition at that time gave him small encouragement to demand in Marriage
any that was the Daughter of a neighboring King or Monarch. Nor is it
difficult to conceive how far the Wit, Beauty, and Air of such a Lady as Madam
Walters was, might prevail upon and entangle a young Prince both naturally
Amorous, and always an admirer of such Qualifications. Nay, My Lord, though the
D of Y. has been twice Married, and when in much better circumstances than the
King then was; yet he has no great cause of beating himself upon the Antiquity
or Greatness of the Families into which he has Matched. For, I Am sure neither
of his Dutchesses derived their Descent from so eminent a Pedigree or of that
Figure in Heraldry, as the D. of M's. Mother proceeded from. They are great
Strangers in England, who do not know that her Father was a Gentleman of an old
British Lineage, and stood possessed of a much airer Estate, than the late Lord
Chancellor Hide was ever born unto. And though I will cast no Reflection upon
his Acquisitions, yet this may be affirmed with modesty, That he was more
indebted to the favor of his Prince for them, than any extraordinary meirit in
himself, or recommendation by the Dignity and Services of his Ancestors. And
one would think the returns he made unto his Majesty in more than a thousand
Instances, should not render the King very fond of transmitting the Crown to
his Off-s^pring.

My Lord, having endeavored to obey you in one of your Commands, I shall in
the next place apply my self to the consideration of your second. And to ease
your Lordship of all unnecessary and superfluous trouble, I shall not entertain
with any long Character of Sir Gilbert Gerrard, as presuming that that
Gentleman is fully known unto you. All I shall therefore say concerning him is,
That he is still the same, and of the same Principles he was when he suffered
so much for the King in the late Times That is, He is a Loyal Subject, a good
Protestant, and a true English man; one who will Obey his Prince as far as
Conscience, Law, and Honor will allow him, but will sacrifice none of these,
neither upon Mercinary terms, n^r to avoid impendent dangers. And as it were
happy for the King, were all his Subjects of that Figure, so it would greatly
redound to the Honor of the Church of England to have all her Members of that
Complexion and Temper. Nor ought his being put out of the Commission of the
Peace be construed as any Reflection upon him, seeing he has so many worthy
and deserving Persons, in all the Counties of England sharers with him in the
same Fortune. What the occasion of that treatment was, your Lordship fully
understands, tho you were no way interested in the Affair; and it is to be
hoped that the King may in Time discover the pernitiousness of those Counsels
which both prevented his hearkening to the humble Entreaties of many of his
People, and have influenced him to disoblige a great number of his best
Subjects. ^'m sure, both his Majesty and the Kingdom do already sensibly suffer
by it, while the Gentlemen themselves, are only discharged from a burden.
There may possibly be some mean souls who covet being in the Commission, to
obtain a respect in their Country, or to make a gain by their Office and
Employment, but Sir G^lbert with those other Gentlemen who are in the same
predicament with him are persons, who in their greatest privacies, can command
a deference from all about them, and whom God has blessed both with Estates
and Minds which exalt them above the temptations off fees for Wararnts, or
Gratuities for connivance at the breach of his Majesty's Laws.

But my Lord that I may give you the better the History of this Transaction, or
rather fairce concerning Sir Gilbert Gerrards appearing before the Council; you
may be pleased to know that he was sent for by a letter under the hand of my
Lord Sunder-land requiring him to come immediately up And because a Miss^ve by
the Post might have too much preserved the Privilege of a Member of Parliament,
and intimated too great a respect to a Gentlman whose Brother had lost his life
for owning his Majesty's interest under Oliver Cromwell, and himself undergone
costly and severe imprisonements; there was a Creature styled a Gentelman Usher
ordered to carry the Letter and to bring him to Whit-Hall.

Now though Sir Gilbert, was hardly recovered from a fit of the Stone, and
remained confined by weakness to his Chamber when these Blades arrived at his
House; yet he immediately complied with the message and addressed himself to
his Journey with all the expedition he could, thereby testifying at once his
obedience to his Majesty and the security he enj^yed in his own mind as to his
innocence though he knew not what he was sent for Being come to the Court,
instead of meeting with my Lord Sunderland, there was an order left for the
conducting him to Mr. Coventry who was then the other Secretary of State,
though he has since resinged to Sir. Leyonel Ienkins. But whereas every
rationalman wou^d have apprehended that a Parliament man being seized and
brought so far prisoner within the time of privilege, could have been
questioned concerning nothing less than a Plot to assasinate the King, or a
Conspiracy of Levying War against the Government; yet all he was interrogated
about was if the late Lord of Durham had at any time entrusted him with a Black
Box, containing a Contract of Marraige between the King and the Duke of
Monmouths Mothe^, or whether he had seen any such Contract. You may easily
apprehend that he was not a little surprised after all the fatigue and expense
they had put him unto, to find himself examined in relation to so ridiculous
and Romantic a story. However being obliged to make a civil Answer, he told
the Secretary, that he was neither entrusted with such a Box, nor had so much
as heard of such a Contract, Which Reply of Sir Gilbert's being recorded in
writing, Mr, Coventry was pleased to tell him (by what Warranty we may possibly
know some other time) that he was obliged both to subscribe it and to ratify it
by an Oath. Sir Gilbert being more amazed than before, replied, That as he
little imagined that he had been sent for upon a business of that nature,
seeing he knew no reason why his name should be interested in it, so he would
neither set his Hand to the Answer he had given, nor take his Oath to confirm
it. And indeed he had reason for what he said, for how could he know but that
this might be a leading Queston to something else, for whosoever had invented
that fabulous story, might with as much truth and with more sense have charged
him with some criminal matter. Accordingly in stead of contrasting it further
with Mr. Coventry, he only asked whether he was sent for thither, and taken
into Custody as a Criminal, To which the Secretary is reported to have
returned, That he had no other directions than to ask him the foregoing
Question, which he endeavored by many Arguments to have obtained his Reply
unto under Oath, But Sir Gilbert wholly declining to swear, and representing
that he had come a long and tedious Journey whereof he was weary, desired to
know how he should be disposed of. Whereupon he was told that he might go to
his Lodging provided he would promise to attend the King and Counsel the Monday
following. Where having at the time made his appearance, he was called in after
that the judges had been there a quarter of an hour before (...) And then his
Majesty (...) (...) to (...) him that he was not sent for thither to be charged
with any Crime but only to make Oath whether the late Bishop of Durham had not
consigned to him a Black Box, wherein was contained a Contract of Marriage
betwixt his Majesty and the D. of M's. Mother. To which having replied as
before, and withal excused himself from taking any Oath in such cases wherein
the Law had not prescribed. There were many Arguments used to persuade him, and
long Harangues representing the mischievous consequences which a doubtful Title
might occasion. But he insisting upon the Rights of an Englishman, namely that
he ought not be required to swear but in such Cases as the Law did appoint, all
the Judges, and in conjunction with them, my Lord Chancellor, gave their
Opinion, that he was obliged by the Law to take his Oath in a matter of this
great moment threatened the Nation which no less than what fell out between the
Houses of York and Lancaster Which accordingly he did, to the purport already
intimated, viz. That he knew no such thing as a Black Box, nor any thing
relating to such a Contract of Marriage as he was then interrogated about. Now,
my Lord, I know not how a Gentleman could have carried it with more True,
Courage and Honor, than Sir Gilbert did. For, as the Opinion of the Judges
were to overruled him as to what was Law, so only a Parliament is capable of
judging whether they acted consonantly to their Duty. And till that happy hour
come, commend your Lordship to the divine Protection, And am,

London, May, 15. 1680. My Lord, Your most humble Servant,


