THE INTEREST OF REASON in RELIGION; WITH THE IMPORT and USE OF
Scripture-Metaphors; AND The Nature of the Union Betwixt CHRIST and BELIEVERS;
(With Reflections on several Late Writings, especially Mr. Sherlocks Discourse
concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc.) Modestly enquired into and
stated.

By Robert Ferguson.

Nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit, homo jam Deo propitius esse debebit:

Tertull. Apol. cap. 5. London Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in
the Poultrey; and at the Ship and Anchor, at the Bridg-foot on Southwark-side,
1675.

TO THOMAS PAPILLON, Esquire.
SIR,
IT cost me no long deliberation, to whom I should direct these Discourses, the
Obligations I am under to you and your Family, rendering them yours by the Title
of a just debt. The Interest you have in me by an Entail of peculiar
kindnesses, gives you a right to my Studies and the Fruits of them. The
declining the Imputation of Ingratitude is my plea for prefixing your Name to
these Papers. And though the concerning you in their behalf may seem an Injury,
yet not to have done it (my condition in the world allowing me to make no
better returns) would have been a Crime. You must either be more wary, and have
a greater foresight in dispensing your Favors, or else you must be content to
forgive such offenses as your self have made the results and effects of Duty.
So that were there any indecency in this Address, yet the Laws of Gratitude do
supersede those of Congruity. But indeed this Dedication is as much yours by
the Rules of Proportion, as by the Measures of Justice. For as you have few
Rivals with respect of the Qualifications required in an active Life, (which I
forbear to make any discovery of, being that which every one observes, and
which all your Modesty cannot conceal) so you are endowed with a capacity
adapted to the highest contemplations. Nor is the knowledge of Aristotle's Moods
and Figures, together with such Technical Terms as Affectation and Design,
rather than necessity and usefulness have introduced, needful to render a
person a fit judge of what is solid and Rational. I more dread being arraigned
at the Tribunal of brisk Reason, assisted by Faith and the Spirit of Life in
the New Birth, than being combated even by your Philosophic Hero's with their
Artificial Premises and formal Ergo's. Your accomplishments are not the less
commendable because you owe them entirely to your self, the Idea's of your
Mind, and the Exercise of your own Faculties; and not to the Drs. Chair, and an
Apprenticeship under University Readers. Though I pay as high a veneration to
Academick Learning as any man does, and judge Philosophy instead of being
Prejudicial to Religion, to be very useful both to promote Faith and Obedience
in our selves, and to defend the Mysteries of Christianity against the rude
assaults of petulant Adversaries; yet as things are commonly managed, I must
needs say that it has often proved a very great Nuisance. It Is through the
encumbring our Minds with insignificant Terms and idle Phantasms, and the
deflouring our Virgin Intellects by absurd Dogm's, that too many, instead of
commencing either solid Scholars, or being prepared to be good and humble
Christians, come abroad into the World, either Disputations Whiflers, or sworn
Enemies to Evangelical Grace. Sir, as I know but few that owe their Religion
more to a Rational choice than you do; so there are also few that have
distincter Notions of the Reasons why we are not able adequately to conceive
the Mysteries of it, and of the Reasons why we are, nevertheless, to believe
them. And if true Eloquence be to speak pertinently, and to proportion words to
things, it is natural to you; nor need you address to the most esteemed Masters
of it, to learn either how to arrange a Discourse in the best Method, or to
adapt the Sentiments and Words by which you express them, to the Subject of
which you Treat. And as you are furnished with more than an ordinary prudence
of knowing when to be silent, and with a Faculty to be so when it is better to
hold ones peace than to speak; so by obliging your self to say nothing but what
you think, there is a Grace as well as commandingness accompanies what you say,
and you find others favorable to what you aim at, through their being possessed
that you are biased by no design, but merely influenced by Love to Truth and
Justice. Sir, there is one thing more which I must not omit, as having mainly
contributed to the Inscription of these sheets to you, namely, that while such
as pretend to be more sagacious than others, or who have a mind to put in a
claim to no vulgar discretion, pitch upon this as the Medium to support their
title to both, that they dare deride the Mysteries of Faith, or profess
themselves Scepticks in the Essential Doctrines of the Gospel, or, which is as
bad as any of the former, betray their profession by an unsuitable Life; you
have learned to unite Obedience to Orthodoxie, and to espouse the precepts of
the Gospel with the same zeal that you do the Articles of the Creed. The
Opinions here arraigned lie as cross to your belief as they do to mine, nor do
I impose upon you the patronage of any thing that thwarts your persuasion, only
I submit to your Judgment whether I have duly encountered them, and how well I
have defended the Truths which they undermine. Nor shall I subjoyn any more,
save that I am as much as I can, though not so much as I ought,

SIR, Your most faithful and Humble Servant, Robert Ferguson.

TO THE READER.
HE that has enrolled himself under the Banner of Truth, needs not make any
Apology for his coming into the Field, when the Cause in whose defense and
service he is listed, calls for his appearance. Whosoever consu^ts either his
Name or his Ease, when an assault is made upon the Christian Faith, deserves
the punishment either of a Coward in his Profession, or of a Traitor to it.
It Is not any Personal provocation, nor any pleasure I take in controversy, but
merely a regard to the Truths of the Gospel, and the Interest of the Souls of
men, that has engaged me in this Undertaking. If there be not strength to be
encountered in the Oppositi^^s of our Adversaries, yet there is petulancy, and
that ought to be rebuked. Though I cannot bring my self to believe that Mr.
Sherlock deserves a Reply, yet I am very well satisfied that the Doctrines
which he undermines, deserve to be explained and confirmed. And as I have made
this my Principal Task, so I have only employed my self about those Truths
which seem to require some further Irradiations of Light than are every where
reflected upon them. I have espoused the Quarrel of no Man, unless you will say
that by defending the common Cause of Christians, I have vindicated those whose
chief Crime is their adherence to the Gospel, and their declaring the Mysteries
of it in words which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. And as I have endeavored to regulate all my Conceptions by
Scripture and Reason, so whatever Proposition shall be made appear to lie in a
Repugnancy to these, I am ready openly to retract it. If any shall attaque
these Discourses with Reviling and Reproachful Language, I do declare
beforehand that I reckon my self superseded from Replying. I will combat no
man at these weapons; nor do I think it a reputation (...) any to Rail (how
much in Fashion soever it is) though he should be able to do it in fine
Language.

How often Mr. Sherlock has contradicted himself, and by what falsifications
he has imposed Principles on the Non-conformists which they never held; how he
treats the Sacred Writers with as much contempt as he does T. W. and Burlesques
the Scripture no less than others have done Virgils Poems; how he has
renounced the Doctrine of the Church of England, and borrowed his Glosses on
the Bible, as well as his Dogmatical Notions, from the Socinians; how Illogical
he is in all his deductions, and slandereth his Adversaries by undue
Inferences; should have been the Theme and Argument of this Preface, and
accordingly I had digested Materials for it; but the Book being swelled to too
great a bulk already, and there being others engaged against the same Author,
within whose Province these things must needs lie, as having undertaken the
arraignment of his whole Discourse, I do wave the prosecution of them all at
this time. And shall detain the Reader no longer, than to tell him, that since
the Printing off the first Chapter which treats of the Interest of Reason in
Religion, there is come to my hands a Treatise of Humane Reason, in which there
are many i^l things, though, as it often happens, they be well said, I know not
an Opinion more pernicious in its Consequences, than that Men may be as safe in
the Event by embracing Turcism as Christianity, and as secure of happiness in
their Errors, as others are in the Truths which they do espouse. Should
Persons conspire to overthrow all Revelation, they could not fall upon a Method
more likely to effect it, than by endeavoring to persuade the World that there
are things equally as strange in the Bible as in the Alcoran. It Is enough that
our Reason may serve us (if duly attended to, and pursued) to discern that
this or that Religion is false, nor are we therefore to be judged Innocent,
because we neglect the Exercise of it in making the Discovery. No man can
embrace a false Religion but by a Criminal Deviation from Reason, and who will
admit one Transgression to take Sanctuary in another? That whole Treatise
proceeds upon a false Hypothesis; namely, that as men's belief of the Scripture
is owing to the conduct of Reason, so they may disbelieve it by the same
Guidance. Corrupt Ratiocinations are recommended by the Name of Humane Reason,
and being once clothed with this Livery, every Foolery as well as Abomination
appeals to them, if not for its justification, at least for its being but a
Venial offense. No man cease to be an Offender in Morals, nor does he
therefore deserve pardon, because he has the concurrence of his judgment in
what he does. Though no man can choose or prosecute what his understanding
continues to represent to him as Evil, yet its fail^ur in point of duty neither
alters the Essential Nature of things, nor makes his condition more safe for
acting under the conduct of it. Some men would have no restraint laid upon
their Understandings, because they will submit to none in their lives; and they
would have their corrupt Ratiocinations in Doctrinals as Venial, as they seem
in reference to Manners to presume the gratifying of their Lusts to be. It Is to
be hoped, that for the undeceiving such as are already imbued with the
principles of it* and for the preventing others from being ^ain^ed and
inveigled, some one or other will bring the whole under an Examen. In the
interim I shall adventure to say, that it is as weak in regard of the Reasonings
which occur in it, as it is pernicious in its tendency. Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Interest and Use of Reason in Religion.
INtroduction, 1. Motives influencing to the handling of this subject. 2. The
Import of Reason. 3. What Is meant by Religion. 4. The serviceableness of Reason
in demonstrating the Existence of a Deity, with an account of the Topics on
which it proceeds. 5. Its usefulness in proving the Divinity of the Scripture,
with the several Media which it makes use of to this purpose. 6.7. Of the
Authority of the Scripture as emerging from its Divine Original. 8. Our Belief
of the Bibles being the Word of God, Divine and Infallible, seeing built upon
Media that are so. 9. The serviceableness of Reason in our attaining the sense
and meaning of the Word, with an account of the Measures which we are herein to
be guided by. 10. Of Scripture-Consequences, and the usefulness of Reason in
making the Deductions. 11. What appertains to Reason, in reference to
Doctrines, which besides the Foundation they have in Revelation, have also
evidence in the Light of Nature; this exemplified with respect to the
Immortality of the Soul, and the certainty of Providence. 12. The concernment
of Reason in defending the whole of Religion from the Clamors and Objections of
Gainsayers. 13. Nothing contradictious to Right Reason to be admitted as a
Mystery of Faith: Many things obtruded for Principles of Reason which are not
so. The prejudice done Religion by mistaken Philosophy, pursued and declared in
various instances, 14.

CHAP. II. Of the Import and Use of Scripture Metaphors.
THe Inducements upon which some men endeavor to discharge all Disputes in and
about Religion. The Grounds of their Quarrelling at Metaphors; with an account
of the reasons of my discoursing this Theme. 1. No Forms of speech used by the
Holy Ghost, but what are proportioned to the end for which they are made use
of. The Bible adorned with all sorts of Figurative Expressions. Some fancy more
Tropes in the Bible than there are. Mr. Sherlock, among others, guilty of this.
2. The Nature of a Metaphor; what Tropes it has affinity with; the Rules and
Lines by which it is distinguished from them. 3. The Reason why God, who does
all things according to infinite sapience, has so often adopted Metaphorical
Terms to declare himself, and the Things of his Kingdom in and by. 4. When an
Expression is to be accounted Metaphorical. 5. How to attain the true
conceptions that are locked up under Metaphors. 6. An Enquiry into the use of
other common Metaphors, with an account of their usefulness, and the Measures
that are to be attended to in the Usurpation of them. 7. The Non-conformists
injuriously charged for their Usage of Metaphors; the Contempt thrown upon them
falls often with the same weight upon the Holy Ghost. None so Guilty of turning
Religion into Allegories and Metaphors as the Modern Conformable Clergy. 8.9.10.

CHAP. III. Of the Union of Believers with Christ*
THe Concernment of the Church of England, in reference to some Discourses
lately Published on this subject: 1. What seems most especially to have
influenced Mr. Sherlock to depart from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in
this matter. 2. The Doctrine of the Nonconformists not framed to befriend men
in a course of Ungodliness. Mr. Sherlock's is 3.4. The Notion of Union in
General stated, with an account of the arduousness of resolving the Nature of
Common Unions. 5. It Is the Person of Christ that Believers are United to. 6.
The Union we are enquiring after, consists not in the specifical Oneness which
is betwixt Christ and us, through his having assumed Humane Nature. 7. Nor does
it consist in any mixture of his Bodily substance with ours through a Carnal
feeding on him. 8. A personal Union disclaym'd. 9. Not merely a Legal Union;
and yet a Legal Union between Christ and those given to him of God, justified.
10. It Is not barely a Love-Vnion. 11. Christians not United to Christ by means
of a previous Union with the Church. 12. What ever it be, it is more than a
Political Union. 13. An Intelligible Notion of it assigned, and the whole shut
up.

CHAP. I. Of the Interest and Use of Reason in RELIGION:
Sect. I.
THe Interest which all Christians have in the Truths of the Gospel, does
sufficiently Authorize a Concernedness in every Believer; that they be neither
directly Invaded, nor secretly Supplanted. And the more Important the Doctrines
are either in themselves, or with Respect to their Influence on the Hopes and
Comforts of such as Believe and Profess Christianity the less chargeable as
Importune is he, who Engages either in the Explication or Defense of them.
Besides the Name of William Sherlock, and the Quality of Rector of St. George
Buttolph^Lane, London, which the Author Characters himself by: I understand
nothing of the Person whose Writings I am now to Encounter; and I wish for his
own sake, as well as the Truths, that I had no further Occasion of knowing him
than as his Interest lies in the Church of England. But having vouchsafed the
World a further Discovery and Manifestation of himself, by a Stated Opposition
of the Immediate Union of Believers to Christ, and their being justified by the
Imputation of his Righteousness; Truths wherein the whole of our Concernment
and Expectation consists: He must not Resent it Amiss, if while we are
Examining what he would Obtrude upon us in these and some other things; we
Regulate our Conceptions of him, in relation to what he Intimates to us of his
Principles in those Matters.

The Prefixed Imprimatur of Doctor Parker, would tempt one to Suspect, that all
this is done, not only under the Connivance, but with the Approbation of more
than we are aware of. I confess Men are filled with Surprizal and Amazement,
that it should be so; considering the Manifest Repugnance of our Authors
Principles, not only to the Opinions of private Doctors of the Church of
England, but the Declared Articles of the said Church. Though it be Unjust to
Ascribe the Sentiments of every private Writer to the Society whereof he is a
Member; yet when Errors are Vented under Allowance, others besides the Authors
become Accountable for them. The Quality of the Licenser, and the Relation he
stands in to a greater Person, in whose Behalf in all these things he is
Reputed to Act, would seem to Plead that the Fame and Dignity of the Church of
England, as well as the Interest of Truth, bespeaks some Vindication from her
Ecclesiastical Rulers, or Dignified Members in these Matters. Or it is easy to
be imagined who will Suffer under the Imputation and Dishonor of them. In the
mean time, a sober Inquiry into, and Disquisition of these Points, may, I hope,
be pursued without Offense to any; especially being managed without passionate
Heats, or Invidious Reflections. Invectives and Satirs do not only disparage
Religion in general, but betray the Cause in whose Behalf they are used: Nor
are they Adapted to proselyte any, but such who have forfeited the Use of their
Judgments, and Resigned themselves to the Conduct of Impudence, Noise, and
Clamor. For my self, I profess, such an Aversation to the Method some of our
Modern Writers take in Treating their Adversaries, that I shall not so much as
insinuate Suspicions, or raise Misprisions of the Tendency of the Notions here
contended against, further than the Unfolding and Pursuing them to their
Springs necessitates me: And if thereby any who wear the Livery of the Church
of England, shall be found to do the Work of the Assembly at Cracovia I cannot
help it* unless I should betray the Cause I am pleading for. Yet I do hereby no
ways intend to List even those among them whose Principles they have imbibed:
Remembering what one said of the Milesians, that, may be they were no Fools,
though they did the same things which Fools are wont to do. However, it is fit
to be declared upon whose Foundations they Build, and with whose Buttresses
they support their Fabric; and withal, that it falls too evidently under the
Prospect of every discerning Person, who are like to Reap the Harvest of these
kind of Sowings. Now though I might be thought sufficiently to acquit my self
by continuing on the Defensive, and only examining the Reasons which have
swayed Mr. Sherlock, to depart from the Common Judgments of other Men; and
though this would be the easiest Undertaking, and in the Judgment of every
indifferent Person, enough both to Undeceive such as are already Misled, and to
pre-arm others against the Danger; yet Designing the same universal Usefulness
to the Reader, as if I were not confined to Reply to another Book; I shall
(together with an Answer to my Adversaries Exceptions) endeavor to State and
Establish the Doctrines in whose Defense I appear, and withal Attaque him in
the Opinions he Erects against them.

Nor am I without Hope, that I shall find the Generality of those who are
styled Conformists, as well as those who are termed Non-Conformists
(notwithstanding their Disciplinary Controversies) Candid and Favorable. The
things here contended for, are the Joynt-Concernment of both; and the Opinions
opposed, are inconsistent with, and Destructive to the Hitherto Received
Doctrine of that Party, as well as this. If I receive no other Fruit of this
Interposure, but the Awakening others to more Matur'd Productions, I shall not
Repent my Labor; the putting a Common Adversary to a stand till greater Forces
Rally, being of some account, though the Victory be Reapt by other Hands.

Sect. 2. As to the Method here observed; it is such as I judge Rational, being
not only Adapted to the Discovery and Vindication of Truth, the Unmasking and
Conviction of Error; but accommodated to the Instruction and Benefit of the
Reader, which would be greatly obstructed by following our Author, (...). Nor
is it needful in a way of severe Disquisition, to pursue every Inconsiderable
passage in his Book, of how bad Aspect soever it be; for if his Principal
Notions be overthrown, and if the Pilla^s upon which the Mayn of his Fabric
bears be Under-min'd; to follow the Quest and Chase of every Expression in
Reflections and Digressions, would be of little Use, unless to Swell this
D^scourse, and Enhance the Price of it.

The only thing I am aware of liable to Exception, as seeming to have no
Relation to the Theme here undertaken; is, that which follows in the present
Chapter, concerning The Interest of Reason in matters of Religion. Now though
the Usefulness of such an Essay will be a sufficient Apology with the Candid
and Ingenuous; yet I have two things else to justify it by, should any prove
severe and morose.

1. I find a People (so far as I know) Innocent of all Undue Reflections upon
Reason, publicly Arraigned of having raised a Cry against it, as the great
Enemy of Free Grace and Faith, and zealously endeavoring to run it down,
Glanvil in his Recommendation of Reason in the Affairs of Religion, subjoyned
to his Phil^sophia Pi^, P. 150.
under the mis-applied Names of Vain Philosophy, Carnal Reason, and the Wisdom
of this World. And that here the Enemies of Diocesan- Government of the Church
began, upon this they insisted still; and filled their Books, and Pulpits, and
private Corners with these Cantings. That this is now their Engine to overthrow
all Sober Principles and Establishments; that with this the People were
Infatuated, and Credit was reconciled to Gibberish and Folly, Enthusiasms and
vain Impulses, (Idem, ibid. p. 230.) That this is the Food of Conventicles to
this day; the Root of the Matter, and the Burden of their Preachments. That
under pretense of Reasons being contrary to Religion, Men have been prepared to
Swallow any thing but what is Sober, and to make every thing that is Absurd a
Mystery; and that the Non-conformists (for it is those he there Impeacheth) by
the Disparagement of Reason, have made Religion a Medley of Fantastic Trash
Spiritualized into a heap of Vapors, and formed into a Castle of Clouds, and
exposed to ev^ry wind of Humor and Imagination. (Idem, ibid. p. 224.) And as
another is pleased to charge them, That a thwacking Contradiction can neither
Stagger nor Astonish them; but that they will stand their Ground against all
the Dint of Arguments* and by the Assistance of the Spirit of God, maintain
Conclusions in Defiance to their Premises: That say what you will, prove what
you can, demonstrate the Incoherence of their Notions, and the Wildness of
their Conceits, they will Foil all your Wit and Carnal Reason with a Caution
against vain Philosophy and Humane Learning, and a Disdainful Reflection
against the Natural Man's Ignorance in the things of the Spirit. Def. and
Contin. of the Ecclesiast. Policy. p. 119.120.
And that they become acquainted with the Workings of the Spirit, because they
are not capable of Understanding the Methods of Reason, and Laws of
Argumentation. Is it not now necessary, that we should Vindicate our selves
from these Aspersions, and endeavor to give a Stop to those Groundless and
Unjust Clamours; at least, to make appear that the whole Party ought not to be
Traduced, because of the Extravagancies of a few? And were there nothing else
in it, this alone is enough to justify the Expediency, as well as the
Seasonableness, of Unfolding the whole Concernment of Reason in Religion. But,

Secondly, I find that the chief Topics, by which our Modern Writers Accost
whatsoever they dislike, is either a pretended repugnancy in the things
themselves to Reason; or at least that they are things unintelligible.

As to the first. We are told that Calvin and his followers obtrude pure
nonsense and contradictious blasphemies upon our belief, with as much Rigor
and boisterous zeal as the most indispensable truths of the Gospel. And an
instance is given, by alleging that there is required as confident an assent
to the black doctrine of irrespective Reprobation, Def* and Contin. of the
Ecclesiast. Pol. p. 665.
as to our Saviors Death and Resurrection. And that it is made as necessary a
point of Faith, to believe that the Almighty thrust innumerable Myriads of
Souls into being, only to sport himself in their endless and unspeakable
Tortures; as that he sent his own Son into the World to die for the Redemption
of Mankind; Or as another represents it, That God so decreed some to eternal
ruin, Mr. Lamb's Sermon. before the Ld. Mayor, on 2 These. 3.2. p. 32.
that he made himself the Author both of their sin and Destruction. Were this a
true account of the doctrine of their adversaries in the matter of Reprobation;
I should not only pardon, but commend their zeal in opposing it. But they are
so far from doing either Calvin or his followers justice in the declaration
they make of his and their opinion, that they betray either wonderful
ignorance in the writings of those authors, or a very bad Conscience in
reporting them. Suppose that Calvin and his followers, mean generally no more
by Reprobation, but the negation of Election, or a purpose of Sovereignty backed
with justice of leaving a certain number of the lapsed Sons of Adam in their
fallen state; I would fain know what in all this interferes with principles of
Reason* or what attribute of God militates against it. To leave persons in a
condition into which they were wilfully brought by the Protoplast, without
Gods withdrawing of any aid from him necessary to have prevented it, or having
any other accession to it, save his not hindering it; is not of difficult
Reconciliation to Reason, as neither reflecting upon the divine Justice nor
Goodness, and is very suitable to Sovereignty, which at least implies God so
far master of his own Grace, that he is Debtor to no sinner for the
Communication of it. Yea, should we besides a Negation of Grace to fallen man,
Include in our Idea of Reprobation, a purpose in God, (partly with regard to
Corruption arisen in us through the destitution of the divine Image, partly
with regard to those sins which will infallibly, but still upon the election of
the creature ensue) not to entertain such Creatures in the arms of his Love,
but to adjudge them to the punishment deserved. I know nothing in it, that
thwarts the Rational nature of Man, or grates upon the perfections of God. And
as I take this to be a truer draught of the doctrine of Reprobation as defended
both by Calvin and his followers, than the Scheme presented us by Dr. Parker
and Mr. Lamb: So I know no considerable exception that it is liable to, except
that it does not serve the design of charging the Non-conformists for obtruding
contradictions upon the World, so well, as the other does. I might also add
that Gods Eternal purpose of Glorifying his Sovereignty in way of mercy upon a
certain number of the defiled Guilty sons of Adam, in decreeing to give them
Grace and Glory, without respect to foreseen Faith or good works, as the cause,
motive or inducement of his Decree; though in the execution of it he as well
designs Faith and Obedience, being made the Qualifications of Life, as that
they shall precede our being Crowned with Blessedness; is traduced by not a few
of our modern Divines as repugnant to Reason. But when they should demonstrate
it to be so, they betake themselves to mis-representing their Adversaries. Some
of them allege us affirming God to make Heaven our Fate, not our Recompense;
and Bliss our destiny, not our Reward. Others report us asserting a
Predestination to the end without regard to the means; And that being Elected,
we may indulge our selves in a course of sin, for nothing shall obstruct our
Felicity. There is no opinion so innocent which these men will not substitute a
perverse Gloss upon; nor any Doctrines so far from being either absurd or
blasphemous, but they will improve them till they become so. I reckon that
ignorance of Books, together with an unhappy education, has led many to undue
thoughts of the sentiments of their Brethren: But that some are influenced to
these sinistrous representations by worse causes, I fear there is too much
ground to suspect. However, should any of our opinions either concerning the
subjects before mentioned, or any other, be found to involve any thing in them
reflexive on the Holiness and Goodness of God, or to draw along with them
consequences repugnant to principles of Reason, I dare say it is to be ascribed
to our ignorance, and not to our Design. And the evincing of this was one main
thing which influenced me to the writing of this Exercitation. Whatever can be
made appear to lie in a contradiction to Reason, we profess our selves ready to
disclaim it. But we are apt to believe that a great deal which only crosses
some false and lubricous Principles that Dogmatists have baptized with that
Name, falls under the imputation of disagreement with Reason. The repugnancy to
Reason fastened upon some Tenets, is rather the result of Ignorance,
prepossession, and sometimes Lust; than their contrariety to universal Reason,
or any genuine Maxims of it.

And as diverse Doctrines which men of late are come to be in a dislike of (for
from the beginning of the English Reformation it was not so) are endeavored to
be discredited upon a pretended inconsistency that is in them to Reason: So
there are some others which are attempted to be run down, because supposed
unintelligible. And a loud cry is raised against whole societies of Men, as if
they never imagine themselves Christians, till they have transubstantiated the
common Creeds, into unaccountable and inexplicable Problems; and never believe
themselves to be good men, Mr. Lamb's Sermon. p. 38.
till they have brought their Bodies and Minds into that Fame, that they can
with ease be ecstatical in all their devotions and expressions of Religion, and
that they do therefore disbelieve propositions because they may be understood.
Or as another charge them with holding things then fit to be believed, Mr*
Glanvil, ubi supra, p. 222.
when they are impossible to be proved or understood. It has been hitherto
judged that the incomprehensibleness of a Doctrine through the Sublimity and
extension of its object, is no just Bar to the Truth of it. Nor can I but
wonder that any who have studied the weakness of their discursive Capacity, the
feebleness of intellectual Light, how soon it is dazzled with too bright a
splendour, the confinement and boundaries our understandings are subject to;
together with the Majesty of Gospel Truth, the immensity of the objects of the
Christian Faith; should think the arduousness of framing distinct and adequate
conceptions of them, a sufficient ground for their being renounced and
disclaimed. And yet this seems to be the Standard that some men regulate their
belief by: And if I mistake not, had no small influence on M. Sherlock in the
carrying him off from the received opinion of the immediate Union of Beleivers
to Christ. For as himself informs us; any other Union save a political, is a
Riddle and Mystery which no body can understand, the perfect knowledge of which
must be reserved for the next world, or the coming of Elias, p. 194. And that
whosoever asserteth any other Union, does make it more than a mystical Union,
that is an unintelligible union, p. 197. That the Immediate union of Believers
to Christ, is to be reckoned among things Unintelligible, p. 147. And to do him
Right, as he describes it, it is so; but I hope to make it appear, ere we have
done, that he both injure's the Truth, and those whom he there personates in
his account of it: However, it is mainly because of the Unintelligibleness of
an immediate Union, that it is disclaym'd. For, as the same Person tells us, He
cannot understand how our Union to Christ, can be an Argument to unity and
concord among our selves, if we are united immediately to the person of Christ,
without being first united to his Church, p. 152.

We shall enquire hereafter whether our Author has in this point justly
entered his charge or not. But because we can neither distinctly understand
what it is to be above the grasp and fathom of Reason, nor duly judge of Objects
that are so, nor arrive at any solid resolution how we are to demean our selves
toward Doctrines of such a Genius and Complexion, without enquiring into the
whole use and concernment of Reason in matters of Religion; I have therefore
upon this account as well as the former, undertaken this disquisition.

. 3. In the pursuing this great Enquiry; we are first to fix and settle the
sense and meaning of the Terms. The neglect of this would expose us to
confusion and impertinent wrangling in all that we are to say. Reason then is
first taken properly for the faculty of Reason, or the Soul as it falls under
the denomination of Mind and Understanding; And in this acceptance it may be
considered either as it ought to be, and originally was; or as it exists
subjectively in us, weakened, darkened and tainted by the Fall. The rational
Faculty as it exists in us since the ingress of sin, differs much from what it
was in its primitive Creation. It was then like the Sun in his Meridian
exaltation, when without the interposure of a cloud to envelope and obscure it.
Knowledge then inhabited our minds in no less plenty than light does the
universal Luminary. Besides what the Soul considered in it self as it came out
of the hands of God under the stamp and impress of his Image lay's claim to; it
was wonderfully advantaged by a delicate and apt disposure of bodily Organs,
and due proportion and temperament of the Animal Spirits, as well as by an
excellent Harmony that appeared in all the parts of the visible Creation. There
was no jarring in our Humors, no blemish in our material Organs, no defect in
our vehicular Spirits, no obstruction in their meatus or passages, no disorder
in the world, nor fallacious medium in the Universe, till the Fall caused them.
But alas! Now, the mind is not only weakened and rendered grovelling by the loss
of its primitive Sanctity and Rectitude; but is infected with Lusts, biassed by
Passions, bribed by the sensual Appetites, clogged and hindered by the
distemperature of indisposed Organs; not to mention the prepossessions and
anticipations of Infancy, the prejudices of Education, with the deceits and
impositions we are liable to, by the delusion of external Objects; for such the
World is filled with, since disorder and confusion arrested it. However, Reason
considered thus, namely as denoting the rational Faculty though even corrupted
by the Fall, is First, That which disposes and adapteth us for converse with
objects of Revelation. As the Light of the Sun had been useless to us, had we
not enjoyed an Organ suited to receive the impression of its Beams; so all
supernatural Revelation had been both impertinent and superfluous, were we not
endowed with Faculties fitted to converse with it. God in all his Transactions
with us, supposes us Rational; and, he is a degree worse than an Enthusiast,
who affirm's that the way to be a Christian, is, first to be a Brute.
Revelation does not cassate the use of our Intellectual Powers, but supposes
them; and by enriching them with discoveries which they could not by their own
search have arrived at, it perfects them; and they plainly acquiesce that these
are the things they sought for, but could not find. There neither is nor can be
any thing in Divine Revelation, that overthrow's the rational Faculty, or
crosses it in its Regular and Due Exercise. There is a Spirit in Man; And the
inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding, Job, 32.8. For, as
Austin says, Poss^ recipere fidem est Naturae, licet actu credere sit Gratiae.
De praedest. Sanct. cap. 5. Both external Revelation, and internal Illumination
presuppose us to be Rational; and through the want of a Faculty that is so,
Brutes are incapable both of the one and the other. Secondly. Reason taken for
the intellectual Faculty, or the Principle of Apprehension, Judgment and
Ratiocination, is both the instrument whereby we certainly discern the grounds
and motives of Faith; and the vital Principle of the Act it self. Faith is not
only an Elicit act of our minds, but besides, there can be no act of Faith
without a previous exercise of our Intellects about the things to be believed.
Faith being nothing but an unwavering assent to some Doctrine upon the account
of a divine Testimony, our Reason must be antecedently persuaded that the
Testimony is Divine, before it can assent to the Doctrine upon the Authority
and Veracity of the Revealer. Though in many things we can give no Reason for
what is believed, distinct from Divine Testimony; yet we ought to be always
able to give a Reason for the Authentickness, and the Divinity of the
Testimony. For, as Austin says, Quod intelligimus aliquid, rationi debemus;
quod autem credimus, auctoritati. Lib. de utilit, Credendi, cap. XI. The
Authority of God in the Scripture is the formal reason of Assent to such and
such Doctrines, but it is by the means and exercise of our intellectual
Faculties that we come to understand such a Declaration to proceed from God;
and that these things are the sense of such and such Propositions. Thus the
Understanding of Man is the Candle of the Lord, resolving us in the
Authentickness and Sense of Revelation; though Faith be built upon the Credit
only of the Revealer. To this purpose is that of Maximus, (...); In Orat. (...).
Should I neglect the Scripture, Whence should I have Knowledge? Should I
relinquish Reason, How should I have Faith?

Secondly, Reason is taken Metonymically for common Maxims, or principles whose
Truth is inviolable. And these are. (1.) Such as be so connate to Sense and
Reason; that upon their bare Representation they are universally assented to.
These Principles are not borrowed from Reason as their first Spring and
Original, but having their Root in the nature of God, and Essences of Things,
are only discerned by the Rational mind and Intellect. I do not say that we are
brought forth with a List and Scroll of Axioms (...) Imprinted upon our
Faculties; (...) that we are furnished with such Powers, upon the first
Exercise of which about such things without any Harangues of Discourse, or
previous Ratiocinations, we cannot without doing Violence to our Rational
Nature, but pay them an Assent. Those Truths whether Logical, Moral, Physical,
or Mathematical; Whether General (because of their Universal Influence upon all
Disciplines) or Particular (from their being confined in their Use to some one
Science) are justly styled Natural, being Founded in the Nature of God, the
Essences of things, and the intrinsecal Rectitude of the Rational Faculty.
These are the Foundations and Measures of all Science, Knowledge, and
Discourse; being in themselves certain and incontestable. Nor is there any
other proof to be Assigned of them besides their Consonancy to the Rational
Faculty, to which they are centrally co-united. And forasmuch as all men
pa^take of the same Reasonable Nature, the certainty of these Principles is
Universal. What is disconvenient to the Essential Nature of one Man being so to
the Nature of another; nor is it possible to dissent from them, without doing
Contempt to our Faculties. Of this sort are these; That a Thing cannot at the
same time be, and not be: That every Effect supposes it is cause; and many such
like. Nor does Theology borrow these from Philosophy, but they are pre-supposed
to both, and Science as well as Faith builds upon them. 2 dly. There are others
whose Truth and Certainty are not understood; nor do they win our Assent upon
their first and naked Representation; but they are discovered by a Chain of
Ratiocinations, and their Verity established by a Harangue of Inductions. These
are styled Acquired Principles, being by an Industrious Exercise of the
Discursive Faculty, raised, and superstructed upon the former. Nor are they
less True than the other, though more Remote from the first View of our
Understandings. Whatsoever is rightly deduced from Unquestionable Premises,
has the same stamp of Truth upon it, that the Principles have from which it is
inferred. Where there is a just Connection between Conclusions and Principles;
the latter cannot be denied without questioning the former, from which they are
fetched. The Deduction of these by regular Trayns of Argumentation, is the work
of a Philosopher; and these being Systematically digested, constitute
Philosophy. So far then as Philosophy includes only Conclusions duly inferred
from Unquestionable Principles, so far there is not only a Friendly Alliance
between it and Divinity, but a wonderful Subserviency in it to Faith. Nor is
any thing true in Philosophy that is not so in Theology. For, as Aristotle
says, (...). Whatsoever is true must be Consentaneous to all that is so. lib.
1. Prior. Analyt. cap. 32. And as he adds elsewhere, (...). All Truth is
consentient to Truth, lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 8. What our Souls in the Regular
Exercise of Reason instruct us in, is as much the Voice of God to us, as any
Revelation he vouchsafes us in the Bible. Nor can we Impeach the Genuine
Issues of Reason, without Reflection upon God who has Endowed us with a
Faculty necessarily swaying us to those Determinations. The Connection of one
thing with another, together with their mutual Dependencies, arises not from
the Arbitrarious Appointment, and Designation of Men; but is involved in the
Essences of Beings, and Results from the Habitudes which the Sovereign Author
has linked them in, one to another. Ipsa veritas Connexionum, non instituta
sed animadversa est ab hominibus and notata, ut eam possint vel discere, vel
docere. Nam est in rerum ratione perpetua and divinitus instituta. August. lib.
2. De Doctr. Christ. cap. 31. Might we not upon Proleptical Principles which
are assented to as soon as the Terms are understood, superstruct innumerable
others; There were no Room left for Meditation, Study, Ratiocination, and
Disputes. All our Knowledge would be either Intelligence instead of Science, or
else we must in all things, save a few Self-Evidents, introduce and Establish
Skepticism. Were there no secondary Principles, which when once deduced from
self-evident Maxims, we may with safety rely on; we must either deny that there
are any Habitudes, Relations, Dependencies, or Oppositions betwixt one thing
and an other; or we must affirm the rational Faculty to be in it is Natural
Exercises universally Fallacious. The indissoluble Connection that is betwixt
one thing and another, transferrs the Denomination of Truth to the Acts of our
Mind styled Judgments, and the Declarations of these Acts to others called
Enunciations; whenever we Judge and Pronounce of things as they really are.
For, as the Philosopher says, (...). I readily grant, that partly through the
Weakness and Darkness which have arrested our Understandings; partly through
the Nature, Quality, Extent, and Arduousness of Objects, and our Inadequate
Conceptions of them; partly through Prepossessions, Prejudices, and the B^as of
Lusts, and Passions that we are subject to; partly through Supineness, Sloth,
and Inadvertency, we do often prevaricate in making Deductions and Inferences
from self-evident, and universal Maxims, and thereupon establish Mistaken and
Erroneous Consequences, as Principles of Truth and Reason. But then this is the
Fault of Philosophers, not of Philosophy; or of Philosophy in the Concrete, as
Existing in this or that Person, not in the Abstract, as involving such a
Mischief in it is Nature and Idea. Our intellectual Faculties being vitiated and
tinctured with Lust, enthralled by Predices, darkened by Passions, engaged by
vain and corrupt Interests, distorted by Pride and Self-Love, and fastened to
Earthly Images, do often impose upon us, and lead us to obtrude upon others,
absurd Axoms for Undoubted and Incontestable Principles of Reason. It is this
(...), Adulterate Reason, which we charge, for being Unfriendly to Religion.
And that it is not without Grounds, shall be afterward evinced: For I doubt
not but that I shall make it appear, that the most malignant Heresies which
have Infected the Church, had their Foundation in Vulgar, and received Axioms
of Philosophy. Whoever will trace the Errors which have Invaded Divinity to
their Source, must resolve them into absurd Maxims of Philosophy, as their
Chief Seminary. Herein we intend not to offer any Disparagement to Reason, but
rather to pay it our Utmost respect, by rescuing it from being accountable for
every vain Imagination, and false Consequence, which are super-scribed with the
Venerable Name of Principles of Reason.

. 4. Having settled the Notion of Reason, we are next to fix the meaning of
Religion. And this is the more needful in that men have always had the art of
Baptizing their weaknesses, fooleries, yea blasphemies with the sacred name of
Mysteries of Faith; and afterward defending them from the assaults of Reason,
by saying, They are Mysteries against which Reason is not to be hearkened to. By
matters of Religion, then, we mean in general as well the Agenda as the
Credenda of it; What we are to perform as well as what we are to believe; what
relates to Obedience as well as what relates to Faith. Now the rule, measure
and standard of both is the Revelation of God in the Scripture. The Bible is
now the only perfect Code and Register of natural Religion, as well as the only
Systeme of supernatural. Those very Articles of Belief, and Duties of obedience
which were formerly Natural with respect to their manner of promulgation, are
now in the Declaration of them also Supernatural. The Scripture is the only
Canon of Faith and Rule of Practice. So the Apostle stile's it in more than one
place, Phil. 3.16. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, (...), let us
walk by the same Rule. As if he had said, what ever dissensions there be
amongst us in lesser things, let us orderly regulate our life and course (for
that is the import of (...)) according to the Canon of the Gospel. And in the
same sense, Gal. 6.16. as many as (...) walk according to this Rule, peace be
on them, etc. The Apostle, having to do with such as introduced (...) an other
Gospel, Gal. 1.6, 7. for their conviction and plainer refutation, he gives us a
brief epitomy and summary both of the Law and Gospel, and at last shuts up the
whole debate with this, that whoever walks according to this Canon or Rule,
peace shall be on him. (...) signifies originally either a Reed made into an
instrument wherewith they measured buildings, or the limits and bounds of land:
or a small Line which Architects square out their work by, that all the parts
of it may bear a just symmetry and proportion one to another; and from this
proper use of it, it is Metaphorically transferred to signify any kind of
Rule. Thus Aristotle uses it. (...); By that which is right we know both its
self, and that which is crooked: for the Canon is the judge of both. And thus
(...) Canon is a law that cannot err, and an infallible measure. Phavorin. Or
(...) signifies that which is over Scales, commonly called the Tongue of the
Balance, which is the director whereby whatsoever is put into the Scales is
tried, and has its just weight adjudged. So the Scholiast upon Aristophanes
tells us that (...) is that which is (...) over the Scales and which brings
them to equality. In Ran.
This Original signification of the word also, has given rise to its
Metaphorical use of denoting any rule or measure, by which either Doctrines or
Practices are tried and adjusted. And thus the Scripture is the true and only
perfect rule of all matters of Religion. (...) the exact balance and Rule or
Canon of all Truths. Chrysostom in 2. ad Cor. cap. 6. Iren. lib. 4. cap 69.
The (...) Rule of immutable and unshaken Truth. Austin improveth this Notion
of (...) excellently) De baptism. cont. Donat. lib. 2 cap 6.) Let us not,
(says he,) bring our deceitful balances, where we weigh what would, and do as
we would, saying according to our fancy, Behold this is heavy, or behold this
is light: but let us bring the Divine Balances of the Scriptures; and weigh
things, or rather not weigh them, but learn and take notice what the Lord
himself has weighed. I rather choose to fix the import of Religion thus by its
reference to its Rule, than by an enumeration of particulars. First, that it
may appear that whatever be the concernment of Reason in Religion, yet it is
not to invent or introduce any new Doctrine; nor to propose or institute any
new Media of Worship, nor to obtrude and force upon us any new moral Duty.
Nothing Magisterial does here belong to it, its highest preferment is to
minister. Secondly, Because there is nothing in the Scripture but what we are
under the Sanction of; and, as it is occasionally made known, we are to pay a
rational subjection to it. Though every thing in the Bible be not alike
Necessary, yet every thing in it is alike True, and our concernment lie's more
or less in it. There is no other Rule by which we are to be regulated in
matters of Religion but the Bible, and therefore the import and meaning of those
Terms can be no otherwise decided but by their habitude to their measure. For
this end did God give forth the Scripture that it might be the foundation and
standard of Religion, and thence therefore are we to learn its Laws and
constitutions. The instructing mankind in whatsoever is necessary to his
present or future Happiness, was the design of God in his vouchsafeing the
World a supernatural Revelation, and foreseeing all things that are necessary
to such an End, the respect and veneration which we pay to his Sapience and
Goodness oblige us to believe that he has adapted and proportioned the means
thereunto. Now the Doctrines of the Bible are of two sorts: 1. Such as besides
their being made known by revelation and believed on the account of Divine
Testimony, have also a foundation in the light of Nature, and there are natural
Mediums by which they may be proved. These are commonly called Mixed, but I
think amiss, seeing they are not made up of dissimilar parts, nor have they
objects complicated of different natures; are only discovered by different
Lights, proved by different Media, and assented to as well upon Motives of
Reason as Divine Authority, of this kind are the Being and Attributes of God,
the Immortality of the Soul, the certainty of Providence, the Existence of a
Future State, and Moral Good and Evil. 2 dly. Such as have no Foundation at all
in Nature, by which they could have been found out, or known; but we are solely
indebted to Supernatural Revelation for the Discovery of them. Their Objects
having their Source and Rise only from the Will of God, a Supernatural
Revelation was absolutely expedient to promulge them. And these also are of two
Sorts. (1.) There are some Doctrines which though our Understandings by Natural
Mediums could never have discovered; yet being once revealed, our Minds can by
Arguments drawn from Reason, facilitate the Apprehension of them, and confirm
it self in their Belief. Of this kind are the Resurrection of the Body, and
Satisfaction to Divine Justice, in order to the Exercising of Forgiveness to
penitent Sinners. (2.) There are others which as Reason could never have
discovered, so when revealed, it can neither comprehend them, nor produce any
Medium in Nature, by which either the Existence of their Objects can be
Demonstrated, or their Truth Illustrated. Of this kind are the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God. Mornaeus. Keckerman*
Claubergius, Bisterfield, etc.
I know that there are many Divines, who though they confess that the Doctrine
of the Trinity could never at first have been discovered by Reason, yet being
once Revealed, they contend that Reason cannot only Illustrate, but Demonstrate
it. But upon the best Inquiry into their Arguments, I find most of them
palpably Fallacious; and others of them so Disproportionate to what they are
brought, that they do not so much as afford some saint Adumbrations of it. I
readily grant that this and the other Mystery are by a clear and necessary
Connection united with other Doctrines of Faith, which Reason enlightened by
Revelation, can give a rational Account of. For the Mystery of the Trinity has
a necessary Connection with the Work of our Redemption, by the Incarnation of
the Son of God; and the Work of our Redemption by the Incarnation of an
infinite Person, has the like Connection with the necessity of sat^sfying
Divine Justice, in o^der to the Dispensing of Pardon to repenting Offenders;
and the necessity of satisfying Divine Justice for the End aforesaid, has a
necessary Connection with the Doctrine of the Corruption of Mankind; and the
Corruption of Humane Nature is both fully confessed, and can be demonstrated by
Reason. Thus though all the Objects of Faith have not an immediate
Correspondence with the Objects of Reason; yet these very Doctrines of Faith
which lie remotest from the Territories of Reason, and seem to have least
Affinity with its Light, are necessarily, and clearly connected with those
other Principles of Faith, which when once discovered, Reason both approves of,
and can rationally confirm it self in. As two Neighboring Kingdoms are joined
together, though some of their Provinces touch not one another: So by those
Objects of Faith which have a clear Connection with Objects of Reason, there is
a mediate Connection between Reason and those Objects of Faith that lie farther
off. I need not add that the most Mysterious Doctrines of Religion are
necessarily connected with the Belief of the Bibles, being the Word of God; and
that is a Truth which Reason is so far from rejecting, that it can demonstrate
it.

. 5 Having settled the meaning of the Terms, namely, what we understand both by
Reason and Religion. We are next particularly to enquire of what Significancy
and Use Reason is in Religion; that so we may give to Reason the things that
are Reasons, and yet reserve to Faith the things that are Faiths. And whereas
we have said, that there are some Principles of Religion, which besides the
Evidence that they have in Revelation, have Foundation also in the Light of
Nature, it may be easily apprehended, that more is to be allowed to Reason in
and about those, than about these the Knowledge of which we are Debtors only to
Revelation for. As to the Latter, Reason, acquits it self in all that belongs
to it, by considering what Doctrines are revealed to us in the Scriptures, and
deduce^ng Consequences, which by clear Connexions, proceed from them; leaving
Faith to assent to them upon the Authority and Veracity of the Revealer. But as
to the former, Reason does not sufficiently discharge it self by discovering
that they are Revealed; and thereupon committing it to Faith to Embrace them
upon Divine Testimony: But it ought further to enquire what Inducements and
Media there are in the Light of Nature, by which they may be also Known and
Demonstrated. And as this is to be allowed to Reason in all Matters of
Religion, which have Foundation in Natural Light; so especially in and about
such Principles of it as are necessarily pre-supposed to Faith; of which kind
are the Being of God, and the Divinity of the Scripture. Though all our
Religion be in an eminent Manner, built upon the Divinity of the Scriptures,
and some parts of it know no other Foundation but the Bible; and accordingly
among such as own that Book for the Word of God, We need no other Bottom to
Erect our Faith upon, nor any other Measure to regulate our Debates, and to
determine our Controversies by; yet when the Divinity of the Scripture it self
is contended about, it is neither a just nor a rational Way of Procedure,
barely to affirm that it is Divine, but we are to prove that it is so. If we
will not believe the Alchoran, to proceed by Inspiration from God, upon the
Testimony of a Mohammedan; no more is it to be expected, that a Mussulman should
believe what we call the Bible to be God's Word, upon the naked Testimony of a
Christian. As upon the one hand, we should betray Religion to every Infidel, by
pretending to build our Faith upon a Book, whose sacred Authority we cannot
justify; so upon the other hand, we oblige our selves to the worst of
Drudgeries, in being resolved to believe what we can give no Reason for.
Besides, we should not only by such a Method, unavoidably expose our selves to
the Dictates of every Enthusiast; but with all Minister a just Plea to such as
dislike Religion, because of it is Unfriendliness to their Lusts, for the
renouncing of it.

Now our Belief of the Scripture supposes the Existence of God, and therefore
our knowledge of his Being must precede our Faith of the Divine Authority of
the Bible. I readily grant that the Scriptures may be brought not only to such
as own their Truth; but even to Infidels as a proof of a Deity: But then it
must not be upon the Score of their naked Testimony, but upon the account of
their being of such a Frame, Nature, and Quality that they can proceed from no
other Author. And thus we Arrive by the Scripture at an Assurance of God's
Existence, as we do at the Knowledge of a Cause by it is Effect. But so far as
we assent to any thing upon the Credit of the Scriptures mere Testification, we
are necessitated to presuppose the Existence of God; it being only upon the
account of his Veracity in himself, and that the Bible is a Divine Revelation,
that we do without the least guilt of vain Credulity, because upon the highest
Reason, implicitly believe it.

In discoursing the Serviceableness of Reason in demonstrating the
forementioned Articles, together with those other Doctrines that have their
Foundation not only in Revelation, but also in Natural Light, and such common
Principles which all men assent to: I shall confine my self to wonderful
Brevity; and rather point at Arguments than pursue them. And to begin with the
Existence of God. Were there no Supernatural Revelation in the World, there is
enough both within us, and without us, to Convince us of the Being of a Deity.
Hence though God has wrought many Miracles to Convince Infidels and
Mis-Believers; yet he never wrought any to Convince Atheists. Nor do the
Penmen of Scripture attempt to prove it, but take it for granted, as being
evidently manifest both by Sensible and Rational Demonstration. I shall not
here insist on the Cartesian Argument, drawn from an Innate and Ingraft Idea of
God: For upon a most serious perusal of what is alleged by Carts himself,
Claubergius, De Bruin, Doctor More and others, in Vindication of it; together
with what is produced by Gassendus, Ezekius, Vogelsangius, Derkennis, Doctor
Parker, and others against it: I look upon it as little better than a Sophism;
and to maintain an Article of such Import by a Medium, either Weak or
Fallacious, is to betray the first Fundamental of Religion. I know no Idea's
formally Innate; what we commonly call so, are the Results of the Exercise of
our Reason. The Notion of God is not otherwise inbred, then that the Soul is
furnished with such a Natural Sagacity, that upon the Exercise of her rational
Powers, she is Infallibly led to the Acknowledgment of a Deity. And this is
first effected by her looking inwardly upon her self and her own Acts; and we
are with Facility, and by a short way of Argumentation, conducted thence to the
Existence of God. For, (1 st.) We perceive that the Faculty resident in us, is
not furnished with all perfections, and therefore not Self-existent, nor
indebted to it self for those it has, otherwise it would have clothed it self
with the utmost perfections it can Imagine; and by consequence, finding it is
own Exility and Imperfection, it Naturally, and with Ease, arrives at a
persuasion of deriving it is Original from some First, Supreme, and Free Agent
who has made it what it is; and this can be nothing but God. (2 dly.) We
perceive that we have such a Faculty that apprehends, judges, reasons; but
what it is, whence it is, and how it performs those things we know not: And
therefore there must be some Supreme Being, who has given us this Faculty, and
understands both the Nature of it, and how it knows, which we our selves do
not. (3 dly.) Our Natures are such, that as soon as we come to have the use of
our Intellectual Faculties, we are forced to acknowledge some things Good, and
other things Evil. There is an Unalterable Congruity betwixt some Acts and our
reasonable Souls, and an Unchangeable Incongruity betwixt them and others. Now
this plainly sways to the belief of a God: For all distinctions of Good and
Evil relate to a Law under the Sanction of which we are; and all Law supposes
a Superior, who has Right to command us; and there can be no Universal
Independent Supreme but God. (4 ly.) We find our selves possessed of a Faculty
necessarily reflecting on it is own Acts; and passing a Judgment upon it self in
all it does: Which is a further Conviction of the Existence of God; for it
implies a Supreme Judge to whom we are accountable. (5 ly.) We find that we are
furnished with Faculties of vast Appetite and Desires, and that there is
nothing in the World that can satisfy our Cravings; and by consequence, there
must be some Supreme Good, adequate and proportionate to the Longings of our
Souls, which can be nothing but God. This is his Meaning who said of the
Heathen, that (...), By the Light of Nature, they nodded after a Summum Bonum:
It were to put a Slur upon Nature, to suppose that she has put those
Propensions and Inclinations into us, only to delude and abuse us. (6 ly.) We
find the Frame of our Rational Powers to be such, that we cannot form a Notion
of God, though it were in denying him, but we include his Actual Existence in
it. Optimus, Maximus, or a perfect Being is the Idea we have of God, whenever
we think of him. Now this includes actual Existence, it being a greater
Perfection for a thing to be Essentially, Independently, and Necessarily; than
to be contingently, and by Origination from another, on whose Pleasure it is
Existence depends. Nor do the Schoolmen mean more when they tell us, that this
Proposition, God is, is Self-evident: For all Propositions whose Predicate is
included in the Essence of the Subject, are styled Per se nota; because if we
do but once understand the import of the Term, styled the Subject, we
necessarily assent to it is Identity with the Praedicate. The Exceptions of
Doctor Parker which he has borrowed from the Thomists, who herein differ from
the Followers of Scotus, I judge not worthy of a Reply; unless he should be so
Importunate as to demand it, which if he think fit to do, I do faithfully
promise it shall be in Readiness for him. (7 ly.) By consulting still our
Faculties, we do not find any thing included in our Idea; by virtue of which,
we must either ever have been, or through existing this Moment, must
necessarily exist the next, which Naturally conducts us to a Persuasion of a
God, from whom we derived our Being at first, and to whom we owe our continued
Subsistence. Nor is this the Argument of Des Carts alone, but of the
Schoolmen in general; though in this, as in most other things, he was not so
Ingenious as to confess at whose Breasts he had Sucked, nor out of whose Gardens
he had gathered his best Flowers.

Secondly, As we have incontestable Evidence of the Existence of God, by the
first efforts of our Souls, in and about themselves and their own Acts: So our
Understandings being awakened, and excited by outward and surrounding Objects,
they do by short and infallible Ratiocinations, lead us to the Belief of a
Deity: We are advantagiously placed in the midst of Magnificent Works, and have
Faculties adapted for the Contemplation of them: Nor is there one of them, but
what bears those Signatures and Impresses of Almighty power and Infinite Wisdom
upon it; as to convince us that there is a God that framed them all. I judge
this sort of Arguments fetched from the Frame of Nature, so uncontrollable a
Proof of the Existence of God; that I am afraid it was not without Design,
that Des Carts not only over-look't, but disparaged them. I will not charge
the like Intention upon him in his Meditationes de prima Philosophia, that his
Countryman Vaninus was guilty of in his Aeternae providentiae Theatrum. But
this I dare say, that those he slighted are Solid, Easy, and accommodated to
popular Understandings; whereas those he chose to rely on, are some of them
Sophistical, and all of them too Metaphysical for every one to understand. Nor
did it become any, who paid a Veneration to the Scripture as the Word of God;
to represent this kind of Arguments as weak, and infirm, seeing the Holy Ghost
has preceded us in this way of Ratiocination. See Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. Psalm.
19.1 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Acts 14.15, 16, 17. and 17.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Job
12.7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Now by viewing the curious Structure of this noble
Machine, the World, how many Convincing Proofs of the Being of God, present
themselves to our Intellectual Faculties.

First, If we consider the naked Existence of things, how they came to be in
the Posture they are; we shall discover thence not a few nor mean Arguments of
their Divine Author. 1 st. The many glorious and beautiful Objects which we are
encircled with, did not cause themselves: Existence is always presupposed to
Acting; nothing can be both before and and after it self. Nor 2 dly. Were they
Eternal; For (1 st.) It is an Hypothesis pregnant with Contradictions, that any
thing Finite, and Dependent, as all things in the World are, should be Eternal.
(2 dly.) We see every thing subsist by a succession of Generation and
Corruption; which is plainly repugnant to self, and eternal Existence.
Production from Eternity is a palpable Contradiction. Whatever is produced
passes from a state of Nonentity into a state of Being; and therefore we must
conceive a time when it was not, ere we can conceive the time when it was. (3
dly.) The Recency of the Existence of things is plain from the Deficiency
either of History or Tradition antecedently to Moses. And he is so far from
Recording the World to have been Eternal, that he instructs us particularly
both how, and when it began. These Topics are so largely prosecuted by others,
that I supersede them. And as the World was not Eternal; so neither did it
result by a casual Concourse of Particles of Matter, moving in an infinite
Ultra-Mundane Space, and justling one and another, till they fell into this
Form and Order which we now behold them in. For (1.) The Eternity of Atoms, is
attended with the same Contradictions that the Eternity of the World is. (2.)
Motion is hereby supposed intrinsecal to Matter, which is not only False, but
Impossible. It is the greatest Absurdity that can be imposed upon Reason, to
ascribe Motion to such a stupid and unactive Principle as Matter, without the
acknowledgment of a First and Divine Motor. (3 dly.) If all things be the
Result of Matter; how comes a Principle of Reason to be conveyed into us, by
that which had it not Inherent in it self? (4.) This Hypothesis supposes that
to have been the effect of Chance, which carries in it the Characters of a wise
Contrivance: But of this more anon. (5.) If the Fabric of the World be nothing
but the result of the casual Meeting and Concatena^ion of Atoms; Pudet me
generis humani, cujus aures haec far potuerunt. Aug.
How comes it to pass, that by their daily Motion, and justling one another,
they do not dance themselves into more Worlds; at least into some one Animal or
other. (6.) Epicurus's Infinity of Atoms, carries a Repugnancy in it to his
Inane Space; and yet without this his whole Hypothesis, falls to the ground.
(7.) Nor is it possible to salve the Permanency of the World, and the
Continuity of Bodies, by the fortuitous Concatenations of Atoms, through their
different Configurations, and jagg'd Angles, without the Superintendency of an
Omnipotent Goodness, who sustains both the whole Creation, and every part of
it. Especially, it is not conceivable, how such Bodies as are made up either of
Globular particles, or of those Minute-Corpuscles which Descartes styles his
First and Second Elements, should hold together without the Influence of a
higher Principle to keep them in their Consistency. And thus from the
Consideration of the Existence of things we are convinced of the Being of God.

Secondly; as Reason demonstrates that there is a God from the existence of
things; so it is further persuaded of the same from the beauty, pulchritude and
order of the Cre^tures; especially the Fabric of Animals, and the suitableness
of their Members for their Functions. Chance has no orderly designs nor is
symmetry and proportion to be attributed to the fortuitous jumbles of blind
matter. If contrivances of art be not effected without an industrious skill,
much less are the works of Nature which infinitely exceed the former, performed
without the conduct of an intellectual Principle. The consideration of the
Fabric of things made Plato say (...), which I may english in the words of the
Holy Ghost, that all things are made in number, weight and measure. Who can
observe the great Luminary the Sun, his distance from the Earth, the motion
communicated to him, that he move's in an orbicular and not in a straight Line,
that in his circular motion he chalk's out to himself an oblique road, that in
his journey throug the Zodiac he employ's so much time; and not confess a Wise
as well as a Powerful Agent to have been the contriver of all this; seeing in
every instance things might have been otherwise, and yet it cannot but be
acknowledged that it is to the best and most universal advantage for them to be
as they are. Is it possible philosophically to view the body of Man; the
Fabric of the Organs of sense; the situation of the Heart; the structure of
its Ventricles, the communication betwixt it and the Bo^dy by Veins and
Arteries; the contrivance of the Larynx; the Frame and use of the Epiglottis;
the contexture of the Brain, the correspondency betwixt it and all the parts of
the Body by Nerves; the Fabric of the Muscles those pullies of motion, etc.
and not confess an Almighty and Wise Artist to have contrived and performed
those excellent operations.

In the Third place what convictions are we furnished with of the Being of God,
from the Innate Harmony that is in the several parts of the Creation; and the
convenient disposure of all the Creatures to a subserviency to one another in
mutual offices. Chance cannot have linked one thing to another, nor can
contraries combine into a mutual coalition without the influence of a supreme
Being, who overrules them. An establshed order among multiplicity of things
void of understanding, is the work of an infinite Understanding. Order and
Harmony, being nothing but a congruous disposition of things, according to
their Dignity and usefulness; He must be supposed to know their natures,
Dignity, and uses that regularly disposes them; and this can belong to none
but to an Infinite Wisdom. To this might be added the orderly and sagacious
operation not only of Brutes, but inanimate Creatures, for ends which they
neither perceive nor understand; which as certainly argues a Supreme, Wise,
Superintender of all things, as the regular course of a Ship in the Ocean
argues that there sits a Pilot at the Helm. Upon these foregoing Motives, not
to mention many other, has mankind in all Ages and places subscribed to the
Being of God. So universal has the Notion of a Deity been, that men have
rather chosen to worship any thing for God, then wholly to be without one.
Being both persuaded that there was a God and that he was infinitely good, they
made every thing that was beneficial to them a Deity, Nor can the Atheist who
denies the Existence of God, give any rational account of the universal consent
of mankind that there is One. Whereas he that maintains One, can easily resolve
it, by showing how such a persuasion flows naturally from the exercise of every
man's understanding. And forasmuch as it is alleged that there have been some
who have dissented, and consequently that the persuasion is not Universal: It
Amounts to no more but that there have been some who did (...) speak falsely of
and belly our Nature, that I may use Porphyries phrase. Nature may be so
perverted by Vice, that men will not acknowledge what lies most proportionable
to Reason, (...); Being corrupted by bad Education, evil Customs, and wicked
institutions, they destroy their natural Notions, says a Philosopher. If the
Contradiction of a single Individual, or two, were enough to invalidate an
universal Persuasion, or to impeach a Natural Truth; there were neither the one
nor the other in the World. De Not. Deor.
For not only Cicero tells us, that there is nothing so absurd, which some of
the Philosophers have not maintained: Metaphys. Lib* 4.
But Aristotle informs us, that there have been some who have held, That a
Thing might at the same time be, and not be; And as the same Person tells us;
(...). That is universally known, not which every one acknowledges, but what
every one who has not Debauched his Faculties, does discern, Topic. 6. c. 4.
It is enough that the Existence of God lies even to our Understandings; though
some who affront their Faculties will not acknowledge it. I shall shut up all
this with a Saying or two of Heathen Philosophers; The Denial of God is (...).
Plotin.
Irrational, and can be approved by none but those who have neither
Understanding nor Sense. The Atheist does e^adicate (...); That which is
Naturally planted in all reasonable Souls, says Plutarch. Nothing but the
Profaneness of the present Age has tinctured it with Atheism. Sensuality
smothers the most connate Notions; and Reason becomes (...) (...). Infected
with those evil Opinions which proceed from Lusts as Plotinus says. When Men
are once sunk into the grossest Sensualities, their Reason becomes (...),
complyant with their sensual Appetites. Besides such Men living as if there
were no God, can make no Apology to the World for it; but by espousing such
Notions which may justify them in their courses. Withal Men being resolved to
live as they list; it becomes their Interest in reference to their Tranquillity
in the mean time, to Believe, through Holding that there is none to call them
to Account, that they may do so. He that finds cause to Fear a God, will soon
wish that there were none; Et Quod valde volumus facile credimus, What we
earnestly desire, we easily believe. However, I hope there is enough suggested,
to prove that there is sufficient Foundations in the Light of Nature, were
there no such thing as Revelation in the World; whereby we may Arrive at a
Persuasion of the Existence of a Deity. Nor shall I further Combat the
Atheist, by showing how imprudent, disingenuous, and absurd his Opinion is; all
these being Largely done by other Hands: And my Concern was only to declare,
that there are Demonstrative Arguments in Nature, whereby our Reasons can
previously to all Revelation, Assure us of the Being of God.

. 6. The next thing to be considered, is the Use and Serviceableness of Reason
in proving the Divinity of the Scripture. And here Reason is of great import,
for by this alone we demonstrate the Divine Authority of the Bible. The ancient
Heathens reproaching the Primitive Christians, that they grounded all their
Do^^rine upon mere Belief; that their Religion consisted In sola ratione
credendi, and that their simple Faith was all they had to trust to: The
Christians complained of the Charge as a gross and impudent Calumny; appealed
to Reason for Proof of their Belief, and offered to join Issue with them upon
that Title. And as they that owe their Belief of the Bibles being the Word of
God to Report, Principles of Education, or the Felicity of their Birth, and the
Clime where they were born, receive the Scripture upon no better Motives than
the Turks do the Alcoran. So if pretended Inspiration may pass for a
Demonstration of the Truth of what every bold Pretender will obtrude upon us;
We expose our selves not only to the Belief of every Groundless Imagination,
but of innumerable Contradictions: For not only the grossest Follies, but
Doctrines palpably repugnant both to Reason, and one another, have been
delivered by Enthusiasts and pretended Inspirato's. I readily grant that the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Souls and Consciences of men to the Truth of
the Scripture, is the most convincing Evidence, that such Persons can have of
it is Divinity. But (1 st.) The Holy Ghost convinces no man as to the Belief of
the Scripture, without Enlightening his mind in the Grounds and Reasons upon
which it is proceeding from God is evidenced and established. There is no
Conviction begot by the Holy Ghost in the Hearts of men, otherwise than by
rational Evidence satisfying our Understandings, through a discovery of the
Motives and Inducements that ascertain the Truth of what he would convince us
of. (2.) No man's particular Assurance obtained thus in way of Illumination by
the Holy Ghost, is to be otherwise urged as an Argument of Conviction to
another, than by proposing the Reasons which our Faith is erected on. The way
of such Men's Evidence is communicable to none, unless they could kindle the
same Rays in the Breasts of others that have Irradiated their own; and
therefore they must deal with others, by producing the grounds of their
Conviction, not pleading the manner of it. And that an other is convinced or
persuaded by them, depends wholly upon the weight and Momentousness of the
Reasons themselves, not on the manner that such a person came to discover them.
For should he have arrived at the discerning them by any other Mean, they had
been of the same Significancy to the Conviction of an Adversary. (3.) The Holy
Ghost as a distinct Person in the Deity, is not a Principle demonstrable by
Reason. Seeing then it is by the Scripture alone, that we are assured of the
Existence of the Divine Spirit, as a distinct Person in the Godhead; therefore
his Testimony in the Hearts and Consciences of men to the Scripture, cannot be
allowed, as a previous Evidence of it is Divinity. To prove the Divine Authority
of the Scripture by the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, when we cannot otherwise
prove that there is a Holy Ghost, but by the Testimony of the Scripture is to
argue Circularly and absurdly. I know the Papists to be even with the
Protestants, for the Circle we charge on them in their proving the Church by
the Scriptures, and the Scripture by the Church; do pretend to fasten the same
way of Circular Argumentation upon us, in that we prove the Spirit by the
Scripture, and the Scripture by the Spirit. Whereas even those Protestants, who
contend that the Spirit and Scripture do mutually prove one another, may easily
acquit themselves from a Circle: Seeing whatever Proof the Scripture and Spirit
mutually Minister to one another; it is in Diverso genere. The Scripture proves
the Spirit either in way of Witness, by plainly testifying that there is such a
Being as the Divine Spirit; or Objectively, and by way of Argument, bringing
into Light such Truths as can be conceived to proceed from none other, save
(...), From the Holy Ghost: But then the Spirit proves the Scripture not in way
of a naked Witness, nor in way of Argument; but under the notion of an
Efficient Cause, Elevating and preparing our Understandings, to discern the
Lineaments, Characters, and Signatures of Divinity, which God has impressed
upon the Scriptures; which through that (...), that is upon our Minds, we many
times do not at all discern; much less do we at any time discern (...), without
it: Or else by giving Efficacy to Scripture Truths in and upon our Hearts and
Consciences; so that the Word arriving with us (...) in the Demonstration of
the Spirit and Power; 2 Cor. 2.4.
we have (...) by the effectual Working of his Power, (...), a spiritual Sense,
and Taste of the things themselves. And this Spiritual Gust, that I may use
Origen's Phrase, is (...), a Diviner thing and more Convincing, than any
Demonstration. For the Word of God, as well as God himself, is best known
(...), by an Intellectual Touch, as the Philosopher says. Plotin.
But, as I have said already, this is no convincing Proof to an Adversary; nor
does the evidence of it reach further than the party immediately concerned. And
therefore our Recourse must be to Arguments of another Nature. In brief, when
we have to do with such, as either Question or Deny the Divine Authority of the
Scripture, we are to prove it by Ratiocination from common Principles received
amongst Mankind; and by Topics that lie even and proportionated to
Intellectual Nature. And here Reason is justly magnified, as hugely Subservient
to Religion, in that it demonstrates the Divine Authority of the Scripture,
upon which our Faith, as to all particular Articles and Duties of Religion is
grounded. Not do I doubt but that Reason can acquit it self in this
Undertaking, to the Conviction of all that are not wilfully obstinate; and for
such, I know no means either sufficient, or intended by God to satisfy them.
Many great Men both Ancient and Modern, as well at Home as Abroad, have already
labored, and to good purpose, in this Theme. Nor can there be much added by
any to what is already said, much less am I likely to do it: Neither is it my
Intention to treat this Subject at large, but rather to touch at the Heads of
Arguments than handle them. And I suppose this will sufficiently answer my
Design, which is to vindicate the Non-Conformists from the Aspersions lately
cast upon them; as if they were Defamers of Reason, disclayming it from all
Concern in Religion, and deserving to be charged with the Reproach which Julian
slanderously fastened upon the Primitive Christians, that they had no Ground for
their Faith, but that their Wisdom was only to Believe; (...). The Method I
shall here confine my self to, shall be; First, To justify the Necessity of
some Supernatural Revelation, in order to the Conducting us in Religion.
Secondly, To evidence the Expediency that this Revelation should be some where
Consigned to Writing. Thirdly, To make appear that nothing can pretend to this
Claym of being a Revelation from God to Mankind, but the Bible. Fourthly, I
shall endeavor positively to demonstrate, that the Scripture is indeed this
Supernatural Law; and that as well by those Authentic Marks and Signatures,
which it has Subjectively impressed on it; as by those Objective Evidences,
which in way of External Testimony God has given to it.

As to the First, There are many things offer themselves in proof of it. (1
st.) All Men being convinced of the Existence of God, are hereupon necessarily,
and by short Deductions led to a Belief, that there ought to be such a thing as
Religion in the World. There has been no Nation so Savage, nor People so
Barbarous, who have not acknowledged some kind of External Performances
necessary for the Expressing of the inward Sentiments of Devotion and Honor
which they bear to a Deity. I know Epicurus by denying God either to have made
the World, or to Govern it, does in effect both overthrow his Being, and
undermine that Adoration which he alleges, must be paid him, because of the
Transcendent Excellency of his Nature. For Omnipotence, Justice, and Goodness,
are bestowed upon him in vain, if he neither made the World, nor regard it
being made: Nor will it be easy to persuade men to worship God; if we neither
be beholding to Him for our Being, nor under his Care; and if he no more
respect our Adorations, than if we did reproach and blaspheme Him. Yet this I
say, that never any acknowledged a God, but they withal confessed that he ought
to be Worshipped. Now forasmuch as without being Instructed concerning the
Nature of God, the Certainty of Rewards, and Punishments, etc. this can never
be Regularly nor Rationally, if at all, performed; and seeing Natural Light at
least as Subjective at present in us, has in many thousand Instances, appeared
Insufficient to inform us of these things: We may from hence reasonably
conclude the Necessity of a Supernatural Revelation. (2 ly.) As all Mankind are
Imbued with a persuasion both that God is, and that he ought to be Worshipped;
so they are also convinced, that all the Religion of Men at present toward
God, is the Religion of Sinners. In all the Addresses of the Sons of Men to
God, they constantly Apply to Him under a sense of Defilement and Guilt. In all
their Transactions from time to time with a Deity, they have been studying how
to purge and cleanse themselves, and atone and appease Him. Now Sinners can
perform nothing duly in Religion toward God, without a knowledge of the
Subordination we were created in at first to Him; his Right and Authority to
prescribe Laws to us; the Capacity we were in, both of knowing and keeping
them; the Way and Means by which Sin entered; that God will not Desert the Work
of his Hands to that Ruin which it has Incurred by it is own Folly; but that
he is yet Appeasable toward us, and will accept a Worship and Service at our
hands; with the Way, Means, and Terms, that he will receive us again into
Favor, and rescue us from the Defilement we labor under. Without some
Information in every one of these, there is no solid Foundation for Sinners to
apply in way of Religion to God at all; and should they attempt it, they will
do nothing but prevaricate. Seeing then the Experience of some Thousands of
Years, has evidenced the Ineffectualness of Natural Light to instruct the
World in any one of these things: We may from hence also infer the Necessity of
a Supernatural Revelation. (3 ly.) All Mankind has universally consented in
this, that besides the Light of Reason, there ought to be some Supernatural
Revelation from God to Man for his Conduct and Guidance in Religion. The
necessity of Commerce in way of Revelation betwixt God and Man, had so
universally and deeply possessed the Ethnic World, that they thought every
Invention that was Excellent, whether in Sciences or Arts, to have derived it is
Original immediately from Heaven. Of this Principle did the Ancient Politicians
and Legislators serve their own Ends, and particular Designs; and therefore to
make the people the more pliable to their Institutions, they pretended Converse
with some Deity or other, by whom they were prompted to such and such things.
The necessity of a Divine Interposure, in determining the Rites and Mysteries
of Religion, gave rise to all the Heathen Oracles. Upon this Principle was the
Credit of Dreams and Divinations erected. The Thing of it self being one of the
first Dictates of the Reason of Man, but perverted in the Application, laid the
Heathen World open to be imposed upon by Enthusiasts, Astrologers,
Soothsayers, Diviners, etc. being convinced of the absolute Need of a
Prophetic Light, they conceived it as much Diffused as the Natural; and that
as every thing did in some design or other, participate of the Goodness of God,
they thought that it did so of his Prescience. Jamblicus de mist. Egypt.
Hence not a Stick in the Wood, Bird in the Air, Line in the Hand, Gut in the
Sacrifice, but was judged Prophetical. Upon this account Celsus expressing the
Judgment of the Heathen in general tell us, Vid. Orig. con. Celsum. lib. 4.
That (...), Brute Beasts were not only wiser than Mankind, but more dear to
God: and the reason was, because they conceived that God conveyed the knowledge
of Futurities to Man through them. Not only the Soul was judged to come into
the Body pregnant with a (...), a prophetical power; only that it is muffled by
it is Commixture and Confusion with this Earthly Lump; (...), as Plutarch
expresses it. But the very Earth was thought Big with a (...), Prophetic
Efflux and most Divine Spirit, by which the Pythia that stood over it was held
to be inspired. Plutarch, de de fectu. Orac.
I know that in all these things, as also in their Opinion of the Inspiration
of their Poets, and such others as were reputed the first Instituters of their
Mysteries, they were grossly mistaken; yet the Principle which they only
foolishly mis-applied, was Genuine, Natural, and True; namely, that all
Religion was to be regulated by some Divine Discovery. See to this purpose
Plato de Legibus, and in his Alcibiades, together with what is said by Camero
de verbo Dei, and Sir Charles Wolseley in his Reasonableness of Scripture
Belief, from page 123. to 128. Enquiry into the Nature and Principle of Moral
Virtue, etc. Cap. 3. Sect. 3.
I have also said somewhat elsewhere about it. The Necessity of a Supernatural
Revelation, in order to the Guiding and Conducting men in Religious
Concernments, being thus briefly Declared and Established, I shall in the next
place endeavor to make appear that it is expedient, that this Revelation
should be somewhere or other consigned to Writing: Nor is this the safest way
only of conveying Doctrines down from one Age to another, but in some Cases,
the only way that can be possibly imagined of doing it with Security. I readily
acknowledge, that the Articles and Precepts of Religion, may in some Cases and
Circumstances be safely preserved, and securely conveyed down from Age to Age
by Oral Tradition, namely, when the Things themselves to be preserved and
reported, are Few; the Number of the Persons to be instructed in them Small;
the Age of those to whom the Successive Communication is given, lengthened out
for several Hundred years; and Mankind in the mean while, neither Slothful nor
greatly Corrupted. And accordingly God, who does all things by excellent
Counsel, and in his most extraordinary Works, uses Natural Agents, as far as
their Capacities will serve, did for some time take this Method, not thinking
it fit in the first Ages of the World, to commit the Revelations He vouchsafed
it to Writing. But taking the Case as it now is, namely, that Mankind is vastly
multiplied; that our Lives are much shortened and contracted to what at first
they were; that the Doctrines, Institutions, and Duties which we are to be
instructed in, are numerous and many; and that Carelessness and Debauchery have
Arrested the World. And I affirm, that some other Means besides Oral Tradition,
are necessary for the safe Conveyance of Revelation from one Age to another.
For (1.) The failure of Oral Tradition in the preserving either Things Humane
or Divine, argues that God having Mercifully condescended to give a Revelation
of His Will to Man, should pitch upon some more certain Method of conveying it
to such as live in Places and Times remote from the first Delivery of it, than
Tradition is. How many famous Institutes of Ethnic Legislators, and Theories
of Ancient Philosophers are lost through not being committed to Writing? I will
take it for granted at present that the World had a Beginning; that Men were
not self-Originated, and that they were not Created Impure; but that Sin by
some accident or other, made it is Entrance afterward into the World: I will
likewise take it for granted, that the First common Parents of Mankind whoever
they were, made their immediate Posterity acquainted with those important
Things: And yet does not Experience tell us how insufficient Oral Tradition
has been, to preserve them among the Gentile Nations? The (...), the (...),
the (...), out of which those Philosophers, who approach nearest the Truth,
allege things to have been at first made, are plainly borrowed from the
Mosaical Records. The Entrance of Sin by the means of certain (...), insolent
Demons, and (...), a Serpent, which some of them suggest, is evidently stolen
from the Sacred Writings; or at least learned by Converse with the Jewish
Nation, to which the Oracles of God were committed. But should we grant that
all these and whatever else we meet with in the Heathen Writers of this kind,
were preserved by Tradition among themselves. Yet their Accounts about these
great Important Matters are so scanty, inconsistent and ridiculous, that we
cannot be so Foolish as to believe them to be the just and full Reports which
were Communicated by our First Parents to their Immediate Offspring. I shall
only add that the Tradition of the One True God though most easy to have been
preserved, being not only short and plain, but having Foundation and Evidence
in the Light of Nature, was nevertheless soon Corrupted and Defaced by the
Worlds lapsing into Polytheism. (2.) In order to Traditions being a sufficient
means of conveying down Revelation to Successive Ages; we must suppose both a
Care from time to time in all to learn it, and that perfectly, an equal
Capacity in all to Understand and Remember it, a regard in every one to
instruct others without the least Variation in what themselves had learned; for
if either through Sloth, difference of Abilities, Entanglements by the World,
or Corruption of Manners, there should be a Failure in any of these, it is
easy to be apprehended what would soon become of Revealed Doctrines, were
there nothing else to secure their Communication from one Generation to
another, besides Tradition. Now he that will believe all Men to be of equal
Capacity, equal Fidelity, equal Diligence, etc. not only contradicts the daily
Experience which we have of Men in the World, but withal affirms that to be
impossible, namely, that there should be any Error in Doctrines of Faith, or
Mistakes about Institutions of Worship, etc. which yet we find Actually to be.
(3.) That cannot be a sufficient and certain Medium of conveying Revelation to
Mankind, by which the grossest and most palpable Falsehoods, under pretense of
Being parts of Divine Revelation, have been obtruded upon the World. In proof
of this I need only instance the Oral Law of the Jews, and the unwritten
Tradition of the Papists, among which I may say with modesty, there are some
Doctrines to be met with, so far from having been at any time revealed by God,
that it is a wonder being so Trifling, Absurd and repugnant to Principles of
right Reason, they should have ever have been invented by men. (4) No man can
be obliged to believe what arriv's with him in way of Tradition, till he have
some assurance that all mankind are agreed and of the same persuasion with his
instructers, unless he should take his teachers to be Infallible. Now as the
first of these is morally impossible, at least for most persons in the World,
who neither have Time, Ability nor opportunity of resolving themselves by
converse with every Individual; so the last is groundless and absurd, and
indeed constitutes all men Infallible, neither capable of being imposed upon
themselves nor imposing upon others. What I have said against the conveying
down Revelation with security by Oral Tradition, makes equally against its
conveyance in writing by men not divinely Inspired. As words are the
representation of Conceptions, so writing is the Register of Words; and if men
may deceive in their vocal Reports, they may do the like in the consignment of
their Thoughts and Words to Script. Besides we shall be first at a loss to
know, whether those that did not write of matters of Religion, who were ever
the major number, were at an agreement with those that wrote. Secondly: is is
not only difficult but impossible for persons of mean Parts, secular Vocations,
etc. to consult the Writings of all those that have written of matters of
Religion; and yet this is necessary ere we can make a judgment in this matter.
Thirdly, we shall find our selves endlesly entangled, when we find them
contradicting one another. And Fourthly, to add no more, we shall be still at a
loss both whether in that they wrote they were not imposed upon by those of
whom they received it, and also whether they lived and dyed in the belief of
all that which may be in their younger, and unexperienced Years they threw into
Paper, or whether afterward in some thing or other they did not alter their
Opinions. As a supernatural Revelation than is necessary in order to the
regulation of mankind in Religious Concernments, so it is also needful that it
should be somewhere or other consigned to writing, and that by persons
immediately inspired. There is no other medium that we can imagine but it would
be obnoxious to fallibility. Nor is there any way besides a (...) or Divine
Inspiration of such Records, by which we can rationally justify our reception
of them, or attain to an (...) security in the things that are so Recorded. I
have discoursed the two foregoing particulars in way of surplusage, the Theme I
am upon not requiring them. For if we can but demonstrate the matter of Fact,
viz. that God has given the World a Supernatural Revelation of his Will, and
that it is consigned to writing in the Book we call the Bible, our Obligation
to receive that Book is indispensable, and our Concern in it is infinitely
Momentous; though we should grant that a supernatural Revelation from God to
Man in order to his conduct in matters of Religion was not needful, and much
more that it was not necessary to commit it to Writing.

Yet pursuing the Thread I have begun; and taking it for proved both that a
Supernatural Revelation is necessary, and that it ought to be Registered some
where or other in writing. I advance to the Third particular, namely, that no
written Records besides the Bible can lay claim to the privilege of being (...)
of Divine Inspiration or that they were written by persons (...) acted and
moved by the Holy Ghost. There is no Book can rival the Scripture in this
pretense. First the writings of the Ethnic Legislators, Poets and
Philosophers, are not fit to put in a Demurrer to the Bible in this matter.
Many of the Records of the Institutions and Laws of the Ethnic Religion are
lost beyond all possibility of Reprive; and those which remain, whether
relating to their Mythick, Politic, or Natural Theology, contain matters so
extravagant and absurd, and are stuff't with Dogm's so repugnant both to
natural Light and one another, that he must have forfeited his Reason, who can
suppose them to have proceeded from God. The whole Heathen Religion, was
nothing but an abuse of that natural Inclination which all men have to worship
a God; whom because they neither knew, nor how he would be served, they guessed
at both in the dark, Mankind being furnished with Faculties instructing them
both in the Existence of God, and that he ought to be Worshipped, fell to
exercising their rational Powers, not only in enquiries after the Nature of the
Supreme Being, but in what manner he would be served. And whereas had they
attended to Reason, they might by short ratiocinations have learned a great
deal as to both, in the Negative, namely what He is not, and what service will
not please Him; and had they improved the (...) the Seeds of God which were in
them they might have arrived at something not inconsiderable as to the
affirmative, in reference to the First. Yet partly through a stretching their
Line beyond its Measure; partly through Supiness and Carelessness in their
Deductions, they became vain in their imaginations, and prevaricated in the
whole they undertook. And whereas they might have been assisted in their
Theologick Speculations by the Works of God, and ancient Traditions which were
the objective helps left them, they did as to both shamefully corrupt
themselves. For instead of being conducted to the acknowledgment of God by his
Works, these they Deified serving the Creature which should have guided them to
the Creator. And hence sprung Sabaism and all the Oriental Idolatry. And for
ancient Traditions, these they woefully disguised and adulterated by Innumerable
Fables, and thence arose their Mythick Theology. But still finding themselves
at a loss, and being also possessed with a persuasion that a Revelation from
God, was necessary to instruct them in Religious Concernments, they became
exposed to a twofold further inconvenience. First, Cunning Men by pretending
either to Inspiration or converse with some Deity, obtruded upon them what they
pleased. And here statesmen did in a special manner play their parts; whence it
came to pass that much of the Heathen Religion was nothing but Stratagems of
Rulers, and little Arts of government. Secondly, Satan took an occasion hence
of abusing mankind by Oracles either immediately uttered, or by men whom he
acted, and who were (...) the Devils Organs, uttering what he inspired them
with. Nor do I mean this only with reference to their Oracular Priests and
Pythian Virgins; but I include both their* Poets and Philosophers. The Poets
were the first and most Ancient Authors of the Ethnic Divinity, and were
generally judged Inspired. Plato expressly tells us that (...); God speaks to
us by them in his Dialogue styled Jon. It is likely enough that some of them
were inspired, but by whom, their Writings abundantly discover. In his
Dialogue, inscribed Menon.
Nor were their Philosophers whom Plato also affirmed to have been (...), acted
by any better Spirit: Many of them of one Sect as well as another being rank
Magicians. In brief, the multiplicity of their Gods, their stuffing their
Worship with Adulteries, and impure Mixtures, their appeasing their Deities by
Humane Victims; not to mention a Thousand things else, that might be mustred
against the Religion of the Gentiles, are so many Demonstrations, that it could
not be Divine. Who can suppose that to be Sacred, which is impure, or conceive
that which Over-throws Humanity, should have proceeded from God? There is
little Hope of finding any thing there for our Conduct in Religion, where we
are so much at a Loss to find the Measures of Moral Virtue. The Writings of the
Heathen whether Poets or Philosophers being then Void of all just pretense of
Admission for Supernatural, and Divine Records, Reason will with the like
Demonstrative evidence, convince us, that this Claim is unduly also ascribed to
the Alcoran. It is true, Mahomet pretended to have received it by Inspiration:
Most think that he Counterfeited in his pretense; and it is certain, that as to
receiving it by Inspiration from God he did so, but that there was not an
immediate Interposure of the Devil in the Case; so that he was deceived
himself, ere he went about to deceive others, I am not so well assured. The
Epileptical Distemper to which he was subject, has in others been attended
with Diabolical Insinuation. The Age in which he lived, was Enthusiastically
inclined: And the Grosseness of the Arabian Wits, together with the
Subserviency of Ethnic Idolatry, which remained up and down among them, might
encourage Satan to make an Attempt that way among that people. But whether it
was indeed so, or whether the whole be singly to be attributed to himself and
one or two Impostors more that assisted him, is not material, and makes not to
the business it self. Mahometism began not, till the sixth Century; about which
time, and for a considerable season before, the whole East was sorely Infected
by Heresies, and rent by Schisms, which together with the impure Lives of the
Professors of the Gospel, both there and in the West, might justly provoke God
to permit this Deceiver to accost the World. Arabia had been ever Fertile of
Dotages and Dreams; for besides other Heretics, the (...), and the
Collyridians sprung from thence; so that we may the less wonder, that it gave
Birth to the Distractions of Mahomet. Obtruding a New Religion upon the World,
and such an one, as neither Reason nor any former Revelation of God befriended,
it concerned him to have justified his Mission by some Miracle or other, as to
what he went about. But these himself plainly disclaims, and though some of his
Followers ascribe such to him, yet there is so little brought in Proof of them,
and withal they are so silly and ridiculous in themselves, that they serve for
nothing, but to disparage both the Person and Cause in whose behalf they are
brought. I know that all Persons who have spoken immediately from God, have not
had the Attestation of Miracles; nor was it always needful, especially when
they only called Men to Obedience to that which had been sufficiently so
attested before. In such a Case, it became the Wisdom of God to be sparing of
Miracles; and indeed he thereby better provided for the Credit of such
Doctrines as were either really, or only in appearance New; and also more
served the Interest of Mankind, than if he should have wrought Wonders in
Attestation of every ordinary Messenger and familiar Truth: And this may be a
reason why none of all the Penmen of the Scripture are reported to have
wrought Miracles, save Moses the Giver of the Law, and the Apostles the
Promulgers of the Gospel. But though every Herald of Heaven had not the
Attestation of Miracles, yet no one came inspired by God, who had not some
Testimony or other born to him, to distinguish him from an Impostor. Either the
Doctrines they delivered were of that Sublimeness, that no Finite Understanding
could have invented them, and yet when discovered, were so Correspondent to our
Rational desires, and so perfective of our Natural Light, that being duly
weighed, the Reason of Man acquiesceth in them, and says, this is what I
looked for but could not find: Or else they made known some present Matter
which lay out of the reach of all Humane Knowledge, such as the Secrets of the
Heart; or declared some Fact done either at a distance, or with that Secrecy
that no Man could know it: Or else they foretold some future Contingent soon
after to come to pass, which accordingly fell out in every Circumstance. Nor is
it unlikely, but that most, Deuteronomy. 18.21, 22.
if not all the Old Testament Prophets had their Missions confirmed by the
Prediction of some thing future, which no Humane Prudence could foresee. Or
else they were born Witness to by the Prevalency and immediate Success of their
Prayers in the preventing some impendent Judgment, or in the procuring some
needful Mercy; for thereby was declared either their Foresight of what God was
ready to do, or the Interest, Favor, and Power they had with him. Nor is it
without probability, that most of the Prophets under the Mosaic Dispensation,
Jer. 27.18.
justified their Mission by some such thing. But as for Mahomet, though he not
only pretended to speak immediately from God, but withal introduced a Doctrine
really New; yet he came Authorized by no Miracle, Sign, or Badge, by which he
might be distinguished from an Impostor. Yea, whereas he owns that both Moses
and Christ were sent from God, it is an Infallible Argument that He was not;
their Doctrine and his being altogether inconsistent. It has been generally
acknowledged, not only by Jews and Christians, but by Heathens, and that
agreeably to the Light of Reason, that Prophetic Illapses never befell Impure
and Unclean Souls; and that God never made an Unhallowed Person his Oracle; at
least, that never any such were employed for the Divine Amanuenses. Now if we
examine the Alcoran by this prophetic Test, we find the Author of it to have
been a Person Lustful and Tyrannical, made up of nothing but Blood and Dirt,
grossly Sensual, and prodigiously Cruel; which plainly demonstrates how unfit he
was to lay Claim to the prophetic Privilege and Dignity. If we consult the
Doctrine of the Alcoran, we have all the Evidence that the Reason of Man can
desire, that it neither did, nor could proceed from God. It is true, there are
some things in it stolen from the Scripture, but even those are so perversely
related, and so wretchedly Corrupted with Fables, that they lose the very
similitude of Truth through the villainous Management of them. Persons are so
Mis-named, Times are so Mistaken, the whole so Interlarded with Contradictions,
and disguised with Absurdities, that we must needs say, the Contriver had a bad
Memory and a worse Understanding. In a word, the whole Alcoran is nothing but a
Cento of Heathenism, Judaism, and Christianity, all miserably Corrupted, and as
wildly blended together. The Doctrines of it are for the most part, either
impossible, Blasphemous, or Absurd. The Rewards promised to the Embracers of
it, are impure and foolish. The whole was at first Invented out of Pride and
Ambition; propagated by Violence and Rapine; and is still maintained in the
way's that it was Established. Profound Ignorance, sensual baits, and force of
Arms gave it its first promotion and do still maintain its credit in the World.
The meanest Reason if duly exercised is able to disprove the Divinity of the
Alcoran.

Some Revelation from God in order to our guidance in Religion being necessary,
and it being also needful that this Revelation should somewhere or other be
consigned to writing; and no other writing that we either know or ever heard of
being sit to enter the list and stand competitor with the Bible in this matter,
we have hereby laid a considerable Foundation in Reason, for the evincing the
Divinity of the Scripture. However in the Fourth place we shall further
consider by what positive Media the Divine Authority of the Scripture may be
rationally Demonstrated. And First, we shall consider it with respect to those
Subjective Characters, which as so many Authentic marks, and infallible
Signatures of its Inspiration from God, are impressed upon it. And these are so
many Mediums of artificial Arguments to Reason, by which we may Scientifically
demonstrate its Divinity. It Is but reasonable to suppose that every Work of God
should be of that frame and complexion as to reveal its Author. We find this in
the Works of Creation, where there needs no other evidence to assure us who
made them, but what themselves are fraught with. God has left those
impressions of his Infinite Power, Immense Wisdom, and exuberant Goodness upon
them, that we need not the Authority of any Man or Church to convince us whose
they are, but they carry a demonstrative assurance of their Author in
themselves. The like evidence may be justly expected to attend the Word of God,
as we find to accompany his Works. And indeed Gods End in Revelation being more
Noble than his End in Creation, and the World being more liable to be imposed
on in that matter, than in this; It Is but Rational to believe that He should
leave at least as conspicuous, and glorious impressions, and characters of
himself upon his Word, as upon the Works of his Hands. And if men in the
writing of Books, do not only leave on them such an impression of Reason, that
we may know them to be the product of rational Creatures; but withal according
to their several degrees of accomplishments either as to eminency of knowledge,
heavenliness of mind, elegancy of style, etc. do imprint on them those
footsteps of their several qualifications, that we can for the most part by the
very frame of the writing discover its individual Author: It may be justly
expected that what proceeds immediately by inspiration from God, should carry
something in it correspondent to the Wisdom, Holiness, Power, Omniscience, and
Goodness of Him from whom it Flows. And yet let me premise, That as we do not
build our assurance of the Worlds being the Manufacture of God upon every petty
Phenomenon, which like the image of Foam that Apelles struck upon his Table by
a hasty cast of his pencil, some, may be, look upon only as a disport of
matter in the fortuitous encounters of one particle with an other; but we raise
our persuasion on the curious Fabric of the nobler pieces, and the Harmonious
Structure of the Universal Machine. In like manner we are not so much to seek
for the evidences of the Divinity of the Bible in every Verse and Chapter, as
in the complex of the whole, and in the principal Parts, Branches and Sections
of it. The intrinsic Evidences of the Divine Revelation of the Scripture may
be reduced to several Heads. The First Topic regards the matter of it. And
here the plain and convincing enlightening of us about natural Truths, of which
we are at best doubtful is one internal Evidence of the Divinity of the Bible.
The bringing into Light such things as we could never have thought of, which
yet being discovered, have that admirable Connection with all true Reason that
we are Ravished with the Glory of Truth that shines in them, is a Second. The
purity and fullness of Scripture-Precepts, commanding every Virtue, forbiding
every Vice, and enjoining nothing either superfluous or burdensome, is a Third.
The greatness and spirituality of the Scripture-promises, where we have the
nature of Happiness so described and stated, the directions for the attainment
of it so full and clear, the grounds of its certainty so many and
incontestable, and the whole so framed as to be both a powerful inducement to
an alacrous and uniform Obedience, and a powerful Antidote against all
Temptations to sin and sensuality make a Fourth. The quality of Scripture
Prophesies, and the Events still answering the prediction, is another
undeniable Evidence of the Divinity of the Bible. The Nature and exactness of
Scripture History relating things of the greatest Weight and with the greatest
Truth, is another Evidence arising from the subject matter of the Scripture. It
alone informs us of many matters of Fact, which no other Writings either have
or could; and as the knowledge of such things was indispensably necessary, so
being examined as they are recorded in the Bible, we find the account of them
rational and satisfactory. What other Nations have only faint glimpses of in
fabulous Stories, of those the Scripture gives us exact and authentic Records.
Not to speak of the Date of the Bible it self! what Book can vie with it as to
antiquity of contents? As all Ethnic Histories are latter than some parts of
the Scripture, so most of them are traductions from thence, and are but parts
of the Mosaic Story corrupted and debased with Egyptian being Grecian Fables.
Where have we such an exact and full display of the Origin and several periods
of the World, and the Original of Nations, as the two first and tenth Chapt. of
Genesis do afford us. Yea, in the Narration of such things whereof we have also
some register in Humane Records, it were not difficult to demonstrate that
there are peculiar Characters in the History of the Scripture, differencing it
from all writings of mere Humane Original, and manifesting it to be of Divine
extract.

The Second Head of Arguments, by which evidence is given to the Divine
Original of the Scripture from the Characters impressed on it, respect the Form
of it, or the manner in which things are delivered and treated. And here the
Majestic Authority that it dictates to mankind in, is hugely remarkable. In no
other writing whatsoever is there that Sovereignty of Commanding usurped, that
the Scripture assumes. It alone treats with us in a way of Supremacy, Majesty,
and Authority, becoming Him in whose Name it pretends to speak. Whatever else
has laid claym to the being a Revelation from God to Mankind, does by its
sneaking, creeping, flattering way of address, evidently betray the meanness of
its Original. 2 dly. The Style of the Scripture does plainly breath of God.
With what Brevity without Darkness; with what Simplicity without Corruption;
with what Gravity without Affectation; with what Eloquence without Meretricious
Ornaments; with what Plainness without Flatness or Sordidness; with what
Condescensions to our Capacities, without Unsuitableness to the Subject Matter,
is the Scripture written? When the Holy Inspirer of the Sacred Penmen stoops
most to our Capacities, he even then retains a Prerogative in his Style, above
what is to be met with in merely Humane Writings. There is that Succinctness,
Prespicuity, Plenitude and Majesty in the Style of Scripture-Laws; that
Sweetness and Spirituality in Promises; that Austerity in Comminations; that
wonderful (...) and (...), force and Emotion in Expostulations; that (...) meet
Accommodation of Words unto things through the whole Bible, that no Humane
Writing can equal. If there be at any time Obscurity in the Scripture-Stile, it
is either from the Sublimity of the Matter declared, which no Words though
never so easy in themselves, can help us to adequate Notions of: Or it is from
some Reference to ancient Customs and Stories, which made the Expressions easy
to the Age and Persons first concerned in them, though they may be Dark to us,
through our Unacquaintedness with those things, that were both the occasion of
them, and the Key to them: Or else it is because they regard Futurities, which
it was neither for the Safety of the Church in General, nor the Interest of
Primitive Believers to have had plainly foretold; and as the fulfilling of them
will give Convincing Light about them; so I do no ways question, but that
after-Ages will admire what we do not Understand: Or God intending the
Scripture for Persons of one sort of accomplishment as well as another, we may
very well suppose that it became his Infinite Wisdom so to frame and adapt the
style of it, that there might be some things in it to find exercise for the
most elevated Capacities and speculative Wits, especially there being not only
enough suited to Weaker enquirers, but all that is absolutely necessary to be
known being plainly revealed, and nothing left difficult to be understood but
what is not necessary to be understood at all. The pretense of want of
Eloquence in the style of the Scripture is a groundless, as well as a false
calumny. And it arises first from a mistake of the Nature of True Eloquence,
as supposing it to consist in a flourish of painted Words, or a smooth
structure of periods, etc. which chiefly influence the affections, and leave
not those lasting impressions that calm Reason does. Such Arguments might
possibly become the Ancient Sophists and Demagogues whose end was (...) and
(...) Ostentation and amazement; but do not at all become the Holiness and
Majesty of God, in whose Name the Bible speaks to Us. Nor does a (...) and
(...) a grandiloquency and bewitching smoothness agree to the end and scope of
the Scripture, which would have the great effects it aims at, produced by the
things whereof it treats, and not by flourishes of Wit, and flowers of
language. For, as Origin observes, if the Scripture had used that Elegancy of
speech which is admired among the Greeks, one might have suspected that it was
not truth it self that prevailed with men, but that they were deceived by the
(...). The splendor and elegancy of words. Upon this account Paul, though he
came behind no man in manliness of expression, yet he declined all (...)
artificial affected Wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2.4.
and (...) enticing Words of man's Wisdom (...), lest the cross of Christ should
be made of none effect. Or 2ly. It proceeds from want of consideration that the
Eastern Eloquence might differ vastly from the Western. If that which even
among our selves is accounted Eloquence in one Age, cease to be held so in
another, why might not the Scripture style have admirably suited the Genius of
those times it was first calculated for, though it do not accord to our western
Rules of Oratory? And who knows but that our Europaean Style may be as little
relished by the Asiaticks, as theirs is by us. In a word if Eloquence and
propriety of Spech ought to be judged of by its commensurateness to its End,
namely its accommodation to the matter that is handled, and condescension to the
capacities of them to whom it is directed; and if a regard in a determining
concerning a style, ought also to be had to the quality of the Speaker, I am
sure in none of these does the Scripture fail; but on the contrary there is
that of every one of them shining in the Language of the Scripture, that
plainly argues it to be of more than Humane Original.

A third, Medium considerable in the Form of the Scripture as a further
implanted evidence of its Divinity, is the admirable Harmony and agreement
betwixt one part of it and another. Though given out at times, ages, and places
distant from one another, and by persons of different educations,
accomplishments, and interests, yet there is an excellent consonancy of one
part with another, and of every part with the whole; which plainly shows that
they all spoke by one Spirit, and though they treated of different things that
they were all the Amanuenses of Him that is uniform to Himself and the same for
ever. The seeming differences in the Scripture are so few in number, so
inconsiderable in the matter of them, and withal so easily salved, that they
strengthen the evidence by showing that the Harmony of the Scripture is without
Craft and Conspiracy in the Penmen of it.

The fourth Common place of Arguments, drawn from Implanted Characters for the
Divinity of the Scripture, arises from a Consideration of the End, Aim, and
Scope of the Bible. The Scripture has plainly an End, wherein no other Writing
has any share, further then as it is taken from it, or framed in Conformity to
it; and yet the very best of such Writings being compared with the Scripture,
do visibly fall short in the Way and Manner of Representing and Enflaming to
the pursuit, and conducing to the Attainment of that End. The Supreme End of
the Bible is the Glory of God by Jesus Christ. It is true, the Works of
Creation and Providence do manifest the Glory of the Divine Attributes
considered Absolutely, and in themselves; yet so as that they neither
extensively nor intensively display the Essential Perfections of God as the
Scripture does: But as to the Manifesting the Glory of God in and through Jesus
Christ, they are wholly silent. This Privilege is the Peculiar of the Word
alone, and reserved to it as that Authentic Character by which he Honors it
above all his Name. The Subordinate End of the Scripture is the restoring of
fallen Man; with a discovery of the Way, Means, and Terms of his Recovery. And
as the Scripture alone does this, so it does it eminently, and to all rational
Satisfaction. It were easy to branch this into many particular Mediums, by
displaying how it alone instructs us in the Remove of the many insuperable
Obstacles; how it resolves us in the great Entanglements and Perplexities that
our Reasons are exercised with; how it brings into Light Pardoning Grace,
without giving the least Encouragement to the Practice of Sin; how it provides
for our being renewed to the Image of God, as well as our being reconciled to
Him; and shows us the Way and Means of being delivered from Lust and
Corruption, as well as Wrath and Guilt. In a word, that it is Defective in
informing us of nothing that is necessary for us to know, either with reference
to our Duty or Happiness; but that it fully instructs us in every thing that
our Natures look after, or are capable of. And all this it so performs, that
the several Lines of it Center in the glory of God by Jesus Christ, through
whom we have not only Happiness conferred upon us, but Grace to fit us for it.
There are other Intrinsecal Evidences insisted on for the Proof of the Divinity
of the Scripture; which as I shall not endeavor to enervate, so for Reasons
that it is not needful to declare, I shall wave the producing of them. Nor is
it Number so much as Weight of Arguments that is to be trusted to in any Case,
especially where the Theme is important, and the Controversy to be decided
only by Demonstration. Now as upon the one Hand, I know not one of these (...),
I have alleged, by which I am not able to demonstrate the Divine Inspiration
both of the Bible in general, and of most of the particular Books in it; so if
there be any Books received into the Canon, where any of these are wanting;
they are such as are Narratives of things done among Men, and most of those are
born Witness to in such other Books, as have all the foregoing Characters; and
if there be any of them that are not Testified to, yet we have all desirable
Evidence that they were Written by Persons Divinely inspired; and though all
the preceding Signatures do not occur in them, yet some one, or more, by which
they manifest themselves to be of God, do; and in none of them is there any
thing inconsistent with the (...), we have produced. Upon the other hand, it is
easy by the preceding Marks to discharge from all Interest in Divine
Inspiration a vast Number of Books that pretend to a Share in it. By such I
mean not only the Sibylline writings, the Prophecy of Enoch; the Epistle of
Christ to Abgarus; the Gospels of Nicodemus, James, and Andrew; the Canons of
the Apostles; the Revelation of Paul, his Epistles to Seneca, and the
Laodiceans; the Missals of Matthew, Mark, Peter, etc. but all those Books which
are Commonly styled, Apocryphal.

. 7. Besides the Characters impressed on the Scripture, by which the Divine
Inspiration of it is plainly evidenced: There are many External Motives by
which the same might be further demonstrated. And here may be pleaded the
quality of the penmen; their candor, sincerity, inability of being the
immediate Authors of such a contrivance, that they had no base nor secular
Ends, that they are impartial in laying open their failings, and that they
always father the whole upon God. (2) The antiquity of Scripture Records at
least some part of them, to which all the rest are consonant and upon which
they superstruct. (3) The preservation of the Bible through so many Ages, when
so many of Wit, Power, and interest in the World had set themselves against it.
(4) Its spread, success, and entertainment in the World, with the manner of its
propagation, without force of Arms, or aft of Eloquence. (5) The effects it
has wrought in great, sudden, and lasting changes that it has produced, in
men principled in their Judgments, prepossessed with Educations and prejudiced
by Lust against it. (6) The attestation of Miracles, which are Gods Seal to
authorize the person in whose behalf they are wrought, and Doctrines to which
they are annexed. For a Miracle is an extraordinary work transcendent to the
powers and capacities of natural Agents. It is either the altering and stopping
the Course of Nature, or the producing some effect above its Laws and power. A
Miracle is an operation of God in Nature either without interposure of a Second
Cause, or above its abil^ty. In a word it is the production of something out of
nothing, either as to matter, or manner of production. Now such Works are the
immediate effects of Almighty Power. It is the Peculiar Title of God to do
Wonders; and he only can do Wonderful Things. Were there not some things
impossible to Natural Agents, there were no room for a real Miracle; and were
there not other things which we only think to be impossibles in Nature, we were
not capable of being deluded by an appearing one. Effects exceeding the lines
of ordinary operations may be produced by a combination of material Agents, and
Satan may wonderfully ape a Miracle by the impressions he is able to make upon
matter; but every true Miracle is the product of a Power that is infinite. As
God alone can work Miracles so he never exerts His Power in the production of
any, but in order to humane instruction. The Devil loves to be acting his
Power, to fill men with Amazement and to make them Wonder, but God reserves his
Power to seal some portant Truth, to relieve men in some Urgent straight, or to
afright them from some destructive Practice. Miraculous Works are one of the
greatest attestations that God can give either to person or thing, and are
usually his Seal to some great Truth. God is a spirit and cannot be seen to
give Testimony, yea should he assume a shape and in that declare himself, there
would be still a great deal of lyableness to exception; and therefore one of
the most convincing Evidences that God can give to Person, Doctrines, or Cause,
is by the effecting of some such Work as is only possible for an Almighty Power
to produce. Hence those ancient Impostors that usurped the Title of Prophets
either among the Jews, Christians or Heathens, pretended to Miracles and Signs,
knowing that without that counterfeit Seal their Doctrine would never have been
received by the People, and the better to Ape a Miracle the greatest part of
pretenders to Enthusiasm, were in all Ages Magicians. True Miracles, being the
effects of Gods immediate Power; the Notions which we have of his Wisdom and
Goodness do not admit us to suppose, that he should lend His Omnipotency to
confirm a falsehood: For this were the way to induce men into error in a matter
of the greatest Moment. And therefore while I believe God to be True and Good;
I will never believe that He will lend his power to Impostors to cheat and
abuse mankind. Yea were it consistent with Divine Truth and Justice so to do,
yet it is repugnant to his Wisdom, in that he should hereby not only weaken
but wholly take off all the Evidence that Himself can give to Truth by
miraculous Operations. For if God can exert his Power in the confirmation of a
Falsity in one Case, what security can we have that He may not do so in
another? To say that God does never work a Miracle for our Trial, in reference
to a false Doctrine, till he has unquestionably confirmed his own Truth
before, and that the having an established Rule to examine after Doctrines by,
is enough to preserve us from being imposed upon by Error, though it should
come backed with the attestation of Miraculous Works: I affirm that this plea is
not sufficient, and and that there are objections to the contrary which it does
not resolve. For First. As primitive Revelation is not capable of receiving
confirmation from its consonancy to any Revelation formerly acknowledged, it
being it self the first; so after Revelations that are either really or
according to the best judgment that we can make, New, are as little tryable by
their congruency to what went before. And if we allow Miracles to be an
Authentic attestation in such cases, I see not how we can admit them to be
fallacious in any. Secondly, The ancientest portion of Scripture are the
Mosaic Writings; now antecedently to the giving forth of these as the Standard
of after Doctrines, Idolatry, Superstition and Error had greatly overspread
the world; I would therefore ask, if God may immediately work Miracles in
behalf of following Errors, what assurance we have that he could not do so in
reference to such as preceeded? I know no argument that can be brought in proof
of the Negative in the latter Case, but what will equally conclude in favor of
the Negative in the former: For if we resolve it into the Nature of God, that
he could not do so in the last Circumstances; the same Essential Perfections in
God which lead us to judge so of him in them, will persuade us to have the like
thoughts of him in all Circumstances that we can imagine. Thirdly, It is
expressly against the Evidence of Scripture-Testimony, that God should work a
Miracle to confirm either the Mission, or the Error of a false pretender, See
Joh. 9.16.29, 30, 31. Christ having restored Sight to one that was born blind,
the Pharisees do notwithstanding question whether he was an Ambassador from
God, yea, expressly affirm him to be an Impostor; as for this Fellow we know not
whence he is. Now let us observe after what manner that miraculous Work is
urged in Justification that Christ could be no Deceiver, p. 16. How can a man
that is a Sinner (...) i. e. one that falsely avoucheth himself to be sent of
God, do such Miracles, and 30, 31, The man answered and said unto them, why
herein is a mavelous thing that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he
has opened mine Eyes, now we know that God hears not sinners: i. e. does not
by miraculous Works, bear witness to them that come in their own Name. I know
that we are to distinguish between what the Scripture it self says, and what
is only said in the Scripture. And that the Scripture it self is true though
there be many false sayings Historically recited in it; because though the
expressions themselves be false, yet it is true that these Untruths which it
reports were spoken. But he that looks into the Chapter, will plainly perceive
that the Holy Ghost does not only Register these Sayings, but Adopt them. And
that he does not barely affirm that such Pleas were made, but that the Pleas
themselves were true and solid. The Exceptions why Miracles are not in
themselves an Incontestable Evidence of the Doctrine they are wrought in
Confirmation of, and of the Divine Mission of the persons that work them, may
easily, I think, be taken off. The 1 st. is, That Miracles have been wrought by
Heretics, Pagans, and others, whose Persons were neither Authorized by God,
nor their Doctrine true. And here the Wonders reported in History to have been
done by Aesculapius, Vespasian, and especially Apollonius Tyaneus, whom
Hierocles durst in point of Miraculous Works compare with Jesus Christ, are
alleged. To which I return these Five Things: (1.) We may justly question the
matter of Fact as to many of them; nor are the Reporters such, as that we are
bound to yield them an Implicit Faith. Piaefraudes have found Entertainment
not only among Heathens, but Christians. Nor do I doubt, but that most of the
Ethnic and Popish Miracles are merely Romantic, and that it is enough to
discharge our selves from them, by putting the Patrons of them on the proof,
that ever any such things were wrought. (2.) Many of these seeming Miracles may
be salved by Natural Causes. We use to Baptize the extraordinary Phenomenon of
Nature with the Name of Wonders, because of our Ignorance of the Ability of
Natural Agents. How many things were looked upon by the Pagan World, as the
immediate Effects of a Supernatural power; that we can now give a distinct and
Philosophical account of? (3.) Many of them are to be ascribed to the Power and
Operation of the Devil, who can (...), make a Lie as well as tell one. Next to
Oracles, Satan has served his Ends on the World by counterfeit Miracles, and
in both, he has set himself to Ape God: And though we cannot so readily in
every one of them detect the Imposture; yet in most of them, we meet with some
Circumstance or other, which may induce us to give the Devil the Honor and
Reputation of them. (4.) Some of them, and those such as descend to us with the
greatest certainty, seem to have been wrought to prepare the World for some
strange and new Providence that God was to bring upon the Stage, or to give
reputation to some person that God designed for some solemn undertaking, and
not in the least to confirm any erroneous Doctrine or false Religion; and as to
such miraculous Works, I know nothing hinders why they may not be ascribed to
God. Thus would I resolve the Cures wrought by Vespasian on the blind and lame
Men, to have been done for the better introducing and establishing him in the
Roman Empire; God having intended him for the Minister of his Wrath against
the Jewish Nation: But that from some Circumstances of the Story as it is
related by Suetonius, and Tacitus, I am apt to think that the (...), Enemy not
easily discovered; or the Agency of the Devil was in the whole. For I find the
infirm Persons alleging their being advised by Serapis, to make their Address
to Vespasian for Relief against their Maladies: Now it is not likely, that God
should employ the Demon for the Herald of what himself would accomplish; or
that he should encourage Idolatry by Communion with Votaries at the Devil's
Temple. (2 dly.) The Method of restoring the blind Man to his Sight by spitting
upon his Eyes, seems plainly to have been done in Imitation of Christ; and that
Satan was the principal Agent in the whole, Cognoscis pie lector falsam
imitationem Miraculorum Christi, sic solitus illuderehominibus, (...). Is.
Casaub. not ad* locum.
intending hereby either to disparage some of the Miracles of our Savior, or
to maintain his own Kingdom in the way that He had erected his. (5.) Some of
the wonderful Works urged in the proof of what we are contending against* might
be wrought in Confirmation of the Truth of God; and yet without any respect to
the justifying the Mission of the Publisher of it. And with reference to such
works, I know no danger in entitling God to be the Author of them. An instance
to this purpose, we have Mark 9.38. Where the Person casting out Devils, was
neither Commissioned by Christ, nor did so much as directly own and embrace
Him; and yet God lent him his Power to accomplish these Effects. And supposing
a Truth in the Matters of Fact, as reported of the Romish Missionaries in the
Indies, I should think this Key sufficient to unlock them.

The second and great Exception, why Miracles are not always a sufficient Proof
of the Doctrine in whose behalf they are wrought, is fetched from Scripture.
And truly if the Texts pressed in this Service, be not found either mistaken or
urged beyond their true Intendment; we will readily resign both our selves, and
the Cause we have been pleading. Nor shall any Show or Appearance of Reason in
favor of it, weigh with us, there being no Reason so great as to believe what
God has said. The first Argument levied from Scripture for this Warfare, is
drawn from what the Magicians did in their Contest with Moses in Egypt; whereof
we have an Account in the 7 th. and 8 th. Chapters of Exodus. To which I reply
(1.) That most, yea all, saving one or two Interpreters, deny any thing done by
them to have been truly Miracles. (2.) The Way, Manner, and Rites they used in
effecting what they attempted, do plainly acquit God from any Agency about
their Works, further than the permitting them. For they are said to have done
so by their Enchantments, Exodus 7.11. and 8.7. I dare not think that God was at
the Magicians Beck; or that he would conciliate Credit to their Hellish Arts by
subserving them; or that he would exert his Sacred and Almighty power in Honor
of Satan's Institutions and Ceremonies. (3.) The Magicians finding themselves
outdone by Moses in the matter of turning Dust into Lice; cry out, that the
Finger of God was there, Exodus 8.19. which I take to be no less than an
Acknowledgment, that whatsoever they had done before, they had done it by
Magic: And that it was through the influence and Agency of the Devil, that
their Rods had been turned into Serpents, and that Frogs had been brought upon
the Land. (4 ly.) Though what they did in the two first Instances, wherein they
confronted Moses, seems to bear such a Resemblance to true Miracles, that it
was not at first easy to distinguish the one from the other; yet it were easy
to demonstrate, that the things which they effected, were not without the
compass of the Power of Demons. And that it might appear, that the Power by
which Moses acted, was different from that by which they acted; God therefore
wisely ordered it, that his Rod should devour theirs; thereby leaving an (...),
singular Peculiarity in the Miracles of Moses to witness their Divine Original.
The second Argument mustred from Scripture to fight in this cause is brought
from Mat. 24.24. 2 These. 2.9. Apoc. 13.13. To all which I answer. (1.) By
granting that the Expressions are lofty, wherein the Holy Ghost predicts the
Signs and wonders which false Christ's, and false Prophets were to work; yet I
think we are not to conclude from the Majesty of the Terms in which they are
foretold, that the Works themselves were real Miracles: But that God would
intimate to us, either that they should be such, as would so hugely resemble
true Miracles, that it would not be easy to detect them; or that he would
thereby awaken us to examine the Doctrines of Men by their Consonancy to the
Scripture which was then given out and established, rather than Implicitly to
resign our selves to the Conduct of every Wonder-monger. (2.) The best Key to
judge of the quality of the Signs and Wonders there foretold, whether they be
true Miracles or not; is to take a View of the extraordinary Works, Recorded to
have been done by the pretended Jewish Messiahs, and the Apostatical Roman
Church, one or both of whom are referred to in the objected places. And if we
will apply our selves to this Method of Trial, I dare undertake that there is
not so much as one Sign or Wonder truly Recorded concerning them, which may not
be solved either by a Co-incidence of Natural Causes, or by the hidden Power of
Demons. (3.) They are expressly styled (...), lying Wonders, and that not so
much Respectu finis, because they were wrought in Confirmation of a Falsity; as
Respectu Materiae, because they only Ap'd true Miracles, but in truth were not
such. Yea, as if that were not enough to acquit God from being the Author of
them, they are expressly ascribed to an (...), Agency of the Devil. The third,
and last Argument brought in Relief of their Opinion, who think that God may
exert a Miracle-Working Power in the Confirmation of a Falsity, is taken from
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. To which I answer: (1.) That the place does more especially
relate to the foretelling of Events, than to the working of Wonders. And
therefore if God never lent his Omniscience to the Service of an Impostor; we
have no reason to think that he should lend his Omnipotency to the Service of
one. And if all the Predictions of false Prophets may be salved without
Recourse to Divine Inspiration (as indeed they may) I suppose their Wonders may
be also salved without Recourse to God's Infinite Power. (2.) They are the
Prophets after the Promulgation and Establishment of the Law of Moses that are
there spoken of; and therefore the Law being given out as the Test of
after-Revelation, at least during that Economy; God tells his People that they
are not to try the Mission of Prophets only by Miracles, but especially by the
Agreeableness of their Doctrine to that of Moses. And this may be a reason, why
we do not find, that other Penmen of Old Testament Scripture were honored
with the working of Miracles. I know indeed that some Prophets were entrusted
with Miraculous Power; but so far as I remember, there was not one besides
Moses who was made use of in giving forth the Revelation of God to the
Old-Testament-Church, that had this Privilege conferred on him.

Having thus made appear, that all Miracles are Effects of a Divine Power, and
that wheresoever God exerts his Miracle-Working Power in Confirmation of any
Doctrine, he declares it to be of, and from himself, and to be Unquestionably
True. I shall not now insist on the proving, that the Bible is justified by
Innumerable, Great, and Undeniable Miracles; that being largely, and beyond all
possibility of Reply done by other Hands. I shall only say, that even those who
suppose that God may sometimes put forth his Wonder-working Power, in
Attestation of an Error, do not hereby design to Rob us of the Evidence of
Miracles for the Divinity of the Script. For as none have gone beyond them in
the proof of the Divine Authority of the Bible in general, so no one has
improved the Medium of Miracles to better purpose. As they have showed that the
Scripture is attested by a greater Number of Miracles, and those both more
eminent, more conspicuous, longer continued, and oftener repeated, than ever any
Error either was, or ever could be. So they not only prove that God never
wrought a Miracle in confirmation of a Falsity for Trial, till he had first
incontestably established his own Truth, but they also declare that he could
not. It is not then upon an apprehension of their having disserved the
Authority of the Bible in this particular that I have assumed the freedom of
discoursing these things, but that an opportunity of more light in this matter
may be afforded. The Cause of the Scripture will suffer nothing in the main, on
what side soever this Controversy issues. And as I know my self in more need of
being instructed than of capacity to offer information to any; So it is the
same pleasure to me, to have my Notions confuted when unsound, as it is to be
restored to health when I have been sick.

. 8. Having briefly viewed the serviceableness of Reason as to the
demonstrating the Divinity of the Scripture; we may, ere we make any further
proceed, infer and conclude from hence its Authority, For upon its Divine
Original does its Authority bear. The formal reason of our submitting our
Hearts and Consciences to the Bible, is Gods speaking in it. The Authority of
God is his right to command and require Obedience, and it is founded not only
in the supereminence of his Nature, but his Relation to us as our maker. Having
made us Rational Creatures capable of moral Government, he may accordingly Rule
us by Laws backed with promises and threatenings. I acknowledge that de facto, men
may withdraw themselves from under the Authority of God, and may deny him
Obedience; but that militates nothing against the Right that is vested in Him
of ruling them, nor the obligation that they are under of obeying him. Now the
Authority of the Scripture arises from its being Gods Word and his speaking in
it. Nor are the most momentous Reasons of that significancy to determine our
Assent, as the Testimony of a person of infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness and
Truth. What greater Assurance can we have to ascertain our belief, than that
the affirmer is infinitely Wise, and cannot be deceived himself, and infinitely
Good and cannot deceive others. To say, as the Papists do, that the Scripture
has its Authority in se, in its self, from its self; but that it has its
Authority quoad nos, with respect to us, from the Testimony of the Church; is
to talk without either Reason or sense. For (1) Authority being a Relative
Term, nothing can have Authority in it self, which has it not in respect of
others: Nothing is a Law properly but what is a Law to some. It is impossible
to suppose an actual Right in any to Command, without supposing an obligation
in some to obey. If the Scripture therefore have no Authority from it self in
respect of us, it neither has, nor can have any Authority in its self, Humana
dicta argumentis and testibus egent, Dei autem Sermo ipse sibi testis est; quia
necesse est quicquid incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium
veritatis Salvian. de vero judicio and providentia Dei lib. 3.
at all. (2) If the Scripture have no Authority with respect to us but what it
has from the Church, how comes the Church it self to be under an Obligation to
receive and obey it. There can be no obligation but in Relation to some
Antecedent Authority, and if there be no such Authority obliging the Church to
receive the Scripture, there should be no Sin in her rejecting it. (3) If the
Scripture have no Authority from its self, and Gods speaking in it, with
respect to us, then the Church should be the first Credible, which is
altogether false, it being by the Scripture that we both know that there is a
Church, and how far her Testimony is to be trusted to, (4.) every Testimony is
posterior to the thing testified, and is accordingly true or false, as it is
agreeable or disagreeable to the nature of the Thing it bears witness to, If
therefore the Scripture have any Authority with respect to us upon the
Testimonial of the Church, it behoved to have it antecedently. In a word, if
God have not a Right of commanding us independently on the Testimonials of the
Church; then no private Revelation that ever God made, or could make of himself
to any, is of the least force or significancy. Nor could they to whom God by
Visions, Dreams, Inspirations or otherwise made himself, his Mind and Will
known, take upon them to give forth and publish to others what was thus
revealed to them, till they had the Testimony of the Church that it was
Authentic. Having established the Authority of the Scripture upon its true
basis namely on its being Gods Word and speaking in it. Now forasmuch as no man
either is, or can be obliged to believe a lie: We may hence learn what to judge
of that Notion of Descartes and some others, Carts. Medit. 3. and Resp. ad
obj. 2^^. Wolzog. de interpr. Script. p. 24.
viz. Deum posse fallere si velit, that God can deceive if he please. No one
denies but there both may be, and are, those things in the Word of God, which
men may turn into occasions of being Deceived; all that is contended for, is
this, that there can be nothing in a Revelation from God, which may be a proper
Cause of Error. To say that God may Deceive if he would, is no less than to
affirm that he may cease to be God if he would. God can do nothing, but what in
sensu diviso, abstracting from his Decree to the contrary, he may Will to do.
If we prove therefore that it is repugnant to the Nature of God to be Willing
to deceive his Creatures, we at the same time demonstrate that it is
contradictory to his Power to do so. First then, If God may Deceive if He
please, what assurance have we but that he has, and may choose to do it? Nor is
it enough to say that he has told us that he will not; for if he may deceive
at all; I know nothing hinders, but that he may even then deceive us, when he
informs us he will not. Secondly, no one can deceive an other, but it must
proceed either from Ignorance, Error, or Malice; but all these interfere with
the Nature of God, and by consequence this posse fallere lies cross to his
Nature also. To deceive argues either want of Wisdom, Goodness or Veracity, and
therefore in no sense can God Deceive, seeing he can neither cease to be Wise,
nor give over to be Good, nor fail to be True. Thirdly, though a finite,
ignorant, and mistaken Creature, may impose upon us, without saying one thing,
when he thinks another: Yet it is impossible that an Infinite, Wise, and
Omniscient Being should deceive any, but that at the same time he must lie: But
that God cannot lie, we have both the Testimony of Scrpture Tit. 1.2. and the
highest assurance that Reason can give us. Hence no one ever acknowledged a
Deity, but he withal included in his Nature (...), to speak nothing but truth.

. 9. Having unfolded the Nature and Quality of the Motives, that our assent to
the Divinity of Scripture is raised on; we may hence infer, that our Belief of
the Bibles being the Word of God, is Divine and Infallible. For as Doctor
Hammond says in another case, Of the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion.
Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
if the Person affirming be Infallible, then is the Belief of such a Person
Infallible also. So if the Grounds of our Assent to the Scriptures being a
Revelation from God, be Infallible, our Assent which is built upon these
Grounds, is Infallible likewise. Assents are not specificated and Denominated
from their Objects, nor yet from the Faculties that elicite them, but from the
Foundations and Grounds on which they are raised. Whilst then the Motives upon
which we believe the Scripture, are more than Moral, our assurance of it is
Divinity is more than Moral also. For as we distinguish between the Consequent
and the Consequence, the thing inferred, and the manner of Inferring it; and as
we reckon every Consequent rightly deduced from an Infallible Antecedent to be
Infallible also, though the Faculty by which it is deduced be in it is Nature
Fallible, and in it is Operation liable to prevaricate and mistake: So every
Assent built upon infallible Inducements, is an Infallible Assent, though the
Instruments by which the Assurance of the Existence of such Inducements
arriveth with us, may in their Nature be liable to Error. Besides, the
Incertitude of the Subject or Mind, does not at all weaken the Certainty of the
Object, or the Certainty of it is Motives. That God is, is in it self certain;
and there are Indubitable Arguments by which his Being may be demonstrated,
though all the World should Hesitate either about his Existence, or suspect a
Fallacy in the Media of it is Probation. The Incertitude of the Mind does not
arise from any Fallacy of the Media, but from want of Evidence into, and
Cognition of them. The principal Grounds of our Receiving the Bible for the
Word of God, are it is Internal Motives, or Arguments impressed upon it; nor is
the manner of it is Conveyance from Age to Age of so great Import in this
Matter, as some do imagine. For should we have Light on it by chance, or had it
dropped out of the Clouds, yet while it carries these Signatures upon it which it
does, we might by the mere Exercise of our Rational Faculties, without the
Testimonials of any Man or Church, have concluded that it could have proceeded
from none but from God. And should it be granted, that the conveying down the
Miracles, and other External Evidences, that are brought in Confirmation of the
Divine Inspiration of the Bible, is done by Humane and Fallible means; yet it
no ways follows, that our Assent to the Scriptures being the Word of God,
though built upon those motives, is Fallible For Tradition is not the Formal
Ground of our belief in this case, but only a means and Instrument of handing
the Grounds of it to us. Nor do I think but that it may be defended, that as
the External Motives upon which we receive the Scripture for the Word of God,
are in themselves Infallible, that they are also infallible in their manner of
conveyance to us. For as it may be demonstrated that the first Reporters of
these Evidences were infallibly inspired in the Reports they make, and in the
writing of the Records which they left behind them, so it may be likewise
demonstrated that the Providence of God has watched over the preserving them
down to us. The exception made by a very learned Person, that there are degrees
of Certainty as to the Divinity of the Scripture, whereas there cannot be
degrees of infallibility; May I think easily be taken off. For if by Degrees of
Infallibility, he mean no more but that there are some who have their Faith
established upon more Media, than others have theirs; There are thus degrees of
Infallibility, as well as there are degrees of Certainty. And though Faith
superstructed upon any infallible Medium be Essentially an an Infallible Faith:
yet that which is built upon a plurality of such Media, may be styled a faith
intensively and gradually more Infallible. But if by Infallibility, Actus qui
ex his Principiis procedit, certus est and infallibilis, quamvis illi, qui hunc
actum elicit, ejus Infallibilitas non semper sit comperta. Compton. Tom.
poster. in Thom. Disp. 9. Sect. 5.
he mean the infallibility of the Mind, then I must crave leave to say, that it
is not to the purpose. For as in an Apodictical Syllogism, there may be a
certainty both in the Consequent and Consequence, and yet our mind, through
either not discerning the necessary connection between the Terms of the
Antecedent, or not seeing into the regular and orderly deduction of the
Consequent from the Antecedent, may remain uncertain: So our Assent built upon
unerrable Motives, is an infallible Assent, though the mind in the mean time
through not discovering the Infallibility of those Motives, may remain subject
to doubts and fears. And indeed the Schoolmen call the Certitude of the Act
only by the Name of a Certainty of Infallibility; whereas they style the
Certitude of the Mind by the name of a Certainty of Adhesion. Compton. Tom.
post. Disp. Dis. 8. Sect. 1.
The Infallibility of the Act of Assent, results from the Infallible Certainty
of the motives which ground such assent; but the firm Adhesion of the mind, or
that which we have called the Infallibility of the mind, though it radically
arise from the Nature and quality of the motives, yet it does withal and that
immediately connotate a perception of the motives themselves that they are
Infallible, and such as we may venture our Faith upon, without either fear,
doubts or Jealousies. And herein lies our first Duty about the Scriptures, that
our Faith answer their Credibility, and that the Adhesion of our Minds to them
be as firm as the Objects themselves are Immutable, or the motives afforded us
in their Confirmation, are Infallible and sure.

. 10. Having declared the great serviceableness of Reason in demonstrating the
Divinity of the Scripture, we are next enquire into the use of it in our
attainment to the sense and meaning of the Word. God in vouchsafeing the World
a supernatural Revelation, supposes us not only furnished with the sensitive
Faculties of Seeing and Hearing, but endowed with intellectual principles by
which we may understand it, judge of, and assent to it. Were we destitute of
the latter, Scripture were of no more significancy to us, than to Brutes: and
were the former denied us, we were no more capable of being transacted with in
this way, than Stocks and Stones are. Now the letter of the Bible without the
genuine sense of it is not properly the Scripture; nor will it avail us to any
end or purpose, more than the having a shell without a kernel. Words are of no
further use, than as they are representations of conceptions and Images of
things. Could we communicate our Conceptions to one another immediately, or by
any other signs, and that with the same facility and certainty as we do by
Words, there would be no Occasion for Words, nor any need of them. As
conceptions are the representation of things in the mind, so words are the
representation of these conceptions to others. But forasmuch as we can have no
perception of the thoughts of another though he should express them in Speech
or writing, unless we first know that such and such words are in the use of
mankind applied to denote such and such things, therefore all words as they are
Manifestative signs of Conceptions, so they are Suppositive signs of things.
And though they be first Indicative of Conceptions in the intention of the
Speaker, yet as to execution with respect to the hearer, they are first
Manifestative of things; for unless we know what things such and such words are
ordained to signify, they can be no interpreters of the thoughts of him that
Speaks. I know no greater disparagement that can be put upon the Bible, nor
affront that can be offered to the Author of it, than to style it, a little Ink
variously figured in a Book, or a few unsensed Characters: And yet at this rate
do the Papists frequently talk. It is of the essence of words properly taken,
to be significative. For this end were they invented and appointed, and it is
this that gives them their Form. Brute Animals though they may be taught to
utter many Words, yet because they understand not truly and really any thing
they say, therefore they cannot be said be said properly to Speak. To affirm,
that by the Scriptures we cannot mean the sense of them, but only a Book of
such and such unsensed Characters; is to degrade God below a Man, and to treat
a writing endited by Him, more opprobriously than we will allow our own Scribes
to be dealt withal. Do we not judge and account other Books to be Interpreters
of their thoughts and judgments that wrote them; and shall this be denied to
God? If there be not a sense intrinsecally included in every Word and sentence
of the Scripture, he was ill employed that gave it forth. In brief, if words be
devoid of sense, when they are Written, they are also devoid of it when they
are spoken; Speech and writing no otherwise differing, but that the one is the
Register, Substitute and Vicarious of the other. If the Scripture have not a
Sense Originally in it self and essentially belonging to it, it can never have
any, seeing for the Church to affix a sense to it, is only to declare her own
sense, not its; and indeed to impose both upon God and Man. Now God in giving
forth the Revelation of his will, not only inspired the Penmen of the Bible, as
to the Doctrines and things they delivered, but as to the Words, Terms and
Expressions in which they declared them. It was God himself that spoke in the
Prophets, Heb. 1.1. The very Words they used were (...), Words which the Holy
Ghost put into their hearts and Mouths. 1 Cor. 2.13. The (...) was (...). The
Writing, or Word written was by Inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3.16. And surely
God, if he please, can speak in as plain Words as any of h^s Creatures can do.
Men many times through some defect in their Judgment, or through a penu^y of
Words, or through an incongruous disposition and texture of them, are at a loss
to express themselves intelligibly; but to none of these imperfections is God
incident, and therefore if he please he may declare himself so as that men may
understand him. Now Words that are Intelligible when they are spoken, are as
Intelligible when they are Written. Yea, there are advantages of understanding
them better in the one case, than in the other. We can better observe the
Restriction and Ampliation of Terms; the quality of every particular
proposition; the connection of an Enunciation that is obscure with what is more
clear going before, and following after; the light that it receive's from
expressions to the same purpose, in other parts of the Book; the Genius of the
Style in general; the nature of the several periods; the manner and Form of
Argumentation, and a hundred things more which we can better search into in the
perusal of a written Book, than we can do by the swift and transitory hearing
of an Oral Discourse. Now as God can speak as plainly as any of his Creatures
can, and as Words are at least as easy to be understood when they are written,
as when they are Spoken: So we have no Reason to think that God affects
obscurity or envies that men should understand him. Men being influenced by
Pride, may endeavor not to be understood, that they may be admired, and may
seek estimation by studying to be obscure: And many of the Ancient Philosophers
are justly arraigned upon this account. Heraclitus grew famous by the only
obscurity of his Wri^^^gs. The Platonic and Pythagorick numbers grew into a
proverb for their Darkness. It is said even of Aristotle, that being reproved
by Alexander for publishing his Acroamaticks he should make this reply, that
though they were (...), made public, yet they were (...) not Published. There
is nothing more notorious than that there have been some writers in all Ages
who have endeavored not to be understood: But this is every way as much
repugnant to the Nature of God as Pride or envy are. It is Inconsistent with
his Wisdom, to give out the Bible for the end which he did, and yet to do it
in such a manner as that it cannot be understood. Nor is it agreeable to his
Holiness, Justice, or Goodness to leave the Doctrines of the Bible
Unintelligible, when he has made it our Duty to know them.

Having made appear that the Scripture has a sense, and that this Sense may be
known, and that it is the main thing which we are to look after. It is now time
that we should intimate what we mean by the sense of the Scripture. By the
sense of the Scripture then, we Understand that which the Words according to
the Intention of the Holy Ghost do signify. We are not to bring senses to the
Scripture, but to receive them from it. It is his Mind and Will we are to learn
who endited the Bible, and therefore are not to impose Minds and thoughts upon
it. And when I speak of Scripture Words, I do not mean letters, nor syllables,
nay nor Words apart, but entire propositions, Sentences, Enunciations,
paragraphs, yea Chapters and Books. Nor can we judge rightly of the sense of
Words but by considering them as they lie in propositions, nor ought we to
determine of the sense of a proposition but in relation to the verse, Chapter
and Book where it occurres, yea nor without having a respect to the whole and
entire Systeme of the Bible.

There is but one sense of Scripture which we may call Literal, Dogmatical, or
Historical. I call that sense Literal which God does intend in the Words,
whether the Words be taken properly or tropically. That which arises from a
figurative acceptance of the Word, Non^negamus dari Sensum Scripturae
compositum, seu duabus partibus constantem; in quo, voces rem quandam, res illa
aliam divina nacuraque reru^ consentanea ordinatione Significat Bisterfield.
disp. de script. p 34*
is as truly a Literal sense, as that which flows from their proper
acceptance. In texts of Scripture where Types are laid down, in which other
things typified are intended, there is not a twofold sense of the Words, but
there is one only of the Words, and the other is of the Types themselves: which
being designed to prefigure other things do accordingly carry a key along with
them by which they may be unlocked. I do not deny, but that of one Sense of a
Text there maybe two parts, namely when those things which are immediately
signified, do denote or at least lead us to something more Sublime. Though even
in this case there be but one proper sense of the Words, namely the Literal,
the Mystical being not so much the sense of the Words, as occasioned by, and
built upon the things signified. Or if you will, there is that (...) and
habitude between the Literal sense and the Mystical, that they do both together
make up one entire, complete sense of the place. Yea, it may be said that in
all propositions which admit a Literal and a Mystical sense, though there be
but one Explicit Enunciation, yet there are two implicitly. And if any have a
mind upon this account, to distinguish betwixt the Literal sense and the
Mystical, they may for me, nor will I quarrel with them. But to assign a
plurality of coordinate or Ambiguous senses to one and the same text,
Obscuritas quae est in Subjecto n^n est transferenda in Objectu^. Spa^hem.
Disp. de Script. i.. 4 i.
is the height of Madness, invented only to reproach the Scripture and to make
way for the Authority of the Church in the expounding of it, Aliud est agere de
obscuritate Subjecti seu personaru^, aliud de obscuritate in Objecto, seu
Scripturarum. Morus causa Dei. p. 18.16.

Nihil impedit Scripturam esse claram and perspicuam, and hominem nihilominus,
esse (...). Coccei. Sum. Theolog. cap. 6.

Perspicuitas Scripturae est proprietas insita quam and semper retinet, homo
licet illuminatus sit necne; quamvis non illuminato homine istam claritatem
idem non videat Heidan. Causa Dei lib. cap. 6. Debemus distinguere inter
Obscurum in se and absolute, and quod Obscurum est nobis and quoad nos. Mares.


and is indeed repugnant not only to the perspicuity of the Scripture, but to
the unity of Truth, and the end of Gods revealing the Word, which is to
instruct us in Faith and Obedience; for wheresoever there is a Multiplicity of
Disparate Senses, we can never be sure that we have attained to the true
meaning of any one proposition. Now when we enquire into the Sense of
Scripture, and asse^t its being Intelligible; we always distinguish betwixt the
perspicuity of the Object, and the capacity of the Subject actually to
understand it. The easiness of the Scripture to be understood in respect of it
self, and our disposedness to understand it right, are things vastly distant.
The Sense of the Word may be in it self facile and plain, though in the mean
time it remain dark and obscure to those who have shut their eyes, or that have
their understanding defiled, tinctured, and darkened by fuliginous vapors. The
Bible is only plain to such who apply themselves to the study of it without
prepossessions, prejudice, and forestalled judgments, and are withal humble
and diligent in the use of means to find out the meaning of it. Though the
Ethereal Regions be replenished with rays of light emitted from the great
Luminary, yet it is both necessary that men have eyes, and that they open them,
in order to their discovering and receiving the benefit of it. If our
understandings either from that darkness and ignorance which they are enveloped
and muffled with through the Fall, or from malignant Habits occasioned either
by unhappy education, or sensual lusts, do not discern the sense and meaning of
Scripture; it is no impeachment of its perspicuity, but a manifestation of our
weakness, corruption and folly. Besides, when we speak of the plainness of the
Scripture and its easiness to be understood, we always put a difference betwixt
Scripture Texts relating to Doctrines of Faith and manners, which are
absolutely necessary to be known; and such of whose Sense we may be safely
ignorant, the Doctrines they refer to, having no indispensable connection with
Salvation. The whole Will and Mind of God, as to all that is needful to be
known in order to our duty and Happiness, is revealed in the Scripture without
any such ambiguity or obscurity as should hinder it from being understood,
though God in his Sovereign Wisdom has in many things whose simple Ignorance
does not interpose with Salvation, left many hard and difficult Texts; partly
to make us sensible of the weakness of our Understandings, partly to employ our
minds unto diligence, partly to induce us to implore Divine instruction, and to
make us depend upon God for illumination, and partly to exercise our Souls unto
reverence: But in Fundamental Truths the Case is otherwise, for the end giving
measure, and fixing bounds unto means, it is not consistent with the Wisdom,
and Goodness, yea nor Justice of God, to leave that hard to be understood,
which upon no less peril than the hazard of Salvation, he has required the
indispensable knowledge of. As first, principles of Reason need no proof of
their Truth, being self-evident to every one that understands the Import of
Terms: So Fundamental Doctrines of Religion carry an Evidence in the plainness
and perspicuity of their Revelation, that every one who reads the Bible without
prejudice and a perverse mind, may be satisfied that such Doctrines are there
proposed. Nor is it any Argument that those Texts of Scripture where such
Articles are revealed, are not easy to be understood, because some out of
prejudice or perverseness have wrested them to a Corrupt sense; seeing God did
not endite the Bible for the froward and Captious, but for such who will read
it with a free and unprejudiced mind, and are willing to come to the knowledge
of the Truth. For, as Aristotle says in the Case of the first principles of
Reason (...); A self Evident Principle is not Evident to all men, but only to
such who have found and undepraved Understandings. Topic. 6. Cap. 4. So it is
no impeachment of the perspicuity of the Revelation of Fundamental Truths of
Religion, that men who have their minds defiled and darkened by Lusts, infected
with evil Opinions, and filled with prejudices, do not believe and acknowledge
them. And by the way, while all Truths absolutely necessary to be known, are
easy and plain, and while we are indispensably obliged to believe and receive
whatsoever is so, an Enumeration of Fundamental Truths is neither necessary,
nor useful, and possibly not safe. Now as all Doctrines necessary to be
Understood are so revealed in the scripture, that they are easy enough to be
so; so being understood, they are as well the Standard and Measure by which
dark and obscure Texts are to be interpreted, as the Key to the opening of
them. As Curve lines are best discerned when applied to straight, so are
Heterodox senses imposed on Obscure Texts of Scripture best perceived, when
examined by their Habitudes to necessary and plain Truths. Whatsoever bears not
a Symmetry with the Foundation, can be no Superstruction of God: And whatsoever
Notion either Formally, or Virtually, directly or consequentially, interfere's
with a fundamental Truth, though never so many Texts be pressed in the proof of
it, we maybe sure both of its falsity and that they are all wrested and
mistaken. But though the Scripture be most plain in points necessary to
Salvation, yet no one Text of the Bible is in it self unintelligible; Discourse
of the true Grounds of Faith annexed to his Divine Dialogues.
for as Dr. More says, to affirm that the Holy Writ is in it elf
unintelligible, is aequivalent to the pronouncing it nonsense, or to averr that
such and such Books or Passages of it were never to be understood by men, is to
insinuate as if the Wisdom of God did not only play with the Children of men,
but even fool with them. Mons. Wolzogen therefore in his late Book de
Interpret Scripturarum, has not only in this matter shamefully betrayed the
Protestant cause, but reflected reproach upon the Spirit of God. There are
somthings, says he, in the Scripture which we cannot understand, Fatemur
inquit, esse quaedam in Scripturis quae non valeamus assequi, non tantum vitio
mentium nostrarum, aut sublimitate rerum, sed ipsa singulari quadam
constitutione Scripturae p. 16. ita verba composuit and orationem, ut sciret si
in eam incideret peccator, inductum iri in errorem p. 172. ita loquitur
quandoque Deus ut nolit intelligi p. 173. Haec tamen dispensatio Divini numinis
quae varia est and infinita prepemodumomnem continet obscuritatis Causam, quae
videtur non a nobis sed a Scriptura proficisci. etc. p. 174.
not through any defect or fault of our Minds, or through the Sublimity and
Majesty of the Doctrines themselves, but through the Frame of the Scripture it
self, and the manner in which they are revealed. If there be but one passage in
the Bible in it self unintelligible, I cannot imagine any use that it should be
off, or that it should answer any end, which we must needs suppose so wise an
Agent as God had in the giving of it forth. Besides, when we discourse of the
Serviceableness of Reason toward the attainment of the Sense and meaning of
the Scripture, we put a vast difference betwixt discerning the Literal,
Grammatical and Historical sense of it, and the discerning it in a saving and
Spiritual manner. I know our Divines sometimes express this as if they
distinguished betwixt the Grammatical or Literal and the Spiritual sense. But
their intendment is not to diversifie the things themselves, and what is
understood in such places, but the manner and way in which they are understood.
Though the Natural man may discover the true and genuine intendment of a text
no less (may be) than he that is born of God; Distinctionem sensus Grammatici,
and intelligentiae spiritualis, ad Intelligendi modum referimus. Vogelsang.
Exercitat. Theolog. Exercit. 6. p. 101.

Haud quaeritur de intelligenda Scriptura, sed de salutariter intelligenda.
Hoornbeck. Socinian. confutat Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 5.


yet their perception is not of one and the same kind, nor do they understand
it after one and the same manner. Though the Sense therefore be Physically the
same, yet in the way of discovering it, there is a Moral difference.

The mere Rational mind may discern the literal Sense of Scripture
propositions, Aliter enim homo naturalis videt, spiritualis aliter, vel eande
licet veritate^ videat uterque. idem quando repraesentatur homini naturali
objectum, ac spirituali, uterque idem necessario recipit, at pro suo quisque
Modulo; Spiritualis qua talis, spiritualiter; naturalis e contr^ naturaliter,
but without a supernatural Irradiation from the Spirit of life, there can be
no saving knowledge of them. The Spirit which breathed out the Scripture at
first, is in this Sense the only Interpreter of it. And as the Text is his, so
also is the Gloss. He that unveiled the Object, must enlighten the eye; for we
need as much the spirit of Wisdom for the one, as the Spirit of Revelation for
the other. Joann Vander Waeyen pro vera and genuina Reformatorum sententia de
Interpret Script. lib. 2. p. 101.

Duplicem sensum non fingimus, uti splendide mentiuntur Remonstrantes, sed
ejusdem sensus diversos recipiendi modos, prout diverso aguntur homines
principio. Idem. ibid. p. 226 vid. etiam Trigland, Antapol cap. 3.




See among many other places Ephesians. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. 1 John 2.20 and 5.20.
John 6.48. Psalm 119.18, 27. But seeing the Socinians and Remonstrants preclude
the necessity of the influence of the spirit of God upon the mind, in order to
the understanding the meaning of the Scripture either one way or an other;
Ostorod. Institut. cap. 1. Catiches. Racov. cap. 3.

Remonstrant. Confess. cap. 1. Episcop. disp. 3. de Script. perspicuitate.
Veluthuis. de usu Rationis, p. 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 194. Wolzog. 209. de
interpret. Script. p. 12.62, 63, 126.


and forasmuch as diverse who are not willing to be catalogued amongst them, do
yet in this fight under their banners; I shall (...) produce something in proof
of it. (1) We have the Testimony of the Scripture, that Reason without
auxiliary beams can never discern Spiritual things Spiritually. The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.14. Where by (...) the Natural man, we are neither to understand the (...)
the babe, the Infirm, the Weak. For though such be often unskilful in the Word
of Righteousness, neither able to frame due conceptions of the mysteries of the
Gospel, nor thoroughly disposed to a due savouring of them, nor fully capable of
improving them to all the holy ends, and in all the useful deductions and
inferences to which they are designed, and to which they are admirably
accommodated: Yet the things of the Spirit of God are not (...) foolishness to
them. Nor are we by (...) here, to understand only the Sensual man, or one that
is wholly sunk into the Animal Life, and enslaved to the satisfaction of his
corrupt appetites, and inordinate fleshly desires; seeing the natural man in
this place is directly opposed to the (...), the spiritual or regenerate man;
and to the (...) and the (...), the Wise, and the Scribe; to the (...) and
(...), the Disputer and the Princes of this World, qui dominabantur in scholis,
Who bare sway and rule in the Schools. But by the Natural man, we are to
understand the mere Rational man, even him that does most excolere animam,
Cultivate his Intellectuals. (...) the person endowed with mere humane Wisdom
as the Greek Scholiast says. Now! what is affirmed concerning this Souly man?
(...), He receives not the things of the Spirit of God, (...), neither can he
know them. There is not only an (...) a dimsightedness, but an (...) an
impotency through a disproportion in his faculty with respect to them. They are
seen in another light, than he is endowed with; (...), they are spiritually
discerned. They are known only by a divine irradiation and conquering sunbeam
of the Spirit of life upon the mind. And therefore God is said to shine into
our hearts to give the (...) light (i. e. the clear and evident manifestation)
of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.
(2.) We have the attestation of Reason, which tells us that nothing is well
known, but by that which has a just analogy to it. (...) every thing is best
understood by that which bears a resemblance of it. Things of sense and life
are only known by vital and Sentient Faculties. Vegetables do not admit every
particle that comes to nourish them, but only such as bear a proportion to
their own pores. Where there is not a congruity betwixt the Subject and the
Object, the Object can never be discerned in its true light. As the eye cannot
behold the Sun, (...), unless it have some resemblance of the Sun in it self;
no more can any Man understand the things of God in a due manner (...), unless
he be made to partake of of the Divine Image. Every thing acts in a way
consimilar to its own Nature; and therefore let the Objects be never so
spiritual, Sine Spiritu arcana spiritus quaerere, nihil aliud est, quam sine
luce videre velle. Rivet. Isagog. ad Script. S. cap. 18.. 3.
the natural man can never know them in a way, analogous to them, i. e.
spiritually, but only in a natural way, that alone being homogeneous to
himself. We are told in philosophy, that quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis, every thing is received in a way agreeable to that which receives
it. And therefore where there is nothing but a natural Mind, it can act no
otherwise than in a Natural way. In a word, without a vital alliance and
cognation to Spiritual things, we can never understand them in a Spiritual
saving Manner. I take these two here in an aequipollent sense, without meddling
with the question, whether there be no difference betwixt knowing Gospel truths
in a Spiritual manner, and the knowing them in a Saving. (3) If we be in the
alone Virtue of our Rational Faculties adapted to a due discerning the things
of the Spirit of God, and that i^ their proper light; I see no reason why an
unregenerate man should be more styled blind in reference to the Word of God,
than in reference to Euclids Elements, or Aristotle's Organon. Nor indeed why he
should be esteemed so inept for that, as for these. I might add in the fourth
place, Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. prestat. and passim.
that according to the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, besides the external
Revelation of the Word, there was also an internal Inspiration of the Spirit
supposed necessary, in order to the understanding of it in a saving manner. And
in this, the Church of England, not to speak of Foreign Churches, has
hitherto harmonised with the Ancients. For though a few are, and have been
otherwise minded, yet they are as far from deserving the name of the Church of
England, as an excrescency is from obtaining the name of the Body upon which it
grows. The way and manner how the Spirit assists us in the understanding of
spiritual things spi^itually, I shall not at this time enquire largely after;
only in brief we may conceive of it thus. (1) There is either through the
immediate in dwelling of the Spirit, or through the Communication of new
principles, a (...) an ablation of every thing extraneous; a dissipation of
those fuliginous vapors that both obnubilate the mind, and do imbuere Objectum
color suo. By the purification of the Heart, the Understanding is clarified.
Scales drop off from our Eyes, and the (...) Governing Faculty becomes purged
from those prepossessions, prejudices, and Lusts which obstructed its
perceptive Powers. (2) By the Spirit of Life in the new Birth, the subject is
elevated and adapted to the Object. Grace renders the mind idoneous for, and
consimilar to Truth. The Eye is not so much relieved by the prospective and
Telescope, as the Understanding is by Grace. (3) There is a suggesting of Media
for the Elucidating of Truth. Exporrigit radios suoscaelestes per universum Dei
verbum. hoornbeck* Theolog. practic. part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 3.
A reviving in the Memory clear texts, to illustrate such as are dark. (4)
There is frequently an irradiation of the Word it self. An attiring and
clothing it with a garment of Light, that is impatient either of Cloud or
Shadow. And upon the whole, the Soul both feels, and is transformed into what
it knows. Its apprehensions are no longer dull and languid, but vigorous and
affective. As every thing relisheth according to its contemperation to the
palate, so the mind being seasoned with Goodness, tastes a pleasure and
delight, and feels an efficacy in what it understands. It sees things in a
steady Light, and exerts its self in all suitable operation, both in matter of
internal acts, and outward Duties. However, though we contend that the Spirit
of Wisdom is absolutely necessary for the Understanding the sense of
Scripture-propositions in a Spiritual saving manner, yet we do not deny, but
that the mere Rational mind, may discern the Literal Sense of the Word, in a
way congruous to its own state, and condition. It is true, even with reference
to the perception of the bare Literal sense, that the person renewed in the
Spirit of his Mind, is greatly advantaged above the Unregenerate Man. For the
Spirit of God makes us of quick Understanding in the fear of the Lord. Isay.
11.2, 3. The mind is defecated from those impure fogs and mists of Lust and
Passion, which greatly hinder and prejudice the Understanding in the perception
of Natural Truths, and much more of Supernatural and Divine. Grace both helps
us to use Reason aright for the discovering the true meaning of Scripture
Enunciations; and furnishes us with a holy Sagacity of smelling out, what is
right and true, and what is false and perverse; and especially by impressing,
implanting, and working in us the thing revealed, it confirms us in, and
causes us rather immediately to feel, than logically to discern, the sense of
such and such a place. Yet I know none who affirms that to conceive the sense
of Theological propositions, the supernatural Light of the Spirit is absolutely
necessary. For if it were thus, Infidels which reject them, would not disclaim
them as False and Incredible, but as unconceivable and unintelligible. Yea
thousands destitute of the Divine Unction, have in a theorical way actually
understood the Bible. All that have usefully commented on the Scripture, were
not born of God. The means conducive to the Understanding of the true sense of
Scripture, are besides Humility, Teachableness, frequent Reading of the Bible,
and prayer; an acquaintance with the Signification and use of Words, the Nature
and kinds of Rhetoric, with the Rules and conditions of Argumentation, etc.
Three things occur to to our consideration, in enquiry after the sense and
meaning of any Book: The mind of the Writer, the Words in which he declares it,
and the connection, habitude and relation betwixt the Words spoken, and the Mind
of the Speaker. What ever there is often in Men, yet in God there is never a
separation betwixt the Judgment himself has of things, and that which the
words he makes use of, manifest and import. He can declare nothing as our
Duty, but what indeed is so, and what himself judges so to be. Men having then
by common consent and agreement established, that such and such conceptions
shall be united with such Words, accordingly whenever such a word is heard or
read, such a conception does arise in our minds; and if at any time we would
make known to others such a Cogitation, such words do presently occurr, to
express it by. To arrive therefore at the knowledge of the sense of the
Scriptures, There is nothing required on the part of the Object, but that it be
intelligibly written, and that the words in which it is given forth, signify
according to the Institution, Use and Custom of mankind. For as one says,
Scriptura non esset Scriptura nisi verbis, Joann. Vander Waeyen de Interpret.
Scrip. advers. Wolzog. lib. 2 p. 5.
ex usu significantibus, scripta extaret. And here the knowledge of the
Etymology of Words, their usage in Exotic Authors, is of great import, but
that which is chiefly to be attended to, in the sensing of Scripture, is their
use in Sacred Writers. God is many times pleased to restrain or enlarge the
signification of Words, as in His Wisdom he judges meet. Hence many Terms
taken up from other Disciplines, Arts, and usages, are peculiarly applied and
confined to denote things otherwise, Deus usus est genere sermonis practico,
and Oeconomico potius quam th^orico and Acr^amatico, adeoque phrasis and
enunciata non tam theoretice velut in Acroaterio Dialecticorum, vel in schola
aliqua metaphysica vel captioso litigatorum foro, quam practice, veluti in domo
disciplinae paternae, intelligenda sunt. Conrad. Berg. de fid. Cathol. dissert
6. These. 179, 180, 222.
than they do there, whence they are borrowed. God uses rather a practical and
Oeconomical way of speaking, than a Theorical and Acroamatical. Nor do
Scripture Enunciations, signify philosophically, as in Dialectical Schools,
but practically, according to their Use in Families and common converse. And
unless there be very urgent Grounds to the Contrary, we are to determine the
signification of Words, not with respect to their Etymology and Grammatical
propriety, or their usurpation in Schools, but according to their popular Use,
Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquendi.

Many a Text otherwise plain, has been rendered abstruse, and unintelligible,
by men's glossing it in analogy to their Metaphysical notions and querks;
fathering those nice and subtle fancies to Terms occurring in the Scripture,
which they find the Schoolmen have applied them to, in their wanton, luxurious
and Aenigmatical Debates. Yea, the same Words are in Scripture, used sometimes
in a larger, sometimes in a narrower signification. And in such cases, the only
Rule to determine their import, is the context and subject Matter. Hence the
Hebrews have a saying, that he preverts the Word from its true intendment, who
does not observe what precedes and what follows. And the Civil Law tells us,
that, incivile est tota Lege non inspecta, Particulas quasdam de Scripturis
eligunt quibus decipia^t, non connectentes quae infra and supra sunt, ex quibus
voluntas and intentio Scriptoris posset intelligi. August* contr. Adiamant.
cap. 4.
ex una ejus tantum part proposita, judicare velle de toto legis sensu: It is
an irrational thing to judge of the whole Law by, consulting only one part of
it. Scripture texts hang together in a chain of mutual dependence, and to know
the Sense of one Scripture, requires a due consideration of many. And though
some passages of the Bible be in themselves difficult, yet there is such light
reflected on, and lent to them, in other places, that the meaning of God in
them, may be sufficiently understood. And this is what our Divines generally
intend, when they say that Scripture is the Interpreter of Scripture. God in
the enditing the Bible, has spoken with that perspicuity, and accommodation of
himself to our Capacity, that we may know what he aims at and intends; and if
any Texts be obscure and dark, yet by those rays of Light which they borrow
from other places, their sense and meaning may be easily understood. Nor is
there one Text alleged by the Anonymous Author of Philosophia Scripturae
Interpres, after all his operose and impertinent wrangling to prove the
Scripture ambiguous, and obscure, which may not be plainly unfolded, either by
a due observation of the subject matter, and Context, or by comparing it with
parellel places, where the same things are declared in equivalent Terms, but
with more clearness and evidence; without the least necessity of recourse to
Philosophy as the Standard of sensing the Bible. Nor is the forementioned Book
any thing else but a plea for Socinianism; only instead of Reason, we have
Philosophy advanced to a Dictatorship over the word of God, and Descartes made
master of the Chair. And whereas Monsr. Wolzogius in a pretended reply to the
said Author, has constituted the Custom and usage of Speech, the only Rule of
Interpreting Scripture; I must crave leave to say, that he confounds what he
ought to have distinguished, namely the Rule of expounding the word with the
media of Interpretation. And besides, a knowledge of the usage of words in
common speech, is rather adapted to help us in the Verbal sense of Scripture,
usually called Version or Translation, than in the Exegetical and real Sense,
vulgarly and truly styled exposition. And withal, there are many things which
God designs our instruction in, by Words and Phrases as they lie in the Systeme
of the Bible, and in a Habitude to the things there treated of, which they were
never in Foreign Authors, or customary Speech among men, applied to the
manifestation of. Scripture is avowedly the best expositor of it self. God by
framing it in the manner he has done, by giving it such a Texture, and by
inculcating the same things in the greatest variety of expressions, has made
it self the alone measure by which it is fully to be understood, and has taken
upon himself to be suorum eloquiorum optimus Interpres. Now the line that in
order to our attaining the sense of Scripture we are to be guided by, is this:
That Scripture Phrases, Propositions, Paragraphs, Sections, etc. do actually
signify every thing, which in such a disposition and Texture, with reference
to the subject matter and context, and in Analogy to the Systeme of the whole
Bible, they can signify. I do not say, that they always excite that sense of
themselves, in the heart and mind of the Reader; Verba sacrae Scripturae actu
significant quicquid significare possunt. Hund. disp. 4. de verbo Dei.
but my meaning is, that they are then only rightly apprehended, and the
intendment of the Holy Ghost in them, fully attained, when this latitude of
signification is alow'd them. There are no empty frigid phraseologies in the
Bible, but where the expressions are most splendid, and lofty, there are
Notions and things enough to fill them out. God did not design to endite the
Scripture in a pompous tumid style, to amuse our fancies, or merely strike to
our Imaginations with the greater force, but to instruct us in a calm and
sedate way; and therefore under the most stately dress of words, there always
lies a richer quarry of things and Truths Words being invented to express
natural things and humane thoughts, the utmost signification they can possibly
bear, proves but scanty and narrow, when they are applied to the manifesting
Spiritual and celestial Objects. The serviceableness of this Notion against
Jews, Socinians, Arminians and others, lies in the view of every discerning
person, and the advantage I promise my self from it, Chap. 3. has led me to
suggest it here. How are the most plain and magnificent Testimonies in proof of
Christ's being the Messiah, the true God, Reconciling us by his death, man's
inability to Good, the necessity and efficacy of renewing Grace, etc. enervated,
by affixing some low, secondary, and metaphorical meaning to them; or by
turning the Scripture into mere Hyperboles, Allegories, rampant and empty
Schemes of Speech. Nor, secluding this from being the measure of our judging of
the sense of Scripture, is it possible to arrive at any Certa^nty about the
meaning of it. If it do not actually signify all and every thing which with
respect to the subject matter, the context, the agreement of one part with
another, and every part with the whole, it can signify; there is not one (...)
assignable, by which we can make a judgment what it does signify. God being
Omniscient, knows what all words are by men ordained to denote, and what import
they have in their combinations one with another, and in the several textures
into which they may be disposed; being Wise he can pitch upon such Words, and
digest them into that frame, as is most adapted to beget a Conception and
apprehension of those things in us, which he would instruct us in the knowledge,
and win us to the belief and obedience of; And being Veracious, Good and
Faithful, it is repugnant to his Nature to design the imposing on us, or the
leading us into Errors and Fallacies. Men either through unaccquaintedness with
the just Valor of Words, or through Ignorance of the Nature of things, or
through oscitancy and neglect in the Election of Terms, may diliver themselves
in expressions both too lofty for the things they intend, and dissonant to
their own Conceptions; but all these being inconsistent with the Divine
perfections, we dare admit no such thing in reference to him. It is the
character of the Spirit of man to speak much and in effect to say little, but
it is the Caracter of the Holy Spirit to speak little and therein to comprehend
much; nor do we thoroughly penetrate into Scripture Mysteries without enlarging
our Conceptions beyond the letter. The Style of the most reputed Orators is
for the most part too pompous, and flatulent for the subjects they treat of;
neither the Images which they form in their minds, nor the Arrayment of them in
Words, are adapted and proporpotioned to things. They are like boys walking
upon stilts, who seem higher then they are, and their discourses are like a
load of flesh in the body of man, that serves only to embarass it with an
unprofitable weight. But to imaigine so of God, or to ascribe (...), great
swelling words of vanity to him, 2 Pet. 218. Jud. 16. or to think that in the
enditing the Bible, he did (...), only feed us with gaudy phantasms, poetical
Schemes, and luxariunt phrases, is to impeach more than one of his perfections.
In a word, Gods design being to instruct us, and it being repugnant to His
Nature, either to be deceived himself in the nature of things, or to deceive
others, it necessarily follows that the Scripture does actualy dedenote all and
whatsoever it is capable of denoting. Nor are we in the interpreting of the
Word to restrain and confine its sense, Bonus In erpres non debet ipse Sensum
Scripturae coarctare; sed tam sumere late quam sumi potest. Sebast. Schmidt. de
Imag. Dei. cap. 4. p. 77.

Deus censendus est dixisse, quicquid ex suis dictis legitime colligitur, cum
non nesciverit, quas ex illis, homines recta ratione utentes, consequentias
nectere possent. Mares System. l^c. 1 These. 17.


but to take it in the greatest Latude of sign^fication it can bear, I shall
shut up this with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.6, 11. So likewise ye, except
ye utter by the Tongue (...) Words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? For ye shall speak into the Air: Therefore if I know not
(...) the meaning of the voice (the (...) posse vocis, the whole force, virtue,
power and signification of the Words) I shall be unto him that speaks a
Barbarian.

11. The next thing considerable with respect to the interest of Reason in
Religion, is its Use and serviceableness in drawing Consequences from Revealed
and supernatural Truths. And this follows from what we have said concerning the
sense of Scripture-propositions. It is by this means, that Divines have always
labored to clear Mysteries of Faith, by making appear the Connection of things
obscure with these that are plain, and those that are contested with these that
are not. It is by this Method also that the Fathers have refuted Heresies, by
showing that those evil Doctrines which they introduced into the Church, either
had not any agreement with the true Mysteries of Faith, or that they were
altogether opposite to them. To disclaim all Scripture Consequences and the
ministration of Reason in deducing them, is plainly to deny all the Connexions
Relations, dependencies, and oppositions of one thing to and upon an other* and
to betray Religion into the Hands of its Enemies. And as this is one of the
last, so I look upon it as one of the most shameful Refuges of the Romanists.
Finding themselves in their disputations about matters of Religion, foiled and
bafled by the Protestants, some of them have thought it their safest course to
renounce all Principles of Reason in the concernments of Faith, and to reject
all Conclusions as well inferred from premises, where both are of Revelation,
as where one only is of Faith and the other of Reason. It must be a desperate
Cause that cannot otherwise be maintaitained; And nothing but a failure in
other defenses would have reconciled them to a method pregnant with so many
absurdities. But when men are pre-engaged in the defense of a Cause, what will
they not rather seek relief from, than reject what their lusts, interests and
educations oblige them to? The first forgers of this new Armature forwarding
off the blows of Protestants, with the entertainment that the Invention met
with at Rome as well as Sorbon, he that has a mind to inform himself, may
learn from Vedelius in his Rationale Theologicum, and Bochart contre Veron. And
how far the Socinians those Idolaters of Reason when it serves their designs,
do conspire with the Papists to disparage it in this matter we are now
enquiring about, when it does not be-friend them, such as are inquisitive, may
read in Hoornbecks Socinianismus confutatus, Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 211.
But that we may address to the matter it self: By a Consequence we mean either
a proposition standing in that habitude, relation, and having that connection
with another, that if that be true, this is also true; or a proposition lying
in that repugnancy and opposition to another, that if the first be true, the
latter must be false. There is either that coherency betwixt them, that the one
infers and draws the other after it; or that contrariety that if truth be the
portion of the one, falsehood must fall to the lot of the other. Now
conclusions are of two kinds; first when there is nothing in the Antecedent but
what is in the Consequent, and this is always between two Terms and no more;
and these Terms are either convertible, as no Innocent person is a sinner,
therefore no sinner is an Innocent person: Or they are subalternate the one the
other, as every man is guilty before God, therefore this and that man is so: Or
else they are Terms Equivalent, as Believers have the guilt of sin remitted to
them, therefore their liableness to legal Wrath is removed. 2 dly. When there
is something In the Antecedent that is not in the Consequent, and to Conclusions
of this Nature, there are always required three Terms, and the Foundation of
deducing one proposition here from another, is either the connection, or
opposition that is betwixt the one and the other. All Conclusions are virtually
included in their premises, and he that assents to these, does in effect grant
those. It is all one whether both the premises be in Scripture, or one only be
there, the other being either fetched from undoubted Principles of Reason, or
evidence of Sense; for in all these Cases, the Conclusion is as much the Word
of God, as if it were in so many letters and sillables in the Bible. Hence that
common saying quaedam in Scripturis sunt, et dicuntur; quaedam in ii^dem sunt
etsi non dicantur: There are some things in the Scripture, and are accordingly
reported to be in them; and there are somethings in them, though they be not in
so many Words there related, etc. Men through Ignorance, ositancy, or the like,
do not always discern what arises and follows from what they say, and do
often therefore affirm that, from whence something does ensue, which they are so
far from holding, that they do detest it; and accordingly we frequently argue
against them, per deductionem ad absurdum seu impossible. But God always
foresees whatsoever follows upon every declaration he makes; Cum Deus sit
sapientissimus, italocutus est, ut quicquid possit concludi ex eo quod dixit,
velit inde concludi, nam hominum ea est oscitantia vel stultia aliquando, ut ea
dicant, ex quibus aliquid colligitur, quod minime velint Came. praelect. de
Eccles.
he understands all the hab^tudes, connexions, dependencies, and oppositions of
one thing upon and to another, and accordingly we not only may with safety,
but he expects that we should, infer and deduce from what he has said, all
and every thing that necessarily bears upon and follows from it. And though
what is thus inferred, be not in the Scripture, (...) in so many letters; yet
while it is there, either (...), in the equivalent, or (...) in the sense, or
(...) by way of Consequence, it may be truly said to be there (...) in effect.
And though some Conclusions lie more connected with the principles from which
they are deduced, than others, yet they are both equally true, providing the
principles be so, whence they are inferred. Let the trains of Ratiocination be
shorter or longer, nothing can flow from Truth but Truth; only there is more
difficulty in the deduction, and more liableness to mistake in the illation of
the latter, than the former. And accordingly we desire no man to assent to the
thing concluded, till he have examined, or at lest may, and be satisfied, that
there is nothing false and sophistical in the Way and Manner of its deducement.
Though our understandings be in some cases subject to mistake, yet there is no
ground to suppose that they universally do so. Though our Faculties be fallible
in their Ratiocinations, yet there are Connate Notions and Congenite Criteria,
by which we may discern, when they deceive us, and when not. There are certain
Rules which the universal Reason of mankind has agreed on as the Test and
Standard, to judge of legitimate deductions by, and of those we have as
infallible certainty, as that it is day when the Sun is in the Meridian. As we
discern pure Metal from embased, by bringing it to the touchstone, so we
discern regular Consequences from Sophistical, by incontested Maxims. To argue
agagainst the use of Reason in drawing Conclusions from undoubted Principles,
precludes the whole service of the Rational Faculty, and lead's to the worst of
Skepticism. Whosoever impeacheth the fitness of our understandings to draw
conclusions from evident Articles of Revelation, does equally endite them of
ineptitude to deduce Inferences from first Maxims of Natural Light. Scripture
principles are as certain as any in Philosophy, and they lie in the same
Habitudes of congruity and incongruity to other things, that first Principles
of Science do; and therefore if we may not argue from those, I see no reason
why it should be thought lawful to argue from these. Nor are we otherwise
secure in any Ratiocinations of Philosophy no more than Theology, unless God
had given us a Logic to instruct us in the Rules of Argumentation, as he has
given us the Scripture to inform us in matters of Faith and Obedience. In a
word, we must either implicitly resign our selves to the dictates of every one
that accosteth us, or we must as brutishly reject them; unless there be both a
Rule to which we may apply, and by which we may try them; and some Certain
Measures by which we may discern, whether we have rightly commensurated and
examined them in Order to discerning what of them is false, and what is true.
Now though Reason be the instrument of deducing Conclusions from Principles of
Faith, yet it is not the foundation and ground, on which we believe and assent
to the Truths so deduced. Nor does Reason judge of the Verity of the Conclusion,
but only of the regularity of the deduction of it. When an Architect applies
his line or square to a Building, they only are the Rule by which he judges of
the Symmetry of his Work, but it is his eye that serves him to discern how the
Work agrees to the Rule. It Is one thing, (as Austin says) to know the truth of
propositions, Aliud est nosse regulas Connexionum, aliud sententiaru^
veritatem, lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap. 33.

De Consequentia stature rationis certe opus est, (eadem scil. Logica est, ut
in Mathematicis, Physicis, Metaphysicis, sic etiam in S. Theologia) at vero de
consequente statuere, certe fidei solius est. Came.

Nemo nostrum docet quod Conclusio sit credenda ut Articulus fidei ratione
Consequentiae, credendam dicimus, quia est Verbum Dei, esse autem verbu^ Dei
consequentia ostendit. Hundius disp. 4. de Consequent; ex Scriptura. Non enim
consequentias proprie sic dictas afferimus ad probandam aut fundandam
conclusionem fidei, sed tantu^ ad ostendam veritatem connexionum. Videl.
Rationale Theolog. lib. 3. cap. 4.


and another to understand the rules of Connection and Laws of Argumentation.
And as Camero says, to determine of the goodness of a Conclusion, or its
regular illation from its premises, is the Work of Reason, and that according
to the Rules of Logic, which is the same in Theology, as in Natural
Philosophy, or in Mathematics; but to determine of the Truth of the Conclusion
is the Work of Faith, through the Testimony of the Word. As a Demonstration in
Geometry does not constitute that a Truth which was not one before, but only
evidenceth it to the Mind: So we do not believe a Conclusion to be an Article
of Faith upon the formal Reason of its deduction, but upon the Authority of God
in the Bible; Argumentation serves only to show that God, has said it. As
Computation in Arithmetic does not constitute the Total of the lesser Numbers,
but only collects and adjusts it; so Ratiocination from Principles of
Revelation does not make a Conclusion to be the Word of God, but only shows
that it is so. Nor is there any weight in that exception, that in all
Conclusions of this Nature, one of the Premises only is of Revelation, the
other being fetched either from Reason, Sense, or Experience. For as that act
which we could not have exerted without the assistance and influence of a
supernatural subjective Principle, is rightly styled a Supernatural act, though
it be Elicited by our Nutural Faculties: So every Conclusion which we arrive at
the knowledge of, through the assistance and conduct of Revelation, is rightly
styled a Conclusion of Faith, and esteemed a part of Revelation, though a
proposition of another kind be assumed to help us in the deduction of it. As a
Child is Federally holy, wheresoever one of the Parents is a Believer, 1 Cor.
7.14.
though the other remain in the mean time an Infidel, so from the Conjunction
of two Propositions, whereof the one is of Faith, there results a Conclusion of
Faith, though the other proposition be drawn only from principles of Reason, or
Evidence of Sense. All men acknowledge that particulars are included in
Universals, and if the Universal be of Revelation, the several particulars
involved in it, are Revealed also. For as much then as there is not one
Conclusion which we deduce from Principles of Faith, that may not be inferred
by some Syllogism or other in the first Figure, where the major Proposition is
always Universal, and the Conclusion is either contained in it as a Species, or
as a particular; it naturally follows, that the Major being of Divine
Revelation, and an Object of Faith, the Conclusion must be esteemed, revealed,
and admitted for an Object of Faith also. While the subject of the Conclusion
is included in the Middle Term which is the subject of the Major proposition,
and the Predicate of both is the same, there is nothing more plain and evident
than that if the Major proposition be of Revelation, and to be believed with a
Divine Faith, the Conclusion is so likewise. Yea, were it so, that the Minor
proposition were only revealed in the Scripture, yet while the Major, which is
fetched from some incontested Maxim of Reason, contains either the whole, or a
part of the Definition, or the Correlate, or the Essential property, or the
Contradictory, or the Contrary of the Predicate of the Assumption which is from
Scripture, one of which it always does, the Conclusion must needs be reck'ned
as a part of Scripture, and submitted to in the same manner, as we do to that,
which carries the express and explicit Authority of God upon it. For whosoever
explicitly reveal's the thing defined, reveals in effect all those things
which we have enumerated concerning it. While the Scripture, for example,
assures us that Christ is a man, it does at the same time assure us that he is
a Rational Creature; and by telling us that he is a man, it does in effect tell
us, that he is not an Angel. And however some late Papists talk in this Matter,
(not to speak of others) that they may shift the Protestant Arguments which
they cannot Answer: Yet I am sure the most learned that ever espoused the
Roman Cause, are at an agreement with us in this point. That is an Article of
Faith, Id est de fide quod Deus per Prophetas and Apostolos revelavit, aut quod
evidenter inde deducitur. De verbo Dei. cap. 9.

Quasi quod ex iis quae Prophetae and Apostoli de Deo docuerunt necessario
deducitur, in Prophetas and Apostolos referri non de^eat. Smiglesius. contr.
Mascorov. de Baptism. p. 7.

Non modo ad Doctrinam Catholicam pertinet, quod Apostolis express revela^um
est, verum etiam quod ex aliera propositione revelata, and altera certa in
lumine Naturali, Syllogismo collectioneque evidenti conficitur: Canus de lo.
lib. 6. cap. ult. vide etiam Vasquez. in jam. Thom. quaest. ja. disp. 12. cap.
2. Veg lib. 9. in Council. Trident. cap. 39. and Catharin. contr. Soto.


says Bellarmine, which God has either revealed by the Prophets and Apostles
or which may be evidently inferred from thence. Smiglesius against Mascorovius
proclaims it ridiculous to think otherwise. That is not only a part of the
Christian Doctrine which is expressly revealed by the Apostles, but whatsoever
can be evidently deduced thence, though one of the propositions going to the
deducement of it, have its certainty only in Natural Light; says Canus. And
whereas they say that Conclusio sequitur debiliorem partem, the Conclusion
receives it specification, and is denominated from the weakest proposition. I
reply (1) Were that Logical Maxim to be taken in the universal Latitude which
they affix to it, they are yet so far from gaining any thing thereby, that
their whole Cause in this Matter, is supplanted: For if both Propositions be
evidently true, their Dogm's must be evidently false, seeing the Conclusions
that lie in repugnancy to them are, our Enemies being Judges, deduced from true
propositions. God is as much the Author of the Rational Faculty in its Regular
Exercise, as of Scripture; Hierocl.
and (...) to be persuaded by God, and to be persuaded by Right Reason is one
and the same thing. (2.) That proposition in a Philosophical sense, is the
weakest which is remotest from self evidence; and therefore where there are two
premises, whereof the one has no other Evidence but what it borrows from the
Authority of the Infallible Revealer, the other in the mean time hav^ng ^ts
Evidence from a light residing in it self, and from its Congruity to the
Essential Rectitude of our Intellectual Faculties; if the Conclusion follow the
fortune of the weaker proposition, it must be a Conclusion of Faith, and not of
Science. For though the Certitude of Faith be not only equal, but transcendent
to the Certitude of Reason, Sense, and Experience. 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. Yet
the Evidence of Reason, and Sense, is with respect to the Object assented to,
and the habitude it stands in to us, beyond the Evidence of Faith, 2 Cor.
5.^.1. 1 Cor. 13.12. Nor do the School men only allow a proposition grounded on
an Axiom of Reason to be more evident than a proposition founded only on
Revelation, but withal, not a few of the Learned. Romanists, both Schoolmen
and others, will have the former to be also more Certain at least quo ad nos,
than the latter. See Bellarm. lib. 3. de justifi^. cap. 2. Durand. in 3. d. 23.
quest. 7. Count. Tom. poster. disp. 9. (3.) The forementioned Logical Axiom
referrs only to the Quantity and Quality of the premises, and not to any other
affections incident to them. If one of the Premises be Negative, the
Conclusion in the virtue of the alleged Max^me must be Negative also; or if
one of the propositions be a particular, nothing beyond a particular can be
concluded, though the other be an Universal. And howsoever in some cases it may
hold further, yet this and no more was the intendment of the first establishers
of it. Nor indeed is it admittable in the full Latitude which the Terms seem to
bear, seeing of two propositions, whereof the one only is true, there may
follow sometimes a Conclusion that is true, though the other proposition be in
the mean time palpably false. But ere I undertake the probation of the thing it
self, two or three things must be necessarily premised. (1.) That all
Fundamental Articles are contained (...) and (...) in so many letters and
syllables in the Scripture: Nor is there any thing necessary in order to our
assent to them, but that we understand the Terms of the Enunciations in which
they are delivered. It Is true, there are Terms, and Phrases, made use of to
declare them unto the edification of Believers, and to secure the Minds of men
from undue apprehensions of them, that are not in the Scripture; but this is no
more than what is needful in the explaining of all Divine Truths, yea, all
Moral Duties. For example, That there is One God, and that the Father is this
one God, and that the Son is so also, and the Holy Ghost likewise, is declared
in many express Testimonies in the Bible; but in the Explication of this
Doctrine, and in the application of it to the Faith and Edification of
Believers; namely, how God is One in respect of his Nature and Essence; how
being Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, He subsists in these three distinct Persons,
what are their mutual respects to each other, and what are the incommunicable
Properties in the manner of their subsistence, by which they are distinguished
the One from the other; there are such wo^ds and phrases made use of, as are
not literally and syllabically contained in the Scripture, but teach no other
thing but what is there revealed. (2.) That these very Fundamental Articles may
be also confirmed by consequences and logical deductions from express literal
Testimonies; nor do probations of this nature alter or enervate the quality of
them. The thing is in it self the same, though the method of proof be varied.
For example* the Doctrine of the Trinity is equally a Fundamental, whether we
prove it from express Texts, or by consequences from literal Testimonies, or by
its connection with the whole Systeme of the Gospel, the Incarnation of the Son
of God, the Economy of Redemption, etc. (3.) That though all Fundamentals be
in Terminis expressed in the Scripture, that yet these very Truths do include
others in them which cannot be proved but by Consequences. For instance, That
God is a Spirit, is revealed in so many letters and syllables in the Bible; but
that therefore he has not hands, nor feet, nor any corporeal members, can only
be concluded by way of Consequence. In l^ke manner the Incarnation of the Son
of God, that the Word was made Flesh, is expressly taught in the Scripture* but
yet there are many things predicable of the Word Incarnate, which cannot be
otherwise demonstrated, but by Consequences, and by borrowing some proposition
or other from principles of Natural light.

Now these things being premised, the lawfulness of arguing from express
Scripture-Truths, by deduction of Conclusions, which though they be not
mentioned in the Bible in letters and syllables, are yet there in effect, and
were accordingly intended, may briefly be thus justified. (1.) In that to
preclude this is to render the Word of God of no significancy to any particular
person; seeing it is by this method alone that general precepts, prom^ses, and
Comminations are applicable to single Individuals. Nor can any one Universal
direction be otherwise brought down to a particular case. (2.) God in
instructing us how we are to demean our selves toward his Word, does it in
Terms and Phrases which are peculiar to such as Discourse, ratiocinate, and
deduce Conclusions from acknowledged Principles. See Romans 3.28. (...) therefore
we conclude, Romans 6.11. (...) likewise reckon ye also your selves, 1 Cor. 2.13.
(...) comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, Act. 17.11. (...) they
searched the Scriptures, namely, whether the things which the Apostles deduced
from the Testimonies of Moses and the Prophets, had foundation in them, yea or
not, 1 These. 5.21. (...) prove all things. Hence we are enjoined (...) rightly
to divide the word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. and to Prophecy, (...) according to
the analogy of Faith, Romans 12.6. and (...), to convince by argument and
demonstration gainsayers. And it is said of Paul that (...) he reasoned with the
Jews out of the Scriptures, Acts 17.2. And of Apollos that (...), he mightily
in the way of ratiocination convinced the Jews, demonstrating by the Scriptures
that Jesus was Christ, Acts 18.28. Nor was it possible by any text of the
Old Testament for the Apostles to prove Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah,
but by argumentation and trains of deductions. There was no other way or Method
by which this could be don, but by showing from Moses and the Prophets, that to
whomsoever such properties, Characters, etc. agr^ed, such a one behoved to be
the Messiah, and then evincing from History and Experience, that all these
Characterisms centred in, and agreed to Jesus of Nazareth. And in this way the
Apostles proceeded in their dealing with the Jews, by producing places out of
their own Scriptures where the Properties, Signatures, Characteristical notes
of the Person, Natures, Offices and Work of the Messiah were foretold and
described, and by which the Faith of the Church was guided to him, and on which
the World was bound to receive him; and then in showing that all these agreed
to, were verified of, and met in our Lord Jesus as their Center, they concluded
that he was infallibly the person concerning whom the Promises were made unto
the Fathers. And this leads me to the 2d. argument in proof of that we have
undertaken to justify; namely the Method which the Inspired Writers observed
in the conviction of Jews and Heathens. There can be no fallacy where we act
conformably to such a pattern; nor can that be disclaimed as Sophistical in
others, which we find practiced by the Sacred Penmen, without impeaching both
the Wisdom and Truth of God by whom they were inspired. To allow it to have
been lawful for them to argue by Consequences, and yet in the mean time to deny
it to others, is to be perverse, partial and humoursome: and to lodge it as an
accusation on Them that they mistook in the course they steered, is not only to
justify the Jews in their unbelief, and the Heathen in their Idolatry, but to
blaspheme the Holy Spirit by whom they were acted and conducted in what they
did. Now that this was the Method which the Apostles observed, in their
demonstrating many of the chief Articles of the Christian Faith, may be made
good by many instances scattered up and down the New Testament, See Act 9.22.
Act 18.28. Act 15.8, 9. Act 17.16.17. Act 2.16, 17, 18. Act 3.22, 23. Romans
1.20. Romans 3.9. to 21. Gal. 3.10. 1 Cor. 15.4, 5, 6, 7. Joh. 1.33, 34. In all
these places, not to name more, (nor to urge the suffrage of the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, in whom this way of procedure manifests it self in
every Chapter and paragraph,) We must acknowledge that they not only argued by
consequences, but that if their Arguments were digested into syllogisms, there
will be only one proposition found that is of Revelation, the other being
assumed either from Reason or Sense. Besides the attestation of Apostolical
practice in this matter we have also the example of our blessed Savior, to
convince us not only of the lawfulness, but to assure us of the obligation that
lies upon us, of accounting all that for the Word of God, which can by any
train of Natural deduction be concluded from it. If men were not resolved to be
obstinate, this alone were enough to issue the debate, and to advance what we
are pleading for beyond all jurisdiction of being gainsaid. It is by way of
argumentation and by consequences that he proves the Divinity of his Person.
Mat. 22.44, 45. The Quality and Authority of his Office, John 5.39, 45, 46.
John 10.25, 37, 38. Luke. 7.20, 21* 22. The necessity of the Death and
sufferings of the Messiah, Luke 24 26.27. The Resurrection of the Dead in
General Mat. 22.31, 32. All his Reasonings in the forecited places, should they
be reduced into a Logical Form, will be found to bear upon one only Scripture
premiss, the other being constantly either a proposition drawn from natural
Light* or from the evidence of Sense. And to affirm that the Ratiocinations of
Christ and the Apostles, though they joined one premise from Reason or
experience, to another from Scripture, were nevertheless conclusive, because
the Proposition from Reason by their very using of it, became upon the account
of the infallible authority they were clothed with, a part of Divine
Revelation; I say to affirm this, is ridiculous and impertinent. For had they
intended to have immediately concerned their authority in what they said,
Argumentation from an acknowledged Scripture Truth had been both needless and
superfluous. Where the whole evidence depends upon the Authority of the
immediate Speaker, a naked assertion is not only sufficient but most becoming.
Let the Authority of a person be what it will, yet so far as in transacting
with others, he recurrs to arguments either from Reason, or the Testimony of an
other, so far in that instance he plainly declines his Authority. Nor did all
these with whom Christ and the Apostles dealt in way of Argumentation,
acknowledge any such authority by virtue of which, whatsoever they said in such
a case became immediately a part of Divine Revelation, to have belonged to
them. When the Scribes and Pharisees confessed Christ in the way and Method of
proving the Resurrection to have said well, Marc. 12.28. Luke 20.39. They did
not thereby intend the acknowledgment of Christ as a prophet sent from God, or
that any authority upon that account resided in him, For that they disclaimed:
but it was the Authority of God, Exodus 3.6. and the rationalness of his
deduction from thence, though made by the joining of a proposition of another
Nature to it, which they paid a respect to. The Multitude were swayed in this
case by the mere strength and weight of his argument, and are therefore said to
have been astonished at his Doctrine, Mat. 22.33. They admired his Wonderful
Wisdom and profound Sagacity; nor were they influenced by any Authority they
held him vested with. Nor indeed is it any great evidence of a profound Wisdom
or of his insight into the Scripture, to argue from Media which have no further
convincing efficacy or force, but what they borrow from his authority that
uses them. In brief, either the Text quoted by our Savior was sufficient,
antecedently to Christ's using of it, and abstracting from his Authority, to
demonstrate the Resurrection, or it was not. If it was, then it was not merely
from his Authority, that they came under an Obligation to a belief of that
conclusion: If it was not; than how comes Christ to lodge their unbelief in
reference to the Resurrection upon their ignorance of the Scriptures? Marc.
12.24. Mat. 22.31. For if they stood not under the obligation of that
consequence, but merely because of his Authority, then the best acquaintance
imaginable with the sense and meaning of that place, could have ministered them
no relief in that point, yea it had been utterly unlawful to have drawn any
such inference from it. (5.) Exclude Scripture-Consequences, and the Papists
are not able to impugn one Tenet of the Protestants, nor are they in Capacity
to prove the first Article of the Roman Faith, namely, the pretended
Infallibility of their Church. While they wrest such Weapons out of our hands,
they at the same time disarm themselves. And by endeavoring to disserve the
Cause of the Reformed Churches, they utterly undo their own. For if our
Reasonings of this kind be insignificant against them, theirs are also
insignificant against us, and by the same art that they endeavor to blunt the
edge of our Swords, they are bound to throw away their own. I shall discourse
this no farther, only shut it up with a saying of Justin Martyr, (...) without
Philosophy and right Reason, there can be no knowledge nor science in the World.

. 12. The next thing that belongs to Reason in matters of Religion, regards
those Doctrines, which besides the Foundation that they have in Revelation,
have also Evidence in the light of Nature. And as I intimated before. 5. more
is allowable to Reason in and about these, than about those we are indebted
only to the Scripture for the discovery of. It Is not enough that we enquire
into the declaration of them, as it lies in the Bible, and how they are there
expressed, etc. but we are further to see what Media there are in the light of
Nature, by which they may be both discerned and confirmed. Yet I shall here
crave liberty to premise; That where the Authority of the Scripture is owned,
our chief Topics in all Theological debates ought to be fetched from the sacred
Records. Thence we should both frame our Idea's of them, and borrow as well the
Arguments, as the Colors and Ornaments, by which we would commend them to the
Minds and Consciences of Believers. Especially a regard ought to be had to
this, in popular Discourses and Sermons. As humane Authority ought to have very
little place, if any at all, in the Pulpit, so we ought not there to serve our
selves too much from Maxims of Philosophy, and principles of Reason. As God
has impressed more of his Authority upon the Scriptures, than upon any thing
else that he has made Himself and his Will known by; so there is an Efficacy
of the Spirit promised to attend the naked Preaching of the Word, beyond what
we can expect to accompany our Ratiocinations from principles of Reason. As
Faith prepares the spirits of men to a submission to what they hear immediately
out of the Bible, so there is something great and elevated, which I know not
how to express, in Truths, as nakedly delivered by the Holy Ghost, which
Argumentations from Natural Maxims, does for the most part obnubilate and
darken. The Majesty of God, whose commands we deliver, does above all things
most attract the respect of our Auditors, nor do we at any time so effectually
persuade, as by the mere authority of him in whose Name we speak. Yet I do not
deny, but that Rational proofs are of great use, not only to such with whom
Scripture-Testimonies signify nothing, but even to those who own and adore its
Authority, by showing that as it is highly reasonable to believe whatsoever God
has said, so the things themselves are agreeable to, and have foundation in
Reason; and the two lights of Revelation and Nature do excellently harmonise.
This being premised, among other Truths which besides their being plainly
revealed in the Scripture, have also evidence given to them in the Light of
Nature, the Immortality of the Soul, and the certainty of Providence, are
especially remarkable. It Is True there are many other Doctrines of this
quality, viz. the Attributes of God, the Creation of the World, Moral Good and
Evil, etc. All which, as they are revealed in the sacred Scripture, so they are
demonstrable from undoubted principles of Reason: But wav^ng these at present,
I shall only by way of essay, and with all imaginable brevity, consider what
media there are in Nature, by which the two former may be evinced, and the
serviceableness of Reason in the doing of it. I shall begin with the
Immortality of the Soul; and the Unhappiness of the Age wherein we live, does
render the inculcation of this Truth not only seasonable, but necessary. Men
having degraded themselves into Beasts by practice, they thence take the
Measures of their Opinions, and allow no difference betwixt themselves and the
p^ttifullest Brute, but that Matter in them is fallen into a more lucky texture
and modification. To justify their sensualities, they contend that they have
nothing but their Animal inclinations to gratify; and indeed the soul of a
Brute will very well serve all the Ends that some men propound to themselves.
Next the Belief of the Being of God, the persuasion of the souls being
Immortal, is the hinge upon which all Religion turns. It Is this that leads us
both to contemn the gratifications of the Flesh, and to be solicitous about a
happiness hereafter, though it be with the undergoing of present
inconveniences, rather than here. There is no one Truth has a more powerful
influence upon the whole course of our present life, than a steady and vigorous
belief that the soul is immortal. Now when we assert the Immortality of the
Soul, we do not intend that it is Immortal in such a sense, as that by no cause
it can be annihilated. God alone is thus Immortal, for as there are no
principles of Corruption in his Nature, so there is no foreign Agent that can
deprive him of his Being. (...) He only has Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. All
things owing their Existence to him, there is both a Power and a Right resident
in him of depriving them (should he judge it fit) of their Beings. Whatsoever is
derived from his Power and Bounty, he may take away at his pleasure. Yet I
reckon it absurd to think that he does annihilate our Souls, it being contrary
to the Method which he observes in other parts of the Universe. No substance
yet ever perished. Under all the Mutations that Matter undergoes, by which this
and that Individual body comes to be destroyed, there is not so much as one
single Atome lost. (...). Plotin.
No substantial Entity is totally destroyed says the Philosopher. Non perit in
tanto quicquid mihi credit mundo. Ovid. By the Immortality of the soul then,
we mean no more, but that it includes no principles in its self, by which it
can be brought to decay. And this it derives from it being Immaterial. No
spiritual substance is capable of that dissolution which a Body is liable to,
and suffers. For seeing Material subjects come to be corrupted only by a
separation of their conjoined parts; The Soul being Immaterial, and so void of
parts, is in danger of no such dissolution. Now in discoursing the Immortality
of the Soul, I think fit in the beginning to discharge my self from an
exception or two, which though hugely insisted on by those who will have the
soul to be merely corporeal, and consequently corruptible, yet are in
themselves absurd and irrational. The first is this, that there is no such
thing in the World as an Incorporeal Being, and that Existence is not to be
affirmed of any thing, but what is perceivable by sense; and that we cannot
have assurance that any thing is, but what we have ocularly beheld. To which I
reply (1) That they miserably beg the question which they ought to prove. They
have not been able to assign any contradiction that lies against an Incorpo^eal
Being, more than against a Corporeal. (2.) Their Objection does equally
militate against the Being of God, as against the Immaterial Nature of the
Soul. For if God be at all, he is Incorporeal, a Corporeal God being pregnant
with Contradictions. (3.) We are not to require more proof of any thing than it
is capable of. According to the diversity of Objects* we are furnished with
distinct faculties in order to the perception of them, and there are different
lights in which they are seen. Who questions the being of Sounds, Odours, etc.
because they are not discerned by the same Organical Faculty that Colors are?
To require that an Immaterial should fall under the perception of sight, is to
demand that an Immaterial should be a Material. There are Innumerable things,
whereof we have the most convincing Certainty, and yet they were never the
Objects of Sense. No man ever saw a Thought, and yet we are fully assured that
we have Thoughts. How many things do the Gentlemen that make this exception
believe, which yet they never saw? (4) Though Incorporeal Beings be not
Immediately perceived by sense, yet through diverse of their operations which
affect our Sensitive Organs, we have a mediate assurance of their Existence by
our very Senses. The second exception is taken from the inexplicableness of
Union, betwixt a Material and an Immaterial. There is no Cement, say they, by
which the one can be knit to the other. Incorporeals are of a penetrating
Nature, and consequently cannot take hold of Matter, so as to make a Whole
consisting of two constituent parts so vastly different. To this I answer, (1.)
That there is nothing more Unreasonable than wholly to question the Existence
of things, because we do not Understand the Modes according to which they
Exist. To discharge a Cause out of the precincts of Being, because we cannot
give a reason of all its particular effects, ought to be justly reckoned
amongst the greatest of absurdities. Whatsoever is proved by Reason, we are
firmly to believe it, though there may be many things in the Theory of it that
are wholly inconceivable. While we have all imaginable assurance of the
conjunction of the soul with the body, and that the soul cannot be corporeal,
our Faith ought no ways to be weakened, though we know not the Physical way of
their coalition, and how they come to be United. (2.) There is as much
difficulty in apprehending the connection of one part of Matter with another, as
in Understanding the Incorporation of the Soul with the Body, and yet no man
questions but that there are bodies in which the particles of matter are
united. I hope to make it appear, Ch^pt. 3d. that there is not any Hypothesis
of Philosophy yet extant, by which the Union of the parts of Matter in
cont^nuous Bodies can be solved, and yet we are very well assured they are
connected together. A 3d. Exception is rai^ed from the Sympathy that is betwixt
the Soul and the Body, from which they would conclude an Identity of Nature
between them. To which I briefly return to these things, (1.) There are many
cases in which our Souls are affected, without the least impression either from
bodily Objects without us, or any previous excitation of the Spirituous Blood
within us. For not to mention the impression which the Soul receives from the
consideration of things purely Spiritual and Divine, which do no ways
immediately affect the Body, all the Influence imaginable which they have upon
it, proceeding primarily from the mind it self, and its dominion over the
Animal Spirits. I shall only name Troubles of Conscience which arise only from
Moral Causes, and the exercise of our Reasons about what we have done. I may
add that there are many cases wherein the Soul and Body seem to have no
Communion with one another, and that not only in Ecstasies, when the Soul is
(...), in a manner for a season separated from the Body; but even in other.
Suid.
Hence men upon the borders of Grave, when without strength, vigor, or pulse,
yet even then they have their thoughts more refined, and their understandings
more spritely, than at other times. And which is more strange, are so little
affrighted at death, though they fully understand it, that they lay down the
Body with the same compo^edness, and more delight, than if they were only
putting off their Clothes. Nor are they only persons tired with the miseries of
the World that do so, b^t such many times, who have enjoyed all the delight
that this earthly state can afford. (2.) We find our Souls frequently
determining themselves in way of choosing and refusing, contrary to the
provocations of sense, and the cravings of the bodily Appetite. Though our
Intellectual Faculties have a perception of sensual Delights, yet they often
choose both that which is contrary to fleshly pleasures, and which no Corporeal
Faculty is able so much as once to apprehend. Were we constituted of mere
Matter, all our operations should be produced by a fatal Impulse, and in every
act we should be under the like Necessity as Matter is, when forcibly
determined to Motion. While we find our selves endowed with a faculty
determinative of it self, We may rationally infer that the impulses of outward
Objects upon the bodily Organs, and the continuation of their Motion to the
Brain and Heart, do only solicit, and not force out Assent, and that the Soul
it self is of an Immaterial Nature. (3.) All that sympathy, which we observe
between the Soul and Body arises merely from the close connection of the one
with the other, and is necessary both in order to the Souls governing the Body,
and its being engaged to take care of it, and provide against its necessities.
And as a Lutanist loses not his skill, because he cannot play melodiously upon
an Instrument, whose str^ngs are either broken or ill tuned: No more is the
Soul prejudiced in her self by bodily Maladies, though she be hindered and
discomposed in her operations, through the distemper of those Organical
Instruments which she is forced to use. That we are too much affected with
every passion and irregular motion of the blood and Animal Spirits, does not
prove that our Souls are Corporeal, or that our irregular actings upon those
inordinate motions are the results of fatal Impulses; but only show that we do
excite our Intellectual powers, to the preventing those violent Motions, and
the keeping the Body Sedate, and to the curbing and restraining them when
excited, and that we do by sloth and neglect suffer our selves to be depressed
by those Terrestrial encumbrances, and hurried by those Motions, which if we
were not wanting to our selves we might easily tame and subdue.

Having freed our selves from these exceptions, we now proceed to the thing it
self, and in the mentioning the Arguments which offer themselves in Nature to
prove the Immo^tality of the Soul, I shall not insist on that Argument which is
so vigorously urged by some Modern as well as Ancient Writers: Namely that if
the Soul were Corporeal we should not be the same to day, that we were yester
day. We remain the same at sixty Years of Age that we were at twenty, though in
the mean time we have worn away many bodies; and therefore, say they, there
must be something Immaterial in us which is the foundation of this Identity.
This I shall wave, for they who contend for the Corporeity of the Soul, will
reply, that we are no otherwise the same this Year that we were the last, than
Brutes and Vegtables are. Nor shall I press the Argument that is drawn from
sensation, because what ever is in it for the Immateriality of the sentient and
percipient Principle, in us concludes in behalf of Brutes that they have the
like. For the Hypothesis of Descartes that Beasts are mere Machines I look
upon it as altogether indefensible. But though I decline and wave the using of
this Medium for the reason I have now suggested, yet I dare not censure it as
trifling, much less disclaym it as Sophistical. These then being laid aside,
there are others to be produced; and seeing that whatsoever is Incorporeal is
upon the very score of its being so, incorruptible, and excepted from
dissolution also: I shall mainly inquire what reasons there are in the Light of
Nature, whereby we may be induced to believe that our Souls are Immaterial.
First, if the Soul were only a Crasis of the Body, it were capable of no other
distempers but what arise from the compression or dilatation of matter, or from
the obstruction and inflammation of Humors while we therefore find it subject
to Maladies which spring merely from Moral causes, and which are no more
curable by the prescriptions of Physicians, than the Stone or Gout are to be
removed by a Philosophy Lecture, we have sufficient Cause to believe that it is
of an incorporeal Nature. 2 dly. The essences of things are best known by their
operations, and the best guess we can make of the Nature and Condition of
beings, is from the quality of their Actions. While therefore by contemplating
our selves we find that we do elicite actions which exceed the power of matter,
and the most subtle Motion of Corporeal particles; we have all imaginable
ground to think, that we are possessed of a principle that is Immaterial, as
well as Intellectual. He who considers that there is not one perfect Organ in
the Human Body, but the parallel of it is to be met with in the Noblest sort of
Brute Animals, and yet that there are diverse operations performed by men, that
no Beast whatsoever is capable of doing the like, must need apprehend that the
Soul is not a Corporeal Faculty, nor a contexture of Material parts. Here all
the Acts of Intellection may be insisted on. (1) Acts of simple Apprehension.
We are endowed with a Faculty that frame's Notions and Ideas of things which
exceed the Sphere of Sense, which are no ways capable of sensible
Representation, nor were the Notions of them conveyed into us by the help of
Terrestrial Images. Such are the Notions of Immaterial Beings, infinite Space,
the Habitudes of one thing to another, Moral Congruities and Incongruities,
abstract and Universal Natures, Proportions of Figures, Symmetry of Magnitudes,
yea the notion of perception it self. (2) Acts of judgments whereby we
contemplate the several Natures and properties of things, compare them in all
their respects, rank them in their distinct orders and dependencies, frame
distinctions and divisions of Beings, connect and disjoyn Subjects and
Predicates, and accordingly say that this appertains to the other, or it does
not, and affirm or deny one thing of another as we observe them to agree or
disagree. (3) Acts of Ratiocination, whereby we infer one thing from another by
Syllogisms, deduce Consequences of longer or shorter Trayns. (4) Acts of
Reflection in which the Soul becomes it own Object, perceive's that it does
perceive, passes a sentence upon its own judgments, which no matter though it
be never so fine, and howsoever modified and agitated, can do. (5) Acts of
Correcting the Errors and mistakes of Imagination, whereby having viewed all
the representations of the Senses it compares them together, makes a judgment
of them, forms apprehensions contrary to those which are suggested to us by
sensitive Organs, rejects the phantasms of Imagination, as insufficient
Indications of the Truth of External Objects. Not that our Senses are deceived,
for they only declare their own Passions, and communicate their Motions to the
Brain, according to the Impulses which they really receive from ambient Matter;
but these representations being made without judgment, the Soul examines them,
perceives that it should be deceived should it always pronounce according to
the Images conveyed to it by the Senses, and accordingly apprehends, corrects
and determines contrary to them. (6.) Acts of Volition, whereby it Chooses and
Refuses by a self-determinating-Power, according as things are estimated,
remaining exempt from all coaction and necessitation by the influence of any
Principle foreign to it. Now all these are impossible to Matter, because That
acts always according to the swing of Irresistible Motion, nor can it be
courted and solicited to Rest, when under the forcible Impulse of a stronger
Movent. 3dly. The Immortality of the Soul is plainly demonstrated from the
Attributes of God and his Government of the World. Without the supposition of a
Future State there is no preserving the Authority of God from contempt, no due
means provided for the preventing men from gainful sins, or the encouraging of
them to hazardous Duties. And accordingly there have been few in the World who
have believed a Providence, but they have likewise asserted the Immortality of
the Soul; these two being inseparably connected. While we contemplate the state
of things in the World, we find Prosperity for the most part attending Vice,
and Misery the Companion of Virtue. Good men are usually accompanied with
Crosses, and have the least proportion of present things, while Bad men are
often glutted with success, and swim in pleasures. Now if there were not an
Immortal state where both the Virtue of the Good might be compensated, and they
receive comfort for their Sufferings, and the Vice of the Bad might be
punished, and they receive Vengeance for their Crimes; both the Wisdom and
Goodness, as well as Justice of the Rector of the World, would be liable to
censure and Impeachment. Yea it seems the better of the two, wholly to deny the
Providence of God, than to think that he should administer humane affairs with
so much irregularity and injustice. In a word there is nothing can administer a
satisfactory resolution in reference to the present dispensation of things in
the World, but a firm persuasion of the Immortality of the Soul, and the
Certainty of a Future state. Judgments inflicted on Sinners in this life,
cannot fully clear the Righteousness of God, because the best of men are as
well involved in them as the worst; yea, it is but now and then that the
greatest Criminals are made as remarkable in their punishments as they have
been in their lives. Besides an Infinite Eternal God is the Object of Wicked
men's contempt, and its his Law who lives for ever, whose Authority they
despise; nor can any punishment be proportionable, but what is Eternal also.
4ly. That inbred desire which is in all men after Immortality, argues that
there is such really provided for the satisfying this Natural and Universal
appetite. For it is not to be Imagined that Nature should furnish us with
longings, when there is nothing that may content them. To have such desires
wrought into the complexion and constitution of our Souls, were there provision
made of nothing that might answer them, would not only reflect upon the Wisdom
of our Maker, who has produced us with these longings; of which there is no
use; but his Mercy, Goodness, and Justice also, in implanting those Appetites
in us, which serve at once to abuse and torment us. And this leads me to the
other particular which I promised to discourse; namely, the Certainty of Divine
Providence. This is one of the Truths also, which besides the attestation given
to it in the Scripture, has evidence enough in the Light of Nature. I confess,
that if we take our Measures in this Matter from the sentiments of the Wisest
Heathen, we should be ready to think there is no foundation in Reason to
convince us otherwise, but that all things go at Random. It was not the opinion
of Epicurus alone, but of many others, that the Gods concerned not themselves
in sublunary affairs. Nor did the Poets only discharge God from the Government
of the World, but their very Moral Philosophers did the same. Horaces, -- Deos
didici securum agere aevum
And Lucans -- Nunquam se cura Deorum
Sic premit, ut vestrae vitae vestraeque saluti
Fata vacent. --
Are not worse than Plinies, Irridendum curam agere rerum humanarum illud
quicquid est summum: and Senecaes, Deus nihil agit, nec illum magis beneficia
quam injuriae tangunt. Even many of them that owned some kind of providence,
either confined it to Heaven, holding it Unsuitable to His Glorious Nature to
concern himself about frail and visible things, but that he governs them by
subordinate Causes, as the Grand Seigniour does his Provinces by his Bashaws
and Lieutenants; or they limited it to effects which depend on a concatenation
of Natural Causes, to which they are ligu'd by trains and connexions, excluding
God in the mean time from any Care of Contingent Events, or Administration
about the Understandings and Wills of Men; or lastly, they bound it up to
Universals and Generals, allowing it little or no interposure about particulars
and singulars. And this seems to have been the opinion of the Author of the
Book de Mundo, who whether it was Aristotle or Philo, or any other, is not
material. The reasons that prevailed with them to question, yea, deny the
providence of God, were 1st. That it is beneath and unbecoming the perfections
of God, and an interruption of his Felicity, to concern himself in the affairs
of the sublunary World, and to distract himself with the cares of it. But this
is (1.) Rather to describe some effeminate Prince, than the Deity. And (2.) It
proceeds upon a Foolish mistake, and an unworthy supposition; namely, that it
is pain and trouble to God to govern the World, which none can imagine but they
who are ignorant of his Attributes and Being. Whatever God can do, he does it
without trouble to his Infinite perfections. Nor (3.) Is the Happiness of God
more impeached in Governing the World, than in making of it. If without
molestation to Himself, he could produce it at first, he can without
encumbrance Rule it still. The 2d. Motive that swayed them to doubt the
Providence of God, was the Impunity of Wicked Men. But in this they concluded
as Illogically* as in the former. God (1.) may have aims in the prosperity of
Criminals that we are not aware of, and therefore we ought not to reflect on
his dispensations, when we know not the grounds of them. He hereby testifies
that severity is not the inclination of his Nature, but that punishments are
extorted from him. He hereby also allows offenders time, as well as Inducements
to Repentance. He also herein sets us a pattern of mercy and forbearance, and
teaches us Meekness and Lenity by his own Bounty and Patience. He withal gives
assurance to the World by this of a future judgment. The Prosperity of the
Wicked here, is a pledge of their punishment hereafter. (2.) Bad men are not so
happy as they are commonly imagined to be. How can they be reckoned happy who
have nothing succeeding, according to their Scope and Meaning? Every man
intends well to himself, but it is the perpetual infelicity of the Wicked, that
they never reach the mark they aim at. For by doing ill, they prosecute that,
which at last themselves will find of all things to be the worst. Besides,
Wickedness is its own punishment, not only in that it debaseth the Soul,
degrades Humane Nature, and offers violence to the principles of Reason; but
that in the very pursuit of it, the offender forfeits all true tranquillity,
for that only accompanies Virtue. That lust cannot be assigned, the gratifying
of which, is not attended with disquietness. The Unbridled appetite is a
scorching flame; Envy is a gnawing Scorpion; Covetousness is a strangling and
corroding care, etc. The multitude of Ends and Objects which exercise a wicked
man's thoughts, do wonderfully distract him. His Soul is full of disquietness
through the intestine and civil Wars maintained in it. Scelera dissident; Lusts
are like the brood of Cadmus. armed one against the other. Diversity of
inconsistent Ends and opposite Means do strangely rack and discompose the Soul
of a Sinner, and his Mind is like the Sea when it rages with the striving of
contrary Winds upon it. Nor is this all, but there is besides, a secret shame
linkt to every wicked action, and every Evil is pregnant with an inward
Horror. Let a man offend never so privately, yet when he thinks what he has
done, he is both ashamed, and his Conscience fills him with remorse for what is
past, and tormenting fear of what is to come. The joy and delight which he
promises himself in prosperous wickedness, is withered by the dread of future
punishment. (3.) All the prosperity of Sinners is constituted of Earthly
Enjoyments, and the disappointment which they find in them, having nothing
better neither in possession nor hope, does not only lessen, but emb^tter the
fruition. There is an insatiable Appetite in the Soul of man, which nothing
Terrene can content or satisfy, and the Meditation of this, is enough to make
them vote themselves miserable in the midst of all their Grandeur and Opulency.
Nor is the frustration which we meet with in every single enjoyment to be
either prevented or remedyed, by having recourse to variety. For after we have
traversed the Creation, we shall still find our selves unsatisfied. And how
unseasonable will it be, to bewayl our folly, for seeking that in sublunary
things which they could not minister, when we find it too late to make better
provision. (4.) As every Wicked man is not prosperous, so prodigious Sinners do
seldom, even in this life, escape exemplary punishment. God now and than
singles out some chief offenders whom he punishes in this World, that they may
be as common Antidotes against the poison of Wickedness, that it may not
increase and spread, through an Universal Impurity of bad men. (5.) If bad men
were immediately punished, Moral government would be subverted, nor should
there be room for the Influence of Comminations and Promises. Sallust. de Diis
and Mundo, cap. 19.
(...), If punishment were immediately inflicted upon Delinquents, obedience
would cease to be a Virtue, as proceeding from fear, not choice. The third
Exception against the Providence of God in the Government of the World, is
fetched from the Miseries and sufferings of the Righteous. But that conclusion
is ill drawn from those premises; nor is there any such Consequent chained to
that Antecedent. There is enough in the light of Nature to satisfy us in this
Matter, though Men have not been so happy as always to discern it. (1). Many
that seem to be good, yet indeed are not so. There are some stark naught, who
nevertheless have the cunning to conceal it. But though they deceive us, they
cannot impose upon Omniscience; and when we think that a Righteous person is
ill entreated, God only punishes a secret Malefactor. It becomes us to suppose
a just Cause why God makes men Unhappy by adversity, though he do not acquaint
us with it. (2.) There is enough in the Best to deserve worse than they suffer.
God never chastens a Believer, but he strikes an offender. He never afflicts a
Saint, but at the same time he punishes a Delinquent. It is true, that though
Men will confess themselves not to be so Good as they should be, yet every one
thinks himself too good to suffer; and let their chastisements be never so
justly and mercifully moderated, yet they judge them too great for them to
undergo. But would men calmly examine themselves, they would not only find
Cause to justify God in what they meet with, but to magnify his Mercy that
they feel no more. (3) No Good man's Afflictions are so many, but his Mercies
are more; and we ought to confront the one with the other. In the day of
Prosperity be joyful, but in the day of Adversity consider, for God has set
the one over against the other, etc. Eccle. 7.14. The 70 read that place God
has tuned one thing to another (...). As Harmony in Music is perfected by
supplies of different Notes; so God has Checkered our Conditions in the World,
for the better beautifying of his Providence. And as the Night sets off the
Day, and the Winter as well recommends as relieves the Summer, so does God give
us the quicker taste and relish of our Mercies, by intermixing them with
Crosses. (4.) Our hesitations about Providence upon the account of the
sufferings of good men, proceeds from Unacquaintedness with Gods design in
them, and an ignorance of their Issue. He is our Friend when he seems to be our
Enemy, and only acts the part of a Physician when we look upon him as an
Executioner. He only withdraws what would be our snare instead of our
advantage; and withholds what he fore-sees we would mistake for God, instead
of being lead by it to him. As there is no judging of a Picture by its first
lines, nor of a Structure by seeing its Materials in heaps; no more ought we to
pass sentence upon the Providence of God, without a prospect of them from the
beginning to the end. Providence is one Entire System, nor can we judge of the
parts but in relation to the whole. What at first we can give no account of, we
are often brought to approve by a subsequent course of Dispensations. (5.) The
abridging Good Men in the fading Transitory things of the World, does not at
all argue that God envies Good Men happiness, but only declares that true
Happiness does not consist in such things. There is no one thing speaks the
Emptiness of the admired greatness, profits, and pleasures of the World more,
then that God permits the enjoyment of them to the worst of men, and withholds
them from such for whom he has the greatest esteem. Who ever understands the
Nature of true Good, must bid adieu to the hopes of it in any thing but God
alone. And for those things that most state felicity in, a Wise and Good man
would judge himself unhappy, if he could not despise them. Who can think that to
live in a Palace, to lie in a soft Bed, to eat nothing but what is delicate, to
give Laws to others, to be controlled in nothing we say or do, etc. were ever
intended for the Felicity of an Intellectual and Rational Being? The Soul of a
Brute would have served all the Ends that some men propound to themselves; but
surely the bestowing of an Immortal Spirit on us, ought to instruct us, that
Blessedness consists in something else than Gauds, Trifles, Grandeur, Airy
Titles and the like. And he who cannot want these things without thinking
himself Miserable, at once reproacheth his Maker, as if he had Created him for
nothing more worthy, and degrades and dishonours himself, by intimating that
such gratifications are suitable to Him. (6.) The advantages which Good men
receive by afflictions, do amply compensate their feeling of them. They hereby
both discern their sincerity themselves, and discover it to others. Nor is it
easy to imagine the satisfaction, that the Consciousness of a constant
sincerity ministers to a Soul. To find that we love God, notwithstanding the
narrow allowance he affords us, is a more sovereign Cordial to the Mind that
would approve its self to God, than the flushest enjoyment of sublunary things
can yield. Their Adversity also gives them either relief in Mortifying those
Corruptions which endanger them, or in exercising those Graces which glorify
God. And who dare reproach the Wisdom or Goodness of God for disposing things
in such a manner, as may turn not only most to his own Honor, but our
advantage. Storms and Frosts are as Useful to the Universe, as serene and clear
weather. Nor are Sugar and Honey more necessary, than Salt and Brine are. If
after all this, there remain Inexplicables in the works of Providence, it is no
more than what we daily meet with, in the Works of Creation. Nor must a finite
Understanding hope to comprehend the Methods of an Infinite God. And the future
state will set all that straight, which we now judge Crooked. Having vindicated
the Providence of God from those Objections which seem to affront it, my next
task is to suggest those Arguments which Reason, abstracting from all
Revelation, can muster to attest it. (1) Were there not an Omnipotent Power,
and an Omniscient skill to restrain and govern the quarrelsome Spirits that are
in the World, it would soon sink under the bottom of its own Confusion. This
the Heathen intimated in the Fable of Phaethon, who being admitted to drive the
Chariot of the Sun but for one day, burnt both himself and it together. It was
well said by the Stoic, that (...), It is not worth the while to live in a
World empty of God and Providence. Nay it were the greatest unhappiness
imaginable to be brought forth into the World, to be perpetually tossed up and
down by blind Fortune. (...), If there were not a Providence, Hierocl. Sallust.
ubi supra. cap. 9.
there could be no Order in the World. And as another Philosopher says (...);
If there were no Supreme Orderer, whence comes order to be in the World? (2.)
Preclude Providence, and we remove one of the greatest foundations of
venerating the Diety. It Is not a persuasion of the Excellency of his Nature,
that can engage us to a hearty Adoration of Him, if we once discharge him from
all concernment in us and our affairs. Though there be the like Eminency of
Dignity in the French King as in the King of Great Britain, yet we have a
greater reverence for the one than the other, because the one protects us,
which the other does not. Nor can we well believe the Divine Nature to be
excellent, should we assert it devoid of Goodness, which is the greatest
perfection; much less will it be easy to honor him for a God, whose Felicity
we judge to consist in Idleness. We find our selves capable of, yea, endowed
with the affections of Fear and Love, and God is an Object most adapted for
them; but seclude him from the administration of the World, and there is no
Foundation left for the begetting and maintaining either the one or the other
in the hearts of men toward him. For if he regard not what we do, instead of
having provided due means for our fearing and loving of him, he has left us
under an unavoidable temptation of acting toward with him with slight and
contempt. (3) If there be no Providence, there is not the least ground for
addresses to God out of hope of assistance, or the thanking him for the
benefits we partake of; and yet the chief of natural Religion consists in
these. Who would pray to God to be delivered when in straits, or praise him
when he has escaped his entanglements, if God no ways interest himself in us
and our affairs. (4) If God govern not the world it is either because he
Cannot, or because he will not: to say the first is to represent him
contemptible for his Weakness; and besides, he that made the World cannot be
supposed unable to Rule it: to affirm the Second is to bestow Omnipotency upon
Him in vain, and to impeach every one of his perfections, because of a faileur
in their most natural and agreeable effects. (5) God is Sovereign of the World,
and therefore he must needs Govern it. Through all things being the products of
His will and Power, he has an incontestable Dominion over them. Now we cannot
fasten a greater reproach upon a Sovereign, than that he throws off all the
Care and Gubernation of his Subjects. (6) We see effects in the World, which
could proceed from no cause but God, and discoveries made to it, which he alone
can reveal; and by consequence he has not wholly withdrawn himself from the
Rectorship of it. (7) He must needs Rule the World who has given it Laws, for
Law is the Relative of government; and that he has given it Laws, the inbred
Notions which we have of Good and Evil, the Fears and hopes that haunt us, do
abundantly demonstrate. These he has woven into the composition of our
Natures, and by these order is maintained in the World. Now it is the greatest
affront that can be offered to Reason, to think that God should make use of a
Fiction to preserve Truth, Justice and Righteousness amongst mankind; or that
he should keep up the Respect of himself by falsehood and Deceit. Thus by
singling out one or two Truths that have evidence given to them in the Light of
Nature, as well as in Revelation; we have shown what belongs to Reason about
all Doctrines of this Genius and complexion.

. 13. The next concernment of Reason in and about Religion is to defend the
whole of it, from the Clamours, and Objections of gainsayers. For as
Bisterfield says, Though they who reject arguments levied from Reason against
the Mysteries of Religion, act modestly, Illi qui argume^ta a recta ratione
petita violenter rejiciunt, eaque solutione indigna pronuncia^t, modeste quidem
agunt, sed pessime de Religione mereri videntur. In Synopsi praefixa libro cui
titulus; Mysterium pietatis defensum contr. Crell.
yet they do not thoroughly serve the interest, nor hereby deserve well of the
Cause of Truth, which they own and profess. It Is true that the Authority of
Divine Testimony is enough to warrant our Faith, whatever Objections lie
against the thing so testified: but to rest here without warding off the
thrusts of Adversaries, is to tempt them either wholly to throw off the belief
of all Revelation, or to affix perverse Senses to it. Now there are some
Articles of Religion, which may not only be defended, by showing from the
Testimony of the Bible, that their Objects have an Existence, but by explaining
how they are, and that either from principles of Natural Light, or from the
account that the Scripture it self Gives of the Modes of their Existence. For
Example, How the Earth could be peopled in so little a time, as the Mosaic
History does tacitly inform us, when all Mankind sprung (...) from one stock
(for so the word there signifies) and proceeded from one Man and one Woman as
their Original Progenitors. Act. 17.16.
How an Ark of that Capacity which the Scripture instructs us Noah's was, could
receive into it all kinds of living Creatures, with provisions of Aliment for
so long a time? How the Israelites could multiply to such a number in Egypt,
within the compass of two hundred years or little more, when there went down
but such a handful thither of whom they descended? There are other Articles of
Religion, which we can only show from Revelation that the Objects of them are,
but the manner and way how they exist we cannot tell. And seeing the Measure of
Faith does only follow and suit the measure of Revelation, we are therefore in
reference to such things only to believe that they are, but the Mode of their
Existence is to be no Article of our Creed. And I crave liberty here to
suggest, that it is both a piece of Tyranny to impose the belief of the Modes
of their existence upon the Consciences of men, and has been found
disserviceable to Religion to undertake to explain the Manner according to
which such a thing exists, when God has only revealed the Existence of the
thing it self, but concealed the Way how it is. If in the explicating the
Phenomenon of Nature, which is the proper province of Reason, the most that a
discreet Philosopher will pretend to, is, to declare the possible ways by which
a Phenomenon may be accounted for; without presuming to say that it is only
performed in this way, and that there is no other in which it may be explained:
Much more does it become us in the Great mysteries of Revelation, to abstain
from defining the Manner how they are, and to content our selves with what God
has been pleased to tell us, viz. that they are; without prying into the Mode
of their being, which he has hid from us. Now in and about such Doctrines
these things appertain to Reason, First, To show that it is not required that it
should comprehend them. Whatsoever God has said is to be assented to, though
we cannot frame adequate Notions of the thing it self, nor understand the
manner how it should be. It Is as much against Reason as Faith, to think to
fathom the perfections, Counsels and Works of God; seeing Reason acknowledges
him to be infinite, and it self to be Finite. If we will pretend to Reason in
Religion, we are to be believe whatever God has said to be True, this being
the greatest Reason, that he who is Veracious cannot lie. There is nothing more
consonant to the transcendency of so a high a Nature as that of God, than that
it be acknowledged incomprehensible; nor is there any thing more agreeable to
his infinite Wisdom, than that his projects, designs, and contrivances should
be held past finding out. It Is both unjust and irrational to think that man
should penetrate those depths and Abysm's, which the Angels desire only (...)
to look into as veiled and hidden from sight. 1 Pet. 1 12.
But more of this anon. 2 dly. We are to hold our selves assured, that every
Argument from Reason, repugnant to a Doctrine revealed in the Scripture, is a
Sophism, though, may be, we cannot discover the Fallacy. It Is one thing to be
assured of a Truth, and another to be able to answer all the Objections that
are pressed against it. There are Innumerable things even in Philosophy, of
which we are fully assured, and yet we cannot resolve all the difficulties that
attend them. If every pusling Objection be enough to make us renounce what we
have express Revelation for; by a parity of Reason, we must disclaim many a
Natural Truth, which we have the evidence of sense and Reason for, because we
cannot answer all the Objections that do encounter them. It were the way to
introduce an Universal Scepticsm, to doubt of the Truth of every thing, the
knotts and intricacies about the Natures, Properties, Operations and Modes of
whose Existence, we cannot unty. What a man has embraced upon just and weighty
grounds, he is not to desert it, merely because he can not answer every
Objection that is urged against it. It Is the height of folly and Madness to
forego an opinion, when the Objections wherewith it is entangled, are not of
greater, yea nor of the same importance with the reasons on which we received
it. 3 dly. We are to answer the Objection, not by explicating how the thing
contested is, but by shew-that there is nothing in the argument that prove's it
impossible to be. And this is done by showing that what is styled a Principle
of Reason, in truth and reality is not so, at least in the degree and latitude
that it is applied. There are many vulgar Axioms, urged as Maxims of Reason,
which are as far from obtaining in Philosophy, as in Divinity: there are others
which though they hold in reference to some Objects, and in relation to some
Agents, yet they are not to be allowed with respect to every Agent and every
Object. For example, though a Finite Agent require a preexistent subject in
order to its operation, yet this holds not in relation to an infinite and
Almighty worker. And though Impenetrability may be affirmed of all Substances
that are Corporeal, yet to apply it to all Substances Universally, and
thereupon to reject Spirits as Mr. Hobbs does, is grossly to prevaricate. Most
received Maxims have their limitations, nor are they principles of Reason
farther, then as they are circumscribed by such conditions and confinements,
and to urge them beyond their bounds, is to contradict Reason, which tells us
that they hold only so far, and no farther. That great Maxim which is the
Foundation of all Argumentation, viz. that Extrem's identified to a middle
Term, are identified the one to the other, admitts more than one or two
limitations, which if they be not attended to, all our Syllogising is but mere
Sophistry. For if either the Extrem's be only collectively identified to the
Medium, not distributely; or if they be one with it inadequately only, and not
adequately; or if they Center in the Middle Term only in the Concrete, and not
in the Abstract, there is no concluding of an Identity betwixt the Extremes
themselves. And I dare say that through a faileur in one of these, both most of
the Arguments against the Doctrine of the Trinity; and for Communication of
Omnipresence to the Humane Nature of Christ, because it agrees to the Person of
the son of God, (not to instance in more particulars,) may be easily avoided
and answered. (2) by showing that if it be an universal and true Maxim of
Reason that the Objection is grounded on, how that there is not any thing in
Revelation that does contradict it. There is an excellent Harmony betwixt Truth
and Truth, and though they be distinct and different, yet they are not contrary
and repugnant the one to the other. They who reject Gospel Mysteries on
supposition of a Repugnancy they lie in to Reason, have not been able to this
day to justify their Charge. It Is true the more we adventure too nearly to
look into them, the more we find our selves dazzled with their Fulgor, but yet
we find no thing in them that implye's a Contradiction to our Faculties, or
that is repugnant to the Nature, and Attributes of God. Nor is there any one
Argument produced to this day in proof of the repugnancy of the Mysteries of
the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, his satisfying Divine Justice
in the Room and behalf of Sinners, the Eternal Decrees, etc. Which has not
received an answer, and the Authors of it been shamefully baffled.

. 14. Having unfolded the Interest and concernment of Reason in and about
Religion, it will be necessary ere we shut up this Discourse, more particularly
to state and fix the Bounds betwixt these two, and to offer some Measures by
which Reason may have allotted, all that belongs to it, and yet nothing in the
mean time be detracted from Faith.

First then, Reason is the Negative Measure in Matters of Religion. Nothing
contradictory to right Reason is to be admitted as a Mystery of Faith. What
Right Reason says cannot be done, we must not father it upon God to do. If
Reason be objected against any Scripture Testimony how plausible and subtle
soever it seems, Si Ratio contra Divinarum Scripturarum autoritatem redditur,
quamlibet acuta sit, fallit very similitudine, nam vera esse non potest. Rursus
si manifestissimae certaeque Rationi Scripturaru^ Sanctaru^ objicitur
auctoritas; non intelligit qui hoc facit: and non Scripturarum illarum Sensum,
ad quem penetrare non potuit, sed suam potius objicit veritati: nec quod in
eis, sed quod in Seippso pro eis invenit, opponit. Aug. Ep. 7. ad Marcellin.
yet Right Reason it cannot be, but only deceives through an Unbrage and show
of it. And if Scripture Authority be urged against an undoubted and evident
Principle of Reason, he that does so, presses not the true meaning of the
Scripture, for that he does not reach, but only imposes, his own Sense, and
urges what himself phancieth to be there, instead of what indeed is so. (says
Austin.) These two lights though different, yet they do not destroy one
another. God is the Author of natural as well as Supernatural Light, nor can he
belly himself. We have no greater Certainty than that of our Faculties, for by
that alone are we enabled to discern a Divine Revelation from Humane or
Diabolical Delusions. Should God reveal such Doctrines as contradict Natural
Truths and Principles of Right Reason, He would thereby eradicate what himself
has planted in our Souls. The Law of Reason being the first declaration of the
Will of God, originally annexed to, and communicated with our Natures, it is not
to be imagined that by any after declaration, he should thwart his first.
Besides, all Revelation is to instruct us in a reasonable, though supernatural
way, and therefore, though in many things it may exceed our Reason fully to
comprehend it, yet in all things it must be consistent with our Reasons. To
admit Religion to contain any Dogm's Repugnant to Right Reason, is at once to
tempt Men to look upon all Revelation as a Romance, or rather as the invention
of distracted men; and withal to open a Door for filling the World with
figments and lies, under the palliation of Divine Mysteries. We cannot gratify
the Atheist and Infidel more, than to tell them that the prime Articles of our
Belief imply a contradiction to our Faculties. In a word, this Hypothesis, were
it received, would make us renounce Man, and espouse Brute in matters of the
chiefest and greatest concernment, for without debasing our selves into a lower
species, we cannot embrace any thing that is formally impossible. Nothing but
men's entertaining opinions which they cannot defend from being absurd and
irrational, could have swayed them to reproach Reason in the manner they do;
but they do only decline the weapons they are sure to be wounded by. When men
have filled Religion with Opinions that are contrary to common Sense and
Natural Light, they are forced to introduce a suitable Faith, namely, such a
one that commends it self from believing Doctrines repugnant to the evidence
and principles of both. And thus under a respect that is pleaded to be due to
sacred Mysteries, do the wildest fancies take Sanctuary: And merely out of fear
of violating that regard which ought to be paid to Objects of Faith, we must
believe that to be true which the Universal Reason of Mankind gives the lie
to. Thus the first Heretics that troubled the Christian Church, under pretense
of teaching Mysteries, overthrew common sense, and did violence to the
Universal Uniform and perpetual Light of Mankind. Some of them having taught
that all Creatures are naturally Evil; Others of them having established two
Sovereign Gods, one Good, and another Bad; Others having affirmed the Soul to
be a part of the Divine Substance, not to mention a thousand falsities more;
all these they defended against the assaults of the Orthodox, by pretending
that they were Mysteries, about which Reason was not to be hearkened to. Thus
do others to this day, who being resolved to obtrude their fancies upon the
World, and being neither able to prove nor defend what they say, they pretend
the Spirit of God to be the Author of all their Theorem's. Nor can I assign a
better reason for the antipathy of the Turks to Philosophy, than that it
overthrows the follies and absurdities of their Religion. This themselves
confess by devoting Almansor to the vengeance of Heaven, because he has
weakened the Faith of Mussul-men in the Alcoran, through introducing Learning
and Philosophy amongst them. There is no Combating of the Valentinians,
Marcionites, Eutychians, and others, but by showing the repugnance of their
Opinions to first principles of Reason. We do not make Natural Light the
positive Measure of things Divine, do only allow it a Negative voice. We place
it not in the Chair in Councels of Faith, but do only permit it to keep the
door, and hinder the entering of Contradictions and Irrational Fancies,
disguised under the Name of Sacred Mysteries. This I thought fit to propose in
the first place, and have the more largely insisted on it, because of its
serviceableness against the Corporal presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and
the ubiquity of Christ's Body, and diverse other Articles both of the Roman and
Lutheran Creeds. What the Universal Reason of Mankind tells us is finite,
commensurable and impenetrable, etc. they would have us believe it to be
Infinite, Immense, and subject to penetration. The great Article of the Roman
Faith, viz. Transubstantiation must needs be false, if there be any
incontestable Principles of Reason, or True Maxims of Philosophy. For to omit
at present, that it is Repugnant to Metaphysical and Physical Axioms, that
Accidents should exist without a subject, or that there should be Whiteness and
nothing white, Sweetness, and nothing sweet; that one Body should be penetrated
by another, when we find every Material substance irresistibly to defend its
self from coexistence in the same place with another that is Corporeal; that
one and the same Being should be entirely at one and the same time in distant
places (which is to be distant from it self) yea, that it should be there with
contradictory adjuncts; that the Sign and thing signified, or Relate and
Correlate should be the same. I say to pass these by, as having been a thousand
times urged against the Papists, and nothing replied but what renders their
Folly and Extravagance the greater and more remarkable. I shall only say that
Transubstantiation is inconsistent with the first Principles of Logic. (1.) No
Enunciation is true, but upon the account of Congruity to its Object; and the
previous existence of the Object according to what is affirmed of, or denied
concerning it, is that which grounds the verity of the Enunciation; If
therefore the Sacramental Elements be not the Body and Blood of Christ
antecedently to the words of Consecration, the Enunciation by which the Priest
affirms the one to be the other must necessarily be false. (2.) Every
Enunciation supposes a previous Act and judgment of the Mind, of which it is
Manifestative; for the End of words, is to indicate Conceptions: Unless
therefore previously to consecration the Bread be judged to be the real Flesh
of Christ, no one can truly assert that it is so. (3.) In every true
Enunciation, the subject may by Conversion become the predicate, as is evident
by an induction of all propositions in the World; while therefore the Body of
Christ cannot in a proper and Physical sense be said to be Bread, no more can
Bread in a proper sense be said to be the Body of Christ. (4.) No Disparate can
be truly affirmed in casu recto of another, that interfering with the Nature of
opposites; Bread and the Body of Christ therefore being Disparates, the one
cannot in a proper sense be predicated of the other. (5.) No real, positive
Attribute or predicate can be affirmed of a subject which is not; for, non
entis nulla sunt attributa. And therefore if the Bread be annihilated (as
indeed it must be, unless instead of allowing Christ to have only one Body, and
that formed of the substance of the Virgin, we should hold that he has many
Bodies, and those formed of Material Particles distinct from what he was framed
of in the Womb of the Virgin,) Our Savior spoke very illogically, in asserting
concerning that which it is not at all, that it is his Body. I shall wave what
might be further added to this purpose, only conclude it with this brief
remarque, That if Principles of Reason obtain so far in Things purely
Supernatural, as that there can be no repugnance betwixt the one and the other,
they ought more especially to have so much place in those things which Grace
borrows and transports from Nature for its Use.

Secondly: When we say that there is nothing in Religion which is truly
repugnant to Principles of Reason, we do not by Principles of Reason,
understand all that this or that sort of men vote and receive for such. The
Universal Reason of Mankind is of great Moment, but mistaken Philosophy and
false Notions of things, which this and that Man admit for theorem's of Reason,
are of very small importance. Men being mislead by their Senses, Affections,
Interests, and Imaginations, do many times mingle errors and false conceits
with the Genuine Dictates of their Minds, and then appeal to them as the
Principles of Truth and Reason, when they are indeed noth^ng else but the vain
Images of our fancies, and the conclusions of Ignorance and mistake* Though
Reason in the Abstract, and those inb^ed notices implanted in our Souls, which
upon the first exercise of our Faculties, command an Assent, be all consistent
with the Mysteries of Faith; yet Reason in the Concrete, and as it exists in
this and that man, being weak, maimed, imperfect, and extremely remote from a
full and just comprehension of things, we do accordingly find many Articles of
Revelation to have been little befriended by Axioms and principles of vulgar
Philosophy. But this proceeds from the Corruption of Reason, its being vitiated
by Lusts, biased by Interests, perverted by Education, darkened by Passions,
enthralled by Prejudice; rather than from Reason it self; and is to be ascribed
not to the Light of Reason, but to the Darkness that envelop's it. It has been
usual for men, according to the School they have been bred in, to expound and
judge of Religion in Analogy to the principles they have sucked in from thence.
By this means has Religion been embased, through men's subjecting the Examen
and conduct of it to mistaken Philosophy. He that would examine an Article of
Faith by a Proposition of Reason, must be careful that his Measure be just and
true, and not deceitful and fallacious. No man ought to distrust an Article of
Religion for its being against a proposition which we take to be true only
because we were taught it. The Prejudice done to Religion by mistaken
Philosophy ought not to be dissembled; and I shall therefore crave a little
liberty here to unfold it. And not to insist on the ill Influence that the
Phenician and Chaldaick Philosophy had on the Judaick Theology; though it be of
easy proof that their Planetary Deities, and their Teraphims sprung from
thence. Nor to do any more but mention, that the chief Errors of the
Pharisees, Sadduces, and Esseans took their rise from the Grecian Philosophy;
their Dogm's being a mixture of Pythagorean, Platonic, Stoic, and Epicurean
Notions. I shall rather observe that the chiefest Errors that have infested
the Christian Church, arose from a mingling Gentile Philosophy with the
Doctrine of the Gospel. Both Irenaeus and Tertullian affirm the Errors of the
Gnostics to have sprung from the Platonic Ideas; Though I think it not
improbable, but that their (...) and (...) took their birth from
Pythagoreanism. The Aeons of the Valentinians, if we will believe Tertullian,
were also ^orrowed from the Idea's of Plato; but if any shall judge that they
were rather derived from Hesiod, I shall not contend, seeing the Ancient Poets
were not only the Ethnic Theologues, but their chief Philosophers. Epiphanius
tells us that the Heresies of the Marcionites came out of the School of Plato.
Lib. de here is. Lib. de curand Affectib. Graecor. Annal. ad An. 174. Dissert. de
vit. and Script. Porphyr. cap. 1. Ep. ad Ctesiph. Augustine. Tom. 1. cap. 18.
Theodoret inform's us that Sabellius became a Heretic by his obstinacy in
Plato's Doctrine. Tatian being deeply tinctured with Platonism became thereupon
Head of the Eucratists, if you will give Credit to Baronius. Holstenius has
shown us how the Manichean principles were framed from the Pythagorean. Hierom
assures us that Pelagius sucked all his Doctrine from the Philosophy of
Pythagoras and Zeno, and Jans^nius fully proves it. Nor did Samosatenus and
Arius derive their blasphemous opinions concerning the Deity of Christ, from
any other fountain, save from the Platonic Philosophy. The Popish (...) or
Saint-worship, is nothing but an imitation of the (...) or Daemon-worship of
the Pagan Philosophers. And that (...) of the latter gave rise to the Doctrine
of Supererogation held by the former. The Romish Purgatory was fetched from
Plato, Lib. 10. de Repub.
as well as from Virgil and Ovid. Yea their Caelibate had its first foundation
in the Doctrine of Pythagoras. I might also add that the Opinion of the
Praeexistence of Souls, lately revived among our selves, and the Notion of
Ethereal Vehicles of Angelical Spirits, were imbibed from Plato and
Pythagoras. Ad Hermog. lib. de praescript.
It was not therefore without Cause that Tertullian styled the Philosophers the
Patriarchs of Heretics; and that he affirmed Haereses a Philosophia subornari,
Heresies to have been occasioned by Philosophy; and that Philosophy was
condimentum, the seasoning of all Heresies. Nor was He alone in this opinion,
for Lactantius, Arnobius, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, besides
diverse others, speak all to the same purpose. The Platonic School at
Alexandria, was the Seminary of the chiefest and most pestilent Errors vented
in the Church, during the four first Centuries. Joannes Baptista Crispus has
wrote a discourse of Plato's Opinions, and has at the End of every Chapter
shown what Heresies sprung from each. Yea, the Apostle Paul seems plainly to
me, to have intended the Pythagoreans and Platonists, when he advises the
Colessians to beware lest any man should spoil them through Philosophy, Col.
2.8. Platonism growing out of request, did the Philosophy of Aristotle after it
came into esteem, prove more friendly to Religion? No! The purity and
simplicity of the Gospel, was no less corrupted by blending the Dogm's of
Aristotle with the Articles of Faith, than it had been by mingling the
Philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato with the Doctrines of Christ. The primitive
Centuries felt some of the mischievous effects of it. The Theodotians upheld
their Error by the reasonings of Aristotle. The Carpocratians out of an
inordinate zeal to his Doctrine, erected an Image to him. The Aetians were
transported to that degree of madness, as to teach their Scholars the
Categories of Aristotle for a Catechism. Lib. 2. cap. 35.
Socrates expressly informs us, that it was the Aristotelick Philosophy that
lead Aetius into the Heresy of Arius. Hierom tells us, that the Heretics
sheltred themselves inter spineta Aristotelis among the briars of Aristotle,
and that their Heresies were fostred from thence. And Tertullian assures us,
that the Enemies of the Christian faith borrowed their Arms from him, De
prescript.
by which they defended their Errors. But the greatest mischief that befell
Religion through the Philosophy of Aristotle, was, after the Schoolmen had
molded Theology to his Method, and undertaken the management of Divinity in
analogy to his principles. The vast Volumes of the Schoolmen are stuffed with
Peripatetick depravations, and their Scholastic controversies are resolved
into the subtilties of his Philosophy. Christian Morality lost its simplicity
and purity by being blended with his Ethics; and the Doctrines of Faith became
depraved through the mixing them with his metaphysical niceties. It was by this
means that Christianity which is a plain simple thing of it self, became
corrupted into an Artificial kind of wrangling, and degenerated into
contentious and unprofitable altercations. For partly through an usurpation of
barbarous and insignificant Words; partly through an introduction of new Terms;
partly through handling the great mysteries of Faith in Analogy to metaphysical
Hypotheses; partly through accommodating the Articles of Religion to a
congruity with Philosophical Axioms; partly by applying Maxims of Philosophy
beyond their proper Objects; partly by their disputing every thing pro and con;
and especially by advancing Aristotle to an equal Authority with God himself,
they wholly defaced and contaminated Religion. Nor have Luther, Melancthon,
Bucer, Calvin, and other Protestants, only complained of it, but many of the
most learned and sober Romanists, such as Mirandula, Beatus Rhenanus, Erasmus,
Vives, Jansenius, Gassendus, etc. have severely censured it. Nor is the case
mended since the Aristotelick Philosophy grew out of repute, and the Cartesian,
and Corpuscularian usurped the Chair. I readily grant that in reference to the
solving the Phenomenon of Nature, there is more to be said for the
Corpuscularian Hypothesis, than for any other. Nor do I envy Descartes all due
praise, though I would not be the person that should fasten the many Encomiums
and Elogiums on him, that some men adorn him with. I also allow that generous
freedom which our Cartesians pretend to, of being baptized into no man's
Notions, upon the mere Authority of his Name; and I wish they were true to
themselves, and while they inveigh against the Aristotelians as Mancipata
Capita, they did nor continue the Tyranny, though they have changed the Tyrant.
Yet I crave leave to say, that as the Cartesian Hypothesis is managed, it is
like to prove as disserviceable to Religion, as any Philosophy hitherto
entertained in the World. I will not insist on his renouncing Arguments for the
Being of God, derived from the Fabric of things, though therein he plainly
reflects upon the Scripture, which in more than one place calls in Media of
that Nature to demonstrate the Existence of a Deity. Neither will I Press his
discharging all Spirits from place, though that seems consequentially to
discharge them from Being; for what is no where, we cannot well apprehend to be
at all. And if Ubication be nothing but the presence of things in place, and if
place necessarily Exist, and that as well without the Circle of the Universe as
within it, it would seem to me impossible, but that if a thing exist at all, it
should coexist with place. Nor will I dwell upon his disbanding all Final
Causes out of the precincts of natural Philosophy. Though that would seem to
imply, that all things are the effects of Fate or Chance, and that there was no
design nor Counsel in the production of them. For if infinite Wisdom contrived,
and infinite Power framed the World, such an Agent behoved to have an End, in
order to which he acted, and this ought to be of prime consideration in our
speculations of the fabric and nature of things. Nor shall I dwell upon his
attempting to solve all the Phenomenon of Nature secluding any Immediate influx
of Divine Providence: yea, that all the Phenomenon of the Universe might arise
out of Matter by mere mechanical Motion, and that Matter alone, supposing such
a degree of motion communicated to it, and the Laws of motion established,
could have produced the Sun, Moon, Stars, Plants, Animals, and the Bodies of
men in such Organization, Order, Beauty, and Harmony, as now they are. Though
this seems wonderfully to befriend the Atheists, for if all that which we
observe in the World, supposing the Existence of matter and Motion, might
result from the mere laws of mechanism, I do not see but that persons
Atheistically disposed, may go a degree farther, and affirm both the
self-existence of matter, and that motion was appendent to it; its Idea no more
excluding motion than it includes Rest. Neither will I dwell upon his Notion of
the Conflict between the Flesh and Spirit which the Scripture so emphatically
mentions, namely, that it is nothing but the repugnance of those motions which
the Body by its Spirits, and the Soul by her Will, endeavor to excite at the
same time in the Glandula pinealis, or little Kernel where he supposes the
Soul to be harbored and seated. As if the whole conflict which the Holy Ghost
so solemnly describes under the Notion of a War betwixt the Law of our members
and the Law of our mind, Romans 7.23. and the lusting of the Flesh against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal. 17. were nothing else, but that
the Kernel in the midst of the Brain, being driven on one side by the Soul, and
on the other by the Animal Spirits (which are minute bodies) it thence comes to
pass that those impulses being oftentimes contrary, the stronger hinders the
operation of the weaker. When the Corporeal Spirits by their rude Joggings of
the glandulous Button, endeavor to excite in the Soul a desire of any thing,
and the Soul repels it by the Will she has to avoid the same thing, This
constitutes the War betwixt the Law of the Members and the Law of the Mind. I
am apt to think that the Author of the Defense and continuation of the
Ecclesiastical Polity, p. 339, 340, 341, 342.
had this in his eye, when he undertakes to resolve all the Joys, refreshings,
Fears, Sorrows, etc. of a people he is pleased to style Phanaticks, by the laws
of Mechanism, and principles of Anatomy. And it is not unlikely but that Mr.
Sherlock before he addressed to the Philosophy of Christ's Satisfaction (for so
he is pleased to call it) had thoroughly digested the Philosophy of this Combat
we have been speaking of; and having accommodated the latter to mechanical
Principles, he may very well mould the other to a compliance with the
Hypothesis of Socinus. To wave all these and many more Tenets in the Cartesian
Philosophy which very little befriend Religion, I shall at present only call
forth two principles of Monsieur Descartes which he superstructs all his
Philosophy upon, and which, if I greatly mistake nor, are likely to disserve
Religion, beyond any thing occurring in the Aristotelick Philosophy. The first
shall be that famous thing called Dubitatio Cartesiana, Prim. Philosoph.
Meditat. prim.
for which he is justly impeached of shaking the foundations of the house of
Wisdom, and laying a ground for Universal Skepticism. The Sum of his Notion is
briefly this, that in our enquiry after Truth we are not only to unhinge, and
suspend our assent from all or any of those things which we formerly believed,
but that we are to demean our selves toward them as if they were false, that
is, as himself paraphraseth it, we are no more to believe them, than if they
were so. Like as a needle placed between two Magnets, at a distance
proportionable to the different forces of the contrary Movents, remains in an
aequilibration without a propension to the one more than the other; so in our
researches of Truth, the Mind is to bind up its assent for a time, from
affirming a thing either to be true or false. And this Dubitation or suspension
of the Judgment he carries to that extent, that he has not so much as allowed
us the postulatum of Archimedes, viz. ground whereupon to set our foot. For he
not only supposes our Senses to be fallacious where the Object is remote, the
Organ tinctured and indisposed, and the Medium inept, but even where there is a
concurrence of all those things which are commonly required to the certainty of
Sensation. Yea he asks us, how we know, that we were not created at first of
such a frame as to be in all things invincibly obnoxious to error? and what
assurance we have, but that some evil Genius, Wise, powerful and malicious,
does haunt and impose upon us in all our consultations? either by mingling
false colors in seeing, or altering the undulations of the air in Hearing, or
by communicating various impressions to the Nerves, different shocks to the
brain, and agitations to the glandula pinealis, or by impregnating the
Imagination with false Idea's, or infecting true ones with false tinctures, or
by variously modifying and changing all the textures and motions of the Animal
Spirits, or by disordering all the ranks and files of our Ideas, and
discomposing all the Vestigia of things which are impressed upon so soft and
dissipable a substance as the Brain? Now how far these reasonings extend, and
what an unhappy and troublesome Guest such a Genius were, if other men could
not with as much facility lay this Devil, as Descartes has raised him, is
easy to imagine. A wariness in pronouncing concerning natural things, where
though there be many things certain which ought not to be called in question,
yet there are many things doubtful of which we ought not precipitantly to
determine, was allowed by all the old philosophers, and was especially
practiced by Plato and his successors in the Old Academy, whence arose the
Academick (...) or suspension of Assent. But the Cartesian dubitation reaches
further, yea they extend it so far as to doubt whether there be a god or not.
Yea that we ought to question the Existence of the Deity. Carts. prin.
Philosoph. and Epist. 10. Tom. Poster Velthuis.
And that if we would philosophise to any purpose concerning the Being of God,
we must not only call into question, but for a time suppose it false that there
is one: as a Cartesian lately proposed it in public questions at Leyden. We
have a further evidence of the extent and tendency of this Dubitation,
vouchsafed us by the Author of Philosophia Scripturae Interpres, who claiming
the same right of questioning all things in Divinity, till he should arrive at
something certain and evident, that Descartes has in philosophy* does at last
issue it in making Faith wait at the elbow of Reason, and in constituting
Philosophy the Standard of Theology. Yea we have a more deplorable instance of
this unbounded Dubitation in the Anonymous Author of Tractatus
Theologicopoliticus, (supposed to be Benedictus Spinosa) who being thoroughly
tinctured with this and the rest of the Cartesian principles, has in pursuance
of them, endeavored in effect to undermine and subvert all Supernatural
Revelation. I cannot but commend the ingenuity of Henricus Regius, who having
imbibed this Cartesian principle, and foreseeing that it would be charged as
leading to Skepticism, he very heartily confesses it, and withal add's, that
it is impossible by any principles in Nature to avoid a perpetual Hesitation;
and I will add, that if there be no principles in Nature to check Skepticism,
the principles of Revelation can never do it, for without presupposing both
that our Senses and Reasons do not universally deceive us, we can have no
assurance that there is any such thing as a Supernatural Revelation at all. I
would not say that the Cartesians are Scepticks, but I say, they owe it not to
the principles of their Philosophy, that they are not so. Supposing us once to
disband, lay by, and to take for false, all that we have imbibed from
Education, or otherwise embraced, I would fain know where we can begin, and
upon what foundation we can superstruct Science? They who propose it as a
Principle that we are to doubt of every thing, ought in pursuance of their
Hypothesis to suspect those very principles with they lay down for Certain. If
there be not some principles incontestable and beyond the precincts of being
gainsayed, it is not to be imagined but that we should be endlesly bewildred
and entangled in a perpetual and inextricable maze. According to this new
Hypothesis, no man can be sure that there are any Material effects or Beings in
the World; for we can have no other Certainty of the Existence of Corporeal
Beings, but by their affecting the Organs of Sensation; and of this according
to the principles of Descartes, there is no assurance can be obtained? For
(1.) How can I be certain that there are any impressions made by foreign
Objects upon the Fibers and Nerves, seeing all may be but mere Fancy and
Imagination? (2.) How shall I be ascertained that those impulses upon the
Nerves which we ascribe to outward Objects, are not begotten and caused by the
Malus Genius we just now heard of? And as I must in pursuance of this Principle
abide in a perpetual Suspension of Mind, whether there be any Material Beings
in the World, so I can no ways be assured from any effects which I observe in
the Universe, either that they have a second Cause at all, or which
particularly is their Cause; not the latter seeing God may produce the like
effects by different Causes; not the former, because whatsoever is brought
forth by the ministry of second Causes, may be produced immediately by God
himself. I will only subjoyn that if there be any Truth in this Cartesian
Notion, no man can be assured of his own Cogitation, or whether he does
cogitate at all. For we cannot otherwise know that we do know, but by a latter
reflex act of the Mind upon the former; and of this I can have no certainty,
seeing I am not sure whether the Act I reflect upon, were elicited by the mind
it self, or only an impression begotten in me by some powerful and malicious
Guest which does continually haunt us. I am not ignorant of the restrictions,
limitations, and expositions with some Cartesians give of the foregoing
Principle, but upon an examination of what is alleged against it by Gassendus,
Schoockius, Daniel Voetius, Vogelsangius and others, and what is pleaded in
justification of it by Claubergius, De Bruin, etc. as well as Descartes
himself; I must needs say that all the Cartesian plea's in behalf of it, do
either overthrow what themselves would establish, and contradict what they
endeavor to obtrude, or that they are wholly weak and impotent. But I am not
without thoughts of discoursing this more largely some other time, and
therefore shall at present supersede the further prosecution of it. The Second
Cartesian principle which I impeach as disserviceable to Religion, is this,
That whatsoever we have a clear and distinct perception of, is infallibly true,
and that we are no ways longer to doubt of it. This they make the only test of
discerning and distinguishing Truth from Falsehood: Nor do they allow any other
Measure or Standard of discriminating betwixt Verity and Error. If we should
be deceived in these things which we have clear and distinct perceptions of,
God himself, Prim. Phil. Medit. 6.
says Descartes would be Fallax and Deceptor (horresco referens) and all our
Errors and Mistakes must be attributed to him. Unless the Cartesians be
infallible in what ever they imagine themselves to have a distinct perception
and cognizance of, God must be cease to be Good and True, and must undergo the
blame of all their hallucinations. I do the rather touch on this Cartesian
Axiom, because I not only find it introduced into Divinity by some Outlandish
Writers, but by some Modern Theologues at home, particularly by the Author of
Deus Justificatus. p. 17.
Nor will it be amiss a little to enquire into it, as well upon the account of
its being erected by the Cartesians for the first and only principle of all
Certainty and Science, as upon the Score of the bad effects it is like to have
upon the minds of men in Matters of Religion. Now the meaning and sense of this
Theoreme must either be this, That whatever we apprehend and perceive as it is,
it infallibly is so, and our perception of it is true. But then according to
this paraphrase of it, there cannot be a more nugatory and ridiculous
proposition formed; for it is as much as if we should say, what we have a true
cognizance of, that we have a true cognizance of; and what is truly known by
us, that we do truly know. But this cannot be the meaning which the Cartesians
intend by it, for as much as they make the clearness and distinctness of
perception the Rule by which we ought to judge of the Existence of Objects and
things. For according to them our perceptions are not therefore clear and true,
because of their congruity to the Objects about which our minds are conversant;
but on the contrary they determine concerning the Object, from the clearness
and distinctness of our perception. The sense therefore of this Cartesian
Axiom, if it have any at all, and be not perfect nonsense, must be this,
namely, That every thing really is as we perceive it, provided our perception
of it be clear and distinct. That those Idea's of things which offer themselves
to our Minds by clear and distinct perceptions, are infallibly the true idea's
of the Natures and properties of the things themselves. Now admitting this to
be the sense of it, I affirm it to be the most silly, fallacious, and lubricous
principle, that ever men pretending to Philosophy laid down. I shall wave that
Medium, that there may be clearness and distinctness of perception in acts of
simple apprehension, and consequently that whatsoever we clearly and distinctly
perceive is not true, because Acts of simple Apprehension are not capable of
verity. This I say I shall decline the urging of, seeing I judge both Verity
and Falsity to obta^n in all the operations of the Mind. For Verity being
nothing else but the conformity of the Act to the Object, there is as well an
Incomplex Verity in acts of simple Apprehension, as there is a Complex Verity
in Acts of Judgment. I may as well apprehend things to be as indeed they are,
as I may affirm one thing of another as indeed it is. However, though I wave
this Medium, yet my first Argument shall be drawn from acts of simple
Apprehension, but built upon another Medium, and it is this; whatsoever I can
clearly apprehend, separate, and apart, I can apprehend the same with the same
clearness united and Conjunct, for example, as I can clearly and distinctly
apprehend a River and Wine apart; I can with the same clearness apprehend them
conjunct and united; and yet I should be loath to trust this Cartesian
principle so far as to assert that there is really a River runs Wine, merely
because I can frame a complex apprehension of these two together. (2.) It
interferes with what the Cartesians elsewhere, and upon other occasions
affirm. For according to them when possibles offer themselves to our Rational
Natures by a clear and distinct perception, we do not otherwise perceive them,
than as actually existent, and yet they themselves will not say that they do
actually exist. (3.) The Objective Verity of Things, is the Rule and Measure of
the verity of perception; for therefore are our perceptions true, because
consonant to the Nature of things, and consequently clearness and distinctness
of perception is not the Test by which we are to judge of the Natures,
Qualities, and Modes of Beings. (4.) We are bound to pay an assent to many
Doctrines, and believe not a few things, whereof we can have no clear and
distinct perception; such for example, are the Mysteries of the Trinity, and
Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. If we could distinctly and clearly perceive
them, they were no longer Mysteries, and if we do not assent to, and bel^eve
them, notwithstanding that we do not distinctly and clearly perceive them, we
are hardly, yea, I may say not at all Christians. This is so indubitable, that
we may, yea, ought to assent to many things which we have no clear and distinct
perception of, that Descartes himself is forced to subscribe to it; his words
are that multis possumus assentiri, quae non nisi perobscure and confuse
cognoscimus; which as it is most true, so he could have said nothing more
contradictory to, and subversive of his own principles, (5.) Experience not
only tells us that Men do often err and mistake, but that they do so in things
about which they suppose themselves to have clear and distinct perceptions:
Yea, if we will believe Descartes, impetrare a nobis non possismus, ut obscure
and confuse cognitis, quamdi^ talia nobis apparent assensum praebeamus; We
cannot obtain of our selves to assent to any thing, so long as we only
obscurely and confusedly know it. Now though this be egregiously false, yet
nothing could be said more to the overthrow of this great and fundamental
principle of his. For if men can assent to nothing but what they have a clear
and distinct cognizance of, and if daily experience assure that one or other is
always embracing, venting, and justifying Error, then farewell to this
principle of the Cartesians, that whatsoever presents it self to us by a clear
and distinct perception, is really, and in it self so as we do perceive it.
(6.) Were it most true that it is impossible for any thing to be otherwise than
what we clearly and distinctly perceive it; yet this can be no first principle
of Science; because we are still at a loss how we shall know, whether we have a
clear and distinct perception of things, yea or not. Let us suppose two men
imbued with Opinions, whereof those of the one are repugnant with those of the
other, and each of them pleading a clearness and distinctness of perception in
reference to his own. Now I would enquire of the Cartesians, by what means
these two men shall be satisfied that their knowledge is clear and distinct,
for clearness and distinctness of perception, can no more be ascribed to both
of them, than truth can be predicated of the two parts of a contradiction. (7.)
The Cartesians in the justifying of this principle involve themselves in a most
shameful Circle. For if it be enquired, how we shall know but that God has
framed us with such Faculties as may in the most clear and distinct perceptions
we have, abuse and delude us. They reply, that we know it from the idea which
we have of Gods being perfect, i e. infinitely Good and True; and if they be
again asked, what assurance they have that this is a true idea of God, they
recurr to their Canon of clear and distinct perception for the justifying of
it. Thus they prove the truth of their Rule and Measure from the perfection of
God; and the perfection of God from the truth of their Rule; which, if I
mistake not, is to argue circularly. Shall I add (in the eighth and last place)
that it is nothing but Socinianism new furbished, and seems indeed shapen to
justify them in their most detestable Errors. For it is remarkable, that when
they are in a sober mood, they tell us that they do not renounce the Articles
of the Trinity, Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. because they are above our
reason, but because they judge them repugnant to the distinct and clear
perceptions which they of things. The words of Smalcius are; We readily
acknowledge many things in the Christian Religion, Nos vero ultro fatemur,
plurima esse in Religione Christiana quae rationem superant. contr. Frantz.
disp. 3. de Sacramento. supra rationem Religionem esse novimus; de liber.
arbitr.
which are above our Reason; and we know that Religion transcends Reason. Their
quarrel with these mysteries is this, that there are many things which they
clearly and distinctly perceive, to which these Doctrines are contradictious.
This I thought convenient to discourse a little the more largely, because
though nothing in Religion be repugnant to any true principle of Reason, yet
there are many things voted for principles of Reason, which indeed are not so,
and it is no disparagement to Articles of Faith to interfere with such. The
Mind is so darkened by the Fall, and Eclipsed by habitual Lusts, that there is
but little right Reason in reference to spiritual things in the World.

Thirdly: Reason is not the positive Measure of things Divine. As there are
many Doctrines of Faith, which Reason in its highest exaltation could never
have disdiscovered, so being made known, it cannot in its clearest light fully
comprehend them. Though Revelation presupposes Reason, and does in no one
thing contradict it, yet the very End of Revelation is both to certify Reason
in such things wherein through its contracted darkness it does mistake, and to
inform it in those which through the essential quality of its Nature it could
never have discovered. Accordingly men in all ages have not only been listening
after some supernatural Revelation or other, but whatever they took for such,
they always without more ado resigned themselves to the conduct of it. It Is
true, they disparaged their Reason in admitting that to be a Divine Revelation
which indeed was not so, but on supposition that it had been such they acted
most rationally in surrendering themselves to the guidance of it. The Article it
self may be plainly revealed, and yet not only the reason and mode of it lie
altogether hid, but the thing it self may overpower our Faculties, and dazzle
them with its Majesty and Splendor. (1.) Reason is often non-plust and puzzled
about its own proper Objects, and the phenomenon of Nature, and shall we think
it a competent judge of Objects it was never adapted for? It is below many of
the Works of God, and therefore much more below Mysteries of Revelation. See
this Argument elegantly and strenuously handled by Bradwardine de causa Dei
lib. 1. c. 1. Here are many things which we ought to admire, but must never
hope fully to understand. Our work here is to believe, not to enquire. (2.) If
our minds will not submit to a Revelation until they see a reason of the
proposition, they do not believe or obey at all, because they do not submit
till they cannot choose. Faith bears not upon demonstration, but upon the
Authority and Veracity of the speaker; and therefore to believe nothing but
what we do comprehend is not to believe, but to argue, and is Science not
Faith. Qui in Evangelio quod vultis, creditis: quod non vultis, non creditis,
vobis potius quam evangelio creditis, lib. 17. contr. Faustu^. cap. 17.
Ye that will believe in the Gospel what you please, and what ye think fit, ye
will not believe, you renounce the Gospel says Austin to the Manichees, for
you believe your selves, not it. (3.) To believe nothing but what we can fully
comprehend, is to remonstrate to the Wisdom and Power of God, at least to
challenge to our selves an Omniscience proportionable to the Divine Wisdom and
Omnipotence. (4.) The Rule and Measure of Faith must be certain, but no man's
Reason universally is so, because one Man's Reason rejects what another assents
to. Every man pretends to right Reason, but who has it, is hard to tell. If it
be lawful for one man to reject a plain Revelation in one particular, because
he cannot comprehend it, why may not a second do the same with reference to
Revelation in another particular. As the Socinians by making their Reason judge
of what they are to believe, will not admit many of the prime Articles of the
Gospel; so the Philosophers would make their Reason judge of what they should
receive, and their Reason would not admit the Gospel at all. (5.) The certainty
of Revelation is preferred to all other Evidence, and we are commanded to
subject our Reason to the Authority of God in the Scripture; and by
consequence, Reason cannot be the positive Measure of Religion. The Sacred
Writers do every where remit us to the Scripture it self as the Rule of Faith,
and not at all to the Tribunal of Reason. Herein are the Socinians justly
impeachable; for though sometimes they acknowledge Religion to be above Reason,
as we lately heard; yet at other times they speak in a very indifferent Manner.
Sola ratione dijudicamus possibilitatem and impossibilitatem articulorum fidei.
praefat. contr. Frantz. 2.
By Reason alone (says Smalcius) can we define what is possible, and what is
impossible in matters of Faith. See to the same purpose Ostorod. Instit. cap.
6. Schlicting. de Trinit. advers. Meisner p. 67. etc. Hence that of Socinus,
that he would not believe Christ to have satisfied for our sins, though he
should read it not only once, but often in the Scripture; and that the
Infallibility of the Revealer had not been enough to establish it, Lib. de
Servat. part. 3. cap. 6. Idem ibid. part. 2. cap. 4.
supposing Christ to have said it, and to have risen from the Dead to declare
his own Veracity, unless he had declared it by its Causes and effects, and so
shown the possibility of it. To which agrees a passage of Smalcius in reference
to the Incarnation of the Son of God, Homil. 8. in cap. 1. Joan.
that he would not submit to it, though he should meet with it not only often,
but in express Terms in the Bible. I wish others did not say the same in
effect: But while they renounce Doctrines upon no other account but their
incomprehensibleness, or because we cannot fully fathom them, they must give us
leave to think whose principles they have drunk in, and whose cause they plead.
Thus have I discoursed the whole Interest of Reason in Religion; and as I know
not that I have said any more in this Matter than what is generally maintained
by all the sober Nonconformists; so I hope I may say that the charge which some
men have fastened upon us, as if we wholly renounced Reason in all Concernments
of Religion, and that no Contradiction can astonish or stagger us; and that
this is the foundation and support of the Credit of the party, especially
amongst Vulgar Hearers, is a false aspersion, groundless calumny, and an
impudent Crimination. And though I do not think that it savour's of overmuch
Modesty, that a few young Theologues of the Church of England (if indeed they
be so) should monopolize to themselves the name of Rational Divines; yet, for
my own part, I neither envy them the Title, nor have any quarrel with them upon
that account, it being indeed their want of Reason that I find fault with. And
as it has generally been the unhappiness of others who have too much boasted
of, and relied upon Reason, to fall into the most irrational sentiments; so I
do not see but that it is in a very great measure the misfortune of our New
Rationalists. As the Philosophers of old made Reason their only Rule, and yet
most of their Religious opinions, whether in reference to Faith, Worship, or
Moral Obedience were perfectly Irrational. And as the Socinians pretend to pay
more than an ordinary veneration to Reason, and yet there are none in the world
whose Tenets lie more cross to the Fundamental Maxims of it, than some of
theirs do. For to give Religious Adoration to a mere Creature (for such they
allow Christ only to be) to deny God the fore knowledge of future contingents,
and to ascribe passions and affections to God in the manner they are incident
to us, are such Repugnancies to Reason, that a man had need renounce that, as
well as Revelation, ere he can admit them. So I account it of easy proof that
many of the Darling Notions about Original Sin, Converting Grace, the Nature of
Regeneration, and Justification it self, etc. of our pretended late Rational
Divines, are as well repugnant to Reason, as they are to Scripture.

CHAP. II. Of the Import and Use of Scripture-Metaphors.
SECT. I.
SOme men having espoused corrupt designs in reference to the Truths of the
Gospel, are in pursuance thereof led to Methods which may subserve and
countenance their Undertakings. For the End being fixed, Means must be found
out and adapted for the compassing of it. Now among other little arts and
contrivances supposed conducible to their Undertaking, I find some late Writers
improving their skill and industry especially in these two things. First, under
pretense of banishing all wrangling, brawling and vain talking, they study to
cashier and discharge all Disputes in and about Religion; and it is become their
Interests upon two accounts so to do: (1.) That they may have the liberty to
vent what they please without running the hazard of being contradicted. (2.)
Because finding themselves unable to justify what they would obtrude upon the
World, unless it be in a Dramatick, Drolling way, they think it fit under the
plea of dislike to a pugnacious, disputing humor, to except against all
Logical and Scholastical Methods of treating things, as knowing the weapons
they are sure to be foiled at. Did they only disallow quarrelling about
Opinions which neither serve to render us sounder Christians, nor better men,
and which were both at first commenced, and are still maintained out of
interest; or did they only impeach the fetching of Topics from Aristotle or
Aquinas, and the arguing with the same confidence from the Decretals as from
the four Evangelists, I should highly commend both their Wisdom and Zeal. But
while whatever crosses Socinus, or Pelagius, is immediately branded as vain
and empty speculations; and Paul's Epistles are censured with little less
modesty than they arraign the Writings of the Schoolmen: I must suppose them
engaged in a design against the Gospel, which they are not willing as yet
publicly to own. If they account that I impose upon them in this matter, I
shall upon the least intimation direct them to the Authors I aim at, and the
places whence I derived my information: But in the mean time, out of respect
both to the interest of Religion, and their Reputation, I shall forbear. The
second is, their arraigning Words, Phrases, and modes of speech, wherein what
they dislike is intended. Hence are their Clamours concerning Metaphors, even
against such, as the Holy Ghost condescendeth to use, in order to the
instructing us as well of our State as Duty. Where the authority and credit of
Men is merely concerned, I love not to quarrel with any about Terms and
expressions, further than as they have an Influence upon things; and providing
I were at an agreement with them in the latter, I should as well give as claym
a great liberty in the former. But when both the Wisdom of God stands
impeached, and under the palliation of quarrelling with Terms and Phrases, the
chief Doctrines of the Gospel are supplanted, it then becomes the Duty of those
who have a Zeal for his Honor and the Truth once delivered to the Saints, to
declare their resentment. The unfolding the Nature, Import and Use of
Scripture- Metaphors, as it is in it self a laudable undertaking, so there are
two things which at present render it needful and expedient. (1.) The
vindication of the Non-Conformists, who are publicly charged for turning
Religion into unaccountable Phansies and Enthusiasm's, dressed up with empty
Schemes of speech; Eccles. Polity, p. 74, 75.
and for embracing a few gaudy Metaphors and Allegories instead of the
substance of true and real Righteousness. So that if you will believe a late
Author, herein lies the Material difference between the sober Christians of
the Church of England, and the Modern Sectaries, that while those express the
precepts and Duties of the Gospel in plain and intelligible Terms, these trifle
them away by childish Metaphors and Allegories, and will not talk of Religion
but in barbarous and uncouth Similitudes. And as another expresses it, Mr.
Sherlock concerning the knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc. p. 108.
That the mystery of Phanaticism consists in the wresting Metaphorical and
Allusive expressions to a proper sense: And as the former person phraseth it,
Abusing Scripture expressions, not only without, Eccles. polity, p. 75.
but in contradiction to their sense. (2.) The defense and vindication of the
Doctrines of the Gospel; many of which are undermined under the pretense of
renouncing luscious and fulsome Metaphors. Thus the Immediate Union of Believers
to Christ is disclaimed, as being built only upon Metaphors perversely sensed;
our spiritual impotency and inability to Good is contended against, as being
inferred from a Misunderstanding of that Metaphorical expression, viz. Our
being dead in Trespasses and Sins; Our being merely passive in the first
communication of grace to us, or Regeneration, is likewise indicted as a
falsity built upon a mistake of the meaning of our being Created to good Works,
which is a Metaphorical phrase. It were endless to recount the many Doctrines
which the Church of Christ has in all ages been in the persuasion and belief
of, that are by this new artifice of crying out Luscious and rampant Metaphors,
subverted and overthrown. The due stating therefore the Nature and import of
Metaphors, is become not only a seasonable, but a necessary piece of Service. I
can very well allow that in Philosophy, where the Quality and Nature of things
do not transcend and over-match words, the less Rhetorical ornaments,
especially the fewer Metaphors, providing still that the phrase be pure and
easy, the better. But in Divinity, where no expressions come fully up to
Mysteries of Faith, and where the things themselves are not capable of being
declared in Logical and Metaphysical Terms; Metaphors may not only be allowed,
but are most accommodated to the assisting us in our conceptions of
Gospel-mysteries.

. 2. But before I proceed further on this subject, there are some few things
which I desire to premise; whereof the first is this. The Holy Ghost in giving
forth the Scripture has usurped no Words, Tropes, Phrases, Figures, or Modes
of speech, but what are proportioned to his End, namely, the instructing us in
Faith and Obedience. To think otherwise, is either to impeach his Wisdom, as if
he knew not what forms of speech in order to such an End were best to declare
himself in; or else his Goodness, in not vouchsafing to speak to us in those
terms which he knew to be most adapted to promote our knowledge of the Things
which he had made it our duty to be acquainted with. The Scripture style can
neither in the whole, nor in any part of it be reflected upon, without offering
reproach to God, who as well guided the sacred Amanuenses in the words and
expressions they revealed things in, as in the things themselves they did
reveal. The 2 d. is this, that the Bible is replenished and adorned with all
sort of figurative expressions. There are hardly any Tropes or Figures in
Rhetoric, of which numerous Examples do not occurr in the Holy Writ. Some
Tropes confer a grandeur, others an elegancy to the style where they are met
with, and some reconcile an easiness to the things that are treated of. Now
among other Rhetorical Tropes to be found in the Bible, I hardly know any, of
which we have more examples than of Metaphors, in which, God by similitudes
borrowed from known and obvious things, intimates to us the usefullest and
sublimest Truths. In such kind of phrases he condescends to lisp those
Mysteries to us which would never be so well understood by any other way of
expressing them. Now though in this case we not only may, but ought to call
such to an account who abuse Scripture-Metaphors to a perverse sense, yet we
must always preserve the reputation of the Metaphor it self. How tender in this
Matter some late Authors have been, we shall afterward more largely declare. I
shall at present only observe, that many Scriptural expressions, abstracting
from any corrupt Gloss put upon them, merely upon the account of their being
Rhetorical Tropes, have been traduced as Fulsom Metaphors. Were they only the
paraphrases which the Non-Conformists affix to them, which they make the
subject of their scorn, the business were more tolerable; Nor should we be
offended with their mockeries and derisions, till we had justified the
expositions fathered upon them: but when the very words which the Holy Ghost in
his care and wisdom condescendeth to use, are also opprobriously reflected on,
they must pardon us if we know not how to digest such blasphemous and profane
boldness. Instances of this Nature I shall afterward give, and hope to make it
appear that many of the Rampant and Luscious Metaphors we are charged with, are
no other but the declaring Gospel-Mysteries, in words which the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual.

(3.) Though there be many Rhetorical Tropes and Figurative expressions in the
Scripture, yet it cannot be denied but that some either out of ignorance or
wantonness, have made many more than there ever were. There have been, and yet
are a sort of men in the World, who affect to turn every thing into an
Allegory, and to transform the plainest expressions into Metaphors. Besides the
Jewish Rabbis who are monstrously guilty in this particular; the miscarriage
of the Ancients in this matter is both too evident to be denied, and too gross
to be justified. Their Expositions of Scripture are often light and ridiculous,
and sometimes perverse and dangerous. Origin especially seems to have made it
his business to find out Mystical and Cabalistical Senses in the plainest parts
of Scripture; which made one of the Ancients themselves say of him, Ingenii
lusus, pro Dei Mysteriis venditat; he obtrudes the sportings of his fancy for
Religious and Sacred Mysteries. And as another expresses it, Ingenii sui
acumina, putat esse Ecclesiae Sacramenta. This practice of some Primitive
Writers in and about the Scripture, influenced Porphyrius to deride the Gospel
as containing nothing certain in it. How well, or rather how unhappily many of
the Popish Friars have imitated them in this, I need not tell. I shall rather
observe that the Socinians, who though they impose a proper sense on some Texts
of Scripture, where it is both absurd and blasphemous to admit it; yet they
disguise and transform into Metaphors other Texts that have a plain and proper
meaning. But at the rate of making the Priesthood of Christ, his Sacrifice,
Redemption through his death, Metaphorical, as they do; the whole Gospel, both
in the Doctrines and precepts of it, may be turned into an Allegory. Shall I
add that these very Authors, who of late among our selves, have assumed a
liberty of censuring their Brethren for Undermining the Gospel by trifling it
into Metaphors, are themselves so unhappy in paraphrasing Scripture, as to make
Tropes where few else in the world do? In proof of this, I shall produce an
instance or two out of Mr. Sherlock. Whereas other Expositors of Scripture,
have expounded Christ's being called the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and
the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.3. in a plain and proper sense, and
have accordingly argued from it for the Deity of Christ against the Socinians.
Mr. Sherlock, by Christ's being styled the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, etc.
p. 32.
Understands no more but those discoveries which Christ has made of God, being
a true representation of the Divine Nature and Will, as any picture is of the
person it represents. Which as he has borrowed word for word from the
Socinians, who hereby understand only his revealing and declaring the will of
God unto us fully and plainly, which was done before, only darkly and in
shadows; so he declares himself guilty of abusing the Scripture to a
Metaphorical sense, where the words according to all Rules of Exposition, will
admit a proper one: and therefore both Grotius and Hammond; persons to whom I
suppose he pay's a respect, do vouchsafe us a much better paraphrase. And
according to Mr. Sherlocks exposition of the words, I see not but what is here
predicated of Christ, may be predicated of the Prophets, at lest of the
Apostles. A second instance shall be that of: the 2 Cor. 4.4. where Christ is
styled the Image of God: Where Nonconformists see no necessity of admitting a
Metonymie, no more than a Metaphore, but that he who was absolutely and
antecedently to his Incarnation (...) in the form of God, Phil. 2.6. is in a
proper sense in his person Incarnate (...) the Image of God, in which
exposition of the words they are countenanced by Col. 1.15. where Christ in a
proper sense is called (...) the image of the invisible God. The places seem
parallel the one to the other, especially if as all Copies have (...) in the
last, we admit the reading of those Copies which have (...) also in the first.
But now Mr. Sherlock is pleased to tell us that Christ's being the Image of God,
comes in very abruptly, unless we understand it in this sense, that he is the
Image of God with respect to the glorious Revelations of the Gospel, which
contain a true and faithful account of Gods Nature and Will. Which is plainly
to fancy a Trope where there is not the least reason of imagining any, and the
deriving upon himself the guilt which he so liberally charge others with. And
whereas he alleges, that without allowing a Meton^mie in the words, Christ's
being the Image of God comes very abruptly in, I see not how the Apostle could
better show how the Father expresses and declares himself unto us by his Son
in the Gospel, than by manifesting what the Son is in himself, and with
reference to the Father. And whereas all Interpreters, Ancient as well as
Modern, except the Socinians alone, expound Joh. 1.16. Of his Fullness we have
all received Grace for Grace, of a participation of renewing, Sanctifying Grace
by Jesus Christ, according to the plain and proper import of the Words; Mr.
Sherlock groundlesly imagines a Trope in them, and accordingly paraphraseth the
Fullness which we receive from Christ, to signify no more than a perfect
Revelation of the Divine Will concerning the Salvation of Mankind; which
Exposition, as I have told him elsewhere, whence he has transcribed it, so I
shall only say at this time, that it is a turning plain Scripture-Testimonies
into Tropes and Figures, where there is not the least reason of supposing any.
More examples of his Paraphrasing the Scripture by substituting Tropes, where
other men in whom this humor is supposed to be predominant, do see no cause
for allowing any, shall afterward be assigned. I shall only further observe at
present, that in several Scripture Passages, where other Expositors can see no
more but an easy and elegant Metonymie at the most, he frames to himself, and
would obtrude upon the World such harsh and uncouth Tropes as none but himself
and some Socinians ever dreamed of. Thus while other Interpreters expound
Christ's being made of God unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. of his being the Author of all these, not only in the
revealing wherein Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. do consist, but in way of
Causality by an easy Metonymie of the Effect for the Cause, yet after a
different manner in Analogy to the things themselves that are spoken of. Sensus
est omnia illa in eo haberi, and habere nos illa in eo, quo modo omnia potest.
Dum enim nobis illa factus est, intelligendum nostra fi^ri plene, singula quo
possunt omni suo modo, id est, sapientia, ut per came sapiamus, Sanctificatio
per quam sanctificemur; Redemptio qua Redimamur; ita and Justitia, ut per came
justificemur. Justificari autem ea non possumus, quod jam est pro natura rei,
nisi imputatione. Hoornb. Socinianism. Confutat. Tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 2. Sect.
2. p. 700.
Mr. Sherlock tells us, That by Christ's being made Wisdom to us, he can
understand no more than the Wisdom of those Revelations Christ has made of
Gods Will to the World, p. 103. I would willingly know how he would paraphrase
the rest of the verse so as to make sense of it, and yet preserve a Consistency
to his commentary upon the first pa^^, without framing other Tropes than those
do, whose miscarriages in this particular he so much blames in their
Interpreting of Scripture. Likewise whereas other Commentators expound, Joh.
14.6. where Christ says of himself, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, by
admitting only a simple and familiar Metaphor in the Term Way; Mr. Sherlock
does over and above fancy a Metonymie in the Pronoun I. For, p. 31. he
paraphraseth the Text thus, I alone declare the True Way to Life and Happiness
which he again repeats p. 229. I will not be so severe as to railly upon his
manner of expressing himself in this Matter p. 135. where he says that it is
not the Person of Christ (i. e. Christ himself) but the Gospel of Christ, which
is the Way, the Truth and the Life, because I suppose his meaning to be, that
though Christ is so, yet that it is not otherwise than by the Gospel; though I
could have wished that out of respect to Sense as well as Modesty he had
otherwise declared himself than there he does. (4) I am the less surprised to
find the Popular Discourses of some Non-Conformists arraigned as stuffed with
Metaphors, and their Sermons and Didactical Writings not only branded upon that
account as unintelligible, and that their Notions would appear Jejun^ and
ridiculous stuff did they want the varnish of fine Metaphors and Glittering
Allusions: Eccles. polit. p.
but their Persons loaded with Calumnies as if they trifled away the Duties of
the Gospel by Childish Allegories and similitudes: Ibid.
I say I am the less surprised at this, in that I find the Scripture it self
impeached in the same manner by others upon the like accounts. For as upon the
one hand the Scripture is blamed as Dull, flat and unaffecting by men of a
wanton and profane wit, because of its not being adorned with Flowers of
Rhetoric; so upon the other hand there are some who find fault with it as dark
and obscure, because of the many Rhetorical Tropes and Figures with it is
replenished which. Nor is there any one Topic which the Papists, to justify
the withholding the Laity from the reading of the Bible, Vid Becan. Theolog.
Scho last. part 2. Tom. poster. Tract 1. cap. 3. Quest. 7.
and to serve the design of erecting a living Infallible Judge, manage with more
confidence in opposition to the perspicuity of the Scripture, than that there
are many Tropes, Figures and Rhetorical Schem's in the style of it. The Divine
Ends in interweaving so many figurative expressions into the phraseology of the
Bible shall be inquired into and declared afterward; and the Scripture
acquitted from any just imputation of Darkness and Obscurity upon the account
of the Rhetorical Ornaments with which it is embellished. But as to the charge
fastened upon some of late, of obscuring Religion and darkning what is
otherwise plain and easy, merely for indulging themselves now and then in the
use of a Metaphor and Similitude: I shall briefly return these things. (1) That
it is for the most part in Popular Discourses, where less accuracy and
propriety in expression is required than in Polemical and Controversal
Writings, that this is to be met with. Our great End being to instruct and
persuade, and the Modes of speaking and Writing being but an Organical Art in
order thereunto, all Methods of Discourse must be estimated by their
Commensurateness to this End. (2) Many of the expressions quarrelled with in
Sermons and Practical Tracts, are nothing else but the very Terms and Phrases
which the Holy Ghost condescendeth to declare sacred things by. Nor can any
reproach be fastened on them in the Writings of men where they occurr, without
reflections on the Wisdom of God who uses them in the like cases and to the
same purposes. Fitter and more Emphatical Expressions to declare Divine things
there are none, than what the Holy Ghost has preceded us in, there being none
that teaches like God. Job 36.22.
Nor is the Scripture only the Rule of what we are to believe and practice, but
also the Measure of our expressions about sacred things, which we are to
declare (...), not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches but which the Holy
Ghost teaches. 1 Cor. 2 13.
God not only inspired the Minds of the Prophets and Apostles with a knowledge
and apprehension of the things they were to reveal; but he suggested the very
words by which they were to express what their Minds had conceived. Hence we
are not only obliged to teach no other Doctrine but what the Scripture
Authoriseth, but we are advised to pay a particular regard (...)* to wholesome
Words even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 6.3.
The (...) which the Apostle there perstringeth, refers not only to the
teaching of Doctrines unadapted to the promotion of Godliness, but the
declining Scripture Words and Phrases in the unfolding Mysteries of Faith; the
sacred Oracles being not only our Standard in the former but also in the
latter. Hence likewise it is that we have in command to observe (...) a Form of
sound Words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
i. e. to conform our selves in the explicating of Gospel Mysteries to the
Terms and Expressions which the Apostle had manifested and declared them by.
And it is made a Character of a good Minister of Jesus Christ to be (...) (...)
nourished up in the Words of Faith and of Good Doctrine. 1 Timothy 4.6.
The mysteries of Faith require a Rhetoric proper and peculiar to themselves;
And as it is only from the Scripture that we can be supplied with Glorious
Images and excellent Idea's of the things themselves which we treat of, so it
alone can best fu^nish us with all Ornaments of Speech and Eloquence as well to
beautify as declare them. (3.) Rhetorical Tropes and Figures have been usually
accounted for Lights and Colors to illustrate things, and not for shades and
Clouds to darken and obscure them. As of all Tropes Metaphors are the most
usual in Profane Authors, so, unless (perhaps) we except Metonymies, they are
more obvious in sacred Writers than any other. Nulla figura florentior nec quae
plus luminis. adfert orat. Cicer. prim. de orat.
And as they add a wonderful pulchritude and suavity to an Oration, so they
hugely conduce to our more easy conception of the things treated of. Nor does
this obtain so much any where as in Mysteries of Faith, for they through a
greatness and Majesty peculiar to themselves, do so far transcend all
expressions, that in order to their being duly conceived, they require a being
accommodated and attempered to the weakness of our Faculties in Allusions,
Metaphors, and such like P^^aseologies in which they are displayed by sensible
Resemblances; but more of this afterward. (4.) Those of the differently-minded
in matters of Discipline and Ecclesiastical Order from the Church of England,
who seem especially guilty of an affectation of Metaphors, Allusions and
Allegories in their Popular and Didactical discourses, (for all of that sort
are not Criminal in this Matter) do appear to me to have imbibed it from the
most famed Writers of the Church of England Nor were it a difficult Undertaking
to declare when Inordinacy and excess this way, as well as Pedantick quibling
with Letters and Syllables, turning the Scripture into clench, and paraphrasing
Texts by the sound and chink of Words, and feeding the People with the Chiming
of Terms, took its rise and commenced, and who were the chief promoters of it.
And in reference to the more ancient amongst the Non-Conformists who are
charged in this Matter, why may not the plea of Tacitus in behalf of Seneca,
(that he had Scribendi genus temporis illius auribus accommodatum) that they
accustomed themselves to a style su^ted to the Genius and Gusto of the Age, be
allowed? And for the younger sort, though I suppose there are but few of them
that can be justly charged with it, yet if there be any such, it may be said
that they owe it either to the Unhappiness of their Converse with an ill set
of Books, or that they (as well as the former) do it in compliance with the
Capacities of their Heare^s, who can neither be edified nor affected by any
other style. However as the Fantastical trifling with Words and Syllables, and
the Boyish affectation of Cadencies is wholly grown into difuse and distaste, as
unbecoming the Sanctity of the Mysteries we treat of, the Majesty of God in
whose Name we speak, and the Gravity of the Ministerial Function, so I hope a
care will likewise possess us in reference to the other, viz. that we coin no
Metaphors of our own to express things by, but what are modest, cleanly, and
carry a due Proportion, Analogy, and Similitude to the things they are brought
to illustrate. But our Adversaries must in the mean time pardon us if we be not
so fond of their Effeminate, amorous style, as to introduce it into the Pulpit:
For indeed it savours more of the style of the Grand-Cyrus, Cleopatra,
Parthenissa, etc. than any style that the Doctrines of Faith, and Precepts of
Morality have been heretofore delivered in. I will take the liberty for once to
say, that their Preaching with an air more brisk and unconcerned, and a
countenance more debonair and lightsome than becomes those who would work
Compunction in others, or reconcile their Hearers to Mortification, together
with their polisht artificial dress of Words, hardly admitting a Quotation from
Scripture for fear of spoiling their Oratory, seem as justly liable to blame,
as the Methods and Modes which they not only censure, but traduce others for.

3. I intend not to discourse of Scripture Rhetoric in General, nor of the
various kinds of Figures as well as Tropes that the sacred style is adorned
with. This task has been prosperously undertaken by Glassius, Flac. Illyricus,
Alstedius, Westhemerus, etc. in Latin, and not many years ago Mr. Lukin laid
out his endeavors this way in English, not to mention others who have done
something in this matter. It is to Metaphors alone that I confine and
circumscribe my thoughts, yet I am not without hope, that by explicating of
them, Light will be administered to the better Understanding of other
Scripture-Tropes. Anciently Tropes were not so thoroughly distinguished the one
from the other, neither were those several Names invented to design them by,
nor were the Lines, Measures, Bounds, Cognations, and Habitudes of each a part,
and to one another, so described and set forth as now they are. And this may
serve as an Apology for Aristotle's confounding Synechdoches and Allegories
with Metaphors. (...). Which occasioned Cicero to observe that Aristotle used
the Term Metaphor in a larger acceptance than after- Rhetoricians are wont to
take it. Metaphora est de re propria ad non propriam verbi alicujus usurpata
translatio lib. contr. mendacium, cap. 10.
Augustine defines a Metaphor to be the traduction of a Word from its proper
signification to a sense that does not originally and properly belong to it.
Terms thus applied, are called by Hermogenes (...), because inverted and
transferred from their proper meaning to a significaon which does not primarily
belong to them. A Metaphor then, is a Form of speech whereby one thing is put
for another to illustrate it. It is the traduction of a Word from its immediate
and proper sense, Translatio quaedam and velut posterior Nominis impositio vel
extensio; Rivet. Isagog. ad Sacr. Script. cap. 14. p. 213. Cum vox a propria
significatione deflectitur ad alienam propter similitudinem.
and the extending it to the denotation of some other thing, upon the account
of some similitude or proportion betwixt the one and the other. It has this in
common with Metonymies, Synechdoches, and Ironies, that in all of them things
are misnamed, and words transferred from what they peculiarly denote, to
manifest something else. But herein they differ; an Irony is the usurping of a
word to an Intention opposite to what it seems to imply, and is an (...) or a
speaking by Contraries, which may be easily discerned either by the thing it
self which is spoken, or by some circumstance or other in the Oration. A
Metonymie is the mis-naming of things, or the putting of one thing for another,
when though they have a connection as Correlates, yet absolutely considered the
one is not of the Nature and Essence of the other. Thus the Cause is Frequently
put for the Effect, and the Effect for the Cause; the Subject for the Adjunct,
and the Adjunct for the Subject: The Act or Affection conversant about any
Object, for the Object it self, and the Object sometimes for the Act; the Sign
for the thing Signified, and the thing Signified for the Sign, etc. A
Synechdoche is a Form of speech, where by one thing that is of the Essence of
another, or that has a necessary Connection with it, is put for that other, to
which it has such a cognation and affinity. Thus the Gender is put for the
Species, and the Species for the Gender; The Integral for a Part, and a Part
for the Integral; the Species for the Individuum, and the Individuum for the
Species, etc. But a Metaphor is the Stiling of one thing by the Name of
another; which as they have no necessary connection absolutely considered, so
they stand in no such relation, but that the one may be apprehended without the
other; only because of some Similitude or proportion, the one is denominated by
the Term which expresses the other, the better to manifest and illustrate some
property, affection etc. in that other. In every Metaphor three things are
carefully to be attended to, the Original, Immediate and proper signification
of the Word; the Signification to which it is transferred and applied, and the
Similitude, Analogy, and Proportion betwixt the things themselves, in some
affection, property, or adjunct, etc. which are denominated by it. For no Term
does otherwise declare and illustrate the things which it is Metaphorically
applied to denote, but with reference to the thing that it properly imports,
and from which because of some congruity it is transferred. This is especially
observable where one and the same Word is Metaphorically applied to decipher
things of a diverse, opposite, and contrary Nature. For example, Christ is not
only Metaphorically styled a Lion, but Tyrants are likewise so denominated,
where as Cruelty and Salvageness are the reason of Transferring the Term to the
latter, so Fortitude and Victoriousness are the Grounds of applying it to the
other. Instances of this kind are numerous, and in the Unfolding and
explicating of Metaphors, great Sobriety as well as Diligence is to be
observed, lest mistaking the Quality, Affection, Property, Operation, or
Adjunct why any Word is transferred from what it Originally signifies, we
misapply and pervert it to intimate something else, which the Holy Ghost never
designed and intended. The proportion between the things that are one of them
substituted in the room of the other, and as they lie compared in their
Indigitation by the same Term, is that which ought mainly to be regarded in our
expounding of Metaphors. In order yet to our better Understanding the Nature of
Metaphors, we must consider what Forms of Speech or Rhetorical Tropes they have
any affinity, alliance, or cognation to, and with which nevertheless they are
not identical nor coincident, that so we may state the Measure, Rules, and
Bounds of each, with their congruities and incongruities to one another. And
the first thing that here offers it self, is the affinity betwixt Metaphors and
naked Assimilations, Similitudes and Comparisons, commonly called (...). Though
in every Metaphor there be at least a Similitude presupposed and included; yet
every Similitude is not a Metaphor. In a Similitude there is an express
comparing of one thing with another, but so as that the same Name is not
imposed on both: Whereas in a Metaphor there is only the transferring the Name
of one thing to denote and indicate another, though in the explication of the
Metaphor, In similitudine est comparatio unius rei cum altera, in Metaphora
vero una res pro altera dicitur. Illyric. de Tropis and Schematibus. p. 341.
the Similitude between the things themselves, which occasions the adscription
of the Name of the one to the other, ought always to be unfolded and declared.
This holds in all Similitudes as well those that are contracted, abbreviated
and envelopt, as those that are expanded and displayed; namely, that there is
an express comparison managed betwixt the one and the other. Whether the
Particle of Comparison be expressed both in the (...) or in each of the two
that are in way of assimilation conferred together; or whether it be lacking in
both, (as sometimes it is;) or whether expressed in the one, but wanting in the
other; or whether when deficient in the first, supplied by a Copulative
Conjunction in the latter, it turns to the same account, there being still a
comparison some way or other expressed between them. Nor have Rhetorical
Assimilations foundation only in the Predicament of Quality, but in any other
whatsoever. The best and most ornate as well as the most usual Similitudes are
(...) where one thing is compared with another in some adjunct affection, etc.
wherein they resemble one the other, and are like; and where that to which the
other is compared, is disposed and put first, and that which is compared to it,
is introduced last. Yet there are sometimes Comparisons of one thing with
another in dissimili, i. e. in properties and Attributes wherein they differ,
whereof diverse instances occurr in the Proverbs of Solomon; and such a
Comparison is commonly called (...), and when that which is compared, is put
first, and the other to which it is compared, last, it is called (...). But the
Measure already assigned betwixt Metaphors and similitudes obtains universally,
Namely that in Metaphors one thing is put for another, but in Similitudes one
thing is only compared with another, or likened to it; nor shall I therefore
subjoyn any more in this Matter. The next Form of Speech that a Metaphor has a
cognation to, and with which it is by some confounded, is a Parable. I do not
by a parable here understand any Proverb (...) or Adage, as the Word is used,
Luke 4.13. Nor do I understand by it an (...), or any thing darkly spoken, as
(...) is applied, Math. 15.11, with 15. Much less do I take it for a Type, as
it is usurped by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 9.9. and chap.
11.19. but by a Parable, I mean a Symbolick form of Speech, where by a well
appropriated Similitude from some feigned story, some Moral Truth or
Instruction is insinuated into the Minds of men, to make it the better
apprehended and understood. Now a Metaphor and a Parable are not the same, for
all Metaphors are founded in some similitude or proportion, but Parables may
proceed on Adjuncts and Affections that are opposite, if there be a likeness in
the Issue and Event; see Luke 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and Luke 11.8. to 11. and
Luke 16.1. to 10. In a Metaphor the sense is to be collected from the Words
themselves in their Tropical Import, but in Parables the meaning is to be
gathered not so much from the words themselves, either in their Tropical or
Proper signification, as from the things that are related and alluded to. In a
Metaphor there is the mis-naming of one Thing by the Term that indigitates
another, but in a Parable there is only the accommodation of one thing
according to the intent and scope of the speaker to another. In a word,
Parables are nothing else but lengthened, continued, and prolonged Similitudes,
wherein something is supposed and related as done, either to commend some Moral
Instruction, or to insinuate with the more vigor, facility, and delight, some
spiritual Truth. And the same Measure which we proposed for the distinguishing
between Metaphors and Similitudes, serves to manifest the difference betwixt
them and Parables. Nor shall I add any more with respect to them, save that we
are neither in briefer similitudes, nor in those that are more drawn out and
styled Parables, to imagine that all things in the (...) or latter part, should
exactly answer to all things in the (...) or former part: nor are we in the
(...) to regard every minute particular, there being many things interwoven
which have no relation to the main scope, but serve only as a Landscape to fill
up a Table; but it is the principal strokes that we are to observe, and thereby
to accommodate the design of the first part of the Parable, to illustrate the
second. And where this is duly attained, Parables are no less argumentative
than plain and express Scripture-Testimonies; nor do they only decipher,
illustrate and explain, but demonstrate and prove. Another Form of speech, to
which Metaphors have an Alliance, is that which we call an Allegory. (...) if
we regard the Etymology of the Word is so styled, because (...), it imports one
thing in the signification of the Terms taken absolutely and abstractedly, and
intends another as they lie in such a texture, and in a habitude to what
precedes and what follows. The Word (...) occuri's no where in Aristotle says
Gerh. Vossius; and Plutarch tells us that what we call (...) the more ancient
Writers styled (...). A Rhetorical Allegory is nothing but the Continuation of
a Trope, viz. of a Metonymie, or a Synecdoche, but most frequently of a
Metaphor. Of such Allegories the Scripture is replenished, and forasmuch as no
Text has any more than one determinate sense, otherwise it could have no sense
at all, the literal sense of such places is to be derived from the Words in
their Figurative use, as they are placed in such a texture and habitude, and
introduced by the Holy Ghost to such an End. That which looks first forth in an
Allegorick Scripture, or what the words import in their immediate and proper
signification, is not the literal meaning of it, but the Literal sense is that
which arises only mediately from the words, and immediately from the things
with their affections, adjuncts and properties, which the words in their
original signification do denote. Whatsoever the Words in the scope and design
of the Spirit according to their Tropical Import manifest, that and nothing
else is the Literal meaning of such a place. For where the Words of the Text
are Tropical and Allegorick, there is no way of assigning any literal sense of
them, but with regard and in Analogy to the Trope. They who will allow no other
Literal sense of any place, but what the Words in their proper, immediate and
original signification imply, may be easily reduced to confess that many Texts
have either no Literal sense at all, or else an Absurd, False, or Blasphemous
one. Now besides this Rhetorical Allegory, there is another kind of Allegory
owned and acknowledged by Divines, and that is, when though the words bear a
Proper sense, which ought to be sacredly observed in our exposition of them,
yet they may be withal translated from their plain and Natural sense to a
Spiritual and Mystical one. An instance we have of this, Gal. 4.24, etc.
compared with Genesis 16. and Genesis 21. As lkewise 1 Cor. 9.9. compared with Deuteronomy.
25.4. not to mention more. Now in order to our demeaning our selves wisely in
this Matter; we are (1.) to be careful, that the proper and original sense of
the Words be not neglected. There have been those, and yet are, who will hardly
allow any Text of Scripture a Proper sense, but do every where obtrude an
Allegorick meaning, as if that alone were intended by the Holy Ghost, and
nothing else. But such kind of Expositors do in effect little less than
undermine the whole Scripture, betray Religion, and turn the Sacred Oracles
into Burlesque. Nor is there any Notion so Romantic which the Scripture by a
luxuriant fancy may not at this ^ate be wrested and debauched to give
countenance to; yea, a very small measure of Wit will serve to pervert the
plainest Scripture-Testimonies to quite another sense than was ever intended by
the Writer of them. An Instance of this we have in the Quakers, who by turning
the whole Scripture into Allusions, have wrested the Revelations of the Word to
justify their own wild Phantasm's, and framed the Words of Scripture (...) to
their own private Notions, and thereby evacuated the sublimest Doctrines, and
most Glorious Actions into empty Metaphors and vain Similitudes. Thus the
person of Christ is Allegorised into themselves, and the Birth, Death,
Resurrection, and Assention of our Savior are construed after the manner of
Aesops, or Philostratus's Fables into useful Morals, as if they were intended
only to declare what is to be done in us by way of allusion. But let them, and
all such persons of what Communion and persuasion soever they are, who turn the
Gospel thus into a Romance, and subvert the Mysteries of Faith, by transforming
them in Fantastic Allegories, be treated with the derision and contempt of
all who pretend to Wisdom and Modesty. (2.) We are not to imagine that every
Text of Scripture besides it Proper, Literal, and Original sense, is to have a
Spiritual and Mystical one affixed to it. Particularly, neither Moral Precepts,
nor Texts recording Promises, Comminations, or declaring Doctrines of Faith,
are to be drawn to an Allegorick sense. (3.) It is necessary in our
Allegorising of Scripture, that we have a particular regard to the Analogy of
Faith, and that we press it to give Countenance to no Doctrine or Tenet by way
of Allusion, but what has foundation and warranty in some plain Text
elsewhere. We are not to frame Hypotheses to our selves, that are no where,
either (...) in so many Letters and Syllables, nor (...) in the sense and
import, in the Bible, and then to Allegorise the Scripture in proof and
confirmation of them. (4.) There must be a proportion and Similitude between
the things themselves, whereof the one is applied to ground, illustrate,
manifest, and support the other. Nor must the Analogy be strained and far
fetched, but obvious and pertinent. Much less must we superstruct any Doctrine
upon Allusions how accomodated soever, unless where the Holy Ghost has
preceded us, as in some cases he has. Where God himself has informed us that
though such a passage was originally and principally spoken of one thing, that
yet he intended to signify some other thing by it, there we may with safety
build, but no where else. Yet I am not without ground to think, that many of
those Old Testament Texts which are supposed to be Allegorically applied in the
New, are only alluded to upon the account of some similitude in the things
themselves, and that there was not any antecedent designation of them by the
Spirit of God to intimate the things which they are applied to. For as there
are many passages in the Old Testament, which though in their Immediate
signification and meaning they relate to Persons, Things and Actions that then
were, yet so that those Persons, Things and Actions were solemnly designed,
ordained and instituted to prefigure Christ and the things belonging to his
Kingdom: And as there are many other Things, Actions and Events which then were
and fell out, related in the Scripture, which have no solemn Instituted
signification affixed to them, but are to be interpreted in reference to what
they primarily declare, yet so as that many of them seem to have had a
Providential Ordination to prefigure something that was afterward to come to
pass. So there are many other things related to have fallen out then, which
though they neither were in the solemn Institution of God, nor yet in his
Providential Ordination designed to prefigure any thing referring to the
Kingdom of Christ, are yet meet to illustrate things and events now, because of
an Analogy and Similitude between what then was, and what now is. Nor is the
applying of a Text to things, Actions, and Events which have some Similitude
with those it originally referred to, to be reckoned for an Allegorising of
Scripture, being only an accommodation of it to our Instruction. The Old
Testament-Church is proposed in matter of Obedience and Rewards, Sins and
Punishments, as a (...) or example to us, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11. and therefore what
befell them, may without the hazard of Allegorising the Scripture be
accommodated and applied to illustrate present events. And indeed the Holy
Ghost has besides General Rules, such as that Romans 15.3. left us particular
Instances of accommodating Scripture-Texts, Passages and Phrases to Things and
Events which they neither were in a Proper nor Mystical sense designed
Originally to signify. See among many others Matthew. 15.8. compared with Isa.
29.13. Matthew. 13.14, 15. compared Isa. 6.9, 10. Rev. 11.4. compared with Zach.
4.3, 11, 12, 13, 14. Nor in this the affixing any new sense to the Words, but
the applying and accomoding their sense to Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, and
Instruction in Righteousness.

. 4. Having declared the Nature of Metaphors, and the difference between them
and other Schem's and Forms of speech with which they seem to have some
Cognation and Affinity: we are next to inquire into the frequent usage of
Metaphors in the scripture, with the reasons and grounds of it. Metaphors
whether founded (...)* in a bare and single Similitude, where one thing is
misnamed by another, because of their agreement in some one adjunct, affection
or property; or (...) where there is a correspondency between plurality of
things in an Analogy of Adjuncts and Properties, are of frequent usurpation in
the sacred Scripture, as well as in Profane Authors. They are too many to be
recounted, the Bible being every where adorned and bespangled with them. Under
Metaphors are comprehended (...) in which Humane Parts, Members, Affections,
Actions, and such things as belong to men, are ascribed to God. In such forms
of Speech God by a (...) or Condescension declares the Infinite Properties of
his Nature, his Everlasting Counsels, with the Mysteries of his Providence, in
Terms adapted to our capacities. (...), he deciphers what himself is, and does,
by things that fall under our Apprehension. And what is thus said of God (...)
and (...) after the manner of men, must be understood of him (...) in a way
suitable to the divine Nature and Majesty. In most Anthropopathies besides a
Metaphor there is also a Metonymie. For as to attribute Members to God who has
(...) an Immaterial and Incorporeal Nature, and to ascribe Passions either
(...) or (...) Irascible or Concupiscible to him who is (...) desiring nothing
for supply, being Infinitely full, nor liable to any Commotion or Perturbation,
being Holy and Unchangeable, must necessarily imply a Metaphor: So Hands and
Arms being attributed to God to import Power and Strength; Eyes his exact
Knowledge and exact watchful Providence; Repentance a change only in his
Providential dispensations; Fear his care in preventing the destruction of his
people, etc. include an easy a Metonymie. God in the Revelation of his mind to
us in the Scripture, has made use of Metaphors drawn from all the Phenomenon
of the Creation, and from all the several properties and operations of the
several species of Creatures. There is not that kind of Metaphor in Rhetoric,
whereof we have not some example or other in the sacred Writ. The Reasons why
he who does all things according to Infinite Sapience, has in the declaration
of himself and Will to the Sons of Men so frequently adopted Metaphorical Terms
to manifest them in and by, are Various. I shall only mention such as are most
obvious, and which lie within the line of every ordinary man's perception. (1.)
He does it to Inform us how the Material World, and the Invisible do correspond
together in Analogies and proportions, with respect to the Nature and
properties of the things contained in the one and the other. Not only the
Jewish Rabbis have a saying that the Works of the Outward Creation carry in
them the Image or resemblance of the Inward; but the Platonists say, That God
has set the same Seal or Stamp upon different matters, i. e. he has framed
and contrived the Terrene World with a kind of subservient conformity to the
World of Invisible things. (...) sensible forms are Images of Intellectual
things, was a Pythagorean Maxim, upon which they founded their Symbolick mode
of Philosophising. The several Creatures are so many Looking-glasses where God
has communicated and scattered some resemblances of himself, and Invisible
Things, and Metaphors are (...) the Academy where Nature strips and unvails her
self. By Converse with, and knowledge of the Natures and Properties of sensible
things, we are the better enabled to conceive and apprehend spiritual things,
when apparelled in earthly resemblances. (2.) May be God in his frequent usage
of Metaphorick Terms, intended it in part, as an accommodation of himself to
the Custom and Mode of the Jewish and other Oriental Nations; who in making
known their conceptions of things one to another, were much addicted to a
Symbolick way. Though the Bible was written so, as that no Person of whatever
Nation or Age, might be debarred the Understanding of it; yet in its texture
and style, there was a regard primarily had to those, to whom the several parts
of it were first addressed. Now it is beyond all contradiction that their usual
Mode of Discourse was Abrupt, Figurative, and Symbolick; and therefore if more
Metaphors should appear to occurr in the Scripture than do well agree with
Western Eloquence, (though indeed it be otherwise) yet they might excellently
suit the Genious of those Ages it was written for, and the people it was first
directed to, and designed to work upon. That the Eastern Nations not only
heretofore had (...) a Symbolick way of teaching, but that even to this day,
those of them who affect to speak more learnedly and gentilely than others, do
choose to express themselves in a Parabolick, Metaphorick way, carry's so much
self-evidence that it need not be proved. The Egyptian Hieroglyphics which
were one of the most ancient Methods of expressing, things, were nothing else
but a shadowing forth their Sacred Mysteries and Philosophical contemplations
by Earthly Images and sensible Forms. The very Origination of the Word (...) i.
e. from Sacred Sculpture, intimates that a Hieroglyphick was nothing but a
Symbol of a Sacred thing engraven on a stone. Nor stood the Egyptian
Hieroglyphics for ba^e Letters or single Words, but sometimes for entire
sentences and complete discourses. Yea, there is not any thing more certain
than that both the (...) Manners and Passions of men were figured and shadowed
forth by the shapes of Animals and other Creatures. Now as Aristotle says
(...), A Metaphor is the Image or Shadow of a thing: For therefore is one thing
Metaphorically misnam'd by another, because there is some resemblance,
proportion, or parallel between them in some property, Adjunct, or the like.
Now this consideration is the more worthy of our notice in that though the Holy
Ghost inspired the Sacred Amanuenses as well with respect to words as matter,
yet the words that he suggested to them, were such as they had a familiarity
with, and to which they were accustomed. (3.) A third and main Reason of the
Scriptures being so replenished with Metaphorical expressions is this; namely,
that Objects which lie remote from our Understandings (as all Spiritual Objects
do) may, by being represented under some obvious and sensible Image, be the
better attempered to our Minds to contemplate, and rendered the more facile to
our Understandings to conceive. I grant that (...), Arist.
Every thing spoken Metaphorically, is spoken obscurely, with respect to
expressing the Nature of things. And accordingly in assigning the Definitions
of things, Metaphorical Terms are to be avoided, because as Aristotle says,
they do not declare (...), what a thing is, but only what it is like to. When
any thing is manifested by a Metaphor, the thing it self is not fully
expressed, but only some similitude betwixt it and another. But yet on the
other hand (...), A Metaphor carries along in it something of perspicuity and
sweetness, as well as it imports something that is strange. It renders things
clear (...), i. e. by a resemblance taken from some sensible and common thing,
it accommodates them to our Senses, and gives some umbrage and shadow of them,
though as to the full manifesting their Nature (...) to our Reasons it falls
short. Now as there is not any thing relating to Doctrine or Manners delivered
in the Scripture Metaphorically, Nihil est obscure dictum in Scripturis quod
spectet ad Doctrinam, vel Mores, quod non planissime dictam sit in alijs locis.
Augustine. lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 6 and 9.
which is not somewhere or other, either explicitly, or implicitly expressed
in Terms that are proper, (one place being a key to the unlocking another): So
neither does the Scripture use Metaphorical Terms to manifest so much the
Existence and Nature of things simply considered, as to illustrate the Mode of
their Existence, and the manner of their operations. The deep things of God do
so far over-match our Reasons and Understandings, that in order to their being
expressed to our Capacities, they are forced to be clothed with as much
external sensibility as may be; that so the disproportion between them and our
faculties, being qualified and reduced, we may the better and more familiarly
converse with them. Where things are of a sublime Nature, and such as neither
words are able to express unto perfection, nor we capable of framing
commensurate Notions of them, Logical and Metaphysicall Terms are of all
others, the most inept to declare them in; nor are there any so accommodated to
display and unvail them, as Metaphorical expressions, wherein by variety of
resemblances, they are brought down to our Reasons, which they could not have
been, had they been discoursed of in proper Terms, or in a dialect fully
answering their Nature. For men to discourse in Metaphorical Terms of things,
whose Nature and Properties they are wholly ignorant of, is plainly to trifle,
seeing while we know not the true ideas of things, we can only imagine some
resemblances in other things to them; but whether they do really resemble them
or not, it is impossible that we should be able to tell. But while it is only the
sublimity of the Subject discoursed of, its remoteness from the Understandings
of men, and the Insufficiency of proper Terms adequately to declare it, and not
ignorance of, and unacquaintedness with the subject it self, that occasions
Gods usage of Metaphors, they are not only justifiable, but the Wisdom and
Compassion of God in condescending thus to accommodate himself to us in the
Revelation of his Counsels and Will, does call for the highest thankfulness and
adoration. For as we are more affected when the things of God are brought down
to us, under sensible representations, so likewise the things themselves become
more intelligible. And as this Method of manifesting Divine things is not
without its Use, even in reference to those Doctrines that lie in a greater
approximation, and are more exposed unto our Understandings and Capacities, so
especially it is of eminent advantage to us in Relation to those Things that are
Sublime and Mysterious, and which exceed our comprehension. He is little
acquainted with Scripture, who does not know that there are many Things and
Truths in it, which are (...), Justin Martyr.
Beyond all expression, conception, and comprehension, and which have therefore
a peculiar Character and Mark affixed on them of being deep and mysterious. Now
though the declaration of these in the Word be never so plain and perspicuous,
yet the Things themselves, through the quality of their Nature, do remain
hidden and obscure, and beyond what our weak Understandings can duly conceive,
or frame adequate Notions of; nor can there be a better Method and course
steered in relieving and assisting our minds in the Apprehension of them, than
(...), to illustrate them by things sensible, and of ocular knowledge. Horat.
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator. --
(4.) The Scripture being intended for the benefit of the Illiterate as well as
the Learned, it was necessary that it should be written in such a familiar
Method as that in things necessary for all to believe and understand, it might
suit and befit even those of Vulgar and Common Capacities. It Is the fault of
some men that they look upon their own and Abilities Understandings, as the
Measure that should regulate all discourses; and whatsoever is not adapted to
their apprehension, they thereupon arraign and find fault with; if they be
above it, they condemn it for Obscure and Unintelligible; if below it, for
trifling, flat, and trivial. It being no small part of Discretion in an
ordinary Author to accommodate himself to the Capacities of all to whom he
speaks or writes, and not to oblige himself merely to suit and please the Sons
of Art; how much more does it become the Wisdom of God, that seeing he designed
the Scripture for the Universal Instruction of Mankind, so to adapt and dispose
the phraseology of it, as that all might be edifyed by it? Now in reference to
the Vulgus, who scarce understand any thing but in proportion to their senses,
and in dependence on Material Phantasms, what Method can be more likely to
affect their Minds with, and raise them unto Spiritual things, than to have
them proposed under the Names, and illustrated by the properties and operations
of those things, with whose Natures and Affections they are so well acquainted.
Much of every man's Knowledge begins at his Senses, and Reason inoculates and
superstructs upon them: especially they of weaker Intellects need the relief of
sensible Adumbrations in the conduct of their Minds to Spiritual and Heavenly
things. Accordingly therefore has God disposed the Revelation of the Counsels
of his Will in the Scripture, yet with that provision and caution, that by a
very ordinary attendance and care, we may see Spiritual things to be intended
and designed, and that our are not to be arrested by those sensible
representations. Hence we have not only a wonderful Variation g^ven to one and
the same proposition, and the same thing manifested and inculcated under
different Forms of speech; but besides in those very places where the Deep
Things of God are most brought down to our senses, there is enough either in
the Nature of the Thing spoken of, or in the scope of the Speaker, or in the
Context, to assure us that there is only a Metaphor, Similitude, or Allegory in
the expression. For indeed, there can be no Corporeal Images of Spiritual
Things, only by considering the properties and affections, etc. of things
Material to which they are compared, we are guided the better to understand and
know their Spiritual Nature.

. 5. Having unfolded the Nature of Metaphors, and enquired into the Reasons of
the frequent usage of Metaphorical Terms in the Scripture, we are next to
state, when an expression is to be accounted Metaphorical, that so we may
neither mistake proper expressions for Figurative, nor substitute a Figure
where there is none. We have already intimated 2. that it is the humor of some,
in order to serving a design, and ministering to an Hypothesis, to transform the
plainest Truths into Metaphors, and thereby to pervert the Scripture from its
true sense, to a befriending their prepossessions and prejudices. Allow but men
the liberty of supposing Metaphors, where their lusts and forestallments
influence them to such Imaginations; and there is not that Gospel Truth which
may not be supplanted, notwithstanding the plainest testimony given to it in
the Bible. If men may be permitted to forsake the Natural and Genuine sense of
words, where the Matter is capable of it, they may notwithstanding their
declaring themselves to believe the Gospel, yet believe nothing at all of the
Christian Faith. Two things therefore are carefully to be attended to in the
Interpretation of Scripture. (1.) That we impose not a proper sense where the
words ought to be taken in a Tropical, Figurative, Metaphorick, or Allegorick
one. Numerous Instances may be assigned how the Scripture has been perverted
from its true Intendment, by the usurping words in a proper sense, where a
Metaphorical, or Allegorick ought only to be allowed. Thus the
Anthropomorphites of old, and some Socinians of late (for all of them have not
thought so contemptibly of the Deity) by taking those texts, which attribute
Humane Members to God, in a proper sense, have fancied him to be Corporeal, and
have ascribed a Material, Humane shape to Him; whereas the meaning of such
places is only to affirm those perfections of God which such Members in us are
the Instruments of. Corporeity is repugnant to the Divine Nature, inconsistent
with the Common Notions of mankind concerning Him, and contradictious to what
the Scripture in other places reveals of his Essence and perfections; so that
the Attributing Bodily Members to him, must be construed as so many Metaphors
declaring only such Attributes and Operations to belong to Him, as those Organs
and Members in us denote, and are the apparatus and instruments of. Thus also
the Jews writing the precepts of the Law on their Frontlets and Phylacteries,
took its rise from affixing a proper meaning to Exodus 13.16. and Deuteronomy 6.8.
whereas indeed the words are Metaphorical, and do only intimate that they were
to have the Law in Continual remembrance. Not but that I acknowledge locks or
fringes fastened to the skirts of their Garments, See Numb. 15.38, 39.40. Deuteronomy.
22.12.
as a badg of that Subjection and Reverence they were to abide in toward God
and his Law, and that they were not to wander after false worship, to have been
enjoined them; but that the Ten Commandments or any thing else were to be
written upon them, I read not; and do Apprehend that Custom to have derived its
Original from the mistake already suggested. In like manner their Imagining,
Isa 19.18, 19, 20. to be intended in a proper sense, gave occasion to Onias's
building a Temple resembling that of Jerusalem, in Egypt, at least was pleaded
in justification of it: Whereas the import of the place, is only to declare the
Gentiles admission into the Church, and that they were to have a share in the
Spiritual Blessings of the Gospel, which the Prophet predicts and describes in
Terms and Phrases, adapted to the O. T. Economy and dispensation. I may here
add, that all the Jewish mistakes, in reference to the Messiah, as if he to be
a Triumphant King, subduing the Earth by the terror of his Legions, and to
confer^ on them all Terrene Pomp and Magnificence, etc. did arise principally
from obtruding a proper sense upon some of those Prophesies which relate to the
Kingdom of the Messiah, whereas in Truth their Phraseology is wholly
Metaphorick; God choosing by words which properly denote and import Things
Terrene and Temporal to instruct us concerning the Spiritual Benefits that we
should be made partakers of, by, and through the Messiah. The imposing a proper
sense upon words which Christ intended only in a Metaphorical, gave rise to one
of the Articles of Indictment which the Scribes and Pharisees preferred against
him: see Joh. 2.19, compared with Mark 14.58. It Is true, they withal altered
his words; for whereas Christ had only said, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up; The false witnesses deposed that they heard him say, I
will destroy this Temple, etc. but yet their main prevarication, and that
without which the other alteration could have no ways served their design, was
their construing his words in a proper sense, as referring to the Temple at
Jerusalem; whereas he designed them only in a Metaphorical, to denote his Body.
Vid. Bellarmin. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 20.
In like manner, Math. 5.3. is not only produced by the Papists in proof of the
voluntary Poverty of some of their Monasticks, but was scoffingly applied by
Julian to justify his robbing and pillaging the Christians, merely through
wresting that to a proper sense, which Christ intended in a Metaphorick, as the
(...), in the very Text does plainly declare. Through the like perverting of
the 1 Cor. 3* 12, 13. to a literal and proper sense, do the Romanists endeavor
to justify a future Purgatory; whereas the words are plainly Metaphorical, In
comment ad cap. 4. Amos.
denoting either Afflictions as Hierom thinks, or the Word of God (that (...),
that I may use Basils phrase) as Calvin and others judge. What Origin practiced
on himself through imposing a literal sense on Math. 19.12. may be seen in
Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 7.
whereas the words do manifestly contain a Metaphor with an Hyperbole. It were
easy to produce many other Texts of Scripture, which even men of great Name,
and justly reverenced some of them for Antiquity, others for their Learning,
have through their too much relyance on the Immediate and Proper sense of the
words, perverted to a far other meaning, than ever the Holy Ghost intended in
them. (2.) No less care is required, that we do not fancy a Metaphor where the
words will bear a proper and Immediate signification. Non aliter a propria
significacatione recedi oportet, quam si manifestissimum sit, aliud testatorem
sensisse; We are not to forsake the Genuine and Natural signification of Words,
unless there be the highest evidence that the Author did otherwise intend them,
says the Civil Law. And as Austin says, semper verborum proprietas servanda
est, nisi quaedam ingens ratio tropum suadeat: De Doctr. Christi. cap. 10.
The proper signification of words is always to be retained, unless necessity
enforce us to expound them otherwise. Every Scripture expression, Word, and
Phrase is to be taken properly, and according to its Original and immediate
meaning, if nothing of absurdity, nothing repugnant to Faith, or disagreeable
to the Common Notices of mankind, arise or ensue upon such an acceptance.
There is no bounding of a roving fancy which love's to sport it self with the
Idea's and Phantasms it self has raised, without confining our selves within
the foresaid limits. There are three rules, by which we are to govern our
selves in determining concerning the Words of Scripture, whether they are to be
taken Tropically, or only properly. (1.) The 1st, respects the Subject Matter,
and scope of the Speaker. De pudicitia.
For as Tertullian says, Ex materia dirigendus est sermo, The Import of Words
is to be judged of by their habitude to the Matter treated of. When the
affixing a literal sense to any Text of Scripture, will either lodge the
imputation of impertinency upon the Author, or argue him deficient in not
pursuing or reaching his scope and design; it becomes us then to have recourse
to a Tropical. The same words are not always capable of the same sense, but
answerably to the subject Matter they are used about, they do not only
sometimes admit a larger, and sometimes require a stricter acceptance, but in
one place are to be taken properly, and in another not. The Import of a word in
one place, is not enough to define its Import in another, unless all things can
be supposed parallel. How wretchedly, and irrationally do the Socinians impose
a Metaphorick sense upon the Scripture-expressions of Christ's dying for us,
Redeeming us, Reconciling us by his Blood, bearing our Iniquities, being made
sin, and a Curse for us; because some of these phrases upon other occasions,
and where the Subject matter leads to it, are used Metaphorically. If there
occurr any Media alleged by the Divine writers, which considered abstractedly,
and in themselves seem not very cogent or Pungent, nor thoroughly proportioned,
to the Scope and End they are brought for; we are to remember that in such
reasonings they argued a concessis from principles confessed and acknowledged
by those they had to do with. Nor are any proofs held more convincing in
relation to persons discoursed with, than what are drawn from their own
principles and opinions. And in such cases, though the Concessions should be
lubricous and unsolid, yet the Ratiocinations from them, are not so. It Is enough
in Argumentis ad hominem, as Logicians call them, that the Principles and
concessions of Adversaries be duly applied, but the Truth or Falsity of them
the discourser is not concerned in. (2.) A second Rule, by which we may
determine whether a Text of Scripture ought to be interpreted in a proper
sense, or only in a Metaphorick, is by observing the Congruity or Incongruity,
which through imposing a proper sense upon it, it would have with other
Scriptures. He that Prophesies i. e. interprets Scripture, must do it says
the Apostle, (...), according to the proportion of Faith. Romans 12.6. (...)
Analogy according to Phavorinus is (...), is the proportion of one thing to
another. There is an excellent Harmony in the system of the Bible, and
therefore one place is so to be interpreted, as to maintain a consistency with
other places. I know that the (...) is apprehended by some to refer to the
(...) v. 3. Namely, that they who were enriched with the Extraordinary Gift of
Interpretation, should use their gift according to that measure and proportion
which They had of it. Which Exposition, as I will not take upon me to gain say,
much less to censure; so I know nothing to the contrary why that which I have
suggested may not be admitted. If the proper and immediate signification of
words cannot without supplanting Doctrines elsewhere plainly revealed, be
retained; A Metaphor or some other Trope must be acknowledged to lie in them.
For the several Amanuenses of the Scripture had their pens guided by one
omniscient Hand, they being the several secretaries of one infallible Enditer,
and by consequence, the Scripture must in all things be consistent with it
self, nor must any sense be imposed on one part of it, that rises up in
contradiction to the meaning of another. (3) A Third means of discerning
whether a portion of Scripture is to be construed in a proper sense, or only in
a metaphorick, is by observing the consistence or inconsistence of a proper
sense with principles of natural Light, and first maxims of Reason. Though the
Scripture was not principally written to instruct us in Philosophy, nor to
teach us the essences and properties of natural things, yet there is not any
thing in it, that contradicts any true principles of Philosophy, or that is
repugnant to what we truly know of the nature and affections of things by the
light of Reason. God being the Author of both Lights, there needs not the
accommodation of what we know by the one, to what we understand by the other.
Verity requires no wresting nor glossing to harmonise with Verity. For as
Aristotle says (...). Truth is always at peace with Truth, be they of what
nature or kind soever. Therefore where the imposing a proper sense upon any
Scripture Words or Phrases, will obtrude upon us any Dogme or practice
repugnant to the Rational Faculty that (...), or to principles of natural
Light, there we are to substitute a tropical one. Forasmuch then as the
interpreting those Texts of Scripture to a proper sense, which attribute Eyes,
Hands, Feet, etc. To God, were to superstruct a Doctrine upon the Foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles that is repugnant to the common notices which we have
by the light of Reason of the nature of God, therefore all such phrases must be
acknowledged to be metaphorical. The like judgment is to be made of all those
Scriptures, wherein the names and affections of brute Beasts are attributed to
Men, the things immediately and originally signified by those words and names
lying in a direct contradiction to rational Natures. Upon the same account must
that phrase, Mat. 8.28. Let the Dead bury the Dead, be acknowledged to contain
as an (...) in the entire proposition, so a metaphor in the first Term Dead.
There are innumerable Instances more of this Nature, namely, where we are
compelled to recurr to a Metaphorick sense, upon the account of the
inconsistency of a proper one with principles of Philosophy and Maxims of
Reason. Now as these are the lights and measures of discerning when a Scripture
is to be interpreted in a proper sense, and when not (for whatever Rules
besides are assigned to this purpose, they may be reduced to one of these) so I
know none more regardful of them, in the sensing and expounding of Scripture,
than those styled Nonconformists are. And should any of them be found to
transgress in this matter, it ought to be ascribed to the ignorance and vanity
of the particular persons that are herein criminal; nor is the Party answer for
it, as being no ways concerned, seeing the common Principles upon which they
are led to dissent from the present establishment of the Church of England in
its Ceremonies and Discipline, have not the least influence upon them in this
affair. Were our adversaries impartial in their censures, the excess and
exorbitancy in this particular will be found to lie among themselves. For if
any be guilty of introducing a Mystic Theology out of Plato and Proclus, and
of Allegorising the Scripture according to a pretended Cabala, they are the
men. Nor do any else that I know of, make such Fantastical applications of
Scripture to purposes distant from its own, as those who style themselves sons
of the Church of England, do. But indeed it is not truth nor zeal for God, but
malice and interest that sway's some men in their discourses and Writings. The
Non-conformists are the persons against whom they are prejudiced, and of whom
they never think but with forestalled Judgments, or Biassed Passions, and
therefore they only must be loaded, both by wresting the most innocent passages
in their Writings to a perverse sense and meaning, and by transferring and
imputing to them the Fooleries of others, with every thing else that may render
them contemptible.

6. That there are many Figures in Scripture, and that many things are spoken
in Metaphorical Terms in condescension and accommodation to our Capacities, and
that there are certain Measures by which we may distinguish between things
Metaphorically and Properly spoken, has been already declared. The next
enquiry is, by what means we may attain the true conceptions that are locked up
under Metaphors? There are no Schem's of speech that are more liable to be
mistaken and wrested to a perverse sense than Metaphors are. The instances in
which one thing may resemble another are so many, and the power of Imagination
so great, that in nothing may a man sooner prevaricate, than in expounding
Metaphorical Terms and Phrases. The consideration therefore as well of this, as
that, the Non-Con-formists are particularly arraigned of abusing Scripture
expressions, not only without but incontradiction to their sense* and of
prating in Scripture Forms of speech without having any Notion of the things
they signify, has prevailed with me to discourse this more particularly. I
take at present for granted, that every Scripture-Proposition whether the Terms
of it be Figurative or Proper, has a certain and determinate sense which it is
designed and adapted to convey to us. Every expression in the Bible as well
Allegorical and Metaphorick, as Proper, is every way apt to instruct us in the
case that it is made use of. Nor needs there any other proof of this, but what
is levied from the Wisdom and Goodness of God, his End in all the Forms that
he speaks to us in being to teach and inform us. I also suppose it beyond all
suspect and debate (at least among persons that are not wild and Phrantick)
that where the Terms are Metaphorical, Omnes enim Figurae, certa ratione ad
proprium sensum tendunt, eumque explicant. Flac. Illyric. de ratione
cognoscendi S. literas. Tract. 1. Col. 30.
yet the Truths expressed by them are Real. It Is a high blasphemy against the
Spirit of God, to imagine the Scripture a mere dress of words employed about
nothing. As every Scripture Phrase is intended to manifest something that is
true and real, so for the most part the noblest and most sublime Truths lie
under Metaphorick expressions. Metaphors are not used to impregnate our Minds
with gaudy Phantasms, but to adjust the Mysteries of Religion to the weakness
of our Capacities. Chap. 1.. 10.
I Shall not here repeat what I have elsewhere proved, namely, that every Text
of Scripture has a Literal sense. For as that is the literal sense of a place,
where words are used properly, which flows from their Natural and Immediate
signification, so the Literal sense, where words are employed Tropically, is
that which arises from their Figurative acceptations. I also suppose it
universally acknowledged, at least in Words, though too many depart from it in
effect, that we ought to conform our opinions and expositions to the sense of
the Scripture, and not wrest Scripture-Words to them. We are not to frame to
our selves Idea's of Religion, Optimus Lector est qui dictorum intelligentiam
expectat ex dictis potius quam imponat; and retulerit potius quam attulerit;
neque rogat id videri dictis contineri, quod ante lectionem praesumpserit
intelligendum. Hilar. lib. de Trinit.
and then to accommodate the Scripture to their defense and patronage. This is
to teach God what he should have said, not to learn what he has. I shall only
further Subjoin in way of Premise, that in unfolding a Metaphor, our Terms
ought to be proper and not Metaphorical. I readily grant, that it is of great
advantage toward the enlightening our minds in the sense of a Metaphorical
Scripture, to consult other Scripture passages where the same Terms are
Metaphorically used, especially where all things are parallel, but still the
meaning of the Metaphor is to be ultimately declared in Words that are Proper.
For Metaphors properly signifying one thing, and being applied to, signify
another only because of some resemblance, we are therefore in our sensing of
Metaphors to remove the Metaphorical Term, Oportet interpretem pro tropica voce
aliam propriam adhibita solida demonstratione verbi Dei substituere. Illyric.
and to substitute in its room that word which Properly signifies the thing,
whereof we conceive the former to have been only a Figure. To paraphrase
Metaphors in Metaphorick terms, is instead of making them Intelligible, to
continue them dark and Mysterious. For as we are not to terminate in the (...)
and Images themselves, but to penetrate into the things couched under, and
represented by them, so much less is a (...) a Mimetick Fancy in our
commenting on them to be indulged. In a word, it is the work of a Judicious
Interpreter to bring forth and declare the scope and matter of all such Phrases
in the most plain and easy expressions. Now in order to the arriving at true
notions and conceptions of those divine and Spiritual things which are locked
up under Metaphorick Terms, we ought (1) in some considerable degree to
understand the Nature and properties of the things, from which the Metaphor is
taken. For Metaphorick Terms signifying one thing, and being only applied to
shadow forth another by reason of some resemblance between them, we are wholly
inept to declare the Heavenly Truth, that such Forms of Speech are adapted, and
have a tendency to instruct us in, while we remain ignorant of the things which
those Words originally and immediately import. And seeing the Scripture
expresses somewhat of Religion by all the parts of the Creation, by the
Employments and very utensils of Humane life, Scriptura dum versatur praecipue
circa ea quae gratia^ and gloriam eternam specta^t, cognitionem omnem
Philosophicam sibi substernit, eque rerum naturis tantum sibi sumit quantum
sibi opus est ad fabricandum speculum per quod divina oculis nostris
quadantenus representantur. Rivet. Isa. ad S. Script. cap. 5. p. 47.
and by the usages and customs of Mankind: Metaphors are not a subject for any
undertaker to exercise upon, who has not more than a tincture of knowledge in
all those. Though to understand the Bible well, be enough to promote Faith and
Good life, yet to understand some passages of it well, a great many other
things must be first understood. It cannot otherwise be, but that to persons
ignorant of natural Philosophy, Agriculture, etc. as well as unacquainted with
the customs and usages of the Oriental Nations, many Texts will seem obscure
which are not at all so to such as are imbued with true Ideas of the Natures
and properties of things, and enriched with a knowledge of Arts and the
Customs of the World. A luxurious Fancy will be apt to frame very wild and
absurd Notions out of Metaphors, if the Understanding be not furnished with a
knowledge of the qualities, operations, and use of those things from which they
are drawn. A familiarity therefore with the works of God, as it will oblige us
humbly to adore the Mysteries of the Word which we cannot fathom, through
finding our selves non-plus't in the most obvious phenomenon of Nature, so it
will exceedingly contribute to our understanding many passages in Scr^pture, of
which we must otherwise either continue wholly ignorant, or judge of them
according to the suggestions of Imagination. I may add, that when a word or
Term is borrowed from any Art, Science, or Discipline, and metaphorically
applied to illustrate some mystery of Faith, or the mode of its Existence, the
genius and value of the word with respect to its usage in the Discipline whence
it is transferred, is carefully to be observed. How expedient and necessary
upon this account an acquaintance with the civil-Law is, in order to the fixing
the importance of diverse Scripture-phrases, such as Adoption, Surety, Earnest,
etc. were easy to Demonstrate. 2. There being diverse Metaphorical expressions
in the Scripture, the meaning of which is not to be arrived at by mere recourse
to the immediate signification of the words and Terms, as bearing rather upon
the things which the Eastern Nations in their symbolical representation of
matters applied them to; It will therefore be needful to know the meaning of
many of the Oriental Symbols, and what things and events, because of some
similitude between the Symbols themselves and the things and events they stood
for, they represented by them. For as there are many Prophetic passages both
in the old and new Testament, which are not strictly Metaphorick, that cannot
otherwise be understood; So there are many Metaphorick expressions in the
Scripture, of whose meaning we can have no assurance, but by knowing something
of the use and import of the Symbols of the Ancients. (3) The same Terms,
according as they are metaphorically applied to different subjects, importing
often different things, their signification must be stated by considering the
subject they are applied to. Through the different Affections, Properties,
Adjuncts, and Effects that appertain to things which Words originally and
properly manifest and denote, it frequently falls out that things hugely
opposite are resembled to them, and styled by their Names. Now in this case the
quality of the Subject Metaphorically denoted by such a Term, can alone
determine the resemblance which intercede's between the thing originally and
immediately signified, and the thing to which it is Tropically applied. I
should be too tedious, did I undertake to enumerate the several Words that with
respect to the various properties or effects of the things which they properly
signify, are applied metaphorically, to represent not only things different
but opposite, some of them in a good sense in Analogy to one property or
effect, and others in an evil in Analogy to another. (4) Great care is
required, that when diverse properties and affections of things Originally
signified by Terms and Words, may without injury to Truth be in Way of
similitude applied to the Things which those Terms are Metaphorically brought
to illustrate, that the comparison and Resemblance be not carried beyond what
the Holy Ghost does there peculiarly design. We ought not only to take heed
that we hurry not a Metaphor beyond the precincts of Truth, but that we drive
it not beyond the limits which the place where it is used, and the end of the
Speaker, confine it to. It Is not enough that we do not trespass against the
Analogy of Faith in the application of a Metaphor, but it is also requisite
that we exceed not the Intention of the sacred Writer in that very place. There
is in all Metaphorical expressions some one Property, Affection, Operation or
other wherein the proportion and resemblance between the things immediately
signified by the Words, and the things which they are brought to manifest and
illustrate, does peculiarly consist, and this the nature of the Discourse, the
Context and speakers scope must determine us in. Want of due attendance to
this, may occasion a prevaricating from the sense of the place, where yet there
may be an Harmony maintained in reference to the universal System of the
Scripture. A failure in this if in any thing relating to the subject before us,
is that which has ministered occasion for the clamours of partial and angry
men. But that others besides some of the Non-Conformists are guilty of it, were
easy to set beyond all exception, did I love to expose the Wisdom and
discretion of any, as some do. Yea, it is not so easy to fasten a just
imputation upon any in this matter as some are prone to imagine. For besides
that fecundity of sense which lies in all Scripture Words, There are none more
pregnant with a vastness of meaning, than Metaphorical Terms are. This at least
must be allowed, that wheresoever the resemblance of one thing to another is
represented under a Metaphorick word or expression, Laconismus scripturae
maxim cernitur in vocibus metaphoricis quae non raro ingentem rerum copiam
complectuntur. Glass. Philolog. Sacr. lib. 1. Tract. 3. Sect. 6. 2.
that all the particulars which stand in Analogy with that expression, and any
ways serve to make out the comparison and similitude, ought to be included. Nor
do I once question but that this alone will go a great length in relieving the
Non-Conformists from the imputation charged upon them in reference to their
exposition of Scripture-Metaphors. (5) When the sense of a Metaphor in this or
that place lies enveloped and obscure, it is of great advantage to consider the
import of the Metaphor as it occurs in other parts of Scripture, where the
Tenor of the Discourse, and the context render the meaning of it more plain and
obvious. When a phrase stands encircled with darkness in one place, we are then
to see what light can be borrowed from the usage of it in some other place
(supposing all things to be parallel) where the tendency of it is more
apparent. God has so tempered the Scripture, that by the use of a Phrase in
one place, light is reflected on the meaning of it in another. By their mutual
irradiations they enlighten each other, and the knowledge of the more
perspicuous guides us to the Intelligence of the more obscure. (6) When a
Metaphorick Phrase abstractedly and irrelatively considered seems dark and
intricate, the surveying it in its Habitude to the context will hugely tend to
the unfolding its sense and importance. The Rabbis have a saying, that Nulla
est objectio in lege quae non habet solutionem in latere; What ever difficulty
attends a phrase considered alone, it may be resolved by observing what borders
upon it. Words are to be sensed in relation to what precedes and ensues, and
are not to be disjoined from the body of the Discourse to which they appertain.
For as Hierome says, Moris est Scripturarum, manifesta obscuris subnectere, and
quod prius sub aenigmate dixerint aperta voce proferre. In Esaias, cap. 19.
We have all imaginable certainty of having attained the true Notion of a
Metaphor, and of having reached the real Truth wrapped up under it, when by
secluding the word that is tropically used, and substituting in its place the
Word signifying the thing whereof we apprehend the other only to be a Figure, a
Harmony with the context is maintained, the end and design of the speaker
answered, and the sense of the whole discourse not only preserved as good, but
rendered more clear. (7) God having revealed nothing in Metaphorical Terms, but
what he has somewhere or other declared in proper Words, we have this
therefore as another Medium of discerning the meaning of Metaphors, namely the
viewing the plain and proper expressions where the same things are manifested.
Metaphors are not so much designed to teach us positively the Doctrines and
Mysteries of Faith, as to illustrate them, to render them more familiar to our
Understandings, to impress them more durably in our Memories, to excite our
affections with the more vigor, and by the artifice of an external dress to
make the study of the Word more pleasant and delightful; and therefore the true
conceptions that are veiled under Metaphors, are to be sought for in those
places, where the same Truths are revealed and declared in proper Terms. It Is a
high satisfaction to observe how plain Texts conduct us to the understanding of
metaphorical, and how metaphorical Terms serve to illustrate things that are
elsewhere delivered in proper Words. God knowing the various Tempers and
Genius's of men, has so disposed the phraseology of Scripture, that the same
truths are represented in a dress, idiome, and dialect which may best suit the
Gust'o of every one. Though there be enough in the things themselves which the
Scripture treats of, to conciliate a Reverence, and Veneration to it, yet the
frequent repeating the same things, were there not some variation in the
exterior Ornaments, would be apt to beget a Nauseum, and expose the sacred
style to be thought languishing, cold and insipid. As upon the one hand
therefore the Scripture is secured from the imputation of being flat, cold, and
unaffecting, through those Lights and Graces of Rhetoric wherewith it is
adorned, which at once illuminate the mind by their easiness, and by a certain
peculiar movement insinuate upon the heart by their striking the Imagination:
so upon the other hand all obscurity is removed from the Word, not only through
the quality of the Schem's of speech themselves, which are all natural, and
have an admirable tendency to illustrate the things they are made use of for,
but because those very things are all of them delivered in plain and proper
terms elsewhere. These being the Lines, and Measures that are to be attended
to in the explaining of Metaphors, I dare pronounce that it is not so much the
obscurity of Metaphorick expressions which hinders them from being understood,
as the want of common reason and sense in those that meddle with them. In a
word, Metaphorical Terms signify all and every thing which with reference to
the nature of the Trope, Analogy with the sacred System, Congruity with the
Context, and pursuance of the scope of the Author they can signify. And as I
know none more observant of these Rules in the sensing and applying of
Metaphors, than those who are styled Non-Conformists so upon a supposition that
some of them either through ignorance, inadvertency, or wantonness should
prevaricate in this matter; yet I no ways understand how either in consistency
with Religion or Morality, a whole party should be traduced for the folly of a
few. Had a regard for the things of God influenced men in these efforts, they
would have found as much cause of impeaching some among themselves of
extravagancy in this matter, as of any else whoever. But proceeding upon other
Motives, they have confined their cavils to the writings of such, the loading
of whose persons with reproach they reckon to be their Interest. Only it has
fallen out here as in other cases where reflections are partially, and withal
too personally address't, that their reproaches have not only for the most part
lost their effect, but they themselves are reputed uncivil and malicious.

. 7. The Nature of Metaphors in general being unfolded, and having also fixed
and stated the Rules of expounding Scripture ones, we are next to enquire into
the use of either common Metaphors whether in popular Sermons, practical
Discourses, or even some times in Polemical Writings. I take it for granted
that as Reason gives a Discourse its Strength and Nerves, so Rhetoric gives it
its Color and Grace. The strongest Arguments when delivered dryly, as they do
not so delight and please, so neither do they so enlighten and instruct, as
when clothed in a bright and flourishing Character. The same things nakedly and
bluntly represented, do not make so great an impression, as when embellished
with handsome Language. Nor is there any thing more persuasive as well as
delightful, than to find good words accompanying excellent Sense. And the
better any subject is, the more worthy it ought to be accounted of a rich and
polished, though not of a gaudy Dress. And indeed elegant expressions are
impertinently bestowed, where the matter and sense are not considerable. Nor is
there a greater evidence of Folly in a Speaker or Writer, (...). Longin. (...)
Sect. 27.
than to affect a loftiness of expression on a mean and petty Subject. Words
being manifestative of conceptions and things, ought to be proportionate to the
Themes whereof we treat, and the Idea's we have of them. Where there is not
something substantial and weighty underneath, a dazzling style serves only to
amuse the Reader, and to palliate the weakness of the Discourse. But though
grave and weighty Matter deserves to be well set off, yet this is chiefly to
be respected in the cleanliness and masculiness of Terms, and not either in the
rankness or glistering of Phrase and Expression. I know nothing more nauseous
to a well balanced judgment, than to find a grave subject handled in a luscious
and Amorous manner. The Gospel particularly disdains to be recommended by
flowers of Language, or to Court the Affections of men by fine words, as
choosing to adjust its self to our Reasons by its Truth, and to address its self
to our Consciences by the Authority which its Author has impressed upon it. I
wish there were not occasion for the revival of Gregory Nazianzen's and
Hierom's complaint, namely, That Theological Truths are so handled by some, as
if they took their measures of the ministerial Function from the Ancient
Demagogues, and not from the Sacred Writers. I reckon it will be also allowed,
that every Argument is not alike capable of external Ornaments. There are some
subjects which the best writer, -- Desperate tractata nitescere posse.
Especially matters Controversal will least admit the colors of Rhetoric.
Feathers and Lace do not become a Warrier so well as Buff and Steel. Here if
any where, Ornari res ipsa negat contenta doceri. And as to Reason strongly,
and to Speak well, do seldom meet in one person; so an ambition of being
excessive and curious in Words, is usually accompanied with a neglect of
Logic. Arguments weigh more in a close Discourse than either an elaborate
Phrase, or a quaint Similitude. Nothing in a Disputation renders a Cause more
suspected, than to find it managed with too much Ornament. Nor can it but
hugely displease, to be put off with an Embarras of words, when we looked for
Demonstration. Of all signs whatsoever, Allegories and Metaphors are the
unfittest to declare Logical Notions by. And whoever they are that manage
Debates in metaphorical Terms, they do but (...) play the Fools, that I may use
Longinus's Phrase, and put the world off with (...), with a flourish of Words
in stead of Arguments. The only use I know of Metaphors and Similitudes in
Disputations, is to refresh the Spirit of the Reader and awaken it when it is
weary; persuade and convince they cannot. Metaphorick flourishes may be also
useful to illustrate and brighten Truth when it is once established, but the
naked and plain mode of disputing conduces only to the conviction and
demonstration of it.

But as to the usage of Metaphors in Popular Sermons, and practical Discourses,
the Case is otherwise. Whatsoever is pleadable in their behalf upon any
occasion, serves to justify the usurpation of them in Discourses ad Populum,
and Didactical Writings. The Inducements and Motives of their allowance in
Rhetorical Tracts, Orations, or whatever else does best admit these Ornaments
of Eloquence, do all of them evince their agreeableness to the Oratory of the
Pulpit. The Original and primitive Causes of the usurpation of Metaphors in
Discourses, seem to have been Necessity and Delight; though afterward an itch
and ambition of not being understood, might influence some men both to an
excess this way, and to an affectation of Metaphors that were altogether
Poetical and presumptuous, instead of being content with such as were easy and
common. Now the several springs and fountains of this Necessity appear to have
been: (1) A penury of words. Though to me Terms thus applied to intimate
different things, ought ^ather to be styled Homonymous and aequivocal, than
Metaphorick. A cognation of Affections, Properties and operations in Beings
otherwise vastly different, being accompanied with a scarcity of Terms to
express them all by distinct Signs, has occasioned the imposing one and the
same word to indigitate things of different kinds. And as the use of any
Analogous Term for that which primarily it was ordained to signify, ought to be
accounted for the proper usage of it; so the applying it to manifest other
things upon the score of Similitude or proportion to the former, may be
esteemed for its Metaphorical Application. (2) That things by being thus
represented, may be apprehended by the Vulgar, (which make up the far greater
Number in the World,) with the greater ease and facility. There are some whom
the clearest and most convincing Reasons, will not instruct, unless you can so
attire and apparel your Conceptions, as by bringing things as near as may be to
their Senses, you impress and strike their Imagination. It Is not so much the
things themselves which are spoken that move the Plebs, as the manner of
delivering them in Scheme's accommodated to strike their senses with vigor.
(3) These Modes of speech are found advantageous to relieve the Memory, and to
render it more tenacious of what is committed to it. Next to the ranging things
in a natural Order, that the one may help to the remembrance of the other by
the connection they have together; I know nothing more subservient to memory,
than the coupling and tying our Notions to such material and outward Objects as
are obvious and known. Now if these and the like inducements have rendered
Metaphors necessary in most kinds of Discourses, I may justly reckon that
Theological Subjects do more peculia^ly require them than any other. For, 1.
Gospel Truths are of such a sublime and mysterious Nature, that no words can
express them unto perfection, nor are there any Terms in the stores and
treasures of men, that can adequately declare them. As all words are instituted
signs, so they were Originally invented to express natural Things and humane
Thoughts by, and thence it is that the utmost signification they can possibly
bear, does prove but scanty and narrow when they are applied to manifest things
Spiritual and Heavenly. Through a deficiency therefore of proper Words to
express them by, we are reduced to a necessity of manifesting, or at least
shadowing them forth by Metaphorical Terms. (2) The Doctrines of the Gospel are
not only such whose Principles, and Media of probation lie not in Nature,
(being indebted for all the knowledge we have of them to the Sovereign Will and
Wisdom of God, who has supernaturally revealed them) But besides, through
their lying out of the roads and paths of Reason, there remains also a Physical
disproportion, as well as a Moral, betwixt them and our Faculties,
notwithstanding their being revealed. And upon this account there cannot be a
more proper means of administering relief to our intellectual Faculties about
them, than to refract, accommodate, and attemper them to our minds, by
dexterously clothing them with all that external sensibility, which their
Natures will admit, through borrowing Light from things material and known to
illustrate them. (3) Whatever be the philosophy of Memory, which for ought I
know has as much of Riddle and Mystery in it, as any one thing in Nature has:
This much is certain, that not only through a Moral indisposition, we find our
memories more leaky as to Divine things, than any else; but through our very
natural frame we are less retentive of, and more in danger of forgetting the
Notions and Ideas of Spiritual things, than of those that are Corporeal. So
that upon this account as well as the two former, viz. the preserving the
remembrance of spiritual Objects with the more facility, it becomes not only a
matter of Relief and Advantage, but even sometimes of necessity to convey them
to the Understandings of men, and commit them to their Memories, by having
linkt and knit them to Material Objects. I know no better Method to preserve
supernatural things in the Memories of Men, than their being expressed by such
things as we constantly converse with, and are like so to do while we have our
abode in the World. Pleasure, and Delight, were another cause of the first
Introduction and usurpation of Metaphors. Augustine proposes it as a Question
not easily to be resolved, why the same Things delivered in plain and
perspicuous Language, De Doct. Christ.
are not found so pleasing, as when set out and adorned with Metaphors. Cicero
(than whom no man could either speak better, or judge what was well spoken,
being himself inimitable both in the art of moving and instructing, as knowing
not only all the Topics both of convincing and persuading, but also thoroughly
understanding the philosophy of the Passions, and the several avenues to the
hearts of men,) gives this Reason for it, Quod omnis translatio quae quidem
ratione sumpta est, ad sensus ipsos admovetur, maxim oculorum qui est
acerrimus: Because every Metaphor that is proper, 3. de Orat.
exposes the Things that are spoken of, to the senses; especially to that of
the Eyes, which of all the senses is the quickest. Besides, Metaphors if duly
and wisely used, beget Admiration; and there is nothing does more impress or
affect us, than that which some way or other commends it self to us as
Admirable. Hence Aristotle says, That if we would write eloquently and to
persuade, Rhet. 3. cap. 2.
(...). It Is also no small pleasure to have the same things represented under
different Forms of Speech, and to have a variation given to the same thoughts,
which the mingling Metaphors with plain Language admirably does. I need not add
the delight there is in having our minds diverted to other objects, and that
not only without taking them off from the subjects we undertake to explain, but
so as by these diversions they are still made more easy and intelligible to us;
and the main intention is still pursued, even when there seems to be the
greatest deviation from the Theme. All which (not to mention more) as they gave
rise to the First use of Metaphors, whether in common, or more elaborate
discourses, so they serve to justify their usurpation in the handling of
subjects relating to Faith and Piety. But there needs no other authorization of
Metaphors on Divine Thems's but the Holy Ghosts having so frequently made use
of them in declaring the Mysteries of our Religion. God by his unfolding
himself and his Mind to us in several kinds of Metaphorical Terms, has not
only allowed, but sanctified our Use of the like. No Schemes of Speech which
the Divine Spirit has made use of to instruct us in the Doctrines of Faith,
and by which the sacred Scriptures do touch our hearts, and make themselves
Mistress of our affections, can be reflected upon without impeaching the
Wisdom and Faithfulness of God who has preceded us in them. And if the
practice of the Ancients, and Example of the Fathers, may be admitted as a
pattern which it is lawful to imitate, a little commerce with them will instruct
us that they indulged themselves a Latitude herein, beyond what is to be met
with in any Modern Authors. I readily grant, that as in the Exposition and
application of Scripture-Metaphors, we are to take the highest care that they
be not perverted to a sense to which they were never intended, so in the
usurpation of other Metaphors by way of Imitation and parallel of what we find
in the holy leaves, a due Sobriety ought to be observed. Nor have I any
Apology, much less Defense to make, for the audacity and phantasticalness of
some men in this matter. It Is enough to declare the Rules which ought to be
attended to, without arraigning the Ignorance and Folly of any man in this
affair. Yet this I may say, that miscarriages in this particular, are not only
incident to persons of the Nonconforming persuasion, but there are some
dutiful sons of the Church, as void of wit, modesty and decorum herein, as
others are. Some entering upon the Ministry without Piety, and others without
Learning, and too many undertaking that sacred Function without any due sense
either of the Sanctity and Majesty of the Mysteries of Religion, or the purity
of Christian Morals, having withal neither any knowledge of Nature, nor
acquaintance with the Rules of Rhetoric; do expose not only their own Folly,
but disparage and profane the Adorable Mysteries of the Christian Faith by
their sluttish and bold Metaphors. And which is more deplorable, though they
escape not reproach, yet they are not capable of instruction. I disclaim being
the Advocate of any such; and wish, that through an affectation of seeming
Witty to Vulgar Heads, they had not rendered themselves ridiculous to such as
are Wise and Rational: and that under pretense of rendering the abstruse Things
of the Gospel, familiar and easy to the weakest Capacities, they had not both
contaminated and disgraced them. Amongst the many Rules laid down by
Rhetoricians for our government in the usage of Metaphors, I reckon these the
most Remarkable. (1) They must not be obscure and Unintelligible, but
accommodated to the Understandings of those we address to. The glass must not
be so besmeared with paint as to shut out the light, nor the cortex so thick as
that there is no coming at the Sense. Aristotle forbids all remote and hardy
Metaphors, even in common Oratory, unless they be prefaced with (...), If it be
lawful to use such a Metaphor, or if the comparison may be admitted without
boldness and danger: And much more are they to be forbid in the sacred
Eloquence. Nor are the same Metaphors to be used before every Auditory, which
may pass for Ornaments and lights before persons of Learning and Ingenuity. A
chief part of Pulpit-Oratory, consists in adapting our selves to the Hearers we
speak to; for what graces and beautifies a Discourse to one Assembly,
discommends and renders it useless to another. Especially Poetic Metaphors,
and such as cannot be understood without an insight into the Mythology of the
Heathen, are to be avoided. Allusions to their Fables and Romantic Stories are
both incongruous to, and unworthy of a Sacred Subject. The Holy Ghost whose
Method we ought Religiously to conform to, has expressed matters of Religion
only by such natural things as we familiarly Converse with, and by the common
employments of Humane Life. (2) We must not crowd them too thick. For that
instead of illustrating a subject, darkens it; and in the room of delighting
the mind, and surprising the Affections, they dazzle and oppress them. Longinus
tells us that Caecilius would admit but two, or at most three, in reference to
one matter. But the Subject can only best regulate us in this, for the same air
of Eloquence does not become every Theme. (...) Sect. 28.
Longinus notes, that a Multiplicity of Metaphors may be allowed, Vbi supra.
(...) (...), where the affections are carried like a Torrent, and the Passions
raised to a becoming height, and enflamed with a due ardor. A plurality of
Metaphors is not only lawful but expedient, when the Subject we are treating of
is so sublime, that Allusions to one thing do not serve to illustrate it. And
as this is often our case in displaying the Mysteries of Faith, so we have the
President of God himself in it. When Metaphors and Similitudes fetched from from
one sort of Subjects, do not serve to illustrate the Matter treated of, the
whole Creation and the several species of Creatures are called in by the Holy
Ghost, to be some way or other Hieroglyphical of it. (3) Metaphors ought not to
be drawn from any thing that is slovenly and Sordid. I the rather mention this,
in that I find the Non-conformists charged for Stuffing their Sermons with
Kitchin-Metaphors and Rascal Similitudes. Def. and continuat. p 163.
There are things enough cleanly and innocent to fetch allusions and Analogies
from, even then when we address to the Vulgar, without defiling the purity of
Religion with any thing that is sluttish or Nasty. One of the Original
Fountains of Metaphors, was the arraying things in themselves uncomely, in a
dress which might not offend the severest modesty; and it is a pity to have the
Antidote perverted into poison. (...), or the declaring that in a modest
Metaphorick Phraseology, which properly expressed would grate upon a Chaste Ear
or Mind, being an Ingredient into Vulgar Oratory, how much more ought it to
obtain a place in the Eloquence of the Sanctuary? The Holy Ghost forbids even
in common discourse, not only all (...) obsceness, Ephesians. 5.4.
but (...), which I think may be rendered childish and fool^sh Quibling. For the
Term in its Native signification denotes the handsome turning or changing of a
word, and is used to signify Urbanity or pleasantness of Conversation, Eth.
lib. 4. cap. 8.
and accordingly Aristotle reckons it for a virtue: but the Apostle plainly
taking it in an evil sense, I know not why it may not be translated foolish
Jingling with words, or insignificant prating. I am sure Suidas renders it not
only by (...) boyish levity, but by (...) Clownishness. Did we in our usage of
Metaphors make the Scripture pattern our measure, it is not possible that we
should debase our selves to the allowance of any that are Uncivil or Immodest.
A discreet person will easily find enough to please the fancy, without
offending either the Conscience of any, or disparaging the Subject whereof he
Treats. Yet I cannot but say, that what some men brand for Kitchen Metaphors
and Rascal Similitudes, are cleanly enough, and appear to have been made use of
in compliance with the exigencies of Themes, and the weaknesses of Audito^s.
Nor needs there any other Apology for most of them, but that the Sanctuary as
its worthy of Gold and precious Stones, so it rejects not Goats Hair and
Badgers Skins. Upon the whole (providing the Rules suggested be attended to) I
see not but that besides the using of Scripture-Metaphors in the sense, and to
the end for which they are intended, we may also use other common and ordinary
ones, at least to express, though not to prove our thoughts. And though such do
not serve to demonstrate the Truths which they are brought for, yet they may
serve to impress and inculcate them.

8. Having discoursed all that I had to offer in and about Metaphors in
general, and having both declared the measures of expounding and applying
Scripture-ones, and the Rules which ought to be attended to in the usurpation
of others; there now only remain a few things to be suggested, to obviate the
scoffings and revilings whereby the Non-conformists are endeavored to be
exposed to Contempt and Scorn upon the account of their use of Metaphorick
Terms. And the first is, that the loudest Clamours and most invidious
Reflections levied against them in this matter, proceed from a disrespect to,
and fall with the same picquancy upon the Scripture it self. And they may well
be admitted to speak reproachfully of men, who have the the boldness to do so
of the Word of God. Only I think they would do better to deny the Scripture all
claim of being Divine, than to treat it with the Contempt which some do, after
they have acknowledged it to be the Word of the Lord. Many of the Phrases and
Passages quarrelled at in the writings of the Phanaticks, are plainly no other,
than what the Holy Ghost has condescended to use in his declaring the
mysteries of Faith, and Duties of Religion. They are the same course
Expressions that the Scripture it self makes use of, that it may suite the
dullness of our understandings, that I may use Chrysostomes Words, In Psalm 7.
speaking of metaphors and Allegories,
(...); so that the most part of the reproaches which are fastened upon the
Phanaticks (as they are pleased to style them) in this matter, argue the
bestowers of them guilty of profaneness against the Scrippture, as well as
incivility to the persons of the Non-conformists in derogation of whose esteem
they apply themselves to write. I know this will be thought too plain and
tuant, nor should I have so blankly charged them, if they had either the Wit or
Modesty to receive instruction by gentler insinuations. But I remember, that
when Dr. Owen had told them That the greatest guilt of some of the Phrases
carpt at, it may be, Truth and Innocence vindicated, p. 17. p. 161.
was only their too near approach to the expressions used in Scripture to the
same purpose: The Author of the Defense and Continuation thought he had
sufficiently acquitted himself by replying, That may be the Sky will fall to
morrow, and it may be S. Paul's Steeple as soon as it is rebuilt will remove it
self to the East Indies. Though he should withal have remembered, that the
foresaid Learned person had also told him, that these things would be made
evident when particulars should be instanced in, Page 20 ubi supra.
viz. that the Metaphors the Non-conformists are charged with, are no other,
but expressions of Gospel Mysteries, not in the Words which man's Wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. But the Author of the Defense judged it meet there to bear back,
reckoning that he came off with Triumph enough, and sufficiently loaded with
the spoils of his Enemy by raillying upon a may be. I shall therefore not
account it enough barely to assert that some of the Expressions reflected on in
the Writings of the Non-conformists, are such as the Holy Ghost himself has
preceded them in the use of, and that to the very same Ends and Purposes for
which they produce them; but seeing nothing less will serve the turn, either
for the vindicating Them from the imputation of canting, or to beget more
modesty in their Adversaries, I shall present the Reader with some instances
where it is so. And that I may not be thought to design the disparagement of
any Party of men, by quoting testimonies from diverse of their Authors, who
rather than not strain up the dreggs of their Choler against the Phanaticks for
their phraseologies, have even written in derogation of Scripture-phrases, and
made the Spirit of God the Subject of their derision, as well as the
Non-conformists; I say, to avoid this, I shall confine my self to Mr. Sherlock
alone. Faith, says he, Page 104. Edit. first.
is very luckily called coming to Christ, whence it is very evident that to
believe in Christ, is to go to him for Salvation; which Metaphors of Coming and
Going, are a very intelligible explication of believing. Now what is this but
to be guilty as well of profaning the Scripture, as of incivility to the
Non-conformists? for this very Metaphor is made use of by the Holy Ghost, Joh.
5.40. and. 6.35, 37, 44. to signify believing, of which, as profanely as
sarcastically our Author styles it a very intelligible explication. But Mr.
Sherlock seems to be one of those who never think any thing intelligible, when
declared in Scripture-Terms. I will crave of the Reader to peruse the 104, 105,
and 106 pages of his Book, (for I do not love to foul these leaves, more than I
needs must, with passages opprobrious against God as well as men, though it be
only to expose and confute them) and then to tell me, whether the very
Scripture-expressions in their proper sense be not made to bear a Share in his
Contempt and Scorn* Though the Receiving of Christ be a phrase which the Holy
Ghost expresses Faith in him, and the belief of his Word and Doctrine by, Joh.
1.11, 12. and 3.32, 33. and 17.8. Act. 1.41. and 8.14. and 17.11. Col. 2.6. 1
These. 2.13. yet that does not secure it from the lash of our Authors pen. It
may seem strange that they will not allow men to speak the things of God, in
the Terms and Phrases which the Holy Ghost teaches. But where the things of
the Spirit of God are first disliked, it is no marvail that his expressions come
to be disliked also. But surely the exposing them to make their Readers sport,
what ever of wit it argues, it declares a profane sawciness. One would think
that the Scripture expressing Faith in Christ by Trust, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. Men
without obloquy might do the like: but that phrase also is made the pleasure of
Mr. Sherlocks scorn, and the use of it turned into open ridicule. Now we have
Christ (says he in mockage and derision) we must Trust and lean upon him.
Distrust of our selves and dependence on Christ for continual supplies against
entanglements from sin and the World, are not only made our Duty (though not so
as to supersede our own watchfulness and best endeavors) but the latter is
certainly the great privilege of Believers. Nor does the New Covenant excel
the Old in any thing more than in this, that God has herein undertaken to
watch over us by his Spirit, and to continue those sovereign supplies of Grace
to us whereby we shall be kept unto salvation. And besides, what may be tendered
in Justification of this from the Wisdom of God, with whose Sapience it seems
not consistent finally to leave us after he has engraven his Image upon us,
considering that he prevented us with his Grace and Mercy when we were in our
Pollutions; The Faithfulness of Christ, to whose care Believers are in a
special manner committed, Joh. 17.12. and 18.9. pleads also for it: Yea, The
Scripture likewise gives in its express. Testimony to this purpose, 2 Timothy 1.12.
assuring us, that on our being found in an attendance upon Instituted means,
and in the exercise of those Duties and endeavors which are required of us,
God will work in us both to will and Do, Philip. 2.13. and keep us by his own
power through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.15. Yet this Mr. Sherlock has
some venomous spawn to bestow upon, and the Phanaticks must upon this account
be made the the Subjects of his sly, but petulant mockage. And now, says he,
we have thus brought our souls to Christ, we must commit them to his trust,
Page 105.
to take Charge of them, and save them; and if they perish it will be his
fault, and he must give account of it. And as if there were not profaneness and
Satyr enough in this, the Words of the Holy Ghost must be brought in to bear a
Share in his scorn and contempt. Thus St. Paul did, (says he) 2 Timothy 1.12. I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep what I
have committed to him against that day. Could he not be content to expose the
Non-conformists without involving the Scripture in the same Condemnation? Or
was St. Paul's case and theirs so much the same, that he knew not how to wreak
himself upon them, without making Him suffer under the same imputation. I
confess Mr. Sherlock is not the only man who seems displeased with St. Paul;
for besides that, Discourse concerning the principles and practices of the
Latitudinarians.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon on Tit. 1.8, 9, p. 5.


one tells us his Style is often the most obscure he ever read: another makes
it a part of a Guild Hall declamation, that the 9 th Chapter to the Romans; is
studied more than our Saviors Sermon on the Mount; and that the firebrands of
the Church have used to fetch all their heat from St. Paul's writings, and have
thought themselves tolerated, if not encouraged by his Example to dispute every
thing. ibid. p. 10. In which words there is not only a false and invidious
supposition, that there are some of the Phanaticks who prefer St. Paul's
writings to the neglect of the Gospels and other Sacred Books, but there is
withal a reflection upon those portions of Holy writ which God has honored
him to be the amanuensis of. But this I do not much wonder at in the Author of
the foresaid Sermon, seeing it is from St. Paul, that we have learned to
distinguish between Faith and good works in the Matter of Justification, Page
22.
which he there so severedly censures. But to return, Though the Reverence
which Mr. Sherlock pays to the writings of the Apostles, may be possibly
consistent with, and reconcilable to his burlesque manner of treating them,
yet one would think, that the admiration which he has for our Saviors Sermons
above the Writings of the Apostles, Page, 240.
(though the Apostles were not less inspired by the Holy Ghost, in the penning
and giving forth the Epistles, than the Evangelists were in writing the Gospels
which convey to us the Sermons of Christ) should have secured them from the
like entertainment. But it has here also fallen out otherwise, for rather than
T.W. should escape our Authors censure, the Words of Christ in the true
intendment and meaning of them, are introduced as the matter of his Mirth and
Scorn. Page, 112.
As the Serpent (says he, pretending to blazon T. W'S. Folly, and to lay him
Obnoxious to Contempt and Derision) was lifted up to be looked upon by the stung
Israelites; which looking, employed a secret hope they had of cure; so if we do
but look on Christ fiducially, we shall be cured of our sins. Now let this be
compared with the words of Christ himself, Joh. 3.15, 16. And as Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life;
and I dare leave it to the Judgment of every sober and Judicious person,
whether the very Scripture-expressions in their proper sense, be not made to
bear a Share in this Gentleman's derision. Had Mr. Sherlock only raillied upon
some things in T.W's discourse concerning the resemblance of Christ to the
brazen Serpent, and preserved the dignity and Reverence of the Type it self,
without reflections upon the main scope and design of the Comparison, he
should have easily escaped my Censure; but having included the Sentence I have
rehearsed in the same indictment with others, wherein, may be, T.W. has
prevaricated, I must renew my Charge, namely, that some of their loudest
Clamours against the Non-conformists for Similitudes and Metaphors, fall with
the same weight upon expressions which the Holy Ghost in his Wisdom has been
pleased to use. I shall add one passage more relating to the resemblance
betwixt Christ and the Brazen Serpent, for which amongst others, Mr. Sherlock
is pleased in way of Irony, to style T.W. very happy in expounding Types, the
equivalent whereof, besides that it may be found in a hundred Dull Authors (he
knows whom I mean, being an Epithete lately bestowed upon a certain set of
Writers by one of his Friends) I have read in a Person, whom though he do not,
may be, universally like for his Divinity, yet he bears him more respect than
to laugh at him for a Fool. The passage in T. W. is this: The Brazen Serpent
was made like a Serpent, but was no real Serpent; so Christ was made in the
likness of sinful Flesh, but was no sinner. The equavalent of it is this; Haec
Imago and effigies Serpentis erat similis Serpenti* ita Christus qui purus ab
omni veneno peccati fuit, in cruce pependit, speciem referem hominis
peccatoris, vel, ut Paulus loquitur, in similitudine carnis peccati, Romans 8.3.
I need not English this, and therefore shall only tell him where he may meet
with it, viz. in a certain Gentleman called Wolzogenius commenting upon Joh.
3.14. so that at least here is one more as happy in expounding Types as T. W.
is. And as I see not how Mr. Vincents advice to young Women to choose Christ for
their Husband, is either a piece of fantastical Wit (as our Author is pleased
to call it) or comes to be spoiled by the Churches being Christ's Spouse, page,
144.
seeing His relation of a Husband to the Church, does no way hinder his being
so to every Member of it: It affords me another instance of Mr. Sherlocks
intolerable sauciness toward the Scripture, rather than he should fail in
exposing those, whom he thinks he has cause to be displeased with. For not to
mention what occurs in the Canticles justifying the utmost of what Mr. Vincent
says in this matter, even the Apostle Paul not only speaks of his having
espoused the Church of Corinth to one Husband, that he might present them a
Chaste Virgin to Christ, 1 Cor. 11.2. but he speaks of every particular Believer
among the Romans as being married to Christ. Wherefore my Brethren, ye also are
become dead to the Law, by the Body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another, even to him who is raised from the Dead, that we should bring forth
Fruits unto God, Romans 7.4. To all which, not only the passage of our Author,
Page, 244.
That every Christian is not Christ's Spouse, is directly repugnant, but his
supposition that Christ, in case particular Believers be espoused to Him, must
be a Polygamist, argues him as well an ignorant as a confident man, and
imposes the same brand upon the Inspired Writers, that he would expose the
Non-conformists under the infamy of. He that would see more of Mr. Sherlocks
Burlesquing the Scripture, and how he has in a profane and Sacrilegious
manner abused the very Words of it, to make his Readers sport, and to render
his Adversaries Ridiculous; Let him consult amongst other places, p. 62, 63,
65, 66, 69, 70. of his Book, for I cannot allow my self to transcribe what
either may have a tendency to the tainting the Minds of some, or the offending
the Consciences of others.

A Second thing which I would reply upon our late Writers for their upbraiding
the Non-conformists upon the account of turning the plainest Scriptures Into
Metaphors and Allegories; or as Mr. Sherlock expresses it, of turning all
Religion into an Allegory, is this; That the guilt in this matter lodges
principally with themselves. It Is but fit, that instead of being always upon
the Defensive, we should sometimes carry the War into their Quarters. Not that
I design this as a justification of any amongst us who may be guilty in this
particular, but merely to show that this way of assaulting us was none of the
wisest, considering how open they lie themselves to Recriminations of this
kind. They are indeed most Criminal herein, who put the imputation furthest
from them; though they ought to look well to themselves, who undertake to
accuse others. I would say Quis tulerit Gracch^s? But that I expect to be told
that I have Classically expressed my self, as an acquaintance of Mr. Sherlock
Jyb'd a Learned Person merely for saying, that he neither desired nor designed
serram reciprocare. In the pursuit of this, instead of producing particular
Texts which they use thus to perve^t, I shall rather instance in some of their
darling Notions, the very maintaining of which, obliges them to turn a great
many of the plainest Texts in the Bible, into mere Metaphors. I am sensible
what a Charge I have entered against them, and do plainly foresee how it will be
resented; and therefore I shall endeavor to give indisputable and
uncontrollable Evidence in Justification of it. The First Medium and Topic I
particularly own my self indebted to an Opinion of Mr. Sherlocks for, there
being none of the Church of England, so far as I know, that ever vented the
Notion before. The Offices (says he) of Prophet, Priest, and King, are not
properly distinct Offices in Christ, but the several parts and Administrations
of his Mediatory Kingdom. His Intercession signifies the Administration of his
mediatory Kingdom, the power of a Regal Priest to expiate and forgive Sins.
Were it my Humor to Treat an Adversary with severity, I would do more than
say, that Mr. Sherlock by making Christ's Office of King but one part and
Administration of His Mediatory Kingdom, Writes not with that accuracy at all
times, which some men ascribe to him. Had a motion of a Friend of his obtained,
viz. that Men should be Obliged by Act of Parliament to write Sense as well as
Truth, I can not see but that an Action at Law might have lay'n against him, if
some of those Persons he so often Raillies upon had thought fit in Revenge for
his Reflections, to have commenced it. What ever care he has taken to write
Truth, he has not been so careful here as he ought to write Sense. But this I
wave: Nor shall I digress into any large Debate of that Question, Whether the
Priestly office of Christ be included in his Regal? Or, Whether, though not
separated in their Subject, the Person of Christ, they be not in their Natures,
Objects, Acts and Effects distinguished the one from the other. Only thus in
brief, If moral Powers which are distinguished by their Objects, Acts, manner
of Operation, See Dr. Owen on Heb. vol. 2. Exercit. 8.
and the Effects which thereupon ensue, be different faculties and powers; then
the Sacerdotal and Regal Offices of Christ, which are moral Faculties and
Powers with which he is invested by God for certain Ends, being thus
differenced; they must consequently be distinct Offices, the one no way
included, superseded or swallowed up by the other. Now that it is thus, may be
easily Demonstrated. For (1) their Objects are distinct. The object of the
exercise of the Priestly Office is God. This not only the Apostle informs us,
in the account he gives of the Nature and Institution of Priesthood, Heb. 5.1.
where he tells us, that the actings of a Priest in the exercise of his Office
respects (...), but elsewhere, Ephe. 5.2. This the common Notion which mankind
has of it, together with the whole Economy of the Aaronical Priesthood, and
Christ's being a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, who was a Priest in a
proper sense, do evince. But now the Object of Christ's Regal Power, is Man. As
King, he Acts in the Name and on the behalf of God, with and toward us. And as
his Power and Authority over the Church, is confessed by the very Socinians to
be a Regal Power; so his being vested in and with such a Power, does
necessiarily imply his readiness to make use of it for the Churches Good. What
inward Thoughts men entertain of Christ I know not, but to declare Him a King,
who, as such, is only able, but not willing to help his People, is not much to
his commendation as inagurated in such an Office; yea, it is more Honorable to
be represented as willing and not able, than as able and not willing. (2) They
differ in their Acts. The Acts of Christ's sacerdotal Office are Oblation, and
Intercession, which as they both respect God as their Object, it being God, not
us, that Christ offered himself to as a Sacrifice; and God, not us, that he
intercedes with: So they differ from the Acts of his Regal Office which are
Legislation, the Communication of the Spirit, the Destruction of his and our
Enemies, and the like. Nor are these any where called the Intercession of
Christ, as Mr. Sherlock falsely imagines. Indeed His intercession, as upon the
one hand, Page, 6.
it is founded on his Oblation and Sacrifice, being nothing but the
representation of his meritorious Passion, and a continuation of His Sacerdotal
Function; so on the other hand it has its Effects toward us, by virtue of the
interposition of some Acts of His Kingly Office. For these Offices being all
Vested in the same Person, and having all the same general End, and belonging
all unto the work of Mediation, it cannot otherwise be, but that their Acts
must have a mutual Respect to one another; yet still the Priestly Office, to
which Intercession appertains, is formally distinct from His Kingly. Nor are
the Acts of his Regal Office ever called His Intercession, though as to the
applying the benefits of His Advocation, there be the Interposure and Exertion
of His Kingly Power. To say as Mr. Sherlock does, That Christ's offering himself
a Sacrifice for Sin, was an Act of Kingship, Page, 6.
is not only to Socinianise, but expressly to contradict the Scripture in an
hundred places. Yea, the very next words of the Text he refers to, which
represents it as an Act of Obedience, which I think is no Regal Act; do oppose
it: This Command have I Received of my Father. Though Originally it was an Act
of Liberty and Choice in the Son of God to condescend, and by his Contract with
the Father, to render himself liable to Die; yet having once Covenanted, and
undertaken to give himself a Ransom, it was an Act of Debt and Obedience so
for do. Though with respect to those that Instrumentally took away his Life, he
had a Physical Power to have preserved it, yet with respect to God, with whom
He had transacted to give himself an Offering for Sin, he had no moral Power or
Right to withold himself from Dying. To affirm (as Mr. Sherlock also does)
that Intercession signifies the administration of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom:
Page, 7.
The Power of a Regal Priest to expiate and forgive Sins, is both false in it
self, and borrowed word for word from the Socinians. The Intercession of Christ
consists neither in a power of exp^ating sin, nor of conferring forgiveness,
but in a representation of his Sacrifice, for the procurement of the actual
communication of the fruits of his Death unto them for whom he had given
himself a Ransom. Expiation of Sin was perfected before Christ went into Heaven
Heb. 1.3. and 9.12. and therefore cannot lie in his Intercession which is an
act of his Priestly Office consequent to his entering into the Holy Place. In a
word, neither is intercession any Act of Christ's Regal Power, nor is the
bestowing of the Forgiveness of Sins any Act of his Priestly Function. The
Scripture plainly Attributes Intercession to Christ as a High Priest, and not
as a King, Heb. 7.25, 26, 27. and on the contrary, ascribes Forgiveness of sins
to him as a King, and not as a Priest, Acts 5.31. Intercession importing the
impetration of something from God, to whom as its Object it is addressed, it
can be no Act of Christ's Kingly Authority; That consisting in the exerting a
Power he has in himself. And on the other Hand, his forgiving of Sins
respecting us wholly as its Objects, it can no way appertain to his Priestly
Office; God alone being the Object of all the parts and Acts of the Sacerdotal
Function. (3) As the Priestly and Kingly Offices of Christ differ in their
Objects and Acts, so they differ likewise in their manner of operation. For
whereas the Acts of Christ's sacerdotal Office operate only morally by way of
Merits, procurement and acquisition: The Acts of his Regal Office operate
Physically, being really productive of their effects. (4) The Priesthood and
Kingship of Christ were prefigured of old, not only by distinct Types, but God
in the prefigurations and instructive Symbols whereby he instructed the Ancient
Church what Christ was to be in his Offices, he informed them of his Priestly
Office by more Figures and Types, and with more distinctness than he did of his
Kingly, which is not very well reconcilable to infinite Sapience, had his
sacerdotal Office been only to be a part and different Administration of his
Regal. (5) Nor did God only in the Typical prefigurations of what the Messiah
was to be, represent his Priesthood by more Types than he did his Kingly
Office, but he ordained an order of Priesthood to be a Figurative and Typical
representation of what Christ in this kind was to be: whereas on the other hand
we do not read that God instituted the Office of a King to be a previous
Typical representation of the Regal Office of the Messiah. It Is true indeed,
that the people having chosen a Ruler of this kind, God in his Faithfulness and
Wisdom adapted and accommodate that Office to prefigure what himself would
afterward do in the person of His Son; but he neither originally, immediately,
nor principally ordained the Office of a King to this end; which is no ways
accountable for, had Christ to have been only a King, and were his Priesthood
only a part and different administration of his mediatory Kingdom. (6) That the
Priestly Office of Christ is really distinct from his Regal, receives not only
Light, but may be demonstratively evinced from this, that though Melchizedeck
the illustrious Type of the Messiah, was in a proper sense both a King and a
Priest, Genesis 14.18. yet His being a Type of Christ is peculiarly referred and
applied to his Sacerdotal Office, and not his Regal, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7. Nor
do I see how with any consistency to Truth, the Holy Ghost could thus
accommodate the Antitype merely to the Priesthood of the Type, were not the
Priestly Office of Christ distinct from His Kingly. (7) I might argue how
disagreeable it is to the Wisdom of God, to have so separated the Offices of
King and Priest by an Ordinance of His own, that from Moses, till the arrival
of the Messiah, they were never to meet in one person, if the Priesthood of
Christ were not distinct from his Regal Office, but were only a part and
different Administration of His Mediatory Kingdom. And this consideration is
the more important, if we observe that the sacerdotal Office and the Regal,
were not only for a long time kept united in the same Person among the Nations,
but that Originally even within the Church, the same persons who where the
Heads and Rulers of Families, had of Right the Office of Priesthood belonging
to them. But this I shall decline further discoursing of, and only refer Mr.
Sherlock to be instructed in this point by the Reverend and Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet, Discourse concerning the true Reason of the sufferings of
Christ. Cap. 8.
supposing he will not think it beneath him to learn of a Person whom the whole
learned World pays a just veneration to, should he disdain the being taught by
such Systematick Divines, as Covetus, Lubbertus, Essenius, Turretinus, Grotius,
or Dr. Owen, etc. as accounting them only puissant in Polemick Squabble, and in
the Budg Doctors of the Schools, that I may borrow a phrase of Dr. P. But that
I may return to the Consideration of the passages recited at first out of Mr.
Sherlock: I would entreat him not to plume and tower too much over this Notion
of Christ's Priestly office being included in his Regal, Socin. de Christo
Servat. cap. 15. Catech. Racov. min. p. 43. Smalc. de Divin. Christi cap. 23.
Ostorod. Instit. Relig. Christian. cap. 40. Crell. contr. Grot. cap. 10.
Volkel. de vera Relig. cap. 38.
as if he were the Original Author of it, there being several persons very well
known who have preceded him in it. And seeing, for ought that I know, it may be
matter of encouragement to him to find that he is not alone in this Opinion, I
shall remind him that he has the whole Tribe of the Socinians for his
Associates. How-ever, if this Intelligence should be of no other use, yet it
may prevent that Elation of Mind he might otherwise fall under, should he
apprehend that he had blessed the World with a Notion which it was not
acquainted with before. But that which I mainly intended from the forecited
passages of Mr. Sherlock is this, viz. that according to this Principle of his,
that the Priestly office of Christ is only a different part and administration
of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom; There is, not one Text in the Bible where Christ
is called a Priest, which can be understood in a proper sense, but they must
all of necessity be interpreted in a Metaphorick. Whether our Author foresaw
this, I cannot tell; but I am sure they who harmonize with him in the Notion,
and to whom indeed he owe's it, if he had Pliny's Ingenuity to acknowledge per
quos profecerit, do by the reducement of the Sacerdotal Office of Christ to his
Regal, seek to destroy the Priesthood of Christ in a prope^ ^ense, and to
allow him only to be a Priest Metaphorically. This they lay as the substratum
of their denial of his satisfaction, his having properly expiated our Sins,
made atonement for us, Reconciled God to us, etc. This they retreat to upon all
occasions, for eluding the Arguments they are pressed with from Christ's being
called a Priest, and a High Priest; namely that he is not properly so, and that
the name does not belong to Him directly to denote what as such He is or does,
but that it is only ascribed to Him by reason of some Allusion between what he
does for us, and what was done by the Priests of Old. And indeed supposing it
once to be true, which Mr. Sherlock in so many Terms affirms, that Christ's
Priestly office is not properly a distinct Office from his Kingly, being only a
different part and administration of his Mediatory Kingdom (or as the Socinians
phrase it, his exerting his Regal Power with Love, Care and Compassion for the
good of his people) and that the Name of Christ being interpreted, signifies
only a Mediatory King: I say supposing this be true, the inference of his being
only a Metaphorick Priest is not to be avoided, and consequently all the Texts
where he is any ways styled a Priest, are to be understood only
Metaphorically. For, if his Priestly and Kingly Offices be not distinct, either
his Regal Office must be reduced to, and included in his Sacerdotal, which our
Author will not affirm (and if he should, he would only gain by it the making
Christ a Metaphorick King instead of a Metaphorick Priest) or else his
Sacerdotal Office must belong to and be included in his Regal, being only a
readiness to exercise that Authority and Power for his Church which as a King
appertains to Him: And if so, then those innumerable places of Scripture which
report Christ to be a Priest, to have given himself a Sacrifice to God for us,
to have expiated Sin, to have made atonement and to have rendered God
propitious, are every one of them Metaphorical. I have insisted the longer on
this Opinion of Mr. Sherlock concerning Christ's Priestly Office being only a
different part and administration of his Mediatory Kingdom, 1 st. to make it
appear, that by Charging Socinianism upon some of our late pretended Rational
Divines* we do not transform them into any thing but what they are. The truth
of the imputation rather than the foulness, seems to be that which makes them
angry. As the Historian tells us of Tiberius, that he was both the readier to
believe, and the more offended at something which was said of Him, because it
was the true report of his guilt; so I wish it were not as much the Justness as
the Odiousness of the Character of Socinian, which renders some men stingy. But
2 ly. the main reason of my insisting upon these passages, was to demonstrate
that, whereas they arraign the Non-Conformists for turning the plainest
Scriptures into Metaphors, the crime lodges especially with themselves* and
that the principles which they have Espoused, are not otherwise defensible, but
by turning the plainest Scriptures into Metaphors. So that here, Clodius
accusat maechos --

And providing Mr. Sherlock will abide by his Notion, That the Offices of
Prophet, Priest and King, are not properly distinct Offices in Christ, I do
here undertake to prove by easy trains of deduction, that for one Text capable
of a proper sense which the Phanaticks pervert by imposing a Metaphorick one
upon it, he lies under a necessity, if he will preach or write consequentially
to his Tenets, of wresting twenty in the same manner.

. 10. But this is not the only opinion imbibed by our Author which I impeach as
pregnant with this mischief, His Notion of Justification being attended with
the same inconvenience, nor is it any ways maintainable but by perverting
innumerable Texts from their plain and natural sense to a Metaphorick. In the
prosecution of this Charge, I shall first give a true representation of his
thoughts about Justification, and then endeavor to demonstrate that besides
what else lies against him, it is accompanied with this fatal unhappiness of
turning a great part of the Bible into mere insignificant and empty Metaphors.
His sentiments then in reference to Justification are these. P. 322.
That we are only Justified by our believing and obeying the Gospel of Christ.
P. 320.
That the Sacrifice of Christ's Death and the Righteousness of his life have no
other Influence upon our acceptance with God, but that to them we owe the
Covenant of Grace. That is, God being well pleased with the Obedience of
Christ's life, and the sacrifice of his Death, for his sake entered into a New
Covenant with Mankind, wherein he promises pardon of Sin, and eternal life to
those who believe and obey the Gospel: so that the Righteousness of Christ is
not the formal Cause of our Justification, P. 324.
but the Righteousness of his life and death is the meritorious Cause of that
Covenant whereby we are declared Righteous, and rewarded as Righteous persons.
The Covenant of Grace which God for Christ's sake has made, pardoning our past
sins and follies, and rewarding a sincere though imperfect Obedience; The
Gospel by its great arguments and motives, and powerful assistances forms our
minds to the Love and practice of Holiness, and so makes us inherently
Righteous, and the grace of the Gospel accepts and rewards that sincere
Obedience which according to the Rigor and severity of the Law could deserve no
reward. This I take to be a true account of Mr. Sherlocks Judgment about
Justification, and I have quoted it in his own words, that he may neither
complain of his being imposed upon, nor the Reader question the Truth and
sincerity of this representation. And as whosoever consults the pages I referr
to, will find that I treat my adversary with faithfulness; so if they compare
them with some other places where he has declared himself with less Modesty,
they will have reason to say, that I have exposed his Opinion in the
favourablest manner I could. Now I design not any accurate ventilation of this
great Theme, nor any severe research into Mr. Sherlocks faileurs in the manage
of it, nor a Critical survey of his neglect of Truth, as well as Modesty in
treating his Adversaries about it: nor yet his partiality in arraigning only
the Non-conformists, when he could not but know that the most Eminent Persons
that ever the Church of England bred, as well as the Generality of Protestant
Divines are equally involved, having appeared in the Defense of that very
Notion of Justification which he so invidiously represents, and tragically
declaime's against those for. The full handling of Justification stands
reserved for other hands; who in due time will retrive the spoils wherewith
our Author has enriched his Wardrobe, and strip him of the Laurels wherewith
he has adorned his Temples. I shall only bestow one stricture upon him, and
then apply to the proof of the inconvenience I have already charged his Opinion
with, and for which in this place I cited it. In brief then, I see not how the
Covenant of Grace is any ways owing to the Sacrifice of Christ's Death and the
Righteousness of his life, providing that Mr. Sherlock will be constant to and
write consonantly to some of his other principles. For, if the Natural Notions
which men have of God, assure them that he is very Good, and that it is not
possible to understand what Goodness is without pardoning Grace, P. 44.
as our Author elsewhere tells us: I say, supposing this to be true, I see not
how the Righteousness of Christ's life and Death can be the meritorious cause of
Gods forgiving our sins and Follies, for as much as his Essential Goodness
obliged him to it. I take it for a principle of Reason, that nothing can be
merited which is due upon an Antecedent Title. Merit in its essential Notion
importing an acquisition of a Right which we had not before, there can be no
room for it in reference to that which we stood entitled to by the natural
goodness of God, and those Notions which we have engraven in our Consciences of
it. Nor can I imagine how the Covenant of Grace can be so much as necessary to
the promising Remission of Sins, much less that the Death of Christ was needful
to procure it to that End, providing what our Author says in another place do
obtain. The passage I referr to is this. The whole Mystery of the recovery of
mankind consists only in the repairing the Divine I-age which was defaced by
sin, that is, in making all men truly good and virtuous^ Sin is our Apostasy
from God, and does as naturally make us miserable as it makes us unlike the
most happy Being. But Holiness restores us to our Primitive state, to the
perfect Constitution of our Natures, P. 89.
and makes us Good, and therefore happy, as God is. Now if this be true,
although the Covenant of Grace might be necessary upon other accounts, namely
to mold and frame our souls to the Love of God and practice of obedience, to
ingenerate piety in us, and to make us inherently Righteous; yet I do not see
how it was needful to the promising remission of sin. Neither can I satisfy my
self how forgiveness of Sin is at all necessary, if the whole mystery of our
Recovery consists only in the repairing the Divine Image which was defaced by
sin. I have observed of the Arminians, that however sometimes they acknowledge
the New Covenant to be gratuitous and f^ee, yet by some principle or other
which they have imbibed, they do in effect make it an Act of necessity in God
and not of favor. Thus (that I may give one instance) upon Corvinus's
admitting all mankind by the fall of Adam to be discharged from that Obedience
which the Original Law required; Contr. Molin. cap. 8. 7.
it necessarily follows, either that Gods sovereignty and Rectorship over man
had been supplanted, Mankind had been under no law at all, and consequently no
ways capable of offending; or else God behoved to enact the new Covenant. This
being suggested, which I leave Mr. Sherlock at his leisure to think of, I now
address to enforcing the Charge I have loaded his Opinion about Justification
with, namely that as it imports our absolution by and before God from the
accusation of the Law, it occurrs not in a proper sense in the whole Scripture,
but must every where be susceptive of a Metaphorick one, if his Notion of it be
admitted. I do not here dispute whether (...) and (...), to Justify and to be
Justified be not sometimes taken in a Moral Sense for justifacere, (that I may
use Davenants phrase) the making an inherent Change in our Persons: as well as
at other times in a forensick Sense, for the making a Change in our state, by
absolving and acquitting us when accused. Though I must say, that I know not
one place in the whole New Testament where (...) and (...) are of necessity to
be interpreted as expressive of Sanctification and purgation from Vice, (though
Romans 8.30. 1 Cor. 7.11. Tit. 3.7. be produced to that purpose) unless it be
Rev. 22.11. and it is certain that some ancient Copies instead of (...) there,
Let him be further justified still, have (...), Let him do Righteousness still.
Nor will I here discourse how inconsistent it seems with the Wisdom and
Sapience of God, to introduce a perfect Righteousness, such as that of his Son
was, merely to make way for his justifying us upon an imperfect Righteousness,
such as that of our Obedience is. Nor shall I argue how that the Righteousness
of Christ's Life, and Sacrifice of His Death must be imputed to us for
Justification, in a proportionableness to our Sins, having been imputed to Him
in order to his expiatory Suffering. To attribute Christ's Sufferings merely to
Gods Dominion, without any respect to sin is the grossest of Socinianism, and
repugnant to the Scripture in a hundred places. To say that our sins were
imputed to Christ, See amongst others Isa. 53.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.24. Gal. 3.13. and
Dr. Stillingfleets vindication of them from the exceptions of Crellius. cap. 2.
ubi supra.
in the effects of them, but not in the guilt, is to contradict all Principles
of Reason. For Guilt and Obnoxiousness to punishment being Equipollent phrases,
he cannot be supposed to have been made liable to the last upon the account of
our Sins, without having been brought under the first. Nor is it imaginable
how without submitting to the guilt of our sins he could have been punished,
should it be granted that without respect to them he might have suffered.
Though without any habitude to sin, his sufferings might have been Dolorous,
yet they could never have been Penal. It Is a thing utterly unintelligible how
Christ could be made sin for us, and have our punishment transferred to him,
without a previous imputation of Sin, and the derivation of its Guilt upon him.
Now by proportion, if our Sins were imputed to Christ otherwise than merely in
the Effects of them, so must likewise the Righteousness of his Life and the
Sacrifice of his Death be otherwise imputed to us, than merely in the benefits
of them. Nor will I press how that secluding not only the Righteousness of
Christ's Life, but the satisfaction of his Death as the matter, and the
imputation of it as the Formal Cause of Justification, it seems repugnant to
the immutability, and Essential Holiness of God, to justify us upon an
imperfect Obedience, the Law which requires a perfect remaining still in
force, and denouncing Wrath in case of every failure. Neither shall I here urge
how there can have been no surrogation of Christ in our room, nor can we
properly be said to be Redeemed by him as our substitute, if all redounding to
us by his Death, be only the procurement of the Gospel Covenant in which God
upon such Conditions as he there requires, undertakes to pardon our Iniquities
and Sins. A surrogation in our room and stead, to Acts and Sufferings which are
not in a Law-sense accounted ours, I am so far from Understanding, that without
admitting injustice in the Rector who allowe's the substitution, it seems to
me a thwacking Contradiction; especially if we consider that Christ was our
substitute to make satisfaction to the Demands of the Law and not of the
Gospel: and that by his Obedience and Death, He has only freed us from what we
were obnoxious to upon failure of perfect Obedience, but not at all from what
we are liable to in case of Unbelief and want of sincere Obedience. That the
Righteousness of Christ is some way or other ours, yea, that it is in a certain
sense the very cause of our Justification; the Socinians themselves do not
deny: Nec enim ut per Christi justitia justificemur opus est ut illius justitia
nostra fiat justitia, sed sufficit ut Christi justitiam Causa sit nostra
justificationis, and hactenus possumus tibi Concedere Christi Justitiam esse
nostram Justitiam quatenus nostrum in bonum justificationemque redundat, says
Schlich tingius, and as Crellius expresses it, that Christ laid down his Life
for us, Contr. Meisner. p. 250, Cont. Grot. cap. 1.
ut jus quoddam ad peccatorum remissionem and vitam aeternam obtinendas nobis
daret. Nor do I find that Mr. Sherlock sometimes acknowledges any more. But
waveing all these things, and many more managed by others, which Mr. Sherlock
if he please may reckon Cavil, Sophistry and Vulgar Talk, and judge them
unworthy of a sober reply; and by slighting what he cannot answer, or with a
storm of words not only darkning but diserediting what he will not find so easy
for him in a Logical way to encounter, bear up his repute amongst his Friends.
There are only two things I would premise in order to the more clear making out
the Consequence of perverting the plainest Scriptures into Metaphors, which I
have fathered upon Mr. Sherlocks Opinion. The First is this, that to justify
is in its proper acceptance a Forensick Term, signifying to acquit and absolve
one that is accused. That this is its import when it refer's to God and Christ
as the Objects of it, and men as the Agents is plain from Psalm. 5.1.4. Mat.
11.19. Luke 7.29. That this likewise is the meaning of it, when it is
expressive of the Act of men standing upon their own vindication and Innocence,
is clear by Luke 10.29. and 16.15. Job 32.2. and 9.10. That this withal is the
only acceptance which it is capable of, when it relates to the Act of a Humane
Civil Judge, as Psalm. 8.2. Isa. 5.23. Pro. 17.15. will I suppose hardly be
denied. In this sense also can it only be taken when declarative of the Act of
God toward us as our Judge, or when set in Opposition to Condemnation, or the
Curse of the Law, to which we are obnoxious, as Romans 8.33.5, 18. Gal. 3.11. The
Second thing I would premise is this, that Justification not only supposes us
to be indicted, but withal imports an absolution from the Charge of that Law of
the breach whereof we are accused. Now as the Introduction of the Law of Faith
has not abrogated the Law of Perfect Obedience, but this as well as that does
remain in force, each of them requiring a Conformity to its own demands: so
supposing us to answer all that the Gospel requires (which is both a
Righteousness of inherent Grace, and of Personal sincere Obedience, a failure
in either of which leaves us incapable, not only of being justified, but of
being pardoned,) yet the other Law abiding uncancelled, and we being all Guilty
of the violation of its Terms, there lies accordingly a Charge against us, from
which by justification we are to be acquitted. Had the Law of Faith repealed
and abrogated the Law of Works, then indeed we should have remained liable to
no farther Accusation, provided we had performed the Gospel-Conditions: But
then it would follow that by being Believers, we wholly cease to be sinners:
and that the Gospel instead of only making-provision for the Remission of Sins
against the Law, has prevented the Breaches of it from being so. And indeed
the Socinians express themselves in this more consonantly to their Principles,
than some others do. For having stated the whole of justification in the
Remission of sin upon performance of the Conditions of the Gospel, in pursuance
of this they accordingly plead for the utter abrogation of the Sanction of the
Law. Vid. inter alios Crel. Resp. ad Grot. cap. 3. p. 322.
These things being premised, I do affirm that upon Mr. Sherlocks Notion of
justification, viz. That we are only justified by our Believing, and obeying
the Gospel of Christ, and that the Sacrifice of Christ's Death and the
Righteousness of his Life have no other influence upon our acceptance with God,
but that to them we owe the Covenant of Grace, wherein God promises pardon of
sin, Page 320.
and Eternal Life to those who believe and obey the Gospel: However in
reference to the mere demands of the Gospel, we may in a proper sense be said
to be justified, yet that in reference to the Indictment of the Law, which is
that alone which accuses us (for were we accusable of Noncompliance with the
Gospel-Terms our Condition were wholly remediless) we cannot in any propriety
of Speech, be said to be justified, but that justification wheresoever it
regards our discharge from the accusation of the Law must be taken
Metaphorically. Pardoned indeed we may be, but justified in a proper sense we
cannot. For to suppose God to pronounce a person just, that is unjust; or to
declare him Righteous, that is unrighteous, is to make him pronounce a sentence
that is unjust and false, and to Act repugnantly to his own Holy and Righteous
Nature. And as to justify and to pardon are not only wholly distinct in their
Natures and Idea's, but always separated in the cases of such as are arraigned
at Humane Tribunals, (unless it be where the substitution of one Person in the
room of another is allowed) and even then, though they accompany one another,
yet they are both distinct Acts, and we have distinct Notions of them. For
neither can an accused Innocent, by being accquitted, be said to be pardoned;
nor a condemned Criminal, by having the execution of his sentence remitted, be
said to be justified: In like manner as they import the Actings of God as a
merciful Father, and Righteous Governor toward us, we have not only distinct
and different Idea's of them, but they have their spring and rise in distinct
Attributes of God, and we become interested in them upon distinct motives and
pleas. Remission is the result of Mercy, and the Act of one exercising Favor;
but Justification is the offspring of Justice, and imports one transacting
with us in a Juridical way without the infringement of Law or Equity. The word
justify neither in its Etymology nor Application and usage, according to the
Institution of men, and least of all in the Scripture Usurpation is Equipollent
to pardon, nor coincident with to forgive. So that upon the whole, If we be not
made Righteous with the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, but that
God only for the sake of Christ will dispense with the Rigor of the Law, As our
Author expresses himself: And if the only Influence that the Sacrifice of
Christ's Death and the Righteousness of his Life have upon our acceptance with
God, Page 315.
be that God being well pleased with the Obedience of Christ's Life and the
Sacrifice of his Death, for his sake entered into a Covenant with mankind,
wherein he promises Pardon of sin and eternal Life, Page 320.
to those who believe and obey the Gospel; as Mr. Sherlock declares his
Conceptions of it. And if those who are justified by Christ, and shall Reign
with him in Life, be not those who are Righteous by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to them, but those who have abundance of Grace and the Gift of
Righteousness, that is, who by the Gospel of Christ, which is the Grace and the
abundant Grace of God, Pa. 334, 335.
are made Holy and Righteous as God is; as our Author further tells us, I dare
affirm, if all this be true, that Justification as it is opposed to the
accusation of the Law, its charging us with Guilt, and its passing sentence of
Condemnation against us thereupon, does not admit a proper sense in the whole
Scripture, but must every where be construed Metaphorically: and that the
import of it is not that we are properly and in a Law-sense justified, but that
such benefits accrue to us by Remission of sin as if we were so. According to
the sentiments of our Author we are only pardoned, but by reason of some
Allusion betwixt the Advantages redounding to us by Forgiveness, and the
privileges, immunities, and benefits which ensue upon a proper justification,
we are therefore Metaphorically said to be justified. It were to bid defiance
to the Scripture in a hundred places, to say that we are not at all justified,
and yet in effect their Principles imply no less; For by stating the whole of
our assoilment from the accusation of the Law in Remission, they indeed say
that we are not justified, only we are improperly said to be so, because of
some Correspondence betwixt the one and the other, in the exceeding great and
excellent Benefits which by Forgiveness of sin redound to us. Justified in a
proper sense we are not, only the Name of Justification is transferred to
Remission of sin, because of some Analogy in the Effects and Consequences of
the one to the other. This our Author is so ingenuous sometimes as to
acknowledge, for he tell's us, That to affirm that the Merit of Christ's Death,
is ours to free us from the Guilt and Punishment of our sins, Page 108.
and his Active Obedience to the Will of God, his Righteousness is ours, for
our Justification, consists in the wresting of Metaphorical Expressions to a
proper Sense. Page 109.
Let the Candid Reader now judge who they are that exercise their Wits, in
finding out Metaphorical Senses in the plainest Scriptures, and in perverting
the clearest Texts into Metaphors and Allegories: and who not daring openly to
decry, and renounce the Gospel, take a course to undermine it. They proclaim us
guilty, when indeed they themselves are the chief Criminals: And accuse their
Brethren at adventure without ever considering that the Charge returns upon
themselves.

CHAP. III. Of the Union of Believers with Christ.
SECT. I.
I Am come at length to the ventilation of that which I principally designed,
and which in my undertaking to accost Mr. Sherlock I had chiefly in prospect.
And as I am not without hope, that what has been tendered upon the former
Themes will not be altogether displeasing, so I reckon that what is now to be
discoursed will both receive Light and be sustained as well by treating, as the
arranging them in the order I have done. Nor is it only Matter of complaint, to
find the received Doctrines of the whole Christian as well as Protestant Church
publicly impeached and arraigned, but it is matter of wonder how by persons nor
only living in the Communion of an Orthodox Church, but enjoying great
emoluments by virtue of their station and interest therein, it comes both to be
so, and to be connived at by those whose Duty it is upon many accounts to
express their resentment. To suffer those principles which we not only believe,
but superstruct our hope and comfort upon, to be publicly invaded, because in
the opposition given to them the reputations of those are endeavored to be
abated, whom for other causes we think we have reason to dislike; is not an
allowable Apology before Men, much less will it serve as a just plea before God
To permit the Articles of our Belief not only to be questioned, but
contradicted and run down with all the Satyr and Contempt that can be imagined,
merely because some of the Non-conformists are at the same time made the
Triumph of their Derision and Drollery who do so, is not wisely done, to say no
worse of it. For by the publication of such Discourses under the stamp of their
Authority, who are entrusted with the Care, Defense and Preservation of
Religion, and through the universal connivance of the Fathers and Dignitaries
of the Church; since their Public venting, it cannot be otherwise expected,
but that the Church of England in general will come to be reputed guilty of the
Principles asserted, and even such as are Innocent will be made to suffer in
the esteem of the World amongst the Nocent. Especially Foreigners who can take
no other measure of the whole, but what they draw from the approved Writings of
particular and Individual members, (no whole having any existence but what it
has in its parts) will be tempted to judge otherwise of the Church of England,
than is either for her Interest or Honor that they should. And besides whilst
these New Doctrines stand propagated under the countenance and security of an
Imprimatur, there is little likelihood that the heats and ruptures between Them
and dissenting Brethren should be extinguished or made up; but that instead
thereof, they will grow to be further enflamed and widened. There is no man,
how modest or zealous of peace soever he be, who will much care to maintain
Communion with that Church, that has both departed from her own established
Doctrine, and that of the whole Catholic Church also. It Is a very incongruous
Method of promoting Unity, and an odd way of providing for the safety of the
Church, to suffer persons of known Learning, Holiness, Gravity and Moderation,
and such as dissent from her only in matter of Forms of Ecclesiastical
Government, and Rites and Modes of Worship, to be treated with all the Scorn,
Contempt, and whatever else the Fall of Adam has stained the World with; and
all this (for any thing that yet appears) merely for maintaining her own
anciently received, and yet Legally estalished Doctrine. Were the matter
controverted only Scholastical niceties, or enquiries of lesser Moment, yet it
were both for their own Honor who manage them, and the Interest of the Church
where their concernment lies, that they should be debated with Candor and
Modesty. And that mutual esteem and Charity of affections might be preserved
under different apprehensions of judgment. And that though the Opinions were
not Reconcilable, yet there might no Variance arise through invidious
representations of one another, betwixt the persons differently sensing. How
much also the Church of England, by suffering her public Articles and
established Doctrines to be assaulted by any of her Members who has but the
pride and boldness to do so, exposes her self to the clamor of the Papists,
is easy to be conjectured. For hereby she retains no common standard of
Religion by which it may be understood what she holds. And this if I be not
misinformed, has been mustered up by a Romanist, and urged in a private
Discourse to a Person of Learning, beyond the possibility of a satisfying
Reply. Did the Fathers and Dignitaries of the Church only resolve on this
Neutrality, till the Non-conformists were worded or railed into silence, yet
this is not reconcilable to the Wisdom (to omit the Zeal) which we are willing
to believe them to be endowed with. For besides that the Trust reposed in them
is not answered by their looking on so long, it is more than likely that if the
minds of men come once to be tinctured with these Notions, an interposure then
will be like the applying a remedy when the Disease is incurable. Unhappy
Principles when once thoroughly imbibed, are not found so easy for men to divest
themselves of. Though persons esteem it no reflection upon their Parts, nor
disparagement to their Understandings to change their Opinions once, especially
if they obtained our Belief before we were in a capacity to examine them, yet
few are willing to proclaim their Weakness so far as to change their Judgments
often, particularly when the things again to be receded from, did not solicit
their Faith till they were of age, and thought them selves of ability to
enquire into them. And if an implicit apprehension of the Concurrence of our
chief Doctors (collected from their Silence) should be found to have influenced
any to submit to these Notions, beyond what the glosses with which their
Authors varnish't them could do, their declining so long to declare themselves
is yet worse to be accounted for.

. 2. But waving the Interest of the Church of England in those Truths which our
Author manageth an opposition to, and Her Concernment more than Ours to appear
in the Defense and Vindication of them from the rude and bold, though weak
assaults of Mr. Sherlock; I shall rather enquire into what seems more
especially to have given Birth to our Adversaries Notion of the Union of
Believers with Christ, and to have influenced him to denounce War against the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church in this matter. And not to insist upon what
our Author is pleased to alledg as the Reason of it, whereof cha. 1. sect 2.
seeing I do rather judge That a pretext than the true Motive: It seems to me to
derive its spring higher, and to own its self to another Opinion espoused by
some of our late Writers, which however artificially glossed, does indeed damm
up all the sources of Grace and Holiness, and is no way defensible but by
renouncing all Immediate Union betwixt Believers and Christ, and disclaiming
Him from being a Head of influence to any. In brief then, the Root and Stem,
from which our Authors Opinion in this matter has shot forth and sprung, is
this; namely That, there is no infused Principle of Grace communicated to us
from Christ as our Life and Head by the efficacious operation of the Spirit,
but that whatsoever is so styled in vulgar Talk, is only the result of our
natural Abilities, assisted and seconded by the Moral influences of the Gospel.
That Mr. Sherlock is thoroughly baptized into th^s Pelagian and Socinian
Principle, though he may sometimes mask himself in declaring it, I shall
endeavor to Demonstrate by presenting the Reader with some passages which
occur in his Book. When Dr. Owen had upon a certain occasion said, That the
Humane Nature of Christ if it could be conceived as separated from the Deity,
could afford no spiritual supply, but only in a Moral way; our Author is
pleased to reply in way of Sarcasm and Irony, that That is a very pitiful way
indeed; intimating in effect, P. 207.
that there is no other way by which supplies of Grace are communicated to us.
Nor does he only Railly upon the foresaid Learned Person, for styling Christ
the Fountain of all Grace p. 213. but he plainly tells us, that by Grace for
Grace which we are said to receive out of Christ's fullness, there is no more to
be understood, but only a clear and perspicuous Revelation of the Divine Will
in the Gospel, P. 216, 217.
because it proclaims so many excellent Promises. A gloss evidently borrowed
from Socinus, Nam quid aliud Christi Evangelium quam veritaes and Gratia quibus
vitam aeternam adipiscamur. Socin. in Joan. 1. verse. 15. Ex qua plenitudine om
es hauserunt, quatenus omnes eandem Doctrinam de gratia Christi and veritate ex
Jesu hauserunt and amplexi sunt. Schliching. in Joh. 1.16.

Significat hic Joannes Evangelista se and alios discipulos, Domini Jesu
salutarem doctrinam Evangelii non a Joanne Baptista sed ex inexhausta
plenitudine Domini Jesu hausisse. Wolzog. ibid.


Schlichtingius and others of that Tribe (which I thought fit to intimate, not
only to prevent his glorying in another man's line, but that the world may know
what copy he uses sometimes to write after. Hence it is that he will have
Christ to be styled our Life, only because he has preached the Word of Life,
and declared the true and only way to Life and Happiness: Page 8.110.
And because he has Power and Authority to bestow Immortal Life upon all his
sincere followers. see also p. 238.
Of kin and affinity to these is his affirming God to have by various ways
attempted the recovery of mankind, but with little success till at last he sent
his Son into the World, who by more plainly publishing the Word of Life, Page
88, 89.
and by his more easy directions and nobler Promises reformed the World, after
that long and sad experience had proved all those Ways ineffectual, p. 10.
which the Divine Goodness out of a restless Zeal and concernment for the
recovery of Mankind had fallen upon. Hence not only the Methods of Divine Grace
are denied to consist in the production of any new Principles by an omnipotent
and irresistible Power: But the asserting a necessity of infused Principles to
regenerate our Natures, relieve our Weakness, and adapt us to live to God; is
represented by our Author a making us to be Acted like Machines by the
Irresistible Power of the Grace and Spirit of God. Page 10.
And to declare us passive in the reception of the first Grace, is said to
render all the Rules and Directions prescribed us by God vain and foolish, P.
354. I purpose not here to discourse the nature of Regeneration, nor the
consistency of Efficacious Grace with humane Liberty, nor how the producing
Faith in us by a power infallible in its Effects, and which is never actually
defeated, is so far from being subversive of our Rational Freedom, that it
promotes as well as preserves it. Nor shall I urge, how if Regeneration be
nothing but the result of the exertion of our Faculties through an-application
of Gospel-Precepts and Promises to our minds for influence and conduct, that
the Holy Ghost has not only suggested things ordinary and obvious to us under
an Embarass of lofty Hyperbolical and swelling words; but instead of
enlightening us in the Nature of the work of Conversion beyond what the
Phlosophers have done, he has only envelopt it in thick Darkness, and cast it
into further obscurity; the chief Terms declarative of it in the Scripture (if
that supposition be once admitted) being only Rampant, fulsome Metaphorical
expressions of Amendment of Life. Nor shall I debate what is required of us in
way of Duty in order to our Regeneration, and how that whatsoever so is
exacted; as to the Matter and substance of it lies within the Sphere and Circle
of our Natural Abilities. As nothing but charming lusts, false delusions,
Carnal Interests, foolish prejudices, indulging the appetites of the Animal
life, and attending to the titillations of the flesh, can hinder men from the
performance of what God in subserviency to his communicating of Grace (at least
in his ordinary dispensing of it) does require; so the being in the Exercise of
those means, and in the discharge of those Duties which God prescribes and
enjoyn's, does not only take us from, and prevent those sins which would render
Conversion difficult, if not impossible; but they are further useful as means
appointed and blessed of God unto such an end. Though our Obedience has
neither any Physical Efficiency upon our Regeneration, nor is Grace bestowed in
the Consideration of any previous merit that is in our performances, yet it is
neither superfluous nor vain, much less does it lie in any repugnancy to our
Conversions being only perfected by an Effectual Subjective Work of the Spirit
of God. Neither shall I here declare with whom the Opinion of our Author in
this matter coincident. Though to do him right he is so far from being singular
in it, that he has not only the Pelagians, Socinians, and the Writer of the
Defense and Continuation of the Ecclesiastical Polity, but the doughty Mr.
Hobbs, for his associates; Leviath. cap. 20.
the last of whom I can very well allow to combat Gods Grace, having first
Listed himself in Opposition to his Being. And as these are enough to secure
him from the impeachment of Novelty, so they may serve him to confront Austin,
Prosper, etc. the African, Arausican, and other Ancient Counsels, as well as
the Synod of Dort, and Generality of Christian Writers with. That which upon a
most serious and Impartial survey and examination of the foregoing passages I
have to offer is, that from hence has proceeded our Authors Notion of the
Union betwixt Christ and Believers. Nor could he in congruity with those
principles allow any other kind of Union betwixt them and Him, but what is
merely Political or at most Moral. Admitting once his premises, his Conclusion
is Good and Regular: And allowing his Antecedent, his Consequent is every way
Logical; nor is there the least Flaw in the coherence. However bad and perverse
his thoughts be in this Matter, yet they are Harmonious and duly Ligu'd one to
another. Union importing a Relation differs not intrinsecally from the Subject,
Term, and Foundation; and therefore answerably to the Nature, Genius and
Quality of the ground and cause of the Habitude betwixt the Extremes Related,
must our Notion and Idea of the (...) and respect between the Relate and the
Correlate be. Other Influences of Christ on Believers, besides the giving them
Laws attended with promises and threatenings being with Mr. Sherlock absurd and
impossible, all Union betwixt Christ and them save a Political is therefore to
our Author obscure and Unintelligible. Ignorance and dislike of the
Communication of the Spirit from Christ to us whose he is said to be, Gal. 4.6.
Romans 8.9. and to be given by Him to be with us and to dwell in us, Joh. 14.17.
1 Cor. 3.16. together with an opposition and enmity to the Holy-Ghosts
producing New Principles in us by a Physical and efficacious Operation (though
he be said to renew us, Tit 3.5. Sanctify us, 1 Pet. 1.2. and regenerate us,
Joh. 13.5, 6.) is indeed the true spring and source of our Authors insurrection
against and contempt of any Union betwixt Christ and his people, but what is
Political. Whatever else is pretended, it is but the casting a mist before the
eyes of men, or rather the Hectoring them out of the Common Belief of the
Catholic Church by a Noise and Clamor of Riddle and Unintelligible Mystery.
And whereas I intimated, Chap. 1.. 2. that it is mainly because of the
Unintelligibleness of the Union commonly pleaded for, that Mr. Sherlock
renounceth and disclaimeth it; my meaning was partly, that this is the
principal reason which he thought fit to alledg; and partly that the obscurity
which in reference to him it is envelopt with, is from that darkness that
be-nights him in relation to the Nature of Regeneration, and the indwelling of
the Spirit. The Immediate Communication of Grace from Christ by a powerful and
Unresisted operation of the Holy Ghost, being in his Opinion first
Unaccountable for, thence in the Second place comes all kind of Union betwixt
Christ and Believers, except a Political and Moral to be Unintelligible. The
obscurity of the Union contended for might indeed influence him to depart from
the received Opinion about it, but his Opposition to the Principles from which
it results gave the Original rise to that abstruseness which made it an
Unintelligible Riddle. For otherwise the Notion of an Immediate Union betwixt
Christ and Believers is not more Unintelligible on the Foundations which we
proceed upon, than Mr. Sherlocks Notion of it is on the Hypothesis which he
has erected.

. 3. One would think that the meaning of the Terms Christ and Believers should
be so fully understood and universally agreed on amongst Professors of
Religion, especially Ministers of the Gospel, that to spend time and words in
stating and settling the import of them were not only needless but superfluous.
But through the misrepresentation which some have industriously, and with
respect to the serving a corrupt design given of their Brethren as to the
fixing the import of these words, the case is otherwise. And therefore it is
necessary, before we advance any further, to settle and determine the Notion of
these Terms as well as of Union, and to set restraints upon their
significations, lest otherwise we be made to accept a sense of them which
contradicts our own judgment as well as the Truth. Mr. Sherlock in his
arraigning the immediate Union of Believers with Christ, is pleased to charge
those whom upon that occasion he thinks fit to encounter, for affirming men to
be United to Christ while they continue in their sins, Pa. 338.348.
and that the Union betwixt Christ and Believers is perfected while men
continue as ugly, deformed, and vicious as may be. And having represented our
Union with Christ to be perfected, we remaining in the mean time unholy, he
proceeds to infer Our destroying all the necessary obligations to Holiness for
the future, Because then the merits and satisfaction of Christ become imputed
to us to remove the guilt of sin, and to deliver us from the punishment of it,
Pa. 351.352.
and his actual Obedience becomes imputed to us to make us Righteous, and to
give us an actual right to Glory. Whether this account which gives of the
Opinion of his Adversaries, proceed from his ignorance or insincerity, I shall
not determine; but false and slanderous it is, and must accordingly be ascribed
either to want of knowledge in these things, or neglect of faithfulness in
reporting what he knew of their Judgments about them whom he undertakes to
oppose. Having lost the Divine Image and our Integrity by the Fall, we not only
contend that there is the efficacy of an external Agent necessary for the
recovering it, and that he who imprinted the Image of God on Humane Nature in
the first Creation of Man, must restore it in his Regeneration; but we affirm
withal, that till the sanctifying Spirit effectually, infallibly, and by an
unresisted Operation, transform us into the Divine Nature, and communicate to
us a vital seed, we remain polluted, unholy, and incapable of doing any thing
with all that dueness of circumstances as may commend us or our performances to
Gods acceptance. Not but that antecedently to the Holy Ghosts renewing us by a
communication of Grace to us, we may both Dogmatically believe the Doctrines of
the Scripture, and be found in a discharge of the material parts, not only of
natural Duties, but of the Acts of Instituted Religion. But to say, that we
ought thereupon to be denominated Holy, is to remonstrate to the Scripture in a
thousand places, and to overthrow the very Tenor and design of the Gospel. Now
while we remain thus Un-holy, we are so far from being actually united to
Christ, or capable Subjects of Justification and Forgiveness, that till we be
actually made partakers of the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, we cannot possibly have any Union with Him, or have a right to
Pardon of Sin, or any thing that ensues or depends thereupon by Him. I know not
one amongst the Non-conformists, who Affirms that wicked Men while They
continue such are actually united to Christ, and thereby have an actual Right
to Pardon and Righteousness, P. 351, 353*
and Eternal Life, yea, that they must be united to Christ (if ever they be
United) while they continue in sin, as Mr. Sherlock is pleased without respect
either to Modesty or Truth to brand them. Nor do I know any Opinion maintained
by them that draws such a pernicious Consequence after it. But it is no matter
with some if the Deduction be odious and reproachful, whether it be Rational
and Coherent or not. All that we plead for is this, that as previously to our
Union with Christ we are polluted and Un-holy; so by that very Act whereby he
Unites us to Himself, He infuseth those Principles into us, by which our
Natures are cleansed, and we come to be denominated Holy and Pure. The
Foundation of our Union, and that by which we become (...), 1 Cor. 6.17. ligu'd
and cemented to the Lord, is the matter of our inward Purity, and the vital
Seed and living principle of our following Obedience. By the same Act that he
assumes us into Union with Himself, He transforms our Natures; and by having
made a Change in the Heart, there infallibly follows a Change in the
conversation. Those very Principles by which we are regenerated, are both the
Ligaments which Knit and Unite us to him, and the springs and sources of all
our Gospel Obedience. It Is a needless enquiry whether our renovation in order
of Nature precede our Union with Christ, or whether our Union go before our
Renovation, seeing in order of Time they are not only inseparable; but that
which is the New Creature, the Seed of God, and Divine Nature in us is the very
Bond of our Cohesion. And as none continuing Un-holy are united to Christ, so
neither does our being united to Him, Destroy our Obligation to Holiness and
Obedience for the future, Pa. 351, 352
of which Mr. Sherlock foolishly as well invidiously impeacheth it. For besides
that both the Consideration of Gods distinguishing mercy in the renewing our
Natures will be a forcible Motive and Argument to Holiness, and the principles
already inlaid into our Hearts like a vital Form in the Soul, turning it into
an universal consent with Gods own Will, adapt, connaturalise and incline us to
it; The same Spirit which was the Author of our Regeneration continues both to
watch over, cherish, foster excite, and draw forth those principles and habits
which he has already infused into our souls, and to communicate such farther
supplies as upon our serving his promises God in his Sovereign infinite wisdom
in order to his own glory thinks meet. These we have described, are the persons
whose being united to Christ we plead for, which I hope neither derives a
dishonor upon the person of our Savior, P. 350.
nor offers any contradiction to his Gospel. We disclaim being the Patrons and
advocates of the Union of any Unholy person, while he continues such, to
Christ: Nor is our adversary able by any Rule of Argumentation to infer it from
any of our Opinions. How far he may be able to prejudice those against us who
are led by Noise, Clamor and Confidence, instead of calm and sedate Reason I
know not; but amongst persons of a better figure, who will not merely be talked
into a contempt of us, who hate us not out of Interest, and so regulate their
Faith concerning us by their Indignation, I defy him a Proselyte. I wish Mr.
Sherlock were not in this very particular liable to have that retorted upon
himself which he has as unjustly as invidiously fastened upon us. For as I
should be sorry that any thing in our own opinion should lie in such an
inconsistency to the frame of the Gospel, as to entitle Unholy persons to an
actual Union with Christ; so it is no pleasure at all to me to find the Doctrine
of an Adversary pregnant with consequences subversive of true Holiness. But we
must take things here as they are, and he ought not to be offended to have his
own Notions in this Matter modestly exposed, having with so much Satyr and
Contempt injuriously represented the Opinions of others. And first, he grants
in so many words, that in one sense we must be united to Christ before we can
be Holy; P. 349.
and he gives this reason for it, Because the first and lowest degree of our
Union with Christ is a Belief of his Gospel, and the belief of the Gospel being
the great principle of Obedience, it must needs go before it. While Mr.
Sherlock impeacheth us, as disserving Holiness and Religion by our Notion of
Union, who yet allow no man to be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17
who is not a new Creature: and that Christ only dwells in us and we in him by
the Spirit which he has given us: 1 John 4.13.
He is at the same time so unhappy, and so little mindful of what he says, as
not only Consequentially, but in Terminis to plead that men must be United to
Christ before they can be Holy. I know he adds, That our Union is not perfected
without actual obedience; P. 350
P. 146.147.
but if to be in Christ signify no more than being members of his visible
Church which is made up of Hypocrites as well as sincere Christians, as our
Author tells us elsewhere, I see not but that Union is completed as well as
begun without a Man's being Holy, seeing to be united to Christ is no more in
its full import than to be in Him. Yea, as if it had not been enough barely to
assert, that men whilst they continue in sin may be United to Christ, the
Scripture must be suborned to countenance it. P. 146.147.
Christ (says he) speaks of such branches in him as bear no fruit; and
therefore being in him can signify no more than being Members of his Visible
Church, which is made up of Hypocrites as well as sincere Christians. But
neither does this nor any other text in the Bible militate in behalf of such an
impious Notion, however it or they may be pressed, wrested and distorted to
such a service. Should we allow Mr. Sherlocks reading of the words referred to
Joh. 15.2. which our present English Translation has preceded him in, yet
there is nothing in them toward the Patronage of the Cause they are brought
for. The meaning of the place is not, that there are any really in Christ who
bear not fruit, but only that there are some void of all fruits of
Righteousness, who make profession of their being so; Who are therefore in an
equivocal sense styled branches, Qui videtur esse in me cum revera non sit,
alioqui ferret fructum. Piscat. in hoc.
because they are numbered amongst the Members of the Church. For it is usual to
speak of persons and things as if they were that which they appear to be. But
withal, the place is capable of another Lection, which if admitted, our
Authors Hypothesis is far from being befriended by it. For the words may be as
well read, Every Branch that bears not Fruit in me he takes away; as every
Branch in me that bears not Fruit. And then the true import of it is, that
unless we be in Christ we can bring forth no Fruit to God, and that what show
of being branches we make by virtue of an External Member-ship in the Church.
Yet that shall be no Obex to Christ's disclaiming and renouncing our Works.
Nothing has the true denomination of Holiness, but what proceeds from the
Spirit of Christ in us, and Principles of Grace by infusion communicated to us,
which are the Foundation, matter and Bond of our Union with Him. And under
whatever gloss or varnish we or our works appear to the World, yet without such
a Relation to Christ we are none of His, nor are our Duties as to the
Principles and Circumstances of them acceptable to God. The Obligation upon Men
to Obedience in what state soever we suppose them; The consistency of Gods
Right of Commanding with our contracted inability to the yiedling of due
Obedience; the Capacity that all men remain in, notwithstanding any Congenite
Impotency for the performing many External Duties good in themselves and in the
matter of them, with the subservience of these performances to Conversion, as
they are means appointed of God in order thereunto; all these I in some measure
understand and can reconcile with the Economy of the Gospel: But that our
Lives can be Holy till our Hearts be so through the renewing of the Holy Ghost;
or that our Works can be adequately Good antecedently to our Reception of
supernatural Grace, I do no wise understand, and I should account my self
obliged to Mr. Sherlock would he unfold these things to me without obtruding
Pelagianism upon the World. And this conducts me to a Second thing wherein our
Authors Notion of Union with Christ disserveth and undermines Gospel-Holiness,
beyond what the highest Malice steeled with a proportionate Confidence, can by
any Laws of Reason fasten upon his Adversaries of such a tendency. For as if it
were not enough to have said, that men are in a sense United to Christ before
they either are or can be Holy, P. 349.
even that very Obedience in which he states the compleatness of our Union with
Christ, and by which he declares it to be perfected, is not owing to an Infused
Principle derived from Jesus by the effectual operation of the Holy Ghost, but
is only the result, and effect of our Natural Abilities awakened and excited by
the Gospel. Hence (that I may not again repeat what we have heard from him
before Sect. 2.) he tells us, That a Holy Life must at least in order of Nature
go before our Union with Christ, Page, 349.
because by this we are United to Him; and that we are not real and living
Members of Christ till we first sincerely Obey Him. Now I say, that this
Obedience wherein our Author places the very perfection of our Union with
Christ, is not only formally distinct from true Gospel-Holiness, but indeed
lies in a contrariety to it. The Gospel acknowledges no Acts of true Holiness
performed by any, where there is not antecedently at least in order of Nature a
principle of true Holiness in the persons performing them. No Acts, operations,
or Duties of ours are in the esteem of the Gospel Holy, but what proceed from,
and are done in the virtue, power, and efficacy of Grace previously derived
from, and Communicated to us by Jesus Christ. There is pre-required to all acts
of Gospel-Obedience, a new, real, spiritual Principle by which our Nature is
renewed and our Souls rendered habitually and subjectively Holy. Grace is not
the effect and product of any previous good Actions of ours, (what ever
subserviency through the appointment and dispose of God they may lie in as to
his bestowing of it) but all Acts and Operations truly Good are the fruits and
efflorescencies of Grace. To talk of sincere Obedience precluding our
antecedaneous adeption of a new Principle, and the Communication of a Divine
Vital Seed to us, is to impose Pelagianism upon us, and that in a more fulsom
way, and in cruder Terms than many of the followers of Pelagius used to declare
themselves. Excluding our being furnished with an active, supernatural,
infused, subjective Principle, the utmost influence the Gospel has upon
Obedience is only by the equity and reasonableness of its Laws, the nobleness
and certainty of its Promises to solicit our Minds, and to awaken the Strength
we have; but as to the conferring any real Strength or the begetting a vital
Form in our Hearts, thereby repairing and restoring the Image of God which we
have lost, it is altogether incompetent and ineffectual. So that upon the
whole, that very Obedience wherein Mr. Sherlock states the Nature and Perfection
of our Union with Christ to consist, is not only contra-distinct from, but
subversive of the Holiness which the Gospel requires, being an Obedience educed
merely out of our natural Abilities, and no ways owing to any Antecedent
Renovation of our Natures by the Holy Ghost; which is that alone that the
Gospel honors with the name of Holiness. Nor is this either all the Invasion
which our Author, by the Idea he gives of Union with Christ, has made upon
Gospel-Holiness, but admitting once his account of it to be true, that which
God alone does entitle by the Name of Holiness is wholly shut out of the
Religion of Christians. So that a Third Reason why I except against his Notion
of our Union with Christ as pernicious to Holiness beyond what the Opinion of
any others is whom he so Tragically declame's against, is this, that it
render's all True Holiness even in persons actually and completely united to
Christ, impossible for the future. For as our Union with Christ is perfected
without any Communication of New Principles by a real, Physical and efficacious
operation of the Holy Ghost; so through our being United to Him, he becomes not
according to Mr. Sherlock, a Quickening Head and a Vital Root of Influences to
us. P. 159.
He is (says he) only styled our Head, P. 165.
because invested with Authority to Govern us by his Laws; and our Union with
Him as such, consists only in an acknowledgment of his Authority, and in
Subjection to his commands. Hence the making the Person of Christ a Fountain of
Grace, is reflected upon by our Author in words full of contempt and scorn. P.
213.
And by our Fellowship with Christ which the Sacred Writers so Emphatically
speak of, we are told there is only meant such a Political Union, as is betwixt
a Prince and his Subjects, between Superiors, P. 187.
and Inferiors. Hence also that Fullness of Grace which is said to reside in
Christ, P. 216.
is declared by our Author to be nothing but his revealing the Gospel to us,
which may well be called Grace because it contains so many excellent promises:
and our receiving out of his Fullness Grace for Grace, is paraphrased to denote
no more but our being perfectly instructed by Him in the will of God. P. 217.
Hence likewise Christ's being styled our Life, is glossed to import only his
publishing the Word of Life to us, which contains the most express promises of
a blessed Immortality, and the most easy and plain directions how to attain it.
Now I do not deny (the things revealed and commanded in the Gospel, P. 231.
being both Good in themselves, and suited to the Reason and Interest of
Mankind, and also enforced by the most attractive Motives which we can either
desire or Imagine,) but that men in the alone strength of their Natural
Faculties, may perform many External Duties, and in that manner also that we
who judge only according to appearance, are thereupon to account them Holy; yea
that nothing but supineness, lustful prejudice, consuetude in sin, and a being
immersed into the Animal Life, can hinder them from so doing: But I deny that
any Act or Duty has the proper Form, and Nature of Holiness, or is so
denominated in the Scripture, but what both proceeds from an Antecedent Habit
or Principle of Holiness in the persons by whom they are performed, and an
Immediate influence from Christ in the virtue of our Union with Him as our
Quickning-Head, Vital Root, and living Spring in the actual performance of
them. It Is he that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. and
without him we can do nothing that is Formally Good or acceptable to God, John
15.3. That exclusively of an antecedent Habit and seed of Grace communicated to
us and Resident in us, and of fresh Influences from Jesus Christ by the Holy
Spirit, we are neither Subjectively Holy, nor do perform any one thing which
the Scripture bestows the Denomination of Holiness upon, has not only been
Demonstrated against the Pelagians both by Ancient and Modern Writers, but
defined in several Councils and Synods. And therefore Both these being
discharged out of Mr. Sherlocks Hypothesis of our Union with Christ, his
Doctrine concerning it is so far from having any Influence upon the promotion
of True Holiness, that it lies in a Repugnancy to it, and makes it impossible
to Christians. Let us suppose Men satisfied of the Truth and Divine Authority
of the Scriptures, and accordingly in the Dogmatical Belief of them; let us
suppose them also persuaded of the Reasonableness and Equity of
Gospel-Precepts, and that upon the promises and threatenings which accompany and
enforce them, they are not only inclined and resolved to obey them, but that
they actually perform the Material parts of all Moral Duties and Acts of
Instituted Worship, which is the most we can conceive of the persons for whose
Union with Christ Mr. Sherlock pleads, and indeed more than truly they can be
entiled to; yet all this admitted, I say, that providing we will take our
Measures of the Nature of Holiness, from the Declarations which God has given
of it, and not from the ill-digested Notions of the Pelagians, and Socinians
about it, Gospel Holiness is not only disbanded out of the whole of this, but
undermined and subverted by it. For as much as the Gospel, judges nothing to
be true Holiness but what presupposes the Grace of Regeneration as that which
adapts to it, and implies a causal Concomitancy of Actual Grace, as that which
does immediately influence it. Moral Virtue it may be, but Christian Holiness
it is not. And thus I have declared who they are that stand united to Christ,
and that our Hypothesis so far as it relates to the Subjects of this Union,
does no ways countenance a profane Course, or frown upon a Holy Life. And have
also demonstrated how the Hypothesis erected by our Author in opposition to it,
is, as it respects that Extreme of this Relation, many ways guilty of such an
unhappy and pernicious tendency.

. 4. Having declared whom we mean by Believers, who are the subjects of this
Union we are Discoursing about, and having manifested that there is nothing in
the Character of the Persons assumed into this Relation of Oneness with Christ,
that in the least undermines Holiness, or befriends a course of Impiety: We are
next to fix and determine what we intend and understand by Christ, who is the
other Extreme of this Relation of Union, and to whom Believers in the Virtue of
it become ligu'd and copulated. I confess I should heretofore have esteemed the
engaging in such a service a me prodigality of Words and Time; but the
Ignorance and Disingenuity of Mr. Sherlock does render it a this time a
necessary Undertaking. Nor can I otherwise either vindicate the Non-conformists
from the unjust representation which in this matter he gives of them, nor
correct the mistakes and prevarications which in assigning the import of the
Name, and Term Christ, I find him guilty of. First then, neither in the
Question before us, nor in any other whatsoever, does Christ signify the Name
of an Office. I expected to have met with Sense whatever I might have mist, in
the Writings of a Person pretending to so great accuracy as Mr. Sherlock does;
and that whatever quarrel he had against any Text in the Bible, or the received
Rules of Argumentation, yet that he would not have fallen out with the
Accidence and Syntax. If either he had not ability, or would not allow himself
leisure to write Reason and Truth, yet he should have been careful to have
avoided Nonsense. To affirm, that Christ is Originally the Name of an Office,
P. 5. and 8. and p. 201.
or to speak of the Duties and Actions of an Office as our Author does, argues
him (that I may express it with the greatest modesty I can) to have forgotten
his Grammar as well as his Logic. As every Concrete Term imports a Form,
Quality, or something analogous to these Administering a Denomination, so it
always implies a Subject denominated from them. Though there be Actions
belonging to Officers, and Actions which Persons by virtue of their being
vested with an Office are obliged to, yet to ascribe Actions to an Office, as
if it were the very Agent (whereas it is merely the Foundation from which an
Obligation to the performance of such and such Actons in the due discharge of
it results) whatever Wit or profoundness his Friends may Imagine in it, I
cannot otherwise account of it than a piece of sublime Nonsense. And Nonsense
is not to be refuted, but exposed. For he betrays the weakness of his own
Reason, who undertakes to encounter an absurd Phrase with Arguments. Nor
Secondly, does the Name Christ in the Question under Debate, signify the
Gospel and Religion of Christ. It Is indeed by the Doctrine of the Gospel as a
Moral means that we come to be united to Christ, but it is not It that we are
united to. As the Gospel alone reveals our Union with Christ, and as the
Communication of the Spirit, and the repairing the Image of God in our Souls
are only promised by it; So God in his sovereign Wisdom has ordained it to be
the alone Vehiculum of the Spirit, and the means of ingenerating Faith in our
Hearts, which are the Bonds of our Union. Hence it is called the (...) 2 Cor.
3.8. in opposition to the Law which was (...). And as the purity of its
Precepts, and the nobleness of its Promises do admirably qualify and adapt it
as an Objective Moral means of restoring the Image of God in us; so through the
Blessing of God attending it as His solemn Institution to this End, we become
(...) by it 2 Pet. 1.4. Though no Physical Efficiency is to be ascribed to it,
yet besides a Moral Efficacy, which through its own frame and complexion it
has to reform Mankind beyond (what any Declaration of God and our selves, that
ever the World was made acquainted with had): There is a Physical efficacious
Operation of the Spirit of God accompanies it on the score of the Lords having
in Infinite Sapience ordained it as a means for the communicating Grace. But
still it is not the Doctrine of the Gospel that we are united to. It Is true,
that it is both by the Doctrine of the Gospel that we are brought to be united
to Christ; and it is also true, that whosoever are united to Him have the
Doctrine of the Gospel (...) as an ingraffed and incorporated Word, and are
molded (...) into the Form of its Doctrine: But yet it is not the Terminus of
the Relation of Union which intervenes betwixt Christ and them, nor is it That
which they are united to. Mr. Sherlock I confess, tells us, that when Christ,
Joh. 15. speaks of the First person I and in Me, P. 147.
he cannot mean this of his own person, but of his Church, Doctrine and
Religion and that by I in him v. 4. and I in you v 5. we are to understand the
Christian Doctrine dwelling and abiding in us. It Is pretty, P. 148.
to observe with what nimble removes from the Church to the Doctrine of Christ,
and again from the Doctrine to the Church of Christ, our Author paraphraseth
the first five or Six verses of that Chapter. The I and me in the first and 2d.
verses are glossed as referring to the Church. I am the true Vine, the meaning
is says Mr. Sherlock, that Church which is founded on the Belief of my
Doctrine is the true Vine: P. 145. P. 146, 147
Every Branch in me, i. e. says he, every Member of my visible Church. But
then the I in you, and the I in him v. 4. and 5. are expounded of the Doctrine
of Christ. His flying from one quarry to another, argues some inconvenience and
danger he foresaw his exposition of the place encumbred with, or else that some
vertigo troubled his pericranium. I shall at present only examine so much of
his paraphrase as respects those words where in stead of the person of Christ,
he will have the Doctrine and Religion of Christ to be understood. That which
he interprets as relating to the Church of Christ, which can only be understood
also of his person, shall hereafter be taken into consideration. And as to that
which lies now before me, it is enough not only to prejudice Mr. Sherlocks
exposition, but to overthrow it with all Judicious persons, that-Expressions of
the same Nature are not allowed the same sense. I know that one and the same
Word is sometimes in one and the same verse differently sensed, when the
subject Matter, context and scope of the Discourse do so require: But to impose
disagreeing and various meanings upon Expressions of one and the same Nature
occurring together, where one and the same sense may safely be admitted, is to
violate all Laws of Exposition, and to make the Scripture pliable to what
purposes we please. The in you, and the in him, v. 4. and 5. are predicates
referring to the same I and affirmed of the same Subject, that True Vine is
predicated of v. 1. and 5. But it being as well absurd to style the Doctrine of
the Gospel the true Vine, as to assert concerning the Church that it is in us;
our Author has therefore found it necessary to make the subjects of the
Propositions different, though there needs no more where the Judgment is not
forestalled, and the mind under a chosen Occecation, than the mere inspection
of the Paragraph, to ascertain the contrary. (2) Though the subject of a
Proposition may be brought into Debate, where it is expressed by a Relative
Pronoun, yet when one speak's of Himself in the First Person by a Pronoun
Demonstrative, as the Evangelist introduces Christ here doing, (...), to say
that he speaks not of Himself, is no less than to give him the Lie. Words in
the common acceptance and stated sense of them being infallible manifestative
signs of the Conceptions of the Speaker when the Author is Veracious; I would
know of Mr. Sherlock, that supposing it had been the design of Christ to have
told us, that by I in you, and I in Him, he meant himself, how he could have
done it otherwise, or in Terms of a more determined signification? What better
Evidence can we have of the sense of a Place than that had an Author intended
such a meaning, he could have used no plainer Expression to declare it? (3) The
I in you, v. 4. is the same with the I that had spoken to them, and through
whose Word they were made clean, v. 3. Now to think that this could be the
Doctrine of Christ or any other than Christ himself, is a Non-sensical
Imagination. What friendship our Author has for the Religion of Christ I
cannot tell, but that he expounds Scripture at a high rate of confidence to the
derogation of his Person, is by the Instance before us too plain and evident.
Nor do we, Thirdly, in the Question under consideration understand by Christ
the Church of Christ. I shall not now controvert, whether by the Name Christ
the Church may not sometimes be signified? All I shall say is this, that as the
Phrases of Being in Christ, engrafted into Christ, and United to Christ, being
one Body with Christ, and Brethren in Christ, are to be otherwise Understood
than merely to imply Our belonging to that society whereof Christ is the Head
and Governor (which is the Paraphrase that Mr. Sherlock is pleased to put upon
them, Page, 11.12.
See in Gal. 3.16. Pareus, Liranus, Cajet. Corn. a Lapide, Rutherford on the
Covenant p. 312. On 2 Cor. 12.12. see Dr. Owen of the Holy Spirit p, 454.455.
but shall be afterward disproved and overthrown) so Gal. 3.16. and 1 Cor.
12.12. where of all other places the Church seems with the greatest probability
to be signified by the Name Christ, ought in my mind to be otherwise
interpreted. And were that my present business, I should think it a matter
encumbred with small difficulty to Demonstrate that it is the Person of Christ,
and not his Church, that is immediately and primarily intended by that Name in
both places. And truly even admitting the supposition that there is no other
Union betwixt Christ and Believers, but merely a Political, I do not see but
that Mr. Sherlock might have allowed Christ himself to be intended wheresoever
our Union with him is declared and spoken of. I am sure as his Hypothesis had
thereby remained as consistent every way with it self, so more reverence had
been maintained toward the Scripture, than there is by justling out Christ,
and substituting the Church in his room. For example, when Christ says of
himself I am the true Vine, etc. Our Author even in pursuance of his own Notion
might have allowed him to be so, and that Christ spoke the Truth, though in way
of Paraphrase he had subjoined that he was so no otherwise but by the Gospel,
and upon the account of his Authority over, and influence upon the Church by
his Doctrine and Laws. I am sure the Socinians (though through their denying
the Divine Person of Christ, they renounce all vital influences from him to
Believers, and disclaim his being other than a Political Head,) unanimously
allow, that where Christ says, I am the true Vine, he mean's himself. Though
the Honor of being the First-framers and erecters of the Hypothesis of Christ's
being merely a Political Head to his Body, be due to them; yet I should be
Injurious to Mr. Sherlock, did I deny him the reputation of being the Contriver
of this New Dress* and Trim, with which he has adorned it. Only it is attended
with this Inconvenience, that it is not shapen very agreeably to the place that
lay before him, and which should have been his measure; with what handsomeness
soever otherwise it be decked and set out. Whereas Christ says, Joh. 15.5. I am
the vine ye are the Branches: this must be expounded, says our Author, to the
same sense with what goes before, P. 145.
where Christ speaking of himself says, I am the true Vine. The meaning is
that Church which is founded on my Gospel, is the true Vine: I, signifies
Christ together with his church which is his Body. Concerning which Paraphrase
I shall only recommend these things to the Consideration of the Reader. 1. It Is
inconsistent with it self. In one line he affirms the Church to be the true
Vine, and in the next he tells us, that the I of which True Vine is predicated,
signifies Christ together with his Church; and yet a few lines after he
contends, that by I am the True Vine, we can Rationally understand nothing but
the Church which is founded on the Belief of the Gospel, P. 146.
and her being the only True Church which God now owns. And accordingly all the
four Reasons brought in confirmation of his exposition, are wholly calculated
to shut Christ out from any share or claim in that Proposition, I am the True
Vine, and to establish the Church for the alone Subject of that Enunciation.
Now I understand not how these things are reconcilable viz. When Christ speaks
in the First Person I he cannot mean this of his own Person but of his Church;
P. 147.
and yet that I signifies Christ* together with his Church, page 145. 2 It Is
altogether Novel. For besides that no one Commentator who own's the Divinity of
Christ has preceded him in it, even the Socinians out of whose Mine he has
too frequently dug his Treasure, do in this particular stand in opposition
to him. As to the Manner of our being in this Vine. viz. through a Belief of,
and adhesion to Christ's Doctrine, Nam sicut ex vite sunt palmites, sic ex
Magistro nascuntur discipuli, and sicut in vite sunt palmites, i. e. adhaerent
palmiti, sic and Magistro adhaerent discipuli doctrinam Ejus amplectentes and
profitentes* in Joan. 15.2.
our Author has the Exposition of Schlichtingius to befriend him. But I know
none of the Socinians that have been so front-less, or who have so far steeld
their brow, as to preclude Christ from being understood here by the True Vine.
3. It Is repugnant to the Universal Reason and sense of Mankind. For though
there may be Contrasts about the Subject of an Enunciation when the Expression
is in the 2 d. or 3 d. Person, yet it was never till Mr. Sherlock wrote so much
as questioned but, that when the Person speaking affirms any thing of himself
in the 1 st. person, he himself is the Subject of that Proposition. Christ
therefore being the Person speaking and saying of himself, I am the True Vine,
it is both to give him the lie, and to contradict the Reason that Mankind is
determined by in judging of the Subject of a Proposition, to say, he is not the
True Vine, but the Church is so. 4. It offers violence to the Harmony of the
Context. For (1) Though we can easily conceive how a particular Believer may be
in the Church, yet it is impossible to a apprehend how the Church can be in a
particular Believer. And therefore seeing it is the same Identical I of whom the
True Vine is predicated, v 1. that in you, and in them, is affirmed of, v. 4,
5. either the whole Church must be allowed to be in every Individual Christian,
which is impossible; or else the Church is not signified by the ^^n either of
the places, which overthrow's Mr. Sherlocks paraphrase. (2) Because no
Christian severed from the Vine and its Influences ((...) for (...)) which is
here intended, either does or can bring forth fruit to God; but this, a person
severed or separated from any Visible Church may do, and consequently it is not
the Church, which by this Metaphorical Term Vine, is here meant and understood.
Now that one living in the fellowship and communion of no Visible Church may
yet be a Christian, these following Reasons do demonstrate. First, Because when
these words were spoken, there was no Church of Christ founded on the belief of
the Gospel, and yet there were believers. 2 ly. Because it is possible for a man
to be a Christian where there is no visible Church for him to be united to. And
unless we should suppose a Number to be converted together, we must grant this
to have been the case at least for a time of such as first embraced the Faith
of the Gospel in Heathen Nations. 3 dly Because a person may be cast out from
actual Communion with the whole visible Church, and yet remain a disciple of
Christ and a true Believer. And that this has been the lot of some of the best
servants of God, might be made manifest in diverse Instances, if it were either
necessary or lay now before me. (4) Because no adult person, especially such as
are not sprung of Christian and Covenant-parents, either has or can plead a
right of admission into the visible Church of Christ, who both does not live to
God, and of whose so doing there is not some previous Moral Certainty and
Evidence. Interest in Christ by Faith, is the Foundation of all that Interest
which any Man rightfully has in the Church, as a Member of it. It is through a
Relation, and habitude to Him as our Vital Head, that we come to be knit
together as Members of the same Body. So far is our Communion with the Church
from being the Fountain and spring of our Holiness, that as its our being Holy
that entitles us to the Communion with the Church before God; so it is our
seeming to be so that entitles us to her communion before Men. So that upon the
whole, our Authors Gloss of the Churches being understood by the True Vine,
proving contradictious to it self, repugnant to the Reason of Mankind in the
measures by which they judge concerning the sense of a Proposition, as well as
inconsistent with and irreconcilable to the Context, and withal Novel; I hope
he will find few Proselytes to it, and fewer Advocates for it. And as the
Arguments upon which he has built it, are no other than vain and trifling
Pretenses; so the most plausible of them have been already replied to, and the
futilousness of the rest shall hereafter, if necessity do so require, be made
manifest. I shall shut up this with Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase of the Text, whom I
suppose none of the Conforming-Clergy will either upbraid with Ignorance, or
deny him to equal Mr. Sherlock, both in the knowledge of Divinity and the
Docttrine of the Church of England. I am the True Vine, and my Father is the
Husband* Man, is thus Glossed by him: I am the True Generous Fruit bearing
Vine, Jer. 22.1. my Blood as the blood of the Grape, shall Rejoice the Heart of
God and Man, Jud. 9.12. And my Father who has thus planted me in this World
here below, has the whole ordering of all that belong to me, and every Branch,
every Believer, every Member of my Mistical Body. And accordingly, he
understands our abiding in the Vine, ver. 5. to be in the Virtue of Grace,
communicated from Christ to us.

Having discharged the Church and the Doctrine of the Gospel from being
signified by the Name Christ, as that Word and Name denotes the Term to which
Believers are united: it remains that we declare what is the true import and
just meaning of it with respect to the room it has in the present Question.
And here by the Name of Christ we understand the person of Christ: nor is any
thing else intended properly by it in the whole Gospel. Supposing that
secondarily and in way of Trope it occur sometimes used to imply the Doctrine
of the Gospel and, may be sometimes to signify, the Christian Church, yet that
primarily and properly it does not denote the Person of Christ, is a
blasphemous and wild Imagination. That Christ is a Person, was never denied by
any, unless it be the Quakers, who neither know what the Idea of Person is
which they deny him to be, nor what themselves intend in the acknowledgment
they make of Him. The Arrians, and Socinians deny the Divinity of his Person,
the Manichees of old disclaimed the real Manhood of His Person; The Nestorians
asserted two Persons in him as well as two Natures; but that he was a Person
some one way or other has been always granted, till a Generation has of late
arisen, who neither understand whereof they speak, nor what they renounce. But
the Enquiry is, What we mean by the person of Christ to which Believers must be
united; And this we are obliged the rather to declare our selves about, seeing
Mr. Sherlock is pleased to Character us, as having here outdone all the
Metaphysical subtilties of Suarez, Page 200. First then, By the Person of
Christ we understand more than his being a mere Man. There are a sort of
Gentlemen, who though they own the Personality of Christ, yet they wholly
renounce the Divinity of His Person. And to give them their due, it is upon the
supposition of his being a mere Man, that they allow him to be only a Political
Head to his Members. Nor is this any thing but a just pursuance of their former
Principle; for not admitting Him to be God, it is impossible that he should be a
Head in respect of Vital Influences to any. And I wish that among the many
Expositions of Scripture-Texts, which our Author has transcribed from them, he
had not in compliance with them perversely sensed even such places wherein
their design is to undermine the Deity of the Son of God. I would not be
thought to impeach Mr. Sherlock of opposing the Godhead of Christ, but this I
affirm, that if his Glosses of Col. 1.19. Col. 2.3. and 2.8. Joh. 14.20. Joh.
1.14. (which are the very same that the Socinians impose upon those places) be
admitted, we have some of the main proofs of it, wrested out of our hands.
Secondly, Though by the Person of Christ to whom we are United, we understand
more than a mere man, yet we also affirm that he is truly and properly a Man.
As we do not Un-God him with the Arians and Socinians, so neither do we Un-man
him with the Marcionites and Manichees. As he is truly and Essentially God, and
not merely styled so upon the account of his wonderful Conception, the Sanctity
of His Life, His Power of working Miracles, His Resurection from the Dead, His
Rule and Care over the Church, and the like; so He is as truly and essentially
Man, having assumed the whole and entire Humane Nature, with whatsoever belongs
to it as a necessary Affection or Adjunct. He had both a true Organical Body,
and was not a mere Spectrum or Phantasm in the shape and form only of a Man, as
Marcion and Manes blasphemously imagined; and had also a true Humane Rational
Soul, nor was the Deity merely instead thereof supplying its Office to the
Body, as Apollinaris with equal folly and perverseness asserted. Thirdly, We do
by the Person of Christ to which we are United, intend and understand more than
his Godhead and Manhood abstractedly and separately considered. And if this
be The outdoing all the Metaphysical subtilties of Suarez, Page 201.
which our Author Charge us with, that we have found out a Person for Christ
(in this sense) distinct from his Godhead and Manhood, we think not to have
done would have been as far from Wit, as Truth. A deep and mysterious Doctrine
of the Gospel we acknowledge it to be, but to style it a metaphysical subtilty,
is to betray high Irreverence toward the great Mysteries of Faith, as well as
shameful Ignorance in the Fundamentals of Religion. The Notions of Suppositum,
Person, Hypostasis, personality as distinct from the Idea of Nature or (...)
are so far from having their first rise in the Schools of Philosophers, or
being Originally owed to Metaphysics, that they sprung from the Mystery of the
Incarnation, which both gave occasion of framing distinct and different
Conceptions of them; and by the account which the Scripture gives of the
Mystery, did illuminate us concerning them. Though the person of Christ do not
at all differ from the (...) and the Humane Nature, as they are considered
united; yet as we conceive of Godhead and Manhood in the abstract, there is
an inadequate difference betwixt them and the Person of Christ. And although
there be no third Nature in the Person of Christ, besides his Divine and his
Humane, yet His Person is neither his Divine Nature nor his Humane. And had Mr.
Sherlock been either acquainted with Metaphysics, or conversant in the Canons
of the Ancient Councils, not to mention his being familiar with the Fathers, he
would never have charged the maintaining of that upon his Adversaries as a
Reproach and Crime, the not holding whereof would have justly exposed them to
the Imputation of Heresy. But when men are under the conduct of Passion, and
their Ignorance is answerable to their Rage; what less can be expected than the
throwing out accusations at adventure, and the listing the most momentous
Truths of Christians, either in the Roll of subtle Querks, or pernicious
Errors; rather than such whom out of prejudice they oppose, should escape being
blazoned for Fools or Heretics. Fourthly, By the Person of Christ then, we
mean the Humane Nature assumed into Union with the Person of the Word and
subsisting by the Hypostasis, and personality of the (...) or second Person in
the Trinity. As the Humane Nature of Christ is of it self (...), so it is
assumed into Union, not precisely the with Divine Nature, but with the second
Person of the Trinity which connotate's something more than barely the Divine
Nature, though what that is, be beyond the Territories of Reason to conceive or
declare. Now with respect to the operations, communications, fruits, Christi
persona constat and conficitur ex Deo and homine, cum ipse Christus sit verus
Deus, and verus homo quia omnis res illarum rerum naturam and veritatem in se
continet ex quibus conficitur* Prosp.
and effects which proceed from the person of Christ constituted and consisting
of the second Person of the Trinity and the Humane Nature, we are to consider
these four things. 1. The (...) the Agent or Cause, and that is the Person of
Christ. The effective Principle of the whole Mediatorial Work is Christ
personally considered, and the things done, wrought, bestowed, or any effected,
are all (...), or the works and operations of God-Man. It Is not this or that
nature simply considered, but the Person of Christ that is the Fountain and
Causal Principle of Actions, and denominated from them. Though we cannot
conceive any operation to proceed from Christ, but what belongs either to his
Godhead or Man hood as its Formal principle, yet as there are many things
predicated of the person of Christ wherein the Humane Nature is united to the
Divine (...), which cannot in any single proposition be affirmed of, or
ascribed to either of them; So whatsoever is attributed to him as the Christ,
He is as a Person the efficient Principle and cause of it. 2. The (...), the
Formal Principle of all his operations, and that is either the Humane Nature or
the Word. Though the Manhood be brought into conjunction with the (...)* yet
as both retain what is proper and essential to themselves, so they remain
distinct Formal Principles of operation. Agit utraque forma cum alterius
communione quod suum est, Leo epist. ad Flav.
Verbo operante quod Verbi est, and Carne exequente quod Carnis est. 3. The
(...) or Action which ceeds either from the Humane Nature or from the (...) as
its Formal Principle. And as This or That is its Formal Principle, it is of
such a Specificate Nature, i. e. a Divine Action or a Humane. Though the things
wrought for us, communicated to us, and effected in us, be all (...); and
though Divines use to style the Actions themselves so, Vid. Derod. de
Substantia and Accident. Art. 4. N. 293.
as proceeding from the same Effective Personal Principle, yet I think it
better to forbear that appellation of them, seeing no Action proceeds both from
the Humane Nature and from the (...) as its Formal Principle. 4. The (...) or
(...). The thing wrought or effected by the concurrence of the Humane Nature,
and the Word as they are united in and constitute the Person of Christ. And
here the distinct (...), or Formal Principles occurring in the person of
Christ, do in their influence meet and center each of them (...) by an Action
congruous and peculiar to its own respective Nature. And though the Godhead
and Manhood in Christ remain distinct Formal Principles of Operations, yet
through the Union of the Humane Nature to the second Person of the Trinity in
Him, those things come to be effected by Him personally considered, which he
could not have wrought, either as God or Man separately conceived. Now Christ
being our Mediator only considered as God and Man in one Person, and not merely
as God, or as Man; And it being from Christ as Mediator, though in ways
congruous and proportionate, that we receive Grace, Life, and all vital
Influences, Therefore we contend and plead, that the Union of Believers with
Christ, is through their being united to his Person.

. 5. The last Term, whose import and meaning we are to state and fix, is Union.
And being a Transcendental Term, it is not easy to assign such an
uncontrollable, and clear Notion of it, as may adequately agree to, and
univocally express it wheresoever it occurs. But though Union be one of the
greatest secrets of Nature, and that which affronts our Understandings, when we
enquire into the Quality and Mode of this or that Union in particular; yet so
much Light may be reflected upon it in general, as may serve to declare the
value, and meaning of the Term. Union then is either taken for Unition; or for
the Effect, Modification or Mode caused by the ^^itive action in the Extremes,
or at least one of them, that come to be copulated; or Thirdly, For the
Relation exsurging between the extremes knit and ligu'd one to another. In the
First acceptance it is to be conceived of Efficiently; in the Second Formally;
and in the Third as a (...) and Habitude resulting from and arising upon the
two former. In the First usurpation it imports an Unitive action exerted either
toward both, or at least one of the Extremes to be united; In the Second, it
denotes the effect or product of the unitive Action in the Extreme or Extrem's
toward which it was put forth; And in the Third, it signifies a State of
Oneness emerging upon the whole betwixt the Exrreme's. Something Analogous to
all these occurs in most, if not in all Unions properly so called. And this is
what I shall offer in reference to the fixing of the general Notion of Union.
But whereas now upon the one Hand the unintelligibleness of the Union of
Believers with the Person of Christ, is that which our Author chiefly pleads as
the Motive, and Inducement of disclaiming it; being (as he phraseth it) a
Riddle, and Mystery, which no body can understand; Page 194.
And whereas upon the other Hand, he tells us, Page 197.
That there is nothing more easy to be understood than our Union, and Communion
with Christ, and that it had certainly continued so, had not some men undertook
to explain it. I must crave leave in the First place, to ask him, whether he
will renounce every other Union, the manner and Mode of which he cannot
intelligibly unfold; and then Secondly, Whether there be any danger or
absurdity in supposing this Union (which the Apostle styles a Mystery, Ephesians.
5.32.) to be as incomprehensible as the connection betwixt the parts of Matter,
in a continuous Body; or the Union betwixt the rational Soul and the Humane
Body. And seeing the finding our selves non-plust, in the explicating common
Unions, may serve to teach us modesty in our Intellectual converse with Unions
of a sublimer Nature; and the having our Reasons baffled by the obvious
Phenomenon of Nature, may possess us with a Reverence toward Objects of Faith:
I shall a little discourse the unaccountableness of the Quality, and manner of
other Unions. Sense as well as Reason, convince us of the Cohesion of the parts
of Matter in a continuous Body; yet, when we arrive to enquire how they come to
be connected, our Understandings hang their Wings, and force us at least so far
to subscribe to the Pyrrhonian (...) Incomprehension. Though we be fully
ascertained of the continuity of one part of matter with another, yet by what
glue, or cement they come to be locked together, no Hypothesis* Camerarius,
Lerees, Digby, White.
hitherto erected can resolve us. Some despairing to unty the knot, endeavor
to cut it; And therefore deny all parts in any Bulk, till they are made by
Division. But First, That cannot be supposed Divisible in which there are not
antecedent parts, into which it may be divided. To affirm, That to be Divisible
into parts which has no parts at all, is the firstborn of Absurdities. They
may as well say that a thing may be separated from it self, as that there may
be a separation made where there were not previous parts. 2. To imagine Bulk
without distinct parts going to the Composition of it, is a plain
Contradiction. Continuum in its very idea is nothing but a coalition of
plurality of parts. 3. If they be not parts antecedently to Separation, they
were never so, because after Disunion each of them is an entire Suppositum or
Bluk. 4. Contradictory predicates may be affirmed of them while in composition,
and therefore they must be distinct parts, for different wholes they are not.
But to dismiss this Opinion, which does not resolve the difficulty, but destroy
the subject of it. Others 2 ly. betake themselves to indivisible continuant
points, which as they assert distinct from the constituent parts, so they
affirm one part to be clasped, and buttoned to another by them. But those
Peripatetick fooleries of Continuative, and Terminative Points distinct from
ingredient Compositive parts, deserve rather to be hissed off the Philosophic
Stage, than to be Calmly, and Rationally refuted. Nor will I be so prodigal of
Time or words as to muster an Argument against them, save that were they
admitted we are still at a loss how they themselves come to be connected with
their Contiguous parts, or how one part can be knit and fastened by them, to
another, without penetration or the coexistence of more Materials than one in
the same place. And notwithstanding what a late Learned Person has said,
Glisson. de Not. Subst. etc. cap 28.
I still judge Penetration not only a greater absurdity than Ina^ity, but, the
rudest Nonsense, and boldest contradiction that can obtrude it self upon the
Rational Mind. Others 3 dly, have recourse to Hooks, and fork'd Corners, and
will have one part of Matter to be held fast by another through an involution
of their Angles. But (1) the Coherence of the parts of these Harpaginous Nooks
will still remain liable to the same difficulty. And to retreat to new Angles
by which the parts of the first hooks are knit together, is only to avoid the
Objection but not to solve it: And our Reason instead of being satisfied comes
only to be lost in an Infinite Circle. Yea the very allowing an infinite
progress without conducting us to something where our understandings can at
last acquiesce, is not only to renounce the Name of Philosophers, but to
destroy the End of Philosophy. (2) It will still remain of difficult
conception, how the first Indivisibles, whereof, according to the Hypothesis
beforementioned, every Bulk is originally constituted, and compounded, do hang
together. For though those Atoms which are the Immediate Ingredients of the
composition of Bodies, should be allowed to consist of parts, yet Originally
they consist of, and are in our conceptions of them ultimately resolved into
Mathematical Indivisibles; and concerning the indiscerptible Cohesion of them,
there is no satisfaction afforded by the present Hypothesis. Now if the
coherence of the parts of Atoms, and Minute Bodies be once refunded into the
force and Quality of Nature, I see not why the continuity of the parts of more
bulky compounds should not be ascribed to the same principle. Nor 4. does the
Hypothesis of Descartes of the parts of Matter being locked together merely by
Juxtaposition, and Rest, adjust it self to our Reason or Sense in this Matter.
For (1) there may be juxtaposition and Rest, where there is no continuity, as
in a heap of stones or wheat, as well as in two polished Marbles that lie
contiguous to one another. (2) There may be Motion where is no dissolution of
the cohesion of parts, as is evident even to Sense in viscous fluids, and the
like might be demonstrated, not only of Solids that are Tensile and Ductile,
but of others also. (3) There are degrees of cohesion, the parts of Matter
being more indiscerptibly clasped together in some Bodies than in others,
whereas there are no degrees of Intenseness in Rest, the least Motion being
repugnant to it. Now upon the whole, if our assent to the Continuity and
Adhesion of one part of Matter to another, remain firm and unshaken,
notwithstanding the difficulties that encounter us about the Manner of it, And
though there be not yet any Philosophic Hypothesis that can resolve us how it
comes to pass that one part more indiscerptibly cleaves to another, than if
they were fastened together by Adamantine Chains; I see no reason why the
Incomprehensibleness of the Manner of our Union with Christ should any ways
obstruct or weaken our belief of it, having all the assurance that Divine
Revelation can give us, concerning our being United to Him. As we assent to an
Evident Object of sense, or to that which is plainly demonstrated by Reason,
though there occurr many things in the manner of their Existence which is
Unconceiveable; So the Quod sit and reality of our Union with Christ being
attested by Him who cannot lie, it becomes us to embrace it with all steadiness
of Belief, though we cannot conceive the Quomodo or Manner how it is. For my
part, I have often thought that through God's leaving us posed and Non-plust
about the most ordinary and certain Phenomenon of Nature, he intended to train
us up to a Mancipation of our Understandings to Articles of Faith, when we were
once assured that he had declared them, though the difficulties relating to
them were Unaccountable.

Nor is the manner of the Coherence of the parts of Matter, the only difficulty
in Nature relating to Union that perplexes and baff^'s our Reason, but the Mode
of the Mystical Incorporation of the Rational Soul with the Humane Body does
every way as much entangle and leave us desperate as the former. That man is a
kind of Amphibious Creature allied in his Constituent parts both to the
Intellectual and Material Worlds, and that the several Species of Beings in the
Macrocosm, are combined in him as in a Systeme, Reason, as well as Scripture,
instructs us. That we have a Body we are fully assured by its Density,
Extension, Impenetrability, and all the adjuncts and affections of Matter; and
that we have an immaterial Spirit we are demonstratively convinced by its
reacting on it self, its consciousness of its own Being and Operations, not to
mention other Mediums whereof we have spoken elsewhere; And that these two are
United together to make up the composition of Man, is as plain from the
Influence that the Body has upon the Soul in many of its perceptions, and
which the Soul has upon the Body in the motions of the Spirits and Blood,
withal that ensues and depends thereupon. Nor could the affections and
adjuncts of the Material Nature, nor the Attributes and properties of the
Immaterial, be indifferently predicated of Man, were not the Soul and Body
united together in the Unity of Man's person. But now how this can be, is a knot
too hard for Humane Reason to unty. How a pure Spirit should be cemented to an
earthy Clod, or an Immaterial substance coalesce with Bulk, is a Riddle that no
Hypothesis of Philosophy can resolve us about. How this intellective (...)
should come to be buttoned to this corporeal (...) is a mystery the unvailing
whereof must be reserved to the Future state: For our Indagations about it
hitherto do leave us altogether unsatisfied. (1) The Aristotelick substantial
uniter and cement will not do; For besides its repugnancy to Reason that there
should be any substantial ingredient in the constitution of man, save his Soul
and Body: the Unition of it self with the Soul, supposing it to be Material, or
with the Body, admitting it to be an Incorporeal, will remain unintelligible.
And to affirm it to be of a middle Nature, partaking of the Affection and
adjuncts of both, is that which our Reasonable Faculties will never allow us to
subscribe to, the Idea's which we have of Body and Spirit having no alliance
the one with the other. And to style it a substantial Mode is to wrap up
repugnancies in its very notion. For though all Modes be the modification of
substances, yet they are Predicamental Accidents: And how essential soever th^s
or that Modification may be to a Body of such a species, yet it is wholly
Extrinsecal and Accidental to Matter it self. In brief, the voluminous
Discourses of the Aristotelians both about Union in General, and the Union of
the Rational Soul to the organical Humane Body in particular, resolve
themselves either into Idle Tattle and Insignificant Words, or obtrude upon us
contradictions and Nonsense. (2) To preclude all Union betwixt the Soul and
Body on supposition that they are not distinct constituent parts of Man, is
plainly to despair of solving the difficulty. For not to dispute whether the
Soul and Body may in Philosophic rigor be called parts, or whether man with
reference to them may be styled a Compositum; it is enough that the one is not
the other, but that they are different principles, and that neither of them
considered separately is the Man. Though the Soul and Body be perfect
substances in themselves; and though the Soul can operate in its disjunct
state, and in its separation will be no less a Person than Soul and Body now
together are; yet there are many Operations belonging to the Soul in this
conjunct state, of which it is incapable in the separate; and there are many
things predicable of the Soul and Body together which cannot be affirmed of
them asunder. How close and intimate soever the Union betwixt the Soul and Body
be, and how great soever their mutual dependences in most of their Operations
be upon one another, yet not only the intellectual Spirit and the duly
organized Matter remain even in their consociation classically different,
(their Essences, Affections and Operations admitting a diversity as well as a
distinction) but there are some operations belong to each of them upon which
the other has no Influence. For as the Mind is Author of many cogitations and
conceptions to which the Body gave no occasion; so the Body is the spring and
fountain of several Functions over which the Soul has no Dominion nor any
direct Influence. They remain as much distinct notwithstanding the Union which
intercedes between them, as they would have done should we suppose them to have
had an existence previous to their confederations, or as they shall be after
the dissolution of the League between them. From all which it may be
scientifically concluded that they are distinct and different Principles in
man's Constitution, But whether thereupon, he ought to be called a Compositum,
or they to be styled parts, will be resolved into mere Logomachie and chat
about Words. Though, to speak my own mind, I see no Cause why Man may not
properly enough obtain the appellation of Compositum, and the Soul and Body be
allowed for Constituent parts. Nor Thirdly, does the Cartesian Hypothesis,
though the most ingenious, and best contrived of any hitherto thought upon,
fully satisfy an inquisitive Mind in the Matter before us. Their Hypothesis is
briefly this, That God in his Infinite sapience chose to create three distinct
and different kinds of Beings, some purely Material which yet through
difference of the Figure, Size, Number, Texture and Modification of their
parts, come to Multiply into many different species. (2) Some purely
Immaterial, among whom whether there be any specifical difference is pro and
con disputed. (3) Man a Compositum of both, having an Immaterial Intellectual
Soul joined to an Organical Body. Now say they, God having in his Sovereign
pleasure, thought Good to form Man such a Creature, he has not only by an
Uncontrollable Law confined the Soul to an intimate presence with, and constant
residence in the Body, while it remains a fit receptacle, or till he give it a
discharge; but withal has made them dependent upon one another in many of
their operations. And in this mutual dependence of the one upon the other, with
respect to many of their operations, they state the Union betwixt the Soul and
Body to consist. For through the impressions that are made upon the Organs of
Sense, there result in the Soul certain perceptions; and on the other hand
through the Cogitations that arise in the Soul, there ensue certain Emotions in
the Animal Spirits. And thus say they by the Action of each upon the other, and
their passion from one another they are formally united. But all this instead
of loosing the knot serves only to tie it faster. For (1) This mutual
dependency as to operation of one upon the other, cannot be apprehended but in
posteriority of Nature to Union, and consequently the Formal Reason of Union
cannot consist in it. (2) There are cases wherein neither the impressions of
outward objects upon the Sensory Nerves beget or excite any perceptions in the
Soul (which whether it proceed from obstinacy of Mind, or intense
contemplation, alike answers my drift) and also cases wherein Cogitations of
the Mind make not any sensible impressions upon the Body (as in Ecstasies) and
yet the Union of the Soul and Body remains undissolved; which argues that it
imports more than either an intimous presence or a dependence between them in
point of operation. (3) It Is altogether unintelligible how either a Body can
act upon a Spirit, or a Spirit upon a Body. I grant it may be demonstrated that
they do so, but the manner of doing it, or indeed how it can be done, is not
intelligible. That a Tremor begot in the Nerves by the Jogging of particles of
Matter upon the sensory Organs, should excite cogitations in the Soul; or that
the Soul by a mere thought should both beget a Motion in the Animal Spirits,
and determine through what meatus they are to steer their course, is a
Phenomenon in the Theory of which we are perfectly non-plust. How that which
penetrates a Body without giving a Jog to or receiving a shove from it, should
either impress a Motion upon, or receive an impression from it, is
unconceivable. So that to state the Union of the Soul and Body in a reciprocal
action upon and passion by and from one another, is to fix it in that which
surpasses the Sagacity of our Faculties to conceive how it can be. Now if
Common Unions of whose reality and Existence we are so well assured, be
nevertheless with respect to their Nature not only so unknown but
unconceivable; we may lawfully presume, if there lie nothing else against the
Immediate Union of Believers with Christ, save that it cannot be comprehended,
that this is no argument why we should immediately renounce the belief of it.
If we can but once justify that there is such an Union betwixt the blessed
Jesus and sincere Christians, the incomprehensibleness of the manner of it
ought not to discourage our Faith. If we can take up with the Evidence of Sense
and Reason as to the reality of other Unions whose Modes are as little
understood, I see no cause why the Veracity of God providing we can produce the
Authority of Divine Testimony, should not satisfy us as to the reality of the
Union; though the manner How it is, were a question we could not answer.

. 6. The import of Terms being fixed we are now to make a nearer approach to
the matter it self. And the first thing that the thread of Reason conducts us
here to, is this, that be the Kind and manner of our Union what it please, yet
it is the person of Christ which we are united to. For suppose it to be
Political and that the only Vinculum be our owning his Laws, yet forasmuch as
Christ only personally considered both does enact them, and exact Obedience to
them, and punish our Rebellion against them; our Relation to Him as Subjects
does ultimately respect his Person. All the reverence we pay his Laws under the
Reduplication as His, bears upon the Veneration we pay Himself. However he come
by his Sovereign Dominion over the Church, it is his Person that it is stated
and vested in. Whatever room either our Obedience on the one hand, or the
Gospel of Christ upon the other, have in this Relation of Union, the Extremes
United they cannot be. Whether it be by means of our Union only with the
Christian Church, or by what Copula soever else we are United to Him, Yet it is
still to the person of Christ, i. e. to Christ himself that we are United. Or
suppose it to be only a Moral Union, an Union in Mind, Love, Design and
Interest, a being acted by the same Principles, having the same temper and
disposition of Spirit; yet still it is between the Person of Christ and the
persons of Believers that this Union intercedes. For as they, through the
guidance of sanctified Reason, embrace, cleave to, and, with the greatest
complacency delight in him; so He, through their participating of his likeness,
and having his Image imprinted on them, loves and embraces them. In a word,
all Unions except Natural or Physical, are the Relations of Persons to Persons;
It Is the Husband and Wife themselves, that are ligu'd together by the
matrimonial Tie. It Is between the persons of Subjects and the Person of the
Prince as clothed with Authority, that the Political Nexus consists. I cannot
therefore but stand surprised to find Mr. Sherlock both endeavoring to disable
such Texts of Scripture as are levied in proof of an Union between Believers
and the Person of Christ, (whereof 4.) and impeaching his Brethren that they
are not satisfied, that Christ and Believers are united, P. 200.
unless their Persons be united too. For, let the Union, as to its Quality and
manner, be what it will, suppose an Union by mutual Relations or Affections or
common Interest, yet it is the Person of Christ and the Persons of Believers,
that the Habitude and (...) lies between. Yea this our Author acknowledges
(though all he reap by it is to contradict himself) For this is a very plain
case, says he, If Christ and Believers are United, P. 200.
their Persons must be united too; for the Person of Christ is Christ Himself,
and the Persons of Believers are the Believers themselves, and I cannot
understand how they can be united without their Persons, that is without
themselves. Nor can any one else understand it that I know of, only I wonder
why then it is imputed to us as a Crime, That we are not satisfied that Christ
and Believers are United unless their Persons be United too. Ibid.
But as Mr. Sherlocks Book is pregnant with Contradictions, so perhaps he has
found out an Art of justifying the Truth of Repugnant Propositions. And though
hereby he subvert the Foundations of Science, and thwart the Universal Reason
of Mankind, yet I will not say that he is herein singular. For besides those
mentioned by Aristotle who maintained that one and the same thing might at the
same time be and not be; and besides that Burgersdicius, Schulerus and some
others, have fancied a Medium betwixt Ens and Non ens; There is a certain
Carmelite styled Franciscus Bonae Spei who will have both the parts of a
contradiction, if it be only in reference to matters of Faith, to be susceptive
of Truth. And indeed if our Author be not acquainted with him, it is pity but
that he should, as well upon the account already mentioned, as diverse others I
could suggest, particularly because he will find him a man of confidence,
hugely addicted to novelty, and one who loves to be invalidating the Evidences
which the prime Articles of Faith are built upon.

. 7. Having established this General viz. that it is the Person of Christ to
which we are United; the next enquiry is concerning the Nature, quality and
manner of the Union of Christians to him. And it being here as in most cases
which relate not simply to the Existence of things, but to the Modes how they
exist, easier to refute false notions than to establish true, I shall therefore
observe the Method of declaring First, what it is not; wherein if I prove
successful I shall either obtain further light to the defining what it is, or
else manifest the unnecessariness of determining positively about it. First
then, it consists not merely in Christ's assuming our Nature. A specifical
oneness there is betwixt Him and us upon that account, but all Mankind being
equally thus related to him, it cannot import the whole of that special Oneness
which intercedes between him and sincere Christians. Now when I say that Christ
did partake of our Nature, I do not mean that he possessed the Individual
Nature of this or that Man, much less that he assumed any Universal Nature,
that is Identically the same in all and every Man; for that as Damascenus says,
would not have been assumptio but fictio; but what I aim at is this, that as
man consists of two essential constituent parts, a Rational Soul and a Body
thus and thus Organized; so the son of God assumed both a Reasonable Soul, and
a true Organical Body framed and made of the substance of the Virgin, who was
lineally sprung from Adam the first and common original of all Mankind. So that
there is an oneness of Similitude (which is all that intervenes amongst men)
between Christ and us; but as for an Oneness of Identity, it imply's a
contradiction; and should any assert it, they are to be reckoned for obtruders
of repugnancies under the pretense of sacred Mysteries upon the Faith of
Mankind. The Son of God through the designation and Authoritative disposal of
the Father, and by the Immediate Efficiency of the Holy Ghost, having assumed
our entire Nature into Union with his Divine Person, became thereby related to
us in a cognation and alliance which he is not to the Angels. And upon this
affinity does the whole of his Mediatory Interposure and our Interest in what
he has done and suffered bear* God in order to the reconciling Man to himself
by the obedience and Sacrifice of a Mediator, did first espouse our Nature to
the Person of his So that was to be so. (...). Greg. Nyss. i. contra Eun.
Hereby he became adapted to his Office and qualified for his Work. Without this
conjunction by the espousing our Nature, he could neither have been a Priest
ordained for men, Heb. 5.1. Nor have atoned God by the Oblation of himself, as
an expiatory Sacrifice, Heb. 8.3. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He behoved to
partake of the Humane Nature in common with men, before he could either be
capable of the Sacerdotal Office wherein he was to act for men with and toward
God, or before he could be provided of a Sacrifice to offer. His agreement with
us in one common Nature is the basis of all his fitness to undertake on our
behalf, and of the equity of the accruement of the benefits derived to us
thereby. It Is this cognation, alliance and propinquity of Nature, that
qualified Christ to be our Surrogate, and to have our sins imputed to Him; and
which gives us our first capacity, of having the Obedience of his Life and
Sacrifice of his death, either formally or in the effects of them imputed to
us. Precluding this, God could not in consistency with his Wisdom, Holiness,
Justice and Truth have exalted the glory of his Mercy in our Justification and
Forgiveness; nor could the Son of God have been Inaugurated unto the Mediatory
Kingdom, or had a right to those Dignities, Privileges and Honors which
emerge and result from thence. Now although upon the assuming our Nature into
Union with the Person of the Son of God, the Essences, Properties and
Operations of both Natures be preserved distinct and entire, being united, as
the Ancients speak, (...), without confusion, conversion, division or
separation: Yet through that conjunction which they are brought into, Christ
becomes as it were a Compositum of the (...) and Humane Nature. And accordingly
the Ancients style the Person of Christ (...), say the Fathers of the Second
Constantinopolitan Council. Maximus, the Martyr does not scruple the calling
the Divine and Humane Natures, parts of which Christ consists; (...). And as
our Nature is highly dignified and exalted by its being taken into Union with
the Second Person of the Trinity, so a certain Relation of Oneness results
thereupon between Christ and us. The Apostle himself, Heb. 2.11. says that we
are (...), of one, i. e. as I suppose (...) of one Blood, or partakers of the
same common Nature, which is the foundation of that Alliance of Brotherhood he
speaks of in the next Words. And so the 14. v. which seems to be exegetical of
this, plainly carrie's it, forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of
flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same. The Ancients
as well as Moderns style this a Natural Union; And indeed Christ thus is so far
one with us, as the participating of the same com-Nature amounts to. He is both
(...), of one and the same Mass of Humane Nature with us, and (...), of one and
the same Blood, being sprung from one and the same common Root or Stock (though
not in the same manner) that we are. Christ and we are (...) of Alliance, and
Consanguinity together; which as it speaks infinite condescension, love and
Grace in him seeing (...) se exinanivit he emptied himself (which respects the
Essential condition of the Humane Nature assumed by the Son of God, and not
merely the poverty which in that Nature he submitted to) so it declares the
Dignity that our Nature is exalted to, being in the Person of the Redeemer
taken into association with the Divine Nature. And as from the Conjunction of
the two Natures together in the Person of Christ there arises (...) a
communication of properties between them, (which is real as to the ascription
of the affections of each Nature to the Person, though it be but (...) verbal
as to the predication of the properties of one Nature concerning the other) so
through the advancement of our Nature into Union with the Son of God, there are
some rays of Honor reflected upon, and some privileges that may be affirmed
of us, that the Angels themselves are not susceptive of. Yet this is not the
Union we are enquiring after; for (1) in this respect all Mankind can plead the
same propinquity to Christ. The worst as well as the best of men may enter
their claim to this Relation of Oneness with him. For though the Apostle affirm
that he took on him the Seed of Abraham, yet the meaning is not that some are
precluded affinity with him in the Humane Nature, while others are Dignified
with that Alliance, but the sense of the place is only this, that according to
the Flesh he came of the Lineage of Abraham, the promise having been made to
him that in his seed should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3.
(2) Were this the whole import of the Union of Believers with Christ, that he
and they partake of one common Nature; the Oneness betwixt one Man and another
were greater than the Oneness betwixt Christ and the Faithful, which directly
opposes the account the Scripture gives of it, and the intendment of the many
Metaphors by which it is represented. Now that it should be so, is plain;
Because the resemblance betwixt one Man and another obtains not only in the
essentials of Humane Nature but in the defilements and sinful infirmities of
it; nor is there any thing in the person of this or that man whereof something
parallel is not in the Person of every one else; but to imagine such an
Universal resemblance between Christ and us, is both to overthrow the Divinity
of his Person, and to supplant the purity of his Humane Nature. Though our
Blessed Savior has assumed our Nature in its essential constituent parts,
together with all the Natural, sinless infirmities that accompany it; yet
besides His being infinitely distant from all likeness to us, upon the account
of the Divinity of his Person, there is a vast dissimilitude even with respect
to the Humane Nature, as it is in Him free from all tincture of impurity and
concomitancy of culpable imperfections, and as it is in us defiled with, and
debased by sin.

. 8. As our Union with Christ is of a sublimer importance than merely to denote
that the same Humane Nature was in Him, which is in us; so what that is which
over and above our participating of one common specifical Nature, it does
imply, is a Theme worthy of our further search. And the Popish Notion
concerning it, is that which presents first to our examen. Though the Romanists
do not wholly disclaim a spiritual Union betwixt Christ and sincere Believers;
yet they principally insist on a Mixture of his Bodily substance with ours.
They will have our Union with Him, to consist in our partaking of the Animated
and Living Body of Christ, by manducation or Carnal and Corporeal feeding on
him. And this Union they will have obtained by means of the Eucharist, wherein
instead of feeding at all on Bread and Wine, they contend that in a Carnal
manner we eat the Body, and drink the Blood of Christ. That the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is an eminent Symbol of our Union and Communion with Christ;
yea, that hereby our Union and Communion with Him are in a special, though
Spiritual manner promoted and maintained, we readily grant. And accordingly we
with all cheerfulness acknowledge a Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
The Truth of the Real Presence has been always believed, and is so still,
though as to the manner of it, there have been for many Conturies, and yet are
fierce digladiations in the World. The Lutherans will have Christ present one
way, namely, that though there be not a destruction of the Elements, and a
substitution of the Body and Blood of Christ in their room, yet they will have
Christ Bodily present with the Elements, though hid and concealed under them:
and this they express by Consubstantiation. The Papists plead for a presence of
another kind, viz. that the Elements being wholly destroyed, either by
Annihilation or Transmutation into the Body and Blood of Christ, he alone is
Corporeally, Locally, and Physically present: and this they style
Transubstantiation. There have been others who have also asserted Bodily
Presence, but after a manner different from both the former; for holding the
Elements to continue undestroyed or unchanged, they fancied them to become
united to the Body and Blood of Christ, and to make one and the same Body and
Blood by a kind of Hypostatical Union: and this may be called Impanation. And
although there be at this day, and always has been, a great number of
Christians, to whose Reason none of these ways can adjust themselves, yet they
all confess a presence that is Real, though they will have it to be after a
spiritual kind and manner. All these four ways of presence are Real, each in
its kind and order. Nor do I know any save the Socinians, and some Arminians
but that in some sense or other, allow a Real presence. Indeed Socinus, and the
Men of that Tribe will admit the Lord's Supper to be only a Commemoration of
Christ's Death, but will by no means have it either to seal or exhibit any
thing to the Believing Receiver. That it is Commemorative and Symbolical of the
Body of Christ as Broken, and of his Blood as shed, they have our astipulation,
but that it is besides both an Instituted seal of the Conditional Covenant,
ascertaining all the mercies of it to such as faithfully Communicate, and in
whom the Gospel Conditions are found; and also truly exhibiting of Christ and
his Grace to the Believing soul, we strenuously affirm. This the Apostle
declares by calling the Cup of Blessing the Communion of the Blood of Christ,
and the Bread, the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. This the very
Nature of the Ordinance does likewise confirm; for in every Sacrament there
must be not only a sign, but something signified; and consequently the Elements
of Bread and Wine being the signs tendered us, they must be really exhibitive of
something else that has an Analogy to them, and this can be nothing but the
Body and Blood of Christ, which are as really exhibited to be spiritually fed
upon, as the sensible Elements are to be Carnally. This the words of
Institution also demonstrate; for when Christ says take eat, this is my Body;
there must either be an Exhibition of his Body to us in some sense or other, or
we must impeach Christ of uttering a false proposition in offering that to be
eaten, which, according to these Gentlemen, in no sense is so. Yea, were the
Lord's Supper nothing but a Commemoration of Christ's death and the benefits
purchased thereby, it were no more to the Worthy Receiver than to the Unworthy,
nor any more to the Receiver than to the bare Spectator; both which are in
themselves the grossest of absurdities, and withal lie in a direct repugnancy
to the Gospel. It is not a Real presence, as the Papists slander us, but a
Corporeal that we disclaim. But should we grant Christ to be locally and bodily
present in the Supper, though it be Contradictious to Reason, Sense, Scripture,
the Nature of a Sacrament, the very words of Institution, and the belief of the
Ancient Church; yet it would no ways serve the End for which it is pretended,
namely its being the means of our Union with Christ. For not to urge that were
he Bodily present in the Sacrament, or were nothing really and substantially
there but the very Body and Blood of Christ as the Papists affirm, it were yet
the most abominable thing that ever men were guilty of to eat Him. For though
some have pawned, sold, Apolog. cap. 13. De Not. Deor. lib. 3.
and let out their Gods to Farm, as Tertullian upbraids the Heathen; yet as
Cicero says, of all the Religions that have been in the World, there were
never any of such a Religion as to eat their God. There are some instances
among the salvage Nations of such as have eat the Flesh, and drunk the Blood of
their Enemies, and of such as have sold their friends to the Anthropophagi when
they were either useless through Age, or in their apprehension irrecoverably
sick; but no Nation has been so barbarous as to feast themselves with the
flesh of their God's, or to quaff their Blood. The Egyptians would not eat with
the Jews, Genesis 46.3. because as Onkelos tells us, the one did eat what the
others worshipped. It Is known who said, if the Christians eat what they adore,
anima mea cum Philosophis. God by distributing the Brute creatures into clean
which might be eaten, and unclean which might not be eaten, did thereby, says
Theodoret, provide against the accounting or worshipping any of them as a God.
Fo who will be so unreasonable as to esteem that a God which is Unclean, In
Genesis qu 55.
or so Mad as to adore that which he eats. Whatever pitiful beings men have
chosen for Gods, and how useful soever in their own Nature to have been turned
into Cates and Viands, yet they who worshipped them have been so far from
making them their repast themselves, that the seeing others (who made not such
account of them* nor paid them any veneration) do it, has been enough to
excite their Rage. An instance we have of this, Exodus 8.26. where Moses being
permitted by Pharaoh to sacrifice in the land o^ Egypt, return's this as a
Reason why he could not: Lo, we shall sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? They who had most
degraded themselves in the choice of their Gods, had yet more respect for them,
than the Papists who make their God a victim, have for theirs. As if it were
not disgrace enough to their God to pawn, and fell him, and that sometimes to
very ill intents and purposes, (all this they have don with their consecrated
Host) they place the most glorious part of their Religion in the Sacrificing
him, and eating his flesh when they have done. Now the only Text to sustain the
weight of the Bodily presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and to justify this
Cyclopian eating of Him is, Math. 26.26. Take, Eat, this is my Body, etc. Than
which I know not one place in the whole Bible that yields us more infallible
Arguments to subvert their whole Hypothesis, every word being pregnant with a
demonstration against them. But all I shall say is this, that whereas they
upbraid us for the admission of one Trope in the paraphrase of the words, they
are forced themselves to substitute a great many before they can serve their
design of them. Had it been the purpose of the Holy Ghost to declare our sense
and oppose theirs, I know no plainer expressions that could have been chosen to
accomplish either the one or the other. The Words are all as plain as the
Subject Matter to which they ought to be adapted will admit; nor can the Wit of
Man invent any that are more proper to manifest the Conceptions of the Speaker,
suppose him to have intended the sense that that we contend for. The
Substantive verb, est is, in which many of our Divines acknowledge a Figure, is
as remote from needing such a concession, and as capable of a proper
acceptance as any one in the whole Enunciation. It Is a Transcendental Term,
and signifies as properly a Similitudinary Being, as an essential, and only the
quality of the Subject of the Proposition, can determine whether it import
Being Substantial or Being Intentional. Forasmuch therefore as it is here a
note of Affirmation, interveening between a Sign as a Relate, and as a thing
signified as a Correlate; I affirm that the only proper Sense which it has or
can have, is to intimate the one to be vicarious for, and representative of the
other. To imagine that est as it is the note of affirmation between Sign^m and
Signatum, can have any other sense than to signify, is a fancy that will never
be entertained in the minds of such who understand what they say. In a word,
it is a Sacramental Enunciation where it occurs, and it is the note by which the
Relation of the sign to the thing signified is affirmed, and therefore the
whole Relation between a Sign and the Thing signified being merely to
represent, it is impossible that it should have any other import, save to
denote that the one is signified by the other. But to wave any further opposing
the Bodily presence in the Sacrament, though the Popish notion of our Union
with Christ cannot consist without it. I say, that supposing all which the
Romanists say in the Matter of the Elements being Transubstantiated into the
Body and Blood of Christ, and our feeding on Him in a Carnal manner, were true;
yet this cannot be the bond of the Union which is so magnificently represented.
For (^) were this the basis of our Union with Christ, and the Nexus by which we
are copulated to Him, then not only sincere Believers, but the most obdurate
sinners, providing only they receive the Eucharist, should be united to Him.
Admitting the Popish Hypothesis, I neither see of what advantage Faith is to
one Communicant, nor of what damage Infidelity can be to another, but that the
whole of both their securities depends upon this, that their Stomachs be not
queasy, and that they have a good digestion. It Is but to swallow the
consecrated Host, and Christ and they are one, whether they partake of the
Spirit of the new Birth or not. Either Paul's assertion of some men's eating
damnation to themselves is false, or else the Popish Notion of our being united
to Christ by the eating of his Flesh under the Species and Accidents of a white
Wafer, is so; and which of these is most likely to deserve that Brand, I leave
to the umpirage of all Christians. (2) Were this the Foundation and Bond of
Union betwixt Christ and his Members, there should then be none United to Him,
but such as have first been made partakers of the Eucharist, which is so remote
from all shadow of Truth, that on the contrary none ought to approach the
sacred Table, but they who are first sincere Christians. It Is true, their
pretending to be so, if their claim cannot be disproved, obliges Ministers to
admit them; but yet it is only their being so that authoriseth them to come.
It Is sincere Love and Gospel-Faith that God prerequires of all his Guests,
though his Stewards are often necessitated to take up with professions of them.
Although the Sacraments be necessary necessitate praecepti, and cannot be
neglected by any without guilt, yet they are not so necessary necessitate
Medii, but that God has and can communicate his Grace independently upon them.
(3) Were there no other bond of our Union with Christ, save that which the
Church of Rome suggests, our Cohesion to Christ were a very lubricous thing,
and not such an indissoluble Ligue as the Scripture reports it. For the
Foundation of Oneness ceasing the Relation superstructed thereupon must cease
also. Union can hold no longer than the unition upon which it results and from
which it emergeth, holds; now this according to the Romanists continues no
longer, than till the Form, Figure, and other Accidents of the consecrated
Wafer dissolve and vanish. So that instead of an abiding conjunction with
Christ, a little time unties the knot, and the incorporation of Christians with
Him comes to nothing. (4) Were our Carnal and Corporal eating the Body of
Christ, the Medium of betwixt Him and us, I do not see but that Mice and Rats,
etc. may come to be united to Him as well as Believers. For that these through
the Priests neglect, or by some accident or other, may snatch up and swallow
down the consecrated Wafer, is a thing easily conceivable, and there are
instances enough of it; and by consequence all that is necessary to the
Relation of Union, intervening betwixt Christ and them, the Habitude and (...)
it self must ensue also. I shall only add upon this occasion, that Minutius
Felix's argument in disproof of the Heathen Gods, does with equal strength
militate against the Corporeal presence of Christ in the Eucharist. The Mice,
Swallows and Crows, Quanto verius de Diis vestris animalia muta naturaliter
judicant, mures, hirundines, milvi? non sentire eos sciunt, rodunt insultant
insident: ac nisi abigatis in ipso Dei vestri ore nidificant. page 175. Edit
Oxon. 1631.
says he, know better than you (Pagans) what your Gods are: For by gnawing and
sitting upon them, and being ready to nest in their Mouths, if you did not
drive them away, they know that they have neither sense nor understanding. (5)
Though I be not forward to concern the Authority of Scripture to confute
senseless and irrational Notions; reckoning it a condescension to encounter
them with Reason, and holding it a disparagement put upon the sacred Oracles,
to call in their Suffrage where Sense alone can give the decision; yet I cannot
but here observe, that our Lord Jesus Christ even there where he most seemingly
speaks in Favor of a Carnal eating of his Flesh, viz. John 6. has in words
hugely Emphatical said enough to prevent such a Gross, stupid, and unreasonable
Imagination. For besides that not a word of that whole discourse relates to
feeding upon Christ in the Eucharist, as is acknowledged by the most learned of
the Roman Writers; we have in the preface to it, ver. 35.40. and in the
conclusion of it, ver. 63. a key afforded us to unlock the whole, and to assure
that it is not only to be taken in a spiritual sense, but that a fleshly eating
of the Son of man would conduce nothing to our Good. It Is the Spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they
are Spirit and they are life.

. 9. Having declared that whatever the Nature and Quality of our Union with
Christ, and what ever the Medium by which it is accomplished be, that it is the
Person of Christ which we are United to: and having also declared that it
implies something more than a mere participating of the same specific Humane
Nature; and having just now manifested that it consists not in a mixture of
Christ's bodily substance, through our eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood
in a Carnal and Corporeal Manner, with ours: The next thing to be disclaimed
from all room and Interest in the Idea of it, is its being a Personal Union.
And this I am the rather obliged to do, because Mr. Sherlock, with little
regard to Truth, and as little consistency with himself, tells the World, That
we place all our hopes of Salvation in a personal Union with Christ. p. 103.
A slander so enormous, and so void of any color by which it may be glossed,
that to what I should impute our Authors charging it upon us, I cannot tell.
Ignorance it cannot be ascribed to, seeing Dr. Jacomb, On Romans ^8.3. p. 46.67.
and 51.
(whom Mr. Sherlock has particularly singled out to oppose in this Theme) not
only barely disclaims, but refutes it; and seeing our Author himself
acknowledges elsewhere, that it is only an Union of Persons, and not a
Personal Union which we plead for; p. 198. and 293. And to attribute it to a
wilful Falsification, were to arraign him of a Crime which I would be loath to
judge any Man pretending Justice and Honesty, much less a Minister of the
Gospel, guilty of. I would rather therefore think it the result of some
deduction unduely and illogically drawn from Innocent principles, or that he
took it up in discourse from some of those who for their diversion throw out
accusations against us at adventure, than that he either judged it to be held
by us in Terminis, or that he should fasten it upon us in mere Malice, only
that he might the better expose us. However, this in Modesty may be required of
him, that the next time he writes, he would either acquit the Nonconformists
from the guilt of this charge, or else enforce it by express quotations
extracted out of their Books, or by lawful Trains of Argumentation from some of
their avowed Doctrines and Opinions. But to resume my Theme; That a person may
by Philosophy and Contemplation attain such a degree of Union with God, as to
know and understand things by a contactus and conjunction of substance with the
Deity, has been asserted both by the Platonic and some of the Aristotelian
Philosophers. The passages which occur in Plotinus, Porphyrius, Jamblichus, and
Proclus (all great and famous Platonists) of such a tendency, are numerous, and
need not to be here transcribed. The possibility of arriving by Contemplation,
at the knowledge of the first and supreme cause, (...), by a kind of bodily
touch, is asserted in those Fragments of Metaphysics Fathered upon
Theophrastus the Disciple of Aristotle, and the immediate Successor in his
School. The same Imagination became espoused by the Arabian Philosophers,
especially by Averroes a great adorer of Aristotle, and who has signalized
himself by his Commentaries upon him. Had this Notion been only entertained by
Contemplative Heathens, I should not have taken notice of it, but it was
imbibed, and that very timely, by Persons professing Christianity. Origin seems
to have been one of those that were first tainted with it, and to have received
it with many other Platonic Dogms, with which he corrupted the Truth and
simplicity of the Gospel, either from Ammonius the Renowned Professor of
Platonism at Alexandria, whose Scholar he was, or from some more ancient
Patrons and Advocates of that Sect. From Origin the Ancient Monks derived the
Ferment and leaven of it. The counterfeit Dionysius Areopagita (for that he was
not truly the Person whose Name he assumes, and that he lived not till about
the Sixth Century, or at least the Fifth has been demonstrated by Scultetus,
Rivetus, Daillaeus, Dogmat. Theolog. Tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 3.
and is acknowledged by Petavius) appears by the whole of his Discourse de
Mystica Theologia, to have been dipped in that Mad and Frantic Notion. From all,
or some of these, it spread among the Romish Monasticks; I mean such of them as
are called Mystic Theologues. Nothing more frequent with that sort of men,
than a tattle of an Intime Union with God, whereby the soul becomes Deified.
And from them the Weigelians, and Familists borrowed their Magnificent language
of being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ. The adventurous
determinations of the Schoolmen concerning the Beatifical Vision smell rank of
the same Blasphemous, Nonsensical figment. For by their contending, that the
Divine Essence is immediately united as an Intelligible species to the Intellect
of the Blessed, and that this species and the Glorified Understanding do not
remain distinct things, but become identified, they do in effect affirm the
soul to be Transubstantiated into God, and to be really Deified. And seeing
it is a Matter of easy demonstration that the knowledge which we shall enjoy of
God in Heaven, differs only in degree from that which we possess here,
(otherwise it is both altogether unintelligible and incapable of rational
explication) it will follow by a short Harangue of discourse, either that
Believers have no knowledge of God in this life, or else that their souls
become Deified and essentially United to God by knowing Him. I need not name
the admired Nonsense and high-flown Cantings of the Quakers which carry a
broad faced aspect this way: That which we have suggested, is enough to
instruct us out of what springs they and other Wild Enthusiasts have drawn the
putid conceits which they propine to the World. But as to the Persons whom Mr.
Sherlock censures for placing all their hopes of Salvation in a Personal Union
with Christ, I dare not only say, that they renounce any such Union, but that
there is nothing in their Principles which consequentially leads to it. If our
Doctrine of Believers Union with the Person of Christ cannot be defended
without introducing a Personal Union with Him, we profess our selves ready to
disclaim it, and do assure all the World, that if it harbor any such thing in
its bosom, our meaning is not so bad as our Opinion. We believe the Person of
Christ, and the Persons of Believers to remain distinct after all the Union
that intercedes between them. We are thankful for the Influences of his Grace,
and the inhabitation of his Spirit; but we detest those swelling words of Pride
and Ignorance, of being Christed and Deified. Whatsoever be the Nature and kind
of the Union between Christ and Christians is, a Hypostatical Union it cannot
without Blasphemy be imagined to be. For admitting once a Personal Union, it
will immediately follow, that Christ and They are but one Person. As two drops
of water which existing apart made distinct supposita, coming to be Physically
United, make but one Physical Body, substance, and suppositum, so two or more
subsisting Intellectual substances which considered separate are so many
Persons, do by Personal Union come to have one singular subsistence, and to
make but one Person. Now to imagine this of Christ and Believers, interfere's
with all that Reason which as Men we are possessed of. To be One Person with
Christ, and yet to be locally distant, is a thing which our Discursive
Faculties will style a Contradiction. Seeing similitude and Identity are
opposite Notions, and our highest attainment, is only to resemble Christ; it is
impossible, that by any Union whatsoever, we should become one Individual
Numerical Person with Him. Innocence and guilt, Legal Merit and Demerit (not to
mention other Innumerable Adjuncts) do too vastly disagree to center in the
same Individual subject, or to be predicable of the same Identical Intellectual
Being. To be made One real Physical Person with Christ, is an Hypothesis
attended with such a troop of Absurdities, that he neither understands what
Christ nor himself is who gives it entertainment. They are rather to be
encountered with an Anathema, who espouse such a blasphemous figment, than to be
combated with Rational Arguments; nor should I have further concerned my self
about it, than barely to disclaim it, but that we have to do with some who will
not believe us, unless we disprove it also. And indeed it seems to have been an
apprehension of the Non-conformists owning a Personal Union with Christ, which
influenced Mr. Sherlock to tell the World that it is not very intelligible how
we can be or abide in the Person of Christ, and that it is more unintelligible
still, how we can be in the Person of Christ, p. 147.
and the Person of Christ at the same time be in us, which is a new piece of
Philosophy, called Penetration of Dimensions. In reference to which I shall
only say, that as our Author's supposition, so far as it relates to the Opinion
of the Non-conformists, is both false and disingenuous; so the Medium by which
he assaults the thing supposed, viz. A personal Union, is weak and sophistical.
For as the preexisting Corpuscles of Matter do without any Penetration, or
without ceasing to be entitatively as distinct as they were before, come to
constitute one Physical Body merely by being copulated together, and brought
into a Continuity; and as the meat which we eat being concocted in the Stomach,
that Laboratory of Nature, does incorporate it self with the previous
Corpuscular Particles which constitute our Organical Body, without the
coexistency of two or more of them in one and the same Individual place, which
is that we style penetration of Dimensions: So I see not but that a
Hypostatical Union of Christ with Believers might be easily defended, if
Penetration of Dimensions were all the inconvenience it were liable to.
Tertullian, who thought God Corporeal, (as did also the Anthropomorphites and
the Audiani) little dreamed tha^ a Personal Union could not be maintained
without Penetration of Dimensions, forasmuch as he believed the Incarnation of
the Son of God, and the Hypostatical Union of the Humane Nature to the Eternal
(...). And though the Opinion of the Corporeity of God has not only been
condemned by the Ancient Church as an Heresy, but rationally refuted and
demonstrated and to be both blasphemous absurd; yet I do not remember that
amongst all the Arguments levied against it, that this of Penetration of
Dimensions through the Personal Union of the Humane Nature with the Word is so
much as mentioned. Though some of the Primitive Fathers, as well as the
Heteticks styled Luciferiani, held the soul to be Material, yet they never
imagined that through being united to the grosser Matter, of which the Humane
Body is framed, that any penetration of Dimensions ensued; nor is this Medium
mustered against them by any that have accosted and baffled their opinion.
There are some odd Stories in Authors worthy of Credit, which seem to import a
Personal Union betwixt two created Intellectual Beings, and yet I do suppose
that no man, unless it be Mr. Sherlock, will thence infer a penetration of
Dimensions. One is in Buchanan's History of Scotland, where he tells us of a
Monster which from the middle downward, having but one Body, had from thence
upward two, and that what ever impression was made upon the lower parts,
excited a perception in both alike, but that one only was affected by assaults
made upon them, where their Members and Organs were distinct. Now this together
with their frequent quarrelling with one another, seems to argue that they had
two distinct souls, and different formal Principles of perception and
operation, and yet that they were personally United, seeing both every impulse
upon the legs and thighs was perceived by each of them, and also because the
inferior parts were under the influence of the one Head as well as of the
other. Disp. select. part. 1. p. 752.
An instance something parallel to this, we have in Voetius de Creatione, where
he tells us of a young man whom thousands in Holland saw, who besides a Head
which he had in its due and natural place, had another prominent and jetting
out from his Belly, and that these two Heads were inhabited and actuated by
distinct souls, as appeared by the contrary perturbations and opposite passions
which sometimes, even to their falling out with one another, displayed
themselves in them. In fine, though we both disclaim all Personal Union of
Christ with Believers, and abhor the ascribing any such thing to sinful Worms
as Identity with the Holy One of God; yet I do not see that the opposing it by
a Medium drawn from Penetration of Dimensions, is either solid or pungent.

. 10. They who instruct us in the arranging Discourses, do not only advise that
in our Ratiocinations the stronger Reasons ought to succeed and support the
weaker, and our Velites precede our Triarij; but that those things which
perplex our progress, though they do not directly oppose it, should be first
removed before we address to that which is either more difficult to be
established, or more particularly contradicted and gainsaid. And accordingly
having proceeded hitherto in the best Method, and by the most Regular steps I
could, and discharged the Notion of Believers Union with Christ from all such
things as have no room in the Formal Idea of it; we are next to apply our
selves to the consideration of these things, which though they some way or
other enter its conception, yet they neither adequately declare it, nor are the
Immediate foundations of that Mystical Union betwixt Christ and Christians,
whose Quality and Complexion we are enquiring into. And the first thing which
here falls under our prospect, is, that though there be a Legal Union betwixt
Christ and Believers, yet a Legal Union alone will not sustain the weight of
all the Scripture-expressions which declare the mystery of our coherence with
our Blessed Redeemer. A Legal Union I not only grant, but assert, only I say
that the whole of a Believers Union with Christ is not comprehended in it. Two
things then I am to prove. 1. That there is such an Union between the Lord
Jesus Christ and the Elect of God, as may be styled a Legal Union. 2. That this
is not all the Union which intercedes between Him and Believers. 1. Christians
may be said in a Law sense to be One with Jesus Christ. This I account my self
obliged to justify, because Mr. Sherlock, by endeavoring to invalidate the
Media, upon which it is built, has not only undermined, but in effect denied
it. Now it is not by any Act, Convention, Appointment, or Designation of ours,
that Christ comes to be constituted our Delegate, Agent, Representative or
Surrogate. We had neither any power over the Son of God to substitute or
interpose Him in our room; nor over the everlasting Father to oblige Him, to
accept any satisfaction from him, or to admit that His sufferings should be
effectual to Redeem us. Yea, having lost Gods Image, and forfeited his Favor,
we were so far from being thoughtfull how to recover either the one or the
other, that Despair in our selves, and Enmity against God were the Natural
Attendants of our Sin and Misery. The Law Union between the Redeemer and us, is
the Emergency and result of a Federal Pact between the Father and the Son. The
Blessed Trinity having resolved to manifest the glory of Immense Wisdom and
Infinite Mercy in the recovering Lapsed Man from Sin and Wrath, the Father by
an act of Sovereign choice and unconceivable Love invites the Son to interpose
between the Law and us, and the Son by the like Love and Complacential Election
condescends to do so. Though the exuberant fullness of God supersede all
thoughts of any real accession to Him in any of His perfections, yet in this
great transaction toward Man, we must conceive Him not only acting in
consistency with the Honor of his Attributes, but to the declaration of the
Glory of all his properties. Man having shaken off his dependency upon God by
transgressing the Law of Creation, Gods Rectorship over him, which is Regulated
by his Wisdom, Holiness, Veracity, and the Eternal Rectitude and Righteousness
of his Nature, would not allow that he should be received into Favor, but in
such a way, and by such means, as may secure the Ends of Government, manifest
the displicency that is in God to Sin, evidence his Truth and Immutability in
proceeding according to the Penal Law which in pursuance of his own Attributes
and Man's Rational Nature and Relation to God, he had at first enacted. And as
upon the supposition foregoing, neither the Glory of Gods Attributes h^d
(...), nor His Authority (...) preserved from (...) interposure of One every
(...) between the Law and us, to suffer its Penalty, and Justice to us, to make
atonement; So in the interposure of the Son of God, there was the Invitation
and consent of the Father necessary as well as a voluntary consent and
undertaking of the Son. Without a Call on the Fathers side, the sufferings of
Christ would have had no tendency to the Glory of God, nor have been pleadable
as effectual to Redeem us; and without the voluntary consent of the Son, he
could neither in Justice have suffered penally, nor could his sufferings have
been propitiatory for Man. Christ's suffering in our stead, and being punished
for our sins, as well as the whole efficacy of his Death, and Merit of his
Passion, bear upon an antecedent contract between the Father and him. And this
Agreement which Divines call the Covenant of Redemption, is the foundation of
that Legal Union between Christ and us. To say that Christ suffered only for
our advantage, and not in our room is plain Socinianism, and to say that he
bare our punishment without being charged with our guilt, is plain Nonsense;
and to grant these, and yet to remonstrate to such a Relation between Him and
us, as may and ought to be styled a Legal Union, is to vent repugnancies in the
same breath. However I shall endeavor to give some further proof of this Union
betwixt Christ and the Elect in a Law-sense, by unfolding the Notions of Surety
and Mediator, which our Author has studied to disable from doing us any
service in this Matter. (...), the word which we render Surety, occurs but once
in the New Testament; I do not deny but that its found thrice in the Apocryphal
Writings, and that the Verb (...) to become bound for another, is used several
times by the 70. viz. Pro. 6, 1. and 17, 18. As also (...) Suretyship occurrs,
Prove. 22.26. (...) is deduced by some from (...), the hand, or palm of the
hand, Vid. Eustath. in Homer. vol. 2. p. 920. and 1334.
and to import the striking of hands, which was an ancient Symbol of one's
becoming bound for another. So Job. 17, 3. Put me in Surety with thee, who is
he that will strike hands with me? and Prove. 22.26. Be not thou one of them
that strike hands, or of them that are Sureties for debts. And by the way, this
may instruct us what to think of the Wit as well as the Modesty of Mr. Sherlock
for reflecting on Dr. Jacomb, merely because he had expressed the Federal
transaction between the Father and Son by striking of hands, p. 289.
though it was only to declare the compact between them by allusion to a rite
and ceremony which among men is Symbolical of some pact and agreement. Others
derive the word (...) sive (...) the Earth, because that of all the Elements
has not only the greatest fixative strength and virtue with reference to other
things, but is in it self the Immovable Center of the World. It Is usually
rendered by Sponsor, fideiussor, praes, an Undertaker, an Engager, a Surety. And
this is acknowledged by all to be the import of it, Heb. 7.22. Where the
Apostle declares of Christ that he is the Surety of a better Testament or
Covenant. The main difficulty is whether Christ be the Surety of the Covenant
from God to us, or the Surety for us to God. The Socinians unanimously
understand it of his making Faith of, and ratifying the Covenant from God to
us. He is styled the surety of the Covenant, Sponsor faederis appellatur Jesus,
quod nomine Dei nobis sposponderit, i. e. fidem fecerit Deum faederis
promissiones servaturum esse. Non vero quasi pro nobis spospo^derit Deo,
nostrorumve delictorum solutionem in se receperit. in loc.
says Schlichtingius, because he undertakes in the Name and behalf of God to
us, that all the promises of it shall be made good and performed; and not
because he undertakes to make satisfaction on our behalf to God. And indeed,
though both Grotius and Dr. Hammond go this way, yet our Authors paraphrase
has greater affinity in its Phraseology to Schlichtingius's gloss than to
either of theirs. His words are these, To be Surety of the Covenant signifies
no more than to confirm and ratify the Covenant, p. 289.
and to undertake for the performance of it, that all the promises of the
Covenant shall be made good upon such Terms and Conditions as are annexed to
them. But first: Should it be granted that Christ, under the Notion of Surety,
has ratified and confirmed the Covenant, yet it will not follow that this is
the principal, much less the sole reason of the denomination of Sponsor which
ascribed to Him. That the confirming the Covenant was a subordinate end of his
Incarnation and Death, many do allow, but that it was either the only, or the
supreme End, without renouncing our Bibles cannot be admitted. His being Surety
of a better Testament, is equipollent to his being styled the Mediator of a
better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. and Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9.15. And
therefore the whole of his Mediatorship not consisting in his publishing the
Covenant, and undertaking in the behalf of God, that the promises of it upon
such and such Terms shall be made good; no more can his being the Surety of it
lie solely in that. Besides the Office of a Prophet, (wherein he transacts from
God with us) which belongs to Christ as Mediator, there also appertains to him
the Office of a Priest, wherein he acts for us with God. But seeing I said that
the Notion of Surety, Heb. 7.22. is of the same import with the meaning of
Mediator, Heb. 8.6. and 9.15. It was because it is his Sacerdotal Office, with
respect to which he is in both these places, so styled. Though there be other
Offices which as Mediator he exercises toward the Church, and which other
places of Scripture bear Testimony to; yet it is his Office of Priest alone
that is intended in the Term Mediator, in both the foregoing Texts. And so the
Notions of Surety and Mediator are of the same Latitude, otherwise his being
Sponsor is a much narrower Notion than his being Mediator. 2dly. Though the
admission of Christ's being styled Surety of the Covenant, because he has
ratified and confirmed it, will not preclude his being Surety also upon other
accounts; yet I will add that there is nothing of his ratifying the Covenant,
and undertaking for the performance of it, intended in that Term. Now the
Reasons that sway me to this belief, and consequently to judge Mr. Sherlocks
paraphrase not only groundless but perverse are these. (1.) It shakes Gods
infinite Veracity, which is the foundation of all Divine Faith. We may
sometimes question whether such a Declaration come from God; but admitting once
that it is His, there is no room left to suspect its being True. To make
promises, is the Issue of Gods arbitrary and sovereign Will, but to keep and
fulfill them, being made, proceeds from the Eternal Rectitude and Sanctity of
his Nature. To deny his Being, is a lesser disparagement put upon him, than to
imagine that he can falsify his Word. Christ needed a Testimony from God to
confirm his Mission, but God needed none from Him to establish his being True
and Unchangable. Though we need good assurance that they who pretend to be the
Heralds of Heaven, be not Impostors, yet the only reason of believing what God
says, is his own Infallibility. (2.) The Apostle reckoning up all the
evidences of the Immutability of God's Counsel has omitted this, and thereby
precluded it from the number of them. Other security in order to our
Consolation we need not, nor has God thought fit to give any but his Promise
and Oath; See Heb. 6.16, 17, 18, 19,
And as by the first he gives us a Right (providing we answer the Conditions
annexed to them) So he assures us by the second, that there are no latent
reserves. See.
(3.) Had the Apostle been introducing Christ in the place of, and advancing
him above Moses, who acted for, and from God to the People, there might have
been some probability in Mr. Sherlock's gloss; but by introducing him into the
room of, and exalting him above Aaron, who acted in behalf of the People
toward God, there is a plain overthrow given to it. Schlichtingius, who uses
not to be over liberal in concessions relating to the honor of Christ's
Priesthood, yet grants credibile esse in voce sponsoris sacerdotium Christi
intelligi, That the Priesthood of Christ is in all probability implied in his
Sponsorship. It Is true, he takes a course by the Notion which he assigns of
Christ's Priesthood, namely, that in eo praecipue Christi sacerdotium consistit
quod per Christum Deus promissa sua nobis exhibeat, that his concession shall
little avail us; but as I dare not think that Mr. Sherlock will espouse it so;
If he do, I shall know whom to list him among, and what to reply to him, but in
the mean time I forbear. It being once evinced that the Vadimony of Christ
relates to his Priesthood, we do thereby immediately obtain that the ratifying
of the Covenant is no part of his Suretyship: For all that Christ does under
the reduplication of a Priest, is for us, and in our behalf toward God; but to
undertake that the promises of the Covenant shall be made good, is to act from
God to us. In brief, that Christ's Sponsorship relates to his Priesthood, there
needs no more but the consideration of the context to convince such as are
teachable; and for others, I know no means sufficient to instruct them, neither
have I the vanity to attempt it. His susception of Suretyship is the rise and
basis of his Sacerdotal Office, and whatsoever he did in discharge of his
Priestly Function, it was in pursuance of his having substituted himself our
Sponsor; and accordingly the Nature and Boundaries of his Suretiship are to be
defined by a survey of what he became liable to, and performed as our High
Priest. For though the compact and convention between Him and the Father be the
foundation and fountain of both, yet his Priesthood is immediately erected upon
his susception to be our Praes or Surety. And forasmuch as his being our
Sponsor arises from an agreement which intervened between the Father and Him,
and exerteth it self in the works of his Sacerdotal Function; we must therefore
have recourse to these as the Standar^ and Measure, by which the full import
and extent of his being our Surety is to be regulated and determined. The
importance and derivation of the Term as applied to Transactions amongst men,
falls infinitely short of expressing the Vadimony which Christ entered into and
undertook. For besides that, the one relates to Crimes, the other to pecuniary
debts; and that the party, to whom the Security here is given, stands
considered as a Rector, whereas elsewhere we consider him as a mere Creditor;
there are also other essential differences, namely, that in transactions
amongst men, he who gives the Security supposes the Debtor Solvent; but in the
case before us, our inability to satisfy, lay as the groundwork of the whole
of Christ's susception. The Law of Creation which had a threatening annexed to
it, denouncing wrath against all manner of transgression, being by us violated
and broken; it pleased God (though he did not relax the punishment at least in
its essentials which was threatened) for the exalting the honor of his Grace,
to dispense with the Law so far as concerned the immediate subject, and to
allow a substitution. Upon this, in compliance with the Call of the Father,
does the interposure of the Son enter. And the great end of his concerning
himself being the advancement of the Glory of Gods Wisdom and Mercy in our
recovery in such a way and manner as that not only none of the Divine
Attributes should be impeached or eclipsed, nor the Decorum of Gods Government
spoiled, but that through Sins having a meet recompense measured out to it, God
might appear the Protector of his Laws; it was thereupon necessary that He
should undergo the punishment which the Justice and Law of God made due to
sin. And forasmuch as this could not be effected without having our sins
transferred upon him; he therefore substituted himself in our room, and became
our (...) and Surrogate. And this is all that we mean by our Legal Union with
Christ, which the Term and Notion of his being our Surety does not only display
and illustrate, but confirm and prove. And whereas Christ is styled the Surety
of a better Covenant, it is because the Enacting of the Covenant of Grace
respects his undertaking to be made Sin, and to undergo the Curse as the Moral
cause and Condition without which there had been no overtures of mercy made to
the Sons of men. It was in consequence of Christ's susception to be our Sponsor,
Appellatur sponsor quia spospondit and ultro in se suscepit praestare omne id
quod Justitia and Lex Sancta Dei quae nec mutari, nec abnegari nec dissimulari
potuit, exigebat ut fieret, si bona Testamenti pax, vita, salus nobis donari
and nostra fieri debebant. Momma de varia condition and statu Eccles. Tom. 1.
cap. 1. p. 8.
and with respect to the Obedience of his Life, and Sacrifice of his Death as
the procuring and deserving Cause, that God entered into a Covenant with
Mankind, promising to pardon their sins, receive them into favor, and crown
them with life, upon such terms and conditions as the Father and Son thought
fit to prescribe. What these are, the Gospel declares; nor is any man actually
forgiven, justified, or admitted into friendship with God, but upon a
performance of the conditions, and having the qualifications there required.
Christ's own discharge was an Immediate consequent of his sufferings, and they
for whom he suffered had also immediately a Fundamental Right of being
acquitted; but their actual deliverance was to be in the way and order, that He
who had substituted himself in our room, and he who had both admitted and been
the Author of the substitution, thought fit to appoint. This I have the longer
insisted upon, because our Author either does not, or will not understand those
whom he writes against. For by what he says against Dr. Jacomb upon this Theme,
I am apt to think that he conceives himself too Witty to understand what he
reads, or that he consults the Non-conformists Book only that he may turn them
into Burlesque and ridicule, He First Fathers such a Notion of Christ's being
our Surety upon Him, as neither he nor any man that was in his Wits ever held,
and then sets himself to exercise his Faculty in opposing it. To affirm of us
that we make Christ our Sponsor to discharge the Offices of Piety and Virtue,
p. 29.
Justice and Temperance in our stead, as Mr. Sherlock does, is to impute his
own mistakes to us, that he may the better upbraid us. Although we plead the
Meritorious Righteousness of Christ against the accusation of the Law, yet we
contend for a personal Righteousness of our own, to answer the demands of the
Gospel. Our fulfilling the Terms of the New Covenant, is the condition
entitling us to the Righteousness of Christ, by which alone we escape the curse
of the Old. Though Christ has merited all that Grace, in the strength and
virtue of which, we repent, believe, and obey, yet it is we our selves that do
so, and not Christ. And therefore I have nothing further to say to our Author
in this Matter, but must suffer him to fight with his own shadow. Let him but
once justify his charge of our making the Personal Righteousness of Christ our
Personal Righteousness, or that we maintain Christ to have fulfilled all
Righteousness in our stead; and I do here assure him that I am not only ready
to allow his severest reproofs, but to commend and second them. But till then I
leave him to encounter the Wind-mills of his own Imagination, and to hew the
posts which his Fancy has erected in the room of Phanatick Adversaries.

The Notion of Mediator, and the serviceableness thereof, to conduct us to the
belief of a Legal Union with Christ, is that which we must address next to the
explication of. (...), which we render Mediator, is a Term in a manner peculiar
to the sacred Writers. It Is true, he whom Thucydides styles (...), the
Scholiast calls (...) and (...). It is derived (...) and signifies one that
interposeth between two parties at variance, to accommodate and compose their
difference. The Socinians, those declared Enemies of the satisfaction of
Christ, though they retain the Term as applied to Him, yet they do so enervate
the meaning of it, as in effect to overthrow what in words they seem to
acknowledge. For by stating the whole of Mediatorship in his being God's Legate,
and the Interpreter of the Divine Will to Man, they not only supplant his
Mediatorial Office through disclayming the principal Reasons and Ends of it,
but mistake the true and primitive import of the word. There may be an
internuncius between parties, who stand in alliance of friendship; but Mediator
includes in its idea, a supposition of difference among those between whom he
interposeth, (...), A Mediator is not of one, says the Apostle, Gal. 3.20.
That is, as Grotius expounds it, There is no need of a Mediator between those
that are at agreement. (...) hic sumo a neutro (...). Non solet sequester se
interponere inter eos qui unum sunt. i. e. qui been convenient. Grot. in loc.

Non unius partis sed duarum earumque dissidentium. Jacob. Capel.


Mediation not only implies two distinct parties, between whom there is to be
an interposure, but also that there is a variance to be accommodated. Suidas
gives us the true import of (...) when he renders it by (...) a Peacemaker. I
do not deny but that Christ's discharge of his Prophetical Office is a part of
the exercise of his Mediatorship; But as the whole of his Mediatorial
undertaking does not consist in his being Gods Ambassador to declare His Will,
and the purposes of his Grace concerning us; so a variance between God and us
lies at the bottom, and gave occasion to his comeing forth as a Legate from the
Lord to us. The whole Tenor of the New Covenant, whereof Christ is the
Messenger and Apostle, imports a difference between God and us, through the
violation of a former. As the prescription of Repentance to us, together with
the whole of that Religious Worship which God requires of us, argues him
reconcilable, so it speaks him antecedently offended. It is an affront to
Reason as well as Scripture, to imagine a Mediator without respect to a
foregoing difference. Some have conceived (though as well against as without
the countenance either of Reason or Scripture) that the Son of God should have
been Incarnate, though man had persevered in his Integrity; but none save the
Socinians ever dreamed that any one could come in the quality of a Mediator,
where there was not a previous difference between those in whose behalf he so
appeared. That he should be styled a Mediator, merely with regard to his
declaring God's Grace and Favor to man, together with the duty which God
required of us, is repugnant to every Text in the Bible, where the Term
occurrs; and that it contradicts the common sense of Mankind in their
application and usage of the Word, Recepta significatione and vulgari usu
loquendi, factum est ut is qui pacem inter duos quocunque modo conciliet
Mediator appelletur. de Servat. p. 1. c. 7.
Socinus himself is forced to acknowledge. Now as an interposure between two
differing parties to compromise a difference is included in the Idea of a
Mediator; so there are several things intrinsecally belonging to the Mediatory
Office and Work of Christ, which do not appertain to Mediation simply
considered. For whereas other Mediations are chiefly managed by way of entreaty
and intercession, the Office and Work of Christ's Mediation consists not only
fundamentally, but principally in his oblation of himself as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice. I do not preclude the Intercession of Christ from bearing share in
his Mediatory Work; I only say, that as the whole of his interposure is not to
be confined to it, so it had in every part and degree of it a respect to, and
did bear upon his giving himself for a Ransom. Not only his Intercession now in
Heaven, which excludes the gestures of a formal supplicant (these being both
inconsistent with the state of Glory, to which he is exalted, and the
accomplishment which he has made of all that was required of Him as the ground
and Motive of the Communication of Mercy to us) and lies merely in the
representation of his Meritorious passion and Sacrifice, (which whither it be
at any time accompanied with an articulate voice, I do not determine) but his
intercession here on Earth, which (as well because the Oblation and Sacrifice
that he was afterward to represent, was not then dispatched, as in Analogy to
the state of Humiliation he was then in) behoved to be vocal, and in way of
formal supplication; I say not only the one, but the other also, respects his
Mediatorious passion as their Foundation, and as the cause, ground and motive,
with relation to which the things interceded for are procured. Christ's
interposure as Mediator between God and Man, took its rise from, and bore upon
a compact between the Father and Him, that he should be Incarnate, and give his
Life a Ransom for many. This the Holy Ghost does most emphatically instruct us
in, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 8.6.9.15. and 12.24. which are all the places where he is
in express Terms so styled. Now had not the susception of our sins preceded as
the Antecedent impulsive cause of Christ's sufferings, he could neither be said
to be made Sin for us, nor to bear them, nor to have them laid upon him, nor to
dye for our Offenses, nor to be our Ransom: Nor could the inflicting of
sufferings upon him have been either good in it self, or an act of Rectoral
Justice in God, or have had any tendency to his glory, or to the honor of his
Law, or to deterr Sinners from offending; yea, preclude once the consideration
of sin as the meritorious cause of the Agonies which Christ underwent, and the
Love, Wisdom, Justice, and Rectorship of God are obnoxious to reflections, and
stand liable to be impeached. And if it be once obtained that our sins are the
Meritorious impulsive cause of Christ's Death, his susception of our Guilt will
necessarily follow. For Guilt being nothing but an Obligation to punishment,
and it being impossible to conceive such a habitude betwixt a person and sin,
that it should be the meritorious impulsive cause of his punishment, and yet he
not be under an obligation to punishment, it plainly follows that guilt must be
supposed antecedent to a demerit of punishment. Guilt and punishment being
Relates, he that is obnoxious to the latter, must be previously under the
imputation of the former; as Bishop Andrews expresses it; Christ was first
made sin in respect of the Guilt, and then a Curse in respect of the
punishment. Sermon. of Justification on Jer. 23.6. Where Sin is so charged, as to
expose a person to a demerit of punishment, there is an obligation to it, and
where there is such an obligation to it, there is in some sense or other Guilt.
Those very arguments, whereby we overthrow the Popish Dogm of Believers being
discharged from the Guilt of Sin but not the punishment, do equally disprove
Christ's undergoing the punishment of Sin without susception of the Guilt. In
brief (1.) Through a convention betwixt the Father and Son our sins are so
charged upon and transfered to Christ, as to be exacted of him; and he has
submitted to the Demerit of them, so as to undergo the penalty in the
substance and kind of it, (though not in the Adjuncts and Consequential
accidents which would have accompanied it upon such weak, finite, depraved
subjects as we are) that we should have undergone. (2.) Through Christ's
interposing as Surety and Mediator by suffering in our stead, God has so
vindicated his own Honor, asserted the Authority of his Commands, and
satisfied the ends of Law and Government, that he accepts of what Christ has
done and suffered as full satisfaction to his Law; and in consideration
thereof, without any reflection upon his Attributes, or subversion of his
Rectorship, he makes a tender of pardon to us. (3.) God having admitted the
interposure of Christ on our behalf, and having inflicted sufferings upon him
as a punishment for our sins, and having accepted those sufferings as a
Sacrifice of Atonement for the expiation of our Guilt, and having also agreed
with his Son and declared in the Covenant of Grace the Terms on which we are
made partakers of the benefits thereof; we upon a performance of these
conditions, come to have all that Christ did and suffered, as our Mediator,
imputed to us in a Law-sence. That is, the Law owns that Christ intervening in
our room, has answered all its demands, so that God in consistency with its
exactions, may be both just in himself, and yet be our Justifier. And this
being all that we intend by a Legal Union with Christ, namely, that by the
Covenant of Redemption, Christ so becomes our Surrogate as to have our sins in
a Law-sence imputed to Him, and that we through fulfilling the Terms of the
Covenant of Grace, have all that, which He as substituted in our place and
stead, did and suffered, imputed in a Law-sense to us: He must not only
disclaim Christ's being Mediator in any proper sense, but renounce the whole
Gospel that denis it. Having not only declared, but justified that there is a
Legal Union between Christ and Believers, and having also stated and defined
what it is, and wherein it consists, all that remains incumbent upon me,
relating to this Head is, to show that the whole of a Christians Union with the
Lord Jesus, is not comprehended in this, nor hereby expressed. And 1st. There
are many Scripture Texts manifestative of an Oneness that the Saints have with
Christ, which a Legal Union does not come up to the height and grandeur of. As
there is not any one thing in the Gospel which the Holy Ghost has judged meet
to express in greater variety of phrase, than the mystery of our cohesion with
Jesus Christ; so this Legal Union can no ways sustain the weight of most of
them. It Is not consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of God to entertain us
with pompous words, or to treat us with Hyperbolical expressions, when he is
declaring to us the Mysteries of Faith, to which he not only requires our
assent, but has made much of our comfort and duty dependent upon them. Who can
think that a Legal Union is all that the Holy Ghost intends by our being one
Spirit with the Lord, and being ingraffed into Him as Branches are into a
stock, or root; cemented to Him, as the building is to the Foundation;
incorporated with him, as our Aliment and Food is with our fleshly substance;
ligu'd and connected to him, as the Bodily Members are to their Natural and
Vital Head? I know all these expressions are Metaphorical, yet I also know that
they must be declarative of something that is not only real, but whose
greatness it is not easy to conceive. As the variety of Metaphors which the
Spirit makes use of to decipher it by, declare its importance, so the quality
of them serves to intimate that it is not merely a Legal Union. If there be no
other Oneness between Christ and sincere Christians, but that which we have
been discoursing of, there could not be a Symbol worse chosen to express it
by, there being no Analogy between what the phrases originally signify, and
that which they are designed and brought to illustrate. 2dly. Those things
being distinct and different whose ideas are so, the formal Conception of our
Legal Union with Christ being hugely different from the Notion which we have of
our Spiritual Union with Him, it plainly follows that our Mystical coherence to
Him, imports some thing besides a Legal Oneness. Now that the Idea which we
have of the one, is distinct from that which we have of the other, appears (1)
in that our Legal Union implies a Relation to Christ as our High Priest and
Sponsor, interposing and acting in our behalf toward God; whereas our Mystical
Union respects Him as acting to us in the quality of a Vital Head. (2)
Because the vinculum of that is Christ's susception of our sins upon him, and
the Fathers imputing them to him; but the nexus of this is the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in us, and principles of Grace infused into us. (3) Because the result
of our Legal Union is the imputation of what Christ in our stead did and
suffered, for Righteousness to us, and discharge from Wrath; but the effect of
our Spiritual Union is further communication of Grace, together with quickening
Influences whereby we grow up into a higher conformity with our Head, and are
more and more adapted to live to God. 3dly. Those things are different, whereof
the one is the meritorious fruit as well as the Consequent of the other; and
that this is the habitude which the things before us stand in, might be easily
demonstrated. For though many of the formal benefits of a Legal Union, such as
Actual discharge from Wrath and Justification to Life, do not arrive to us, but
through the intervention of a Spiritual conglutination to our Mediator, (it
being not only in the power of the Father and Son to appoint in what order, and
upon what Terms we should have an Interest in the purchased Redemption; but the
very Nature of our deliverance, which was not only a ransoming us from Wrath,
but a restoring us to the favor of God, and an exalting us to a superadded
blessedness, required that it should be in such a Method and upon those
conditions, as that God might both exercise forgiveness in consistency with His
Holiness, and we be adapted for that to which we were advanced) yet, even our
spiritual Union in the very vinculum and bond of it, is a purchased fruit of
what Christ as substituted in our room, and so one with us in conspectu curiae,
did and suffered. Yea, the Honor of being Heir of all things, and Head of
Influence to the Redeemed, is a reward of what Christ underwent and performed
as our Surety, in the relation of which he stood Legally United to us.

. 11. I now proceed to the consideration of Moral Union, which is all that some
(and those very considerable Persons) will admit to intercede betwixt Christ
and Believers. By Moral Union we understand a Harmony of Wills, an agreement in
designs, a confederation in affections; in a word, an Union by way of mutual
and reciprocal love. It Is styled Moral from its band or ligature, which is
Love. Love is not only ^he principal and chiefest* but the source and fountain
of all humane Affections. All the Affections are but the several forms and
shapes of Love. Desire, Fear, Anger, Hope, Sorrow, Delight, etc. are but the
various Forms and Aspects of Love, according as its Object is circumstantiated
under the consideration of absent, present, easy, or difficult to be enjoyed,
etc. As the Object Beloved is affected with this or that Circumstance, so Love
receives a new Modification, and becomes clothed with this or that Form. And
indeed Love is of a very Unitive Nature, it is the Marriage of one Intellectual
Being to another. It Is the strongest bond of Alliance, the most connexive
cement. All Love tends to Union, to have the heart implanted and incorporated
with the Object beloved. It both unites the Lover to the Object which he loves,
and transform's him into it. What, and where our Love is, that and there we
are. There is an assimilating efficacy in Love, whereby it casts the mind into
the Mould of the thing Beloved, which made Austin say, si terram amas, terra
es; If thou love the Earth, thou art Earth: And the Philosopher to say (...),
a Friend is only another Self. Friendship which is nothing but mutual
endearedness, or a confederacy in sincere affections* (save that it superadds
conversation and society to Love) is not only styled by Hierocles (...) the
noblest efflorescence and perfection of Virtue; but Aristotle defines it (...),
by one Soul in two Bodies. Or as Horace calls Virgil whom he entirely loved,
dimidium animae, the half of his Soul. Now a Love-Union we readily acknowledge
between Christ and Believers. As it was infinite compassion which influenced
Him not only without Motives, but in despite of obstacles in us, to become our
Ransom; so having Redeemed us by his Blood, and engraven his Image upon us by
his Spirit, he does with superlative delight behold his purchase and embrace
his likeness. It Is in pursuance of his complacency in them, that he Espouseth
their concerns, resents their troubles, and ministers opportune relief to them
under their several exigencies. Nor is his Love greater than it is lasting,
being as Unchangeable as it is free and superlative. Upon the same Motives that
he works such dispositions and qualifications in us, as may render us fit
objects of his Delight, he takes care to prevent their being totally lost, that
so we may not cease to have a share in his complacency. Admit that Christ's
complacential Love stands determined to Holiness, and that he delights in none
till they be good; yet the Immutability of the Divine Counsels, the Convention
between the Father and Son in the Covenant of Redemption, Gods Veracity in
reference to the promises which he has made in the Covenant of Grace, the
absolute compleatness of Christ's Sacrifice for all those in whose behalf he
gave himself a propitiation, together with the prevalency of his Intercession,
and his design in purchasing and bestowing the Holy Ghost to reside in and
watch over Believers, may assure us that he will preserve those as meet objects
of his Love, upon whom he has once engraven his Image to make them so. And by
the way this may serve as a reply to that of Mr. Sherlock, p. 211. where he
tells us, that the Unchangeableness of Gods Love does not consist in being
always determined to the same Object, but in that he always Loves for the same
reason; that is, that he always loves true Virtue and Goodness wherever he
sees it, and never cease to love any Person till he cease to be Good, and
then the Immutability of his love is the reason why he loves no longer. For
besides that our Author does hereby preclude all Gods love of Benevolence and
Compassion, of which Persons abstracted from qualifications are the Objects.
Which as the Scripture does every where celebrate as the highest love, so there
was nothing in us that could attract it, but on the contrary, there was every
thing in us which might have rendered us the Objects of everlasting Indignation:
See Romans 15.8. Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.9, 10. I say besides this, the whole
passage, even taking it as refering to Gods love of complacency, is framed to
overthrow Election, Efficacious Grace, the perseverance of Believers, and to
render the New Covenant no better than the Old, and our standing in Christ as
lubricous as our standing in Adam was. And therefore I hope Mr. Sherlock will
pardon me if I do not readily subscribe to him in this, forasmuch as I know it
repugnant to the Articles of the Church of England, not to mention what else it
is. The unchangeableness of his Love of Benevolence which took its Motives from
himself, and can no more be inconstant than the Divine Nature is, does strongly
infer the preserving those qualifications in us which are the immediate
foundations of his love of complacency, supposing that he has once wrought
them. For the bestowing of those upon us in order to this that he might delight
in us, being the aim and design of his Eternal Love of Good Will, it naturally
follows that the Immutability of his kindness ensures his watching over and
maintaining them, when once he has wrought them in, and communicated them to
us. In brief, Christ's heart is wonderfully knit in love to the renewed and
sanctified soul, Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, says he,
Cant. 4.9. The word there used occurrs no where else in the Scripture, and
signifies to have won, engaged, seized upon, or robbed one of his heart. It Is a
term borrowed from a passionate Lover, who is not Master of his own heart,
another having gotten the possession of it. He that loved us at no less rate
than dying for us, when we were Enemies, cannot but be affectionately linkt to
us, having once washen us in his Blood, and renewed us to his likeness by his
Grace. On the other hand, though the love of a gracious Soul to Christ can
neither equal his in its degrees, nor any way rival it in the freeness,
earlyness, or instances of discovery; yet it is so far reciprocal, that upon
conviction of Reason, conduct of Judgment, and the propension of the New
Nature, it cleaves to and embraces him. The sincere Christian not only reckons
Christ an object chiefly worthy of his love, but by exiliency, egress; and
expansion of Soul after him, he endeavors a Conjunction and Union with him.
From hence comes that liquefaction and languor of heart to enjoy him, and to
receive his impressions; hence proceeds that consignment of our Wills to his;
from hence also there springs a concernment for his interest more than for our
own. All the reciprocal love and friendship of the World are but (...), Idols
and Images of Love and Friendship, being compared with what intercedes between
Christ and Christians. Now this Love-Union, we not only own, but plead for, and
do state our happiness in the perfection of it. Nor is there any thing that
recommends Heaven more to us, than that our souls shall be there enflamed with
and united by holy ardors to One so infinitely amiable in his own perfections,
and so unspeakably deserving our purest flames for his free and preventing, as
well as his exuberant and superlative love to us. This Conjunction, through a
ligature and bond of love, (manifested in imitation and uniform obedience)
betwixt Christians and the Lord Jesus Christ, is often mentioned in the holy
leaves. But yet I cannot assent to those who state the whole of Believers Union
to the person of the Mediator merely in a reciprocalness of affections. 1.
Because one Christian should at this rate be as much One with another, as he is
with Christ; which the Scripture will not allow us to submit our assent to, as
not being reconcilable to those grand, lofty, and emphatical expressions which
the Holy Ghost peculiarly appropriates to declare the Unity which intervenes
between Christ and Christians. That there is an Union of Affections between one
Christian and another, I suppose will not be denied, nor is he indeed a
Christian who has not a witness of it in himself, and who does not in the
several ways wherein it is displayable, endeavor to give evidence of it to the
world. It Is this Love Union amongst Christians which our Lord Jesus so solemnly
prayed for, Joh. 17.21. It Is this which he has enjoined his Disciples as his
New Commandment, and which he has appointed to be the bond of perfection unto
them; Joh. 13.34. Col. 3.14. It Is this which is represented as an evidence both
of our Love-Union with God, 1 John 4.12. and of our implantation into Christ by
Regeneration, 1 John 3.14. It Is this that was the glory of the Primitive
Saints, Acts 4.32. and for which the very Heathen both admired them, and paid
them an Internal veneration. In a word, it is this whereby all the Members of
Christ being first copulated to Him as to a Vital living Head, and being
Harmonious in the belief of all the Essential Fundamental Doctrines of the
Gospel, come to be principally knit together among themselves. And where this
is not, a politic confederacy, and a wicked conspiration there may be, but
such an Union as ought to be amongst Christians, there is not. But how high,
noble, and necessary soever this Union is which intervenes betwixt one
Christian and another, yet it is not equipollent to the Union which occurrs
between Christ and Believers. Nor do I hereby only mean that they differ
gradually in some accident or other (for so even the Moral Union betwixt Christ
and Christians differs from the Moral Union of Christians among themselves; the
source and spring, the Motives and Arguments, the degrees, dimensions, acts and
instances of Manifestation being not universally the same, either in the love
that Christ bears to Believers, or in the flames which they cherish and
maintain toward him, with those that obtain in the love of one Child of God to
another) but my meaning is, that they differ specifically and in kind. And in
proof of this, I desire no more, but that Persons would without prepossession
and prejudice examine such Texts as Joh. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.27. Romans
8.1.9, 10. Gal. 2.20. Joh. 6.5, 6. not to mention more, where the Union betwixt
Christ and Believers is represented and illustrated; and if he can find any
thing in the Love-Union of one Christian with another, that bears a
proportion and Analogy with what is there declared concerning the Union of the
Lord Jesus with Believers, I am mistaken. 2. Because the Holy Angels would be
every way as much connected and ligu'd to Christ as Believers are, were no more
to be understood by this coherence, but a conjunction by way of Affection, or
did this adequately express the Notion of it. For, besides the subjection that
the Angels are in to Christ as their Lord and Governor, 1 Pet. 3.22. and the
attendance which in pursuance thereof they give at his Throne, Isa. 6.1, 2.
together with that adoration and worship which they pay him, Heb. 1.6. and
their readiness to minister in whatsoever services he enjoins them about his
Church, Heb. 1.14. I say besides all this, they are in a special manner
cemented to him by pure flames and holy ardors. Those blessed Spirits, through
that more perfect knowledge which they have of the attractive beauties and
excellent perfections of Christ, (partly by the means of their more illuminated
intellects, partly through their immediate attendance upon his glorious person,
especially from their being above all temptations that may divert their minds
from so amiable an object, and being free from all impure Lusts that may damp
their flames) do cleave to him with a Love more defecated and pure, as well as
more intense and elevated; than we can who are so far beneath them in the
quality of our Nature, and whose Understandings are still so much benighted
with ignorance and obnubilated with the vapors of Lust, and whose residence is
so remote from the place of perfection as well as happiness. I do not determine
whether their happiness be improved, and their perseverance in holiness secured
by Jesus Christ; though if so, there is a field of occasion and Motives to
promote and exalt their love to him, arises thence. But declining to define
any thing in that matter, there are enforcements enough besides, by which their
sallies of Love to the Lord Jesus are allured and charmed forth. For 1st.
Whatsoever they do, or have received from the exuberant goodness and pregnant
fecundity of their Creator, they have it all by and from the (...) the Person
of the Son as the immediate Operator and Dispenser of it. For the order of
operation in the blessed Trinity, as to external works, corresponds unto, and
follows the order of subsistence. Hence though the Fabric and Creation of
all things be ascribed to the Father as to Authority and Order, Heb. 1.1. and
to the Spirit as to disposition and ornament, Joh. 26.13. yet they are
peculiarly attributed to the Son as to immediate operation, Col. 1.15, 16, 17.
2dly. The Glory of God being the alone object of the desires of the Heavenly
Host, it cannot otherwise be, but that the honor which arises to God by the
restitution of man, through the interposure of the Son as Mediator, must
inflame those pure Spirits with love to him, through whose undertaking that
Glory is compassed and effected. Nor is the Mysterious contrivance of Man's
recovery a Theme which with a Religious curiosity they only look into, 1 Pet.
1.12. but they both celebrate this plot of Love and Wisdom with Hallelujahs,
and express their acknowledgments for the Glory which thereby redounds to their
blessed Maker, in affections resembling the description given us of their
Nature, Psalm. 104.4. to the Person of the Mediator. 3dly. Man belonging to the
same classis of Creatures, though of a different species with the Angels, the
compassion which these Courtiers of the great King bear to the sublunary part
of the Rational System, (whereof we have an evidence and instance in the joy
that possesses them upon the Conversion of a Sinner, Luke 5.10.) may be looked
upon as another incentive of their love to Christ. We being separated from the
Love of God, through the loss of the Divine Image, forfeited thereupon the
kindness and friendship of the Angels; but being restored to conformity and
favor with God by Jesus Christ, there immediately ensues an (...) a
redintegration of friendship between them and us. Nor do I question but that
the consideration, that it is by Christ that they and we are (...) reconciled
and brought into Oneness together, does help to kindle their love to him. And
as there is an adhesion of the Angels to Christ by love, so on the other hand
he embraces them with complacency and delight. For as there is nothing to be
found in them, why he should look upon them with displeasure; so the sanctity
of their Nature, and their ministering with readiness not only about his Throne,
but in the affairs wherein he employs them abroad in the World, lead him to
behold them with approbation and love. And though none of their Homages equal
his perfections whom they address their Services to, yet their faileurs being
no ways the results of an impotence contracted by sin, but the inseparable
appendants of the finiteness of their Natures, he readily accepts them. The
covering their faces with their wings, (being in testimony of their infinite
distance) is as welcome to him, and does as much oblige his Love as their
acclamations and celebration of his praise. There being then a Love-Union
betwixt Christ and the Holy Angels, I hope that I may infer from hence that the
Union between Christ and Christians is both something else and more sublime. I
cannot think that any, who have read their Bible and believe it, dare affirm,
but that besides the Oneness which we have with the Lord Jesus, through his
participating of our Nature which the Angels have no share in, but that there
is also a further Union between him and us, of which as the Angels do no ways
partake, so neither are they capable. 3dly. That the Mystical Union between
Christ and Christians consists not in a reciprocalness of Affections, may be
yet further demonstrated from this; namely, because according to that Notion of
Union, Believers are no less United to the Father than to the Son; yea, they
are United first to the Father ere to the Son. And I am apt to think that there
needs not any more to be said against an Hypothesis, but that it is pregnant with
consequences of so mischievous a tendency. Admit once Believers to be United
after the same manner to the Father, as they are to Christ, and we immediately
justle the Lord Jesus out of the place of Mediator. That there is an Union of
Love between the Father and Believers, the Gospel does every where display in
most amiable and bright colors. Hence that of the Apostle, He that dwells in
Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. As Love is the only
Attribute of the Divine Nature which is alone put to give us an Idea and Notion
of God; so to be Love, is represented after a manner peculiar to God as the
Father. The Love of the Father was the first spring and source of our recovery,
and of all the means of accomplishing and bringing it about. It was the Fathers
Love that contrived a way to recover us, when we had forfeited all right to
Happiness, and were neither careful, nor in a condition to regain it. When
there were no Motives in us to invite his Love, his Love it self was in their
room. And how great was his Love when he gave him whom he so dearly loved, for
a Ransom of those who were guilty of sin which he so greatly hated. The
transcendency of his Love, is the greatest Obstacle to the belief of it. After
that, his Love had travailed with plots of Mercy to poor Sinners, in what noble
and amusing effects did it exert it self? See Joh. 3.16. Romans 5.8. 1 John 4.9,
10. In a word, it is Love which is eminently ascribed to the Father in the
Economy of the Blessed Trinity about the Work of Man's Salvation. And this
property of his Nature, which he chose to display in the work of Redemption, he
has acted to the uttermost, whereas he did not so by his Power, which he
manifested in the Works of Creation, it being within the compass of his
Omnipotence and Exuberant Bounty to produce a World more glorious than this.
And though all this respects Gods Love of Compassion to the Elect, yet we may
hereby guess what his Love of Delight in Believers is, on whom his Love of
Goodness has compassed its designs. When his Love of Benevolence has attained
so much of its End as the renewing us in part to his Image, and the recovering
us back to our obedience, He views over with delight the births that his
compassion went with, and beholds the effects of his good Will with unspeakable
complacence. That similitude which his Love in its first consideration designed
an^ ^ntended, his Love in the second Notion of it embraces and settles its
delight upon. And that Believers do embrace the Father with a Love equal and
proportionate to that which they have for Jesus Christ, I hope I need not spend
time to prove. Besides the Allective and attractive perfections which the
illuminated Understanding discovers in both, as they partake of the same Divine
Nature and Essence, it meets with enforcing Motives of Love in the Oeconomical
actings of each, as they are represented in the Scripture, operating toward,
and about our Redemption, with different peculiarities in the manner of their
acting. How does the Father's Love, (in being the Author and Fountain of our
recovery, in his contriving the means of it, in giving his Son to be our Ransom
and Propitiation in order to the effecting it, and in pursuance of his
accepting the Sacrifice of his Death as an Atonement for sin, and a meritorious
price of sanctification, his being the Original disposer in way of Authority
and Order of all that Grace by which we are rendered meet objects of Gods
delight) inflame the souls of renewed Ones with Love to him. 4. This
Love-Union, as it terminates upon Christ from us, or, as it implies our
Affections being set upon him, is so far from being the formal Reason of our
Mystical Union, that it does suppose us already cemented to him. There can be
no true Love to Christ without a previous conformity, seeing all love includes
a supposition of likeness: Now to imagine either a resemblance between us and
Christ, without a New Nature previously formed and wrought in us, or to
conceive that there are any principles communicated to us as the ground and
matter of similitude, and yet we remain unconnected to Christ, are fancies that
the Gospel obliges us to account absurd. To apprehend a Person renewed by
Grace, and not implanted into Christ, is to bid defiance to the Gospel, and to
conceive a soul cleaving to Christ by a Love that is sincere without an
Antecedent Principle of Grace adapting and connaturalizing it, is not only to
contradict the Scripture, but to denounce War against Metaphysics, which tell
us that every Effect presupposes a cause proportioned to it. In brief, As we
are not naturally imbued with a Love to Christ, so no man will by a prevalent
Love embrace him till he be first connaturalized, attempered and brought into a
suitable habitude of mind to him. Every act supposes a Power, nor is there
hopes of Fruit where there is not a Root that can communicate sap to the
branches that are to bear it. Though the soul be the Vital Principle of all
actions and Affections, yet it is Grace that gives holy actions and affections
their constituent form. The Union which we have with Christ by love, says the
Reverend Bishop Reynolds, presupposes an Unity we have in him by Faith; Faith
is the immediate tie between Christ and a Christian, but Love a secondary Union
following upon, and grounded on the former. By Nature we are all Enemies to
Christ and his Kingdom, of the Jews mind, we will not have this Man to reign
over us; therefore till by Faith we are thoroughly persuaded of Christ's love to
us, 3. Treatise, viz. The Vanity of the Creature; the sinfulness of Sin, and
the Life of Christ, p. 480.
we can never repay love to him again. Herein is love, says the Apostle, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son, 1 John 4.10. Now
between Gods Love and ours, comes Faith to make us one with Christ.

. 12. That there ought to be nothing in Religion which is incomprehensible, or
of which we are not able to form adequate Notions, is a fancy espoused by the
Socinians. Hence it is, that though they do not wholly renounce the Gospel, yet
by designing to accommodate the mysteries of it to the Level of Humane
apprehensions, they supplant the prime Articles of it. That there are Doctrines
in the Christian Religion which our Understandings cannot fathom, seems to have
been the chief thing that influenced Celsus, Hierocles, Porphyrius, Lucian, and
other Heathen Philosophers of old, in their opposition of it. This their
upbraiding the primitive Believers for receiving things (...) with an
Irrational Faith, and their styling them (...) persons of easy belief, that
had no reason for the things which they embraced, abundantly declare. And truly
admitting the Principle which they proceeded upon, namely, that there ought not
to be any thing in Religion, but what our Intellects bear a proportion to; they
seem to me to have acted more rationally in refusing the Gospel altogether,
than those do who embrace it, and yet (...), Model the Oracles of God to their
private fancies, that so they may level the Mysteries of Christianity to our
weak and shallow capacities. That there are Mysterious Doctrines in the Gospel,
and particularly that our Union with Christ is of that Number, the Holy Ghost
who should best know the complexion of every truth in it, has plainly informed
us. We are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; This is a great
Mystery says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.30.32. Mr. Sherlock, who seems to judge all
such things foolish and fanciful Notions which men cannot fully conceive and
comprehend, is pleased to tell us, that there is nothing more easy to be
understood than our Union and Communion with Christ; p. 197.
but how he can reconcile himself to Paul, unless great Mysteries be of easy
conception and comprehension, I know not. It Is true, he has taken care to
present us with such a Notion of Believers Union with Christ, as may be
understood on this side Heaven, and without sending for Elias to unriddle it,
p. 195.
that I may use his own expression. Now what that Notion is, and whether it
fully answer the account which the Scripture gives us in the Matter of
Christians Union with the Lord Jesus, is that which we are now addressing to
the ventilation of. And that neither he, nor others may think themselves
imposed upon, I shall represent his apprehensions of it in his own words. p.
142.
Those Metaphors, says he, which describe the Relation and Union betwixt Christ
and Christians, do primarily refer to the Christian Church, not to every
individual Christian: The Union of particular Christians to Christ, is by means
of their Union to the Christian Church. The Church is the Body of Christ, p.
143.
and every Christian by being United to this Body, becomes a Member of Christ.
The Union of particular Christians to Christ, consists in their Union to the
Christian Church; p. 144.
and our Union with the Christian Church, is the Medium of our Union to Christ.
p. 149.
Those Phrases and Metaphors which represent our Union with Christ, signify our
visible Society with the Christian Church, and our sincere practice of the
Christian Religion. Now this Union (says he) between Christ and the Christian
Church is a Political Union, that is, such an Union as is between a Prince and
his Subjects: Christ is a Spiritual King, and all Christians are his Subjects;
and our Union to Christ, p. 156.
consists in our Belief of his Revelations, Obedience to his Laws, and
Subjection to his Authority. Fellowship and Communion with God, according to
the Scripture Notion, signifies what we call a Political Union, that is, that
to be in Fellowship with God and Christ, p. 186.
signifies to be of that Society which puts us into a peculiar Relation to God.
This is the account that Mr. Sherlock is pleased to afford us concerning the
Union of Believers to Christ; and were this a true report and description of
it, it cease to be Mysterious, nor needs the perfect knowledge of it be
reserved to the next world, p. 147.
or the coming of Elias, that I may again usurp our Authors phrase. He seems
very careful that there should be nothing left Mysteririous in the Christian
Religion, nor does the Term Mystical please him, being, as he tells us, p. 197.
a hard word. Only I wish that under pretense of wariness and caution, there be
not any thing in the Gospel acknowledged of arduous conception, he did not lay
a foundation of going soberly to destroy Christianity.

Now in the examining Mr. Sherlocks Notion of the Union of Christ with
Believers, I reckon it necessary before I address to the disproof of what I
dislike in his opinion, to declare what I own to be true in the matter of a
Political Union between Christ and Christians. First then, That Christ is the
Political Head of his Church we readily grant, nor is it denied by any, so far
as I know, that profess themselves Christians. The very espousing the
Profession of the Christian Religion includes an acknowledgment of Christ's
being our Supreme Legislatour and Governor, and that we are to be subject to
his Authority, and obedient to his Commands. A Right of Erecting, Governing,
and protecting the Church, is delegated to, and vested in him. And as he in the
discharge of this Regal Office wherewithal he is entrusted, has enacted Laws,
appointed Ordinances, and ordained Officers for the Government of his Church;
so we by our submission to them do acknowledge his Authority, and make
profession of our subjection to him as our Lord and King, and therereupon may
be said to be related to Him as our Political Head. All that own the name of
Christians are thus far agreed, for though the Papists interpose another
immediate ruling Head between Christ and the Catholic Church, yet as they
acknowledge Christ to be the only Head of Vital Influence to the Church
Regenerate, so they confess Him to be the only supreme Governing Head of the
Universal Church. But as their Notion of a Vicarious, Political Head over the
whole Church, is both destitute of all countenance from the Scripture, and
repugnant to it; so no one is capable of enacting Laws for the Universal
Church, nor of seeing them executed; nor has the Catholic Church ever
acknowledged such a constitutive Imperant Head, what ever some part of it may
have done. Upon this account especially, we judge the Pope to be (...) the
Antichrist, and (...) (...), The Opposer, who exalts himself above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God, sits in the Temple
of God, showing himself that he is God; because he usurpeth the Headship over
the Church of Christ as to Legislation, Judgment, and Execution; dispensing
with Christ's Laws and enacting his own. He challenges a peerage with Jesus
Christ as to Legislative Power and Headship over the Universal Church, which is
no less than to storm his Throne, and Usurp his Scepter. The claym of the Roman
See is great, but their Allegations to justify it are wholly precatious. And
when Jesus Christ appears to vindicate his Supreme Authority from the invasions
which Usurpers have made upon his Dignity, the counterfeiting the broad Seal of
Heaven, and the suborning Scripture to supplant Christ's Throne, will prove a
Crime unanswerable. I shall only add in reference to this particular I have
been discoursing, that no verbal profession of being a Christian, unless it be
accompanied with a belief of the Revelations, and an Obedience to the Laws of
Christ can de Jure entitle us amongst his Subjects.

Secondly: As a visible profession of subjection to Christ, testified in the
belief of what he has revealed, and in the obedience of what he has
commanded, is the foundation of this political Union between Christ and his
Church; so we do hereby become politically united one to another, and are
denominated Members of Christ's Catholic Visible Church. For as the Profession
of the Gospel in the belief of its Doctrines, and an avowed subjection to its
Laws, is the constituent form of the Church as Visible, and the formal reason
of its obtaining that appellation; so all that profess the Invocation of the
Name of the Lord Jesus, their Lord and ours, 1 Cor. 7.2. do hereby belong to
Christ's Catholic Church Visible, and become Politically united as Subjects of
the same Legislator and King. In the profession of the same Lord, Faith and
Baptism does the Union of the Church under the consideration of Catholic and
Visible consist, and as the Subjects of one and the same Temporal Prince,
become politically United together, by their being in subjection to the
Authority of the same supreme, civil Ruler, and governed by the same Laws; so
may all Christians be said upon a parallel account to be politically united one
with another. And here upon the one hand, as Christ has not made our Right to
a room and membership in the Catholic Church to depend upon a formal belief of
every thing that he has revealed, though every thing that Christ has revealed
ought to be believed when it appears that he has revealed it: so upon the
other hand, there are some Doctrines the explicit belief of which is necessary
to the having a place in the Universal Church; a Church being nothing else but
a company of men owning the Authority of Jesus Christ as Lord and King, and
agreeing in the faith of such Doctrines as he has made Salvation dependent
upon. As we do not outwardly hold the Head, nor declare our subjection to
Christ as our Lawgiver and Ruler, but by a belief of those things which he
has made the Essentials and Fundamentals of the Christian Religion; so we have
no Right of Matriculation into the Church Catholick-visible, nor have we any
Union with the Members of it, but through a belief of these common radical
principles. These are what we commonly call Fundamental Articles, which as I
shall not take upon me to enumerate, being neither necessary, nor, may be,
convenient; so they are in themselves both few and plain. Only as the Romanists
are injurious to Christ, and uncharitable to men in confining Christianity
within the Circle of their own communion, and making the Roman and Catholic
Church Terms Equipollent; so they are both unreasonable and ridiculous in
making the Unity of the Universal Church to consist in the belief of all that
they have thought fit to determine necessary to be believed. For, besides many
other things pleadable against this Romish Foundation of the Unity of the
Universal Christian Church, and the Relative Politic Union of one member with
the rest; it renders the Unity of the Church, and the Union of Christians one
with another, first, impossible, and secondly, absurd. Impossible in that most
Men can neither allow time, nor have they sufficient acquired intellectual
abilities* either to know what the Roman Church has defined necessary to be
believed, nor in what sense she has proposed and determined them to be
assented to. Absurd, (1) Because a man must believe contradictions before he
can be a member of the Catholic Church, or have any Union or Communion with
Christians; That is, he must renounce Reason before he is capable of having
Faith; and divest himself of Man before he can espouse Christian. And the
reason is plain, because the Romish Church has defined things to be believed
that are repugnant one to another. (2.) Because what serves to matriculate a
person into the Church of Christ, and to give him the Relation of an Oneness
with all Christians this year, may not be sufficient to secure and continue his
Union and Relation the next, but that without alteration or change in his
belief, he may cease to be a Member of the Catholic Church. For the Church may
in that compass of time determine something necessary to be believed,
concerning which before she had not pronounced. But to resume what I was upon,
as there is through our subjection to Christ by the belief of his Doctrine and
obedience of his Laws, a Political Union betwixt Christ and Christians; so I
see nothing to the contrary, but that all Christians may in the virtue of their
common Faith and Obedience be accounted united amongst themselves. I shall not
here discourse the reciprocal and mutual duties which we come under the
obligation of by this Relation, but as they are many and great, so were they
attended to, a check would be given to that wrath and bitterness which is
amongst Christians, and a stop put to that war and persecution which one wageth
against another. Neither shall I here discourse the Nature and Measures of a
particular Church with the foundation and media which ground the Relation of
one to another in it; but shall only say this, that though admission into an
instituted particular Church presupposes whatsoever was necessary to entitle
us to a Membership in the Church-Catholick, yet there are both diverse things
required in order to the latter, which were not so in reference to the former,
and diverse fresh duties emerge from this posterior Relation, beyond what we
were obliged to by the precedent.

Having briefly treated these things which ought not to be denied, and showed
my self as liberal to our Author as without trespassing upon my light I can: I
come now to discourse those things wherein our Author differs from the general
sense of Christians, and the common opinion of the Universal Church. And the
first conclusion which I propose in opposition to the Hypothesis that Mr.
Sherlock has erected, is this, That were the Union of particular Believers
with Christ only a Political Relation, yet it were immediate to the Person of
Christ. Let our Relation to Christ, which is styled by the name of Union, be
whatsoever our Author pleases to make it, yet it is not the Church that we are
primarily united to, nor does our Union terminate there, nor is it merely by
means thereof, that we are brought into a cohesion with the Lord Jesus. This,
if justified, overthrows Mr. Sherlocks two first Conclusions, which indeed are
but one in import, though obtruded upon us for two. For to say that those
Metaphors which describe the Relation and Union betwixt Christ and Christians,
p. 142, 143.
do primarily refer to the Christian Church, and not to every Individual
Christian, which is Mr. Sherlock's first conclusion; and to say that the Union
of particular Christians to Christ, p. 143, 144.
is by means of their Union to the Christian Church; which is his second
Conclusion, are in my opinion, things coincident. The same Metaphors which
describe the Relation and Union of Christ with Christians, do also display the
Relation and Union of Christians with Christ; and if the Union betwixt Christ
and Christians does primarily refer to the Christian Church, the Union of
particular Christians with Christ can result from no other Medium, nor bear
upon any other foundation but the Union with the Christian Church. I should not
bestow remarks upon the ridiculous and impertinent Battologies of our Author,
nor sally out into reflections upon what merely favors of dullness and
hebetude, but that it may not be amiss to inform the World how undeservedly Mr.
Sherlock has obtained the name of an accurate Writer, and if it be possible,
to give check to his briskness in Descanting upon the Writings of others. For
he may remember what a reflection he has cast upon Dr. Jacomb, merely for
converting a Proposition, and saying, That the person of the Believer is United
to the Person of Christ, having before said (though not so as to make it a
different conclusion) That the Person of Christ is United to the person of the
Believer. See p. 198.
But to return to the proof of the Assertion which I have advanced in
contradiction to Mr. Sherlocks Notion of our being United to Christ only by our
Union and Fellowship with the Christian Church. 1. If particular Christians be
United to Christ only by virtue of a previous Relation to the Church, I would
then fain know of Mr. Sherlock how the whole Church comes to be united to the
Lord Jesus? For I suppose it will not be denied but that there is a Relation of
Oneness between Him and the Church; and if any should be so perverse, and of so
unreasonable a humor as to question it, there are Media enough to evince it,
though obstinate persons and such as maintain Tenets in despite of evidence to
the contrary, may not be convinced by them. It Is the Church in its full
latitude and extent that is eminently Christ's Body and his Spouse, and it is his
Body and Spouse that he is conjoined and married to. Now for any one to say
that he is united to the Church by the vincula that are between him and
Individual Believers, is to run himself into the absurdity which we commonly
call a circle. For if the copula of particular Christians to Christ be their
Society and Fellowship with the Christian Church, and if the vinculum between
Christ and the Church be through the cohesion of particular Believers to
Christ, there is no remedy but that our Author must be entangled in a circle,
or else there is no such thing in the World as circular defining and
discoursing. And to say that Christ is united to the Church by the Churches
belief of his Revelations and Obedience to his Laws, is but instead of loosing
the knot to tie it faster. For the Church being an Aggregate Body of Believers,
she can no other ways embrace the Revelations of the Gospel, or yield obedience
to its commands, but in the virtue of what her particular constituent Members
do. 2. That our Union with Christ, even supposing it a mere Political Relation,
should be by the means of our Union with the Christian Church, is repugnant to
that conception and idea which we have of the Church. For the Church
Catholick-Visible (and much more particular instituted Churches) being nothing
else but the Collective Body of Christians, it naturally follows that they must
in priority of Nature be Christians before they can any ways belong to the
Church. Now to suppose them Christians (I speak of adult persons) without their
previous owning the Authority of Jesus Christ through a belief of his
Doctrines, and a professed subjection to his Laws, is an absurd and
self-contradictious Imagination. 3. If the Apostles were immediately United to
Christ without any Antecedent Relation to the Christian Church, I see no cause
why every Individual Christian ought not to be held united to Him in the same
manner that they were. For the Apostles being united to Christ under the formal
consideration of their being Christians, and not under the reduplication of
their being Apostles, it follows by a short and easy train of ratiocination,
that all who have a right to the denomination of Christians, are united by the
same Bond, and stand in the same immediateness of conjunction with Christ, that
they were. Yea, Paul has said enough to set this beyond all suspect, in that
speaking of the Body of Christ, he reckons the Apostles in the classis of
Members with other Believers; 1 Cor. 12.27, 28. Now that the Apostles were not
united to Christ by the Mediation of any Antecedent Relation to the Christian
Church, but that their Relation of Oneness with Him was immediate, there be
unanswerable Arguments at hand to demonstrate. But I shall only mention one,
namely, there was no Christian Church pre-existent to them, into whose Society
and Fellowship they could be admitted. I have thus far discoursed these things
with Mr. Sherlock, taking the church for the universal Catholic Visible
Church, which is the most favorable acceptance to befriend the Notion of our
being united to Christ by the means of Union to the Christian Church, that it is
capable of. And this acceptance of the Church, as our communion with it is the
Medium and Bond of our Union with Christ* Mr. Sherlock finds himself in some
cases necessitated to retreat to. If, says he, there be no Visible Society of
Christians professing the Faith of christ, p. 165.
and living in Communion with each other (as it may happen in times of
persecution, or some great degeneracy of the Church) our Union to Christ then
consists in an acknowledgment of his Authority and Subjection to his Laws,
which makes us Members of the Universal Church, though there be no particular
Church to communicate with. Now if the Notion of Union with Christ by the
Medium of a previous Interest in the Catholic Visible Church, be not
defensible; much less is it maintainable on the Hypothesis of an Union with a
particular Church, as the Vinculum and Foundation of it. And yet most of our
Authors discourse is framed in countenance of this; namely, that Individual
Christians are not united to Christ, but by means of their Union to some
particular Church. Hence we are told that we cannot be United to Christ, p.
163, 164.
that is, cannot own his Authority and Government till we unite our selves to
the public Societies of Christians, and submit to the public Instructions,
Authority and Discipline of the Church. And this is made the motive and ground
of our living in the Communion of the Church where Providence has cast us, so
long as she submits to the Laws of Christ, and acknowledges his Authority,
because, p. 165, 166.
as our Author says, this Unites us to Christ. Mr. Sherlock, so far as I am
able to conjecture, was not at leisure to think what was most serviceable to
the Hypothesis he had espoused, or what was most disserviceable to it. All
Immediate Union of particular Christians with Christ, save by means of their
union with the Christian Church he was resolved to deny, but in what sense the
Church was to be taken, by Communion with which, we come to be copulated with
Jesus Christ, he durst not determine. At one time it is by our being Members of
the Universal Church; at another it is by our Fellowship with such a Church as
is under the conduct of Bishops and Pastors, p. 165.
whose Members are in regular subjection to their spiritual Guides and Rulers,
p. 163.165.
and live in concord and Unity amongst themselves, and in a mutual discharge of
all Christian Offices. But that Communion with a particular Church cannot be
the Medium of a Christians Union with Christ, I come under the influence and
command of these Reasons to believe. 1. There may be some Individual
Christians, where there is no particular Instituted Church of Christ into which
they can be admitted. Nor may this only be supposed, but there are diverse
instances in Ecclesiastical story to evince it. Yea, there can be no particular
Church without the pre-existence of Individual Believers; seeing it is of such
that every particular Church is constituted and formed. We may as well build a
House without pre-existent Materials, as erect a particular Church without
Believers to constitute it of. There must be living stones, of which this
Temple of God is built and framed. The being Saints through the effectual
Vocation and renewing of the Holy Ghost, is the first ground presupposed by the
Apostles, in their adscription of the Name and Title of Church to any. Nor are
the Duties required of those that stand in a particular Church Relation,
possible to be performed but by such as are sincere Christians. 2. Christians
in the very Virtue, and upon the alone Motive of their being Believers, may be
obliged, and that upon no meaner inducements than their Loyalty to Christ, to
renounce Communion, not only with the particular Church with which they have
walked, but to suspend Fellowship with any particular Church that lies within
the circle and compass of their knowledge. If any Church shall so degenerate as
to forsake the common Faith, it becomes the duty of every honest Christian to
forsake that Church, and renounce all external communion with her. And yet I
hope it will not be said that the Person so acting, cease to be united to
Christ, there being no greater evidence of his Union with the Lord Jesus, than
his disclayming fellowship with those who had revolted from the Faith of the
Gospel. 3. Christians may be injuriously cast out of the Communion, not only of
one, but of every particular Church, and yet remain united to Christ; and
consequently their union with a particular Church cannot be the Bond of their
cohesion to Him. Our Blessed Lord has predicted it to be the Fate sometimes of
Believers, to be so entertained: and has accordingly advised his Disciples to
expect it as their lot, and to resent it as their honor, to be cast out and
separated for the Son of man's sake, Luke 6.22. The Term (...), rendered, they
shall separate you, is of the same import with (...), Joh. 16.2. Yea, it may
fall out, that a person may be justly secluded for a time from communion with
any particular Church, and yet his union with Christ not be dissolved. A
scandalous sin in a Professor, providing the party offending give not evidence
of his sincere Repentance, is foundation enough for the Church to proceed to
such a censure; (yea, the maintaining her own Dignity and Honor, and the
making Christianity appear to be a Doctrine of exact purity; and that the
Christian Religion (as Celsus and Julian reproached it) does not allow impunity
to Criminals, obliges her to it) and yet it will be unsafe to pronounce of
every person that is the Object of those censures, that he cease to be a
Christian, or that all his union with Christ is interrupted and dissolved. 4.
Our union with a particular Church being the Medium of our Union with Christ,
is an assertion so remote from all truth, that on the contrary none are to be
received under the Notion of Members into a particular Church, but upon a
presumption that Christ has first received them. Without previous grounds of
judging men to be Believers, we are not only destitute of all warranty to admit
them, but we are obliged by the Laws of the Gospel, yea, by principles of
Reason, considering the Nature of the Society, not to do it. A Church being a
Spiritual Corporation wherein Privileges are to be enjoyed upon Terms
antecedently required, and these Terms being at least the acknowledgment of
Christ's Authority through a belief of his Doctrines, and a professed subjection
to his Laws (which is the Notion and Idea of a Political Union with him) to
suppose our Union with a particular Church, to be the foundation and ground of
the Relation of Oneness with Christ, involveth no less than a Contradiction. 5.
It Is a persons submitting himself to the Laws and Authority of Christ (which is
that wherein Mr. Sherlock himself stateth the Political Union of Christians
with Christ to consist) that swayeth and influenceth him to submit himself to
Pasto^s and Teachers, and to join with others in the Fellowship of the Gospel;
and by consequence, our Union with a particular Church, is so far from being
the Bond of our Union with the Lord Jesus, that on the contrary our Union with
Him is the Motive and inducement of our joining into Fellowship with a
particular Church, which is that we mean by Union with it. The account which
the Apostle gives us of the Churches of the Macedonians, is that they first
gave themselves to the Lord, and then unto them by the Will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5.
It was by taking upon them the observance of Christ's commands, that they found
themselves obliged to coalesce into Church-Societies. 6. I shall only add in
the last place (for it is not number, but strength of Arguments that men are
prevailed upon by) that an Imagination of our being United to Christ by the
Mediation of an Union with the Church, seems to have been the foundation of the
Papal Vicarious Political Head. Nor is this my apprehension alone, but it is the
sense also of Episcopius, a Person whose Judgment and Testimony Mr. Sherlock
will not undervalue. And to speak my inward thoughts, Hoc ipsum Papatus
paulatim, and sensim introducti fundamentum esse videtur. in 1 Joan. cap. 1. v.
2, 3* 4.
it is all he says to purpose upon this Theme, (though he undertake to treat it
with some industry,) being in this, as in most other particulars, rather florid
than nervous. Besides a brisk air that displays it self in his manner of
handling things, there is little solid, or beyond what is vulgar and common in
him. But to return, into this supposition that Christ is not the immedidiate
Political Head of his Church, is the substitution of an Universal Vicarious
Head resolved. And to do the Papists right, if Believers, even in a Political
sense be not immediately united to Christ; it is more congruous to Reason to
establish one Vicarious Catholic Visible Head, than five thousand. And though
upon the supposition that there is such a Head, the Pope may fail in his claym
to it, yet I see not, but that if the honor and privilege of it be refused
him, some one or other must have the credit of it. Thus admitting that were all
the Union which intercedes between Christ and Believers, merely such a
Political Relation as is between a Prince and his Subjects; yet I hope I have
proved that our Union with Christ is nevertheless immediate. I am sure, the
King of England, through his governing his Subjects by subordinate Officers
delegated to Rule by his Authority, does not cease to be an Immediate Head to
all his Subjects, and to every Individual person amongst them. There remains
only before I advance to the second Conclusion, some exceptions of our Author
to be taken notice of. And upon a survey of what he has mustered in the behalf
of his Hypothesis, I cannot but ascribe to him a faculty of pressing any thing
that comes in his way to fight for him. Nor shall I here only rescue some Texts
of Scripture, and some received Doctrines from the rape which our Author has
committed upon them, and from that involuntary service into which they are
compelled, but I shall endeavor to defeat his cause by them. p. 142, 143.
The 1st. is drawn from the Metaphors which describe the Relation and Union
between Christ and Christians, which says he, do primarily refer to the
Christian Church, and not to every Individual Christian. Thus Christ is called
a Head, but he is the Head of his Church, which is his Body, as the Husband is
the head of the Wife, Ephesians. 5.23, 24. No particular Christian is the Body of
Christ, but only a Member in his Body. Christ is called a Husband, but then the
whole Church, or Society of Christians, not every particular Christian is his
Spouse, as St. Paul tells the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.2. Christ is a
Shepherd, and the Christian Church is his Flock, Joh. 10. For the Relation
between a Shepherd and Sheep, does primarily concern the whole Flock: Christ is
the Rock upon which his Church is built, the chief corner stone, and the
Christian Church a Holy Temple; so that all those Metaphors in their first and
proper use, refer to the whole Society of Christians, and are designed to
represent the Union between Christ and his Church. To this I answer, 1. That
were this discourse of our Author framed into a Syllogism, the incongruity
between the conclusion and the premises would easily appear. For example,
Christ is the Head of his Church, Ergo, no particular Believer is united to
him, but by means of their Uinion with the Church I deny the consequent;
surely, though the King be Immediate Head to the whole Kingdom, yet he is also
Immediate Head to every Individual person in it. Mr. Sherlocks Logic is like
that of Chrysippus which men were too dull to understand, though they say the
Gods would have used it. 2. The Church and its Individual Members being of an
homogeneous Nature, whatsoever is predicated essentially of the whole is
equally predicable of every part. 3. The Holy Ghost plainly affirms that it is
between Christ and the Church, as it is between the Head and Members of the
same Natural Body. And therefore, as not only the whole Body has influence in
the disposal of it self, and in the discharge of its Functions from the Head,
but also every particular Member has influences of life and strength from
thence; so Christ is not only an Immediate Head of Direction and Rule to the
whole Church, but to every Individual Believer in it. Whatever the Habitude of
Pastors and Teachers be to their particular Churches to which they are related,
and to the Members of which these Churches are constituted, yet it is to the
Word of God as the Rule of conduct, by which Christ under the Notion of a
Political Head governs his Church, that every Individual Believer is to attend.
4. Though our Author informs us, that he has almost pored out his eyes in
searching the Scripture in order to his being enlightened about this and some
other Notions, p. 40.
yet I must take leave either to question the matter of Fact, or to suspect
that his sight was not good before, or that his visible Faculty was strangely
tinctured. For the Apostle, whose Authority and Testimony may I hope be allowed
to rival Mr. Sherlocks, tells us, that as the whole Church is Christ's Body, so
we are all Members in particular of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. and that the whole
Body is joined to Christ by the conjunction which every Member has with him, 1
Cor. 12.12. And that Christ is not only a Husband to the whole Church, but that
he is so to every Christian, appears by this, seeing not only the particular
Church of Corinth is said to be Espoused to Him, 2 Cor. 11.2. but every
Individual Believer among the Romans is also represented as Married to him,
Romans 7.4. Neither do they only report him to be the Foundation, Rock, and
corner Stone of the Church taken Collectively, but likewise in its distributive
acceptance, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Thus having not only defeated
the strength and force of his first objection, but improved the Medium from
which he musters it, to subvert the cause in whose defense it was brought; I
proceed now to the second. That the Union of particular Christians with Christ,
consists in their Union with the Christian Church, the Sacraments which our
Savior has instituted as Symbols of our Union with him, are, says he, a plain
demonstration. p. 153, 154.
Our first undertaking of Christianity is represented in our Baptism, wherein
we make a public profession of our Faith in Christ; and it is sufficiently
known that Baptism is the Sacrament of our admission into the Christian Church,
etc. Thus the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of Union, and signifies the near
Conjunction that is between Christ and the Christian Church, and the mutual
Fellowship of one Christian with another, etc. For answer, whether the
Sacraments import any more than a Political Union between Christ and Believers,
I shall wave till anon, and only consider them at present as brought in proof
of Christians being united to Christ by means of their Union with the Christian
Church. And truly if these be the weapons with which Mr. Sherlock thinks to
captivate and subdue the minds of men to espouse his Notion, he must either
only encounter those that court their own Bondage, or there will be few found
following the Chariot wheels of our Hero. Instead of any slaughter he is like
to make amongst the Non-conformists by these Forces, he only wounds himself,
and overthrows his own cause by them. And first, as to the Argument drawn from
Baptism, I reply these four things. 1. Baptism is neither the Medium of our
Union with the Catholic Visible Church, nor that by which we formally become
Members of a particular Instituted Church. Not the latter, seeing it is not
only possible that a Person may be Baptized where there are not enough to form
an Instituted particular Church, but it may be sometimes found necessary to
deny the Privilege of Membership in an Instituted even to such as have been
Baptized. Yea, before any particular Churches were erected, there were Baptized
Christians, it being of such that the first Christian Churches were
constituted. Not the Former, forasmuch as a Person may be of the Universal
Visible Church, and yet not be Baptized. Nor is this a Chimaerical Imagination,
for there have been many who (partly through want of opportunity to enjoy the
Ordinance of Baptism, partly upon other Motives, though they are not
justifiable) have denied themselves the Mercy of the Baptismal Laver; and yet
to suppose that thereupon they are not Christians, is to renounce all exercise
of Charity, and to involve our selves under the guilt of condemning those whom
the Lord has received. 2. Were Baptism as well the Medium, as the Symbol of
our Union with the Christian Church, yet it does not follow that we are only
United to Christ by means of our Union with the Church. And the reason is
plain, seeing none ought to be admitted to Baptism (I speak of adult persons)
but such who are antecedently judged to be Christians, Act. 8.37. Now to reckon
any one a Christian, who does not beforehand own the Authority of Jesus Christ
in the belief of his Doctrines, and an avowed subjection to his Laws, (which is
the Bond of our Political Union) is no less than a contradiction. 3. Our owning
the Authority of Christ, which is the Vinculum of our Political Union with him,
being presupposed, our submitting to the Ordinance and Institution of Baptism
is a visible profession of it. It Is not enough that we are persuaded of the
Truth of the Christian Religion, and that we secretly embrace it, but we are
publicly to own it, and to tell the World that we are of such a Belief. As
Baptism presupposes Repentance, which respects our turning to God as our End,
and Faith which implye's our owning Christ as our Way; so our being Baptized
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is a solemn declaring to the
world our coming to God by Jesus Christ, through the Sanctification, Influence,
and Conduct of the Spirit. Nor is our naked promise so Authentic, as when we
publicly seal to the Articles required of us. It Is both a Badg and Symbol of
our profession, and a Bond and Obligation upon us to discharge the Duties which
our profession of Christianity calls us to. Hence it is called an Answer
toward God, which as it supposes the demands of the Covenant, so it proclayms
our undertaking to perform them. 4. The Union of the Catholic Visible Church,
consisting in a joint profession of the same Lord, Faith, and Baptism, there
does therefore, upon a Persons submitting to the Ordinance of Baptism, such a
Relation to the whole Catholic Visible Church emerge, as that he is rendered a
complete Member of the Church under the consideration of Catholic Visible. By
this, as by a solemn Rite, we become visibly separated from the World, and
enrolled amongst those who have consigned over and consecrated themselves unto
the service and obedience of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So far is our Union
with the Visible Church by means of Baptism, from being the Medium of our Union
with Christ, that it is our dedicating our selves to Christ by this August
ceremony which constitutes us complete Members of the Church under the Notion
of Visible. Secondly: As to the Argument Levied from the Lords Supper, I reply
these things. 1. The Supper of the Lord, though a Sacrament of Union, yet it
cannot be the first Medium of our Union with the Church, seeing none have a
right to it, but such as are already Church Members. Men are first to approve
themselves sincere Christians, before they are to approach the Holy Table. Only
those that have Fellowship with God in Christ, have a title of participating at
this Christian Eucharistical Feast. Much less is it the Medium of our Political
Union with Christ, it being only through a previous subjection of our
Consciences to his Authority, that we celebrate this Ordinance. 2. As by
Baptism, we publicly avow our taking upon us the profession of Christianity,
so by the Lords Supper we ratify our perseverance, and renew our engagements of
being the Lords. By coming to his Table, we proclaym our selves of his Famimy,
and declare our resolution of continuing to be his Followers and Retainers.
It Is a profession of our being in Covenant with him, and that we will remain
constant and faithful in it. 3. Though, as I have already said, it can neither
be the Medium of our Union with the Church, nor with Christ, yet it is both a
Symbol of the one and the other. It Is an eminent badge of that Union, which is,
and ought to be among Christians. Our eating at the same Table, is an argument
of our being of one and the same Family. Forasmuch as we all eat of one Loaf,
(that is the meaning of (...) 1 Cor. 10.17.) we do thereby intimate that we are
one Body, and Members of the same Christ. Yet at such a distance does this lie
from evincing our Union with Christ to be by means of our union with the
Church, that indeed nothing else than an Antecedent union with Christ, can give
us a Right to partake of this Sacred Supper, or of Fellowship and Communion
with the Church in it. Thus the Reader may see that even on the supposition
that our Union with Christ is merely a Political Union, or such a Relation only
as is between a Prince and his Subjects, yet, that it is immediate, and not by
the means of an Antecedent Relation to the Christian Church.

Having then dispatched the first thing which I laid down in opposition to Mr.
Sherlocks Hypothesis; That wherein my concernment next lies, is to prove that
the Union between Christ and Christians is not merely Political. And if I be
but able to acquit my self in this undertaking, the whole of Mr. Sherlocks
Notion in reference to the Union of Christ to Christians, is subverted and
overthrown. And it being here that we have our Authors most Heroic Adventures,
and where especially he seems to speak as standing on his Tiptoes, it is but
fit that he should be the more peculiarly attended to. In opposition therefore
to his Assertion, that the Union of Christians with Christ is only a Political
Union, that is such an Union as is between a Prince and his Subjects; p. 56.
I Advance this Antithesis, that a Political Relation does not adequately
express that Oneness which the Scripture so augustly celebrates as interceding
betwixt Christ and Believers. This directly contradicts Mr. Sherlocks third and
fourth Conclusions, which indeed are coincident. For to affirm that the Union
betwixt Christ and the Christian Church is a Political Union, that is, such an
Union as is between a Prince and his Subjects, p. 156.
which is his third proposition; and to say that our Fellowship and Communion
with God, according to the Scripture-Notion, p. 186.
signifies what we call a Potical Union, which is his fourth, are according to
the best understanding of Enunciations I have, coincident and equipollent
propositions. Now in discoursing this, we are to take all our measures from the
Scripture, and to regulate our conceptions by it alone. For this Union between
Christ and Christians is one of those Mysteries which no Ideas congenite with
us, nor objective discoveries in the works of Creation and Providence could
have conducted us to the knowledge of. It Is a Truth which our Intellectual
Faculties in their Immediate exercise could never have discerned, nor has it
any connection with the things which we naturally know, to be collected and
deduced from them. Though by attending to Revelation we may come to frame an
intelligible Notion of it, yet as it is considered in it self, and with
reference to other Doctrines of Faith, on which it depends, we could never have
formed any apprehensions of it, if the Gospel had not previously declared and
revealed it. Now the first Argument in proof that our Union with Christ is more
than Political, shall be levied from those Symbolick Metaphors, and Terrene
Figures and Images by which the Holy Ghost is pleased to express it. I have in
the fore going Chapter assigned this as one Reason among others, why God, who
does all things in Infinite Wisdom, declares the Mysteries of Faith under
Earthly Parables and Symbols, namely, that Spiritual Things which lie remote
from our Understandings, may be rendered more easy and familiar for our minds
to contemplate, and that our Faith concerning them may be promoted and assisted
by their being represented to us under obvious and sensible Images. We have
also elsewhere intimated that where the Terms are Metaphorick, yet the Truths
intended and expressed by them are Real. And as to that which we are now upon,
it is highly remarkable, that there being no one kind of Union in Nature which
serves fully to illustrate the Union betwixt Christ and Christians, that
therefore the Holy Ghost has sought to enlighten it by Similitudes and
Resemblances transferred and borrowed from all sorts of Unions. For, as
Chrysostom well observes, (...), Christ Unites us to himself by many paterns.
Hom. 8. in 1 Cor.
And it is worth taking notice of, that having given us a List and Collection
of some of them, he shuts up the whole with this, (...), all these things
declare an Union between Christ and Believers, and such an one as will not
admit the least thing to come between them. Had our Oneness with Christ been
only represented by the Relation between a Shepherd and Sheep, the Conjunction
between a Husband and Wife, or the habitude between a Prince and his Subjects,
there might have been some probability in Mr. Sherlocks Notion: but being also
represented by resemblances drawn from Natural and Artificial Union; as the
Insition of branches into their root, the copulation of Members to their Vital
Head, the incorporation of concocted Food, with our pre-existent Flesh, the
cohesion of a building by a strong cement to its Foundation, and the
confederation of the Vital Soul with the Organick Body: There must be a
sublimer kind of Union between Christ and Christians, than merely what a
Political Relation does import. Christ is the Vine, we are the Branches; He is
the Vital Head, we the enlivened Members; He is the Living Foundation Stone, to
whom we as lively Stones are cemented. I may confidently say that there is not
any Analogy between what is originally signified by these Metaphors and the
thing aimed at and designed by them, if only a Political Relation between
Christ and Christians is to be understood. The Gospel-Method and Form is the
most obscure and improper way in the World of teaching the Truth of things, if
all these Tropical phrases imply no more but that Christians acknowledge Christ
for their Legislator, and obey him as their Sovereign. Grand expressions, and
magnificent Terms in Subjects that require Low, are an argument of no great
discretion in a common Author. And to imagine that in the Scripture petty
things should be declared in Forms that are august, lofty, and Emphatical, is
to think diminutively of the divine Wisdom. In a word, if there be no more
intended under all those Symbolick expressions which we have mentioned, but
that Believers own the Authority of Jesus Christ by believing his Doctrines,
and submitting to his Laws, then we wonderfully expose the Gospel to contempt,
by telling the World that under a grandeur of words and Hyperbolical
expressions, things of a mean and low sense are to be apprehended and
conceived. I shall only urge this from two other Pattern Unions, to which the
Scripture in the shadowing forth and illustrating the Oneness between Christ
and Christians, signally alludes. The first of these Symbolical Unions, is that
of the association and adhesion of the component particles and corpuscles of
Meal, of which a Loaf is kneaded and compacted. For as the Apostle says, (...),
Seeing it is one Loaf of which we partake, we are therefore one Body (viz. in
Christ) who participate of that one Loaf, Non dicit Paulus fideles unum esse
panem, sed ab uno pane ducit similitudinem, Dissert. de Miss. cap. 3.

Quoniam unus est panis, unum corpus nos illi multi sumus: Nos enim ex uno illo
pane participamus: Bez. in Loc.


1 Cor. 10.17. Picherellus well observes, that Paul does not say, we are One
Loaf or Bread (though our Translation render it so) but that he argues from the
coalition, of the clusters of the small corpuscles of Meal, of which a Loaf is
kneaded and contexed, to the identity and Oneness that intervenes between
Christ and Believers. And accordingly Beza translates it, As the Loaf of which
we all eat is one, so we partaking of that One Loaf, although we be many, are
but One Body to Christ. Thus also Chrysostom paraphraseth it, (...), etc. What
is that Loaf? It is the Body of Christ, (viz. Sacramentally) what are those who
partake of it? They are the Body of Christ; not many Bodies, but One. For, as
the many grains, of which a Loaf is formed, are so convened into one Mass, that
the distinction and diversity of one from another does not appear, (...), in
the same manner are we conjoined to Christ and one another (in 1 Cor. Hom. 24.)
The cohesion of the many little parts of Flour, of which one and the same
Individual Loaf is kneaded and compacted, being that which the Apostle declares
and illustrates our conjunction with Christ by, it plainly follows that our
Conjunction to him must be of another kind, than what a bare Political Relation
does import. The second Pattern Union I shall at present argue from, is the
Oneness betwixt the Father and Son in the blessed Trinity. At that day ye shall
know, (says Christ to his Disciples) that I am in my Father, and you in me,
and I in you, Joh 1.14, 20. I pray that they all be One as thou Father art in
me, and I in thee, that they also may be One in us, etc. Joh. 17.21. I readily
grant that it is not an Oneness of Essence betwixt Christ and Christians, an
(...), or (...), as the Weigelians wildly and blasphemously imagine, that is
here to be understood. Nor does the particle (...) always signify sameness,
but is often used to denote similitude and likeness, as Matthew. 9.48. Luke 6.36.
But yet upon the other hand I deny that it is merely an (...), or an Oneness of
Will and affection between the Father and Son, as the Arians and Socinians
pretend, that is here meant. Nor indeed can there be an Oneness of Will, and an
universal Consent and Agreement in Design and Affections, where there is not
previously either a Specific, or a Numerical Oneness of Nature. An attendance
to other Texts, such as Joh. 10.30. Joh. 14. 9, 10. 1 John 5.9. where the same
phrases occurr, will best resolve us what kind of Oneness between the Father
and Son we are here to understand. And certainly, unless we will betray the
Gospel and the Faith of Christians into the hands of their worst Enemies, it is
an Essential Unity that is there meant. Now though we plead not for the same
kind of Oneness between Christ and Believers as is between the Father and Son;
yet we affirm that something more sublime than barely a Political Relation
between Him and Them is adumbrated and shadowed forth to us. It Is not a
sameness of Union between Christ and Christians, with that betwixt the Father
and Son, which the Holy Ghost intends by those expressions, only by alluding to
that incomprehensible Identity which is between the Persons of the Blessed
Trinity through a Numericalness of Nature, he would instruct us that the Union
between Christ and those that are born of God, is intimate, great and
mysterious, as well as True and Real. Before we dismiss this, we will take a
brief survey of our Authors exceptions against the conclusion deduced from the
foregoing allusive Metaphors. Christ, says he, is styled the Head of his Body
the Church, because he has the command and rule over, p. 157, 158, 159.
and is invested with Authority to Govern her, and the Church is styled the
Body of Christ, because she must be obedient to his Laws, and subject to his
Government. Now to this I reply: 1st. The Head in reference to the Natural Body
having not only an Influence upon the Members by way of Communication of Animal
Spirits, but by way of conduct and Government; accordingly I deny not but that
the Term as applied to Christ, may sometimes refer only to the last property.
There are some Texts of Scripture where the subject Matter does plainly
determine the signification of Head as predicated of Christ to refer merely to
Eminence and Rule; Particularly the 1 Cor. 11.3. is so to be understood. But
that Christ is never styled Head, save in Allusion to the property and
affection of Government which belongs to the Head in the Natural Body over the
Members, is a bold Imagination, and which never any espoused before Mr.
Sherlock, except the Socinians. All pretending to the Name of Christians, the
Enemies of the Godhead of Christ only secluded, have, besides their
acknowledging the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Political Head of the Church in
respect of Authority and Rule, owned him likewise to be a Spiritual Head in
respect of quickening Influences. 2dly. It Is received as an Universal Measure,
by which all Expositors are to Regulate their Glosses upon the sacred Text,
that whenever any thing is represented by a Metaphorick Term, all that bears
any proportion or analogy to the affections and properties of the Thing which
the Word in its Original signification does denote, ought to be understood.
Every Scripture, whether it be proper or Tropical, is to be expounded in the
greatest Latitude which the Word will bear, as we have demonstrated, cap. 1..
10. Christ being therefore to the Church what the Head is to the Members of the
Natural Body, and the Head not only giving Direction and Guidance to the Bodily
Members, but having also a vital Influx upon them; it naturally follows that
Christ is as well Head to the Church in regard of actual Influences of
Spiritual strength and life, as in respect of Guidance by Laws and Rules. Nor
is there any way to avoid this inference and sequel, unless it can be made
appear that the attribution of spiritual Influences to Christ in reference to
his Body does contradict some principle of Reason, or supplant some sacred
Truth, which I Am sure our Author has not hitherto done. 3dly. Suppose that
Christ's having the Rule and Government over the Church, were all that by
attendance to the Allusive Metaphor of his being to the Church what the Head is
to the Natural Body, could be established and enforced; yet the Holy Ghost
having, besides the accommodation of himself to our instruction in the bare and
naked usurpation of the Metaphor, extended the import of it so far as we
pretend, by a comment and paraphrase of his own which he has left us upon it,
we may reckon our selves secure in the application which we make of it. For as
if it had not been enough through the naked and bare use of that Allusive and
Metaphorick Term, to have intimated that it is between Christ and Christians,
as between the Head and Members; he has expressly informed us, as there are
communications of Spirits from the Head unto all the Members of the Body,
through the subserviency of these parts, which, by the great and wise Architect
of the Humane Fabric, are thereunto designed; that there are in like manner
supplies of spiritual life and strength from Christ to every Believe^* through
the Moral subserviency of one Christian to another in the Duties and Offices
which he has appointed. Thus the Apostle Ephesians. 4.15, 16. having styled Christ
our Head, he adds by way of defining the sense, in which he is so, from whom
the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes inerease of the Body, unto the edifying it self in love. And to the same
purpose, only more emphatically, speaks the same Apostle, Col. 2.18. And not
holding the Head, i. e. Christ, from which all the Body by joints and bands
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase
of God. If these Testimonies be not sufficient to silence the Sophistry of men,
and to level the Objections whereby our Author endeavors to supplant Christ's
being a Head of Influence, I will not say that we may despair of Understanding
the Bible; but this I will say, that by the same art that Mr. Sherlock avoyds
those, he may retain a belief of such Scripture expressions as are declarative
of any Fundamentals of Faith, and yet renounce the Truths they are designed to
reveal. I shall only here subjoyn Bishop Davenants paraphrase upon the (...),
Joints and Bands which the Apostle speaks of. (...) Vocantur ea omnia quae nos
Christo devinciunt, (...)* ea omnia per quae membra sub hoc capite sibi
cohaerent. Jam vero commissi^rae per quas Christo capiti jungimur and per quas
Christi influxus ad nos derivatur, sunt spiritus and dona ejusdem spiritus,
praesertim fides, quae manus est qua apprahenduntur spiritualia beneficia, in
Col. 2.19.
By (...) Joints, we are to understand says he, those Vincula and ligatures by
which we are copulated to Christ; and by (...), Bonds, we are to understand
those Media by which we are concatenated to one another. Now, says he, the
Ligatures by which we are knit to Christ as our Vital Head, and by which we
receive quickening Influences from him, are the Spirit and the Graces thereof,
especially Faith.

The second Argument in opposition to our Authors Hypothesis, shall be raised
from such Scripture Texts as are not allusive to any Pattern Union, but yet are
manifestative of such an Intimate conjunction between Christ and Christians, as
a Political Relation is so far from giving us an adequate Notion of, that
indeed it bears no proportion nor Analogy to it. Nor shall I insist on such
places at this time as express Christ's Abiding in us, and our Abiding in Him;
His Dwelling in us, and our Dwelling in Him; His Being in us, and our Being in
Him; Though a Political Relation be too mean and low to answer the Grandeur of
these phrases. He that without prepossession and prejudice consulteth these
following Texts, viz. Joh. 15.4. Joh. 6.56. 1 John 4.13. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col.
1.27. Romans 8.10. 1 John 5.20. 2 Cor. 5.17. will soon find that such an Union as
intercedes between a Prince and his Subjects, is too flat, jejune, and cold an
Interpretation to sustain the weight of those sentences. Had the Holy Ghost
designed the delivering the Doctrine which we contend for, he could not have
chosen Terms more plain, full, and Emphatical to declare it, than those by
which he has expressed it in the foregoing places. And the same subtilties
that are used to persuade the World that what we alledg, is not the true
meaning of them, would equally serve to pervert their sense, were that the
intendment of the Holy Ghost in them, which we affirm. There are two passages
which I reckon eminently manifestative of the Intimate Conjunction that is
between Christ and Christians, which I shall at this time borrow some Light
from, and reflect some upon in reference to the Matter before us. The first is
that of Paul, Heb. 3.14. (...), For we are made partakers of Christ if we hold
the beginning of ou^ confidence steadfast unto the End. I know that Modern
Interpreters do generally suppose the name Christ to be taken here
Metonymically, viz. for the benefit of Christ's Mediation; but I judge that the
Apostle intends a great deal more by our partaking of Christ, than merely so.
The Syriack renders it (...) We are mingled, i. e. united to Christ. Chrysostom
paraphraseth it (...); What is it to be partakers of Christ? He and we are made
One. He the Head, we the Body; Coheirs and Incorporated with Him. And
accordingly he makes the (...) the beginning of our confidence to be (...)
Faith, by which, says he, (...), We are begotten and consubstantiated with him;
i. e. intimately and truly United to Him. That an Union with Christ by some tie
and ligature, beyond what a bare owning of his Authority denotes, is here
intended in our (...), Being made partakers of Christ, the use of the Verb
(...) by the same Apostle, from whence the Noun (...) comes, induces me to
believe. When Paul would express Christ's participating of the Humane Nature, or
of Flesh and Blood, he does it in this phrase, (...), which seems clearly to
conduct us to the meaning of the expression (...), which we are now upon. As he
became no otherwise (...), but by the assumption of our Nature into Union with
his Divine person; so we do no otherwise become, (...), but by participation of
the same spirit that inhabited the Humane Nature of Christ, which is the Bond
and Medium of that Union which we plead for between Christ and Christians. The
other expression which I judge declarative of a higher Union between Christ and
us, than what a Political Relation does imply, is his being styled our Life.
Life is said to be in Christ, not only formally as in its subject, but causally
as in its fountain. Nor is he only called the Word of Life, and the Prince of
Life; but he is expressly said to be our Life, Col. 3.4. And Paul witnesses of
himself that he lived through Christ's living in Him, Gal. 2.20. Now that he
should be styled our Life, merely with reference to his bringing Life and
Immortality to light in the Gospel, is too jejune a sense to sustain the weight
of the Phrase. I do not deny but that the Gospel is the Word of Life, and that
it is so styled in the Scripture: Nor do I bring into debate Christ's being in a
proper and eminent sense, the alone Author, as well as the Subject of it: Only
I affirm that the making his revealing the Gospel, which discovers the Glad
Tidings of Life, and the Terms of it, to be the only reason of the Appellation
given to him which we are now discoursing, is to impose a Notion upon the
expression which is too scanty and narrow to answer the Majesty and Grandeur of
it. And as the Context (even to any who do but superficially view it) will not
admit this to be its full import; so the Apostles expression of Christ's living
in him, which seems a commentary and paraphrase upon it, does plainly overthrow
this from being the sense of it. Nor will it suffice to say that he is our Life
in a Moral sense, because our Life of Grace here, and of Glory hereafter, are
owing to the Sacrafice of his Death as their procuring cause. It Is true that
both our Holiness and Happiness respect Christ's Meritorious Life and Death as
their price; but yet this neither comes up to the Loftiness, nor exhausts the
fullness of that expression, He is our Life; much less is there any thing in
this Gloss that bears affinity to his living in us. The only sense which bears
a proportion to the Words, is this, That as Natural life proceeds from, and
must be ascribed to the Soul as its spring and principle; so all spiritual Life
is owing to Christ as immediately acting us by his quickening Spirit. Of our
selves, says the Learned Bishop Reynolds, we are without strength, without
love, 3. Treatises, p. 407. Idem. ibid. p. 144.
without life, no power, no liking, no possibility to do good, nor any
principle of Holiness or Obedience in us. It Is Christ that strengthens us, that
wins us, that quickens us by his Spirit to his Service; Christ is the Principle
and Fountain of Holiness, as the Head is of sense or motion. And this he makes
to be one eminent part of the meaning of that place, He that has the Son, has
Life; 1 John 5.12. though Mr. Sherlock is not only pleased to tell us that it
signifies no such thing, p. 103.
but treats those who do so paraphrase it with words full of contempt and
scorn. But to resume what I was upon, forasmuch as no Vital Principle does or
can operate, but as it is united to the subject that is to be quickened by it;
Christ being then the Principle of our spiritual life, there must be an Union
of Christ with us as the spring and foundation of his Influence upon us. No one
thing can be supposed the principle and source of life to another, without
admitting a previous Union between them.

The third and last Argument whereby Mr. Sherlocks Hypothesis of a Political
Union may be combated, and if I mistake not, utterly defeated, is levied from
the Vinculum and Bond, by which the Scripture reports Christ and Believers to
be copulated and brought into cohesion one with another. As every Union implies
such a Relation, in the virtue whereof there resulteth an Oneness between the
connected Extremes; so, as the Nature and Quality of the Unitive Principle or
Cement is, such is the Genius of the Union it self, and of the oneness that
thereupon emergeth. Now by consulting the Scripture, which alone ought to
regulate and bound our conceptions in the Matter before us, we find the Spirit
to be the Vital Ligature of the conjunction and coherence that is between
Christ and Christians. The very Spirit that resides in Christ, being
communicated to us, we do thereby in a secret but sublime and real manner
become knit and ligu'd together. Animation by one Spirit, is both a nobler and
firmer way of Union than adhesion even by continuity of parts is. Now by one
Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. And hereby we know that
we dwell in Him, and He in us, namely by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 4 13. Hence as upon the one hand, If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. So upon the other hand, He that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. I know that Mr. Sherlock glosseth both
these Texts of our having the same temper and disposition of mind which Christ
had, p. 172, 173.
but most ignorantly as well as falsely. It Is true, such a temper and
disposition of Mind as Christ had, is the fruit and effect of the Spirit of
Christ; but it is no more the Spirit of Christ it self, than an effect is its
own cause. Our having the Spirit of Christ is assigned as the cause of our
having a Spiritual temper of mind, and I hope our Author will admit a cause and
its effect to be distinct and different things. The Spirit which we are said to
have, is the very same Spirit by which Christ will at last quicken our Mortal
Bodies, and I suppose this will not be the produce of any temper or disposition
of mind of ours. In a word, the whole context lies in a direct repugnancy to
our Authors paraphrase of Romans 8.9. For that Hypothetical proposition, If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, is an inference from the
foregoing words; if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you. And this Spirit of
Christ is said to be the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, v.
11. And to have the Spirit of Christ, is the same with being led with the
Spirit of God, v. 14. This Spirit of Christ which Believers are said to have,
is the (...), A Spirit it self that bears witness with our Spirits, that we
are the Children of God, v. 16. and the Spirit that helps our Infirmities,
the (...) that makes intercession for us, v. 26. All which lies in a direct
contradiction to Mr. Sherlocks Gloss. And whereas our Author objects, that what
the Apostle calls the having the Spirit of Christ, v. 9. he expresses by if
Christ be in you, v. 10. and that this is no more than our being possessed with
the same love of Virtue and Goodness which appeared so eminently in Christ; I
reply, that though the having the Spirit of Christ, and Christ's being in a
Person be coincident; yet it is most false that we are to understand no more by
Christ in you, v. 10. but a being possessed with the same love of Virtue and
Goodness which appeared so eminently in Him. And my reason is, because the
Apostle makes Christ's being in them, the ground, principle and cause of their
minds being connaturalized to Virtue and Goodness, (for that is the import of
those words, but the Spirit is Life, i. e. the inward man is quickened and
renewed) and surely to establish an Identity betwixt Causes and their Effects,
is to impeach the first Principles of Science. And as for our Authors
exposition of 1 Cor. 6.17. namely, That He who is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, signifies no more but our having the same temper of mind which Christ
had; it is not only too dimininutive and scanty a sense to bear a proportion to
the words, but it is plainly contradictory to the scope of the Text. For not to
insist upon the word (...), which we render joined, though it be a very
emphatical Term, importing no less than such a near and close conjunction
between Christ and Christians, as is between things which are strongly cemented
and glewed together. Nor yet to dwell upon the (...) is one Spirit, though it
be the highest phrase in the stores and treasuries of language to express an
intimous conjunction by. I shall only take notice that the Apostle having
asserted, v. 15. That our Bodies are the Members of Christ, and having
subjoyned by way of inference from thence, that we ought therefore by no means
to take the Members of Christ, and to make them the Members of an Harlot. He
gives this reason for it, v. 16. because whosoever does so, becomes One Body
with her, and so cannot be One with Christ, those two lying in a direct
repugnancy the one to the other. So that now I argue, if the Union betwixt a
Man and an Harlot, in the virtue of which they are One Body, import more then
merely a likeness of Temper and Moral Dispositions, as surely it does,
forasmuch as there may be a similitude in sensual propensions and inclinations,
where the becoming One Flesh through Carnal Conjunction interposeth not; Much
more does a Believers being One Spirit with the Lord, imply a higher kind of
Union than an affinity of Dispositions. For this being it which the Apostle
sets in opposition to the former, it must at least bear a proportion to it
in respect of neerness of cohesion, although through being compared to it as an
oppositum, it can have no agreement with it in its Principles, Bonds and Media.
I shall only add that the Affinity between our Authors paraphrase, and that of
a certain Socinian upon the place, Ita suum spiritum seu animum cum Domino
conjungit, ac si unus and idem cum ipso esset, quatenus se totum illi regendum
tradit; sic amici dicuntur iidem, cor unum, anima una, propter constantem
concordiam, amorem and perfectum consensum. Schlichting.
gives me some ground to suspect whence our Author imbibed the Gloss which he
would obtrude upon us.

But to resume what I was upon, namely, that the Spirit being the Vinculum and
Ligament by which we are united to Christ, our cohesion therefore to Him must
be something more than a Political Relation. That Believers are inhabited and
actuated by the Spirit, is a Truth which the Scripture gives Testimony to in an
hundred places. Nor is he only present in the Hearts of Believers in respect of
that New Creature, Divine Nature, and Spiritual Being which he has wrought in
them, but even immediately also. Thus the Ancients in a manner unanimously
(...); The Spirit is not only in Believers now as heretofore, merely by his
operations, but he exists and dwells in them as it were after a substantial
manner, says Nazianzen; (...); He knits us to himself by a kind of Immediate
contact, while he makes us partakers of the Divine Nature, says Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. Non per gratiam visitationis and operationis sed per ipsam
praesentiam majestatis; atque in vasa non jam odor balsami, sed ipsa substantia
sacri defluxit unguenti, says Austin. He who desires to know the Harmony and
agreement, as well as the sense of the Fathers in this matter, De Trinit. lib.
8. cap. 4, 5, 6.
may consult Petavius who treats it at large. And if any have a mind to
understand the Opinion of the Schoolmen concerning it, they may advise with
Ruiz de Trinitate d. 109. Sect. 7. Vasq. 1.2. d. 205. Valentia 1.2. d. 8. q. 5.
and they will satisfy them. This is all that I shall offer at present in
opposition to Mr. Sherlocks Hypothesis, nor should I have said so much, but
that it is here where we have his most Heroic adventures, and where he seems
all along to speak as strutting and standing on his tiptoes. It Is here that he
flings down the Gantlet to all the World, and treads the Stage with no less
state and majesty, than as if he intended to erect lasting Trophies to himself,
for having baffled the received Opinion of the whole Christian Church. And it is
here that most particularly I have accepted his Challenge, and bid him battle
on his ground, and at his own weapons; and as to the issue of the Encounter, I
leave it to the Reader to pronounce betwixt him and me. This I do affirm, that
as I have not declined him in any thing where he seemed to argue like a Man and
a Scholar, so I must beg his pardon, if in some things I have forborne him and
given back, forasmuch as I was not willing to be under the temptation of
exposing him too much. And upon this very inducement, I thought once to have
overlookt his Argument taken from the Nature of the Sacraments, which he brings
in proof that all the Union between Christ and Christians is merely political;
but upon second thoughts I am resolved to say something to it, least by being
left in the way it should put some to a stand, though it should put none to a
retreat. We have already encountered the same forces in another field, and
being defeated there, there is the less likelihood of their standing it long
out here. As we have disabled this Medium from serving our Author against the
Immediate Union of Christ with Believers, so we will now venture to see what
strength is in it against the common Opinion of the Christian Church about the
Nature and quality of the Union that is between Him and them. Now I take it for
granted, says he, that there can be no better way to understand the Nature of
our Union with Christ, than to consider the Nature of those Sacraments which
were designed as the Instruments and signs of our Union with Him; and if we
will take that account the Scripture gives of them, all the Union they
signify, is a public and visible profession of our Faith in Christ, and
subjection to Him as our Lord and Savior, p. 185, 186.
and a sincere conformity of our hearts and lives to the Nature and Life of
Christ. Thus Baptism is a public profession of the Christian Religion, that we
believe the Gospel of Christ, own his Authority, and submit to his Government.
p. 181, 182.
And the Lords Supper is a Federal Rite which answers to the Feasts or
Sacrifices under the Law, whereby we renew our Covenant with the Lord, and vow
obedience and subjection to him, etc. For answer: Baptism and the Lords Supper
being Ordinances instituted by Christ in a Habitude to the whole tenor of the
New Covenant, as it mutually obliges both on Gods part and outs; accordingly
they may be considered, either as they respect us, or as they respect God who
has instituted and ordained them. As they respect us, they are both Symbols of
our Profession, and solemn engagements upon us to Duty. As they respect God who
has appointed them, they are representations of the mercies of the Covenant
and Ratifying seals of it. But to speak a little particularly to each of them,
and First to Baptism; Baptism, as it is the outward way and means of our
Initiation into the Lord Jesus Christ, and of our matriculation into the
Catholic Visible Church; so it is the great representation of the inward
washing of Regeneration, and of our being renewed by the Holy Ghost. The
effusion of the Spirit, being often likened to the pouring forth of water, (See
Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Joh. 3.5. Joh. 7.38. Heb. 10.22.) So in
Baptism it is most excellently signified and represented. The Spirit, says Dr.
Patrick, is very well signified by water, Aqua Genitalis, p. 31.
for as that cleanses and purifieth from filth, so the Spirit of God is the
sanctifier of Gods people, purging and cleansing their hearts from all
impurities. Now the Spirit being no otherwise the spring and principle of all
our Sanctification, but as he is the Bond and Vinculum of our mystical Union
with Christ, out of whose fullness we receive all the Grace which we are made
partakers of; therefore Baptism being a representation of the effusion of the
Spirit, it is also an adumbration of the Union which we plead for. 2ly. As to
the Lords Supper. As the Lords Supper is a visible Symbol and Badg of our
abiding in Christ, into whom by Baptism we were Initiated, and an obligation to
all the Duties of growth, and progress in Christianity; so it is really
exhibitive of Christ to us, and a representation of our Spiritual Union with
Him. As the Bread and Wine could not in any congruity of speech be called the
Body and Blood of Christ if they were not exhibitive of them; so our eating his
Flesh, and drinking his Blood in a Sacramental sense, can signify no less than
our being spiritually incorporated with him. The Cup of Blessing, says the
Apostle, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor.
10.16. And as by one Spirit we are Baptized into one Body, so we are all made
to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Our very Author tells us, (not aware
that thereby he overthrows his whole Hypothesis) that the Lords Supper is a
spiritual feeding on Christ, an eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, which
signifies the most intimate Union with him, v. 84.
that we are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, Ephesians. 5.30. The Apostle,
in the place that Mr. Sherlock refers to, does in way of illustration of the
Union between Christ and Christians, allude to the Oneness which was between
Adam and Eve. Now that was greater than the Oneness between any other Husband
or Wife in the World, for she was not only of the same specific Nature with
Him, and knit to him in a Matrimonial tie by God himself, but she was extracted
and formed out of his very Body, and so is the fitter Symbol of the Intimate
Union that is between Christ and Believers. And thus I hope, I have not only
wrested this weapon out of Mr. Sherlocks hand, but struck through his cause
with it.

. 13. It being acknowledged on all sides, that there is an Union between Christ
and sincere Christians, and it being now declared and made manifest what it is
not; I might here wind up without proceeding any further, or undertaking to
assign the true and just Notion of it. Nor is Religion exposed by our affirming
some of its Mysteries to be incomprehensible. Our Reason fails us when we
attempt to give an account of our selves, and the obvious phenomenon of Nature,
and therefore we may well allow it unable to explain things which lie at a
vaster distance from it, and to which it bears less proportion. If neither the
Nature of God, or of our Souls, or of Matter (of whose Existence we have the
most scientifick evidence) are to be comprehended by our narrow and shallow
Intellects; why may we not justify the belief of such things, of whose Truth
and reality the Scripture instructs us, though we cannot conceive the manner
how they are, or indeed how they can be. And if men will not be talked and
huff'd out of the persuasion of those things, of whose Existence their Senses
and Reasons ascertain them, though they cannot answer all the difficulties they
are accosted with in their enquiries about them; much less will Christians be
Hectored out of the belief of the Doctrines of Faith, because of the
Entanglements which attend the conception of them. It Is the Nature of Faith to
embrace things upon the alone Testimony of God, though it understand nothing of
the Mode and Manner how they are. The highest assurance of the reality of any
thing, is Gods affirming it, and what he asserts we are with all reverence to
assent to its Truth, though we can frame no adequate Idea of it, nor fathom it
in our conceptions. To bring down the Doctrines of Religion to the Model of
Reason, is wholly to overthrow belief, and to pay no more respect to the
Authority and Testimony of God, than we would to that of a Worm like our
selves. If there were no obscurity and difficulties in the Notions of
Gospel Truths, where would our submission and Humility be, which are the
qualifications that do most recommend us to God, and upon this account
especially, because they prepare the Mind for Faith, and give check to all bold
and curious enquiries. It Is enough that we can by rational proofs demonstrate
the Bible to be the Word of that God, whose Veracity is proportionate to his
Sapience, and both of them infinite; nor is it needful that its Doctrines
should further adjust themselves to our Understandings. And indeed as to the
Doctrine we have been discoursing, not only the Apostle styles it a great
Mystery, but Christ himself seems to adj^rn the perfect knowledge of it till the
glorified state. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
in me, and I in you, Joh. 14.20. Yet seeing the Holy Ghost has been pleased
not only to assert an Intimate Union between Christ and Believers, but has
condescended to illustrate it by so many similitudes; and seeing many things
that are Mysterious and unsearchable till God reveal them, are afterward of no
difficult conception, providing we regulate our apprehensions of them by the
Word; I shall therefore, having arraigned and overthrown the false Notions of
this Spiritual Union, venture to assign a true, and I hope also an Intelligible
Notion of it. Now this I shall attempt by these several steps and degrees. 1st.
The highest and closest Union is between those things that are actuated by one
Spirit dwelling and moving in them. Adhesion of parts is not so noble an Union,
as information by one and the same Spirit. If the vegetative juice be precluded
admission into any branch, it is no longer in a proper sense United to the
Root, notwithstanding its Physical continuity to the other Branches. When the
Animal spirits forsake any Member in the Organick Body, it is immediately as if
it were not knit to the Head, though it remain not only connected to the
adjoining parts by Muscles and Sinews, but ligu'd to the Acropolis by Nerves
and Arteries. The strictest and most proper Union is that which emergeth from
actuation by the same spirit. It Is this that renders the inferior Members as
much coherent with the Head as the superior are, because they are all acted by
the same Animal spirits, which as they are prepared in the Brain, so they have
their flux thence to all the Regions of the Body, and their reflux back thither
again. Thus the soul, though she keep her residence (...), is really joined to
all the Body, because of the commerce that is between the Head, where her
Imperial Court is, and the rest of the Members, through the ministry of the
Animal spirits. 2dly. Things at the greatest distance, and between which there
is no physical continuity, may be acted by the same Spirit, providing he be
immense and infinite. That Spirit, who through the Infinite perfection of his
Essence is every where, may both inhabit and produce similar operations in
those subjects that are locally distant the one from the other. Though a Finite
spirit cannot at the same time influence and act distinct and distant Subjects,
if there be not either a continuity or a contiguousness between them, yet an
Infinite Spirit may. 3dly. It Is Christ as Mediator that Believers are United
to. The Mystical Union is between Him and Believers, as he is a Middle Person
between Them and his Father. Our Moral Union with the Father in way of
complacential love, is through our Spiritual Union with the Son by the
renovation of the Holy Ghost. 4. The Holy Ghost did in a singular manner
operate upon, and reside in the Humane Nature of Christ. Though Christ was Holy
by Essence, in respect of his Divine Nature, yet he was Holy by Consecration
and Unction with the Spirit in respect of his Humane. Though it was only the
Son that did assume our Nature into subsistence with himself, yet it was the
Spirit that positively adorned and furnished that Nature with Grace. It Is true,
it is not of easy apprehension how the operation of the Holy Ghost should
interpose in the same person between the one Nature and the other; but it is as
true that we have it plainly affirmed in the Scripture, which is the highest
assurance we can have of any thing. It Is one of the deep things of God, which
we ought to submit to with an humble Faith, and not to enquire after it with a
presumptuous boldness. The Testimonies to this purpose are many, but I shall
only refer the Reader to two or three, viz. Isa. 11.1, 3. Joh. 3.34. Luke 4.1.
5thly. The Holy Ghost is the Immediate Renewer and Sanctifier of the Elect. All
the saving Illumination, all the Gospel conviction, all the Vital quickening,
all the Regenerating Virtue that we come under, at any time have, or are made
the Subjects of, they are from the Spirit of God and the Efficacious subjective
operation of the Holy Ghost in and upon us. Our birth and progress in Holiness,
are to be ascribed to Him as the Efficient Cause and Immediate Worker. It Is for
this Reason that the Third Person in the Trinity is so frequently styled the
Holy Spirit; For that Title does not so much refer to the Essential Purity of
his Nature, as to the sanctifying operations which are assigned to him in the
Economy of Man's Redemption. This I shall not now divert to the proof of, it is
enough that the Scripture bears witness to it in a thousand places; nor can the
contrary* Opinion be espoused and asserted, without a Virtual renouncing the
Gospel. 6thly. It Is from, by, and through Jesus Christ as Mediator that the
Spirit, whether it be with respect to his Immediate seizure of us, and dwelling
in us, or with reference to any of his saving operations, is given to, and
bestowed upon us. As God never dispensed any Grace to the Sons of Adam but in,
and by the person of Jesus Christ, as the Mediator and Head of the Church; so
the Communion of the Spirit, who is our Immediate Sanctifier, is from and
through Christ. His Spirit he is, by Him he is promised, His bodily absence He
supplies, and of His fullness He takes and communicates to us: Ye have received
an Unction from the Holy One, says the Apostle, 1 John 2.20. Though the giving
the Spirit be ascribed to the Father, as He with whom the Authoritative
disposure and appointment of all Divine extrinsick operations lodge; yet with
respect to Immediate Mission, his sending is attributed to Christ, whose Spirit
upon this account as well as others He is called. Hence the Ancients style him
Vicarium Christi, the Vicar of Christ, and Vis Vicaria, the power by which he
is present to our souls. Spiritus nos Christo confibulat, the Spirit buttons us
to Christ; that I may use Tertullian's phrase. The Holy Ghost supplies Christ's
place here in the World, and through him the Lord Jesus Christ is present with
his Church till the consummation of all things, and by Him he dwells and walks
in his People. The Spirit is Christ's purchase for his People, and his Donative
to them. The Holy Spirit was given to Christ as a reward of his Obedience and
Death to be by him communicated to men. Jesus Christ as Mediator is Authorized
by the Father to dispense Grace to whom he will. 7ly. Through the communication
of the Spirit from Christ to us, and immediately upon his taking the possession
of us, the Nature of Christ, the Seed of God, and a vital living principle
comes to be formed in us. For though the Donation of the Spirit to us, and his
possessing of us, precede the Geniture of the New Man in priority of Nature,
forasmuch as the Cause must be conceived before the Effect; yet the
inhabitation of the Spirit, and the production of a New Creature and spiritual
Being in us, are perfectly simultaneous as to time. Now through the formation
of this Seed of God in us, we become partakers of the same spiritual Nature
that Christ was. We do hereby not only beat the Image of the Heavenly, but are
changed into the same Image. This is Christ formed in us. And this New
Spiritual Being and Internal power becoming incorporated and made One with our
souls, it is as a Vital Form in us. And as this (...), does by transforming the
soul, attemper it to universal Obedience; so one of its first operations, is an
exercise of Faith upon Jesus Christ. And this being that which entitles us, in
a peculiar manner, to fresh communications of Grace and supplies of the Spirit
of Jesus, as well as that which interests us in his meritorious Righteousness,
we are therefore not only said to live by Faith, but Christ is said to dwell in
our hearts by it. Thus by the guidance and conduct of Scripture, we are by
short steps, and Regular Ratiocinations, arrived at such an Idea and Notion of
Believers Union with Christ, as is both plain in it self, and easy to be
understood, providing that men be not obstinate against Evidence. Nor have I
wrested or suborned any Sacred passage to give Testimony in this cause; all I
have made use of, being such as voluntarily offer themselves without any force
or distortion put upon them. And for such as are mustred against us, I have
either gained them back to our side, or showed that their Testimony does no
ways oppose what we plead for. Were I now sure that my Reader would not tire, I
might draw out this discourse to a greater length; but as I have not the
confidence to entertain Guests longer than I can afford them entertainment
worthy of them, so I am not so disingenuous as to treat men with words, when
thoughts and material remarques fail. If after all this which I have said, any
shall still be found quarrelling at the Unintelligibleness of Believers Union
with Christ, I think we may justly either complain of their perverseness, or
blame their Hebetude. To such as are not refractory to Scripture Light, and to
the easy deductions which our Intellectual Faculties in their Rational
exercise do draw from Revelation, there is enough said to make it understood;
and as for others, I leave them to the punishment of their own obstinacy.
Instead therefore of filling up pages by producing Testimonies of Ancient and
Modern Divines, or of calling in the Authority of the Church of England, I
shall shut up all with a few passages out of Dr. Patrick's Mensa Mystica. And
this I the rather do, being informed that the Opinion of this Dr. weighs more
with Mr. Sherlock, than either the Canon of a Convocation, or the Decree of a
General Council. The Passages (with which much of what I have delivered, is not
only coincident in sense, but in words) are these, As the highest and closest
Union is that which is made by one Spirit and Life moving in the whole; p.
99.100,
so the Union between Christ and his Members is by one Life. As things at the
greatest distance may be United by one Spirit of Life actuating them both, so
may Christ and we, though we enjoy not his bodily presence. Although Christ, in
regard of his corporal presence, be in the Heavens, which must receive him
until the time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. Yet he is here
with us always, even to the end of the World, (Math. 28.20.) in regard of his
holy Spirit working in us. p. 102.
By this he is sensible of all our needs, and by the Vital Influences of it in
every part, he joins the whole Body fitly together, so that he and it make one
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. And that this Union is wrought by the Spirit (which every
true Christian has dwelling in him, (1 Cor. 6.17. Romans 8.9.) the next (v. 13.)
will tell you, we are Baptized into one Body by one Spirit. p. 103.
This Spirit is always needful, being that which maintains our life. It is the
very bond and ligament that ties us to Christ. p. 104.
For our Union is not only such a Moral Union as is between Husband and Wife
(which is made by love) or between King and Subjects (which is made by Laws)
but such a Natural Union as is between Head and Members, the Vine and Branches,
which is made by One Spirit or Life dwelling in the whole.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
I find upon a Review of these Sheets, that several Errors and mistakes, and
those of diverse kinds have crept into them. Some of them are only Literal or in
Pointing; others lie in omission, addition, and transposition of Words; of ^ach
sort I have collected a few by way of instance, and for the rest, being such as
will not minister trouble to an Intelligent Reader, I leave them to his Candor
to mend.

PAge ^. line 8. ^. But to the p. 15. l. 17. r. frame, p. 22. l. 10. r. 11. p.
45. l. 12. ^. I^gen^^^s, p. 63. l. 19. r. (...) ibid. r (...), p. 54* l. 8. ^.
(...), p. 55 l. 22. r. Foundation, p. 67. l 23. ^. (...)* p. 74. l. 11. r. it
is, p. 76. l. 10. r. (...), p. 96. ^. 2. ^. in ^^te^mining, p. 121. l. 19. r.
and his speaking, p. 128. l. 9. r. an assent, p. 135. l. 10. in the Margent ^.
naturaeque, ibid. l 12. r. significat. p. 137. in the Margent, l. 24. r.
retinet, p. 146. l. 10. r. Velthuis, p. 150. in the Marg. l. 9. r. praefat. p.
151. l. 8. ^. (...) p. 156. l. ult^. perverss, p. 163. l. 19. r (...), ibid. l.
21. r. luxuriant, p. 166. l. 20 r. contra, p. 168. l. 23. r. oscitancy, p. 172.
l. 9. in the Marg. r. statuere, p. 173 l. 30. in the Marg. r. ostendendam, p.
192. l. 14. Argumentation, p. 199. l. 6. del. to, p. 201. l. 6. r. our, p. 223.
l. 1. dele with, p. 226. l. 2. r. (...), ibid. l. 2. r. 26. p. 244. l 8. r.
(...), p. 307. l. 21. r. (...), p. 311. l. 7. r. into, p. 314. l. 18. r. with
Isai. ibid l. 20. r. (...), ibid. l. 22 r. accommodating, p. 317. l. 24. r.
that sensible p. 318. l. 17. r (...), p. 342. in the Marg. l. 2. r. certa, p.
366. l. 4. r. (...), p. 385. l. 4. r. referens, p. 391. l. 3. r. to do, p. 394.
l. 4. r. were Christ, p. 412. l. 16. r. Justitia, p. 447. l. 28. r. the Lord
Jesus, p. 456. l. 2. r. at this, p. 484. l. 1^. r. Bulk, ibid. l. 7. r. (...),
p. 538. l. 18. r. (...), p. 552. l. 2. r. (...), p. 579. l. 21. r. amasing, p.
590. l. 17. r. precarious, p. 624. l. 7. r. (...), p. 634. in the Marg. l. 20.
r. apprehenduntur, p. 637. l. 26. r. (...), p. 643. l. 12. r. the Spirit, p.
648. l. 13. r. own ground.

Books sold by Dorman Newman, at the sign of the King's-Arms in the Poultrey.
An Advertisement of Two Books, Published by the same Author; Entitled,
A Sober Enquirey into the Nature, Measure, and Principles of Moral Virtue, its
distinction from Gospel-Holiness; with Reflections upon what occurrs
disserviceable to Truth and Religion in this matter, in three Books, viz.
Ecclesiastical Policy; Defense and Continuation, and Reproof to the Rehearsal
Transprosed.

JUstification only upon a Satisfaction, or the Necessity and Verity of the
Satisfaction of Christ, as the alone ground of Remission of sin, asserted and
opened against the Socinians, together with an Appendix in Vindication of a
Sermon Preached on Hebrews the second and Tenth, from the exceptions of H. W.
in a Pamphlet called The Freeness of Gods Grace in the forgiveness of Sins by
Jesus Christ.

A Golden Key to open Hidden Treasures, or several great points that refer to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness, with the resolution
of several important questions. Here you have also the Active and Passive
Obedience of Christ vindicated and improved, against men of corrupt minds, etc.
Who boldly in Pulpit and Press, contend against those glorious Truths of the
Gospel. You have further eleven serious singular Pleas, that all sincere
Christians may safely and groundedly make to those ten Scriptures in the Old
and New Testament, that speak of the general Judgment, and of that particular
Judgment that must certainly pass upon them all immediately after death. The
Godhead and Manhood of Christ, is here largely proved and improved against all
Gainsayers, by what names and titles soever they are distinguished and known
among us. Several things concerning Hell, and hellish torments, opened, cleared
and improved against all Atheists, and all others that boldly assert that there
is no Hell, but what is in us. Some other points of importance are here cleared
and opened, which other Authors (so far as the Author has read) haved passed
over them in great silence, all tending to the confirmation of the strong, and
support, peace, comfort, settlement and satisfaction of poor, weak, doubting,
staggering Christians: By Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at
Margaret's-New-Fish-street.

Mores hominum, the Manners of Men described in sixteen Satyrs, by Juvenat;
together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, and the L^tine and
Greek Histories. By Sir Robert Stapleton, Knight.

The Christian Mans-Calling: or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business:
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious duties, Natural
Actions, particular Vocations, Family directions; and in his own Recreation* in
all Relations, in all Conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the choice
of his Company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from morning
to night; in visiting the sick, and on a dying-bed, by Geo. Swinnock.

Gospel Remission; or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs.

The Real Christian: Or a Treatise of Effectual Calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the Holy
Scriptures; some things required by our late Divines, as necessary to a right
Preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: To which is added a few words concerning
Socianism. By Giles ^ermin, sometimes Minister a^ Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah: or a Prospect of Heaven; being an Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Thomas Case,
sometimes Student in Christ-Church, Ox^n, and Minister of the Gospel.

Grammatica Quadrilinguis; or Brief Instructions for the French, Italian,
Spanish, and English Tongues, with Proverbs of each Language, fitted for those
who desire to perfect themselves therein: By J. Smith. M. A.

Mr. Janeway's last Legacy to his Friends, containing twenty-seven famous
instances of Gods Providence in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the names of several that were Eyewitnesses to many of them; whereunto is
added a Sermon on the same Subject.

A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-peace and Unity; with the
Occasions and Reasons of present Differences and Divisions about things Sacred
and Religious. By John Owen, D. D.

Hieragonisticon, or Corahs Doom; being an Answer to two Letters of Inquiry
into the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

THese are to give Notice, That the Psalms of David in Meeter are newly
Translated, and Diligently Compared, with the Original Text and former
Translations, more smooth and agreeable to the Text than that of Tho.
Sternhold, John Hopkins, or any other Extant in English; and do run with such a
fluent Sweetness, that the Ministers whose Names are here under Subscribed,
have thought fit to Recommend it to all with whom they are Concerned; some of
them having used it already with great Comfort and Satisfaction: These Psalms
are to be sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry, at One
shilling Four pence Price.

John Owen, D. D. Tho. Manton, D.D. William Jenkyn. James Innes. Thomas Watson.
Thomas Lie. Matthew Poole. Jo. Milward. John Chester. George Cockayn. Matthew
Meade. Robert Franklin. Richard Mayo. Hen. Langley, D. D. Thomas Doolittle.
Thomas Vincent. Nathaniel Vincent. John Ryther. William Thompson. Nicholas
Blaky. Charles Morton. Edmund Callamy. William Carslake. James Janeway. John
Hicks. John Baker.

