LETTER To A FRIEND, Containing certain OBSERVATIONS Upon some passages, which
have been Published In a Late LIBELL Entitled, the Third Part of NO
PROTESTANT-PLOT; And which do Relate to the KINGDOM OF IRELAND

Dublin* Reprinted MDCLXXXII

SIR,
I Have received the third part of No Protestant Plot which you were pleased to
send me out of England: And I could have wished the two preceding parts had
accompanied it which I don't find are to be met with in this Kingdom; But I am
apt to believe you did forbear the sending of them, because they might not
possibly contain such things as the other does is Relation to Ireland, and
concerning which you only desire to be satisfied in. And therefore I am as
heartily thankful for this, as I have been honestly careful to inform my self
by the most Authentic papers and the most knowing persons in Affairs here,
with what truth the Particulars of it touching this Kingdom are related in it;
For I will not pretend to meddle with its relations as to other places, both
because they are no part of your commands to me, and in regard I have not the
same opportunities of coming to the knowledge of them: But this I may adventure
to say, that if the Author did use no greater sincerity in his delivery of
passages as to the one, than he has shown as to the other, he is absolutely one
of the most Malicious and Barefaced LIBELLERS that (even in this time of Excess
of such Creatures) has been produced: For not to detain you too long with
Prefacing, but as briefly as may be to come to the matter, neither therein to
follow this LIBELLER with a direct or formal Answer, for fear of falling into
the Error against which Solomon thus Cautions, Answer not a fool in his own
kind least thou also be like unto him. But only to make some few Animadversions
upon his LIBEL, for the detection of his Malice, and the conviction of his
Falsehoods in those parts of it which touch this Kingdom and the Government of
it, according as you expect, and I have premised; I find, that although at his
first entrance upon Irish Affairs in page the 2d. of his LIBEL, he appears as
an Abhorter of the Bloody and Cruel Massacres committed by the Papists in the
late Rebellion of Ireland, yet he only assumes that shape in this Conjucture
of Time, the better to Insinuate himself with, and the more plausibly to Convey
unto the too Credulous Populace, his designed Calumnies upon persons Concerned
in the present Government of this Kingdom; who are all firm Protestants, and
most of whom by their Zealous oppositions of the Popish Party during the time
of that Rebellion, as every of them by their steady Administrations since, have
manifested the greatest Abhorrency in the World of those Cruelties; Although
they are opposite to the present FACTIOVS and Pretended Protestant Party; Which
therefore thus hires and employs base and Mercenary fellows to invent and
publish scandals of them.

And notwithstanding he would in page the 16. where he makes his next step as
to Ireland, seem only to inveigh against the ingratitude of the PAPISTS for the
lenities they might have received, yet in his handling thereof, he scatters
malicious invectives against the Ministers here, and unjustly glances upon
them, by making instances of lenity to have been extended to the PAPISTS, and
of severity to have been measured to the DISSENTERS since the Kings
restoration, most whereof are perfectly invented, and not any of them can this
Government reasonably be charged with. Of the former sort are these his
following allegations musterd up in page the 17th viz.

First, that PRIESTS and FRIARS are tolerated to swarm and openly to Celebrate
Mass in Ireland. The contrary whereof is universally known in the Kingdom;
Repeated Proclamations having been Issued from the Lord Lieutenant and Council
for the Banishing of FRIARS, and all others of the Popish Regular and Titular
Clergy out of this Dominion, and promising Rewards which have been punctually
performed to such as should find and seize them, which for a great while has
rendered that sort of People not to be visible in these parts, and for the
PRIESTS (who were permitted to stay in all times, in so much, that not any of
the ORDERS which came out of England, nor even an ADDRESS which was lately made
by the House of Commons there to the King, and by his Majesty sent hither for
banishing the rest of the Popish Clergy, did mention them) Although they are
suffered to remain, yet are they so strictly inhibited by Proclamations, and
those of them caught Offending so severely punished, that for a Considerable
time here has not been any such open Celebration of the MASS heard of amongst
us, as the LIBELLER has falsely suggested,

Secondly, that the Introduction of the whole Popish Hierarchy into this
Kingdom was Connived at, and a public Assembly of the PAPAL Clergy allowed by
a Commission of the Duke of ORMONDE to be held and to sit in 1666. The
scandalous untruth of both which, do upon inquiry appear very evidently, for as
to that pretended Commission for Assembling of the Papal Clergy, which I begin
with, because from what I shall say by way of answer to it, will naturally flow
a confutation of that feigned connivance of the Popish Hierarchy: it is to be
observed that as my Lord Duke of Ormonde, whose word will surely outweigh that
of the LIBELLERS, does utterly deny his ever having granted a Commission of
that kind, so is there no such thing to be found, nor the least footstep^ of it
to be met with in any of the Offices, through which all Commissions must pass
before they can be of any virtue, and where they are Recorded for every one to
have recourse unto; Besides, the Ground upon which it is manifest the LIBELLER
would raise this structure, and the sourse from whence it is plain he would
derive this Objection, when explained, and considered, cannot bear or Warrant
any such thing, for they stand thus, Peter Walsh (who was a stiff opposer both
of the Popes Nuntio, and of the whose Rebellious party in Ireland during all
the time of the Irish Rebellion) sometime after the Kings Restoration having
projected and Presented to his Majesty, a Remonstrance signed by him and diverse
other Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, and containing the highest expressions
of Loyalty to his Majesty, and the largest assurances of Fidelity to the Crown,
that had ever before been tendered by Papists, and which proved so derogatory
to the Usurpations of the Pope, that it was discountenanced and Censured at
Rome, Lovain, and other Popish Universities, and opposed by the Popes
Internuncio then residing at Bruxels, who did all that in him lay to dehort
PAPISTS against it, and upon the account of all which, the subscribers and
adherers to it have not dared unto this day to adventure their persons into any
foreign parts where the Pope bears sway. His Majesty was very well satisfied
with it, and upon Walsh's repairing into this Kingdom about the year 1666. for
propagating such the Doctrine of it (which no Loyal Protestant could be
against) was pleased to send his instructions to my Lord Duke of Ormonde His
then Lord Lieutenant, for his suffering of Peter Walsh to meet with some
Titular Bishops, at that time here, to persuade them by his Arguments, and to
gain others of the Papists by their Examples, to subscribe unto that
Remonstrance; which meeting His Grace accordingly Permitted, but only, and so
strictly to that end proposed, as He was both vigilant in seeing that those
Bishops did not make use of it to any other purpose, and careful in providing
that they should not take up too much time, even in the doing of that business,
and therefore very early perceiving that they could not come to such an
Agreement as might produce the effects which were expected, He Ordered them not
only to disperse, but to quit the Kingdom, insomuch that afterward when His
Grace was called from the Government, there were not above three Popish Bishops
remaining, two whereof were Bedrid and the third absconded; although when His
Grace returned again to the Government (in immediate Succession to my Lord of
Essex) he found no less then thirteen of them to be here, and them he has
caused to be driven out also, and this sufficiently confutes the LIBELLERS
allegation, of His Graces conniving at the Popish Hierarchy being introduced,
which in English is Governance, since He did thus expel the Governors in whom
it resided.

Thirdly, That when the PLOT was to have been executed in ENGLAND anno 1678.
there were no fewer than fifteen Sheriffs in IRELAND, who were either professed
and avowed PAPISTS, or such as bred and educated their Children in Religion;
The Notorious untruth whereof appears by Original Roll of the SHERIFFS of that
Year (whose Names are placed in the Margin Co. Dub* Ja. Springham (...) Co.
Lowth Ja: Smallwood E^^ Kings Co: John Leyster Esquire: Co: Wexford John Tench:
Seni^^^ Co: Kilkenny John Kealy Esquire* ^^ing within the time, Hen: (...) was made
Sheriff the 23 (...) April 1678: Co: Mead Nath. Poole Esquire Queens Co: William
Gilbert E^^ Co: Wicklow Christopher Usher (...) Co: Kildare Edward Baggot Es^
Co. Westme^th Edward Terill E^^ Co: Catherlagh George Beech (...) Co: Longford
Geo: Conyngham E^^ Co: Co^k Richard Hull Esquire Co: Limerick John Oddell, Esquire Co:
Kerry william Ryves Esquire Co: Waterford Tho: Christmas Es^ Co: Clare Thomas
Hickman Esquire Co: Tipperary Tho: Osborne Esquire Co: Gailaway Char. Holcraft Esquire Co:
Leytrim Henry Crofton Esquire Co: Sligo Roger Smith Esquire: Co: Mayo Sr. George
Bingham Bar. Co: Roscommon Ed. Gardener Esquire Co: Donegall Geo. Vanghan Esquire Co:
Tyrone John Moderale Esquire Co: Fermanagh Ferdinando Davis Co: Antrim Edw:
Harrison Esquire Co: Armagh Godfry Walker Esquire Co: Monaghan Rich: Johnson Esquire Co:
Down Hugh Eccle^ Esquire Co: Cavan John Coin Esquire Co: and City of Londonderry James
Morison and Char. Newtowne.
to abide all scrutiny if there should be Occasion) not one of them there
mentioned being so principl'd, or suspected to be so quallified, especially by
my Lord Lieutenant, who cannot be supposed to know every Man's person, much less
to look into his heart who happens to be placed in that Office, and therefore
If one or two differently quallified should chance to have escaped Him through
want of knowledge or Information, and throughout a whole Kingdom, His Grace
might very well be excused in such a Case, as it falling out that there was not
one in this, He is to be extremly Justified. And whereas he affirms, That the
Papists have promiscuously before with His Majesty's Protestant Subjects been
advanced to several places of power and trust, If he means public places of
power and trust, as he must if he means any thing he says, upon a strict
inquiry made it cannot be found that any PAPISTS have had advancements of that
kind since His Majesty's Restoration, save only such of them as were made
Justices of the Peace by the Lord BERKLEY's Orders in the time of his
Government, and Colonel Richard Talbott made Captain of a Troop of Horse by
Commission from the Earl of ESSEX when He was Chief Governor, so as the
present Government which this reflection most Darts at appears to be the least
entitled to it.

^ourthly, That though a Proclamation was Published in Ire^^^d, for searching
the houses of all Roman Catholics for Arms, (...) when the SHERIFF of the
County of GALWAY went in ^^rsuance thereof to search the Earl of CLANRICKARDS
^^use, where as be was informed all the Papists in that County ^^d lodged their
Arms, the said Earl produced a Warrant from (...) Lord LIEUTENANT the Duke of
ORMONDE that his ^ouse should not be searched, Which Article although it be placed
in ^^age the 27th of the LIBELL yet for order sake is ranked and taken notice
of here with the others of page the 17th in the Libell because it is of the
same nature, and of the like truth with them: For my Lord Duke of ORMONDE was
so far from granting a Warrant to that Earl to hinder his house from being
searched for Arms, that he never so much as gave him a License to keep any, but
contrariwise where the Earl of ESSEX in his Government had given the said Earl
his License to keep a quantity of Arms, they were since by my Lord Duke of
ORMOND's Orders taken from him, and delivered into the public stores.

Lastly he alleadges, That yet while all this forbearance and tenderness have
been expressed to the PAPISTS, the DISSENTERS have fallen under the misfortune
of having an express Law made against them, and diverse of them have been
prosecuted to Fine and Imprisonment upon it. Wherein the LIBELLER shows his
Ignorance as well as his Malice, for although the Statute of 2d. Eliz. for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer in this Kingdom (which is without doubt against the
PAPISTS, and who are frequently prosecuted upon it) should by construction be
extended unto the DISSENTERS, (as I never heard it to be so Adjudged in the
Case of any of them, so far are they from having been Prosecuted
notwithstanding their openly numerous and frequent Meetings) yet was there
never any Particular express Law made against them either before, or as the
LIBELLER would have it believed, since the KINGS Restoration, And as that too
moderate Act of 2d. Elizab. be all that is in Force against the PAPISTS or that
can be supposed to be against the DISSENTERS, so it is to be wished that for
the quiet of the Kingdom, more and severer Laws were made against both. And
this brings me to the latter part of my Assertion, that as most of the
LIBELLERS instances of the Lenity shown the PAPISTS and of the severity
extended to the DISSENTERS in this Kingdom, since the KINGS restoration are
invented, which I hope I have fully proved to you, so that none of them can be
reasonably charged upon the present Government, which I think, I shall be able
very easily and briefly to show you, For all the LIBELLER observes with
semblance of truth and which looks like an Objection in that point as to this
GOVERNMENT against which he levells it, is, that there has not any Laws been
made against the PAPISTS in Ireland since the Kings return, save one against
there living in Walled Towns,

But if the method of enacting Laws in Ireland be thought upon, how that by
Poynings Act the Chief Governor cannot call a Parliament, for the making of
Laws in that Kingdom, before he prays the King and Councils leave for it, and
transmits some Bills for their Approbation to be passed in it, and until he
receives those Bills back again with License for the calling of a Parliament,
and if it be Considered that my LORD LIEUTENANT the Duke of ORMOND since his
being here, has REPEATEDLY prayed such License, and Transmitted Bills, whereof
some were as effectual against the PAPISTS (although there were none among
them against other DISSENTERS) as could be devised, and that he and the Kingdom
were disappointed therein, by the oppositions of some Persons who are mightily
extolled by the LIBELLER, that objection of there being no more Laws against
the PAPISTS cannot in the least affect this Government, especially in the
person of the Duke of ORMOND, neither can his Grace be thought to be concerned
in the letter of suspension of, or dispensation with the Law against PAPISTS
living in walled Towns, which the LIBELLER mentions; that being procured and
executed when the Lord BERKLY was Governor, no more than he is to be
responsible if the Orders for the taking off that suspension which the LIBELLER
passes over with silence and which were grounded upon the Address of the house
of Commons in England, were not as effectually, as they should be put in
execution here, they happening to come Over hither in the time of the Earl of
Essex's Government.

After the LIBELLER has thus, as in a false Artificial Glass, which is able to
make the best faces look deformed, misrepresented our GOVERNOUR^ and others
co-oporating with him for the KINGS service in the Government, and as he
fancies has by his traducements of them rendered the worst of things, which he
the worst of Men can feign to be believed concerning them; he proceeds to page
the 40th, and from having before endeavored to asperse them as if they should
by his fictious indulgences to the PAPISTS encourage them in the old POPISH
PLOT; He there advances and in effect charges them with being ABETTORS with
them in the new fangled PROTEST ANT PLOT; But the persons he names for support
of this Charge are some of them, so ridiculously Idle, and others of them so
notoriously wicked, and the instances he brings for proof of it, are all of
them so manifestly false, that if the LIBELLER were not possessed with a singular
spirit of folly as well as of lying, he would never have mentioned them, for as
to SMITH who I find to be the first of the persons named, he is such an abject
wretch, and so great a malefactor, and even in the Goal, where he has most
deservedly layn for a great while, and still lies, does daily appear so vicious
a thing, that he had been only fit for the Laws to take notice of, were it not
for the nature of the Information he gave in, which Authority would not pass
over without examining, for be it known unto the LIBELLER and to all such whose
turn he would serve, and under whose pay he writes, that those in GOVERNMENT
here, are as apprehensive of Dangers as they can be; Though not as inventive of
them as they, for this only reason, are, because not in GOVERNMENT there;
Therefore of the great sholes of Informations brought in here, since the first
discovery of the Plot, and which tended to the proof of it, not one was ever
rejected, although coming from the vilest of Men. And therefore when that of SMITH
against the Priest St. LAWRANCE proffered it self at DUBLIN, it was immediately
received and solemnly proceeded upon, the Lord PRIMATE who was then the first
of the Council on the place, by the Lord LIEUTENANTS happening at that time to
be in the Country, having convened such COUNSELORS as were in the Town, and
with them having given all necessary Orders in that affair, which produced the
immediate apprehension of St, Lawrence, together with the seizure of his
papers, and the Commitment of his Person, and SMITH had all the Encouragement
fit to be given him in this his Discovery, insomuch that if any persons, were
found, reflecting upon his Evidence, they were reprimanded by the Magistracy
for it, But this did not answer his end, in what he designed and expected by
making such discovery, being no less than that he should forthwith be permitted
to go out of prison upon the foot of it, Which there was no reason in the earth
yet to allow him, until he had to satisfaction either proved his accusation of
St. LAWRANCE upon his Trial, or disproved others accusations of himself, and
for which he was imprisoned, upon his own Trial; And therefore, he did betake
himself unto another course, and to walk in the steps of some of his
predecessors the IRISH evidences, who obtained their releasments out of prison
in this Kingdom where they found they were too much known, by getting
themselves to be sent for as Witnesses into ENGLAND where they were too little
known; For which purpose, according to the Mode of the times we are fallen
into, he Prepares a NARATIVE with a letter to enclose it in, unto a BVSIE
Person at LONDON in such matters, and by the assistance of, together with
recomendatory letters from a half witted fellow and wretched RIMER of this
Town; gets them transmitted to him, Who upon his receiving of them, and
according to his accustomed manner of running headlong without weighing
matters, or if he chance to do it, making the scales to light on that side
which contains least truth, and is likliest to make the greatest stir, conducts
them with all speed and bus^e to WHITHAL, and in hopes of having this fresh
INFORMER or rather new Engine sent for over to work with, lodges them with Mr.
Secretary JENKINS for the Information of the KING and COUNCIL, having most
dutifully and mannerly taken especial care before to Print and publish them for
the Amusment of the world, but His MAJESTY and the Lords knowing this Conductor
and his drift too well, and experiencing such kind of Artifices as this
Informer used too much, would not be so passed upon by them and yet at the same
time were pleased so far to take notice of those papers, as to send them over
hither with Orders to proceed upon them according to Law here, where the matter
of them were properly Conizable, and where preparations were made for St
Lawrence his being strictly prosecuted upon them, The KINGS Counsel having by
order and with great circumspection formed a firm Indictment for misdemeanor
(which was all that in their Opinions the matter could bear) to be preferred
against him, and the Judges having carefully provided that no PAPIST nor any
suspected to be POPISHLY affected should pass upon the Trial of him, which came
on the last Michaelmas Term in the Kings bench, Where a Jury all consisting of
the strictest protestants and ablest Citizens of the City of Dublin did
appear, where SMITH had the greatest liberty and latitude afforded to him, and
which he made use of in the proffering and management of his evidence, that any
Court did ever give or Witness take, and where St. LAWRENCE (whose person I
know not, and whose professien I abominate, and therefore, you may be sure I
speak impartially what was observed universally) had nothing beyond mere
Justice extended to him, and as a part thereof was that of Allowance of Counsel
to plead for him, (which the LIBELLER with more Malice than Law makes his
Observation upon) to be rekon'd, since he standing indicted for misdemeanor
only, no Judicature could have refused it to him Justly, so as all things
seemed to concur, if not to have been calculated for St. LAWRENCES
Condemnation, except SMITH himself, who by variety of villainies proved upon him
in other Cases, which he could not deny, and by many and palpable incoherences
and contradictions that fell from him in this Case, which were not to be
reconciled, did wholly prevent it, for they were the reasons that particularly
swayed with the Jury to acquit St. LAWRENCE by their verdicts, and generally
made all others who heard them, to do the like in their Judgments, and these
were the motives, which made the Gentlemen of the long Robe (as they have
declared) to forbear, because they were ashamed to appear on the behalf of such
a blur'd and stellionated Creature, and none of those wild instances which the
LIBELLER invents and mentions only to debase them, and to reflect upon
Authority, and which it is to be observed he at once insinuates to be believed
by others, and yet expressly says, he will not so much as conjecture them
himself: so as he needed not in the Conclusion of this his fable of SMITH, have
any more told us that he was no diviner, than I need tell you after all this
that he is an idle Dreamer.

The next man our LIBELLER produces is JAMES MORLEY, whom he Styles Captain
MORLEY, though I know not for what reason, unless it be because of his
appearing at the head of the band of IRISH WITNESSES, which sometime since
Marched to LONDON, and of his drawing them up with what he would have them
swear unto for him, but however true he may be in giving of that Title to him,
I am sure he is most false in those things he relates of and possibly from him,
and because the LIBELLER will not be long before he makes my words good (though
neither I nor all the World will ever be able to make his so) he no sooner
mentions the name of MORLEY, but as if it were a spell to raise a lie with, he
falls plum into the telling of one concerning him, by introducing and
expressing of him to have appeared and Sworn before the Committee of LORDS and
COMMONS in England, two Consults which the Papists had in Ireland in reference
to the extirpating the Protestant Religion in that Kingdom; whereas it appears
by MORLEYS Examination taken either before a Committee of the LORDS, or of the
COMMONS, or both, that he did not swear to those Consults, but only to a
hearsay touching them; which he said he had from HUBBERT TIRRELL and Henry o
Neal, who it is to be observed, were two Beggars, and such miscreants, that an
honest and a discerning PROTESTANT who knew them as well as MORLEY did, would
hardly have adventured to repeat any thing after them, much less to conduct
what they should say, unto public assemblies, and in prejudice of any who was
a PROTESTANT also, especially Considering that as it is well know MORLEY had
such experience of their villainies, as before that time, he did reject their
proferr'd Oaths to him in some Trial which he had in this Kingdom, however
afterward he became so reconciled to them, as in the last PARLIAMENT at
Westminster to make use of their names for injuriously accusing of Sir. JOHN
DAVIS, a person who with all his Relations, have ever been eminent professors
of the PROTESTANT Religion, and for that reason known to be obnoxious to the
POPISH Party, and it is besides to be remarked that Tirrell has lately and
solemnly disavowed his ever having known of any such Consults, and declared
that what he had informed concerning them was a mere fiction, which as TYRRELL
alleges MORLEY prompted and hired him to make, and to get others to swear unto
for carrying on some designs of his own, and what is yet more remarkable o NEAL
(who was lately hanged for a Robbery in this KINGDOM) did just before he was
thrown off the Ladder, Confess himself to be perjured, both in what he
delivered as to those CONSVLTS, and in what he had sworn against Sir. JOHN
DAVIS, and that he was by MORLEYS desire led into the latter perjury, which
Confession coming from one in the instant he was going to the dead, must be
convincing with all but such who will not be persuaded tho one rose from the
dead; After the LIBELLER has thus begun and dispach'd this untruth of MORLET,
who has no reason to con him thanks for it, since it has provoked and produced
the representation of these truths concerning him, he grows upon his own
hands, and to show his proficiency in the lying-trade, he proceeds to the
delivery of a grosser falcity, in asserting, that six or seven witnesses have
been procured to depose in this Kingdom, that MORLEY was suborned by the Earls
of ESSEX and SHAFTSBURY, and by Sr. ROBERT CLAYTON, to swear treason against
the Duke of ORMONDE the Lord CHANCELLOR BOIL and Sir JOHN DAVIS, whereas upon
search in the Offices where things of that nature (if any had been,) would be
lodged, and upon inquiry from the Officers who could not but know of them if
they were there, it cannot be found that ever any one such deposition was
taken, or so much as heard of, but several Examinations (and with probability
of truth too considering the before mentioned proceeding: of MORLET) do appear
of his Contrivances of that kind with people of infinite lower ranks, and it
is to be hoped of infinite different principles too, than it can be thought the
Earls of ESSEX and SHAFTSBURY and Sir Robert CLAYTON are of, who the Lord Duke
of ORMONDE and those named with him do not suppose would Imbarque themselves
with such a sort of man as MORLEY is, and in such manner of Designs as he was
upon, so as the setting up of these imaginary depositions, which never had
being but in this LIBELLER's idle brain, and in his Idler LIBELL, must have
been a piece of MORLEY'S magic, by such Incantations to charm those persons of
Quality to stand by him in this time of his deservedly Expiring Credit, and to
raise their Spirits (tho most Vndeservedly) against others whom his and the
LIBELLERS malice would point them unto, and whom (though it be imposible to
find them out by the mark the LIBELLER puts upon them,) of having obtained
those depositions, because there were never any such, yet by all this Lurry
about Morley, I gess them to be certain persons of such uprightness and
integrity as I am certain, they will not fear to have their Actions placed in
that approaching light of a PARLIAMENT with which the LIBELLER threatens them,
and which then shines brightest when MORLEY and the LIBELLER, and such other
sons of darkness are scattered from before it, and thanks be to GOD, we have no
reason to despair of a blessing of that kind to attend that time, for the
weather seems to clear very much, and the air to be so well upon Puryfying,
that those infections cannot remain. And as the LIBELLER has thus ingenuously
in this Paragraph represented things that never were, so he will not leave it
off until he has as ingenuously misrepresented Matters otherwise than they
were, according to the saying of Fame, the true Parent of this lying Monster,
that pariter facta atque infecta canebat; thus purposely to reflect upon
persons concerned in this Government (which the scope of his whole discourse as
to Ireland drives at) he would from the receiving an Information which was
given in here against MORLEY, for such treasonable expressions as are not fit
to be repeated, but in a Judicial way of proceeding against him, and from the
transmission which was made of it to the KING and COUNCIL in ENGLAND infer a
fondness, and I do not know what, to have been in them of it, whereas they did
but as they were bound, in taking a matter of that dangerous import when it was
offered, and as they would have done, if it had related to any one elss besides
MORLET, and only observed their duty and the Custom of their predecessors in
transmitting (as they always did) things of such a transcendent nature, let
them concern whomsoever they would, And why this ordinary practiced method in
all other Cases, should be thus extraordinarily handled and represented in
MORLEYS by the LIBELLER, is what I cannot think of any other reason to be given
for, but this, that he is a LIBELLER; Besides, suppose it were true, as the
LIBELLER says, (and it is the only thing he says of affairs in IRELAND which
supposition it self can help) That at the time of this transmission as to
MORLEY it was withal desired he should be sent over hither to be Tried, where
his Crime was supposed to be done, (although really no such thing was desired) and
that the KING had granted it, which He neither did, nor denied, because no
application was made for it, dos the LIBELLER believe himself? or can he imagine
any one elss will believe him in, but laugh at him for, this his doctrine
thereupon, That it were illegal and Arbitrary to send a Malefactor to be Tried
here for a fact committed by him here; For surely that is as legal and looks
some thing more reasonable than to send for persons from hence to be Tried in
England for things they are only charged to have Committed here, as we see has
of late been practiced, and which tho the Lawyers say may be done in this Case,
I am sure no Lawyer will ever allow what the LIBELLER says in the other Case,
especially, if no pertinent^r reason be given than this, which he assigns for
it, because the party was born and bred and has an Estate in ENGLAMD, For such
Circumstances alone, can never protect any one in ENGLAND, or IRELAND, from
answering for his breach of the Laws in either KINGDOM, and in that KINGDOM
too, where he so broke them if the KING please to have him sent thither, Nay in
this Case of MORLEY, if the matter charged upon him to be Committed here (from
which I shall not with the LIBELLER acquit him only because he is a PROTESTANT,
considering: what kind of one he showed himself in the times of usurpation,
thorough-pacedly serving of them, and what sort of one he manifests himself in
the present time of faction, by those baser Offices of subornation and Perjury
ministering to it,) were any felony under Treason, I speak it with reverence,
it were unjust not to send him hither to be tried, because the Statute of Hen:
the 8th for Trial of foreign matters in England, extends expressly and only to
Treasons, so that lesser Offenses done here cannot be tried there, and
consequently, to have kept him in such Case on the other side from appearing
here, would be to hinder a malefactor from being brought to Justice, which were
not Just; But as MORLEYS Case is, being for Treason Committed here, which by
that Statute may be Tried there, the KING can Justly enough (if He Pleases)
detain him to be Tried in ENGLAND, or (if he thinks fit) as Justly too may send
him hither for Trial, for by that Statute it is in the KINGS Choice, in which
of the KINGDOMS such a Case shall be Tried; But then if the Trial be ordered to
be there upon a Treason Committed here, the Judges in ENGLAND are therein to
Govern themselves according to the Laws of Ireland, that is, they are not to
adjudge any thing to be Treason, but what is so by the Law of IRELAND, or by
some Act of PARLIAMENT in ENGLAND where IRELAND is named, or that is Enacted in
IRELAND; And this Rule holds concerning Pleas in discharge of Treason also,
wherefore though MORLEYS charge consists of Treasonable words only, and they
really were spoken two years ago as the LIBELLER observes, whereby he was to be
discharged by the late Statute in ENGLAND (if they were alleged there) yet
being laid to be spoken here, where that Statute not naming IRELAND, nor being
Enacted in IRELAND dos not extend, he cannot reap any Benefit, by it; From all
which though I will not take upon me to conjecture, what were the Causes MORLEY
was not sent hither, yet I may rationally conclude, that they could not be any
of those which are given by the LIBELLER for it, so as he proves to be as
grossly out in his Matters of Law as he is notoriously mistaken in his Matters
of fact; And where, for Conclusion of this his Paragraph, and for the bringing
off MORLEY by it, he says, it is remarkable that what MORLEY did declare, (I
suppose he intends to the PARLIAMENT) in relation to the Duke of ORMONDE the
Lord CHANCELLOR, and Sir John Davis, he referred himself for, the truth of it to
the Council Books or to depositions before the Council of this Kingdom; it is
more remarkable that MORLEY did declare nothing there (whatsoever he has done
elsewhere) as to any of those Persons, save only Sir JOHN DAVIS, and as to him
that he referred nothing to the COUNCIL BOOKS, or to depositions before the
COUNCIL to prove, other than a pretended Copy he produced of the said o NEAL or
TYRRELLS Examination, but of which there never was any Original in the Council
books or at the Council Board, or indeed in being, so as the LIBE LLER by his
thus elaborately attempting to preserve MORLEYS gasping reputation, for support
of his Scandalous reflections upon the GOVERNMENT, does but destroy his own
Credit, and confound his own Devices.

There are two other persons, whom the LIBELLER brings by head and shoulders
into this Paragraph for evidence of what he amies at by it, but he giving only
surnames to them as HANLON, and MURPHY, whereby it is Impossible without more
certainty, out of the herds that are of those names, to gather whom he means,
and not assigning any particulars to have come from them, in proof of his
General assertion which he Cites them for, by means whereof he only sets up
Shadows to be contested within them; I will therefore pass them over and come
to that more solid body in the LIBELLERS single opinion of Mr. HAWKINS, whom he
shows as his next and last man, but who performed such a part when he first
brought himself upon the stage, as I cannot tell whether folly, or something
that is worse were his greatest Vice, and therefore I will determine on neither
side, but give a true account of it, as it has been collected out of the
Original papers of that matter, and then let any sober and impartial man make
his Judgment of it, and of him upon it, which was thus; Mr. HAWKINS (between
whom and some of the mac GENNISES his neighbors there were some differences)
came to my Lord LIEUTENANT to the CASTLE, having made his way as being a
stranger by presenting of a letter from Sir HANS HAMILTON a late member of the
Council unto his GRACE, and there acquainted his Grace that one Daniel Hanvy
came to him to his house in the Country, and told him of a meeting which he had
a little before with one Con mac Gennis at Down-Patrick, and that among other
things which at that meeting passed betwixt them, mac GENNIS engaged him to
join with him in swearing HIS GRACE, Mr. HAWKINS and others into the Plott,
and at the same time did give him a little money, and promised him a great deal
more when they should afterward meet, as they then agreed to do at Dublin,
where the design was to be carried on betwixt them, That with this Information
Mr. HAWKINS repaired to Sir, HANS HAMILTON, who advised him to carry it to my
LORD LIEUTENANT where he thus brought it, hereupon my Lord LIEUTENANT caused
Mr. HAWKINS to bring HANVY to him, and after his GRACE had with great privacy
taken his Examination, which was much to the purpose aforesaid, he asked Mr.
HAWKINS if he knew CON mac GENNIS and where he was to be found, which he said
he did very well, and that as HANVY told him, he was come to Town in order to
their aforesaid appointed meeting, which was to be sometime on that or the day
following, and though Mr. HAWKINS did not know the certain house where it
should be in, yet he would learn it from HANVY, and thereupon he proposed to
his GRACE that for having more witnesses besides HANVY of what should pass at
that intended meeting, his GRACE would appoint another Trusty person to join
with one NEAL mac LAVGHLIN whom Mr. HAWKINS designed to employ, for so
disposing of themselves in the Room of the house where the others were to meet
in, that they might (without being observed by them) see them, and hear the
discourses betwixt them; Which my LORD LIEUTENANT complied with, and was
accordingly done, only with this Variation, that Mr. HAWKINS employed another
in that service in the stead of mac LAVGHLIN, who could not be found, In the
mean time his GRACE kept this matter as a secret from all persons, least any
disappointment should befall such a promised discovery, afterward Mr. HAWKINS
came to my LORD LIEUTENANT, and acquainted him the parties had met, and the
person appointed by his GRACE, with the other whom Hawkins did employ in the
Over hearing of them, came likewise, and told his Grace that they saw HANVY and
another man whom he called CON mac GENNIS together, and heard them discourse of
such designs as were at first informed, but withal that they observed and heard
mac GENNIS to say at their parting to the Master of the house, who came toward
the end of their discourse to them, These words, take notice I never saw this
person pointing at HANVY before the last night, upon this Report brought to my
Lord LIEUTENANT He ordered CON mac GENNIS to be sent for, who appeared and
denied his name to be CON mac GENNIS, affirming it to be OWEN DVFFY, and proved
it to be so by invincible Circumstances; but he owned at the same time his
having gone under the name of CON mac GENNIS to, and his having had the
aforesaid meetting with HANVT, whom withal he protested he never saw until the
night before he had the meeting with him, which with his other feigned parts,
he said he was prevailed upon to Act, by the desires of one HENRT FARREL, whose
reason for the same he knew not, but referred it to FARRELL to declare: At this
proceeding my Lord LIEUTENANT (as any one woul'd be) was strangly surprised,
and the more, because His GRACE was satisfied at his first sight of the Man,
who now is DVFFT, and before he named himself to be so, that he was not CON mac
GENNIS whom HANVY had described, for him His GRACE had occasions to see and
know long before, in the quality of a Deputy Pursuvant, for dispatching of
Irish Witnesses, sent for from hence into ENGLAND, but what HIS GRACE most
wondered at was, that HANVY should have affirmed as he did, his having had a
familiar acquaintance for many years together with that CON mac GENNIS before,
and yet that he should now take this DVFFY for him; Hereupon my Lord LIEUTENANT
had HAWKINS and HANVY who were attending, called in, where HANVY upon the
question put to him, declared again such his long acquaintance with CON mac
GENNIS, and all the other matters touching him, and confidently affirmed, that
DVFFY then present before him was the Man, and Mr. HAWKINS (although at his
first coming to my Lord LIEUTENANT, and as is before mentioned, he told His
Grace that he knew CON mac GENNIS very well, and consequently, could not but at
this time know that DVFFY whom he saw thus to personate him was another person)
yet as if he would have had my Lord Lieutenant deceived, did suffer Duffy to
pass upon His GRACE for Con mac GENNIS, without offering any thing to undeceive
him, until my Lord LIEUTENANT did at last take notice to them, how that person
had proved himself to be OWEN DVFFY, and how his Grace himself knew that it was
not CON mac GENNIS, upon which HANVY and HAWKINS confessed themselves to be
mistaken, and so in great confusion vanished; After this scene was thus over,
which in the persons and the parts of it looked the most odd, and was the least
intelligible, that for a great while has been presented, my Lord LIEUTENANT
conducted the whole matter to the Council, where it seemed as a perfect riddle,
and because FARRELL appeared the ablest to unfold it, by giving an account how
he came to make DVFFY personate CON mac GENNIS unto HANVY, he was ordered to be
examined, who in his Examinatiom and upon his Oath declared, that NEAL mac
LAUGHLIN did some time before, lodging at his house, let fall expressions which
gave him suspicion of HAWKINS his being upon some evil designs, and that he
was confirmed therein afterward, by lighting upon a letter from HAWKINS to mac
LAVGHLYN which FARRELL produced, and HAWKINS confessed, but pretends to be to
an innocent end, and which directed mac LAVGHLIN to go to one RAWLINSON in
Dublin for the furnishing him with money, enjoining him afterward to repair to
HAWKINS into the North concerning the business which mac LAVGHLIN to do for
him; That after mac LAVGHLIN (who then went to the North accordingly) returned
unto Town, he came to Farrells house, but told him that he was to lodge no
longer with him, for that he had a lodging provided in another place hard by
the said RAWLINSON; which with FARRELLS observing of mac LAUGHL^N to be flush
of money, and understanding that HAWKINS was come to Town, put it out of all
doubt with him that there was some mischief a contriving, which Farrell
resolved to employ himself in the finding out and for that purpose remembering
that mac LAVGHLIN had been very inquisitive of him for CON mac GENNIS, and
perceiving several messengers to come to his house at diverse times in a day to
inquire for CON mac GENNIS, as from persons newly come out of the Country, He
dogged some of Them to a certain House whither he prevailed upon OWEN DVFFY to
go with him, and if there should be Occasion to take upon him the name of CON
mac GENNIS, after whom this great inquiry had been, and when they came thither
and a little after they had talked something loud, on purpose to be heard by an
obscure man who they were told was in the next Room, that man (who proved to be
DANIEL HANVY) hearing the name of CON mac GENNIS, came in unto them, and
applying himself to DVFFY whom he took or pretended to take for CON mac
GENNIS, finding him to be called so, said to him with much kindness, you know
we have great business to do, to which DUFFY Answered, yes, yes, and so after
having appointed to meet together the next day, they then parted, which was the
only occasion, as FARRELL said, of his thus persuading DVFFY to personate CON
mac GENNIS unto Hanvy, and of such meeting and discourse had betwixt them, and
now let any one who reads these true passages of that affair Judge, whether Mr.
HAWKINS has aquitted himself like that man of honor, discretion, and
ingenuity, which the LIBBELLER would blazon him; and whether my Lord DVKE of
ORMONDE be not a more merciful person to the DISSENTERS, than the LIBELLER
would seem before to represent him, since notwithstanding Mr. HAWKINS be one of
the virulenst of them, and by such his proceedings appeared a very great
Triffler with, if not an affronter of GOVERNMENT, yet his GRACE let him go
without inflicting any Punishment upon him for it, although he could not but take
more notice of him afterward, when an Information amounting as near to
HIGH TREASON as could be was given in to the Council against him, and by such a
Person too, as Mr. Florence Weyer a Sanctified evidence in ENGLAND and who was
one of the Chiefest of those Witnesses upon whose Testimonies the Titular
Primate PLVNKET was found guilty in the Kings Bench there, for which reason the
LIBELLER never so much as mentions WE^ER here, but only takes notice of mac
GENNIS and mac LAVGHLIN who swore latter in time, and much inferior in matter
against HAWKINS than the other did, and as to mac LAVGHLIN it is observable,
that though the LIBELLER affirms he never spoke with HAWKINS but once, and then
only to insinuate into his acquaintance, yet HAWKINS himself in his
Exa^mination ownes to have known him and to have Employed him in his business
for some years past; And besides it is manifest by HAWKINS his above mentioned
Letter to Mac LAVGHLIN (which FARRELL produced upon his being Examined and
HAWKINS Confessed in his Examination to be his hand,) that there was a familiar
acquaintance betwixt him and Mac LAVGHLIN before, which Letter, looking so
suspicious, and being followed with WEYERS and the others Informations, which
sounded so dangerous, my Lord LIEUTENANT and COUNCIL could do no less than as
they did, to Commit HAWKINS upon them, and notwithstanding the LIBELLER and his
Party would now, because it seems to thwart their designs, reflect upon the
Government for doing of it, as too much countenancing of Informations, yet (as
has been found by late experience,) they would be apt at another time (if it
might advance their purposes) more severely to fall upon the GOVERNMENT for not
doing of it, as too great discountenancing of Evidence, so partial and so
passionate are the FACTIOVS.

Thus, ( Sir,) have I run through the several Parts of this LIBELL, which touch
upon this Kingdom, and the Government of it, and in my answers to them, I have
for the most part mentioned and referred unto such papers of Estate and public
Records, and besides, all the matters of them prove to fall within the
knowledges of so many persons living, that if I had not a singular regard to
truth (which I hope I shall ever follow) and a particular respect for you (whom
I am certain I will never abuse) yet you may be sure I would not dare, and
therefore that I have not adventured to say any thing, but what contains the
greatest veracity, since in doing otherwise (which was a sufficient Precaution
to me from the beginning unto the end of this work) I knew I should be by
variety of Testimonies disproved, and rendered not only as Odious, but as
Ridiculous and Contemptible to the World, as our LIBELLER has shown himself,
who though he would have it believed, as if he were in his principles the
farthest removed from the Popish Party, dos yet expose his LIBELL (by the gross
lies which are dispersed through it) to be the nearest allied unto the Popish
Legend. I am with Esteem and respect.

Sir Your most affectionate and most humble Servant
Dublin the 1st. of April 1682.

