A TRUE COPY OF THE PAPER Deliverd by Sir John Fenwicke, Baronet, TO THE
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, on Tower Hill, the Place of Execution, on
Thursday Jan. 28. 1696/7.
Published by Authority.

SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent; I shall therefore give a very Short
but Faithful Account, first, of my Religion; and next, what I suffer most
innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may reasonably expect my Enemies will
cast upon me when dead, since they have most falsely and maliciously aspersed
me whilst under my Misfortunes.

As for my Religion, I was brought up in the Church of Engl^nd, as it is
established by Law, and have ever professed it; though I confess I have been an
unworthy Member of it, in not living up to the strict and excellent Rules
thereof, for which I take Shame to my self, and humbly ask Forgiveness of GOD.
I come now to dye in that Communion, trusting, as an humble and hearty
Penitent, to be received by the Mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ my Sav^o^r.

My Religion taught me my Loya^ty, which, I bless God, is unt^in^ed: And I have
ever endeavored, in the station where^^ I have been placed, to the utmost of
my power, to sup^^^t the Crown of England in the True and Lineal Course of
Des^^nt, without interruption.

As for what I am now to dye; I call God to witness, I went not to that Meeting
in Leadenhall-street with any such (...), as to invite King James by Force to
invade this (...) nor was I my self provided with either Horse or (...) ^g'd
for any number of Men, or gave particular (...) any such Invasion, as is most
falsely Sworn against (...)

I do also declare, in the Prosence of God, That I knew nothing of King James's
coming to Calais, nor of any Invasion intended from thence, till it was
publicly known: And the only Notion I had that something might be attempted,
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

I also call God to witness, that I received the knowledge of what is contained
in those Papers that I gave to a great Man that came to me in the T^wer, both
from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me, when I read
them to him, That the Prince of Orange had been acquainted with most of those
things before.

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was instrumental in
saving his Life: For when about April 1695, an Attempt formed against him came
to my knowledge, I did, partly by Disswasions and partly by Delays, prevent
that Design; which, I suppose, was the reason that the last Vilianous Project
was concealed from me.

If there be any Persons whom I have injured in Word or Deed, I heartily pray
their Pardon, and beg of God to pardon those who have injurd me, particularly
those who with great Zeal have sought my Life, and brought the Guilt of my
innocent Blood upon this Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those noble and worthy Persons who gave me
their Assistance, by opposing this Bill of Attainder, without which it had been
impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of Death: God bless them and
their Posterity, though I am fully satisfied they pleaded their own Cause while
they defended mine.

I pray God to bless my true and lawful Sovereign King James, the Queen, and
the Prince of Wales, and restore him and his Posterity to this Throne again,
for the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation, which is impossible to prosper
till the Covernment is settled upon a right Foot.

And now, O GOD, I do with all humble Devotion commend my Soul into thy Hands,
the great Maker and Preserver of Men, and Lover of Souls, beseeching thee, that
it may be always dear and precious in thy sight, through the Merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

J. FENWICKE.

LONDON, Printed by J. Orme, for R. Bentley in Covent Garden, and A. Bosvile in
Fleet Street.


