Janus Alexandrus Ferrarius, An Augustine FRIAR, HIS EPISTLES To the TWO
BRETHREN OF WALLENBVRGH, Concerning the VSEFVLNESS and NECESSITY OF THE ROMAN
CATHOLIC FAITH.

Wherein the Ambition and Avarice of the Church of ROME are Lively Demonstrated
in a Mathematical Method, by a Continued Series of Connexed PROPOSITIONS.

-- Ridenti dicere verum
Quis vetat?
From the Original Latin.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and Nathaniel Thompson, and are to be
Sold at their House in Newstreet, near Shoe-Lane. 1673.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBVRY, etc. Lord HIGH CHANCELLOR
OF ENGLAND.
My Lord,
IF those High and Weighty Employments to which your Great Worth and Abilities,
approved by the Judgment of the most Experienced King of Christendom, have
Called you, can Admit of any Divertisement, it will not, I hope, be thought a
Sin in me, if I have Attempted thus to Contribute something toward it, or if
it should, yet be pardoned as the Fault of a too hasty Zeal, in a Person
desirous to thrust himself amongst the crowd of your Adorers.

For deservedly have you, my Lord, Drawn the Hearts and Affections of the whole
English Nation to your Self; and never did King and People so Unanimously agree
in the Choice of such a great Minister of State: Your Virtues making all the
World Admire the Kings Judgment, and the Kings Judgment confirming to all the
World, their long before entertained Opinion of your Virtues.

The King is, my Lord, (notwithstanding all Popish pretenses) sole Vicar and
Vicegerant under God, in his own Realms and Dominions; and he has Chosen you
his Substitute in the Management of his Highest and Greatest Affairs, wherein
your Conduct has been such, as has given him every day new Encouragement to
approve the Work of his own Hands, and he cannot but with Delight and
Satisfaction hear with what Acclamations of Joy and Content, the whole Body of
the Nation Applaud your Justice, Prudence, and Equity whereby you have almost
quite removed all Misapprehensions they had sometime conceived against
Chancellors.

Nor has your Zeal in the Protecting and Defending the Settled and Established
Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, appeared less then your great Abilities in
State, you having largely Contributed your Counsel and Assistance both to King
and Parliament, for the Weakening the hands of our common Enemy, and may
therefore claim a Right to Divertise your Self at their Follies.

But however, my Lord, this small Present of mine prove, let not my Duty and
Devotion be accounted a Crime, nor that be Blemished as a Presumption, which is
a sincere tender of my part of that Service and Affection which all men pay
you, and which shall ever be Paid you by

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, most Humble, and most Obedient Servant,
J. D.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THat Ignoble pair of Wallenburgh Brethren (to whom the following Epistles are
written) Treacherous Hollanders, and Popish Renegado's, Created indeed, Titular
Bishops (the one of Adrianople, the other of Mysia) but in troth, corrupt
Pentioners of the Popes, and sworn Slaves to that Servant of Servants, have for
a long time exercised their mercinary Pens, and with united Forces, diligently
Employed all their Skill and Power, to settle and at length Establish that
Synagogue of Satan, which has so long stood Tottering. And when all the old
Deceits and Devices were Detected and Exploded, advanced new Methods and Ways,
Hammered out of their own Brains; and among others, that Form in use among
foreign Civilians, of Probation by Witnesses, not ancient and pure ones, but
Corrupt ones of the Church of Rome; as if the Testimony of that Queen and
Mother of Harlots, were abundantly sufficient to confirm all her Ridiculous,
and for the most part Impious Tenants, whilst she Exhibited all things under
the Regal Signature of Test meipsa; a Privilege which even Christ Himself,
the reverenced Head of the Catholic Church truly called so, when conversant on
Earth, scarce ever assumed, or thought worth the Claiming.

These Epistles are Scourges to those Brethren in Iniquity; nor (as the title
of the Book seems to declare) are they so much Demonstrations as Derisions of
the Roman Catholic Faith, under a vail of Kindness, and pretense of Reverence,
smiting it, as we say, under the fifth Rib; For throughout the whole course of
the Epistle, the Irony is pleasantly played with: Sharp Taunts, witty Jests,
and biting Reflections every where mixed, which the Author chose rather to
couch in the Latin Tongue, as most proper for treating of things concerning
the Roman Church, and more applicable to the Wallenburgh Brethren, those two
new Atlas 's of the Papal Heaven.

But our Author both bears another name, and is by Nation an Englishman, (and
why then should so much Wit and Ingenility of their own be hid from the
English, or only revealed to a few?) of no Ignoble Family, who enticed by the
crafty Arts of those Emissaries, was not only initiated in the Mysteries of the
Papal Iniquities, but bred up in them, even to Surfeit and Lothing, till
growing up to riper Judgment, they could no longer impose upon him those
portentuous principles of Popery, which not only holy Writ, but sober Reason
utterly abhors; and which are even so repugnant to sense, that they are rather
to be hist at, and lasht by bitter Sarcasms, then otherwise taken notice of, or
endeavored to be confuted by any thing of solid Argument.

JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIUS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER. HIS First Epistle Concerning
the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith. To the Right
Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALENBVRCH.
MAny have valiantly, Most Reverend Sirs, and with Various Success, contested
for the Welfare of the Church, against Heretics, but scarce any with a
caution, and dexterity like yours. For when Reason and Experience had taught
us, that nothing hitherto has been more pernicious to our Sacred Republic,
then that the most material and weighty Points contended for, should be
maintained by the authority of the Scriptures, and ancient Principles of
Christianity; You from your admirable and immense height of wit have made right
discoveries, that things are not to be debated with positive Arguments or
absolutely pertinent to the matter, which the subtilty of Heretics might
easily either pervert or evade, but dilatory Exceptions are to be made use of,
the Court of Scripture to be waved, and all Judges besides the Pope to be
refused; Or else what before all pleased you best, That title of long
possession and prescription, was to be stretched upon the tenters, and tedious
cavils for worldly profit and advantage started: Which manner of acting (of use
indeed in Courts and Seats of Judicature, but in matters relating to Faith and
the understanding of Divine things utterly unheard of till now) when I more
curiously considered, I could gather nothing else from it, but that you by an
uncredible perspicuity of understanding had found out, that the Controversies
to be handled between Catholics and Heretics, were not to be treated in a
Sacred and Religious, but Judicial and Politic manner. For thus I revolved in
my mind: Of what prevalency is prescription against truth? Or, how does
possession justify error? Surely the understanding of these Reverend Brothers
is more sublime, their Learning more exquisite, their Judgments more
experienced, then to imagine that such clamorous was of Judicial Reasoning can
ever be transferred to the searching out, or establishing the truth of Divine
Decrees. Whereupon I utterly began to believe they meant wholly another thing
then what I first thought, and that they disputed not for Religion, but Empire;
not for Faith, but Obedience; and whilst with so much anxious care, they
endeavor to reduce Heretics into the bosom of the Church, and labor to
remove all causes of separation; the main scope and aim of their contention is
only, that they may at length subject them to the Empire of the Church, and
divest them of their late gained liberty.

I can scarce tell you Right Reverend Brothers, with how great, and how
wonderful a light, this thought entered into my mind, and how clearly I
immediately began to perceive what in this Argument (hitherto unassayed) was
for the future with utmost care and industry to be garnished and imbellished.
To wit, that in this your way of arguing, suitable matter was to be found out,
Principles agreeing with their conclusions, and commodious Hypotheses; fitted
to every Thesis; That those Doctrines of the Catholics, which neither the
Testimony of the Scriptures, nor the Principles of ancient Divinity could not
maintain, may now be not only defended by Judicial clamours, but demonstrated
by the profoundest Axioms of civil prudence; which if once allowed us, I easily
foresee the whole task performed. For who will hereafter doubt, but that to
the establishing so vast and extensive an Empire, stretching it self over all
Earthly Regions, and over most powerful Emperors, Kings, and Princes, though
unwilling and struggling against it, so that never was there any Dominion extant
like it, who I say will doubt, but that to lay such a foundation, there was a
necessity of more then humane prudence? Or who will hereafter believe it the
sole work of unarmed Eloquence, to make a weak, unwarlike, inconsiderable man,
the Successor of a poor Fisherman, boldly and unpunisht, trample on the necks
of fiercest Emperors, and with a nod alone drive Kings out of their Thrones;
or, that he should be believed to have a power over the Gates of Heaven, to
shut and open them at his pleasure, and with his breath confine as many
Thousand Souls, as he thinks fit, to the infernal Courts, and when he will,
from thence release them. In short, that out of a fear of Extreme and Eternal
punishment, or the awe of some visible earthly Divinity, not the Rude and
Barbarous, but most civilized knowing Nations of the whole World, should be
persuaded to adore him?

There are three powers, to which Humane Nature, by a certain unavoidable
necessity, seems subjected. AMBITION, AVARICE and LUXURY. These no
Philosophical Precepts, nor civil Sanctions could ever restrain. One man alone
is to be found, who with a Pride too lofty, and unsuitable to Humane Nature,
tramples all these under his Fee^, and leads them in triumph after himself,
binding the first by a Willing Obedience, the next by Poverty, and the last by
Continency, in voluntary Chains, whilst yet he, though the Servant of Servants,
accounts Kings his Slaves and Vassals; whilst destitute of Gold and Silver, has
not only the whole Universe, but Pluto's Region for his Patrimony, and though a
Bachelor, and freed from the Marriage Yoke, makes use of what stranger Beds he
pleases. Who-ever shall deliberately consider these things, need not be
tormented into a confession, that who commits them; Lifts up himself above all
that is called God, and over every Dignity, sitting in the Temple of God as
God, and boasting himself as God! But those things which are of God, Who will
deny to be divine?

He has certainly forsworn all reason, who shall imagine, that the destruction
of all reason is to be ascribed to reason, or that it proceeds from the
dictates of common reason, that Captive reason is thrust out and displaced,
under the obedience of most prodigious faith.

Shall we attribute that to humane sense, which charms, and bewitches all
Sense? when no torments, no terrors can affright us from testisying those
things to be true, which both sight, hearing, touching, smell, and tasting, and
all that is of sense in us does openly and constantly gainsay. Who then does
not perceive that the persuasion of the Roman Catholic Faith, is derived from
far distant Principles?

The Heretics indeed confess that the wisdom of the Apostles was divine. Yet
was it not so sublime, that they could conceive by what art upon such slender
foundations, and in their Nature so unproper for such Institutions, as they saw
laid by their great Master Jesus, so vast a weight of Empire should be built;
though Evangelical story testifies them sufficiently ambitious and desirous of
Reign, and consequently not altogether incurious, after Political Mysteries.
But if therefore that Divine wisdom, which fell upon the Apostles, if when
compared to this of ours be but mere folly, and insufficient to raise the
Fabric of this our holy dominion, with what Elogies ought the wisdom of our
Popes to be celebrated? Certainly it may well be termed the Divinest, that so
far surpasses the Divine it self. For that it is Diabolical, not Heretics
themselves dare affirm. All men confessing our Pope to be a most potent Prince,
who not only Rules over part of Italy, and in that over the Head of the World,
but stretches or imposes his Dominion, into almost all Regions of the Earth,
being Master of so many Forts and Garrisons, as there are Churches and
Monasteries dispersed through the World; and having so many Soldiers ready at
his beck, as there are Friars and Monks there fed and fatned up. But now the
Heretics out of those things which to this very intent the Apostle writ in his
Letters to the Clergy and People of Rome, have learned, that There is no power,
but it is of God. The Powers that be are ordained of God, so that whosoever
resists the power resists the Ordinance of God. Romans 13.1. With what face
then can they deny the power of the Roman Church to arise from God, or be of
Divine Ordination? Who ought therefore themselves to be subject to this
Ordination: And to that end the same Apostle elegantly testifies the Pope to be
armed not with one, but two Swords.

Is there Evil in the City, and God has not done it? which the Prophet of the
Calvinists robs of the question, and make an affirmative Doctrine. Yet
themselves cry out, there never was any greater evil extant, than the
Pontifical Power, so that then of necessity they must grant it to be of God,
and what is of God; Who can deny to be Divine? But by the same means we have
demonstrated the Churches Original to be from God, by the same in my Opinion,
may its preservation be ascribed to God, by what a Mass of studied Snares and
Devices, by what a Power and Multitude of Engines have the Lords of the Earth
studied in all Ages to pull in pieces, and overthrow this Sacred Empire, but
all in vain, and to no purpose, that the whole World might take notice that the
most just Judge of all things presides over this Monarchy, whose Oracles have
foretold its power to last many Ages, and to that end how liberally has he
promised to enlarge among Mankind, the Spirit of Error and Power of Seducing.

But whither am I wandering? It Is not out of the Scriptures, as foreign; and
not at all pertinent to the present purpose, but out of the proper and genuine
Principles of the Universal Faith of the Roman Catholics, as far as it is by
Protestant Heretics opposed, that it is to be demonstrated; which, I hope will
be the more commodiously dispatched, if we distinctly contemplate the admirable
frame of this Religious Empire, diligently deliberating all its Laws, and all
those Opinions repudiated, or rejected by the Heretics.

In the treating of this, I had proposed for my Method to follow Euclide, and
from a few Fundamentals, raise the whole structure of this Sacred Monarchy; but
taught by Experience, I found the Materials so various, so diverse, and so
contrary to themselves thrown into one mighty Pile of Rubbish, by the
Architects; but all with such wonderful and cunning Arts closed and cemented
together, that it was not possible to expose them all at one view; for, though
some did appear, some were hid and covered over by others, that it would be too
difficult in the Order wherein they are joined, to represent them fingly.

Three only Fundamentals, omitting all other, I have therefore pitched upon. One
Definition; One Axiom, or Proposition; And one Postulatum, or Request.

THE DEFINITION. The Church is a Spiritual, but visible Rule or Empire, wherein
Men follow the prescribed Faith, under one spiritual or visible Head, to wit,
the Pope of Rome, and yield him conformable Obedience.

The AXIOM, or PROPOSITION. Whatsoever contributes to the Defense and Increase
of this Church, that, and that only ought to be adjudged True, Holy, and Pious.

The POSTULATUM, or REQUEST. May this Church extend it self, even to the ends
of the Earth.

Though these be indeed the first Principles, which of themselves do not
furnish out the whole matter for demonstration, yet they suffice to include all
the other Principles, which in due time we shall bring to such light, that not
the most obstinate Heretics shall be able to doubt of them. But the Reasons by
which I was induced more especially to write to you, concerning this matter,
Right Reverend Brothers, do already from what I have said, so abundantly
appear, that it would be superfluous farther to explain them; and if you in
your judgments shall approve this Holy Design, what I have now only veiled in
Epistolary brevity, I shall more diligently hereafter digest into better order,
and enlarge with comments, endeavoring as much as in me lies, with all
plainness and ingenuity to explain all the arts of the Catholic Religion.

So Farewell in the Lord. Paris, Call. Aug. From the Birth of the Blessed
Virgin, MDCLxvi.
JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIVS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER. HIS Second Epistle
Concerning the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith. To the
Right Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALLENBVRGH.
WHat I lately promised you, Most Reverend Sirs; to demonstrate in order, the
Usefulness and Necessity of all the several Heads of the Roman Catholic Faith,
now under your favor and protection, I attempt. Pardon that delay, which the
interposition of other affairs, that distracted me, has hitherto caused, which
I promise again to redeem by a future compliance, and diligence; and in the
mean time, let what I now offer, receive your favorable Censure.

In the first place therefore, since the very Rule of Doctrine does require
those things to be preferred before all others, which will either afford the
amplest light, or give the best assurance of accord. We judge we ought to take
our beginning from the WORD of GOD, for though that may afford the Heretics
never so ready and commodious, occasions to maintain their errors, yet by the
incredible, and almost divine dexterity of ours, it has been used to be so well
wrested and turned, that our most advantageous Tenants seem as aptly built upon
it, as their most pernicious Opinions; Wherefore not only Catholic Writers,
and amongst those the most renowned Bellarmine, but even the Fathers of the
most holy ecumenical Council held at Trent, adjudged all Treaties of Religion,
should thence have their original, and the Legate Cardinal de Monte proposed The
Word of God to be the first matter of all such arguings, Hist council. Trid.
Lib. 6. c. 11.
per Istabilire con quali Armi si dovesse pugnare contra gli Heretici, ed in
quali base dovessere fondare la lor credenza i Catholici, to use the most
eminent Pallavicini's own words, for the establishing with what arms the
Heretics were to be combated, and on what Foundations the Catholics were to
ground their Faith, and we shall effectually show what a steadfast confidence
the Doctors of the Roman Catholic Faith ever had of forming the Scriptures, as
though they were of wax, to their own party and purpose: For, though at that
time, Er. Vincentius Lunellus (following the example of Sylvester Prierius,
Eckius, and others their Predecessors) was of opinion the Church was to have
the first place in dispute, as the main and more solid Pillar of Theology, to
which both Holy Writ and Traditional Authority should only bow, yet that
counsel, though not proceeding from an evil mind, but certainly very imprudent
and dangerous, was rejected by the other Fathers, because the authority of the
Church, as then esteemed, was to be fixed and determined, and ought not to be
exposed to the least stretch of controversy, for fear some impious or unwary
mind should chance to fall into, or start a doubt. Therefore neither have we
placed this Divinity of the Roman Church amongst those truths that are to be
demonstrated, but even in our former Epistle ^et it down, as the first and
indubitable Principle; and such, that whoever durst deny, or call in question,
was not to be chastised with weak and ineffective words, but furious stripes,
and unless he soon and seriously repented; (As a violater and defiler of the
Spouse of Christ, a disturber of the Holy State, and a Traitor both to the
divine and half-divine Majesty) have his blaspheming tongue cut out, or he
taken from the number of the living, and burnt in expiatory flames, according
to Christ's own command. If any one abide not in me, (that is, in the Church,
which together with the head constitutes the body) he is cast forth as a
branch, Joh. XV. Verse vi.
and is withered, (that is, being thrown out of the Communion of the Church, he
is by various torments so macerated, and dried up, that he becomes fitter for
fuel) and men gather up those branches, and cast them into the fire, and they
are burnt.

Nor indeed is there any other way, since from a common School-prescript.
Contra negantem principia non est disputandum. There Is no disputing against a
denier of Principles; We have already found out that the authority of the
Church ought to be reckoned among those things which the Philosophers call
(...), or indemonstrables, which though they cannot themselves be proved, yet
may serve to prove others.

Nor ought it to trouble us, though Heretics make such a clamorous babbling,
that Indemonstrables may be three ways called so; For there are some which for
their falsity or obscured perplexity and incertainty cannot be demonstrated:
Others may be called Indemonstrables, though they have such and so plain a
light of Truth, that our heart if never so little intent upon them, constantly
approves them, and nothing can be propounded that seems then them more firm and
evident: Others again may be called so, not that they are utterly not to be
demonstrated, but which already have been demonstrated; so that they want not
the utmost probation, but are taken in the progress of resoning as Principles
already certain and evident. They therefore ( i.e. the Heretics) that the
authority of our Church is in the first sense Indemonstrable, out of derision
easily grant. But the second and third they deny; nay from thence they conclude
taking it from your own hint. (Judgment without evidence or proof of the matter
is but rashly given) That it is a rashness to believe the authority of the
Church; Yet am I of the mind that it is all those three ways; and therefore
(...), simply and perfectly indemonstrable.

For that it is so in the first signification, from hence manifestly appears,
that by universal confession it pertains not to Knowledge, but to Faith, and
therefore according to St. Basil, (...), an assent is required to Faith not
made apparent; for as Clemens Alexandrinus truly says. (...), We embrace Faith
from an indemonstrable Principle; for what he speaks of the word of God, as it
manifests it self to him by its own light, we much more commodiously pronounce
for the Church. Whence it is no wonder, whilst Faith by general consent is so
obscure, that it is (...), Of things not seen, that likewise that proposition.
The Church of Rome is Mistress of Divine Faith and manners, appears not of such
evident certainty. There is therefore both for its falseness and obscurity,
between this and other indemonstrable Propositions, this vast and terrible
difference, That the rest only cannot be demonstrated, but this neither can
nor ought. For certainly, That ought not to be done, which whilst any one
undertakes, he both makes himself a laughing stock, and exposes the whole
matter to danger and debate. But whosoever endeavors to demonstrate the
Authority of the Roman Church out of its vulgarly known Principles, must as
Experience witnesses, of necessity run into many wild mazes and windings, or
fall into greater obscurities and uncertainties.

Wherefore assenting herein with the very Heretics themselves, we conclude,
That the Divinity of the Roman Church is in the first sense indemonstrable.

But how that may likewise be said of the second signification, will be of
somewhat more difficult disquisition: for as you have very well hinted, Most
Reverend Brothers, In vain do we seek for the evidence of things in the Roman
Faith, as things which do not appear: that is, by the interpretation of the
Apostle, things that have no being: from whence it happens, that when we hear
those words, The Roman Church is Mistress of all, we do not immediately yield
steadfast assent to it, as if it were an undoubted Truth, nor find we any force
upon our Souls to constrain our belief of it. Wherefore this proposition seems
not to deserve any place among those which with one single prospect of the Mind
are at once perceived and approved of by us. But yet indeed to remove that
difficulty it should diligently be weighed that the Mind of Man may be two
several ways affected, for either it is simple and unbyassed by any thing of
prejudice, or otherwise disposed to some agreeing temper, and as it were
seasoned with some savor: for the most part it has not light proper for
discerning this Truth, nay sometimes is so absolutely indocible to any belief,
that without that light which proceeds from a flaming Faggot, it can never be
effectually illustrated: but this is so ordained and established without any
arguing or fear of Error, that though as the Proverb says, The Church should
sheep with both Eyes, yet it has conclusively both for knowledge and all
faith, that manly and magisterial Ipsa Dixit. But of such a mind, the
perception is like to that which when quickest sighted deny the seeing of
Phantasms and Visions, it does pretend distinctly and accurately to see every
thing, no otherwise then those who beholding their first Vital Light on a
Sunday, are reputed to see Fayries and Hobgoblins, and other Spirits of the
Night, Wandering Fires, and Terrors of the Grave, which others in the clearest
light, and under what Star soever born, nay though they had Lynceus his Eyes,
cannot at all discern. Nor ought any one to derogate from this Judgment of
ours, that in the manner we have declared many Spirits are so senseless and
insipid as to adhere without any discernment or Examination to what has from
their tenderest age been taught them, or rather commanded them by their Nurses
and Tutors. For it does not from thence follow that in those kinds of knowledge
they should not see as clear as others: for even Experience it self teaches,
That those who are weak-sighted do in the thickest darkness see a thousand
strange and discolored Figures which fly before a quick and piercing Eye. Thus
as those who with the violence of a Fever grow distracted, often fancy things
in their imaginations which the soundest minds could never conceive; yet
neither weakness of Eyes, nor Fevers, nor Distractions are reckoned among
Vices: So though neither stupidity nor folly, nor an unapt propension to Faith
in any thing, are accounted among Virtues of the Mind, yet they are used so to
instruct and perfect Man, as to make him at first view embrace this Principle
of the Churches Authority, and firmly adhere to it: for it is necessary that
between our Faculties and those Observations laid down to us, a certain due
reason or proportion should interpose, that as it is in the Proverb, Time and
Straw ripens Medlars, that is, brings them to a perfect rottenness and
corruption.

None therefore need think it a wonder if what we have asserted concerning the
Divinity of the Roman Church, do seem a little obscure to an Understanding not
yet initiated or at all accustomed to our Principles, whilst, that I may use
the solemn words of our Mystical Theology, he was so stupefied that he was not
capable of perceiving things not appearing by reason of their being: for which
he may confide in these Arts; and when he shall hereafter be modelled by our
wisemen, we shall teach him in a larger and more peculiar manner.

Thus have we manifested the Fundamental Doctrine of our Church in the first
and second Signification to be Indemonstrable. There remains yet the third
place that is how it may be termed so after a framed Hypothesis of
demonstration, which plainly appears in our first Epistle: for we have already
there laid down the Demonstration of the Popish Religion, and the power founded
on it not to be framed or made out a Priori indeed as the Schoolmen have it;
but nevertheless a Posteriori.

Therefore for trial-sake only, we will set down this one Argument, which
after your Example we will give perfection to by this Triangular form: That
Power which no humane force can resist, must needs descend from Heaven.
But no humane force could ever resist the Power of the Church of ROME.
Therefore the Power of the Church of ROME is descended from Heaven.


The first Proposition is clear in it self, the next is proved by the
Experience of many Ages: whereupon the third must needs remain firm and
unshaken. -- Veluti Marpesia Cautes.

Now if any be of so steady a Brain, that with whatever Syllogistical
Circulation it be turned about and agitated, he can yet be secure from
giddiness, he may likewise have by Witnesses confirmed the Demonstration of
this Proposition; after your Example, Most Reverend Men, who a year ago
divulged that excellent way of proving things, so much wished for by the
Lawyers, and by which with so much success you defended the Follies of I know
not what Helmstadt Divine; That hereafter you thought nothing solid was to be
expected from the Protestant Divines, if (to wit) they were ignorant of the
Knowledge both of Divine and Humane Laws. Such as heretofore in that Julian
Academy were Calixtus, Conringius, and their Scholars, a sort of wretched
lurking Knaves, and an untutored race of People.

But though whole Regiments of Witnesses might be brought, who have writ of the
Invincible Majesty of the Roman Church, I will now only produce one; but such
an one as both testifies of times past and to come, at once a Historian and a
Prophet, the most blessed Campanella. For if, says he, De Monarc. Hisp cap.
xviii Quod si inquit, etc.
all Princes and People should join their forces together to dissolve the
Papacy, yet they will never effect any thing: for if only the Expedition of
the Croissado were set on foot, all Religious Orders, of which there are so
many Millions, would fly to Arms, and with their Tongues and Swords restore
that, and strike Terror into the Whole World; for neither would People dare to
bear Arms against holy men; or if all did not, the greatest part submitting,
the rest affrighted would lose their Courage: for though the Pope should be a
wicked man, yet that Prince that shall dare to draw his Sword against him, will
be overcome even whilst a Conqueror; a thing made manifest in Roger Guiscard
King of Naples, who gaining the Battle, yet was compelled to kiss the Popes Toe.

Nay even the very same Syllogism (applying those things as we have said with
caution) may be proved by innumerable Testimonies out of Holy Writ, of which
one may suffice: Rev. xiii. 7. And it was given (to wit, by God) to him (to the
seven-hill'd Church) to make war with the Saints and to overcome them, and
power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations: whence
ravished with an Admiration of her self, she cries out, I sit as a Queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no sorrow, Rev. xviii. 7. For it has a promise, that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. xvi. 18. And the reason of
the promise, For if Satan be divided against himself, how shall his Kingdom
stand, Luke xi. 18.

Lastly, As a late Philosopher assumed an Authority of laying down his
Hypotheses as direct Certainties, on which might be laid a Superstructure of
the Universality of all things, and all Phaenonoma's thereby explained: so we
to our Principle assume the same right, and confirm it by these two Syllogisms:
That which so strongly cements any vast Body composed of a thousand parts, that
no one part shakes or totters, is absolutely a solid Foundation: But by this
Proposition, That the Authority of the Church of Rome is Divine, the whole
weight and body of the Papal Empire is cemented and knit together; Ergo.


Again, That in which all Doubts may be resolved, and it self not dissolved, is
the First Principle of all Doubts: But this Proposition, etc. Ergo.


Thus from You, Most Reverend Brothers, we have learned to Argue in Form, which
is accounted to have such a wonderful efficacy in persuasion, that I cannot
doubt but the very Heretics, startled at these Syllogisms, will be ready to
give us their hands, which if they suddenly do not, we shall next proceed to
Demonstrations from the Word of God.

In the mean time farewell. Paris in the great Convent, Call, October. MDCLxvi.
JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIVS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER HIS Third Epistle, Concerning
the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith, To the Right
Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALLENBVRGH.
BY what Reason we have been induced to reckon the Authority of the Roman
Church, amongst the (...) or Indemonstrables; and why we determined to take the
beginning of our Order of Demonstration from the Word of God, we have already
at large Explained in the former Epistle. Wherefore we will now approach the
main Point, first by Universal Theology, laying down simply and nakedly all the
Propositions controverted by the followers of Luther, and Calvin, then singly
if need be Explaining them; and in the last place bringing them under
Demonstration, but as to what respects the Form and Manner of proving them,
though we had once designed to use Syllogistical Figures, we afterward changed
our mind, and more advisedly determined to express our Arguments in a freer and
more continued manner of Discourse rather then to fashion them after the Mode
of Barbara, or imprison them under the Modes of Celarent, and Felapton;
especially whilst all that Syllogistical Texture (if we have regard to you)
would in a manner be Vain and Useless, for I have heard that all things which
you have usurped either with your Eyes or Ears, or but touched with the Tip of
your Finger, are by a most wonderful Power (and yet not Transubstantive)
straight ways Triangulated into formal Syllogismes.

THAT THEREFORE THE WHOLE MOST HOLY MONARCHY, MAY BE FORTUNATE AND HAPPY, and
more safe and beneficial for the wafting all those Invoke the Papal Deity into
a more magnificent and splendid Life. Be thou the First

PROPOSITION.
That to the attaining Salvation, some Religion is absolutely necessary.

EXPLICATION.
It may possibly be wondered at by some, that having proposed the Demonstration
only of such Heads of the Catholic Faith, which the followers of Calvin and
Luther oppose; that we should undertake the proof of this Proposition, since
they themselves do not only defend it as a truth, but urge it as necessary, and
judge all who think otherwise worthy to be cast out of Humane Society; but
their wonder will cease when they shall know that I have stated the matter in
the same words indeed, but in a sense quite different from the Heretics, for
as to the word RELIGION, that indeed sounds the same to them and us. That is,
The fear of some invisible power Exalted above humane Condition, Mortals as
more feeble, and inferior to it, are to apply themselves to, with all
submissive Reverence. But that word SALVATION, General, it be taken by both
Parties in the same sense, to wit, for the top and extremity of all Truth,
Piety, and Holiness, and therefore the end of all Religion: Yet specially it
usurps a diverse signification, for when in our only Axiom, Epist. 1. that only
ought to be deemed Pious, True, and Holy, which tends to the Churches, that is
(as in the same Epist.) to the Defense and Amplification of the Papal Empire;
it will of necessity be gathered thence, that that word SALVATION signifies
nothing else to us, But a prospect of the Vastness and Perpetuity of that
Dominion, which under Christ's Name, his Vicar Exercises here upon Earth. But
the Heretics in a quite different manner abuse the word, to wit, by making it
signify I know not what imaginary Kingdom of Christ which they call Invisible,
here upon Earth Internal, but in the Heavens Eternal, and which with our
Salvation (that is, with the Welfare and Prosperity of the Roman Empire) to
have any Consistency, they expressly deny. Wherein least either side happen to
Err, it is by the way to be observed: That by the Name of Roman Empire, no one
is to understand that profane thing, which at present is Vulgarly called the
German Empire, and by the Germans Das Romische Reich, but that most truly Holy,
yea Divine-Power, which our great Pope as Vice-god Exercises upon Earth; for as
for the Caesar's, and other worldly Kings, they neither are in Rome, nor scarce
get any Right in or from that City; nay, rather all they possess is solely from
the Churches favor, holding it in Fee and under that Title becoming her
Vassals, whence it would be very Idle and Ridiculous to call them either Kings
or Emperors of the Romans.

Therefore the Heretics meaning of the word, differs from ours as far as East
from West, whilst for SALVATION they understand that blessed Estate which
Mortals too greedy, and therefore too Credulous of Immortality, do, as I
suppose, expect to enjoy in the Elysian Fields: But we mean by it certain and
present Happiness; and that this last signification is much more Noble and
excellent then the other, and brings as we say, More Grist to the Mill; from
hence appears, that in the judgment of all Prudent men, Certain and present
Goods, are to be preferred before future and doubtful ones; and therefore
likewise the Church has a Value for present things.

DEMONSTRATION.
Since by SALVATION nothing else is to be understood but the Welfare of the
Church, as Def. 3. Propos. 1. and that the Church from the only Def. Epist. 1.
is a spiritual Kingdom, which in fear and Spiritual obedience, and therefore as
Def. 1. Propos. 1. in Religion only consists; it must of necessity be thence
Collected, that Salvation cannot be obtained without some Religion, which is
what was to be Demonstrated.

The force and power of this Period is so Firm and Evident, that not only the
wisest Lawgivers and Founders of Republics have in all Ages observed it, but
even Boys are at this day Taught in the Schools, that no Earthly Governments
can Subsist, unless they be founded upon, or at least Bordered about with
Religion: And yet some trivial writers of Politics (of which sort of Vermin,
whole Shoals have in this Age been Bred in your Germany, as our most Eminent
Richlieu used to say) have even to Loathing dictated out of Plate, Aristotle,
Tully, and Seneca, whole Hundreds, nay, repeated Thousands of patcht Systems
for a Foundation to the Religion of Empires, which needed not have been so
laboriously Inculcated when no one can doubt of it, that is not absolutely
unexperienced in all things, and a stranger to all Commonwealths: For though
(if I may speak out of Plutarch) there are in all Stages of the Universal
World, Contra Colosen.
Cities to be found wanting Walls, Learning, Laws, Houses, Goods, Money, and
Ignorant of Schools and Theaters; yet a City wanting those Temples of the gods,
where Prayers, solemn Vows, and Oracles were used, where Sacrifices are made
for good things, and evils endeavored to be averted by holy things no man yet
ever saw: I therefore think it were easier to Build a City without a ^un, then
that that City should either gather or subsist, where the Opinion of the gods
is utterly taken away. And it is but this Savayedra meant when blushing to say
over again what had been so often said, he chose rather to paint the Pillars of
the Republic Floating in the Air, unless they were knit together by a Basis of
Religion. And the same thing though more newly and briefly (as he does many
things else) says our Montaigne: Toute Police a un Dieu a sa Tete, Essais l. 2.
c. 16.
All Police has a god at the head of it: To wit, It has ever been the Business
of the Wisest and most Prudent men to deceive the people in matters of
Religion, as St. Austine in his de Civ. Dei lib. iv. cap. 23. very well noted:
For that all Actions might be made more venerable, they are to be referred to
God, according to the Counsel of Campanella de Monar. Hisp. cap. 9. for as much
as all have a greater value for Divine, then humane Power, as was rightly
observed by the most wise Machiavel Counselor to his holiness Pope Alexander
VI. in his Discourse of Commonwealth, Lib. 1.11. Nor if we consider the Nature
of men, can things be otherwise swayed, for all men are by Nature equal, as
Hobbs de Cive. has rightly observed, and therefore as well out of a sense of
that Natural Equality, as out of a General Ambition common to all Mortals, man
does not so easily subject himself to Man as to God. But that Man (compelled to
it by unavoidable necessity) may live in Society, he ties himself by certain
Covenants and Laws: but those Laws are only armed against external actions,
which must be proved by certain Reasons and Circumstances, so that not so much
wickedness, as the discovery of wickedness, not so much malice, as imprudence
seems to be punished. Whoever therefore can closely commit Injuries,
Adulteries, Fr. in ad Ant. Fabri de relig. reg.
Rapines, Murders, will certainly care little for humane Laws, unless there be
another Law which does inwardly extend its Threats even to the Soul of the
Sinner. Hence Polybius, after he had told us, that the care of Religion and
Superstition was so much increased among the Romans, (...), Superstition is
increased unto admiration, says he; and then, as though out of profound
darkness he espied through a narrow crevise, some distant light approaching, he
adds, (...). I can think it done for no other end then to please the People,
for the multitude are always various, full of unlawful desires, precipitate in
anger, and thence easily driven to fury; whence it comes to pass that the
Rabble are no way to be compelled, but by terrors not made manifest, or some
horrible Bugbear fictions. Thus that Politic Scribler, whom if any one will
not believe, he is surely to be condemned, not only fasting and next his heart
to swallow down the Monitions of Lipsius (for that Book is too small) but even
all the weighty Politics of the R. F. Friar Adam Runken, with all his Notes
and Appendixes, and the universal Common Places of the Germans. But enough!
Return we to our purpose.

If then to the establishing and preserving of any Empire whatsoever, Religion
be so necessary, how much more is it requisite in ours, which is altogether
sacred and spiritual, and not administered by profane men, but by our most Holy
Pope. By Religion, says the often by us praised Thomas, the Pope rules over all
Europe, Asia, Africa and America, and in a word over all the Christians of this
World, for those who shine with the Majesty of Religion cannot be resisted. De
M. H. C. 19.
Take notice of Samuel, Id. C. 18.
who placed Saul on the Throne, and again Electing David, deposed him. But what
has not the Pope both dared and done in this Kind. Look upon Moses, who alone
with the Levites and Priests took Arms against the Rebellious Children of
Israel and their Princes, who with their Wives exceeded the number of a
million; and yet with the Arms of one Sacerdotal Tribe, he slew in one day
three and thirty thousand men. Of these Priests it might truly be said, That in
their hands the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then a two-edged
Sword piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, as says a certain nameless Author in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Cap. 4.

PROPOSITION II.
But Natural Religion is not sufficient for Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
BY Natural Religion we understand A comprehension of the Knowledge of some
Superior and Invisible Power, Def. un.
whether begotten at the same time with the Mind of Man, or collected from
Contemplation, or a certain way of reasoning of the Universality of Things.
These Heads are by our people termed Les cinque points du Catechism des
Deistes, The Five Points of the Catechism of the Deists; by the Germans, Du
funff Haupstuct der Allgemeinen Naturlichen Religion. Of our side they have
among others been Explained by the Venerable Father Garassus, but among the
Heretics by Herbert in his Fundamental Divinity, in two Books, one containing
that of the Laics, the other the Religion of the Gentiles; of which Treatises,
the first was Midwif'd into the World by a Man above all Praise and Veneration,
and whose own Name is not to be named by us; but the other by that Belgian
Heretic and a half, whom you know, the most ingenious Isaac Vossius. But the
Articles are mustred up in this Order:

I. There is some Supreme Deity. II. That Deity ought to be Worshipped. III.
Virtue joined with Piety, is the Best Rule of Divine Worship. IV. Sin is to be
Repented of. V. Rewards and Punishments are to be given after this Life.
These Five Axioms, and therefore all Natural Religion, we deny to be
sufficient for Salvation.

DEMONSTRATION.
IT does not from those Five now Rehearsed Heads of Natural Religion, follow
that all mortal men owe obedience to the Pope of Rome. For any one may believe,

1. That there is some Supreme Deity, although he do not believe any other
besides Kings and Princes, Vicar to that Deity, or that it has an Universal or
Spiritual Head existant upon earth.

2. He may likewise believe that Deity ought to be worshipped, and yet not from
thence become persuaded that our Pope's Buttocks or Toes (for so it must be
when all of him is alike holy) are to be kissed, or he to be adored in the
Elevation at the Altar.

3. He may believe that Virtue joined with Piety is the best Rule of Divine
Worship, and yet doubt whether all Virtue consists in Liberality to the Clergy,
or whether all Piety be discharged in a blind Obedience to the Church.

4. He may believe Sin is to be repented of, though he be utterly ignorant of
Sacramental Penance, nor ever thought that Absolution was to be bought from the
Priest with a sacred Sheckle.

5. Lastly, He may believe that there are Rewards and Punishments after this
life, though perhaps he may judge that speech of Sincerus Actius to Pope
Clement, rather poetical than sincere, Magne Parens custosque hominum, cui jus
datur uni
Claudere coelestes and reserare fores.
Man's Guardian-Parent, to whom's only given
A right to shut and open the Gates of Heaven.
Therefore by the single definition of this Proposition, and Def. 3. Propos. 1.
Natural Religion is not sufficient for Salvation, which is what was to be
demonstrated.

COROLLARY.
Therefore it does not appear from the Light of Nature only, That the Pope of
Rome is Lord of the Universe, nor is this Mystery revealed to all Nations.

THere are which object all the Oracles and Auguries of the Gentiles, by which
the Eternity of the Roman Power, has been from the most Ancient of times
prophesied and foretold. Yet I must confess that most Ancient Prophecy of
Homers in his Illiads, concerning the Original of the City of Rome seems to me
more wonderful then all the four or twelve Oracles of the Hebrew Prophets.
(...),
(...).
Nunc autem Trojana Aeneas Sceptra tenebit,
Et Nati Natorum and qui nascentur ab ipsis.
Trojan Eueas shall the Scepter sway.
And to his Childrens Children all obey.
For Jupiter to the Romans. -- Nec metas rerum nec tempora ponit,
Imperium sine fine dedit --
Neither to bounds of things nor time,
Their endless Empire did confine.
As Maro afterward Sung. But not by Men only; but even by Women did these
Southsaying Spirits foretell the Eternity of the Roman Dominion. Let us read
those of the Erinnian Poetess; which the nearer to approach the Delphick
Majesty, we will first rehearse in the Greek Tongue. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which in the Latin Tongue runs thus: Filia o Martis mihi Roma Salve,
Aureo Regina decora cultu,
Quae vel in terra stabiles Olympi
Incolas arces.
Nam dedit foli Tibi cana Parca.
Regium sceptrum minime atterendum,
Ut potens rerum domineris una,
Imperitesque.
Ipsa quae gandet variare cuncta,
Resque transformans Hominum Vetustas
Spirat haec uni tibi semper auram a
Puppe secundam.
And in English may signify thus: Rome Mar's daughter Hail to me,
Of Gold, O Queen, thy deckings be.
Thou who on Earth possessest powers
As firm as the Olympic towers.
To thee fate only gave to bear,
A Scepter can feel no impair.
That yielding to thy powerful sway,
Whilst thou command'st, all might obey.
Time which delights the World to range,
And subjects Men and things to change:
Finding his power over thee to fail,
Blows with a constant prosperous gale.
For out of the Charonensian Augury, a certain Fortune, Winged and Wandering,
and now haunting the Assyrians; now the Medes, Persians, Macedonians and
Carthaginians, and forsaking them all, at Tiber laid down her Wings; and
leaving her Voluble Globe, entered the City as a perpetual Inhabitant.

But above all, that Venusian Poet deservedly ravishes us with an extreme of
Admiration, who actuated with that Aetherial Spirit wherewith he was possessed,
foretells not only the Perpetuity of the Roman Empire, but of our Papacy.

Non omnis moriar, multaque lib. 3. od. ult.
pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam: usque ego postera
Crescam laud recens, DUM CAPITOLIUM
SCANDET CUM TACITAVIRGINE PONTIFEX.
I shan'c all die, my better part cannot fade,
But with fresh praise the future World shall fill,
So long as POPES SHALL WITH THE SILENT MAID,
MOUNT UP UNTO THE CAPITOLIAN HILL.
That is, for ever; which last words, a French Paraphrast, much more pleasant
then the venerable Marolius, very pregnantly rend red thus: Tandis que le
Pontiff montera au Chateas de St. Ange quelque Religieuse, que le laisser^
fair and ne dira mot, c'est a dire, tandis que le monde durera. As long as the
Pope shall in the Castle of St. Angelo, mount some Nun, wh^ shall let him do
it, and not say a word; that is, as long as the world endures. Upon which place
a very late Comentator advises, that not only the lives of the Popes, but of
the Ladies of Marozia, Theodora, Vannocia and Olympia, should be made
inspection into not indeed as they were writ by the Heretics, but as lately
set forth at Lions, by the R. P. Fra Franciscus Carriere Aptensis Minoritae
Convent. D. Theol. Our singular good friend and whom out of respect we name.

There are therefore that imagine, that a man attentive and desirous of
Salvation, may easily, out of these and such like Oracles of the Gentiles,
collect that the Eternity and Divinity of the papal Empire, and therefore that
the power of the Roman Church, may become known to Mortals from the very Light
of Nature.

But nevertheless, whoever they are that object such things against the truth
of our Corollary, do (in my opinion) much fail in their Judgment. For first,
Those Oracles are no way to be ascribed to the universal light of Nature; but
either to the cunning of some few, or chance; And smell rather, of the
ingenuity of the Readers and Interpreters, then of the Authors; nor do they at
all appertain to natural Religion, but to the (...), the Doctrine of Devils;
that is, the choicest, and most powerful part of the mystical Conclave.
Moreover, though they should praesignifie some Roman Empire, and in that, the
Eternity of the Sacerdotal Order; yet they least of all portend that Monarchy
which our Vice-Christ extends into almost all Regions of the Universe; for this
is a Mystery hid from all Ages, and only revealed in these latter times, which
never eyes before saw, nor ears heard; neither entered it into the heart of man
to conceive; for between that profane Empire of Kings, Consuls and Cesars; to
which old Rome was obnoxious: and this of ours, lies a bottomless Pit, and that
is as much outreached by this, Longius terraeplaga quam remoto
Did at Olympo.
-- As Heaven is from Earth, --

Elegantly has the Author of the Nipotisma di Roma, explained this difference,
which the R. F. Sempercus three days ago sent me a Copy of to read, out of
which, doubting it may not be come to your hands, I have inserted these few
things to be referred to Rome seemed born to rule over the World; Il Nipotismo
di Roma p. 1. lib. 1.
which may be said with good reason, since it has ruled, and does at present
rule. But in the time that Rome was a Commou-wealth; in the time that the
Emperors governed in Rome: Rome never assumed a Command over Consciences; nor
in any time obliged the Souls of Men to pay so great a tribute to the Vatican.
But the Popes (quite contrary) confound together Spiritual Rule, and Temporal
Living, to make one body of these two Powers; and applying themselves more to
the Spiritual then the Temporal, oblige both Princes and People to pay them so
exact an Obedience, that the memory of it terrifies the very thoughts and soul.
That power of the Popes, to shut the Gates of Heaven at their Will, and open
those of Hell at their Pleasure, obliges People to forget the Obedience due to
their Prince, and Prostrate themselves with Reverence before their Feet. That
Commonwealth which governed the World by Policy; The Roman Emperors who
Lorded it with Arms: Those Tyrants who trampled on it with Tyranny, never Dived
into such hidden Maxims, nor knew how to Humble People to their Devotion, as
they are at this day Humbled. So far He: From all which it appears, how vain it
is that some affirm, That the universal Monarchy of our Pope may be discovered
by the Light of Nature. We shall in the next place proceed to other things.

In the mean time, most Reverend Fathers, we bid you most heartily Farewell.
Paris, from the Convent. Major, the Ides of November, 1666.
JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIUS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER. HIS Fourth Epistle
Concerning the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith.
To the Right Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALENBVRCH.
Most Reverend Men,
ALmost at the first building of the City began the use of Martial Strenaeor
Newyears-Gifts, under the Authority of King Tatius, who first made wreaths of
the happy Tree in the strenuan Grove wearing them as happy Omens to the
New-year. The Name it self declares the thing for men strenuous for their
Virtue here used to meet, and therefore such Cognizances are due to you, whose
divine Soul is a greater testimony of the Vigilance, then the Omen can Expect.
Lib. x. Ep. 35.
Pardon the words of Symmachus, wherewith he of old complimented the Emperor
Valentine, Theodos. and Arcads. but which we to the most Excellent worth of
your most Reverend Persons, with an ampler Right and greater Merit, have now
applied, who have hitherto so dexterously labored in so strenuous a work; not
for the sake of any profane Empire, but for the Principality of the most holy
Roman Church: For it was you who at the command of his Holiness our Lord
Alexander the VII. being then Apostolical Nuncio to the Region of the Rhine (
upon which there is now Prayers and Peace in the Castle of Gondolpho) first
brought forth of your Armory, Darrs of a clear new Frame, and to Ancient
Mortals unknown; to wit, the SHIELD of ASSISTANCE, and the SWORD of GLORY,
which what terror they struck into the Protestants, Evangelicks, Reformists (or
by what Names soever you will have them distinguished) sufficiently appears
from the Loud Clamours and Lamentable Howlings wherewith they every where
filled the Air: So that about the very same time (and it was now almost the
three and fortieth year of this Century) the Catti beyond Taunus and Melibocus,
being stirred up to Arms, made louder Clamours, placing their Garrisons against
the Ubii, whose seats you then Inhabited, with so much affright, as if they had
feared an utter destruction from the revived Germanicus, or Silius.

But it is not only for your strenuity that the Catholic Church owes you these
Strena's, or Newyears-gifts, but for that likewise you lately on the Calends of
January, made a present by-way of Newyears-gift of these your Arms, gnawn
indeed a little with Rust, but yet new Cleaned and Polished, to the most
Venerable Pastors of the Arch-bishopricks of Mentz, and Collogne, and those
who had the Care of Souls; withal Exhorting them that that New year, they with
new minds should subdue Heretics, and if they must less publicly and solemnly
Triumph over them, yet at least in their Pavilions do it by Festival Dances;
for the Laws of Newyears-gifts require that (...) be sent to the Givers, as out
of the old Institutes of Gifts;

Hoc damus alternis accepimusque die, These we alternately Give and Receive.
Since then the use of that Gift is common to all, it belongs likewise to me,
and least both by others and my self, I should be thought ungrateful to you,
most Reverend men; I thought fit, as well for the defense of the Public
safety, as for your singular Liberality, to address some small present to you;
not clad in Gold, since our Monasterial Poverty deprives of the honor of
enjoying that rich Metal, but such as my small Stock will afford; this little
Paper, to which I have configned some things already begun and Inscribed to
you, as Demonstrations of the Catholic faith.

In the progress of which, that we may come to the thing it self there now
follows in the order of our design.

PROPOSITION, III.
To purchase Salvation, or to Establish and maintain the Regal Papacy of Rome,
there is besides Natural Religion, another required which is called
Supernatural.

EXPLICATION.
That by the attaining Salvation, nothing else is meant then the Establishment
of the Royal Roman Papacy, plainly appears from Prop. 1. wherefore we shall use
these Terms in the same sense promiscuously, which it will be sufficient to
have given this Advice of.

Def. un. But by Supernatural Religion, we understand that mass of Rites and
Tenants which not from the common and usual Dictates of Reason, but out of some
singular and immediate Revelation of a Diety is made known to some one in
particular, or to very few Mortals, and by them said to be Propogated to
others. Which description if you compare with Def. 1. Propo. 2. you will easily
find what is the difference between these two kinds of Religion: Yet this
Religion which we call Supernatural, may likewise be termed Civil; for it is
either only devised for the Constituting and Maintaining the City, or if it
truly come from God and he being indeed the Author of it, it be destined to a
more Sublime and Eternal end, yet it conduces no less to this: I might add that
it commands a more punctual observance of Civil Laws, and may therefore in that
sense likewise be called Civil; but since that Appellation strikes not any
Religious Veneration into the Hearers, I had rather wave it as well as that of
Preternatural, as which, has methinks, something an uncouth and hateful sound.
We have therefore said Supernatural, as a word composed of a nobler Particle,
and which Imprints a loftier Idaea in our Souls.

DEMONSTRATION.
Since by Prop. 1. to the Constituting sacred Empire, some Religion is
necessary; but the Natural by Prop. 2. is not sufficient, it is expedient that
to the Supplement and Assistance of the other should be added which is called
Supernatural, which is what is to be Demonstrated.

That Religion simply (which Nature has taught to all, scarce ever contented
any one City, but either they Illustrated it with the splendour of Ceremonies,
or augmented it with the accession new Tenants and Opinions, either derived by
Tradition from others, or devised out of their own Brain; so that if the
Universal consent of all Mankind be sufficient to Establish a truth, it may
from hence be possitively concluded, that there is a necessity of a
Supernatural Religion; but if a more solomn and diligent Pomp in Divine Worship
be requisite to the maintaining of any Commonwealth, none can be so stupid but
to foresee how abundantly it is necessary to our Empire, as that wherein
altogether consists in the Institution, Defense, and Amplification of the holy
Conclave.

PROPOSITION IV,
That Supern^tural Religion ought to be so constituted, that in it self and in
the Nature of its Principles, it may Level at Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
There are two kinds of means, some from themselves and out of their own
inclination are carried to some end, and others beside their Nature are wrested
to it by some art. Those are Smooth, Native, Genuine and Straight: These
Violent, Artificial, Counterfeit and Crooked. Those therefore are more Facile
and more Firm. These more Difficult and Unstable, and which though never so
much Bowed to our purpose, yet often on the sudden leave us, and briefly return
to their own Nature. Wherefore as they also say in the Schools: Hypoth.
Vntosoph.
The Excellency of Means consists only in the relation and sufficiency to the
end. Because, It Is that from which they receive all Loveliness, Order and
Measures. It must necessarily be gathered, that those things are best and most
perfect which are destined from their own Nature and Internal Principles, to
the obtaining of any end.

DEMONSTRATION.
Since by Prop. 3. Supernatural Religion is a means necessary to Salvation, and
out of the Hypoth, Ontosoph. those means are best which by their own proper
Nature are carried to some end, it necessarily follows such a Supernatural
Religion is to be established, which in it self, and the genius of its
Principles, tends to Salvation; which is what was to be demonstrated.

PROPOSITION V.
Where therefore either by the Ignorance, Imprudence, Malice or Studies
differing from ours of our Ancestors; any such Supernatural Religion, has got
sway, as does not conduce to our Solvation, it is expedient it be destroyed.

EXPLICATION AND DEMONSTRATION.
When even the Freshmen of the Ramists can tell us, that the means are only for
the end, therefore that taken away they cease: There is no need of a more ample
Explication or Demonstration.

Certainly that Camel-driver Mahomet, though rude and untaught in other things,
was not ignorant of these; who out of his love to Chadiga, being to seek out
Empire at the expense of his Magot; when among the ancient Tribes of his
envyers, he perceived the Idolatry of the Korathites, the Religion of the
Saboeans, the Superstition of the Jews; and the Faith of the Christians, to be
quite different from his purpose; he abolished them all, and established a new
form of Worship, made up of a commixture of their principle Tenants, with the
addition of some new ones. Nor was it for any other end that the Persians,
rejecting Mahomets Doctrine, have more lately followed, the Prophesies of Haly;
but only, because they believed one common worship with the Enemies of their
Empire, to be dangerous; and with better Wisdom, adjudged an entire Wall was to
be erected between them, at least, out of a new trimmed up Religion.

But what need is there of reciting Examples from Infidels, when in this matter
we may praise God as the prime Author? Who when he was about by Moses to erect
his Theocracy over Israel, not only abolished Idolatry, and the discordant
Opinions of right reason; but even those Noachides lately restored to us by
Seldens admirable industry; composing a Religion full of new Precepts and
Ceremonies; and prescribing that sort of Worship, whose several Heads, though
they refer to mystical ends, yet do as highly tend to the Service of the
Politics, and what is called Reason of State. And yet that Religion, though
established by Divine Authority, and made Dreadful by many Miracles and
Prodigies, was afterward not a little altered by Jeroboam, when snatching away
the Ten Tribes from Judah, he founded a new Empire, and constituted a new seat
of Religion.

But of these things, when I can obtain both that Indulgence from my
Superiors, and that leisure agreeable to me and my temper, I have a design
more largely to discourse, taking the Argument of my Treatise from Maimonidis
More Hannev. part 3. cap 26. and the Disput. Regis Cosareorum, part. 4. Sect.
13. Either of which Books, if you do not abhor (for the Character of Damnation,
set upon them by your Richleran University) yet to read over, we have them in
the library of our Monastery; and that (at your Service) in the Latin Tongue,
set forth by that famous Interpreter among the Judaizing Calvinists, Buxtorfius
the Son, lately indeed slipped hence; but both whose, and whose Fathers glory,
the half Heretic Flavignius's our Scholars, do report plentifully to blossom
forth in the Nephew, so that if any Scruple happen in the reading them, you
have yet one living to remove all doubts.

PROPOSITION VI.
Therefore that Supernatural Religion which does not conduce to Salvation,
should immediately, at one stroke, and with open violence be destroyed;
Provided that may safely and conveniently be done. If not, by slow and gentle
Arts it must leasurely and by piece meal be changed; still keeping the same
outward face and favor, until it be prrfectly quafied for the attaining
Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
Two ways principally may things be abolished; either by manifest and open
strength and violence, or by close proceedings and secret wiles. The first way
is most conveniently applied, when those things we defire to root out consist
in few, and those solid parts, and obvious to every eye; so that they neither
admitting of sundry degrees, nor varying themselves into diverse modes, scarce
can separately be dissolved, or secretly destroyed; Such things it were more
advisedly to overthrow all at once, and at a single blow: For should you
attempt to ruin them with a slow and gentle Arm, the most you could do, would
be unseasonably to betray your own Counsel, stirring up others, who at first
onset will cry out upon you for a Corrupter and an Innovator; and more
curiously observing every thing, contrive stronger Engines of resistance. But
then here, first of all, you must diligently consult whether you are furnished
with Aids, and fortified with Strength, sufficient at one clash to Overthrow,
Oppress and Break all Opposing Parties; for if such powers be in the least
wanting, another way is to be tried; that with a silent step, and careful
motion, by Stratagem you may arrive at your end. And this last way is chiefly
to be practiced when those things we are about to abolish, consist of many
parts; and those so various and imperceptible, that they may be increased and
diminished, stretched and loosned, and varied into so many shapes, that though
they are in truth changed; either they shall seem still in their same State, or
to Vulgar Eyes appear not much receded from it: For if you would remove all
those parts at once, or at one violent push, substitute all new things in their
Room, it can never be done without raising mighty Troubles, and stirring up
infinite Confusions; from whence you will never get free, but either with
ignominy, beforced to a dishonorable retreat, or contract to your self most
Pestilent Envy. And this is likewise chiefly to be observed, when those things
you strive to pull up, have taken deep Root, Et jam per longas invaluere moras.

For though at all other times, yet especially in this case, vehement and
sudden changes are most dangerous; and therefore we have likewise said in our
Proposition, that that Sepernatural Religion which is already grown powerful,
but is unproper for our ends, ought to be quasht at one stroke; PROVIDED THAT
MAY SAFELY AND CONVENIENTLY BE DONE; otherwise you must tread another path much
safer, and not only to things, but to the understandings of Mankind more
agreeable: For we are so formed by Nature, that we had rather be with
Flatteries allured and circumvented, then forceably compelled; And we more
willingly admit gentleness, though Treacherous and Deceitful, then any open
Violence. Besides, whenever by our imprudence, the business is brought to an
Issue; though we afterward discover the deceit, we for the most part choose
rather to acquiesce under the present state of affairs, then seek to recall
what was before with difficulty and uncertainty of event.

But this last Method contains two precepts, One, That things be changed
leasurely and closely; the other, That they still retain the same outward Face
and Favor: Which two, if rightly observed, will produce incredible advantages;
and which if you will hearken to St. Aquinas, seem to exceed the Omnipotency of
the most high; For by them it comes to pass, that the several parts, though at
length all taken away, yet the whole, notwithstanding, remains entire; which
yet the Thomists and Occamists with one consent teach us, implies a
contradiction, as I remember long since to have heard from my Master, of
blessed memory D. Raconis, of the Navarr College. But we will follow the
Scotists; and then those to whom, as you have taught, it were to be wished that
the defense of the Catholic Religion, were hereafter to be delivered, rather
then to the Divines, to wit, the Lawyers; for thus Alfenus, l. 76. F. de
Judiciis. Proponebatur, ex his Judicibus qui in eandem rem dati essent
nonnullos causa audita excusatos esse, In Exam. Princip.
inque eorum locum alios esse sumptos, etc. It was proposed out of those Judges
employed in the same thing, some after the hearing of the Cause were dismissed,
and others taken in their places; and it was questioned if the change of
several Judges, made the same thing, or another Judgment. I answer, that if not
only one or another; but if all the Judges were changed, yet the matter would
remain the same, and the Judgment the self same it was before. Nor does it only
happen in this, that though the parts be altered, the thing is adjudged to be
the same, but in many other things; For that Legion is still accounted the
same, from which many have departed, and others have supplied their places; and
the People at this time think it the same that it was an hundred years ago,
though not one that was then in it be alive. In the like manner, a Ship, though
it be so often rebuilt, that there is not one Plank in it but what is new, is
notwithstanding judged to be the same Ship; for if any one shall think the
changing of parts, changes the thing, we by the same reason must not be our
same selves, which within a year we were; for as Philosophers say, we consist
of certain minute Particles, which continually give place in our Bodies to
others which inwardly succeed them; and this all our Interpreters advise, to be
effected in things that successively, and by parts, but not at once are wholly
changed.

And the same is delivered by the new Doctors of the Metaphysics, and by the
Heretics themselves; among all whom we will make choice of Claubergius, a man
doubly Heretical, as both infected with Cartesianism and Calvinism; and who
under that Title (had the Tutoberg Sepultures been in our power) was to have
been burnt; but yet, whom our most worthy Clerselerius, and the most friendly
Rovraeus have given great praises to, for the sharpness of his Wit, and
clearness of his Writing.

He therefore Ontosoph. Sect. 294. Tota, inquit, haec disputatio de eodemac
diverso, Edit ult.
potius ad modum cogitandi and loquendi pertinet, etc. All this disputation
(says he) of the same or a diverse thing, rather relates to the manner of
thinking and speaking, then to the things well considered in themselves; whence
the wise and vulgar, neither think nor speak alike in this matter; nor indeed
do wise men among themselves, though it be made evident by other examples then
that of the Philosophers dispute concerning Theseus's Ship, which may be read
in Plutarch his Theseus.

Sect. 295. Si non simul and semel, at paulatim and sensim sit mutatio facta,
etc. If not together and at once, yet leasurely, and by little and little, let
the change be made; so that being scarce observed, it will for the most part be
called the same. Thus Fire, which (as Aristotle well observes, lib. de juvent.
cap, 5) continually is rouling and pressing forward like a Flood, though by its
swiftness it gets out of our sight, is thought all night the same Fire, if fed
with continual Fuel; but if the Fire be once quite extinguished, and then
again gets head, it is avouched to be another. If a Ship be at once destroyed
in all its parts, that is, reputed of another number, which in its place is
built of new Timber. But if a Ship be repaired in parts, and in progress of
years becomes wholly changed, there are few men but will call it the same Ship:
For Example, that of Theseus, in which at last, there was not one Plank of the
old Timber remaining. This reason of the self same being, proceeds wholly from
our carelessness and inconsideration, making us account a change leasurely and
slowly made, though it be as much a change, as when happening together and at
once, almost for none at all. Sect. 296. Licet omnia accidentia externa quae
incurrunt in sensus mutentur, dummodo maneat invariatum aliquod fundamentum
saepe res eadem esse censetur, etc. Though all external accidents that present
themselves to the senses may be changed, yet if any fundamental part remain
unaltered, the thing is often judged to be the same. An Example we have in
boiling or melted Wax, in respect of that is solid and hard, in which all the
Sensibles are changed. Yet the extended and mutable subject remains still
endued with certain essential properties of Wax. Sect. 297. Si mans^rint parts
Principales, licet minus principales pereant, totum Judicatur idem, etc. If the
more principal parts remain, though the less principal parts perish, it shall
be judged to be all the same: For Example, It will be called the same House,
whose foundation and walls are standing, though all things else be destroyed.
Sect. 298. Si veltota mutetur materia dummodo forma quaedam eadem conservetur,
totum haud rar^ dicitur idem permanere, etc. Or though the whole matter be
changed, yet if some form be preserved, the whole is not rarely said to remain:
For Example, That is thought to be the same City or University now, which it
was an hundred years ago; though now the Citizens are all other persons then at
that time they were. But how the word FORM is to be understood in such things,
can scarce be defined by a general conclusion; for if you call that City the
same, because it re tains the same Laws and Privileges, and Place. Yet though
those be in all or the most part changed, it will not be forthwith thought
another. Academy's remain the same, though transferred elsewhere, as is done
either in time of War or Plague; and the City may go out of the Town. Sect.
299. Omnis igitur identitas, quae rebus tribuitur, requirit aliquod
fundamentum, quod vel revera vel apparenter maneat immutatum, etc. Therefore
every Identiry or sameness, which is attributed to things, requires some
Foundation, which must either really or seemingly remain unchangeable; whence
it is either truly or apparently so, according to being, or according to saying
only. You will doubtless wonder Right Reverend Men, that we continue so long
upon these Metaphysical observations, unless your selves have already made the
discovery; That hereunder lies hid the whole mysterions foundation of the
thrice holy Monarchy, and that in these Cradles, from the first Infant Estate
of the Church, that mighty Monster first began to be nursed up. Wherefore I
think it well worth the pains, to advise that these things be diligently
deliberated in our minds, being certainly persuaded that the fuller we
understand them, we shall the more fortunately and readily be versed in all the
rest. Nor will there any great difficulty in the rectification of Religion
intervene, when we shall from these principles have but indifferently learnt
the arts of erecting Idols, and setting up of Images. And what may give the
greater facility to this work is, that we have lately, by most beneficial
industry, and exceedingly to the good of all Mankind, that art of laying on
Colors, and disposing a F^^us, most excellently and neatly laid down in a
certain System of Precepts; to which end likewise, and with less labor to be
attained by us, many Examples of all humane actions do present themselves,
which we may imitate, as either the nature of things or ingenuity of Mankind,
shall suggest us the occasions.

DEMONSTRATION.
Since by Prop. V. it apppears, that that Religion, which is not proper to the
attaining Salvation, ought to be abolished; and from what we have now
explained, it is evident it cannot be abolished, but either by Force or Art; it
is necessary one of those two ways, according to the condition of time and
place be applied, which is what was to be Demonstrated.

I had many more things, but the Post is going, therefore Farewell in the Lord.
Paris, from the great Convent. these Calends of January, from the year of the
Blessed Virgins Childbearing, MDCLxvii.
JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIVS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER HIS Fifth Epistle, Concerning
the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith, To the Right
Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALLENBVRGH.
Most Reverend Men,
THe sad fate of the BREVINGIAN Scholar, I heartily grieve for. I took care
Yesterday that all the Scholars at St. Mathurinus, should Implore their Patron
in Ashes, and make a solemn Procession for his Health, I often heard indeed ere
now, that he was troubled with a (...), or fainting and sounding fits, but
never knew it was gone so far that his whole good mind was utterly infected. I
consulted our Guidon, who you know is a most Experienced Physician, and who in
words commanded me most friendly to salute you. I concealed the Patients name,
only exposing the Disease with its Symptoms; he advised to let Blood in the
Vena media, and then follow the same Rule of Physic, which Franciscus
Bartolettus, prescribed those afflicted with a Stentory. I went to another
Physician who believes the Disease may be only a simple Consumption of the
Understanding, yet fears least it may next turn into a total, and therefore
incurable Cachexy of the Brain. I hope better things, especially if he could
but once return to himself. Had he but that Medicine which we vulgarly call
Antimony, but the French call in Latin Antimonachum, and which, as I have
heard, is excellently well prepared by some of the Heretics; nor do I believe,
but that one in Orders may seek health from Heretics, as well as Christians
receive it from Jews. But I will here stop, and no longer detain you with the
unsavory Memory of the hard Fate of so friendly a man. I send you therefore a
Dialogue which I Yesterday received from Italy, of which what your thoughts
are, let me know as soon as you can.

Paris, from the great Convent these Calends of May, MDCLxvii. A DIALOGUE
BETWEEN Sona the Church of Rome.
SONA and ROPHAEUS.
Roph. I Heard you were Tormented with a cruel Distemper, fairest Sona, and
therefore with that same Devotion wherewith I adore your Father and your
Spouse, I came hither to offer you my Assistance and become your Physician.


Spona, I owe you indeed many thanks for your kindness, most Experienced
Rophaus, but for your coming to me upon such an Occasion there was no
necessity. Envious and Malicious men asperse my Fame, and among the perversest
of them, those wicked Renegado's, Rethulus and Usinulca, whom by the Mass,
could I but catch, I would so Comb with a Faggot, that --


Roph. Pray be not angry sweetest Lady.


Sona, Who can be patient in such a case as this, for can thou my Rophaeus,
discover in my Face, or the whole Constitution of my Body, any thing that
denies me to be in perfect Health?


Roph. Let me, I beseech you, beg leave clearly and plainly to tell you what I
think. When you were a tender Maid, you did not look so Beautiful as now: Your
Face then was Swarthy, as if it had been Sunburned, and by reason of your
frequent (...) or bleedings, your Body was leaner and drier, your Forehead was
not then decked with those Curles, nor had you that Lascivious Agility in your
Carriage, the Arts and Curiosities of Dressing had not then past upon you; and
I then remember to have seen you not clothed in Purple, nor shining in cloth of
Gold, nor glittering in Gems; but Poor and Ragged, far below the glory of your
Descent, and the Dignity of your Espousals: But now I behold you more Stately
and Magnificent. Those more charming Allurements of your Eyes, that Exalted
Countenance; That Lofty and Majestic Gate; That enticing Demeanor of Body;
That Splendor of Attire; That Pride of Furniture, and that Throne Shining
every where with Gold and Ivory, draw both the Eyes and Hearts of Specators, so
that you seem to Sit here like a Goddess; yet all these things promise but
little toward perfect Health. I know Women naturally love to hear themselves
praised, and therefore it is possible I may seem Rude and Uncourtly thus to
throw your Vices in your Teeth; but I hope both the Office of a Friend and a
Physician, will plead my Excuse. When therefore, I most steadfastly regard you:
I find (to speak ingeniously) all these things Painted and Counterfeit, nor can
I discern the flowers of Native Beauty, nor the lively and active Strength of
Body; your Eyes dart forth I know not what kind of Venim, that their very
Brightness seems infected with Contagion; those Patches with which here and
there you have bespeckled your Face, do not so much serve to set off it is
Complexion, as to cover Blemishes and hide Tokens of your Disease, and its
apparent to every one that Crimson mixed with White, is rather the effects of
Ceruse and Minium, then a flourishing Tincture of the Blood. There being
therefore so many manifest signs that you are infected with a foul Disease:
Pray tell me when your Distemper first seized you?


Sona, As though I had taken notice of the hour.


Roph. It will be very necessary that you tell me what time you began to be
first afflicted with it, that I may know whether the Disease be Fresh, or
Inveterate.


Sona, And pray then, do you tell me too good Old man, From what hour you began
to be thus unmannerly and importunate, or from what minute you began to grow
Old?


Roph. From the very minute of my Birth.


Sona, How can that be? That you should be Young and Old together, when these
two are contraries.


Roph. Leave your Gibing, there is somewhat of more moment in hand: But why
do Laugh?


Sona, There comes into my head, a dispute of my seventh Lover, he though the
most decrepit of all Men, hotly contended Yesterday that he was young: He
alleged that when none could determine the time, nor place wherein he began to
grow Old or Defective in strength, as no man could say that he did wax Old; so
from thence he gathered all men ought to esteem him Young, and of a Juycy and
entire Strength, and pleasing himself with this way of Reasoning, he collected
together all the strength his Fancy could feed him withal, and addressed
himself more fervently to me, embracing me streighter then ever Mars did his
Venus, when Vulcan caught them together in a Net: But alas, poor wretch, he
soon found his Nerves fail him.


Roph. Very wittily, and from hence thou would argue thy self a Virgin and in
perfect health, because you know not the hour when first this Distemper siezed
you, and from what Coition you first received the seeds of Contagion.


Sona, I must confess, I set not that down in my Calendar, nor do I remember
the Age in which I either was a Virgin, or ceased to be so. Petron Arbiter.
For, Et infans cum Paribus inquinabar, and subinde prodeuntibus annis
majoribus me pueris applicui, donec ad hanc Aetatem perveni. Vitulum puellam
solebam tollere, quo facilius adulta taurum sustinere possem.


Roph. Yet did you appear holier then the holiest Vestals.


Sona, It Is true, I composed my Countenance to such Bashfulness and Modesty,
that it deceived even the severest Censurers, no less then Aretines Nanna, who
so often sold her Virginity. Aret. Region Par. 1. Gior. 3.
Chi non vende un di questi pretacci la messa novella, attaccando per ogni
Citta police all chiese del suo eantarla.


Roph. Tell me the truth. How could thou fall into this course of Life, when
thou were descended from so holy a Father, destined to so holy a Spouse, and
brought up with such solicitous Care and Diligence.


Sona, Thou know, friendly Rophaeus, my Parents, and under what Covenants I
was in my Infant years delivered by my Father to my Spouse, to be Educated
according to his will and pleasure; thou know with what mind he went to the
Father, not designing before I was of perfect Age, to return to me and carry me
Home. Before he departed, he appointed several Instructers over me and my
Sisters, by whose care and exemplary Life we were stirred up to Piety and
Chastty, and instructed in diverse Tongues; whence it came to pass that of my
Sisters, some spoke Greek, others Persian, others Arabic, and others,
Ethiopian. He would not have us all Cohabit in the same place, and yet be
subject to the Empire of one only Tutor, who should Administer to all our
Welfare, and have a supreme Power over all our Instructors: He was a man of an
Austere inclination, who very roughly treated me and my Sisters, whether out of
some concealed command of our Parents, who by Rigid Discipline would have our
Chastities preserved, and all Lasciviousness bridled; or out of a natural
severity and ill will conceived against us. He then lived at Valentia, where I
was likewise bred up: Wherefore my Sisters when they had any Affairs to be
negotiated with our Tutor, made use of the care and diligence of my
Instructors, and my own Recommendations, whereupon there accrued to them a
great Authority above others; and I, though the youngest, easily gained the
upperhand of my Elders in all Ages. Indeed, I carried my self very strictly,
for though tempted by many, and though I willingly would have been profuse in
Lust, I had not the liberty, unless very closely to play the Wanton; for I was
watched over in the same manner which our Boccalinus teachesfrom the Spaniards,
as the best way to mortify the Neapolitan Courser: Che molte volte in un tempo
medesimo piu tosto ha voluto esser calvalcato da doi Regi che da un solo: Which
often at the same time had rather be rid by two Kings then one. Under this
severe Discipline, I now arrived the third Luster of my Age, when my first
Tutor dead, another succeeded; to wit, that great Quadratus, whom you knew,
most indulgent to me and to my Sisters, and who to us and to our Instructers
granted things which my Father and Spouse would not have had granted, as from
that time I knew. But he was so allured with the artifices of my Instructers,
that leaving Valentia and removing his Habitation to Zantybium, he in a manner
committed both himself and me to his Arbitriment. Then being less restrained by
the fear of our Tutor, webegan to live in a much more sweet and familiar
manner, till my Instructers mind heightened by the mighty Riches came in from
his Administrations, and by his growing Power and Authority, he became at last
so puffed up, as to dare publicly to solicit me of marriage, and to love me to
the utmost Rites. He boasted that in the absence of my Spouse he only was
proper for me, and to that end commended to me my Fathers Testament, which
sparingly read to me he Explained to his own purpose. Often turning himself
toward me; If (said he) thy Spouse had any love for thee, if he intended to
confirm the Marriage Contract made between you, he had not gone away so
suddenly to the Father, nor for so many years left thee here alone, nor
committed thee at first to so harsh a Tutor, nor commanded thee to be
over-burthened with such bitter Servitude, nor bound thee under such strict
Laws, the observance of which is scarce Imposed on, or Exacted from the vilest
Slave. In short, how heavy and troublesome, how prodigious and ridiculous is
that habit wherewith he, I think, only for a Laughing Stock would have thee
Clad? The Girdle of Truth, Ephesians. vi.
the Blest-plate of Righteousness, Shoes of the Preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the
Spirit; He will have to be your Wedding Garment. Who ever since the Memory of
man, designed his beloved Spouse such a sort of Attire? When Purple, and
Scarlet, Revel. xvii.
and Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, are fitter for thee. These things
become a Virgin of thy Rank.


Roph. The same then happened to thee which lately our Friend Scarron writ me
from France, The fruitless Precaution.
had happened to Laura, a Noble woman of Spain.


Sona, Pray tell the Story.


Roph. There was among the Noblemen of that Kingdom one Don Pedro, a man of
Excellent understanding and clear insight into things, but more especially
Experienced in the Arts of Women, and how fickle both their Faith and Chastity
is. He took care of the Education of Laura, a most Beautiful Virgin, whom he
caused to be shut up in a Monastery, from the Society of all men, and to be
Bred up under the strictest Discipline till she arrived at her Sixteenth year
of Age, when he espouses her and carries her home; She was then altogether as
simple as Albaspina in Marinus, who did not so much as know what Wantonness
was; and Don Pedro told her, that Conjugal Faith and Loyalty consisted in her
standing whole Nights by her Husband's Bedside armed Cap-a-pee, with Helmet,
Sword and Spear, watching her Husband whilst he sweetly slept. She willingly
obeys him, being Ignorant of any other Delight or Pleasure, till within a few
days Don Pedro is called to Court. And she being left at home alone, is visited
by a Neighboring Nobleman, who understanding her Husbands injunctions,
Laughs, and soon teaches her a different and much more pleasant way of
Marriage-life: Don Pedro returns, and going to Bed admires his Wives new
knowledge; who throwing aside her Helmet and Breast Plate, boasts her having
learned a much more easy and sweeter way of Conversing with her Husband.


Sona, Right, and well applied. For the first Instructers of my Infancy was
likewise called Peter, and did Dictate the same things difficult and
ungrateful: To wit, That my Adorning should not be that outward Adorning of
Plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, 1 St. Pet, 3.3.
or of putting on of Apparel: And declaring me blessed, When I suffered many
things for Righteousness sake, and became Partner in the sufferings of my
Spouse. But these things my latter Instructor Laughed at as Follies and Absurd,
he told me, Now were other times which required other manners: Gal. 4.
And that I was neither in Bondage to the old weak and beggarly Elements; Nor
was I still a Child, which differs nothing from a Servant, but freed and set at
liberty from the OldYoke. Whereupon likewise he took care least I should too
often or too diligently read what former Instructers had taught, the Epistles
and Admonitions of Peter and Paul, or the last Commands of my Spouse; Nay, as
much as he could he strove to blot out even his Memory, forbidding me the
tasting of Wine at our solemn Suppers, in remembrance of him.


Roph. This was indeed, That he might Espouse you to one Husband and present
you to him as a chaste Virgin. 2 Cor. 11.2.
But did you never remember to Admonish him of the Treason he committed against
his Lord.


Sona, Yes very often; But he used to Answer that he could not commit any fin,
that though two do the same thing, yet it is not the same. That there was
another Rule for worldly or secular men, Che non hanno autorita de maneggiar le
cose sacre, who have no authority over sacred things.


Roph. I remember the same answer lately given to Sister Marina, by Father
Francis. Nel parlatoria delle Monache fenestra? But what said thy Sisters and
their Instructers to this, did not they envy this familiarity with thee, and
the pleasure thence to be derived?


Sona, Oh extremely, and first of all he at Zybantinum, who being settled in our
Tutors house, had likewise purchased to himself great Authority, but with
various Arts, which it would be too long to relate, we prevailed at length, and
that at first by the assistance of many Strifes and grievous Misfortunes which
so Turmoiled, Vexed, and Perplexed our Tutors (for many of them first died)
that they had neither the heart to look after our Affairs, nor Power enough to
restrain us to our Duty. Nay, so far things went that my Instructor having
obtained commands sent from the Father, sought a Supreme Empire over the Tutors
themselves, and avouched himself to have no less Authority then the Father, or
the Spouse given me by the Father.


Roph. Did there rise no Quarrels from thence?


Sona, Many indeed. And often truly the Father sent his Messengers to reprove
and chastise the Insolency of my Lover; but he either corrupted them with
Bribes; or if corrupt them he could not, made them guilty of Imposture and
Rebellion, and thereupon by a kind of Law of his own, with cruel Torments
removed them out of the way.


Roph. But could these things long lie hid?


Sona, No certainly. I have now received a Message of the coming of my Spouse,
to whom all things are known, and who will Execute severe Justice: I understand
from the Relation of our Pallavicini, that Paul his Secretary is already
arrived Incognito, to make a curious Inquisition into Mine and my Instructors
manners.


Roph. 'Twere best then to call for Physicians in time.


Sona, Alas, many already have been here, who came of their own good-wil, but
all in vain, for they could not agree among themselves what Physic to
prescribe; Vsinulca and Rethulus's way of Cure by Quick silver, I took; and
they prescribed to add to it Vomiting and Sweating, so that what I have a long
time received I Vomited and Sweat out. Sarmeus and Crendassa, thought this way
too dangerous and violent, and believed a milder Course was to be begun, but
what, they did not know themselves; some prescribed one thing, some another,
And so many men, so many minds. There are those who think if any strong Remedy
were applied, it might be accompanied with danger of sudden death, and
therefore are of Opinion to do nothing, but that College of Physicians which my
Instructor lately summoned in the City of Mentirdut, beyond the sense of all
the World, with one Voice pronounced me Pure and of perfect Health; and that an
Action of Slander should be decreed against all those who durst report me
Infected with the Foul Disease. Which though I am willing all men should
believe; yet I must confess to thee, I do not my self believe it, for I adjudg
the Venom in my inveterate Fistulaes and Ulcers to be so knit and bound
together with a kind of a dry hardness, that though any one should accompany
with me, they need not thence fear any mortal contagion.


Roph. You say that only, not to scare away your Lovers: But what will your
Spouse say, when he knows all these things.


Sona, He already knows them, and has already thought of a Divorce, having
entered his Action with the Father. What is done in the business is contained in
this Libel, which some days since Pallavicini communicated to me; and what
shall be done, that I am ignorant of, he has promised upon his soul to let me
know with the first.


Roph. I will read a little, by your leave. THE INSCRIPTION. The Eternal Word
answers to the Father, and signifies the Occasions of his disgusts with his
Spouse, making instance of a Divorce upon these accounts.


Sona, Take the Libel home with you and read it, but on this condition, that
you restore it to me, and to no one else.


Roph. I understand you, therefore till I return, as much as you can, Farewell.




JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIVS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER HIS Sixth Epistle, Concerning
the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith, To the Right
Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALLENBVRGH.
Most Reverend Men,
IT IS true indeed you say, That Dialogue lately sent from Italy; and which by
Letter I Communicated to You, contains a true Image of the Roman Church. Who
Usinulca is, Boys may learn out of Argenis, who Rethulus, Sarmens, Crendassa,
The transposition of the Letters shows, Valentia is Rome. Mentirdut, Tridentum
or Trent; by Instructors are signified Bishops; and by Tutors, Emperors and
Kings. Thus all things are made plain; But what to some People seems
inconvenient, that the speakers should take the rule of their discourse rather
from Petronius, Aretine, Miletus, then from holy Scriptures, or graver
Histories, that our Siderius does not at all value; For he says, That as he
believes the minds of holy Men, in their closer converse with God, would be
best expressed in the delicate and lovely Hebrew Style, so Minds estranged from
the first truth, and alienated from all goodness, are best represented in a
Scheme of Obscene and Adulterous Expressions. And to that purpose he praises,
in that book which we all account Holy, those Orations of Ezekiel, Cap. XVI.
and XXIII. as well as those of Hosea. However it ought to be, I altogether
leave to you; but I must tell you, the Author of this Dialogue is a Heretic,
and a most implacable Enemy of our Church of Rome. Wherefore I think we ought
to labor more diligently, that our begun demonstrations may be the sooner
perfected, that so the fundamentals of the Catholic Faith, may more plainly
appear. And to that end, what comes next in order is,

PROPOSITION VII.
That Religion which we call Christian, as it was by Christ at first delivered
to his Apostles, is in it self, and in the Nature of its Principles, most unapt
for Salvation: Whereupon it was of absolute necessity for those first
publishers of the Gospel, enormously to wander, and go astray from the very
Foundation of the Catholic Doctrine, and that Scope of the whole Faith.

EXPLICATION.
It Is now about One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty seven Years, (if we may believe
the uncertain calculation of a certain Roman Abbot) since there was in Judaea,
of Kingly Stock indeed, but very poor Parentage, Born one Jesus Surnamed
Christ. He both the Holiness of His Life, and the Miracles by which He grew
Famous, and other Excellent Doctrine, made Himself appear not only to be a Man,
but even a Divinity it self. Whence He called Himself Son of the most Highest,
and thought it no Robbery to be Equal with God. There flourished then in the
Roman World, two most powerful kinds of Religion; one of which, was the Worship
of the Jews; the other, that so called of the Gentiles. The first prescribed by
the Creator of all things, and confirmed by many Prodigies, acknowledged but
one God; and yet Groaned under such a mighty Load of Ceremonies, that it moved
not so much the People by the rules of its Governance, as because it contained
so much of the Authority of the Legislator. The latter, devised only from the
Wit of Mankind, as the invention of several Men are always diverse, and
several; contained many things different from, nay, even contrary to the rules
of Divine Worship; all which notwithstanding, centred in this, That though they
taught the Worship of many gods, they did not one damn the other; whence that
Religion, though composed of such manifold variety, seemed not at all the less
Simple or United. Therefore both those toilsom rites of the Jews, and the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, the most Wise Jesus quite took away, and reduced all
Religion to the first Principles of right Reason, and Native or simple
Ingenuity. One only thing he added, and effectually exhibited the Mystery, the
Propitiation and Atonement of one particular Deity; which by the Sufferings
and Death of that Deity was to be perfected. Which Doctrine fetched from the
most secret, and holy recesses of Heaven; and to all past Ages of Mankind
utterly unheard of, did most wonderfully Illustrate, as well the immense Wisdom
and Goodness of God, as the strict and unalterable observance of Divine
Justice, whence of necessity there must needs arise and be confirmed in minds,
at all seasoned with Divine Grace, both an Admiration and Reverence of the
Deity, and a veneration of Love, Duty and Gratitude; In which, both the
knowledge and use of all Religion is consummated. This Christ having suffered a
most cruel Death, and again got the Victory over it, being to return to His
Fathers place, committed the farther propagation of that Saving Doctrine which
he had chiefly Expounded to the Jews, and the Preaching it among all other
Nations of the World, to certain of his Kinsmen and Followers, Weak and
unlearned Men, and of the meanest of the People. These being Born in an obscure
place, bred up among Sordid Fishermen, and oppressed with Poverty, having
their minds dejected, and incapable of great things, understood nothing but
what was mean and low, yet they had heard the magnificent promises of their
Master, which, being fully persuaded that he was a Man altogether Divine, they
could not at all think Vain, or He in the least a Liar. Whereupon, when they
beheld no way lie open for them to arrive at ampler Fortunes here, which indeed
they had senced against themselves by their (...), and dejection of mind; but
that, though they went about under a most honorable Embassy in the name of
God; yet they were every where most contumeliously treated, and obnoxious to
the most grievous injuries, they placed their hopes in a future age, dreaming
that what for the present was denied them, should be enjoyed by them after
Death, not unlike to that Nuper, Tarpeio quae sedit culmine, Cornix,
Est been, non potuit dicere, dixit, Erit.
A Crow sitting on the Tarpeian Hill,
Could not cry all is well, but cried, it will.
And seasoned as it were, by a kind of prepossession with this error, they
understood nothing rightly of all those things they had either received from
ancient Prophecies, or the Promises they had heard from their Master; for they
most unseasonably and importunately recommended nothing more then Patience,
Forbearance, abstaining from Pleasures, Humility and Moderation of Mind,
together with taking up, as they called it, of the Cross, and Crucifying of the
Flesh, Selfdenial, contempt of the World, and neglect of Riches; In a word, the
defrauding of Sense, and renouncing even Humane Nature. They urged likewise
Obedience to Kings and Princes, and that Magistracy was not to be strove
against under any pretense of Religion or holy Orders; but the Powers
Established by God, to be submitted to; Thus broke they the minds of Men, and
recalled them from all studies after Riches, Honors or Power; and to that end,
whatever they taught of the Glory or Majesty of the Church, they applied to
some Spiritual Excellency, and Inward Grace of the Soul; whence it came to
pass, that by all those who are only wise for the present, they were not only
treated with Contempt and Scorn, but persecuted with Whips and Tortures; and
yet even in those things, as in some particular good, they used to glory.

You will perhaps object to them, what St. Paul attributes to the Jews, That
there was a Vail drawn over their Hearts when they read Moses, or any of the
Old Prophets, so that they could not attain to the Temporal Prerogative, and
External Privilege of the Church, of which they ought to have been the
Architects and Governors.

Indeed, at the very beginning of his first Book, that great Hebrew Prophet has
most Elegantly writ, God made two great Lights, the one to rule by Day, and the
other to rule by Night. Which words, do plainly demonstrate, that the Future
dominion of the Church was to be much greater, and more Splendid then the
Imperial Majestty. For thus writes Innocent III. to the Illustrious Emperor of
Constantinople. You ought to know, says he, c. 6. Solicitae de major: and obed.
that God made two great Lights in the Firmaments of Heaven, the greater Light
to rule by Day, and the lesser Light to rule by Night; both great, but the one
greater. To the Firmament of Heaven, that is, the CATHOLIC CHURCH, God made
two great Lights, that is, instituted two Powers; which are the Papal
Authority, and Regal Dignity; but that which is to rule by Day, that is, over
Spiritual things, is the greater, but that over Carnal the less, that there may
be known to be as much difference between Popes and Kings, as there is between
Sun and Moon. The Pope adds, That though he writ not these things as chiding to
the Emperor, yet that he might with reason chide him. How much more then are
you to be chid O ye Apostles? That should have had more Understanding in the
explaining Oracles, then any little worldly King or Byzantine Prince. As for
what the Glossary on the Canon Law adds, Whilst the Earth is seven times bigger
then the Moon, and the Sun eight times bigger then the Earth. The Papal Power
must consequently be fifty seven times bigger then Regal Dignity. This I say, I
do not wonder you were ignorant of, nor can I accuse you for it, since in
truth, this observation could not have been deduced, but out of new and very
particular principles, and that by the assistance of most subtle Logic, to you
unknown.

The same Moses sets forth a most exact Image of the Royal Papacy in
Melchisedeck, who did praefigure the Majesty of St. Peter, and his Successors;
yet St. Peter understood not a word of this; no nor St. Paul neither: For, as
for the first, that dignity which he ought to have vindicated for himself only,
he declared common to all Christians; and when from thence he ought to have
asserted his own Authority over the universality of mankind, he collects the
quite contrary, to wit, That the Clergy ought to be subject to every Ordinance
of Man, 1 Pet. 2.9-14.
whether to the King as Supreme, or to Governors, as being sent by him. And
the latter in his Epistle to the Hebrews, has indeed largely and laboriously
discoursed many things, but in a far different sense, concerning the Priesthood
of Melchisedeck, when he ought to have explained only that one thing; that he
and his Successors had Melchisedeck for their Prototype. As Campanel de Mon.
Hisp. c. 5. for he is indeed a High Priest, as of the Patriarchate of Abraham,
so of the Order of Melchisedeck, and him God has appointed a Royal Priesthood,
and armed him as well with the Civil as Spiritual Sword; for if it were
otherwise, Christ would be a diminutive Lawgiver, and not as Melchisedeck, who
was at once both King and Priest.

And that same Ignorance of his, St. Paul has elsewhere, as well as in this
Epistle to the Romans c. ix. more openly betrayed. For when as Brevengius
witnesses, Esau and Jacob, In auctar Epist. obse. vir.
were types of the Heretics and Catholics; and that the first signified, that
the Lutherans and Calvinists should lead a Life of Poverty and Affliction; but
the other, that the Catholics after his Example, should abound in all Riches
and Delights. Paul omitting all those things, which only made to this purpose,
explains both Stories of Man's Eternal Damnation and Salvation, which he should
obtain after the putting off Mortality; which error is the more inexcusable,
because he might easily have learnt from the salutation of Gabriel to the
Virgin Mary, (which doubtless was sometimes repeated in those days) That our
Pope was to Reign over the House of Jacob for ever; Luke 1.33.
that is, both he, and all the Clergy following him, shall live Plentifully and
Splendidly in this World, as most subtly he again divined, whom we have
before praised.

-- Lymphata mente Sacerdos. -- Frantic or Fantastical Priest. But with the
same, most manifest error does St Paul wrest that Prophecy in the Eighth Psalm,
1 Cor. XV. Heb. 11.
to Christ alone: God shall put all things under his Feet; When by that is
clearly meant Peter and Paul, and their Successors in the Sea of Rome; To wit,
To them God shall subject the Sheep, that is, the Christians; the Bulls, that
is, the Jews and Heretics; the Beasts of the Field, that is, Brevingius and
the Pagans; the Fishes of the Sea, that is, the Souls in Purgatory; Summa
Theol. Part. 3. c. 5.
and the Fowls of Heaven, that is, the Blessed Spirits and Angels; as, full of
Enthusiasm, the most spiritual Antoninus explains it.

But it exceeds all manner of wonder, that these unlearned Apostles should not
lay hold upon those things which Isaiah so diligently inculcated concerning the
Power and Dignity of the Pope of Rome, and the Catholic Church under him. That
unless any one with that late Arch Heretic Cocceius; will transpose every
thing into a Spiritual sense, he will be forced to confess, that it cannot be
otherwise explained, then as the most Noble Count of Claraval, not so lately
has done it. Scioppius in eo ad nobil. Germ de solendo re and div. Eccl.
Ingolst. 40. 1605.
According to whose interpretation, the Gentiles walked, says the Prophet,
speaking of the Roman Church, They walked in thy Light, and Kings in the
Brightness of thy Rising. Then shall thou see and wonder, and rejoice when the
riches of the Sea, and all the substance of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.
The Sons of strangers shall build thy Temples, and their Kings shall minister
unto thee. Thy Gates shall be open day and night, that they may bring unto thee
the Riches of all Nations, and their Kings shall be brought. Whatever Kingdom
will not serve thee shall Perish. The Emperors of the Heathens that oppressed
thee, shall adore the footsteps of thy Successors. I will place thee in the
Pride of Generations, that is, (in Secular Pomp and Splendour) and thou shall
suck the Milk of the Gentiles, (Chald. Thou shall satiate thy self with the
riches of the People) and thou shall suck the breasts of Kings, (LXX. Interpret.
Thou shall devour the riches of Kings.) For Brass I will bring Gold, and for
Iron Silver, and for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron. So he upon the LX.
Chapter; which words, Apoc. XXI.
though made so clear by our Interpreter, the Evangelist St. John renders
ambiguous, nay, delivers in a quite different sense, and but ill applied to the
Church Triumphant; who as he there out of a certain innate (...), or
Pusilanimity, describes the Angel refusing the honors offered him, so without
doubt would neither have accepted this, nor that which of the mighty honors to
be done to his Colleague St. Peter, is elsewhere foretold by Esaiah, to wit,
Kings and Queens, shall prostrate on the Earth adore thee, and lick the dust of
thy Feet. Which indeed, not in Peter, as incapable of those honors, yet in his
Successors we see happily completed.

But yet these dull Fishermen, if they had but a little regarded their own
proper Trade, might have easily understood what fortunes they were to have
fished out for themselves. For can there be any thing plainer then what they
may read in Habakkuk. And make men as Fishes of the Sea, Chap. 1. v. 14, etc.
as the creeping things that have no ruler over them. They take up all of them
with the Angle, they catch them in their Net, and gather them in their Drag.
Therefore they rejoice and are glad. Therefore they Sacrifice unto their Net,
and burn Incense unto their Drag; because by them their Portion is Fat, and
their Meat Plenteous. But that by this Fishing with the Hook, is to be
understood the Preaching of the Gospel, is as well taught by that Parable, they
received from the mouth of Christ, as by the promise made to St. Peter, I will
make thee a Fisher of Men: That is, as Reginald Pool interprets it, Thou and
thy Successors shall have dominion over all Men, ruling over Kings, and
commanding, regulating, and casting out Emperors. But Christ gave not only the
fishing of Men, but likewise the Fishing for Money, and so easily purchased to
the Clergy a right of Fishing in all Secular Ponds. The Kings of the Earth
(says he to Peter) from whom do they receive Tribute? Not certainly from us,
for we are Children and therefore free: But go thou to the Sea and cast forth a
Hook, and take up the first Fish that comes up. Tros Rutulusve fuat nullo
discrimine habetor. No matter of what Kingdom, Country, or Nation. That take,
and when thou have opened his mouth thou shall find a piece of Money, that
take. Certainly, Nisi tunc Petri men's Laeva fuissit. Unless Peter were then
Lightheaded. He could not but from those words gather what a great
Fishing-right was Established in him; but though he had sometimes the
mannagement of fiercer minds, yet it must be confessed that he being of a more
fearful temper, was very insufficient for the undertaking taking or supporting
any great matter; Luc. v.
for if fear seized him and all his Consorts, when in the Lake Genezareth, they
once took some few Fishes more then ordinary, with how great a trembling would
they have been surprised to have beheld their Nets enfolding mighty Whales, and
the live Bodies of men: From which fearfulness, I likewise believe it happened
that when All manner of four footed Beasts, and wild Beasts, and Creeping
things, and Fowls of the Air were sent down to him in a certain sheet, and he
was twice or thrice commanded that he should kill and eat; yet he doubted and
durst not touch, whereupon the Vessel was again taken up into Heaven: And yet
it is evident according to the Interpretation of the most Eminent Baronius. God
by this Vision as by some solemn Investiture, would confer upon Peter the power
of Slaughtering men at his pleasure; yet he, that propriety of Supreme Majesty,
out of his Fisherman-simplicity then so neglected, that it was in danger of
having utterly come to naught, had it not been recalled by his Successors, and
among others asserted by Paul, not that Idiot of Tharsus, but Paul the V.
though indeed something unseasonably, and so not altogether unhappily. Peter
therefore applied himself to (I know not what) Spiritual Fishing, hunting after
mystical Fishes, and enclosing them in the Net of some invisible Kingdom in the
Heavens, when he ought to have exercised his Fishing-trade in the Waters, and
those the largest and deepest: For, In great Waters, great Fishes are to be
taken; as it is in the Proverb, Now the Waters are People, and Nations, and
Tongues, and Languages. Wherefore Christ likewise commanded him to launch out
in the deep, Luc. 5.
and let down their Nets for a draught: That is, Go up to Rome which had a vast
Dominion over all People, Sermon. 2. in Fest. Petr.
and from whence they might spread their Nets over all the World to catch all
Nations. As is well observed by Pope Innocent III.

But if any one should say, those Ancient Oracles and Promises of Christ you
have hitherto so much praised, were not delivered in naked and simple, but in
figurative words, so that they could not be so accurately understood by the
Apostles: Let him consider Peter's own saying, Here are two Swords; and Christ's
Answer, It is enough. And then again his Command, Put up thy Sword into its
sheath: What can more clear and plainly be said, to assert the Spiritual as
well as the Civil Sword, to be given to Ecclesiastical Princes? For had the
Civil Sword not at all appertained to Peter, certainly Christ when mention was
made of two Swords, ought to have said It is too much; but he only said, It is
enough. Nor had he commanded Peter, Put up thy Sword into the sheath. If that
Sword had not belonged to Peter, as is most discreetly observed by Boniface
VIII. in Extravagantibus: Where the Comment teaches the distinction between the
Sword out of the sheath, and the Sword in the sheath: That being visible,
therefore Material, and by cousequence Temporal; this invisible, and therefore
Spiritual, yet both belonging to Peter: For if the Sword in the sheath be mine,
certainly the same will be mine when it shall be out of the sheath. Yet
notwithstanding all this the Apostles collected from hence things quite
different, persuading themselves that the Use of the Temporal Sword was
prohibited them by their Master. So hard a thing it is to be wise, when the
mind is once seasoned with Erroneous Principles.

However I must confess some of them have sometimes pitched upon better things,
and converted their thoughts to more sublime Matters; as when the Mother of the
Zebedees with her Sons, requested a certain place to be assigned them, to wit,
next on the Right and Left Hand of Christ: And again, when the Apostles
contended among themselves for Precedence, and made Enquiry who should be the
greatest. I confess likewise, that Christ answered very sharply to these
Requests, and reproving their Ambition, You know, Mat. 20.
said he, that the Princes of the Gentiles exercised Dominion over them, and
they that are great exercise Authority upon them; but it shall not be so among
you, but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister. And
again, He that would be the greatest among you, let him be as the least; and he
that would command, as him that serves. Which words might possibly disturb
them, and lead them into that Error, as if it were forbid them to affect
Government, or seek Empire over Emperors; but however that were; In this at
least the Apostles grievously erred, that they gave the same Precepts to their
Successors which had been given to them, when the Reason of things are quite
otherwise: For as Severinus of Mozambane, has most rightly observed in his
Golden Commentary to his Brother Laelius: Postquam recentiorum Portuna
sacerdotum, De Statu. Im. Gem. cap. 2.
immane quantum a tenuibus Antiquis-simorum rebus discessit; Absurdum fuerit
illosamplius adstringere velle Obsoletis, super modestia ejus Ordinis hominum a
salvatore promulgatis. Et fortasse istae leges ad prima illa tempora duntaxat
debebant valere; Nam id revera ridiculum erat, homines Piscatores aut Textores
Primum locum affectare, quibus in diem victus aut labor manuum aut stipibus
collatis quaerebatur. Since the fortunes of the latter Clergy has been so
wonderfully changed even from the slightest things of the Ancient, it would be
absurd any longer to tie up them to those obsolete Laws, for the Modesty sake
of that first Order of men to whom they were at first published by our Savior,
and possibly those Laws were designed only to be of force in those first Times.
For it would certainly have been very Ridiculous that Fishermen and Weavers
should have affected the first places, who were daily to seek their Bread,
either from the Labor of their hands, or Setwages. Which distinction the
Apostles not observing, gave occasion to Heretics, and to those who are often
worse then Heretics, Politicians; to think that those Answers of our Saviors
might appertain likewise to our Days, then which no Opinion can be more
pernicious to our Church, or more scandalous to Pious minds. And hence it comes
to pass, that the Right of Fishing which in all Lands, nay, even in the
Super-caelestial and Infernal Waters, does Jure Divino, belong to our Popes, is
at this day Prohibited them, and that neither in the British Ocean, the
Baltic Sea, the Lake Lemane, nor the Rivers of Germany, they are admitted such
free Fishing as formerly. Nay, it was once to be feared least it would have
been Prohibited in the Neighboring Adriatic, Epist. Piscat venet ad Paulum V.
as one of his own Tribe, Pisanius di Pizzoni, an Honest man, and a Lover of
his Country, very Brotherly admonishes. So much is that Puzillaminity of the
Apostles; and that (...), or Simplicity, in which they used to Glory, hurtful
to the present Church.

DEMONSTRATION.
Since the Apostles aimed at nothing High, nothing Sublime, but with broken and
dejected minds, praised and recommended only Plebeian Virtues, such as Modesty,
Patience, Humility, by which not only the Churches Welfare is impeded, but the
whole Structure utterly overturned: It is of necessary consequence, that they
Enormously have straied from the foundation of the Catholic Doctrine, and the
whole Scope of that Faith; and therefore the Religion by them delivered is in
it self, and the Nature of its Principles very unapt for the attaining of
Salvation, which is what was to be Demonstrated.

It will be therefore our Business quite to remove, or at least to amend all
ill placed things from those Principles, and accommodate them to the
Establishment of the Sacred Empire; which in our next Letters we shall begin to
do. In the mean time, Farewell, and take diligent care of Brevingius Health,
Paris Call. June, MDCLxvii.

JANUS ALEXANDRUS FERRARIUS OF THE AUGUSTINE ORDER. HIS Seventh Epistle
Concerning the Usefulness and Necessity of the Roman Catholic Faith. To the
Right Reverend ADRIAN and PETER of WALENBVRCH.
Right Reverend Brothers,
THat the Christian Religion, as it was at first dictated by the Apostles, is
both in its self, and in the Nature of its Principles, not at all fit or proper
for attaining Salvation, or establishing the Royal Priesthood of Rome. We have
in the preceding Epistle at large set forth. There remains that we as evidently
demonstrate what is therefore to be done with it; To which end we lay down,

PROPOSITION VIII.
Though the Christian Religion does unreasonably, and even to abhorrency,
differ from the ends and aim of our holy Roman Church; yet it is not at all
advisable, that where it is approved by Reason, introduced by Custom, and
established by the Authority of Princes, attempt should be made openly to ruin
it at one violent and impetuous stroke.

EXPLICATION.
Sect. 1. There have been those indeed who have adjudged it ought utterly to be
overthrown, and openly destroyed; as altogether so erroneous from the most
profitable, and therefore main end of True Faith: That there seemed but little
hopes it should ever by any Art or Industry be wrought to our purpose; or if
(possibly) it were never so well accomodated, there was still some hazard, lest
at some time or other it should unawares revert to its pristine Nature, and to
that dull and Sterril genius first possessed it. And that this was no vain fear,
the experience of former, as well as present times, has taught us. For from
whence have the Rebel Heretics raised more, and more serviceable Engines to
assail the Powers of our Sacred Empire, then from the most hidden and secret
Mysteries of the Christian Religion? Which if they had been not only hidden,
and as it were Plaistred over, but utterly blotted out, they could never have
provided themselves of such vast quantity of Arms against our Church.

Sect. 2. But though this may have prudently enough been thought of by some;
yet before we can assent to it, we think it convenient other ways of proceeding
be first examined; For in affairs of this kind, which are on every side
encompassed with difficulties, the first way presenting it self, is not
obstinately to be held, but all are to be made trial of, that after having
diligently compared one with another, we may make choice of the safest and
easiest.

Sect. 3. And the first thing herein to be taken notice of, is, what has in
this case been the opinion of wise Men in former times. Among which, we may
account of Mahomet, a Man, as the event testifies, of a very clear Judgment;
whose example we should be the more earnest to imitate, because he so happily
prosecuted the same purpose, and was verst in the same cause with us. Wherefore
the very Heretics themselves make him a Colleague with our Pope; and whilst
they will have Antichrist to be two-headed, or at least two-horned, they give
the right Horn to our most holy Father; and the Left they place on Mahomet, For
this Mahomet, when out of his quickness of Spirit, he perceived how much the
Christian Religion was averse to his purpose, as diverting Men from seeking
after present Felicity, and softning and depressing their minds with the awe
and reverence of Weak and Unwarlike Virtues, recommending Peace instead of War,
Gentleness instead of Fierceness, Service instead of Freedom, and Prayers and
Tears instead of Arms; though he believed it utterly pernicious and averse to
his design; yet he judged it was not to be demolished at a Blow, or by open
Violence overthrown; And therefore among other Chapters of the Alcoran, he
wisely commands his People, That they should believe for truth those books sent
amongst them of the Prophets and Apostles, and should therefore profess Christ
the Son of Mary, to be the Spirit of God, and an Apostle sent by him, and the
Gospel and Mosaical Law he every where approves. Nay, on these very Foundations
he seems to lay the Superstructure of his whole Doctrine, supporting it by the
authority of the Scriptures; Whereupon the Mahometans, with a subtilty like
ours, in relation to the Pope, find mention made of their Prophet, in both
books of Old and New Testament. For in the Law, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. v. 2. where it is
said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, and shined
forth from Mount Paran. Those words they will have distinctly to signify that
the Law descended to Moses, the Gospel to Jesus, and the Alcoran to Mahomet.
And as that Prophet Abulkasimo Surata Lxxi testifies, Jesus the Son of Mary
said, O Children of Israel, I am the Apostle of God to you, that I may verify
the Law you have, and announce a Prophet to come after me, whose name shall be
Achimed. That is, as Beidavins interprets it, Mahomet; which likewise a certain
Saracen Dialogist in Theodorus Abucara, very wittily asserts to have once been
writ in the book of the New Testament, when he says to the Christian, In the
Gospel Christ writ saying, I send to you a Prophet called Mahomet. To which the
Christian, But the Gospel contains no memory of it; Opusc. 19. inter Opusc.
xiv. edita a. G.
The Barbarian replies. It anciently indeed contained it, but you have blotted
it out. Subtly arguing it from the xiv. chap. of St. John, which discourses
of the Comforter; Where on the other side the page, in the same context, I am
persuaded might be extant also the prophecy of the Occidental Comforter, which
is resident in the Cabinet of the Popes breast; But if that is not to be found
in any of the Copies or Translations now adays, it is done by the cunning of the
Heretics, and certain kind of Calvinists, whom I would swear before sixteen
hundred years ago, had with special care blotted all those things out of
Scripture. But for these reasons the Turks, if at this day offered a book of
the New Testament, translared into Arabic, receive it with an excess of
reverence, and most Religiously kiss it, as a Book sent down from Heaven; and
in which of Old, mention was made of their Prophet. From all which we may
gather that great Architect, as well of a new Principality, as a new Religion,
judged some outward show, and external Scheme of the Christian Religion was to
be set forth; whilst its internal Power and Force was utterly extinct. To which
purpose, though he often spoke Magnificently of the Scriptures, yet he utterly
forbid the Reading, or nice disputing about, or search into them, content with
this as Achimed Iben Edris ingeniously elsewhere professes, that he made them
serve to his purpose; and for this reason he enlarged them with a supplimental
Alcoran, which as the last dictates of the Prophetic Spirit, contained the
perfect principles of Salvation.

Sect. 4. The courses of this most happy Monarch, and with our Pope, Joint
Colleague and Brother in Antichrist, why should not we follow? For if he only
to erect a gross and corporeal Empire, believed the use of such exquisite Arts
so necessary, of how much more subtle industry shall we stand in need to raise
up our Mystical and Spiritual Kingdom; least it chance to offend any Eyes
before its Foundations be solidly laid, and the whole machine so firmly compact
and brought to that height, that it become the terror of its Enviers, and be
able to support its self by its own strength. For as such an Empire ought to be
composed of a mixture of Divine and Humane things, that it may be
Spiritually-corporeal, and Invisibly-visible, so it is of necessity that the
Arts whereby it is erected, should agree to both those kinds. Thus profane
things with Sacred, Truth with Falsehood, Heaven with Earth, are happily mixed:
Thus Churches will at the same time be Fortresses, Monasteries, Castles,
Islands fitted into the figures of Crowns; and the Crosier or Pastoral Crook,
be at once both a Murderers Club, and a Regal Scepter; But he who shall employ
all these Arts to the establishing of Sacred Empire, will every way appear a
true Leviathan, much stronger, and more formidable then Hobbs his Leviathan;
Then which what can be invented, at once more slender and more strong.

Sect. 5. Therefore let not any fear of those Arms the Heretics may fetch from
Apostolical Doctrine disturb us; For the same things were to be feared by the
Mahometans, even from very Subtle Heretics. For it may always happen, that
Christian Religion boiling like a kind of Fermentation, may separate it self
from opposing and Heterogenial Doctrines; and casting them off, convert its
self to its pristine Purity, and liquid Simplicity; which yet has not happened
in many Ages, whilst Christianity mixed with Mahometism does at this day remain
in the same, feculent crasis, or filthy temperature.

Sect. 6. Moreover, if this affright us, or we suffer our selves to be scared
by unseasonable fears, we shall never reap any benefit from the errors of
others. For since Falsehood without a mixture of Truth, nor Evil without a
Foundation of Goodness cannot subsist; It will be always to be doubted, least
Truth and Goodness should withdraw themselves from Falsehood and Evil, and leave
them.

Veluti Nudos in littore pisces -- Like Naked Fishes on the Share. The
consequence of which over provident fear would be, that only pure truth, and
uncompounded goodness were to be followed and taught to others, whereby all the
fruit and advantage might accrue to us by Falsehood, and Evil would Perish and
be lost.

7. Certainly, Nil prodest quod non laedere possit idem. There Is nothing
profitable, but may likewise hurt. So let us despise Food, Fab. Instir. cr l.
2. c. 26.
because it is sometimes the cause of Distemper. Let us never go into a House,
because they sometimes fall on the Inhabitants Heads: Who is ignorant that Fire
and Water, without which there is no living; and not to stay, at Earthly things,
the Sun and Moon, those Sovereign Lights, are sometimes Noxious and Hurtful?
The dispute therefore lies not, whether from those relics of the Christian
Religion any great damage may accrue to us; but whether more good be to be
hoped thence, or evil to be feared. But we have already from the example of the
most crafty Mahomet, and evident reason showed, That if we should utterly
renounce all Christianity, there would no solid Foundation remain, whereon to
erect our Machines.

8. To these fall pat both the Judgment and Example of that great Man, and most
excellent Artist in framing of Religions Gulielmus Postellus, S. R. E.
Presbyter, and who in the latter age, having Traveled through almost the whole
World, was at length, being an old Man of above an hundred, settled by royal
Bounty at Paris, in the Monastery of St. Martins in the Fields. This Man, even
in the midst of Paris, Verdier, Tom. 3. dela Prosopog. des homines Illustres.
both publicly taught and delivered in writing, that a certain Woman, his
Familiar, whom he called Mother Jone, was the Savior of Womankind, with the
same right that Christ was of the Males. Who would believe, that in the Capital
City of so renowned and flourishing a Kingdom; in the midst of such light of
all Knowledge, and Doctrine; among such crowds of wise and learned Men, any one
should dare to expose such shameful and prodigious trifles, unless he had
conjoined them with the true History of Christ? Apolog. pro Herod. Henr. Steph.
l. 1. c. 14.
And when to his Friends and to Stephanus, who relates this to us, he at Venice
once confessed that the Christian Religion disliked him; yet that it was not to
be quite cast off, but tempered with the Turkish, and the Jewish: What else
could he mean, but that Christ was not with violent hands to be destroyed, but
with a kind of friendly embrace to be stifled?

9. And the long experience of former times, commends likewise this way of
acting; and thence sprung that Oracle of the most holy Pope Leo, who instigated
by the Spirit of Satan, and ravished at the sight of that vast Mass of Treasure
he saw gathered by Indulgencies. Hem quantum, inquit, nobis Profuit ista fabula
de Christo. How much, says he, has this fable of Christ gained us? So the Image
of Christianity, may every way be profitable to our affairs; provided we know
how to make good use of it: But that depends solely on the dexterity and
industry of those concerned, for Religion is, -- Come il Coltel, Il Pastor
Fido. Act. 1. Sce. 4.
chesi tu'l prendi
In quelle part ove per'l uso humano,
La man sadatta, a chi l'adopra e buono
Ma ch'il prende one fere, e spesso morte.


Thus Englished by the excellent Fanshaw. As Knives which if they warily be
caught
By that safe part, which for the hand was wrought
Are useful, but if rashly they be t'ane
By The Edge or Point one may be Hurt or Slain.
So the Christian Religion, if we lay hold on that part which presents it in
its naked Simplicity and truth, we Perish; if otherwise, it serves excellently
to our profit and advantage: For so is that truly fulfilled which the blessed
Campanella has said, That opinion, which almost all People conceive and believe
of the Christian Religion, does very much avail: Make them but therefore
believe, that whatever appertains to our Pope, the same all appertains to
Christ; and that at whatever offends the one, the other will likewise be
offended. Do not you easily see that with so much the more Pomp and Glory the
name of Christ is exposed, so much the more is the Power and Authority of our
Pope amplified?

10. Historians relate of the Templars, that they were condemned to exquisite
punishments, Du Puys dans l' Histoire des Templaires.
for that they openly renounced Christ, and determined the rooting out of the
Catholic Faith; and yet the clearest Writers testify their Innocence of these
Crimes. So Mazenius lately, Dans l' Histoire de France.
Il' n'y a point d' homme de bon sens qui croye que tou't l'ordre ait este
coupable des enormites qu' on lay imposoit. There is no Man of sound sense, who
believes the whole order guilty of those Enormities wherewith they are charged.
Whereupon many think they were guilty of no other Crime, but only the not
religiously enough observing the Papal Majesty. Quelques ans disent qu' ils n'
estorent pas si impiet ni si mechans qu' on les fuisoit, Gerard du Hail del
Estat de France live. 2.
mais qu'il Estoient riches, etc. Some say, they were not so Impious, nor so
Wicked, as they were made; but that they were Rich, and tha^ they spoke too
freely and publicly of the Vices Cheats and Impostures of the Roman See, and
against the debauches of the Ecclesiastics, are the words of another French
writer. But though these things were so, they do not a whit clear them to any
one who believes the cause of Christ, and the cause of the Roman See, to be the
same; for unless that be firmly allowed, I confess I should hardly be convinced
how they could be so unmercifully persecuted without the Infamy of extreme
Envy, and horrid Cruelty. But if those who scoff at the Pope, are believed to
make a Mock of the Eternal Deity of Christ, Clemens is not to be thought
unmerciful, though he cruciated them with most dreadful Torments, and caused
them to be Burnt in Expiatory Flames; Nor ought it to trouble us, nor raise in
us any ill suspicion, That when Molaeus, the chief of that Order, cited the
Pope to appear within forty days at the Tribunal of Christ, he should on the
very day depart this Life. For it is not credible that the Pope would appear
only at the Citation of that Man; or if at that fatal term appointed he would
appear, and willingly submit his Majesty to the Judgment of Christ, by that he
showed he had little distrust of his Affairs, as if Christ were easily to be
persuaded that in Burning the Templars, he acted for the Common good; indeed
these things are not easily distinguished. Le temporel S'allie si subtilement
avec le spirituel et del interest del homme on sait fair si adroitement la
cause de Dieu, Dans la preface au Card Rachlieu sur son livre del immortallitat
del ame.
and il survient des occasions si melees de ces chooses, qu'ill est malaise
fair la separation. Temporal things are so subtly allied to spirituals, and
the Interest of man is so artificially made the cause of God, and such mixed
occasions happen in these matters, that it is hard to make any separation: As
our Silhonius lately very well advised. But I must believe that Christ though
very little versed in Suarez Metaphysics, or Castanaeus his Distinctions,
easily found out the difference.

11. But let us grant that there may danger accrue, by even the least remains
of the Ancient Apostolic Faith, yet from thence it does not follow that they
are utterly to be Obliterated, unless the success of the design seem apparent
to us; for it is prudence not only to inspect what may be useful and profitable
to us, but in the first place what may do it: For 'twere foolish to make an
attempt, where the very condition of things is opposite* Where therefore the
Christian Religion by the Sublimity of its Principles, the Sanctity of its
Precpets, the Majesty of its Miracles, the Efficacy of its Doctrine, and other
signs of its Divinity has insinuated into the minds of men, where by long
Custom and established Traditions of Parents and Elders, and by Laws of
Princes it is Confirmed, so that the Name of JESUS is Worshipped with a Divine
Trembling and Adoration, and an Horror conceived against all thoughts of
Blaspheming it. Do not you perceive, most Reverend Brothers, how rash an
attempt it would there be, how bold, how full of danger, how dubious of any
prosperous Success, to undertake the overthrow of Christian Religion, by open
Violence and one sudden Blow?

12. But where things are more at Liberty, and that Old Doctrine of the
Apostles not so firmly seated in the minds of men; there I must confess to Act
with full Sail, and freely, and without doubts, or ambages to Preach a new
Gospel, and better fitted to our Advantage, both may done and ought. Which safe
way being by the first Spanish Apostles sent into America, of old neglected;
our Sacred Empire, suffered thereby no small damage, as the blessed, and
already by us often praised Campanella, rightly argues; who least hereafter we
should fall into the same Errors, Elegantly bound up all Christian Institutions
as well in a brief Summary of the Law, as in a new Catechistical Method: A
Summary, to wit, on which the Law and the Prophets all depend, contained in
these Conceptions. There is not so much Reverence to be used to it, De Monar.
Hispan. in Apend.
among that people who never before heard of the Name of Christ, as to the name
of the Pope, that they may the more firmly adhere to our Religion, and that it
become necessary that they seek to us, both for the Moral Rules of Life, and
the way of attaining Eternal Salvation. But the Method of the Mystagogy, or
first draught of the Catechism, though it be a little more Prolix, yet by
reason of its singular Elegancy, I cannot forbear Transcribing it, not doubting
but you likewise, most Reverend Brothers, though you have often elsewhere Read
it, will take some pleasure in once more reviewing it. De Mon. His. c. 31.
Opertet inquit docere missos a Deo fuissi Magistros, veluti Moysen and alios,
quibus cum Mundus parum fidei haberet, Deum ipse assumsisse carnem humanam,
flagrantique nostro amore, etc. It is convenient, says he, to teach Meaning the
Indians in America.
them, that there were Masters sent from God, to whom then the World gave
little Faith; God himself assumed Humane flesh, and Burning with Love toward
us, took upon him our Nature, that he might become as an Instrument to teach
us, by what ways we were to reach Heaven, and how Truth was to be practiced;
and this only by Friendly persuasions, not by force of Arms: Moreover that God
himself did by his own Example, Ratify and Seal what he Taught; thereby
Demonstrating how we were to lead our Conversations here upon Earth, and least
after he had Taught us, we by any terrors of Death should fall away from God,
and his Divine Worship; he first submitted himself to Death, being slain by
cruel Tyrants, that we might follow his Footsteps; and that on the third day
Rising again from the Dead, he ascended into Heaven, leaving his Vicar upon
Earth, who is called the Pope, who sits in his Tribunal, filled full of
Heavenly Wisdom, with many mighty Princes, Defenders of the Divine Truth, among
whom the King of Spain is the chief. Lastly, that God moved with Mercy toward
them when they were Idolaters, sent their Brethren the Spaniards to reduce them
into the way of Truth, and by the Pope and King of Spain (from whose World they
are divided by a vast Ocean) draw them to himself. That to this end our
knowledge in building Ships was enlarged, our Art in Navigation increased, and
our skill in taming Horses perfected, Carts likewise are to be made, and showed
them, that looking on all these things, they may yield better faith to us: That
besides these, we can do many other Miracles which He himself in this World
did; such are healing the Sick, and raising the Dead; so that we obey but his
holy Commands, have been Baptized with Water in the Name of the only God, and
by his invisible Grace have been cleansed from our sins: That these Arms were
given us by him to take Vengeance on those who withstand the Propagation of
Truth. These beginnings in Blandishing them should have been used, and many of
them whose Physiognomy declared them fittest, chosen our, and bred up in this
Doctrine; and after sent out like that Samaritan, to call in their People and
fellow Citizens, with all Mansuetude and Kindness, and without any Cruelty or
Avarice, persuading them that we care for Gold no more then they, and that we
only use it for Exchange of things, seeking after it without any Covetousness;
and showing them that instead of Gold we bring them Iron; much more useful then
Gold, both for Tilling the Earth, and protecting the Life of Man. All which
accomplished a great number of those People should be Shipped, as if by Divine
command revealed to the Pope and King of Spain, into whose Regions they are to
be brought and dispersed into the Colonys of Africa, whence they are to be
Transported into Spain to Labor, Till the Earth, and Exercise Mechanic Arts,
whilst the Spaniards addict themselves to Arms, and by degrees subdue that
whole Region. But the Spaniards that first entered there, were Rude and mere
Soldiers ignorant how much the Opinion of a Divinity prevails over the mind of
man to subject him; but as soon as they entered the Confines of their nearest
Enemies, began to snatch at Gold openly, showing that they had little care of
their Salvation; and threatening them without any premised precept, that they
should suffer themselves to be Baptized, and believe Christ to be Crucified for
them. Which things at first sight were absurd, to wit, That Water should bring
any one to Heaven, or that a God could Die; and was straightway at the very
first a Stumbling Block to them, as the Apostle St. Paul says, not observing
the Apostolic Canon, Preach to men.

13. Such a Method of Christian Catechism, have the most diligent Propagators
of the Ignatian Faith observed in our Times, in the utmost Provinces of Asia;
for they when they took notice that even those, though very few, remains of the
Apostolical Doctrine which yet kept Footing in Europe, contained something
harsh and hard, so that as of old they seemed to the Greeks foolishness, and to
the Jews a stumbling block; they forbore to Preach Christ Crucified, whom only
Paul professed to know, and set up another Christ, Beautiful, Splendid, Clad in
Chiness habit, who with wonderful Magnificence had formerly descended from
Heaven into Europe, and foretold the Reign of our Pope. Palafor. in Epist. ad
Innoc. x. Pontif. viii. Joan. And also in Diario de Mr. de St. Amor. Doctoris
Sorbon alegatorum.
Nothing Preached they of Christ Crucified, nothing of Mortification, nothing
of Fasting, nothing of Repentance, nothing of yearly receiving the Sacrament;
so that if the Church would again teach the Chinesses, and Instruct them in the
right Rules of Faith, they would oppose it, and cry out they were deceived; for
no Fasting Religion, no Penitent and Weeping Faith dreadful to Nature, enemy to
the Flesh, destined to Death and Danger; No Savior Crucified had their Masters
the Jesuits told them of: They will protest they Embraced him not as Man and
God, Scourged, Spit on, Contemned, laden with Wounds, hanging on the Cross,
and Dead, but received a Savior, Beautiful, Lovely, Glorious (such as the
Jesuits paint him in the Chiness habit) and a Law and course of Life, Easy,
Pleasant, Sweet, Delightful, Merry and Peaceable.

14. Yet this new Method some have disallowed, and among those great stirs were
raised in this matter, by John Palafox de Mendoza, Bishop of the City of Angels
in America, and Dean of the Counsel of the Indies, a man too Simple and Rude to
understand these Arts. He possibly imagined with himself that Anathema, which
St. Paul pronounced, Gal. 1.8.
Even against an Angel from Heaven preaching any other Gospel, was to this day,
and even in the Indies themselves of force; and did not rightly Interpret
another saying of the same St. Paul, So that Christ be Preached, that is so
that Christ's Name be retained. Led by which Errors, this Morose old man
publicly damned that Jesuitical Catechism, whereupon it was no wonder if he
were disturbed in his Bishopric, cast out of the City, and by the Ignatian
Society made a comman Laughing Stock, having a Cross put upon him made of Bulls
Horns, whilst they sung as a Litany, From Bishop Palafox, Good Lord deliver us,
as himself in his Letters most lamentably complains. Certainly he that thus
durst stickle for the ancient Purity and Simplicity of Religion was worthy to
be turned out of doors; there eternally and bitterly to Weep, and exercise
Fasting, as long as he pleased.

15. Indeed many good and simple Men throughout Europe, were much offended at
the declarations; and importunate complaints of this Bishop, and such like
imprudent Men: whom that the Pope might in some measure satisfy; and perhaps
being justly fearful, by sacred edict he restrained the publication of that
Method; the instrument of which prohibition was lately transmitted us by
Hurtado a Spanish Divine. Thomas Hurt. in Opusc. Colon. ^ 1655.
But that Censure is not at all to be interpreted, as relating to the
Christians, Inhabiting beyond Ganges, and the Equinoctial Line, when it was
only made in favor of those who yet in Europe retain some remains of ancient
Christianity; as to omit others the famous Didacus de Moralez, a Jesuit,
Rector of the College of St. Joseph, in the City of Manilia, which is the
Capital of the Phillipines, has taught us in one entire and solid volume.

16. And since things are so, I believe that the safest way which the Emperors
of old, held in Converting the Roman Commonwealth into a Dominion. For as they
left some resemblances of the late liberty, though the liberty was wholly taken
away, so it will be convenient to expose some image of Christ; though himself
by degrees be utterly abolished. To which end, we may observe the advice of the
most Religious Machiavel. Whoever would innovate the form of the Commonwealth
in that attempt, Disput. de Repub. lib. 1. c. 25.
it is necessary that he retain some shadow of things that were before; for so
it comes to pass, that the People do not think any thing changed, though all
things be innovated: For the People use to look no farther then things are
Visible, and outward appearances; and as such takes and receives them, though
the Magistrate plainly creates new things, and new duties are imposed upon Men;
yet retaining the same names, they are thought still to be the same. Hence may
evidently be gathered.

The CONCLUSION.
Since the Condition and State of things permits not, that Christ be taken from
the midst of us by open Violence, it is advisable to dispatch Him by a
lingering Consumption; and whilst He Withers and Pines away by Babylonish or
Egyptian Arts, so temper, harden and paint Him over, that He may be imposed
upon duller Understandings, as the Image of a lively and perfect body. Which
Arts, that I may truly set forth, and particularly explain, I humbly supplicate
that Spirit which resides in the Cabinet of our Popes Breast, not to think we
unworthy of his Guidance and Inspiration: And you likewise Most Reverend Men,
assist me with your Prayers and Intercession to him.

Dated in the Library of the great Convent, these Calends of December,
MDcLxvii.
FINIS.

