A SOBER ENQUIRY INTO The Nature, Measure, and Principle of Moral Virtue, Its
distinction from Gospel-Holiness.

WITH Reflections upon what occurs disserviceable to Truth and Religion in this
matter, in three late Books, VIZ. Ecclesiastical Policy. Defense and
Continuation. AND Reproof to the Rehearsal transprosed.

By R. F.

Vnus tamen scrupulus habet animam meam, ne sub obtentu priscae literaturae
caput erigere tentet Paganismus.

Erasm. London, Printed for D. Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1673.

TO Sir CHARLES WOLSELEY, Baronet.
SIR,
DEdications are so often abused to flattery, commenced upon so low motives,
and so unsutably addressed, that unless they be rescued from these vulgar
abuses, they will deservedly grow into contempt. And indeed were it not that I
am conscious to my self both of the congruousness of this Address, and that I
am influenced by none of those inducements that commonly prevail to
Inscriptions of this nature, and that there is nothing here of the wonted
strain of Epistles Dedicatory, I should have superceded the Dedicating of this
at all.

Sir, you have been so happy in your choice of the Theams that you have
designed to Illustrate and Vindicate; and so matchless in the performance of
what you have undertaken, that whoever has a Reverence for Religion, owes you
not only thanks, but Veneration. Whilst others combat Atheism with Drollery and
Satyr, you have encountered it with Demonstration; and whilst they only mock and
jeer the Atheists, you have baffled and refuted them. By vindicating also the
Scriptures to their Divine Author you have justified our belief of them: Whilst
you degrade Reason from that Supreme Judicature that some would erect it into,
you have rightly vested it in whatever belongs to it as an Instrument of
discerning and conduct. As he must either have a design to betray Religion or
Himself who owes it to any thing less than a rational choice; So he must have
very irreverent apprehensions of the Authority and Veracity of God, who will
embrace nothing but what himself can frame adequate Notions of. Whereas then
the Socinian on the one hand, and the Papist and lazy Protestant on the other,
rendered it necessary that both the Reasonablness of Scripture-Belief, and yet
the mystery of Particular Doctrines should be equally asserted and secured: We
ow a Homage to Sir Charles Wols^ley for employing himself about so Noble a
Subject, and without incurring the censure both of injustice and ingratitude,
we cannot but acknowledge his success in it. And truly the testifying my own
thankfulness was the main, though I cannot say the only incentive to this
Address.

For having, Sir, assumed the liberty to arraign the Writings and some of the
Notions of a Person considerable at least for his confidence, self-esteem, and
the contempt which he treats all men with; that he may not think himself ill
dealt withal to be fallen upon by so mean a Man, and so illiterate a Divine as
my self, I am willing to do him that right as to refer the Umpirage of the
Debate between him and me, to a Person as far above either of us in Learning as
in Quality. And if he should decline your Award, as I am confident he dare not
stand the Verdict of so Competent and Impartial a Judge, I have the
satisfaction of having committed the whole Cause into such hands, as wherein
soever either as to Argument or Style I am defective, knows how to substitute
better in their Room. And I acknowledge this to have been one reason among
others for the prefixing your Name to the ensuing Discourse, that by
recommending the Subject to your care, I might thereby call forth a Person of
so strong and clear a Judgment, so Masculine and Celebrated an Eloquence, as
well to rescue so excellent a Theme from so short a Reason and dull a Pen as
mine, as to vindicate it from the declamatory assaults of such whose skill and
strength lies next to their Railing in their Rhetoric and Picquancy.

There is one thing more, Sir, that contributed to the concerning your name in
this Dedication, namely to tell you, that whereas you have promised an account
of the admirable contrivement of saving Men by Jesus Christ, we can no longer
excuse the delay of it. It would have been welcome and useful before, but it is
now become necessary. The Opinions brought to the Bar in the following
Discourse, are modest and innocent in comparison of some others vented by the
same Author, viz. That small sins God takes no notice of, and that great Sins
Repentance expiates them. Religion as well as your own Promise challenge from
you that you would help to check this growing boldness; Nor do I know a Subject
wherein you may more advantagiously serve both Truth and your own Fame; The
Accession of Light derivable from so great Accomplishments to that, will
infallibly reflect a luster, upon your self. Sir, whilst most Books serve only
to betray their Authors to an universal contempt, and to expose their pride and
folly, which might have been concealed, had not themselves taken a course to
divulge it; you have already by your Writings not only further endeared your
self to your Friends, and raised your estimate among such as have the honor
and happiness to know you, but withal you have obliged strangers to pay you a
Veneration, and won your self a number of secret Votaries and unknown admirers,
among whom I presume to reckon my self, and am,

SIR, Your most faithful, and most humble Servant, R. F.

To the Reader.
HAving in the following Treatise mentioned the motives that induced me to this
Undertaking, I shall not entertain thee here with what thou will meet with
hereafter. Only this I may say, that as it was not to gratify the Entreaties
of a Bookseller, such men's Importunity weighing little with me, if the
Advantage and Interest of others be not concerned; so neither was it upon the
solicitation of Friends, who perhaps had they known of it before it had
proceeded too far, would have been loath to have trusted so great a Concern in
so weak hands. No one is responsible for it but my self; whatever mistakes,
failures, etc. are in it, I am only accountable for them. As for the main of
the Discourse I leave it to stand or fall as it shall be found in the judgment
of Christians and Scholars. I know I have not been able to wed the Graces to
the Muses; it satisfies me if the Sword have a good Edge, though the Handle of
it be not so well gilt. Nor do I despise any thing more than Rhetoric putting
an Ostracism upon Logic; though otherwise I like the meat the better for
having a pleasant Sauce. I hope I may say that the whole is managed in a Spirit
of Meekness and Terms of Modesty. I am none of those who affect to be
offensive, or who endeavor to grow remarkable by being saucy. There is nothing
more disgusts me in the Writings of others than to find them stuffed with Satyr
and Scurrility. Men do but disserve their own designs by writing huffingly; nor
will any one that is wise judge the worse of a Cause by finding it reviled and
slandered. Clown, Yelper, Despicable-Scribler, Buffoon, Coloss of Brass, Mr.
Insolence, Impudent Fop, Whelp, Monky, Crop, Smutty Lubber, Dastard Craven,
Mushrome, Coward, Judas, Crocodile, Hunger-starved Whelp of a Country Vicar,
(not to mention a thousand more Epithets of this complexion, which occur in a
late Book) do ill become the extraction and civility of a Gentleman, the
Education of a Scholar, the Morality of a Philosopher, the Religion of a
Christian, and the Profession of a Divine to give to any, especially to a
Person who for his Birth, Breeding, Natural and acquired Accomplishments,
Honorable Employes in his Country, and Untainted Conversation, Rivals at least
the bestower of them. Men of all Persuasions are scandalized at this way of
writing. Nor will any credit accrue to the Cause and Party in whose favor we
meet with nothing but Insolence, Malice and Calumny. I do not interest my self
in the Transproser's Quarrel, h^ is able himself, if he think it needful, to
give the ^^prover due correction for his Folly and Impudence. But suppose that
(abating the unhandsome terms, which I am confident when his head is cooler the
very Author cannot but condemn) something might be pleaded for his keenness
against A. M. being a sacrifice to Revenge rather than Truth, for meddling with
his Comfortable Importance; yet I cannot imagine upon what Motives he hopes to
justify his treating J. O. with so much Pride, Petulancy, Wrath, Rancour,
Revenge, Scurrility, Reviling and Railing, as I think is not to be matched
again; especially being a Person not only second to none for Learning and
Modesty, but who for what appears had given him no offense, unless it were that
by a sober Reply to his First Book he had furnished him with an occasion of
rectifying some things, wherein he was not only mistaken, but had grossly
prevaricated; and therefore instead of defaming and maligning his Monitor, he
ought to have thanked him: nor is there a greater injustice in the World, than
to make that a Quarrel which is really an Obligation. It is a new way of
securing our selves from Opponents, to overlook the Cause, and spend our
Indignation upon the Person of our Adversary, and to fetch our Defense from the
Dung-Cart and Oyster-Boats, instead of the St^a and Academy. It had been enough
to allow him neither Wit nor Sincerity, to grant him neither Ability nor
Patience to write Sense or Reason; to remand him to the Ferula, to make his
Mittimus for Bedlam; and, in gratitude for old kindnesses, to undertake the
providing him a dark Lodging and clean Straw; to reproach him with a hundred
abusive tales and defaming stories: but over and above all this to render him
at least suspected, if not odious to Rulers; he must not only have an address
fathered on him, to which he was both an utter Stranger, and his known avowed
Principle's always repugnant; but in pursuance of that Calumny he must be
represented as an Enemy to the present Government, and bound in Conscience to
abhor and oppose Monarchy, etc. (See Repr. to the Rehears. p. 422, 423.) So
that unless Magistrates will be wanting to their own security, here is an
Object presented them not only to employ their Rods, but Axes upon. Haec mi
Pater^e dicere aequum fuit? Is it lawful to calumniate when judged conducive to
interest? or may we indulge our selves in detraction and slander, in hopes of
promoting our design by it? For I cannot conceive but that the Author of this
accusation fully understood him to be innocent whom he impeached, and if it
would have served his end could better then I have laid the Saddle upon the
right Horse. I know there needs none to vindicate that worthy Person but
himself, or rather he needs not do it, carrying a justification in this matter
in the hearts of all that know him, who understanding themselves bound to
defend the Reputation of their Neighbor from Slander, will not be wanting, as
opportunity serves, of acquitting themselves therein. In the mean time he may
satisfy himself in having Plato's Reserve, who being told of some who had
defamed him, It Is no matter, said he, I will live so that none shall believe
them.

But as if Men's Pride and Malice knew no bounds, and single Sacrifices were too
little to satisfy their Insolence and Revenge, a whole Kingdom must be made a
Victim to their Wrath, Rage, and Ambition: As if it were not enough to slander
particular Persons; the Honor, Learning, Language, and Religion of a whole
Nation must be arraigned. It is come to pass (says a late Author) that the
Scots from their antipathy to Bishops are become the most Barbarous People of
all Europe, so as that they will not have any Traffic with any other Countries
for fear of corrupting their Language and Gentility, though that is little
better than wild Irish, and they little better than Jack-Gentlemen. And though
they have some dark and general Notions of Christianity still remaining among
them, yet are they since their Picque against Bishops, fallen into such
Rudeness and Ignorance, that they have scarce any knowledge at all of the
particular Articles of their Faith, and Precepts of their Religion. Repr. to
the Rehears. page 502. It would seem by this Gentleman, that Faith, Virtue,
etc. are to be measured by respect to the Mitre and Crosier-Staff; and that
subjection to Prelacy is the only standard of Learning, Righteousness,
Gentility and Good-Breeding: And that it is not the belief of the Bible and
Obedience to the Gospel that does constitute us Christians, but submission to
the Bishops Cannons. Only I wonder how other Nations have escaped the same
misfortune, or are all the Foreign Protestant Churches involved in the same
Unhappiness? It were easy to be tart and severe upon this occasion, but I
shall leave it to the Wisdom of Authority in vindication of the Honor of
Religion, a Nobility famous for whatsoever is truly Great and Honorable, and a
Ministry no less Learned than Pious, to chasten this Excess of Insolence.

OF Moral Virtue and Grace.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion of this Discourse. Terms here occurring unfolded. What meant by
Virtue; What by Moral and Morality. The import of Grace, so far as it has any
concern in the ensuing Debate. The Question stated.

Sect. 1.
AMong other Methods and Arts pursued and improved to the disservice of the
Souls of men, and the subversion of the Truth as it is in Jesus; there are two,
which though opposite to one another, are yet equally of a malignant influence
upon Religion. The First is, men's deluding themselves with an Imaginary
Romantic pretense of Grace and Faith, and consequently, that their conditions
with ^eference to their everlasting interests are secure; while in the mean
time their hearts and minds are strangers to, and void of all those
Dispositions, Qualities, Habits, etc. by which we are assisted to live soberly
to our selves, righteously toward our neighbor, or answerably to the
dependence we have on, or the relations we stand in unto God: whence it
naturally and by a kind of necessity comes to pass, that they are wholly
estranged in their lives from that Sobriety, Temperance, Justice, Equity,
Devotion, Humility, Gratitude, Meekness, etc. they should be in the exercise
of. These men presume themselves into Salvation, and claim happiness on the
boldness of their belief; nor do they apply themselves to conquer heaven
otherwise than in the alone virtue of their imagination. If they can but arrive
at so much impudence as to vote themselves Saints, they think that they are
acquitted from all care of Virtue and Obedience. These are the men who set
virtue and grace at odds, who frame to themselves a Religion not only empty of,
but inconsistent with real goodness: the unhappy offspring of those whom the
Apostle James encounters, Cap. 2. verse. 14. to the end. The Second is, That
some having obtained of themselves, endeavor to prevail with others, to
renounce and seclude all infused principles (commonly called grace) with the
subjective influences of the Spirit, and to erect in the room thereof acquired
habits, natural dispositions, innate abilities, and moral virtues, as the whole
of that, in the strength of which we may live acceptably to God, and acquire a
fitness and title to immortality and life. Moral virtue (says a late Author)
is not only the most material and useful part of all Religion, but the
ultimate end of all its other duties: And all true Religion can consist in
nothing else, but either the practice of virtue it self, or the use of those
means and instruments that contribute to it. Eccles. polit. p. 69. All Religion
is either virtue it self, or some of its instruments; and the whole duty of man
consists in being virtuous: ibid. p. 71. There is nothing beyond the bounds of
moral virtue, but Chimera's and flying Dragons, illusions of fancy and
impostures of Enthusiasm; Idem def. and continuat. p. 338, 339. Hence he
challenges any man to give him a notion of grace distinct from morality,
affirming, that if grace be not included in morality, that it is at best but a
phantasm and an imaginary thing; Eccles. polit. p. 71. and again, that the
spirit of God, and the grace of Christ, when used as distinct from moral
abilities and performances, signify nothing; def. and continuat. p. 343. Thus
virtue and grace are not only made co-incident; morality and Religion in its
utmost latitude made convertible terms: but in the pursuance of these Notions,
men are acted to vent all manner of contempt against the Spirit of God,
deriding the inward operations, quicknings and influences of the Holy Ghost, as
Enthusiastic dreams, canting phrases, and the fumes of Religious madness. To
be born again, and to have a new spiritual life, is a fantastic jargon,
unless it only signify to become a new moral man, (says the former Author)
def. and continuat. p. 343, 344. All the pretended intercourse betwixt Christ
and a believing soul, in way of discoveries, manifestations, spiritual
refreshments, withdrawings, d^sertions, is nothing but the ebbs and tides of
the humors of the body, and the mere results of a natural and mechanical
Enthusiasm; nor otherwise intelligible, than by the laws of mechanism, as the
motion of the heart, and the circulation of the blood are: ibid. p. 339* 340,
341, 342. Hence to describe conversion, by our being united to Christ, and
ingrafted in him, is called a rolling up and down in ambiguous phrases, and
canting in general expressions of Scripture, without any concern for their true
sense and meaning; ibid. p. 343.

The consideration of the inconsistency of these principles with truth, the
affront offered to the Gospel, and damage done to the souls of men by each of
them, has led me to this undertaking. On the one hand to separate grace from
virtue, and to set faith and morality at variance, cannot but furnish men
Atheistically and irreligiously disposed, with occasion of Blaspheming that
worthy name by which we are called: it being too much the custom of prejudiced
and disingenuous persons to reflect the scandals which arise either from the
doctrines or conversations of professors, on that Holy and innocent Religion,
which they (though but hypocritically) do profess. On the other hand, to
swallow up the whole of Religion in morality, seems a plain renouncing of the
Gospel, and shapen particularly to befriend men in such a design. For if the
Gospel be nothing but a restitution of the Religion of Nature; as the aforesaid
Author affirms, def. and continuat. p. 316. And if the Christian institution
does not introduce any new duties distinct from the eternal rules of Morality;
as is alleged, def. and continuat. p. 305. I see not, but that whoever would
act consistently to these principles, he must needs proceed to a plain
renunciation of all the instituted duties of the Gospel, (which is to overturn
the whole fabric of Christianity) and confine himself to the Decalogue; that
being a plain and full system of the law of nature, and a sufficient transcript
of the duties we were obliged to by the rule of Creation. Nor, supposing that
Martin Sidelius was not mistaken in his hypothesis, that all Religion consists
in morality alone; (The same opinion with that asserted by a late Author;) can
I censure him for what he thereupon proceeded to, namely, the renouncing the
Gospel: Nor does he deserve the character fastened upon him; def. and continuat.
p. 313. of a foolish and half-witted fellow, upon the account of his
deductions, they being neither streined nor absurd, but clear and natural;
whatever he demerited upon the score of his premises.

These among other Considerations, having swayed me to this undertaking; I
would hope, that an endeavor of instructing the minds of Men, and of
contributing to the conduct of their Judgments and Consciences in those things
may not be unacceptable: and the rather, because not only of some difficulty
in setting forth the due lines, measures, and bounds of Virtue and Grace; the
describing their mutual Relations, and the subordination of the one to the
other: But, because there is very little extant upon the subject, at least with
respect to the end, and in the manner that it is here managed. Nor indeed was
any thing of this nature thought necessary in a Nation where the Gospel is
embraced, till the Debates and Discourses of some have of late made it so.

2. To avoid all Ambiguity, Darkness and Prevarication, it will be needful ere
we make any further proceed, that we fix the meaning and import of Virtue and
Morality; Grace and Religion; these being the terms of the Question to be
Discoursed and Decided; nor without a settling the Notion and Conception of
these, can any thing of this Argument be duly understood.

Virtue is a term seldom occuring in the Scripture. In the Old Testament we
have (...) Chajil, several times rendered by our interpreters Virtuous, viz.
Ruth, 3.11. Prove. 12.4. Prove. 31.10. and once Virtuously, namely, Prove. 21.29.
but indeed the word (...) has no such signification as that we now use to
express by Virtue: it properly signifies Courageous, strenuous, industrious,
diligent; strength, valor, activity of body and mind, etc. And accordingly the
Septuagint in none of the preceding places, nor elsewhere, translate (...) by
(...). Prove. 12.4. The 70 render it (...). Jun. and Trem^l. Mercer, Piscator,
strenua; Pagnin fortis; industrious, diligent, sirenuous. Prove. 31.10. who can
find a Virtuous Woman? The 70. translate it (...); Munster, Pagnin, fortem:
Jun. and Tremel. Piscator, Mercer, Castalio, strenuam. Prove. 31.29. Many
Daughters have done Virtuously. The 70. turn it, (...), have gotten Wealth: So
Munster, Pagnin, paraverunt sibi opes. Jun. and Trem. Mercer, Piscator,
gesserunt se strenue, have done, or approved themselves industriously. Ruth.
3.11. The 70. translate it, (...), a woman of courage, activity. (...) virtue,
is very rarely met with in the N. T. I do not say, that it occurs not at all
there, in so affirming, Valla mistook; nor do I say that it occurs but thrice,
for in so alleging, Laurentius was overseen: But I think I may affirm that it
is to be found but four times in the whole New Testament, viz. Phil. 4.8. 1
Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 1.3. and 2 Pet. 1.5. In any of which places I much question
whether it ought to be interpreted in the sense vulgarly received. 1 Pet. 2.9.
we render (...) Praises, and Dr. Hammond paraphraseth the place thus; That you
may set forth and illustrate Christ's powerful and gracious Workings, who has
wrought so glorious and blessed a Change in you. 2 Pet. 1.5. it plainly
signifies a peculiar disposition of mind distinct from Faith, Patience,
Temperance, etc. and so cannot bear the sense commonly there put upon it: D.
Hammond renders it by Courage, Fortitude, Manhood; and that agreeably enough
to the derivation commonly given of the word from (...) Mars, Bellum, War. In a
word the foresaid Annotator acknowledges that it no where in the N. T.
signifies probity of mind or what we now understand by virtue, unless it be
Phil. 4.8. where I think the context if narrowly viewed, will lead us to render
it rather as the Syriack has done, by any work Glorious or Honorable etc.
However it must be Acknowledged though (...) Virtue may possibly be used in the
Scripture in the sense vulgarly put upon it; that originally we are indebted to
the School's of the Philosophers for it, and ought therefore to address our
selves to them for the sense and meaning of it.

If in this matter then we consult the Philosophers, we shall find (...)
Virtue, used in a twofold signification. First to signify a habit or facility
of working or acting conformably to the Law of Right Reason. The alone moral
measure of humane actions known or acknowledged by the Philosophers was Reason.
Hence Aristotle having stated the form and essence of Virtue in a mediocrity;
he explain's Mediocrity to be that which Right Reason teaches; (...); Eth.
lib. 6. cap. 1. and lib. 2. cap. 6. he defines (...), mediocrity, to be that
which is (...); circumscribed by Reason. They knew no other measure of moral
Good and Evil but Reason; and this they styled the common Law; (...), the
common law is right Reason. Laert. in Zenon. (...); Law is Right Reason,
commanding such things as ought to be done, and forbidding such things as ought
not to be done; was the definition that the Stoics gave of Law. To which
agrees the description given by Tully; that it is recta and a numine Deorum
tracta ratio, imperans honesta and prohibens contraria; Right Reason derived to
us from God enjoining things honest, and forbidding things dishonest: Philipp.
12. and lib. 1. de Legib. and lib. 1. de not. Deor. (...); To obey Reason and
to obey God is all one, says Hierocles on the Pythagorean golden Verses: ver.
29. This they called the Royal Law, (...), Right Reason is the Royal law; Plato
in his Minos. This they likewise styled, (...), the Law of being; Plato ibid.
Where I suppose by (...), of being. He means the Law of Nature, the Law common
to all men: For so Aristotle defines that which he calls common Law in
contradistinction from the Law which he calls private; (...): Common Law is
that which is according to Nature. Retor. lib. 1. cap. 14. Nor is there any
thing more common than to express their obedience to the Law of Reason, by
their following the conduct of Nature (...); to live agreeable to Nature:
Epict. (...). If we observe Nature as our rule ordering our conversation
according to right Reason, and agreeably to our Nature, we shall perform what
in all things becomes us: Hierocles on the golden Verses of the Pythagoreans.
ver. 13. To which accords that of Seneca, propositum nostrum est secundum
naturam vivere; our purpose and design is to live according to Nature; Epist.
5. and beata est ergo vita conveniens naturae suae: A happy life is such as is
agreeable to Nature; Senec. de vita beata cap. 3. and idem est beat vivere and
secundum naturam; it is all one to live happily and to live according to
Nature; idem ibid. cap. 8. -- haec duri immota Catonis
Secta fuit, servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi: -- says Lucan.
In all which places and many more which might be produced, nothing is meant by
nature, but the law of reason: for as Juvenal says, Nunquam aliud Natura,
aliud sapientia dicit; Nature does not teach one thing, and Right Reason
another: Sat. 14. Now any habit, promptitude or facility of acting conformably
to this law of right Reason, they called it Virtue. Thus the Pythagoreans
defined Virtue to be (...), a habit of which ought to be done: or of what
Reason conducts, and leads us to; (...); Virtue is nothing else but a habit of
decency: Theag. lib. de Virtut. Aristotle describes it to be (...), A readiness
of acting according to right Reason; Eth. lib. 6. cap. 13. And more fully that
it is, (...), etc. An elective habit consisting in mediocrity in things
relating to us, defined by reason etc. Eth. lib. 2. cap. 6. This is
acknowledged by our late Author, Eccl. polit. p. 68. The practice of virtue
(says he) consists in living sutably to the dictates of Reason and nature. And
def. and continuat p. 315, 316. All men are agreed that the real end of
Religion is the happiness and perfection of mankind; and this end is obtained
by living up to the dictates of Reason, and according to the laws of nature.
This promptitude and facility of acting conformably to the dictates of Reason,
the Philosophers styled the (...), good order of the Soul: (...) The music of
the Soul. And herein they stated the Souls sanity, beauty, harmony etc. Hence
Pythagoras and from him Plato defined (...), virtue to be the harmony of the
Soul. Plat. in Phaed.

Secondly, Virtue is used by Philosophers to denote any act which because of
its conformity to Reason is Morally good. Whatever actions were found agreeable
and conformable to Reason, they styled them virtues; and on the contrary, any
act that was morally evil, they called it vice; stating withal the obliquity of
vice in a difformity to Reason, (...); Vice is a Practice against right Reason;
Plato. (...), somewhat besides or beyond reason, Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 13.
(...); vice is a transgression against right Reason; Stob. Sermon. 1. The
denomination of virtue being once used to signify the conformity of our mind
unto the law of Reason; it is thence applied to express the agreeableness of
our actions unto the same law. And these are the alone acceptations of virtue
which can claim any room in the present debate; all other signification put
upon it, being foreign to the matter we have in hand. By consulting then the
original Authors of this term, we have found it appropriat and fixed to express
the conformity of our minds and Actions, its Habit's and Operations to the Law
of Reason; and this must carefully be attended to in the whole of our future
proceed.

3 With reference to these habit's it is further needful to be observed, that
though they be not affirmed to be essential to our Natures, nor to proceed by
way of emanation from them, nor to be congenite and connate with us; it is yet
contended that there are those igniculi and semina, sparks and seeds naturally
in all men which may be maturated and improved by frequent repetition of Acts
into habit's of Virtue. It is true all the Philosophers were not of this mind,
some of the wisest of them acknowledging a Divine interposure in the
communication of Virtues to men. Hence Plato in his Meno discourses at large
that Virtue comes by a (...) a Divine infusion. And that it is (...) neither
from nature, nor teachable. See Maximus Tyrius dissertat. 22. and the Dialogue
between Alcibiades and Socrates in Plato. But the generality of them were
otherwise persuaded: all the Stoics affirmed (...) that Virtue was teachable.
This was what they meant by their (...), their (...); self-power and absolute
free will to Good; their (...), good Nature or Seeds of Virtue in Nature.
(...); Virtues are acquired by a rational government of ones self, and by good
Education; whereas Vices spring and proceed from the contrary; Sallust. (...).
Beata vita causa and firmamentum est sibi fidere: the alone foundation and
source of Happiness is for a man to trust to himself; Sen. Ep. 31. Omnibus
natura fundamentum dedit semenque virtutum: omnes ad omnia ista nati sumus: cum
irritator accessit, tunc illa animi bona velut sopita excitantur; Seneca.
Nature has bestowed on every one the Seeds and means of Virtue: We are all
born disposed to these things: and whenever excited thereunto by a
praeceptor, those dormant endowments display themselves. The passage of
Apuleius lib. de philosoph. is pat to this purpose; viz. That man by Nature is
neither good nor bad* but alike indifferent and equally disposed to either:
having semina quaedam utrarumque rerum cum nascendi origin copulata, quae
educationis disciplina debeant emicare; congenite with him some Seeds of each,
which education maturates, and excites. Hence though they used to acknowledge
themselves indebted to Jupiter for life and estate, yet as to the honor of
being virtuous, they would neither allow him, nor any other to have a share
with them in it. It was upon this account that Seneca thought it not enough
that his Vertuoso should vie perfection and happiness with God himself; Deus
non vincit sapientem felicitate, etiamsi vincit aetate; non est virtus major
quae longior: God does not excel a wise man in happiness, but only in duration;
nor is Virtue the greater, for being of a long standing, Ep. 73. But he add's
elsewhere, est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum, ille enim naturae beneficio
non suo sapiens est; there is something wherein a wise man challenges the
precedence of God, for as much as God is good only through the advantage of his
Nature, but the wise man is so, through his own study and endeavor, Epist. 3.
Of the same complexion are all the notions of Aristotle with respect to the
attainment and acquisition of Virtue, as may be seen at large, lib. 2. Eth.
cap. 1 and 2. Yea some flew higher, contending Virtue not only in the
principles and Seeds of it to be an appurtenance of our Nature, but to be
formally inlay'd into us: Hence that of Cleanthes, (...); That a wise man is
such by Nature and not by institution. To which accords that of Cicero, justos
quidem nature nos esse factos etc. That we are naturally good and upright. In a
word, the Original Authors of this Term neither knew nor acknowledged any other
Virtue, save that whose alone measure was Reason; and power of operation,
natural strength. He that desires to see more of this may consult Plutarchs
Dissertation entitled (...), that Virtue is teachable: And Stobeus Sermon. 101.
Now how suitable soever this Idea of Virtue already assigned be to Humane
Nature considered as innocent, yet falling upon it as corrup^, it has proved
of no better use than to keep men off from Christ and the Covenant of Grace,
and to lead them to live upon, In potestate habeo justum esse and justum non
esse. The common saying of the Pelagians: Dubitari non potest inesse quid^m
omni animae naturaliter virtutum semina. Cass.
and trust to a Covenant of Works. From these, and no other principles sprung
Pelagianism: and the dogmata of the one are nothing but a transcript of the
sentiments of the other; Instances ly at hand, if it were needful to produce
them. The Pelagians recta Ratio is all one with the Philosophers (...). In Ipsa
enim natura inserta sunt velut semina, quae a^ditu and voluntate exculta
fructificant -- testimonium creatoris. Comment. in Epist. fathered (but
falsely) on Ambrose.
The virtutum semina are asserted equally by both: See Aug. de great. Christi.
cap. 18. And Jansenius his Augustinus, lib. 4. de here is. Pelag. cap. 7.

After all the claim put in by any to right Reason and Seeds of Virtue, there
was not one of them but still discerned a darkness to have benighted the mind,
and a feebleness to have arrested the Soul with respect to all virtuous
operations. This Plato called (...), an evil in nature; (...), a bad nature;
(...), a natural evil etc. It is true, the source and real cause of this
darkness of the Soul, and its proneness to forbidden instances they rightly
knew not; and accordingly they generally imputed it to the Body. (...), That
the Body was the fountain of the Souls misery; is a noted saying of
Pythagoras's. Plato tells us how that the Soul, by being thrust down into the
body suffered a (...), lost its wings; both in his Phaed. and in his Timaeus.
Hence nothing more common with them, than to call (...), the Body the Sepulcher
of the Soul. The very Poet has it, Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent,
gaudentque, nec auras

Recipient, clausae tenebris and Carcere caeco.

Virg. Who has a mind to it, may see more in Plotinus, lib. 8. Enneadis.
Hierocles in aurea carmina, verse. 56. However though they were ignorant of the
true cause of man's blindness and proclivity to evil; yet the thing it self they
were sensible of. It is a remarkable passage of Aristotle, (...): What the Eyes
of Owls and Bats are with respect to the meridian Light: such are our minds and
understandings with reference to those things, which even by nature are most
manifest: lib. 2. (...). Nature has brought us forth, not as a Mother, but as
a Stepmother, animo prono ad libidines, with our Souls bent upon Lusts. Cicer.
apud August. cont. jul. lib. 4. Now against this they sought relief from
Philosophy: Other means by which they might be assisted to answer the end and
Law of their Creation they knew not. Moralis Philosophia caput est, ut scias
quibus ad vitam beatam perveniri rationibus possit. The sum and scope of moral
Philosophy is, that we may know how to obtain and arrive at blessedness: Apul.
de Philosoph. Thus the Pythagoreans made the chief end of moral Philosophy to
be the curing the Soul of its (...), its sick diseased passions; and to bring
it to an (...) and (...), a healthy Complexion, a perfect Temperament, an
athletick sound Constitution: which consisted in virtuous Dispositions and
Actions. Socrates the great Author of moral Philosophy, proposed to himself as
its end the correcting and regulating of Manners: and from him both the Stoics
and Platonists made the chief end of Philosophy to be (...), to live according
to Virtue, Hence Seneca discoursing the fountains and causes of prevarication
in manners, and having reduced them to two Heads, a natural proclivity in the
mind to be tainted and led aside with false idea's and Images, and a fixed
aversation to Virtue* contracted by false Opinions and corrupt Hypotheses. He
refer's us to Philosophy as that which can alone administer relief to us;
affirming that the Precepts of Philosophy do sufficiently assist us to cure and
remedy both the former evils: utrumque decreta Philosophiae faciunt; Epist. 94.
And a little after in the same Epistle he has this expression, Quid autem
Philosophia nisi vitae lex? What else is Philosophy but a law of Life? Animae
morbis medetur, it cures the diseases of the Soul, says Apul. de Philosoph.
Facere docet Philosophia, it teaches us how to live; Sen. Ep. 20. (...): The
end of Philosophy is assimilation to God; Ammon. on Arist. Categ. (...): it
advances the Soul into the Divine likeness, Hierocl. praefat in aurea Carmina.
(...), Philosophy is the purification and perfection of Humanity; Hierocl.
ibid. Hoc mihi Philosophia promittat, ut me Deo parem faciat, Let Philosophy
minister this to me, that it render me equal to God, Sen. Ep. 48 See more to
this purpose in him passim, and in Plato in his Euthyd. Accordingly they
defined Practical Philosophy ( in contra-distinction from Theoretical) to be
effective of Virtue; (...). Thus the whole design of moral Philosophy, was to
arrive at Virtue, and thereby to attain happiness. Other means of compassing
both, they neither know nor looked after. How insufficient it was for either of
those, will be hereafter declared: I shall only intimate at present, that
through this, Philosophy became a snare to them, and as to the generality of
them they proved of all men the greatest enemies to the righteousness and grace
of God by Christ: for being (...), vessels filled with arrogance,
self-estimation and presumption as Timon said of them: Enmity and aversation to
the means appointed of God for the healing and renewing our natures, the
pardoning and forgiving of us our sins, fixed their roots in their very minds.
What lies in greater opposition to a meetness and idoneity for the Kingdom of
God, than the description given by themselves of a Philosopher: (...): The
constitution and image of a Philosopher is to expect good, as well as fear evil
only from himself. Epict. Enchir. cap. 72. You may see Seneca to the same
purpose Epist 111.

4. The signification of virtue, so far as the first Authors of that Term
instruct us concerning it, being sufficiently laid open: The next Word whose
sense we are to fix is Moral: a Term that has bred perplexities, and
occasioned mistakes in whatsoever controversy it has been used. We meet with
it in the controversy of the Sabbaths; in the disputations about converting
grace; in the question of humane power to good; in the doctrine concerning the
causality and efficacy of the Sacraments; and in this question which we have
now under debate; in all which it is liable to ambiguity, and so apt to breed
confusion, darkness and prevarication. Concerning the meaning of it in other
controversies, we are not concerned at present to enquire; it will be enough
for us, if we can clearly settle the import of it as it takes up a room in the
question before us. The word Moral has as little in footing the Scripture yea
less than the former. (...), manners, whence Moral is derived, if I mistake
not, occurs not at all in the 70. Nor do we meet with it but once in the whole
N. T. viz. 1 Cor. 15.33. And there it is plainly borrowed from Menander, the
whole sentence being an Iambick verse out of a Comedy of his. It proceeded out
of the same Mint that the former term did, and we are beholding to the schools
of the Philosophers for it; Aristotle's books (...) gave the principal rise to
this word. Quintilian denies that there is any Latin word by which (...) and
(...) can be expressed; lib. 6. cap. 3. But Tully renders them by mores,
manners, Lib de fato; and Orat. de lege Agraria ad Quirites. The Schoolmen
brought this exotic phrase, as they did many other, first into Divinity. And
it must be acknowledged of most of them, that they seem to have traded more in
the writings of the philosophers, than in the sacred Scriptures; and to have
taken their measures of the notions and apprehensions of things, rather from
Aristotle than the Bible. You may see this laid open at length both as to
matter of fact and the mischievous consequences which have ensued thereupon, by
that great and incomparable man Dr. Owen, De nature. ort. etc. verae Theolog.
lib. 1. digress. and lib. 6. a page 509. ad p. 521. However it being now
universally taken up, and having harbored it self both in the minds and
discourses of men; it would be in vain for us to contend against it; we shall
sufficiently approve our selves, if we can manifest the just acceptance of it.
Moral as it relates to virtue is capable at most but of a threefold
signification. First, to denote the conformity of our minds and actions to the
whole law of God regulating our practical obedience. But this description,
whether we take our measure from virtue to which it is an adjunct, and of which
it is predicated; or from law which first claiming the Denomination of Moral,
does afterward impart it to certain habits of the mind, and its operations, is
much too large. If we determine of the meaning of it by virtue; Then for as
much as in all true affirmative propositions there must be an identity betwixt
the subject and the predicate, Moral must relate only to an observation of
these things, and a practice of those duties, which virtue refer's to, namely,
an observance of what Reason without any superadded declaration can conduct us
in, and natural endowments and self acquirements enable us to the performance
of. Nor could the first Authors of this Term mean any more by it, being at once
strangers to all external Revelation, and Subjective grace. Or, if we should
choose to decide the import of Moral as it refers to Virtue, by taking our
measure of its signification from Law as that to which the style of Moral
primarily belongs, and by analogy only to habits and operations; we shall still
find that the foresaid signification of Moral is too wide: for according to
this method of proceed, Moral as referred to virtue, can be of no larger extent
than Moral as referred to law is. Seeing then it were against ordinary sense
and the custom of mankind, to style every law of practical obedience moral; it
is no less irrational to style the conformity of our minds and actions to those
laws by the name of Moral Virtues. A Second signification put upon Moral as it
has reference to Virtue is to intimate thereby the observation of the precepts
of the Second table of the decalogue: and this is the common acceptance of it
among practical Divines; whereof I judge this to be the reason; either because
the Philosophers in their writings vulgarly called Ethics and Morals, do
principally treat of the duties which men owe to themselves, and one another;
which are likewise the subject of the Second Table: or because they discourse
of those only, with any consistency to reason, and comme^^dableness; while in
the mean time in what soever we owe immediately to God, the imaginations are
vain, and their sentiment dark and ludicrous. But this acceptatio^ of Moral
Virtues I take to be as much to^ narrow as the former was wide; nor d^ any that
handle these matters accurately so straiten and restrain them. For whether we
state the meaning of Moral by its Habitude to Virtue, or to that Law which is
so denominated; We must admit it a greater latitude of signification, than
merely to imply Second-Table duties. If we judge of its import by its (...) to
Virtue, we must then allow it the same largeness of sense which we allow that,
namely to declare whatsoever is required of us by the Law of Nature in the
Light of Reason: and I suppose it will be readily acknowledged that there are
some duties which we owe immediately to God, and which respect him alone as
their object, that can be demonstrated by principles drawn from Nature, and the
foundations and grounds of them discovered in the Light of Reason; and by
consequence Moral Virtues ought not to be confined to the observation of the
precepts of the Second Table. Or if we determine the sense of Moral by its
(...) and Relation to that law which is so called, and with respect to
conformity to which, the Habit's and Operations of our minds are afterward
denominated Moral: it will with the same evidence follow, that the Duties of
Morality consist not alone in obeying the commandments of the Second Table;
forasmuch as the Precepts of the First constitute a part of the Moral Law as
well as these of the Second do.

There is a Third sense which Moral as it belongs to virtue is capable of;
namely, to declare those habits and operations of the mind required by the law
of creation. And this sense of Moral will prove either stricter or larger
according as we take the measure of the term, from virtue, or from law. If we
define the meaning of it by its habitude to virtue, it will then signify only
those duties that we are under the obligation of by the law of creation, which
we are able to discover by the light of Reason; But if we determine the sense
of it by that law which is commonly called moral, it will then express all
those duties either to God or Man, which we are obliged to by the rule of
creation; whether there reside in man in his lapsed state an ability of
discerning them by Reason yea or not* Now this being the most comprehensive
notion of moral virtues, or duties of morality, that any one who have treated
those things with exactness have pitched on: and being the largest sense, which
in any propriety of Speech the Term can be used in; I shall be willing to admit
this as the true notion and idea of it. Morality then consist^ in an observance
of the precepts of the law of our creation, and that by the alone strength and
improvement of our natural abilities, whether the particular duties we are
under the sanction of by the foresaid law, be discoverable by and in the light
of Reason, yea or not.

5. Besides, these moral virtues whereof we have been discoursing, and whose
nature we have fixed and stated; There is frequent mention in Christian writers
both ancient and modern, not only of Evangelical ones, which they make
specifically and essentially different, both Quoad Substantiam and Quoad modum
from the former; as may be seen in Aquin. prim. 2. quest. 62. Banes in 2m. 2^.
passim, etc. Which Evangelical Virtues they call supernatural, partly because
they are Supra debitum naturae, beyond what was required by the law of
creation, and partly because viribus naturae acquiri non possunt, they are not
attainable by the strength and endeavors of Nature. These are not my words but
Becanus the Jesuits sum. Theol. Scholast. p. 238. Among those they reckon faith
in Christ. So that not to mention the other heterodoxies wrapped up in an
expression of a late Author; I dare say he speak's dissonantly to what either
Fathers or Schoolmen ever said, while he affirms that in the primitive Ages of
Christianity, the righteousness of Faith only employed a higher pitch of moral
goodness; Def. and Continuat. p. 305.306. I say moreover, that there are not
only Evangelical Virtues contended for as distinct from the moral ones we have
been unfolding: but they also mention moral Virtues infused, different from the
other moral ones which are only acquired: so Aquinas prim. secund. quest 63.
act. 3. and 4. And these by the very Jesuits are confessed to differ
specifically from one an other quoad modum; while moreover they are
acknowledged by the Dominicans to differ essentially quoad substantiam; see
Alvarez. de auxil. lib. 7. disp. 65. So that I cannot but be amassed at a late
Author that dare tell us; that Evangelical Graces are the same for substance
with Evangelical Virtues, and Evangelical Virtues the same with moral ones,
Def. and Continuat. p. 305. And I must needs say that he has betrayed
Ignorance or something worse, in reckoning the distinction of moral Virtue from
Grace among the tricks and frenzies of a newfangled Divinity that was scarcely
heard of fifty Years ago, Def. and Continuat. p. 307. And whereas he
challenges that great Man who replied to his first Book, to produce one
ancient Author that makes any difference between the nature of moral Virtue and
Evangelical Grace; Def. and Continuat p. 304. I who know my self unworthy to be
mentioned in one day either as to Reading or Learning with that Reverend
Person, am able if need were, to produce him a hundred. It is not many Years
ago, that the like question was debated with some warmth by persons of great
learning among our selves: and though the controversy was not concerning a
specifical difference, betwixt the acquired habits which are in unregenerate
men, and the infused habits which are in believers; nor yet whether the acts
proceeding from infused habits differ essentially from those acts which proceed
from acquired habits; the parties contending being herein at full agreement:
but the alone quarrel was, whether this Specific Difference was to be called a
Specific Physical difference, or a Moral only: yea the debate was not so much
about the Habits of the one sort, and the Habits of the other, a Specific
difference even in Kind being as good as on all sides acknowledged; for as much
as the roots and principles of the one, were confessed by both parties to be
Physically different from the roots and principles of the other; but the
contest was chiefly in reference to the acts which proceed from Acquired
Habits, and are found in unregenerate men; whether the Specific difference
between them and the acts which proceed from infused habits, be only Moral or
also Physical? Now though this was the whole and the alone ground of quarrel
between the contending parties, yet we remember what keen resentments appeared
in some learned men against a holy and worthy person, for his stating the
difference betwixt the Acts of the one sort of Habits, and the acts of the
other sort, to be onl^ Gradual or a Specific Moral difference. See Dr. Kendal's
Sancti sanciti digress. against Mr. B. and Durham on the Revel. from p. 125. to
145.
The theme I am treating lay me under no necessity o^ declaring my self on
either side in the controversy, nor was that my design i^ mentioning of it;
all that I intended wa^ to intimate how novel the doctrine of the universal
coincidence of Moral Virtue an^ Grace is; and what entertainment it wa^ likely
to have met with, if it had bee^ started some Years sooner. Yet I care no^ if I
add, that where there are positive qua^lifications concurring in the act of the
on^ habit, which are not in the act of the o^ther: as when they proceed from
differen^ Principles, are exerted with respects t^ different ends, and
influenced by differen^ motives; I should not scruple to call that: Specific
Physical difference, and should hope to justify my self by Philosophy as well
as Divinity in doing so. There is only one thing more that I intend here to
subjoin; namely, that whereas Suarez contend^ that without grace there may be
and are some Dispositions to true habits of Virtue, though he confess at the
same time that Perfect and Firm habits of Moral Virtue, Sine Gratia acquiri non
possint, cannot be acquired without grace; lib. 1. de great. cap. 7. n. 20.
Which though much more modest than what is alleged by our late Author, yet
Iansenius for that alone notion severely rebukes him. See his Augustinus de
stat. not. laps. lib. 4. p. 238, 239.

6. The last Term to be explained, and whose signification, so far as it has
any concern in this discourse, we are to determine, is Grace. Now this being a
word which we are peculiarly indebted to the Scripture for: It is but just and
reasonable, yea it is necessary, that we should take the measure of our
conceptions and notions about it from what the Word of God delivers to us
concerning it. It is true (...), which in the N. T. we commonly render Grace,
occurs in other Authors, but not in any of the principal senses that the
Scripture instructs us of There is not one of the Philosophers who gives us the
least acquaintance with those notions of Grace, which the Gospel chiefly
unfolds. As we have then confined our selves to the Philosophers in the
declaring the meaning of Virtue and Morality, they being the first Authors and
users of those terms; so we judge it but equal, that both we and others should
be limited to the Scripture in our conceptions about Grace.

(...), Grace, is a word of various acceptance: to discourse the several
senses in which it is used, would be both tedious, and in a great part alien to
the Theme in hand. I shall therefore only meddle with such significations of
it, as are either properly applicable to, or have some affinity with the design
I pursue. Grace then is taken either actively, or passively; the first is
called Gratia gratis dans, Giving Grace: The second, Gratia gratis data, Grace
Given. Now each of these does also admit variety of significations. The first,
or Giving Grace, does eminently resolve it self into one of three acceptations.
It is used, (1) to intimate the purpose, design and contrivance of Divine
Goodness, Wisdom and Love, as the source and spring of our whole recovery,
together with all the means and instruments of it: Or to declare the favor of
God toward sinners, in recovering them from sin and wrath by Jesus Christ.
Being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, Romans 3.24. For if through the offense of one* many be dead: much more
the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ has
abounded unto many, Romans 5.15. And if by Grace, then it is no more by works;
otherwise Grace is no more Grace, etc. Romans 11.6. Having predestined us unto
the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his Will: To the praise of the Glory of his Grace, etc. Ephesians. 1.5,
6. But we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God
should taste Death for every Man, Heb. 2.9. There are innumerable places where
it is thus used. And from (...) Grace in this sense, comes (...), Gratia
aliquem dono, gratia afficio, charum reddo, gratis acceptum facio: Graciously
to accept, freely to receive into favor. To the praise of the Glory of his
Grace, (...); wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; Ephe. 1.6. Non
tamen propterea Grecum non est; sed (...), Graecissimum, cum Sp. S. metam a
pr^phanis sibi praesigi non sinat. Schmi^ius.
(...) does not, so far as I know, occur in any profane Author: Nor is it
matter of any Wonder, they being wholly ignorant of the thing it denotes. From
(...) in this acceptance comes likewise (...), gratuitously or frankly to give
or forgive* (...); Forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.32. (...); having (freely) forgiven you all trespasses,
Col. 2.13. (...), remitto mulctam apud; Graecos Authors. And for as much as
the Gospel is the Word of Gods Grace, Act. 14.20, 24. unfolding, bringing into
Light and displaying this Grace and favor of God to sinners by Jesus Christ.
It is therefore frequently expressed by the term Grace; Receive not the Grace
of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, you are
fallen from Grace; (i. e. Renounce the Gospel, and the favor of God therein
declared) Gal. 5.4. See also Tit. 2.11. Jud. 4. 2 ly. It is applied to express
the effectual working of the Spirit of God, imprinting his Image on the Souls
of men, and thereby elevating, moulding and disposing them to comply savingly
with the Gospel. This the Schoolmen c^ll Gratia operans, and Gratia
praeveniens, Effectual and preventing Grace, Gal. 1.15. When it pleased God,
who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace, to reveal
his Son in me, etc. 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God I am what I am; and his
Grace which was bestowed on me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly
than they all, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. Hence the
Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Grace, Zech. 12.10. Heb. 10.29. Yea, (...),
the Spirit is once and again put for Grace: These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, Jud. 19. see Luke 1.80. 3 dly. It
is made use of to declare the actual, energetical working of the Spirit,
exciting, assisting, and enabling to every Gospel-performance; working both to
Will, and to Do. This Austin styles adjutorium quo, in contra-distinction from
the former, which he calls adjutorium sine quo non, lib. de Correp. and Great.
cap. 12. And the Schoolmen call it Gratia co-operans; Gratia adjuvans; gratia
Nulla in homine bona fiunt quae non facit homo; nulla v^ro facit h^mo quae non
D^us praesta^ ut faciat homo. Council. Arau^ic. can. 20.

Cassi sunt omnes mo^us si a gratia^ non adjuventur, and nulli si non
excitentur. Bern.


applicans and determinans ad agendum: Grace determining the Will to act. And
in Scripture Phrase it is called, The Lords upholding us by his free Spirit,
Psalm. 51.12. The holding us up, Psalm. 119.117. The enlarging our heart, Psalm.
119.32. The standing by and strengthening us, 2 Timothy 4.17. Bona and conversa
voluntas adjuvatur, Sed perversa and convertenda plusquam adjuvatur. Spiritus
aliter adjuvat inhabitans, aliter nondum inhabitans: inhabitans adjuvat
fideles, nondum inhabitans adjuvat ut sint fideles.

Secondly, Grace is taken passively for Grace given, and in this passive
acceptance, it admits likewise variety of significations. (1.) It is put for
favor and acceptance either with God or men. The Angel said unto her, fear not
Mary; for thou have found (...), favor with God, Luke 1.30. The same with
(...) highly favored, v. 29. And Jesus increased in Wisdom and Stature (...),
and favor with God and man; Luke 2.52. Thou have found Grace in my sight, says
God to Moses, Exodus 33.12. where the 70 render it by (...). So Acts 47. having
favor with all the people, (...). Nor are other Authors strangers to this
acceptance of (...), witness that passage of Herodian; (...); by courage and
skill in shooting he obtained favor with the people, lib. 1. Secondly, it is
used to denote a quality impressed on the minds and souls of men, whereby they
became habitually disposed for God. This ^s styled by Divines Gratia
habitualis, habi^ual Grace. It is true, Habit and Habitual ^re no
Scripture-terms. (...) Habit occurs ^ut once in the N. T. viz. Heb. 5.14.
(...); and there it signifies custom or ^ong use. Erasmus renders it, propter
as^uetudinem. Vulg. pro assuetudine. Bez. prop^er habitum. Our old translation
had it, ^y Reason of Custom: The New has it, ^y Reason of Use. The word is
peculiar to Philosophers, and with them it denotes a promptitude and facility
of acting acquired and contracted by Custom or frequent repetition of acts.
(...); a disposition through length of time connatural, Ammon. Quintilian
translates (...), firma quaedam facilitas, a certain stable facility. Instit.
Orat. l. 10. cap. 1. From Philosophy the Term is transferred to Divinity, and
as applied to Grace is put to declare the Image of God communicated to and
imprinted on the soul, by which it is elevated, adapted and brought into a
disposedness of living to and acting for Him. Now this Habitual Grace is
twofold; Gratia sani hominis, and Gratia aegroti, the Grace of innocence and
the Grace of Recovery. The first is styled by Austin n^^turae sanitas, animae
sanitas, adjutorium rob^^ris naturalis; The Health of the soul, the concreated
aid communicated at first to and with our Nature: the Second he call^ Gratia
medicinalis, medicinale salvatori auxilium; Medicinal Grace, the Souls cure*
These two differ no less than health an^ Physic do. This acceptance of Grace
i^ frequent in the Scripture, Joh. 1.14 The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
amon^ us full of Grace and truth, ibid. v. 16. O^ his fullness have all we
received and Grace for Grace, Ephesians. 4 7. Unto every one of u^ is given Grace,
according to the measure o^ the gift of Christ etc. This is the (...) The
Divine Nature whereof we are mad^ partakers; 2 Pet. 1.4. The (...) the Image of
his Son to which we are pre^destinated to be conformed, Romans 8.29 The (...);
the Image of him that created us, Col. 3.10.

Thirdly; It is used Passively to intimat^ those actual supplies of ability and
strength which from time to time are ministre^ unto us. This Austin calls
adjutorium actio^nis, in contradistinction from the forme^ which he calls
adjutorium possibilitatis. This is the import of it, 2. Cor. 12.9; and he said
unto me, my Grace is sufficient (...) thee, for my strength is made perfect in
^^akness. And, Heb. 4.16. Let us there^^re come boldly unto the throne of
Grace, (...) we may obtain mercy and find Grace to (...) in time of need.
Through this it is (...) we are not at any time tempted beyond that we are
enabled to encounter and un^^rgo, 1 Cor. 10.13. And according (...) the
proportion of assistance afforded us (...) this kind, we are more or less
vigorous (...) duty, victorious over temptations, en^^rged in our communion
with God.

Fourthly, it is made use of to express ^ose acts and operations of ours, which
pro^eed both from habitual and actual Grace. Col. 4.6. Let your Speech be
always (...), with Grace; i. e. Gracious, pious, ^uch as may appear to be from
Grace. Col. ^.16. Singing (...), with Grace in ^our heart: i. e. after the
manner of pious persons. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, (...), that it may
Minister Grace unto the Hearers; i. e. some spiritual advantage. And I suppose
the Apostle in his using (...) for Contribution, intended not only to declare
the freeness of the donation* but to intimate the Principle whence (...)
relieving of others should flow; 1 Cor. 1^3. Whomsoever ye shall approve by
(...) letters, them will I send to bring (...) your Liberality to Jerusalem. 2
Cor. ^6, 7. We desire Titus that as he had beg^^ so he would also finish in you
(...) the same Grace also. Therefore as ye (...) bound in every thing, in
faith, in utteranc^ and knowledge, and in all diligence, and (...) your love to
us; see that ye abound (...), in this Grace also. Nor is it a^ exception of any
import, that (...) occu^ in other Authors expressive only of benev^^lence,
without relation to a vital renewe^ principle, whence in order to an
acceptatio^ with God, it ought to proceed: as in tha^ of Aristole (...); That
is charity, when he that has, relieveth him that wants, Rhe^ lib. 2. cap. 9.
For alas! How should they look farther than the Substance of th^^ action, who
as they did not thoroughly understand the corruption of Nature, so they knew
nothing aright of the renovation of it. But their use of a word or phrase is no
ground for the circumscribing and confining the Holy Ghost in the application
of them.

These are all the acceptations of Grace, which have any affinity to the
present ^ubject. I know not whether all this will ^ot be called Gaudy
Metaphors, childish ^llegories, Spiritual Divinity, a prating of ^^rases, empty
schemes of Speech: But ^esides that all these acceptations and dis^^nctions
have been received by Fathers, ^choolmen, and Divines of all ages and
^erswasions; we have found them also ^arranted by the Holy text: so that to
im^each any one of them, is not only to ar^aign Divines of all sorts, but to
remon^trate to the Scripture it self. The Terms ^hen being thus opened and
explained: The Question to be debated is, Whether Moral Virtue be all one with
Grace? Whether Morality and Holiness be Universally the same thing? Or, whether
the whole of that Obedience which we owe to God, be nothing else but the
practice of Moral Duties? Now the negative is that whereof we undertake the
defense and justification in the following Chapters.

CHAP. II.
Several things premised in order to (...) decision and the determination of
(...) question. 1. All Moral actions receive the denomination of Good or Bad,
from their c^^^formity or difformity to some Rule. 2. (...) alone Rule of
Morality is Law. 3. Man o^^^ginally created under the Sanction o^ Law. 4. The
nature of that Law, with (...) manner of its promulgation. 5. Man end^^ed at
first with strength and ability, for (...) observance of all the Precepts of
it. 6. S^^posing an observation of all the duties m^^^kind was obliged to by
the said Law, (...) he could have laid no claim to immorta^^ and ^ife without
a superadded stipulat^^^ from God. 7. The Law of Creation bei^^ ratified into a
Covenant, God took (...) therein to secure his own Glory what ev^^ should be
the event on man's part. 8. (...) through the fall forfeiting all title to Li^^
abode nevertheless under the obligation* (...) the Law of his Creation. 9.
Every Law (...) Nature is of an unchangeable obligati^^ 10. A twofold mischief
with refere^^^^ to that Law, arrested mankind through (...) fall. 11. Some
knowledge of moral Duti^^ and an ability to perform the substance of them, still
retained. 12. The introduction of a remedial Law, with the relations and duties
which thence emerge. 13. The subordination which the Law of Creation is put in
to the Law of Grace. 14. Our in^^ptitude to the Duties required in the remedial
Law, and the Nature of it. 15. Grace communicated to us, to relieve us against
this impotency. 16. where ever it is wrought, it is not only attended with,
but it is the principle of all moral Virtue. 17. Through the renovation, and
assistance of Divine Grace, such an observation of the commands of God is
possible, as according to the Law of Faith, does entitle us to Life.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter sufficiently explained the terms, belonging
to the question under consideration; we now proceed to make a nearer approach
to the matter it self. And that what is afterward to be offered may be the
more clearly apprehended; and the lines, measures, and principles of Virtue and
Grace the more duly stated: I shall in this Chapter propose and endeavor to
establish several conclusions; which, as they are of considerable import in
themselves, so of no less influence, to the enlightnin^ of what we have
undertaken.

First then; All moral actions become Good ^ Bad from their agreeableness or
disagreeable^ness to some Rule, which is as their meas^^^ and standard, to
which being commensur^^^ they appear either equal or unequal. As in m^^terial
and sensible things we judge of the^^ streightness and crookedness, by their
agree^ment or disagreement to a material rul^ which is the measure of their
Rectitude an^ Obliquity: so in things Moral, we judge whe^ther a thing or action
be Good or Evil, b^ their agreement or disagreement to some moral Rule. For an
Action then to b^ good or bad, it imports two things; the entity of the Action,
and the Rule to which it is commensurate. They greatly mis^take who state the
mora^lity of an action, As Compton does; de bonitate and malitia humanorum
actuum, Disp. 89. Sect. 1. N. 4.
formally to consist in its being spontaneous, voluntary and free; for though
no action can be Moral that is not free; ye^ its morality does not lie formally
in its free^dom. Hence those very Philosophers who made Virtue and Vice to be
things only Arbitrary, founded alone in the imaginations of men, did
nevertheless acknowledge man to be a free agent, and that ^iberty is inseparable
from every Humane ^ction. Freedom intrinsecally belongs to every action, as it
is an human action; where^s morality is but partly intrinsecal, namely ^s it
imports and includes the entity of the ^ction; and partly extrinsecal, viz. as
it de^otes the measure by which it is regulated.

2. The second thing we premise is, That ^he immediate and formal Rule of Moral
^ood or evil, is Law, or the constitution of the Rector as to what shall be
due. I ^^ant that the fundamental measure of ^ctions unchangeably Good or Evil,
is (...) Divine Nature; and of things and ^ctions indifferent and variable, the
Di^^ne Will: But the formal and imme^^ate Rule of both is Law. No action (...)
otherwise Good or Bad, than as it is ^^ther enjoined or forbidden. It is
im^ossible to conceive any action or omis^^on to be a duty, abstracting from
ob^^gation; and it is as impossible to con^^ive obligation, secluding Law. This
^^nd's abundantly confirmed by that of ^he Apostle John, 1 Epist. chap. 3. ver.
^. (...); Sin is the transgres^^on of the Law: An illegality or deviation ^^om
law. To which accords that of Paul, Romans 4 15. (...) Where no Law is, there is
no transgressio^ It is a great mistake (which yet I find to^ many guilty of) to
make either the objec^ or circumstance of an a^ction, In hoc hallucinantur
I^s^ite f^re omnes. vid. V^s^. di^p. 57. Count. did. 84. Sect. 2. de act. Ham.
the rule of its Mo^rality; or to constitu^^ them the measure wh^ we judge an
action goo^ or evil. An action is ^ot otherwise Goo^ or Evil with respect to
its circumstances then as clothed with them it is either pr^^hibited or
enjoined. It is true the cir^cumstances of an action, conduce and co^^tribute
toward the discerning and defi^^ing when it is forbidden and when comman^ded;
when allowed and when disallowed But still, the Law, permitting and enjoy^ning
the action in such cases and circum^stances; disapproving and prohibiting it i^
other; is the proper and immediate Rule o^ its morality.

3. The Third premise it this; that man being created a rational creature, was
u^^der the Sanction of a law. It is a contra^diction for man to be such a
creature as h^ is, and not to be obliged to love, fear an^ obey God. All
creatures according t^ their respective and several natures, an^ necessarily
subject to him that made them, ^t is impossible that whatever owes its en^^re
being to God, should not also be in ^ suitable subjection to him. Man then
^eing a Rational creature, must owe God ^ rational subjection; and on
supposition, that his being is of such a Species and kind, ^ necessarily
fallows from the constitu^^on of his nature, and his Habitude to God as his
Maker; that he should be ac^ordingly bound to love, reverence and ^^rve him
that made him so, this being (...) only Reasonable subjection. But for^^much as
not only Pyrrho, Epicurus, etc. ^f old; but Hobbs and some other wild,
^theistically disposed persons of late, have ^anaged an opposition to all
natural Laws: ^ontending that all things are in themselves indifferent; that
Moral Good and Evil, result only from men's voluntary re^training and limiting
of themselves; and ^ow that antecedently to the constitutions, ^ppointments and
custom's of Societies, ^here is neither Virtue nor Vice, Turpi^ude nor Honesty,
justice nor injustice: That there are no laws of Right and Wrong previous to
the laws of the Commonwealth, but that all men are at liberty to do as they
please. I say matters standing thus, I shall discourse this head a little (...)
amply.

That there have been some, who eith^^ through a supine negligence in not
ex^^^cising their faculties, or, through have defiled and darkened their Reasons
by co^^verse with sin, have lost the sense (...) distinction of Good and evil;
as well (...) memoir's of ancient times, as the sad ^^^perience of our own, do
evidently (...) Diogenes Laertius, in the life of Pyrrho (...) us, that he
denied any thing to be just unjust (...), by nature. But that all this were so
only, (...), by positive law (...) Custom. Nec Natura potest justo secernere
(...) quum;

There is no difference betwixt what (...) call good, and what, evil, by nature.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Forasmuch as there are different laws (...) different places, it thence
follows that the^^ (...) nothing in it self, honest or dishonest: but that
according to occasion, the same thing, may be sometimes the one, and sometimes
^he other. In Fragmentis Pythagoreorum, ^nter opuscula edita a D. Theoph. Gale.
Se^eca (as well as others) charge the same upon Epicurus, and says that
therein he will dissent from him; Ubi dicit nihil esse ^ustum natura; where
Epicurus affirms, that by nature or natural law there is nothing just and
honest. And this indeed ^ecessarily follows from Epicurus his dis^harging God
from the Government of the World. For if there be no Government, ^here is no
law; and if no law there is neither moral Good nor Evil: As Good and Evil are
relatives to law; so is law the ^elative of Government: and all these ^tand and
fall together. With those already produced does Mr. Hobbs fully agree; Ubi
nulla Respublica, nihil injustum; where there is no Commonwealth, there is
nothing unjust, Leviath. p. 72. Nihil absolute bonum est aut malum, neque est
regula ulla communis boni aut mali, a natura objectorum petenda; verum a
persona ubi Respublica non est, vel in republica a Magistratu: There is nothing
good or evil in it self, nor any common law constituting what is naturally just
and unjust: but all things are to be measured by what every man judges fit
where there is no civil Government and by the laws of Society, where there
(...) one: Leviath. cap. 6. p. 64. Ante impen^ justum and injustum non
extitere, ut quor^^ Natura ad mandatum est relativa, act^oq^ omnis sua natura
est adiaphora; Before me entered into a state of civil Government the^^ was not
any thing just or unjust; forasmu^^ as just and unjust are the relatives of
huma^ Laws; every action being in it self indiff^^rent: de cive, cap. 12.
Thence he define's sin to be quod quis fecerit, omiser^^ dixerit vel voluerit
contra rationem civit^tis, i. e. contra leges civiles; whatever (...) man
says, or does against the laws of the Society, of which he is a member; lib. ^
homine, cap. 14. Sect. 17. Rationis dict^ mina ex usu hominum leges vocantur,
improprie vero; cum solum Theoremata and conclusiones sunt, de eo quod ad
propriam conservationem and tutelam aliquid confert, etc. The dictates of
Reason concerning vice and virtue, men use to call by the name of Law's but
improperly; For they are but conclusions or deductions concerning what
conduces t^ the conservation and defense of themselves: Whereas law properly
is the word of some man who by right has command over others: Leviath. cap.
15. Now this hypothesis, as false, absurd and thwart to all the first
principles of Reason, as it is, being become the darling of too many in those
unhappy ^imes, and those contrary-minded laughed at as easy and credulous
persons: We shall first unfold and state the principles upon which our
conclusion bears, which will be so many demonstrations of it a priori, and then
we will subjoyn some further col^ateral proofs of it, as so many evidences a
posteriori; by which we hope not only to vindicate our selves from the
imputation of easiness of belief, and credulity that we are charged with; but
withal to declare that we are of another humor than those men we have to do
with, who embrace any notion how precarious soever, if it do but serve a design.

The Principles then upon which, as so many Pillars, we build our assertion of
a natural Law, may be reduced to four. The first is this: There are some things
in themselves dissonant and incongruous to the Divine Nature, and that
dependence we have on God. The perfections of God are not arbitrary adjuncts,
to be put off and on at pleasure: whatever he is in himself, He is by the
necessity of his Nature, and by consequence he cannot approve or disapprove
otherwise than as may be consonan^ and agreeable to the Attributes of Wisdom
and Sanctity, which are fundamental Laws of his Being. The Holiness o^ God is
that essential perfection of his Being whereby he cannot but act suitably to
the Dignity of his own Rational Nature. To imagine one thing as congr^ous to
him as an other, is at once to Blas^pheme him and to establish contradictions
the Philosopher well styles him, (...); an eternal Law inclining on every hand
to what is just and equal, Arist. d^ mundo. cap. 16. There are many things the
goodness and badness of which, depend not so much on Gods Will as his Nature.
There is that congruity in some things to the Being of God, and that
incongruity in others, that he cannot allow the one and disallow the other,
without ceasing to be what he is. That some things are loathsome to him, is not
from the determinations of his Will, but from the Sanctity of his Essence. Thou
art of purer Eyes, than to behold iniquity, and can not look on evil says
the Prophet, Heb. 1.13. Indeed nothing properly good, is so (...) positive
Sanction and Precept, but (...) the result of Gods own being and the ^^bitude
we stand in to him, from which (...) can no more swerve than destroy him^^lf,
or render rational Creatures unrea^^nable. And if at any time we acknow^^dg the
Divine Will the measure of that is Good and Evil, we do not un^erstand it with
respect to its Soveraign^^ and Arbitrariness, but with respect to (...)
Sanctity and Holiness: what ever he ^ills is Good not because his Will is
^rbitrary and Unlimited; but because (...) can will nothing unbecoming his
Puri^y. The Manichees themselves under^^ood Sin to be so thwart to the Nature
^f a God that is Good, that they framed (...) supreme Evil, to salve the
intro^uction of it. And to suppose all things ^o be alike equal to the Divine
Being is ^o blaspheme and prevaricate in a degree ^eyond what they did. The
second is this, God creating Man a rational Creature, endowed him with
Faculties and Powers capable of knowing what was congruous to the Nature of God
and his dependence on him, and what was not. We do not say that we are brought
forth with actual congenite notions of Good and Evil; with labels of Virtues
and Vices append^ to our minds. This were to establish (...) Platonic
preexistence, and that all kno^^ledge is by Reminiscency. But our m^^^ning is,
that we are furnished with (...) Faculties, which if we exert and exerc^ in
comparing such acts and their objec^ it is impossible but that we should
percei^^ some Acts to be congruous, and others (...) be incongruous: Namely,
that it is (...) that we should love God, and uneq^^^ that we should hate him.
Now that (...) minds can compare Acts and their o^^jects together, and discern
whether th^^ are equal or unequal, is evident from (...) daily operations of
our faculties: (...) does this depend totally upon the (...) but upon the
essential rectitude of the^ which no man can call into question without razing
the foundations of M^^thematicks as well as of Ethics; and man as well say,
that the Determinations which men make upon the plainest Demonstr^^tions of
Geometry, depend not upon the certainty of the rational faculty; as (...) say,
that their determinations about Go^^ and Evil do not do so: For the one (...)
as connate to the judgment of Reason a^ the other do. There is that proportion
^etwixt some acts and their objects, and that disproportion betwixt others:
That ^hen ever we are led to particular con^^derations of them, and to
pronounce (...) sentiments concerning them; we cannot without a manifest
repugnance to our ^atural Powers judge otherwise of them, (...) have other
conceptions about them, ^ut that the one sort of Acts (whether (...) Mind, or
Tongue, or Hand) are un^qual, and the other equal. These are that the
Philosophers called (...), ^^mmon Notions, (...), anticipations, (...) previous
Images of the moral Beauty and congruity, or deformity and incon^^uity of
things in the Soul. The (...), the rudimental Princi^les of the Rational
Nature. There are (...) well indubitable maxims of Reason, ^elating to Moral
Practice, as there are ^elating to Science: and these not only stand ^pproved
by the universal assent of man^ind, but they demonstrate themselves (...) their
agreeableness to the Rational Faculty. It is not more certain, that one and the
same thing cannot at once be and ^ot be; That if equals be subtracted from
equals, what remains will be equal, etc. Than that of whomsoever we hold our
Beings, Him we ought to love and (...) That God being Veracious, is to be
bel^^^ved; That we are to do by others as (...) would be done by our selves,
etc. And (...) deny these is in effect to deny Man to (...) Rational: for as
much as the faculty (...) call Reason exists in us necessarily (...) these
Opinions. Now these Deter^^^nations, being the natural Issues of (...) Souls in
their rational exercise, in co^^paring Acts with their objects, come to (...)
called ingraft-Notions and universal C^^^racters wrought into the essential
Co^^position of our Nature. And besid^ what we have already said, to
demonstra^^ that some things being compared (...) the Holy Nature of God, and
the rel^^tion that we stand in to him, are intri^^secally Good, and other
things intrins^^cally Evil: It is inconsistent with the pe^^fections of the
Divine Being, partic^^larly with his Sanctity, Veracity an^ Goodness, to
prepossess us with such con^ceptions of things, as are not to b^ found in the
Nature of the things them^selves. In a word the Effluvia of the ran^kest and
worst-scented Body, do not strik^ more harshly upon the olfactory-Orga^ nor
carry a greater incongruity to the Nerves of that Sensatory; than what we call
moral Evil, does to the intellectual ^aculty. (...); There are some things
which all men think, or wherein all Men agree, and that is common Right or
In^ustice by Nature; although Men be not ^ombined into Societies, nor under any
Covenants one to an other, Arist. Rhet. ^ib. 1. c. 14. Paul tells us that there
are some things which are (...), ^ust and honest in all Men's esteem; Romans 12.17.

The Third is this; There being some things so differenced in themselves with
^espect to the nature of God, and our dependence on Him (as has been said;)
and man being created capable of knowing what is so: It is impossible that God
should allow us to pursue what is contrary to his nature, and the Relation we
stand in to him; or to neglect what is agreeable to it, and the dependence we
have on him. God having made man with faculties, necessarily judging so and so;
He is in truth the Author of those judgments, by having created the faculties,
which necessarily make them; Now whatever judgment God makes a man with, must
needs be a Law from Go^ given to man, nor can he ever depart from it, without
gainsaying, and so offendi^^ Him that was the Author of it. Whatev^^ judgment
God makes a man with, concer^^ing either himself, or other things; it (...)
Gods judgment: and whatsoever is his judg^ment, is a law to man, nor can he
negle^^ or oppose it without sin; being in his exi^stence made with a necessary
subjection t^ God. Such and such dictates being the n^^tural operations of our
minds, the Being (...) essential Constitution of which, in right re^^soning we
owe to God; we cannot but estee^ them the voice of God within us and
conse^quently his law to us: says Sr. Chapter Wolseley o^ Scripture belief, p. 32,
33. And accor^dingly these dictates of right Reason, wit^ the Superadded act of
conscience, are stile^ by the Apostle, the Law written in the heart^ (...); For
when the Gentiles which have not the Law, (viz. in writing as the Jews had) do
by Nature (natural light or the dictates of right Reason) the things contained
in the Law (those things which the Moral Law of Moses enjoined) these having
not a Law, (a written Law, or a Law ^ade known to them by Revelation) are a ^aw
to themselves: (have the Law of na^^re congenite with them) Which show the ^ork
of the Law (that which the Law in^^^ucts about, and obliges to) Written in
^^eir Hearts: Romans 2.14, 15. (...); ^ational Beings do in the light and through
^he conduct of Reason, choose and pursue ^^ose very things, which the law of God
the Divine Law) enjoins: says Hierocles (...) verse. 29. Pythag. Sponte sua
sine lege ^^dem, rectumque colebant; as the Poet ^^ith. Hierocles in verse. 63.
and 64 Py^hag. assigns this as the cause, why men ^o not escape the
entanglements of lust and passion; (...); because they attend not ^o those
common notions of Good and Evil, which the Creator has ingrafted in rational
Beings for their conduct and Government. It is of this Law that Austin speaks
lib. 2. confess. cap. 4. Lex Scripta in cordibus hominum, quam ne ipsa delet
iniquitas; A Law written in our hearts, which sin it self cannot expunge. The
Fourth and last is this; that God for the securing the honor of his own
wisdom and sanctity, the ma^^^taining his rectorship, and the preservi^^ the
dependence of his creature upon hi^ annexed to this natural Law, in case of me^
failure a penalty. The constituting of the ^^^ness of punishment, on
supposition of tra^^^gression, does so necessarily belong (...) Laws, that
without it they are but lu^^crous things. Tacit permittitur, quod (...)
ultione prohibetur; what is forbidden wit^^out a Sanction, is silently and
implicitly a^^lowed; Tertul. Where there is no penal^^ denounced against
disobedience, Gover^^ment is but an empty notion. The fear (...) punishment is
the great medium of Mo^^ Government: coaction and force wou^^ overthrow
obedience, and leave neithe^ room for Virtue nor Vice in the worl^ The means of
swaying us, must be accom^modated to the nature of our Beings; no^ are rational
Creatures to be otherwise in^fluenced than by fear and hope. Th^^ Ruler governs
at the courtesy of his Sub^jects, who permits them to rebel with im^punity.
Not only the Poets placed (...) in the throne with Jupiter for the punishment
of disobedience: but the Moralist makes Justice to wait on God, to avenge him
on those that Transgress his Law; (...) (...); ^lutarch. As every law then must
have penalty annexed to it, so had this of which ^e are treating: (...): Their
conscience also bearing ^itness, and their thoughts in the mean ^hile accusing
or else excusing one another; says the Apostle, Romans 2.15. of those ^ho were
under no other law than the law of Nature. Conscience is properly nothing else;
but the soul reflect^ng on it self and actions, and judging of both according
to Law: Now where there is no Law there ^an be no guilt, and where there is no
possibility of guilt, there can be no Con^cience. If there be no Law
constituting ^he distinction of good and evil in men's ^ctions; Men can neither
do well nor ill: and by consequence can have no inward ^lace in the sense of
one course of life, nor r^gret on the score of an other. Where all things are
indifferent, there can be neither joy nor grief through reflection on what a
man does. All the actings of Conscience relate to a Law under the Sanction of
which we are, and suppose a judge who will accordingly proceed with us. Where
^here is sense of guilt and a fear of wrath, it is impossible to preclude Law,
the (...) being the Correlate of the other. (...) that there is in every man a
Conscience a^ ingraft apprehensions of hope and fear, (...) need no other proof
of it, than to appe^^ every man's experience.

Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, ita (...) cipit intra
Pectora pro facto spemque metumque
The Apostle tells us that even (...) who had no revealed Law, and were (...)
filled with all unrighteousness, fornicat^^^ wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness; (...) were full of envy, murder, debate, (...) malignity, etc.
(...) Yet they knew the judgment of God ((...) which God has constituted and
deno^^^ced) that they who commit such things worthy of death; Romans 1.29, 30,
31, 3^

-- Prima est haec ultio qu^^
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur, imp^^ quamvis
Gratia fallacis Praetoris vicerit urnam.
It is in reference to this Law, that ^^ings either not determined by humane
^^ws, or not cognizable by them, men (...) themselves in the closets of their
own ^^asts. The actings of Conscience with ^^^pect to Law, and our being judged
by (...), and that there is such a faculty in us, is propossest with the sense
of the distin^^ion of good and evil, and accordingly (...) in way of fear or
hope, suitably to (...) course that is steered, and that these (...)
apprehensions are neither acciden^al frights, nor delusions cunningly (...)
upon Mankind, may be further (...) by a brief consideration of these (...)
things: (1) The perplexity that haunt's (...) soul on the commission of secret
sins, ^^ich as others do not know so they can^^t punish. Now even in reference
to these ^oth the sinner: Nocte dieque suum gest^re in pectore testem.
-- Day and Night oppressed,
Carry about his Witness in his Breast.


(2) the lashes and scourges the sinner ^eel's for such things as the world is
so far from punishing, that it does rather reward them. The crimes committed
with the applause and gratulation of the world, do^ escape the censure and
condemnation conscience.

-- Qui stimulos adhibet, torre^ flagellis. (3.) That those who through Pow^^
and Greatness, have been above (...) punishment of others, have yet fou^^
tormentor in their own Breasts. I (...) alleadg no other Witness, than Tibet
(...) his confession in an Epistle to the Sen^^^ Dij me Deaeque omnes pejus
perdant, (...) quotidie me perire sentio: Let all (...) Gods and Goddesses
torment me worse, (...) I every day feel my self Tormented; (...) eton. in his
life: and likewise Tacitus (...). lib. 6. cap. 6. Who take's occas^^^ thence to
add, that if the Hearts of (...) Lay in view, we should see (...) they are
Flayd and Torn with lashes (...) scourges: si recludantur Tyrannorum (...),
posse aspici laniatus and ictus.

-- Tormentaque sera Gehennae Anticipat, patiturque suos men's con^^manes. (4.)
That when Men are going out of ^he World, and the reach of punishment ^re; That
then the fear of punishment ^ost revives in them. The approach of ^eath which
sets out of danger from ^en, fills with the greatest trembling with respect to
punishment from God. upon this account among others is Death ^^lled the King of
Terrors; Job 18.4. (...), of all Dreadfuls be most Dreadful, as Aristotle
styles it.

Hinc metus in vita paenarum pro malefactis est insignibus insignis. (5.) That
those who with all their S^ill, endeavor to disband their fears, cannot get
rid of them. Hence that of Cotta in Cicero concerning Epicurus; (...) quenquam
vidi, qui magis ea quae ti^enda esse negaret timeret; mortem dico and Deos: I
never knew one (says he) that stood more in fear of those things, which he
reckoned to minister no ground for it, namely Death and God, then he did; de
^at. Deor. lib. 1. And these are the foundations upon which the existence of a
natural Law bears: and from which so ^ar as the brevity we are obliged to study
would admit, we have endeavo^^ to demonstrate it.

I shall now add some further consid^^tions, for the Existence of a Law of
^^ture, as so many Arguments there posteriori; by which I hope to mak^ further
appear that the contrary hy^^^thesis is both absurd and mischiev^^^ The first
shall be the universal conse^^ Mankind in this matter. Where (...) there at
any time been a Nation or Peo^^^ that did not acknowledge a distinction Good and
Evil? They might and often prevaricate in the defining (...) was Good and what
was Bad; but (...) Universally agreed in this, that all thi^ were not naturally
alike. Of this (...) Plato de legib. Cicero de legib. and de off^^is; and
Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 14. omit others. We meet with no N^^^on so barbarous,
but we find ackn^^^ledged Principles, as well as exces^^ instances of Morality
amongst the^ Now de quo omnium Natura consenti^^ verum esse necesse est;
Wherein all (...) agree that cannot be otherwise than (...) says Cicero. (...)
every Man holds to be so is so: old He^^clitus. Nor is it sufficient to reply
that: ^en have not at any time been nor yet (...) of this mind. For athing is
not the less (...) because some either through sottish^^ss, wilfulness or
depravedness of Mind ^^^pose it. There have been some who h^ve contradicted the
first Principles of Science, affirming that one and the same t^ing may at the
same time be, and may not ^e; as well as there have been others ^ho have
opposed the first Theorems of Moral Doctrine. Nor is it improbable, (...) that
some people talk so out of crosness, as loving to run Counter to the common
sense of Mankind. And for others, I question not but they are sunk into this
bruitishness, either from supine^ess and sloth in not exercising their
facul^ies to consider the habitude of things, and to compare Acts with their
objects; or else through too great familiarity with Sin, which has tinctured
their Souls with false Colors, and filled their Minds with prejudices and
undue apprehensions. (...): Now we are to judge of what is natural from those
who live according to the dictates of Reason; and not from those whose Minds
are depraved by Lust and Passion: says Aristotle lib. 1. Polit. That is the
Law of Nature (...); Which prevails among Men gove^^ned by Reason, not that
which prevails ^^mongst persons debauched. Mich. Ep^^ ad Nicomachia. For as
Andronicus inf^^^meth us; (...): The (...) of Nature is unchangeable among such
(...) are of a sound and healthful Mind, (...) does it make any thing to the
contrar^ that men of Distempered and depraved ^^^d^rstandings think otherwise;
for he dot^ not mistake who call's Honey sweet, thoug^ sick and diseased
Persons be not of (...) judgment. The Second is this; that there be no Law of
Nature constituting what is Good and what is Evil, an^tecedently to Pacts and
Agreements a^mongst Men, then all humane Laws signify in Effect just nothing.
For if there be no antecedent obligation binding to obey the just Laws and
constitutions of the Commonwealth, then may they at any time be broken without
Sin: and Rebellion will be as lawful as obedience, ^or needs any one to
continue longer ^oyal, that he hopes to mend his con^^^ion by turning Rebel.
Nor does it ^ffice to plead Promises, Pacts and Co^enants to the contrary. For
if it be not (...) it self a duty to keep ones Word, and ^o perform what a man
has promised, ^hen are promises but W^ths to be broken at pleasure, and serve
for nothing ^ut to impose on the easiness of good-natured men. According to
this Hypothesis we are discoursing against, no Man is bound to be honest if he
can once hope to promote his interest by being otherwise: and we may be either
True or False, Just or Unjust as we find it most for our turns. All Humane
Laws, suppose the Law of Nature; And seeing Revelation extends not to every
place, where Humane Laws are in force, that Civil Laws do at all oblige, must
be resolved into Natural Law. Obligation of Conscience with respect to the Laws
of Men, is a conclusion deduced from two Premises; whereof the First is, the
Law of Nature enjoining Subjection and Obedience to Magistrates in whatsoever
they justly command; The Second is, the Law of Man under the Character of Just;
from both of which results the obligat^^^ of Conscience to such a Law. In a
(...) if there be no Natural Law, then (...) ever has either Wit enough to
(...) Humane Laws, or Power and Strength ^^nough to despise them, is innocent;
(...) do men deserve punishment for be^^wicked; only it is their unhappiness
(...) they are weak, and cannot protect the^^selves in their Villainies. The
Third (...) this, supposing all things originally (...) in themselves
indifferent, as there can no sin in disobeying the justest La^ of the
Commonwealth, so no (...) can offend by despising and transgr^^sing the Laws
of God. Yea, precluding ^^^tural Law, it is not possible for God to (...) an
obligation upon us by any positive La^ and that upon two accouts: ( First) in
(...) after the clearest Revelation and prom^^^gation of it, I am still at
liberty to belie^^ whether it be a law from God or not. U^^less it be in it
self good and a duty to belie^^ God, (because of his Vera^ity) whensoev^^ he
declares himself; it will be still a ma^^ter of courtesy to believe it to be a
(...) from God notwithstanding that it come a^^compained with all the evidences
and m^^tives of credibility, that a Divine declar^^tion is capable of being
attended with. (Se^ondly) because supposing we should be (...) courteous, as to
believe God to be the Author of such and such Laws, and that it is with all his
will and command, that upon our Allegiance to our maker and the greatest
^enalty that angry God can inflict, or finite creatures undergo, that we be
found in the practice and pursuit of such and such things: I say, supposing all
this, it still remains a matter of liberty and indifferency whether we will
obey him or not. For if there be not any thing that is Good in it self, nor any
thing that is in it self bad; then it is not an evil to despise the Authority
of God, nor is any man obliged to obey him further then he himself pleases and
judges for his interest; the Authority of God being, according to the
principles we are dealing with, a mere precarious thing.

The Fourth and last that I shall name is this; If all things be in themselves
ad^aphorous, and good and evil be only regulated by customs and civil
constitutions; Then if men please they may invert the whole moral frame of
things, and make what the world has hitherto thought Virtues* to be adjudged
Vices, and Vices to come into the place of Virtues. Yea a man may be bound to
(...) his opinion of Truth, Honestly, Ver^^ Justice, etc. both according as he
chan^^eth his Country, and according as the (...) Laws of the Nation where he
lives (...) alter: So that what is Truth to day, (...) be Falsehood to morrow;
and what he ^^^tertain's as Religion in one place he (...) detest as Irreligion
in an other: Nor it more lawful to worship Christ in En^^land, than it is to
worship Mahomet in (...) Levant: Nor do the idolatrous heath^ adore a stock or
a stone, upon weaker re^^sons or worse motives, than we do the Go^ that made
the World. For as Tully sai^ well; Si populorum jussi^, si Princip^^ decretis.
si sententiis judicum jura co^^stituerentur; jus est latrocinari, jus
adulteerari, si haec suffragis aut scitis multitudinis probarentur: If justice
be regulated b^ the Sanctions of the People, the decrees o^ Princes or the
opinions of judges; then it is lawful to rob, to commit adultery, when^soever
these things come to be established by the acts and ordinances of the civil
power. de Legib, lib. 1. This inference is so natural and clear, that the
Authors of the Hypothesis we are examining have granted no less. The Scripture
of the new Testament is there only Law, where the civil power has made it so,
says Hobbs, Leviath. cap. 24. The Magistrate can only define what is Scripture
and what is not; says the same Author ^n the same Book. That the Scripture
obliges any man is to be ascribed to the Authorty of the civil power; nor are
we bound to obey the laws of Christ, if they be repugnant to the Laws of the
Land; idem ibid. All which a man of any Reason as well as Conscience, must have
an abhorrency for. And indeed these things pursued to their true issues, will
be found so far from befriending any Religion, that they are shapen to
overthrow all Religion. And this for the third pr^mise, that man was created at
first under the Sanction of a Law.

4. The Fourth thing we are to declare, is the nature of this Law that man was
created under the obligation of; and the manner of its Promulgation. Learned
men do wonderfully differ, and some of them strangely prevaricate, in stating
the Measure of natural Law and in defining what Laws are natural. Some would
have that only to be a natural Law; quod Natura docuit omnia ainimantia, which
beasts are taught by instinct. Justinian, lib. 1. Institut. But though the
consideration of (...) things in Brute creatures, to which the^^ are directed
by instinct, may conduce^ instruct men what becomes us that are Ra^tional;
particularly Parents may learn the obligation they are under to their children
and the care they ought to take for the^^ education and subsistence in the
worl^ from the (...) or Natural Affection whi^^ we find in Brute Animals, to
their young yet this is no certain, much less sufficie^^ Indication of Natural
Laws For Bru^ creatures being under no Law at all, it (...) unreasonable and
ridiculous to judge of (...) is a Law of Nature, and what is not, (...) them.

(...). They devour one another because they have no right nor law amongst
them: says Hesiod. Beasts may do hurt but they cannon sin. They may exercise
cruelty in pursuing the satisfaction of their appetites but they cannot be
injurious. And therefore when God commands that the bea^^ which has killed a
man should be put to death, Exodus 21.28 It is to show the horridness of the
fact of murder, not the ^^ligation of the beast to Law; nor is it ^^tended as
a punishment to it, but to de^^re Gods detestation of the like in us. ^here are
many things generally practiced (...) the Brute Animals, the imitation of which
would be abominable in men. That which in us would be incest, is not so in
them: For I suppose there are few of Diogenes and Chrysippus mind; who, from
the example of Cocks Treadding their own ^ames, in fer the Lawfulness of the
like cop^lations in Men. The Poet has determined much better in this case,
then the abovenamed Philosophers.

-- Coeunt amimalia nullo
Caetera delicto, nec habetur turpe Iuvencae
Far patrem tergo; fit equo sua filia conjunx.
Ovid. Others judge of the Law of Nature, by the consent and harmony of Mankind:
what men universally agree in is accounted by some, if not the only, at least
the best medium of arriving at a sure knowledge of the law of nature. In re
consensio omnium gentium jus natura putanda est. The consent of all nations in
any thing, is to be thought the Law of Nature; Cicero. 1. Tusculan. But neither
is this a sure indicat^^^ of Natural Laws; nor shall a Person (...) attain to
satisfaction in this method of p^^^ceed. For the Laws and customs of (...) have
been so different and oppos^ that what has been accounted v^ce one nation,
has been held for virtue ^^nother. The Athenians punished theft, (...) the
Egyptians and Lacedaemonians allowe^ When God forbade the Jews the imitat^ of
the customs of their neighboring N^^tions, He reckon's up vile and abomina^^
lusts as their national customs; Deuteronomy. ^^ 30, 31.14.1, 2.18.10, 11. There (...)
been vices not only countenanced, but (...) commended by Laws in the wisest and
b^ policyed Commonwealths of the Worl^ In the Third Place, the dictates of
rig^^ Reason are contended for by others to (...) the Law of Nature. Lex est
ratio insita^ Natura, quae jubet ea quae facienda sunt, pr^^hibet que contraria
Law is natural: Reas^^ commanding what ought to be done, (...) forbidding the
contrary: Cicer. de Legi^ lib. 1. But I cannot acquiesce in this account
either. For right Reason is rathe^ the instrument of discerning the Law of
N^^ture, than the Law of Nature it self. The Law of Nature is not so much a Law
which (...) nature, prescribes unto us, as a law ^^scribed unto our nature. It
is the table which this law was originally written, and exercising of which in
its rational func^^^s we came to understand it. Law ^he will of the Rector
signified, but this (...) knowing and perceiving of it: and ^his our Reason was
originally (...) But Alas! Reason is now so (...) by sin, and misled by
prejudice, (...) and self-interest; that it frequently (...) Evil Good, and
Good Evil.

Hence men pretend to right Reason in (...) contradictory: Nor do we in any
(...) find the great improvers of (...) at greater variance one with another,
(...) about what is just and what is unjust. (...) man determining as humor,
(...), lust, or profit swaye's him: but (...) of this chap. 3. Though there be
(...) evident congruity betwixt some acts (...) their objects, that if we
exercise our (...) in comparing the one with the (...), it is impossible but
that we should discern it: yet there are others, wherein we arrive at the
knowledge of that propor^^^n only be deduction, and long haran^^^es of
argumentation. By the Law of (...) then we understand the whole Law given by
God at first unto our Natures: Whereof our Reasons exercising themselves in the
consideration of the Nature of God, our own Nature, the relation we were
created in to him, the habitude we stood in to our Fellow Creatures, and the
Divine method and order in the production of all; was a sufficient Instrumental
conveyance while we abode in the state of Integrity. It is true, since the fall
it is otherwise, many Dictates of the Law of Nature being grown inevident,
obscure, subject to controversy, not easy, if at all, to be defined, without
the advantage and assistance of Scripture Light. There are various degrees of
evidence in those things which relate and appertain to the Law of Nature: in
some the Moral congruity betwixt the Act and the Object is manifest and
apparent; in other it lye's more remote and out of view: So that now the only
sure, universal, perfect System of natural Law, is the Decalogue of Moses: This
is a true draught of what by the Law of Creation we were under the Sanction of;
A transcript and written impression of the whole Original Law; not at all
differing in its nature from what was imposed on man in innocence; but
distinguished only in the the manner of its Promulgation; that which was
formerly internal and subjective, being now external and objective. But though
we affirm that never any since the fall did so act his Reason, as to comprehend
Universally the Law of Nature, with the bounds and consequences of it: yet we
also readily grant that our Reason at first was a sufficient Instrument of
conveying the knowledge of the whole Law of Nature to us. Seeing then that no
man can justly come under obligation by a Law, unless it be sufficiently
promulgated, promulgation being an essential qualification of a Law; for Law
can have influence upon none that do not know it. Leges quae constringunt
hominum vitas, intelligi ab omnibus debent: Those Laws which have influence
upon men's lives ought to be understood by all, say Civilians. We shall in the
next place therefore endeavor to lay open the several fountains, in which the
whole Law of Nature was at first fully understood.

Now there were Five ways which our Rational Faculties exercising themselves
in, should before that sin had darkened the mind and disordered the creation,
have attained to a full and perfect knowledge of the Law of Creation by. The
First was by considering the nature of God and the habitude we stood into him,
as our Creator, Preserver and Benefactor. There was in mankind an ability of
soul, of ascending unto the knowledge of the invisible Being, and First cause,
by the effects of his Power Wisdom and Goodness; of knowing as much of God as
was needful for our living to him and our dependence on him in that state and
under that Covenant that we then stood. From which there could not but have
resulted a clearer and more distinct knowledge, than we can now imagine, of that
love, Gratitude, Reverence which we owed to him; and these would have been
attended with a recognition of our own nothingness, a dependant frame of
spirit, and a resignation of our selves and all things to his will. The Second
was the consideration of our selves, that amphibious kind of Nature we are made
with (it is Hierocles's expression) being allied in our constitution and make
to several Species of creatures. And the observing the Subordinations of the
parts of our Composition one to another: That the Animal and sensitive powers
are to be governed by the Intellectual and Rational. From which would have
arisen a plenary and steady knowledge of the unsuitableness of earthly things to
constitute us happy. That our Blessedness lay not in the pleasing of our
senses, and gratification of our Animal part. In a word, that the Soul was to
be principally regarded, and that Reason was to be our only conductor: which I
suppose was enough to have precluded all intemperance* incontinence and, the
subjecting of our selves to the Animal life etc. A third way was, an ability of
penetrating more fully (than now we can) into the natures of the several
creatures, their fabrics, orderly operations, various instincts, relations
both to us and one an other: in all which as in a glass, much of our duty, had
we abode in the state of integrity, would have become plain and evident to us.
If notwithstanding the fall and all that darkness and confusion which has
ensued thereupon; We abide still directed to the creatures for the learning
many parts of our duty: See Job. 12.7. Prove. 6.6. Jer. 8.7. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Should
we not have been capable of learning more from them and that more clearly and
distinctly, when there was no tincture of sin or shadow of darkness on the
mind, nor fallacious medium in the whole Creation. A Fourth was, an ability of
mind of knowing the Relation which we stood in one to another. How that we were
not self-sufficient, but brought forth under a necessity of mutual assistances:
and that we could not subsist without the mutual aids of love and friendship.
That we arose not like mushromes out of the earth, nor were dug out of
parsly-beds, neither came into the World by a fortuitous Original; That we
sprung not Originally from diverse Stocks, much less were created at first
multitude of us together: But that the whole race of mankind was propagated
from one single Root. That each of us was intended as a part of the Rational
System, and made for society and fellowship. From all which we should have been
able by easy deductions and short dependencies to have argued out the whole of
those duties we are under the Sanction of, either to parents, children, or
neigbours. In a word, doing as we would be done by; which epitomiseth the whole
duty that one man owes to another, would have proved the natural issue of the
foregoing considerations. The Fifth and last way was, through observing Gods
order and method in the Works of Creation. As the works of God themselves were
to be instructive unto man not only of the Being, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
of God, but of the Moral duties that God expected from us: Psalm. 19.1. Romans
1.20, 21. So God's Order and Method in the Production and Disposal of his Works
into their several Relations and Subordinations, was likewise intended to be
instructive to mankind, and it was the will of God that we should learn our
duty thereby. Thus the Preeminence of the man over the Woman is confirmed by
the Apostle from the order of the Creation; I suffer not, (says he) the Woman
to usurp over the man, for Adam was first formed then Eve; 1 Timothy 2.12, 13.
Christ himself establishes Monog^my upon the same foundation, namely God's
Method of Creation at first. From the beginning of the Creation he made them
Male and Female; for this cause shall a Man cleave to his Wife, and they two
shall be one flesh; Marc. 10.6, 38. Thus also with respect to God's order in
the Creation, did the observation of the Sabbath become a part of the Law of
Nature: And on the seventh Day God ended his Work which he had made; and he
rested on the Seventh Day from all his Work which he had made; and God blessed
the Seventh Day, sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his
work, See Dr. Owen of Sacred Rest; Ex^^cit ^.
which he had created and made, Genesis 2, 2, 3. All these instances do fully
evidence, that there was both a sufficiency of objective light in the things
themselves to instruct man into his duty, and of Subjective light in man to
discern and improve it to the ends aforesaid. Nor does it at all weaken what is
said, that the Light of Reason as it reside's in us now, seems defective and
insufficient to direct us unto the knowledge and observance of these things.
For, it is enough, that we have proved them to have been originally designed by
God for these ends; and that there is ground and evidence in the things
themselves to conduct to them. Nor is the ex^ent and effects of Primitive light
to be measured by the (...) or Ruins of it which remain in us since the fall.
Alas! our present light is faint, Languid, Scant, Superficial, Distracted,
leaving us under uncertain guesses, dubious hallucinations, exposing us to
fallacious and delusive appearances, unable to minister due indications of
virtue and vice, even in such things, as, according to All, come under the
Sanction of the Law of Creation: Witness the Idolatry, Uncleanness, Rapine etc.
that Nations and Persons pretending to the greatest improvement of Reason and
natural Light, have lived in. But Original Light was pure, clear, certain, not
tinctured with false images and colors, nor darkness by lust and sensuality;
capable if it had been exercised and attended to, of preserving us secure as
well from Doubt, as Error.

5. God having thus prescribed a Law to man, the Notices of which lay
sufficiently plain in the exercising of his faculties: He also endowed him with
a proportionate strength for the observance of the precepts of that Law. That a
law be obligatory it is necessary that it enjoin nothing but what is possible
to be performed. That none can be bound to impossibilities is an indubitable
axiom. It is not consistent with the Wisdom, Justice, Righteousness, and
Goodness of God to command that which we never had strength for the performance
of, nor can he call men to account for what was never in their power to do. He
cannot expostulate with men for their sins, if he created them destitute of the
means and power of obedience. In such a case we might be pitied, but could not
be blamed. In a word, this were to charge our sins upon God in a degree beyond
what the asserters of fate and destiny ever did. I may usurp therefore what the
Philosopher says in the like case: (...); to ascribe our wickedness to
necessity, is to justify our selves and to condemn God: Sal^^st. de diis and
mundo cap. 9. An ability then of answering the Law of Creation, man must at
first have been endowed with. What this was, and the nature of it, is next to
be declared. God then having created man, He not only made him a Rational
Creature furnished with a soul of an immaterial and immortal nature, which was
his essential perfection, and did perfect him in genere Physico, as he was such
a particular being in the universe: which may be styled the Natural Image of
God in man: Being in its spiritual immortal nature a representation of the
Divine nature, and is accordingly alluded to under that notion by the Holy
Ghost, Genesis 9.6. But besides, He impressed a Rectitude on the soul of man,
perfecting him in Genere Morali, as he stood in Relation to God as his Rector
and Governor, and was under such and such Laws. Lo this only have I found,
that God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29. i. e. endowed with divine Wisdom to
understand his duty, and with perfect ability to perform the same. And this is
principally intended Genesis 1.26. Where God saye's Let us make man in our Image,
after our own likeness. For the likeness of man to God consists chiefly in
purity: Be ye Holy, as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. And be ye perfect even as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect: Mat. 5.48. A moral resemblance can in
both these places, only be understood. And that this is the primary and proper
intendment of that phrase, our being created in the Image of God; The Apostle
Paul in more than one place, does confirm: Put ye on the new man which after
God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. with Col. 3.10.
And this we may call the Moral Image of God in man, not only because it
consists in Moral perfections, answerable to what we conceive in God under that
notion, but especially because it adapts and qualifies us for the observance of
the Law of Morality appointed us as the Rule of our living to Him. Now this
Moral Image, though it was no part of our essence, nor belonged inseparably to
our faculties, nor did our being Rational creatures consist in it; yet it was
not only concreated with Humane nature, consentaneous to it, and perfective of
it; but was in the state of Creation naturally due: considering the end man was
made for, and the duties which were required of Him. Had God sent man out of
his hand without this Divine impressed Image, Si hoc adjutorium vel Angelo vel
homini, cum primum facti sunt, D^fuisset, quoniam non talis natura facta erat,
^t sine Divino adjutorio posse^ manner si vellet, non uti que sua culpa
cecidissent. Adjutorium quippe defuiss^t sine qu^ manner non possent. Aug. de
corr. et Great. cap. 11.
he had not had that goodness which it is necessary every work of God should
have, and which the Holy Ghost tells us that every work of God had: And God saw
every thing that he had made, and behold it was very Good. Genesis 1.31. That is
every Creature was not only furnished with such perfections as might Render it
a Being of such a species and kind in the creation; but besides was endowed
with whatever might qualify and adapt it to the ends, that it was made for. In
this superadded rectitude and image (I mean superadded with respect to our
essence; but Natural as well as connate with to the respect State and Law we
were made in and under) con^isted our ability of living to God, in an
observance of the Law of Creation, commonly styled the Law of Nature. Nor could
man even in the State of innocence have so lived to God in the single strength
of his Rational faculties as to be accepted with him. Natural Grace (I style it
so not with respect to the kind but the dueness) was as necessary in order to
our observing the Law of Creation then, as Supernatural is to the obeying the
Law of faith now. This I would have due heed given to, forasmuch as there will
be considerable occasion to improve it afterward.

6. Though man was created under the Sanction, and in the knowledge of a Law and
every way qualified and adapted for the keeping of it, had he not been wanting
to himself: Yet if we consider him precisely as under the Law of Creation
without any farther stipulation from God; he was the mere object of Gods
Dominion, made at his will and for his pleasure, and annihilable by the same
will, to which he owed his subsistence. I readily grant that Gods Dominion
which is nothing else but a right of disposing his Creatures according to his
own pleasure in way's becoming Holiness, Justice and Goodness, did no way
Warrant him to damn them without the intervention of sin. For this were to
inflict a torment on them outweighing the Good of existence which he had given
them. If God should create a Creature only to make it miserable, in stead of
bestowing a benefit on it, He would do it the greatest injury he possibly
could. Though bare existence be a term of perfection, yet when it is
over-ballanced with an extreme and infinite misery it becomes an unhappiness,
and can be no longer eligible. While we are then asserting the Sovereignty of
God, we would not affront his Justice and Goodness. Now to reduce an innocent
Creature into a worse estate than that out of which it was taken, we cannot but
esteem it inconsistent both with the Justice and Goodness, which essentially
belong to the supreme Being. Nor can we once admit into our thoughts that he
whose ways are weight and measure, can inflict on any an extreme and endless
torment, without the consideration of an antecedent crime: There is nothing
more repugnant to the notions of justice and equity than to damn a harmless
Creature, merely out of will and pleasure. The Savage allowances in the Heathen
Worship, have been alway's reckoned a just impeachment of the Deity of those
they adored; and shall we admit a worse Barbarity to be an appendage of the
Dominion of the Holy Jehovah? God forbid! Nor do I in the second place deny,
but that tranquillity and serenity of mind would have necessarily accompanied
Rectitude and Obedience. Light is not more inseparable from a Sunbeam, than
pleasure and peace of Soul is from a state of purity and uprightness. The
obedient Soul ^asts its own acts, and keeps a Jubilee in its self. Had there
been no other reward annexed to Obedience, the pleasure of ^cting conformably
to Reason would have been a sure and momentous one. Whatever calamities God in
Sovereignty might have inflicted on us, and whatever comforts of life, he could
have taken from us, yet anxiety and remorse would never have arrested us. Yea
the continual recognition of that nothingness, out of which by the arbitrary
fiat of our Creator we were taken, would have rendered all our thoughts of
reducibleness back into that state again, both satisfactory and delightful. The
apprehensions of our disposableness at the will of our Maker, would not have
grated upon our innocent mind. In a word, we should have esteemed the very
observance of the Law of Creation, a considerable reward. And the innocent soul
should have been satisfied from its self. For as the Poet says.

Ipsa quidem virtus sibi pulcherrimamerces. Sil. It is likewise confessed that
there is a great condecency, and admirable suitableness in it to Divine Wisdom
and Goodness; that a perfect, and spotless innocence should be attended with a
happy and unafflicted life: But yet all that carries such a proportion is not
necessary. For there is an admirable condecency to Divine Sapience and
Benignity, that the whole race of mankind should not be utterly lost: that God
should not loose active glory in way of thanksgiving and praise from a whole
Species of Rational Creatures: and yet I suppose it will not be affirmed that
God was obliged to re-instate fallen man in all the circumstances of that
felicity, which by his disobedience to the Law of his Creation he had
forfeited. Surely no property of the Divine Nature had been impeachable, had
God suffered Mankind to perish under the guilt they had wilfully contracted.
All that I contend for then is this, that had not God ratified the Law of
Creation into a Covenant, and thereby set bounds to his own Dominion, we could
have had no foundation of expecting any thing from him, after the utmost and
exactest of obedience, save the pleasure of having performed it. There is no
property in God which antecedently to his own pleasure, obliges him to
remunerate our obedience; nor precluding a Covenant could we warrantably have
expected any such thing from him. First, not his Justice* For (1) There is
strict Distributive Justice observed, where God takes no more away than he
freely gave. Every superior Authority, if it has not abridged it self* by some
promise or Covenant, has still liberty to revoke all the free issues of its
own power and bounty. Where benefits are freely bestowed, there the Donor
retain's a right of rescinding his own donations. God having therefore made us
of his Mere will, and for his pleasure Rev. 4.11. He had full power
arbitrariously to destroy the Beings he had conferred. The whole interest that
we have in our selves, is from the free gift of our maker, and by resuming what
he has given, he may cancel that interest when he pleases. Nor is God's
donation of being to the Creatures any silent contract (as is alleged by the
Author of Deus Justificatus, p. 266) That He will never destroy them: For we
have the experience of Brute Animals to the contrary, who in the virtue of
their Beings conferred on them, cannot plead a title to continuance. Perceptive
capacities they have as well as we, though not of that kind; and are allowed
Gratifications suitable to them; yet this hinders not, but that without the
least fault in them or injury in God, they are at once deprived both of the
Delights of the Animal life, and of Being it self. (2) For Commutative Justice,
there neither is nor can be any such thing betwixt God and Creatures. For that
supposes an equality between what is performed and what is received; and only
there, where there is an equalitas dati and accepti can Commutative Justice
take place. We can therefore neither plead nor enter a claim upon this
foundation, unless we could have brought as much benefit to God as we had
received as well in his conferring our beings on us, as in the after-reward.
Gods raising us out of nothing by his alone power and goodness, and furnishing
us with those faculties which made us fit for Moral Government, did
sufficiently entitle him to the utmost service we could perform, without laying
him under any obligation in point of Justice of remunerating it when we had
done. Merit from a Creature to its Creator is a Contradiction not only to
Scripture, Job. 22.3. and. 35.7. but to Reason. I am sure that of the Apostle
is enough to render it indubitable; For if Abraham were justified by Works, he
has whereof to glory, but not before God; Romans 4.2. Justification could not be
strictly merited, no not by works. The very Law of Works excluded glorying
before God: and let me add, that the Law of Faith excludes not only that, but
also glorying before men; which is enough if carefully attended to, to
overthrow some of the chiefest Pelagian and Arminian notions.

Secondly, not his Mercy and Goodness; forasmuch as all the effects of
Goodness, (as Goodness is taken for Beneficence and Bounty, which is the only
proper notion of it here) are free and elective. And indeed it is necessary it
should be so: Because no kindness can oblige, but what proceed's from one who
is vested with Power and Right not to bestow it. Nor do we pay thanks for what
is derived to us by the necessity of an Agents Nature, but only for what
arriveth with us from the choice of his will. Though the Holy and Rational
nature of God determines him as to Moral Good, without the least infringement
of his liberty; yet the case is not the same in reference to Physical good;
There being no property in God obliging him to produce all the creatures he
can, and to do them all the Good he is able: But the application of his
Omnipotence and exercise of his Beneficence depend as to both on the choice of
his will. To drive the opposite notion to its issue, would prove the world to
have been if not from eternity, at least many Myriads of ages sooner than it
was? and that every Creature is as perfect, as it was possible for Omnipotent
power and infinite Fecundity to make it, and that that there are no more
Creatures possible than what are already: with a hundred absurdities more,
which contradict not only Reason but Experience.

I shall Subjoin but one thing farther in proof of the conclusion I am
establishing, but in my Opinion such a one as may stop the mouths of the
Amyraldians in this particular, who affirm that for the bare performance of
what was antecedently our duty, Amyr^ld. in Animadve^s. Speciaibus contra
Spanhemium. part. 4 ad Ero^ema 13.
God is not only obliged to continue our existence, but to recompense us with
the reward of Heaven and Eternity. And it is this, namely that Gods Covenanting
with mankind in the state of integrity to reward them provided that they
persevered in their dependence on him, by obedience to the Law of their
Creation: This does abundantly testify that He was under no antecedent
obligation to it. For the very Nature of a Covenant and Covenanting supposes
the thing Covenanted about to be free and in his power to do or forbear that
makes the Covenant. Where there is an Eternal and natural necessity, a Covenant
is not only superfluous but absurd. Whatever accrueth to us either from
intrinsic Equity, or Essential Goodness, we neither need, nor do derive it
from Grant and Agreement. Now that there was such a Covenant no man that has
read either his Bible, and believes it, or a System of Divinity, though but a
Dutch one, can deny* However see Heb. 8. from the sixth verse to the end, and
Heb. 12.24. All essentials to the constitution of a Covenant, occur in that
transaction, as might be with ease evinced, if we did but suspect that it came
into question. Now all this as it declares the wonderful condescension of God,
that He should humble himself to set bounds to his own Dominion, and come to
terms of agreement with a puff of precarious breath, and a little enlivened
dust. So it enhanceth the guilt of the first transgression, being as well
against Love as Sovereignty, an act not only of Rebellion but Ingratitude.

7. Seventhly: God having ratified the Law of Creation into a Covenant by
annexing a Reward to the observance and keeping of it: He took special care
therein for the preserving and securing his own Glory whatever should be the
Event on Man's Part. Though he trusts us with the manage of our own
happiness, yet he would not trust us with the manage of his Glory. In case we
should make an invasion on his Honor, by transgressing the Law of our
Creation, and violating the terms prescribed us; He did not leave himself to
the necessity of retrieving it, but provided for it in his first transaction
with mankind. Though* the felicity of the Creature depend necessarily on its
obedience, yet the Glory of God does not. God having then in the Covenant of
Works provided for the exaltation of the Glory of his Faithfulness, and
Goodness in the rewarding of man, had he persevered in obedience to the Law
appointed him; He likewise in the same Covenant, by constituting a penalty
proportionable in his Justice to the demerit of sin; took care for the securing
of his Glory in the exaltation of his Holiness, Righteousness, Rectorship, etc.
in the punishment of man, supposing him to transgress the terms prescribed him.
However things should fall out, no prejudice was to ensue thereon to God's
Glory. Had he therefore left us to stand or fall accordingly as we should
demean our selves in reference to the tenor of that Transaction; Though misery
would have fallen out to be our Lot, yet no d^triment would have arisen thereby
to the honor of Gods Perfections of Government. On the one hand then, as man,
supposing his perseverance in integrity, had gro^nd afforded him of expecting
good things from God on the account of his Fidelity and Righteousness; his
promise making life a debt, though even in that case God did not become
properly a debtor to us; but what he was of that kind, was to his own Veracity*
Which made one say Reddit debita nihil debens, donat debita nihil pendens. So
on the other hand, being once fallen the whole of our recovery can have had its
rise in nothing but in the free and mere mercy of God. For had he left us in
our forlorn state, He had lost no more honor by us, than he does by the Angels
who kept not their first Habitation.

8. Man falling and thereupon forfeiting all that title to life which he had
settled on him by the Covenant we have been discoursing of, abode nevertheless
still under the obligation of the Law of Creation. For that resulting from the
Nature of God, and the Nature of man, and the relation that man stood in to God
as hi^ Creator, etc. so long as those continue, the Sanction of that Law must
continue. Whatever obligation arises upon us from our Nature must be as
perpetual as our Nature is. Now though the Lapse has deprived us of the
Rectitude of our Natures, yet it has taken nothing from us that is essential
to our constitution as men. Though we be transformed into Beasts and Demons in
a Moral sense, yet not in a Physical. Though we have lost our Souls legally in
that they are obnoxious to, and under the wrath of God; yet we are not brought
forth deprived of them, nor of any thing essentially belonging to them. Such a
loss would render us unfit for Moral Government, nor should we be so any longer
men, or that species of the Creation, which supposing that we are at all, we
necessarily must be. What we have said in proof of a Natural Law. 3. is all
applicable to that we have now in hand; so that all farther confirmation of it
might have been here superseded. But having met with a late Book of one Mr.
George Bull, styled Harmonia Apostolica, and therein with some principles
altogether inconsistent with the proposition we have now asserted; it will not
be amiss to prosecute it a little farther. Now the doctrines in the foresaid
Author, subversive of what we have been affirming are mainly two. (First) That
there is no Law of God now requiring perfect obedience, or that any man is
bound to live free from sin; and his reason is, quod justitiae Divinae
repugnet, ut quisquam ad plane impossibilia* (sub periculo presertim aeternae
mortis) teneatur. Because it is repugnant to the Righteousness of God, that any
man should be obliged to that which is impossible. And that a spotless, sinless
life is so to every one in the circumstances we now stand. Dissertat. poste^.
cap. 7. p. 105, 106.

(2.) That there is no Law now in being, threatening future death, but the Law
of Faith: That the promises and threatenings of the Law of Moses were only
Temporal and Earthly, p. 210. If either of these be true, that which I have
affirmed must needs be false. A refutation of these is so far then from being
superfluous, that it is a necessary service to the design which I have in hand.

First then, If there be no Law now in Being, threatening future death, but the
Law of Faith, then of all men in the world, the condition of the Heathen is the
most eligible; And the enjoyment of the Gospel is so far from being a
privilege, that it is a snare. For, seeing where no Law is, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. Then, for as much as the Gentiles are not under the
obligation of the Law of Faith* it naturally follows, that whatever courses
they pursue, or whatever sins they are found in the practice of; yet eternal
Death they are not obnoxious to. Instead therefore of pitying and bewailing
the condition of the Gentiles for their want of the Gospel, we ought rather to
lament their case that have it, being brought only thereby under a hazard of
Damnation, which antecedently they were free from.

Secondly, If there be no Law threatening Eternal Death, but the Law of Faith,
then is there no such thing as forgiveness and remission of sin in the world.
The Reason is plain, because all pardon supposes guilt; nor can any properly
be discharged from that to which he is not obnoxious. Now the Gospel denounces
damnation only against final Impenitency and Unbelief; As on the one hand,
therefore, these are neither pardoned, nor pardonable; so on the other hand, if
there be no Law threatening eternal death, besides the Gospel, then is there no
other sin that we either need, or are capable of having forgiven; And by
consequence there is no such thing as remission of sin in the World.

Thirdly, If there be no Law threatening eternal Death, but the Law of Faith,
then Christ never dyed to free any from wrath to come. For it is nonsense to
say that he has freed us from the Curse of the Gospel; yea, it is a
Repugnancy, unless you will introduce another Gospel to relieve against the
terms of this; nor will that serve the turn, unless you likewise find another
Mediator to out-merit this. If Christ then have at all delivered us from wrath
to come, it must be that of the Law; and if so, there must be a Law besides the
Gospel, that denounces future wrath, vid. Gal. 3.13.

Fourthly, To say that there is no Law now in Being, requiring perfect
Obedience, and that no man is bound to live wholly free from Sin, is in plain
English to affirm a contradiction. For, There being nothing that is sin, but
what is forbid, or what we are under obligation against; ( all sin being a
transgression of some Law, 1 John 3, 4.) To say that no man is bound to live
free from sin, is to tell us that he is not obliged to that, that he is obliged
to. See Mr. Truman his endeavor to rectify some prevailing opinions, etc.
page 4. and 14. I know well enough that some of these Consequences are things
which the foresaid Author does plainly detest, but they are naturally the issue
and birth of his Assertions. For I would not fasten an odious inference upon
any man's discourse, if the cohaesion were not necessary and clear. I reckon it
an Unmanly, as well as an Unchristian thing to wring conclusions out of others
premises. Nor would I drive the doctrine of any, farther than it is apt to go,
and with the greatest Gentleness may be led.

. 9. That we are still under the Sanction of the Law of Creation has been
already demonstrated. That which come's next to be declared, is, How that every
Law of nature is of an Unchangeable obligation. A late Author tell's us, that
there are Rules of Moral Good and Evil, which are alterable according to the
accidents, changes and conditions of humane life. Eccles. polit. p. 83. And
accordingly a power is pleaded to belong to the Magistrate over the consciences
of men, in the essential duties of Morality; Eccles. polit. 68. And it is
affirmed that He has power to make that a particular of the Divine Law, that
God has not made so; ibid. p. 80. And from the power of the Magistrate over
the consciences of men in Moral virtues (which our Author tell's (...) are the
most weighty and essential parts of Religion) the like power is challenged as
appertaining to him over our consciences in reference to Divine Worship;
Eccles. polit. p. 67, 77, 78: and def. and continuat. p. 356, 357, 358, 371.
etc. I shall not at present meddle with his Consequence, nor indeed can I
without a digression: Though I think it easy upon the Grounds that he states
the Alterableness of Natural Laws, to evidence the impertinency and incoherence
of it. For if either the matters of worship be already stated by God; or if God
should have precluded the magistrate by a declaration of his will, as to
meddling in this matter, and bequeathed that trust into other hands; his
Consequence falls to the ground. But it is the Antecedent that I am to deal
with, and it is some comfort to me, that there are men of equal learning with
the foresaid Author, who have been of a persuasion widely different from his.
Grotius a person of some account in his day, and who will continue so while
Learning is had in reputation, judged otherwise in this matter: Est autem jus
natural adeo immutabile ut ne a Deo quidem mutari queat; De jure Belli and
Pacis lib. 1. cap. 1.. 10 Natural Right (or Law) is so unchangeable that it
cannot be altered by God himself. And that it may appear that he mean's those
Rules of Good and Evil, which have reference to contracts and positive Laws,
and in some sense depend upon them, He adds a little after; fit tamen interdum
ut in his actibus de quibus j^s Naturae aliquid c^nstituit, imag^ quaedam
mutationis fallat incautos, cum revera non jus naturae mutetur quod immutabile
est, sed res de qua j^s naturae constituit, quaeque mutationem recipit. It
comes to pass sometimes, that a kind of resemblance and shadow of change in
those acts which the Law of nature has determined and unalterably fixed,
imposes upon unwary men, While indeed the Law it self is not at all altered as
being immutable, but the things which the Law regulates and about which it
determines, undergo an alteration. ibid. It was of this Law that Philo gives us
this character: Lex corrumpi nescia, quippe ab immortali nature insculpta in
immortali intellectu; A Law neither subject to decay nor abrogation, being
engraven by the Immortal God into an immortal soul. (...); in men or not
distracted there remains an immovable unalterable Law, which we call the Law
of Nature, Andron. (...); Nothing determined by Nature can be any ways
altered. Arist. lib. 2. Eth. Hence he styles the Laws of Nature (...),
immovable and immutable. For the further demonstration of this; we desire it
may be observed, that Law is nothing else but the will of the Rector
constituting our duty, (...): Hierocl.
made known to us by sufficient promulgation. Now in order to the obtaining a
signification of the Rector's will enacting what he exacts of us. (1) a
Rational faculty and a free use of it is necessary, that being the only
instrument by which we discern what the will of the Sovereign is. Hence, mere
idiots, children, and men totally deprived of the use and benefit of Reason are
under the actual Sanction of no law, Not that there is any cessation,
abrogation, or alteration of Law thereon, but because through the incapacity of
the subject, it was never the Rector's will in those circumstances to oblige
them. For as Plutarch says, there are some (...); distempers and infirmities
of soul which do Unman us. (2) Our obligation as to the exercise and discharge
of some Natural duties, is by the Law of Nature only bound upon us, on
supposition of some fundamenta or relations and circumstances that we are
brought into. Now though the thing be alway's a duty in it self, and the Law
requiring it unalterable, yet antecedently to my entering into that Relation or
those circumstances, it was not my actual Duty. For example, the Law commanding
a Husband to love and cherish his Wife, or a Father to provide for his
Children, is immutable and invariable; though in order to my being under the
sanction of it, as to the actual discharge of these duties, it is needful that
I have a Wife and a Child: Si creditor quod ei debeo acceptum ferat, jam
solvere non tencor, non quia jus Naturae desierit praecipere solvendum quod
debeo, sed quia quod debeb am deberi desiit: If a Creditor should forgive me
what I owe and am justly indebted to him, I stand no longer under Obligation to
payment, not because the Law of Nature cease to command me to pay my just
debt, but because that which was a debt is no longer so, Grot. de jure belli
and pacis, lib. 1. cap. 1.. 10. By what has been said it is easy to discover
how weak and impertinent the Ecclesiastical Politician is in all the instances
he brings of Natural Laws alterable as circumstances do require* or as the
Magistrate thinks fit. It is well, if upon every times changing our condition,
or upon every humor of the Magistrates altering the civil penalty of a moral
crime, the Law of Nature must change also. Yea, according to the rate that any
Laws of Nature are alterable, I will undertake to prove that they are all so.
We readily grant that a man by putting himself into new circumstances, or new
relations, is thereon obliged to performance of many duties which as so
circumstantiated he was not bound unto before, but we altogether deny that,
therefore the Laws of Nature suffer the least alteration; and the Reason is,
because they did never bind to such duties, but on supposition of such
Relations and Circumstances. In a word, the whole Law of Nature bearing upon
the Nature of God, and the Nature of Man, while these are unchangeable, it is
unchangeable. It is strange that we should envy the Pope to dispense with a
Natural Law, if the Magistrate at pleasure may.

10. That mankind notwithstanding the fall abode still under the obligation of
the Law of Creation, and that every Precept of the Law of nature is of an
unchangeable and unalterable obligation, has been already unfolded and made
Good. The evils which overtook us through the lapse in reference to that Law,
come next to be disclosed and manifested. And besides what befell us in relation
to it, as it was ratified into a Covenant, whereof I shall not now treat; there
were two mischiefs arrested us in reference to it, under the reduplication of
its being a Law; namely, Darkness and Ignorance, that we do neither clearly nor
fully discern it; and Weakness and Enmity whence we neither can nor care to
keep it.

First Darkness and Ignorance; and these are grown upon us two ways. (1) From
an Eclipse of primigenial light in the mind it self. The Soul at first was a
lucid orb, embellished with all the Rays of light, created (...) in knowledge,
Col. 3.10. in (...) true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. that is, in sanctitate voluntatis
veritatem ^mplectentis; Cocc. (...), Holy with Wisdom, Plat. in theat. But
Alas! an Universal darkness has arrested us: (...); The eye of the Soul is
drowned or immersed in the barbarick gulf of Ignorance: Plat. de Repub. lib. 7.
The concreated beams of light are lost and vanished. There remain none of those
Radii Solis, or lucida tela diei. What the Poet says of dyed Wool -- Nec
amissos colores
Lana refert medicata fuco;
is applicable to the Soul deprived of the Image of God, and tinctured with Sin
and Lust. (...), There is none that understands, Romans 3.11. We are born
(...), without Understanding, Romans 1.31. (...) blind, 2 Pet. 1.9. (...),
darkened or benighted in our minds, Ephesians. 4.8. (...), darkness, Joh. 1.5. Our
light is not only too dim to preserve us from the mistakes of Error and
Ignorance, but abuses us with false representations. The Mind is now like an
Icterical Organ, which imagines all the objects of sight tinctured with false
colors. (2.) This Ignorance of the Law of Nature, may be partly ascribed to
that disorder and confusion which have invaded the Creation; (...). The
Creature is subjected to Vanity, Romans 8.20. An (...) or disorder has
overspread the Universe through the Curse inflicted upon the Creation for man's
sin; objective mediums are become in a great measure both dark and fallacious.
They have lost much of that fulgor, by which the glory of God's Wisdom and
Goodness, and our duty to Him, our selves, and others was at first visible. The
present calamitous scene of things not only with reference to Brute Animals,
but inanimate Beings does strangely impose upon our easy and distorted minds.

Secondly, Weakness and pravity has arrested us in all our faculties, so that
we are neither able nor careful to observe and perform what we know. Impotency
and corruption cleave to our very Natures, by the loss of that Rectitude which
was concreated with us, and impressed upon our faculties; the subordination and
subjection of the appetite to Reason, is in a great measure lost likewise; so
that the animal life does now sway us; our passion does both baffle our
Judgment and enslave our Wills, we are at once not only weak, but corrupt;
Impotent and averse to Good, and propense and disposed to evil. As darkness
does naturally ensue on the withdrawment of light, or as lameness does
necessarily attend the interruption of the Loco-Motive-faculty; so does
inability and aversation to good, and positive inclination and adaptedness to
evil, ensue on the loss of that Rectitude which disposed us to live to God.
Ungodly and without strength, is the just and due Character of every one of the
Posterity of Adam. But more of this chapt. 4.

11. Notwithstanding the Ignorance, Darkness, Weakness, Corruption, etc. that
man was thus sunk into; yet retaining still his Faculties, he retained likewise
some knowledge of the Duties he was obliged to by the Law of Nature, and in the
virtue of his abiding, still endowed with Intellective and Elective powers, he
continued likewise able for the performance of the substance of these duties,
and that in his own strength. A promptitude, readiness, and facility of acting
in reference to these, is what we commonly call Moral Virtue. And in many of
them did some of the Heathen excel. It were to be wished, that as to Graveness
of deportment, Amiableness of Conversation, Moderation in the pursuit and use
of the Creatures, Acquiescence in the dispose they were brought into, Candor,
Fidelity, Justice, etc. We who pretend our selves Christians did but equal
them; And as appears by what Paul asserts of himself, The Pharisees were
eminent in many of the instances of Morality; Hence what he expresses, Phil.
3.5. by being in reference to the Law a Pharisee; he styles v. 6. Being
touching the Righteousness of the Law blameless. And now I must either
contradict the Apostle, or take the liberty of differing from a late Author,
who not only assumes a confidence, wherein none have preceded him, of
divesting them from all title to Moral Righteousness, but attaques withal, and
that in a very pert and clamorous manner, the Wisdom, Honesty, and Conscience
of a Learned man, for but presuming to say that the Pharisees were a People
Morally Righteous: See def. and continuat. p. 350, 351. Go thy way (says he)
for a woeful guesser; no man living beside thy self could ever have had the ill
fortune to pitch upon the Scribes and Pharisees for Moral Philosophers, etc.
This I dare say, that on whatever evidence the Pharisees are condemned in
their claim to Moral Righteousness, there is the same reason why the
Philosophers should be cast also. Did the Pharisees paraphrase the Law, as
regarding only the external act, without deriving the Sanction of it to the
mind, intention, and disposition? The Heathen Moralists were no less guilty
herein, than they; which made Tertullian say of their Moral Philosophy, non
exscindit vitia sed abscondit; it cutteth not off, but covers vice^, lib. 3.
cap. 25. See Romans 7.7. I bad not known Lust, except the Law had said, thou
shall not Covet. Were the Pharisees defective in the true end of obedience,
designing instead of Gods glory, ostentation and applause? The best of the
Philosophers were herein also criminal, which made Austin say, that cupiditas
laudis humanae, was that, quae ad facta compulit miranda Romanos. Pride had as
much leavened the Spirit and way of the Philosopher, as of the Pharisee.
Whatever grosser vices they abandoned, Pride was congenial to them. Hence
Antisthenes seeing a Vessel wherein Plato's Vomit lay, said, I see Plato 's
bile here, but I see not his Pride; meaning that his Pride stuck closer to him,
than to be vomited up. Curious, though he supped upon roots, yet Ambition was
his sauce. Diogenes in censuring Plato's Pride by trampling on his Carpets,
discovered his own. Did the Pharisees pretend to communion with God? Did not
the Philosophers the same? What else was the meaning of Socrates's Demons? Did
not the most eminent of them neglect the conduct and guidance of sober reason,
and addict themselves to Magic and Divination! Witness as well Pythagoras as
those of the new Academy. But to wave the further prosecution of this. An
ability, notwithstanding the fall, of discerning some considerable part of our
duty, and of performing it as to the substance and material part thereof, was
never gain-sai'd by any who understood whereof he spoke, and what he affirmed.
This we also acknowledge to be in it self desirable, praiseworthy, of
wonderful advantage to humane societies, and that which seldom misseth its
reward in this World. However it is always thus far useful to its Authors, quod
minus puniantur in die judicii, that I may use a saying of Augustines, lib. 4.
contra Julian. cap. 3.

. 12. Man having brought himself into the condition of weakness and corruption
already declared; and having by sin lost all title to life in the virtue of the
Covenant first made with him; yet still continuing under obligation to all the
duties of the Law of Nature, and obnoxious to the Wrath and Curse of God upon
the least faileur: God might here have left him, and have glorified himself in
the same way and method upon the posterity of Adam, as he has done upon the
Angels that sinned. No property of his nature, no word of promise bound him to
the contrary. The terms of the first Covenant being violated, all was devolved
upon the Sovereignty of God again. If an end was not to have been put to
obedience, by the immediate destruction and perishing of the Creature; yet at
the least an end was put to God's acceptance of any Moral service from the seed
of Adam; and they lay under an utter incapacity of performing any such service
as might with respect to the nature and quality of it be accepted with Him.
Matters being thus, God out of his Sovereign pleasure, and infinite free Grace,
proposed a Remedying-Law, treating with us upon New terms, and giving us a New
standing in a Covenant-Grace. And herein he engaged his Veracity, providing we
complied with the overtures now made us, for the pardoning of our sins, the
delivering us from Wrath to come, and the stating us at last in the happy
enjoyment of himself. Now in the virtue of this transaction, there arose New
Relations betwixt God and us, with new duties thereon. So that henceforth the
Law of Creation was but one part of the Rule of that obedience we owed to God,
the condition of the New Covenant making up the other part of it. Whoever then
shall now state the whole of Religion in Moral duties, bids a plain defiance to
the Gospel, either by telling us that there is no Remedial Law at all, or that
the terms of it are universally the same with the terms of the Old Covenant. Of
this complexion are several expressions in a late Author, viz. That Religion,
for the substance of it, is the same Now, as it was in the state of Innocence.
For as then the whole duty of man consisted in the practice of all those Moral
Virtues that arose from his Natural Relation to God, so all that is
superinduced upon us since the fall, is but helps and contrivances to supply
our Natural defects, and recover our decayed powers, and restore us to a better
ability to discharge those duties we stand engaged to by the Law of our Nature,
and the design of our Creation. So that the Christian Institution is not for
the substance of it any new Religion, but only a more perfect digest of the
eternal Rules of Nature and Right Reason. All its additions to the Eternal and
Unchangeable Laws of Nature, are but only means and instruments to discover
their Obligation, Def. and Continuat. p. 315. That there are Duties to which we
stand obliged by the Law of Faith, which we were not under the direct,
immediate Sanction of by the Law of Creation; yea, the repugnancy of them to
our Original state, and the habitude we were at first placed in to God, shall
be afterward (God willing) demonstrated, cap. 3.

13. The Relation and habitude of the Original Law to the Law of Faith, is that
which bespeaks our next enquiry. The present existence of neither of them can
be called into question; for, without the overthrowing the Nature of God, the
Nature of Man, and the Decalogue of Moses, we cannot suspect the Being and
Obligation of the first. Nor can the existence of the second fall under debate,
without disclaiming the Gospel, not only in all the conditions of it, but our
hopes by it. A consistency betwixt them must also be granted, it being
unbecoming and repugnant to the Wisdom of God to keep in establishment two
several Laws, whereof the one is wholly subversive of the other; nor can
Subjects in justice and equity be at one and the same time obliged to Laws
which neither in their demands nor designs are consistent one with another.

The Apostle has long ago determined this: Do we then make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law, Romans 3.31. (...) make
void: (...) signifies inutilem, inanem, ignavam, omnibus viribus destitutam
reddere; to render idle, fruitless, destitute of all binding power, to evacuate
the obligation of a thing, (...): That through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, Heb. 2.15. (...) we establish; legem statuimus, vulg.
stabilimus, i. e. firmam and efficacem reddimus; Bez. We fix and settle it in
its Sanction and force. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law (says
Christ) I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, Mat. 5.17. (...): whereas
(...) signifies to dissolve the obligation of the Law, to abolish and abrogate
it; (...), to overthrow the Democratie or popular Government; Homer. (...),
leges tollere, to evacuate or cancel Laws often in Greek Authors. So (...)
being put in opposition to (...), signifies to maintain the obligation of the
Law; consistent then they are. Yet coordinate they can not be, their terms
being not only different but opposite. It is true each of them in their own
kind, sense and way, requires perfect obedience; For no Law can remit what it
self exacts: but then it is only perfect obedience to its own demands. And with
respect to its own terms the Gospel is as strict as the Law. As the one
denounces Eternal death to all those who transgress its terms, so does the
other to all those who violate its. He that ^ailes in Repentance from dead
works, Faith toward Jesus Christ, and sincere obedience to the Moral Law is
left as remediless by the Covenant of grace; as he that fails in obedience to
the Law of Creation is brought and left under the curse by the Covenant of
Works. Only the terms of the one are not so severe and strict as the terms of
the other; The Remedying Law being purposely introduced for the pardoning our
trespasses against the Original Law. The Law threatens death absolutely, repent
or not repent: The Gospel threatens that the legal curse shall be executed
except we repent. And herein they are not only so distinct and different, but
distant and opposite in their demands the one to the other; that whoever pleads
on a personal fulfilling the terms of the one, is not at all capable of
pleading on the terms of the other. The Subject of justification by the
Original Law must be one perfectly innocent; The man that does these things
shall live by them, Rom 10.5. Whereas the Subject of justification by the
Remedying Law, must be supposed a sinner and a criminal; They that be whole
need not a Physician, but they that are sick: I am not come to call the
Righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9.12.13. The Original Law both as it
was first Subjective in our natures, and as it is now Objective in the
Decalogue to our natures, requires perfect obedience: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength;
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law that the man
which does those things, shall live by them; Romans 10.5. And accordingly in case
of the least faileur, it denounces eternal death; Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them; Gal. 3.10. Nor can sincere obedience give any title to life, by the Law
of Creation: all the Right that it states us in to happiness is by the Law of
Faith. The obedience which gives a claim to life by the Original Law, must be
perfect, and perpetual as well as sincere: Seeing then none of the sons of Adam
even in their best state, does good and sins not, Eccl. 7.20. 1 Kings. 8.46.
But in many things we offend all; Jam. 3.2. And if we should say that we have
no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; 1 John 1.8. It
Naturally fallows that by the Deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified in God's sight, Romans 3.20. But that as many as are under the works of
the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3.10. The Papists do here grossly err, by
affirming that Mankind is still able perfectly to keep the Original Law. But in
order to this they are necessitated to hold that some sins are in their own
Nature venial, and that they are not contra sed praeter legem, against, but
besides the Law; Bellarmin. lib. 4. de justif. cap. 14. The whole of which as
it is false, so it is absurd and non-sensical. For if they be against no Law,
they are not at all sins, but acts in themselves indifferent and Lawful. And if
they be violations of any Law of God, i. e. if they be at all sins they demerit
eternal death; That being the penalty annexed by God to the breach of every
command; Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy 27.26. Romans 2.9. Besides did we remain able
to fulfill and observe the Law of Creation perfectly, there could be no place
nor room for the Law of Grace; For (as the Apostle says) if there had been a
Law given, which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been
by the Law; Gal. 3.21. It being then impossible that they should be Coordinate,
it remains that the one lie in a subordination to the other. And seeing that
the Gospel in all its super-structions supposes the Original Law still in
Being, though not Universally to the same ends that it first served; and for as
much as the Law of Faith is provided and introduced of God, to minister relief
against the Law of Nature; it likewise appears that the Original Law is now
brought into a subserviency and subordination to the Remedial-Law. How and
wherein this is, shall be farther laid open.

First then; Our Lord Jesus has in the Gospel adapted the Decalogue (which is
a complete transcript of the Natural Law) to be the alone measure of Moral
Rectitude and Obedience. Though the Gospel strengthen the Duties of Morality by
new Motives, and improve them upon New Principles, yet it no where gives us any
New Precepts of Moral Goodness. It is true, Christ once and again, particularly
in the fifth of Matthew, vindicates the Moral Law from the corrupt glosses and
flesh-pleasing expositions of the Scribes and Pharisees, who had restrained and
perverted it from, and besides the meaning of the Law, and the intent of the
Lawgiver; But he no where superinduceth any New Moral Duty that was not
designed in the Sanction of it at first. He has retrived the old Rules of
Nature from the evil customs of the World, and rebuked the false expositions
put upon the Decalogue by those who both then, and for a considerable time
before sat in Moses's Chair. But he has no where made new additions to them by
putting his last hand (as some men take upon them to say) to an imperfect
draught. And indeed, to affirm that the Decalogue was an imperfect and
defective edition of the Natural Law, is to assert that which no way accords
with the design of God's Wisdom and Goodness in giving it. For God's intendment
in giving the Law of the Ten Commandments, being to relieve us against the
Darkness of Moral Good and Evil, which had seized us by the Fall; we must
suppose it a sufficient draught of the Original Law of Morality, otherwise we
must conclude it not proportionable and adequate to the end it was given for,
which to assert, is no less than an impeachment of the divine Sapience,
Faithfulness and Goodness. Nor does the bringing up such a report upon the
Moral Law, accord with that account which the Scripture every where gives of
it; The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. Not only essentially perfect,
in respect of its purity and holiness, but integrally in respect of its
plenitude and fullness. As it is in nothing superfluous which it ought not to
have, neither is it deficient in any thing that it ought to have. Thy
Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. This it could not be, if it were
not a perfect measure of all Moral Duties. Shall I add that the institution of
New Moral precepts seems not at all consonant to the design that Christ came
upon. The Holy Ghost entirely allots the giving of the Law to Moses, telling us
that the work, errand, and business of Christ was of another Nature: The Law
came by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. Christ's
work was to bring into further light the Law of Faith, and to redeem us from
the Curse of the Moral Law; not to augment the number of Natural Duties. This
may suffice to perstringe among others a late Author, whose words are, that the
Decalogue was never intended for a perfect System of the Moral Law. That ^e
cannot imagine, that by thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, is
meant, Thou shall not institute Symbolical ceremonies; or that by thou shall
not Murder, alms and fraternal Correption are enjoined, etc. Def. and
Continuat, p. 312. It is likely, that he and those of his persuasion would take
it ill if I should tell them with whose Heifer they here Plow: Therefore I
shall irritate no man, only recommend those who desire farther confirmation in
this matter, to such who have debated the Socinian Controversies. Now with
respect to Christ's having made the Moral Law of the Family of the Christian
Religion in the place already assigned it, a threefold subordination of that to
this, is easy to be manifested. (1.) That it is upon the alone score of the
Law of Grace, that God will accept any service at the hands of Sinners: For
though the Law, as to the Obligation of it, remain still in force, and for the
substance of it, will do so to all Eternity; yet that God will accept the
service of Sinners, is to be wholly attributed to God's transaction with them
in the Covenant of Grace by Jesus Christ. (2.) It is in the alone virtue of the
Law of Faith, and God's Mercy and Faithfulness therein displayed and declared,
that an ability is ministered to us of performing any part of Moral Obedience,
so as to be accepted with the Lord, and afforded ground of expecting a reward
thereupon. This Grace comes not by Moses: The Law as such, administers no
strength for the performance of what it requires; this comes alone by Jesus
Christ, out of whose fullness, we receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16, 17. (3.)
Though the Original Law continue both to claym perfect Obedience, and to
threaten Death in case of the least faileur, yet because of the introduction of
the Law of grace over it, the penalty shall not be executed, provided we be
sincere Christians, and fly to the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. Romans 8.1.
Not-withstanding both our manifest faileurs in that Obedience which the Law
exacts, and its severe denunciation of wrath upon the least sin, yet our
condition is not left hopeless, providing we fulfill the terms of the Law of
Grace.

Secondly. The Original Law is brought into subserviency to the Law of Grace in
this. That though in it self, and abstractedly considered, it be only shapen to
drive us from God, and to fill us with thoughts of fear and flight, and
accordingly that was the effect of it upon Adam as soon as he had sinned; yet
through the introduction of the Remedying-Law, it is become a blessed means in
the hand of the Spirit, to conduct us to Christ and God through him. Hence it
is styled our (...) Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. And Christ
is called (...), The end of the Law for Righteousness, etc. Romans 10.4. The
scope and drift of the Law; He, to whom the Law guides and conducts: Thus the
word is used likewise elsewhere, (...); Now the end (i. e. finis intentionis,
the scope) of the Commandment is Charity, 2 Timothy 1.5. And not as Moses, who put
a vail over his face, that the Children could not steadfastly look (...), to the
end of that which is abolished; To that which God aimed at in, and by the
Mosaic Ceremonies, 2 Cor. 3.13. That Righteousness which the Law becoming weak
through the flesh cannot confer upon us, Romans 8.3. It conducts and leads us to
Christ for the obtaining of. This is a blessed subserviency, that all that is
frightful and perplexing in the Original Law, whether the amazing strictness of
its precepts, or the severe dreadfulness of its denunciations, is made
contributory and influential to bring us to Christ, and to God by him.

Thirdly. Herein also is the Original Law subjected and made subservient to the
Law of Grace: That Faith in the Messiah is constituted an ingredient in every
Moral act in order to its acceptance with God; it is this which mainly gives
every action its Moral specification. Though the foundation of all Moral Duties
be laid in the Law of Nature; yet the practice of every Duty, with respect to
acceptance with God since the fall, is regulated by that great positive Law of
the New Covenant which enjoins the tendering of all things through the Messiah.
Now the manner of performance being an essential ingredient into the
determination of the Moral quality of an action, and the New Covenant
determining this as the manner in which every Moral action ought to be
performed; it naturally follows, that Faith in Jesus Christ is become an
ingredient into, and a part of every Moral Duty.

14. Having intimated the introduction of a Remedying-Law, and the
subordination of the Original Law thereunto: That which we are next to address
to, is the unfolding our impotency and inability for the performance of the
Duties and Conditions of this Law of Grace. We here suppose, that the New
Covenant has its terms and conditions as well as the Old. Every Covenant of
God, made with us, as with parties Covenanting, does by virtue of the Nature of
the thing, require some performance or other of us antecedently to our having
an interest in, and benefit by the promises of that stipulation. We take
likewise for granted, that Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, Act. 20.21. are the terms and conditions of the New Covenant. The
state and condition of Weakness, Alienation and Enmity, that we are in to these
great Duties of the Gospel, is what I intend a little farther to treat.

First then. The terms of the Gospel, together with the foundations on which
they bear, were not discernable by Natural Light. They take their alone Rise in
the sovereign will and pleasure of God, nor is there any medium by which we can
know the free determinations of the Divine Will, but his own Declaration. These
things have no foundation in the imagination of any Creature. They are (...)
things not possible to be found out by sense or reason: It is only Faith on the
Word of God that gives (...) evidence and convincing demonstration of them, and
that begets an (...) or confidence and full assurance concerning them, Heb.
11.1. Hence it is that the Gospel is so often styled (...) a mystery; see Math.
13.11. Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 1.9. and 6.19. 1 Cor. 4.1. etc. Some take the word to
be of a Hebrew Original, and to be equivalent to (...) or (...) a secret, or a
thing hidden; others derive it from (...) nicto, clausos oculos habeo.
Whencesoever we fetch it, the unsearchableness and hiddenness of the Gospel is
intended in it. The New Covenant both in the Doctrines and Duties of it, lies
in a higher Region than humane Reason in its most daring flight can mount to.
The matters and concerns of it, are omni ingenio altiora, out of the reach of
Reason to discern, till brought nigh by the Revelation of them in the Gospel,
(...); The world by all their Natural and Metaphysical Wisdom, knew not God,
viz. as reconciling Sinners to himself by Christ, till by the Gospel, and the
Preaching of it, he made it known, 1 Cor. 1.21. How should it come under the
Apprehensions of men, when it lay out of the reach of the Angelical
Understanding, Ephesians. 3.10? Unto Principalities and Powers in Heavenly places is
made known by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God. Had it not been for God's
revealing it to the Church, the Angels themselves had abode in everlasting
ignorance of it. There are no footsteps of it in the whole Creation, nor
evidence of it in the works of Providence. The Placability of God through
Christ is no part of the (...). of that which maybe known of God, by the things
that are made. Alas! How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
Romans 10.14. That sin is pardonable, we can only learn it there, where we are
taught how it is actually pardoned. Before we can be sure of the
Reconcileableness of God, or the remissableness of Sin upon Faith and
Repentance: We must first be persuaded of one of these three: (1.) Either that
God both can and will forgive Sin without any satisfaction: But this according
to the Amyraldians themselves, contradicts that idea of Righteousness,
Holiness, and Justice which we have of God. Or (2.) That the Sinner himself can
make satisfaction* but that is repugnant to Natural light as much (if not more)
than the former. Or (3.) That God has found out a way of satisfying himself,
and that either by the death of his Son, or by some other means; not the first,
for as much as there is not one Iota of the incarnation, death, satisfaction,
etc. of Christ, in the whole book of Creation and Providence; neither the
second, because notwithstanding the advantages which we, through the enjoyments
of the Scripture have beyond the Heathen* of knowing what could have been, and
what could not have been, we are yet so far from any clear certain grounds of
believing the possibility of Salvation in any other way, that we are furnished
with very momentous arguments to the contrary. Besides, if I should not not be
counted Young, Raw, Petulant, etc. I would ask the Disciples of Amyrald,
whether the works of God do naturally, and by a virtue intrinsecal to them,
declare this Placability of God, and Pardonableness of Sin on Faith and
Repentance; or whether they do it by virtue of a Divine Institution? If they
affirm the last, pray how come the Heathens without a Revelation acquainted
with that Institution? Where, and by whom had God told the world so much? If
they assert the first, which alone carries probability in it: Then (1.) Adam
from his own, and his Wifes not being instantly destroyed upon the commission
of Sin, had sufficient assurance of the Placability of God, and pardonableness
of Sin, previously unto, and abstracting from all promulgation of the Covenant
of Grace. (2.) How is it, that seeing there are in the Government of the World
as manifest instances of God's severity, as his Lenity, that forgetting all
thoughts of the Wrath and Anger of God, they should only possess a persuasion
of his Mercy and Kindness. (3.) Suppose that God had preserved the Creation in
Being, without transacting with Sinners in a Covenant of Grace (which I think
implies no Contradiction,) pray what then of the Placableness and Compassion of
God could it have taught us? In a word, all the Notices which the Heathen have,
or at any time had of the Reconcileableness of God, they had it by Tradition
from the Church, nor do they resolve themselves into any other Original. Shall
I add in the last place, that I never understood the consistency of the
Amyraldian Hypothesis, either with the Wisdom or Goodness of God. A
Reconcileableness on terms which (according to those we are dealing with) men
neither will, nor can come up to, and where there is no provision for their
relief, signifies not very much, nor accords with infinite Wisdom which adapts
one thing to another. Of all the defenders of Universal objective Grace, they
spoke most coherently, who affirmed the Heathens to have been saved by
Philosophy, as well as the Jews were by the Law, or we by the Gospel. vid.
Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 7. Just. Mart. Apolog. 2.

Secondly: such is the disproportion betwixt our intellectual faculties and the
great objects of the Gospel, that they can neither fathom nor bear the Majesty
of the doctrines of the New Covenant, though they be never so clearly revealed
The Sun does not more overpower and dazzle the eye, than those things of the
Gospel from which all our pardon and peace flow's, do overmatch our
understandings. The Natural man ((...) the man of a large inte^^ect) Receives
not ((...), non est capax, is not adapted, a metaphore, says Beza, taken from
a small vessel, which cannot admit any large body into it) the things of the
Spirit of God ((...) in contradistinction from the (...).) We may gather
cockles on the shore, but we cannot dive to the bottom of these depths. It is
enough that we are persuaded of the infallibility of the Testimony, we must not
hope to comprehend the things testified. Our work is not so much to look after
the evidence of the things themselves, as the Evidence of the Revelation of
them. And herein we have an instance of the Love, Care, and Wisdom of God that
what is most incomprehensible in its own Nature, is above all other things
revealed in terms most plain and intelligible. The obscurity of the Mysterious
truths of the New Covenant is not to be reflected on the darkness of the
Declaration, but is to be ascribed to the Majesty of the things declared. Est
enim objectum ita sublime, ut a mente nostra perfect comprehendi nequeat, non
etiamsi careret omni labe: tantae scilicet rei creatura modus capax non est:
The things are in themselves so sublime, that were our understandings pure and
unspotted they could not be grasped or comprehended; Our f^^ite capacities
bearing no proportion to them; Amyrald. Therefore, as one says, sicut in
Logicis argumentum facit fidem, sit in Theologicis fides facit argumentum: as
demonstration begets faith in Philosophy, so faith begets assurance in
Divinity; Alex. A^ens. The Scripture of whose Divineness we have all the
evidence that is possible, is the truest ground for the certainty of particular
Doctrines, that our understandings can rest in. Jansenius therefore says well,
that quemadmodum intellectus Philosophi^ suscipiend^ propria facultas est, ita
memoria Theologia. Ille quippe intellecta principia penetrando Philosoph^m
facit; haec, ea quae sibi script^ a^t praedicatione tradita sunt recordando,
Theologum Christanum: As the understanding is the proper faculty for
Philosophy, so is the memory for Theology: for as that by penetrating into the
Principles of things makes a Philosopher, so this by remembering what it meets
with in, and hear^ from the Word, makes a Divine; Tom. 2. lib. pro^^m. cap. 4.
page 4.

Thirdly, There is not only a Physical disproportion through the finiteness of
our faculties, betwixt us and the objects of the Gospel, but there is also a
contracted adventitious Moral ineptitude, through the priv^tion and loss of
that Rectitude which was at first concreated with us. I grant that the
Doctrines of the Gospel being attended with so great subjective and objective
evidence of their truth, neither indwelling lust nor practical immorality can
prove a total bar to the assenting to them. Unregenerate men may perceive the
truth of Scripture-Propositions, as well as of those of Humane Authors; The
word revealing things as clearly, and being accompanied with more and stronger
motives of credibility than any other writings are. But through want of a Vital
alliance to the things they are conversant about, there is a Threefold
unhappiness such men labor under. (1.) They are Skeptical and fluctuating in
the belief of Gospel Truths. Every temptation can fetch them off. In stead of a
firm settledness of mind in the persuasion of them, they are loose and
Aporetical. Their assents are weak and vanishing. Divine truths having no
cognation with the subject they are in, they are easily blown away or wither;
whatever certainty be in the object, there is little in the Mind. They want the
full assurance of understanding of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and
of Christ. No man (says the Apostle) can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12.3. He cannot say and profess it from a full
persuasion of heart, till the Holy Ghost have taught it him, See Heb. 11.1. And
remember the notion we have already given of the design and meaning of those
words. (2) Their knowledge of Gospel-mysteries is not affective. They do not
savor the things they assent to. Objects have quite an other aspect to an
unregenerate person, than they have to one that is renewed in the Spirit of his
mind; and the act of seeing is of a different kind. How tastless are the great
truths of the Gospel to unregenerate souls, and how faint are the Rays of
Gospel Light! The mind being depraved by impure and vicious tinctures, it does
not relish the things which it is even persuaded of. Unless a man (says
Christ) be born again, (...) he cannot see (know or understand) the Kingdom of
Heaven (the mysteries and doctrines of the Gospel.) Hence it is that the
believing soul, though otherwise simple and ignorant, has an insight into the
things of God, which the Learned, whose hearts are not connaturalized to the
Gospel, have not. It is one thing to know in the Light of Reason, and another
thing to know in the Light of the Spirit. Therefore the doctrines of the new
Covenant being (...), Spiritualiter* res divinas cognoscere est eas agnoscere
judicio, ductu and illuminatione Spiritus; sicut animaliter, vel rationaliter
cognoscere aliquid est ex judicio rationis cognoscere, Musc. ad. 1 Cor. 2.
Animalis homo intelligi^ quidem vocabula and aliquot sententias: S^iritualem
autem little sensum* percipere and fidem ^is habere no^ potest. Par. ad. 1 Cor.
2* 14.
Spiritually discerned; 1 Cor. 2.14. They lie out of the Gust and true
perception of a Carnal man. For as to discern Rationally is to perceive it in
the virtue of a Rational Principle, and through the influence of Reason: So to
discern a thing Spiritually, is to do it by a Spiritual Principle and through
the illumination of the Holy Ghost. It is an excellent expression of Amyralds.
Quod sicut operationes omnium animantium, quantumvis subtilissimae, nihilominus
cum iis quae a mente hominis proficiscuntur, collatae, defectum Rationalis
facultatis arguunt; similiter etc. that as the operations of Brutes how
sagacious soever they be, yet being compared with the operations of men, do
manifest a want of a faculty in them, that we are endowed with; so the
sublimest actions of Natural men, being compared with the operations of such as
are born of God do as plainly argue the lack of a faculty in those which these
have. These. Salm Tom. 1. p. 139. (3.) Their knowledge of divine truths is not
transformative Their assent is accompanied with a disaffected heart to the
things they assent to. Under all the imbellishments of knowledge, they are not
attempered into the likeness of what they believe and profess. Their hearts are
not changed into the vital Image of truth, but remain Animal and Brutish,
notwithstanding all the Notions their heads are fraught with. They are not cast
(...), into the form and mo^ld of the doctrine they believe. Their hearts and
affections are not framed into the similitude and figure of it. The Word is not
(...) an Ingrafted Word, turning the whole stock into its own nature and
likeness. But they do (...), hold or imprison the truth in unrighteousness.
Inest homini sanct^ legis scientia, nec ^amen sanatur vitiosa concupiscentia.
Aug. lib. de gest. Pelag. cap. 7. see Romans 7.8.

Fourthly. Because of Weakness through the loss of the Divine Image; and
because of Enmity through indwelling lust; we are altogether unable in our
selves savingly to comply with the terms of the Gospel. There is an (...) a
want of power in every one of us to those things. No man can come to me except
the Father draw him: Joh. 6.44. To come is as much as to own Christ as the
sealed and Anointed of God, and to believe in him as the alone Mediator and
Surety ( Joh. 5.40. Joh. 6.35, 37.) And without the Fathers drawing i. e.
without an efficacious work of God engaging the Soul in a most sweet but
powerful manner no one will be ever found in the practice and exercise of those
things. There is both that disproportion of faculty, and that wicked aversation
from the terms of the Gospel in every one; which only the Divine Spirit can
relieve and conquer. Objective grace or the Moral Swasion of the word is not
enough, we need also subjective Grace and a new principle. What a dead man is
to vital operations, that every one by Nature is to Spiritual acts. The soul is
not more necessary to the body, for the functions of Life, Sense, and Reason;
than the Spirit of life in the New Birth is to all holy performances. We not
only need insinuations of Spiritual light to awaken our slumbring minds, but to
elevate and dispose them for the due perception of the things of God; nor do we
only need grace to court our perverse wills, but to determine them to the
choice of holiness. An impotency is acknowledged by all who measure their
conceptions about these things, either by the declaration of the Word, or the
Universal experience of Mankind. The Natural man (...) cannot know the things
of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned; 1 Cor. 2.14. The
Carnal mind; (...) (the wisdom of the flesh, i. e. the best thoughts,
affections, inclinations and motions of the mind of a Natural man; (...) being
as much as homo corruptus, Joh. 3.6. Genesis 6.3.) is Enmity against God, (...) in
the abstract: For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,
(...), Romans 8.7.

Fifthly; How this impotency is now to be called, is not of so great
consequence as some men make it. For on the one hand all are agreed, that it
consists not in a Deprivation of any Essential Power or Faculty of our Rational
Being: This Spanhemius as well as Amyrald, Twiss as well as Truman are at an
accord in. And it is granted likewise on the other hand, that it is not only
Congenite with us, and so in that sense Natural, wherein we are said to be by
Nature the Children of Wrath; but farther, that it implies both a want of
concreated Rectitude, and a connate pravity and aversation from God; and that
it is only God who can overcome our opposition, and relieve our weakness; and
that secluding his work upon the soul, we neither will nor can comply savingly
with the terms of the Gospel: so that whether it ought to be styled a Moral, or
a Natural Impotency is for the most part but a strife about words. There is a
perfect harmony as to the sense and meaning, the alone contest is about the
manner of expressing and phrasing it. Philosophy is only concerned in it, not
Divinity. Nor is the question, who speaks most truly, but who speaks most
properly. It is the dispute of Divines, not of Divinity. The terms might have
been avoided without prejudice to truth; Nor do I know any reason for the use
of them, but to confound men's apprehensions. I heartily wish that those Learned
persons who have made so great a noise about Moral and Natural power, would
have been so ingenuous as to have told the World that they impeached no man of
error, but only of solecism, and that their adversaries were as sound in the
matter contended about, as themselves, only that they had not the luck of
declaring it in so apt words: as this would have contributed more to the peace
of the Church, so hereby private Christians would have judged their concern but
small in these debates. But seeing for Reasons that I think not fit to enquire
into, this needful Advertisement has been neglected, I hope it will not prove
an unacceptable service that we have here suggested it; presupposing then that
Agreement in the Main which has been intimated; All that lies upon our hand,
is to enquire who express themselves most Philosophically in this matter. And
though I must confess that (...), Dion. Halicarn.
apt words are of great import to a clear apprehension of things; yet I must
withal add, that I am no friend to a (...), or a co^ning of new terms when old
ones will serve the turn. And I am so far from seeing any solid ground, why in
the matter and case before us, we should wave the word Natural for the word
Moral; that I think there is a great deal of reason for the contrary. (1.) The
most likely way of arriving at a distinctness of understanding our present
inability, is by considering what at first was communicated to us, and for what
ends; and according to this method of proceed, I would argue thus. That
impotency which consists in the want of a principle not only concreated with
us, but Naturally due to our undefiled Natures in order to our living
acceptably to God, may I think not unfitly be called a Natural Impotency; and
that the impotency under consideration, is such, were easy to demonstrate from
what our Divines have proved against the Papists, viz. That Grace was Natural
to man at first, not Supernatural. (2.) As the strength and malignancy of a
Disease is best known by the powerful remedies which are necessary to conquer
it; So the quality of our inability will be best understood by considering the
Nature of the means which can relieve us against it. That inability then, which
Moral means are not sufficient to relieve us against, is more than a Moral
inability; Now that Moral means are not sufficient to relieve us against the
impotency we labor under, might be easily proved by producing the arguments
for Inward Efficacious Grace, against those who admit only a Moral Suasion; but
this I suppose sufficiently done against Pelagian, Jesuits, and Arminians; and
in the matter both of the necessity of efficacious Grace, and the way in which
it is wrought we have both Amyrald and Truman harmonizing with us. (3.) Let us
measure our thoughts by the report which the Scripture makes of our inability,
and we shall find abundant cause of judging it a Natural Impotency. For the
better clearing of this, we may observe that in order to our readier conceiving
our ineptness and indisposition to the things of God, the Lord is pleased to
represent it under such Metaphors and Similitudes as are of a familiar and
easy perception, and to wave others which possibly may be more Emphatical: I
shall only take notice that the Holy Ghost upon this occasion frequently styles
us Blind. Now Blindness properly is affirmed of the eyes of the body, and
thence transferred to the Soul. As we do not call him blind, who wants a
visible object, Intellectus humanus non est id qu^d in oculis corporis est
facultas videndi; cui satis est si lux ex^erna offeratur, Muscul. in Isa. 42.
Caecitas est privatio Luminis interni: cui tamen deest externum, privatur
quidem actu videndi, cui vero internum deest privatur potentia videndi, quantum
ad organum spectat.

Strange. de Volunt. Dei lib. ^4. cap. 8.


or who wants an enlightened medium, nor yet who wilfully shuts his eyes in the
Meridian shine, but him that wants an Organ; so in spiritual things we are not
to style him Blind, who by shutting his eyes precludes the light, but he only
is so that wants the faculty of seeing. Other arguments to this purpose I
supersede at present; for the pursuing of this controversy is not that which
we are much concerned in. And indeed, while such an (...) is on all hands
acknowledged, which only the immediate, inward, efficacious working of the
Spirit of God can relieve us against; other debates are of small moment. Only,
seeing (...); Nature requires that words be adapted to Conceptions, not
Conceptions molded to words. Dionys. Halicarn.
I will always prefer (...) a clear expression to that which is doubtful and
equivocal, which I reckon Moral Impotency to be.

. 15. The necessity of Grace for the succouring us under, and relieving us
against this impotency is pleaded by all: But it is withal too true, that under
the most specious pretenses of it, there is nothing more meant by some, but our
Natural faculties, or at most the Objective assistances of the Holy Ghost in
the Gospel. That all the Jesuits and Arminians intend in effect no more, were
easy to demonstrate, if that now lay before us. All that we intend on this
head at present, we shall reduce to three conclusions.

First: The operation of the Holy Ghost upon our faculties, is always in
agreement with, and in conjunction with the Word. We allow no man to pretend to
the guidance of the Spirit, who cannot justify what he pretends to be
conducted in, by some Scripture-Text. The inward energy of the Holy Ghost,
presupposes the outward teaching of the Scripture. There is always a sweet
harmony betwixt the subjective and objective teaching of the same Spirit, Jam.
1.18. Romans 10.17. As upon the one hand, toll Spiritum a verbo, and remanet
mortua litera; so on the other hand, toll Verbum a Spiritu and non amplius
remanet Spiritus Dei sed Sathanae potius; Take away the Spirit from the Word,
and the Word is but a dead Letter; so take away the Word from the Spirit, and
it is not the Spirit of God, but of Satan rather; Heming. in Romans 11.27. And
therefore we require both an assiduous study of the Word, and an examination of
all impressions by it, 1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. As less will not secure us
from unaccountable impulses, so there is no fear of Enthusiastic phrenzies
where this method is attended to.

Secondly: There are th^se arguments impressed on the Scriptures, as are every
way fit to sway our Rational minds. The Spirit does not hurry us against Light
and Reason, but leads us by discovering a prevailing evidence in the things
that it frames and moulds us to. There is conviction goes along with the
Spirits efficacy, (...), in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, 1 Cor.
2.4. Whenever the Holy Ghost by a vital presence persuades the soul to
disengage it from sin, and attract it to holiness, he does it in a way that is
congruous to our Nature, and the soul divorceth that, and espouseth this upon
plenary conviction. Flecti^ Deus voluntates non invitas, sed volentes; August.
He does not reduce us to himself by overthrowing our Wills, but by the
irradiations of truth and efficacy of Grace he makes us willing. The Spirit
when he comes, (...) he will convince the world of Sin and of Righteousness,
etc. Joh. 16.8. He will manage it in way of demonstration. Now the Topics of
these Arguments are partly the precepts of the Word, which are all holy, just,
and good; agreeable to the Dictates of Reason, and the distinguishing taste we
retain of Good and Evil. Approving themselves to our understandings, if they be
not enslaved to our lusts and sensual appetites. Courting us to our interest,
as well as obliging us to our duty. Arguing the Mercy of the Legislator, as
well as his Sovereignty. Partly the promises of the Word, which as they are in
their Nature suitable to the immaterial quality of our souls, and in their
duration to their perpetuity and immortality. So they are propounded to us upon
the strongest grounds and motives which can engage our hopes and faith; namely,
the Promise and Oath of God; the death and merit of Christ, the earnest and
pledge of the Spirit. Partly the threatenings of the Word, which as they are
dreadful in reference to things they denounce, whether we consider the Nature
of them or their continuance; so they are unavoidable unless we repent and
believe.

Thirdly; There is an immediate powerful operation upon the Soul it self, by
which our Opposition is conquered, our impotency relieved, our faculties
healed, and elevated to concur as vital principles of Faith and New Obedience.
There is a secret (...) or powerful working on the Soul, by which the darkness
that did benight us is dispelled, our minds irradiated with beams of light, our
wills softened and rend^ed plyant, and our affections purified and changed. The
faculties being one individual entity both with one another, and with the Soul,
only receiving various denominations according to its exertions to different
objects; whatever impresseth or affects the Soul, so as to dispose it to one
operation, disposes it proportionably to all. This is called the saving us by
the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. The
Creating us again to good works, Ephesians. 2.10. The shining into our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4.6. The giving us an understanding to know Him that is True, 1 John
5.20. The enlightening the eyes of our Understanding, Ephesians. 1.18. The working in
us to will and to do, Phil. 2.12. The writing the Law in our hearts, Jer.
3^.33. Hence we are said to be born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. To be (...) taught
of God, Joh. 6.45. To receive an Unction from the Holy One, 1 John 2.20. This
is the New man, which after God, is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness,
Ephesians. 4.23, 24. This is our (...) being made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4. This is a vital Law, Romans 8.2. The Spirit of God dwelling in us, Romans
8.9. By this we become of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa.
11.33. This restores the Soul to an athletique healthiness, like leaven
ferments it into its own Nature, and by a vital antipathy crosses all the
heavings and stirrings of Lust in it. And where this inward working is
withheld, outward teaching signifies little. Sonus verborum nostrorum aures
percutit, Magister ^^tus est. Nolite putare quenquam hominem discere ab homine.
Admonere possumus per strepitum vocis nostra; si non intus sit qui doceat,
inauis fit strepitus noster; The sound of our words strike the ear, but the
teacher is within. No man learns of another the things of God. We may admonish,
but all is in vain, unless he be within that instructs, August. Per vocem non
instruitur quando men's per spiritum non Ungitur; Where there is not the inward
anointing* there is no saving instruction received by the outward Ministry of
the Word, Gregorius voca^, allocutionem intim^ inspirationis, quae humanam
mentem contingendo sublevat.
Greg. Homil. 30. in Evang. There is an actual influence of the Spirit both
irradiating the word, and elevating the faculty; otherwise nothing is truly
attained.

16. A New Principle being thus formed in the soul, there is thereby begotten a
promptitude and readiness of acting according to the Law of Creation. So that
wherever there is Grace, there is Virtue also. Grace is our Medicine by which
our Aversation and Weakness in reference to the Original Law is removed and
healed; and proportionably to that measure of it we are made partakers of, we
are brought under an inclination and into an aptitude of obeying the Primitive
Law. There is hereby an (...) a restoring us in Christ as our head to our
primitive dependence on God, Ephesians. 1.10. Through him we are not only recovered
to a state of favor but reduced to a subject posture. The Soul is now brought
into a due subordination to God as its Maker, Preserver, and Rector. In stead
of adhering to the Creatures and pursuing the gratification of the animal life,
God becomes our great end and the pleasing him in all things our main study and
endeavor. According as the will of God becomes known, it is spontaneously
embraced, and complacentially rested in. The Grace of God not only teaches,
but inableth us to deny Ungodliness and Worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and Godlily in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. Exemplariness in
all virtuous conversation is a certain concomitant and effect of renewing
Grace. However immoral men may be antecedently to their being born of God, yet
afterward virtue is a chief part of their endeavor and study, 1 Cor. 6.11. If
any then pretending to Grace do either in their doctrines encourage immorality
as the Nicolaitans and Marcionites of old, and some Germane Antinomians of
late; or in their practice be void of sobriety and honesty: Let the persons so
teaching and walking bear the imputation of it; but let not Religion in General
be reflected on. So far are all the Advocates of Grace as distinct from Moral
Virtue that I know of, from setting them at odds, that they Unanimously affirm,
that where there is not Virtue there can be no Grace, and that none can be
truly Devout, that is not highly Moral. It is true, our renovation being
carried on but by degrees, and there being remains of indwelling and
unmortified lust in the best, there is not one, but at some time or other is
transported less or more to undue objects. But so far as any one is imbued with
the spirit of life, and born of God, he sins not, because his seed remains
in him, 1 John 3.9. It is a most slanderous imputation therefore which a late
Author fast'neth upon the Nonconformists, that they have brought into fashion a
Godliness without Religion, Zeal without Humanity, and Grace without good
Nature, or good Manners, Eccles. Polit. p. 74. see also Def. and Continuat. p.
308. and 338. etc.

. 17. An Obedience to the Law of Creation, answerable to the Original and
proper form and tenor of it, we have already demonstrated to be in the lapsed
state impossible. For as it is a contradiction to make that not to have been,
which has been, so is it to suppose a conformity in him who has sinned, to
that Law, which in its primitive Sanction requires every man to be sinless.
Yet this Law being still continued, not only as the Rule that God will judge
every man by, who through noncompliance with the terms of the Gospel, is not
relieved by the Law of Faith: But also as the Rule of that obedience, which
with some attemperations introduced by the Indulgence and Mitigation of the New
Covenant, God continues to exact of every one that shall enter into life. It
will not be amiss to enquire briefly into the Nature and degree of that
obedience, and to state the ability we enjoy through Christ of performing it.

First then; Sincere Obedience to the whole Law of Creation is not only still
required, but it is required under the penalty of Damnation. Though the Gospel
relieve us from the sentence of the Law on faileur of perfect obedience, yet it
ministers no such relief where there is a want of sincere Obedience. An
endeavor to walk in all the Moral Commandments of God, with a performance of
the superadded Duties which respect the Mediator, is the qualification required
in every one that would escape legal Wrath. And if it were not thus, the most
wicked might lay claim to Pardon and Salvation as well as the most Holy. And
the Gospel in stead of being an engagement to duty, were an indulgence to sin:
Christ is the Author of Salvation to none but to them who thus obey him, Heb.
5.9. And that we may not here deceive our selves, and think that we are
sincere, when we are not, I will only mention two things, leaving the
prosecution of them to practical discourses. (1.) That to live in the constant
allowed neglect of any duty, or prosecution of any sin is inconsistent with
sincerity, 1 John 3.6, 10. Romans 6.12, 14, 20. (2.) There are some sins which
the very falling into, argues the heart never to have been upright with God, 1 John 5.16, 17, 18.

Secondly: Improvement in all habits of Grace, and degrees of Holiness, with
endeavors after a most exact strictness are likewise required of us. Be ye
perfect as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, see 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
2 Pet. 3.18. 2 Cor. 7.1. And though damnation be not denounced here in case of
faileur, yet hereupon we miss much comfortable communion with God, are liable
to the withdrawments of the sense of his love, and are exposed to what paternal
castigations he thinks fit in his Wisdom to inflict, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33.

Thirdly: There is provision made in the New Covenant for the promotion of our
strength and growth, if we be not wanting to our selves. There is a fullness of
Grace in Christ, out of which we have ascertainment of supply, providing we
attend unto the means appointed for the Communication of it. An unshaken Faith
in the power of God, and in the assistance of the Spirit, a watching unto
prayer with diligence and constancy, Meditation of the ugliness of every sin
and amiableness of Universal Righteousness, etc. are exceeding useful hereunto.
Here mainly lies a Believers Province, and the attainment is not only possible
but easy; if sloth, negligence, love of ease, indulgence to the flesh,
superficialness in Duty, unbelief of the promises, do not preclude and bar us.
But then we are only to blame our selves, not to slander the provisions of the
Gospel.

Fourthly: In the virtue of Gods furnishing us with a principle of Grace, the
heart is immediately imbued with a sincere Love to God, and becomes habitually
inclined to walk in his Laws. Obedience is connatural to the New principle. And
though through remains of indwelling sin, and the souls harkening to
temptations; we be not so uniform in our Obedience, nor at all times alike
disposed to Holy exercises; yet partly from the struglings and workings of the
vital seed it self* and partly through the supplies ministered by the Spirit,
according to our exigences, we are so far secured, that we shall not disannul
the Covenant; see 1 John 3.9. Jer. 32.42. 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Pet. 1.5. So that now
upon the whole Christ's yoke is an easy yoke, Math. 11.30. nor are his
Commandments grievous, 1 John 5.3.

CHAP. III.
(1) The Question reassumed: Two Great Instruments of Duty; The measure
regulating it, and the principle in the strength of which it is performed, The
first of these discoursed in this chap. (2.) All that Relates to Religion,
belongs, either to Faith or Obedience, so far as Natural Light is defective in
being the measure of that, so far is it defective in being the measure of this.
(3.) All Obedience refers either to Worship or Manners; Natural Light not the
measure of Religious. Worship. (4.) An inquiry into the Original of Sacrifices;
not derived from the Light of Nature, nor taken up by Humane Agreement; their
foundation on a divine Institution justified at length. (5.) Manners either
Regulated by Moral Laws, or by Positive. Natural Light no Rule of positive
Duties. (6.) As it is subjective in Man not a sufficient Rule of Moral ones.
(7.) Considered as objective in the Decalogue, only an adequate Rule of Moral
performances, not of Instituted Religion.

. 1. I Cannot think that I have digressed from the subject which I have
undertaken, while I have been discoursing Principles which have so great an
influence as well upon the due Understanding, as the right deciding of it.
These being then proposed and confirmed in the former Chapter; We are now not
only at leisure, but somewhat better prepared for the prosecuting the assertion
at first delivered, viz. That Morality does not comprehend the whole of
practical Religion; nor do'th all the Obedience we owe to God, consist in Moral
Virtue. For the clearer stating and determining of this, it must be observed
that there are two great Instruments of Duty; the measure Regulating it, which
we call Law, and the Principle in the strength of which it is to be performed,
which we call Power. That directs and instructs us about it; this adapts and
qualifies us to the performance of it: By the first we are furnished with the
means of knowing it; and by the second with strength to discharge it. Both
these were at first concreated with, and subjective in our Natures. There
resided in us Originally, not only an ability of mind, of discerning the whole
of our Duty which the Law of Creation exacted of us, but a sufficient power to
fulfill it. Whether since the Fall we abide qualified as to either of these, is
yet farther to be debated. The first we shall Discuss in this Chapter, having
designed the following for the examination of the other.

We have already demonstrated the Law of Creation, commonly called the Law of
Nature, to be the alone Rule and measure of Moral Virtue. This is granted by a
late Author: The practice of Virtue (says he) consists in living suitably to
the Dictates of Reason and Nature, Eccl. Polit. p. 68. Now the Law of Nature
may be considered either as it is Subjective in man, or as it is Objective in the
Decalogue. As it is Subjective in man, it is vulgarly styled Right Reason, The
Light of Nature. The Philosophers who were the primitive Authors of the Term
Virtue, knew no other Rule by which it was to be regulated, but Reason: This
they made the alone (...) of virtues Mediocrity. The Mediocrity of Virtue
(says Aristotle) is, (...), as Right Reason dictates, Eth. lib. 3 cap. 8.
(...), Virtue is a Habit measured by right Reason; idem Eth. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Other testimonies to this purpose we have elsewhere produced, viz. cap. 1. Now
I affirm, that the Law of Nature is no sufficient Measure of Religion; and
consequently that all Religion consists not in the mere practice of Virtue; but
that there is something beyond the bounds of Moral Virtue, besides Chimera's
and flying Dragons. Eccl. Pol. p. 69. def. and continuat. p. 338, 339. ibid. p.
315.
And that the Christian Institution is not a mere digest of the Eternal Rules
of Nature and right Reason.

. 2 All that Relates to Religion may be reduced either to faith or obedience;
to what we are to believe, or what we are to perform. Faith and practice
engross the whole of man's duty. Credenda and agenda constitute the System of
Religion; nor are the Articles of our Creed less necessary than the precepts of
the Decalogue. It is not therefore the running after a Bubble of our own
blowing, as a late Author phraseth it, def. and continuat, p. 326. To discourse
the obligation we are under to Articles of Belief. For as they constitute one
entire part of Religion, and are bound upon our souls by the same Authority,
and under the same penalty with Moral services: So our assent to them and
belief of them is not only a necessary part of that Homage and Fealty we owe to
God, but it is introductive of all the other operations and services we exert
toward him. Every distinct act of obedience, supposes a distinct act of faith
with reference to some Article or other. So far as we preclude any Article of
faith from our Belief, we so far discharge our selves from the practical
obedience that emergeth from it. Our obeying the Sovereign will of God, does
not only suppose his Veracity in every Revelation of his will concerning our
Duty, but a distinct knowledge and fiduciary assent to the several Articles from
which it arises, and on which it attends. The Articles of our faith are not
like the Theories of Philosophy which no way influence obedience; but every
Dogma in the Creed is subservient to, and authoriseth a practical Homage. So
far then as Natural Light falls short of being a sufficient measure of the
Credenda of Religion, so far does it also fall short of being a Measure of the
Agenda of it. Is it probable that it should direct us to the conclusions, when
it is ignorant of the premises: or that it should inform us of the
superstructures, when it has no knowledge of the foundation? Though nothing
proposed to our belief be repugnant to Reason; yet I hope we do not so far
Socinianize as to deny but that there are some things above the reach and
comprehension of it. Some Articles of our Religion, as they have no foundation
at all in Nature by which they can be known or understood, (such are the
Doctrines of the Trinity, The Incarnation of the Son of God, The Resurrection
of the dead, the Economy of the Spirit, and the whole method and means of our
Recovery by Jesus Christ:) So being most plainly revealed, they exceed the
Grasp of our minds as to the full comprehending of them. Though Reason be the
great Instrument by which we come to discern what is Revealed for our belief;
yet it is no way's the Formal Reason of believing them. Though we examine the
Truth and certainty of Revelation by it, whether such a Declaration be from
God, or not; yet it neither is, nor can be the Standard Regulating the things
Revealed. There are other Doctrines, which though as to our perception of them,
they have a foundation in Nature, and there be Natural Mediums by which they
may be discerned; yet such is the present Darkness and pravity of our minds,
that without the assistance of a Revelation, they only puzzle, mislead, or
leave us skeptical about them. Of this kind are the Articles relating to the
Production and Fabric of the World; the Origin of Evil; the Corruption of
Humane Nature; the Ingress of Death etc. Concerning which never any without a
supernatural Revelation attained either to satisfaction or certainty. Much of
that Homage and practical obedience which we pay to God, results from Truths
depending on mere Revelations. Yea it were not difficult to demonstrate, tha^
there is hardly one Article of Belief so fully and certainly known by Natural
Light, as is requisite to a through encouragement and practice of virtue, and
suppression of vice. A knowledge of the Entrance of sin, the corruption of
Nature, our obnoxiousness to Punishment, together with an account of the means
provided of God for the Removing of Guilt, and the bringing us to a
Reconciliation with himself, are absolutely necessary to be understood, in
order to the performance of the Duties of the Gospel. On these Heads does the
whole of Instituted Religion and Christian odedience depend. Now whatever dark
and uncertain guesses, men through the exercise and improvement of Natural
Light may arrive at, as to some of those, yet no one left to the conduct of
mere Reason arose ever to any clear persuasion and full certainty about them.
See Amyrald his Treatise concerning Religions, from page 183, to 264.
That Light wherewith every man is born, has served the best improvers of it
for little else, but to mislead them about these things. Nor needs there any
other evidence of this, but the sad prevarications of the most knowing persons
of the World, where a Revelation has not been heard or received, concerning
them. Forasmuch therefore as Natural Light is every way incapable of
instructing us in these Truths, it necessarily follows that it can direct us
unto none of the Duties which proceed from them. It is a poor Apology of a
late Author, that intending a comprehensive scheme of the practical Duties of
Religion he purposely omitted articles of mere belief, as impertinent to the
matter and design of his enquiry; Def. and Continuat. p. 326. For besides that
there are no Articles of Mere Belief, every one being adapted more or less to
influence our conversation either toward God or man: The doctrines represented
by the learned person whom he there reflects on, are such as ground the whole
of Christian practice; and to exclude them the Scheme of Religion, is plainly
to vacate all the Duties which as Christians we are bound to.

. 3. Whatsoever appertains to Obedience, must be referred either to Worship, or
Manners. To one of these branches do all the practical Duties of Religion
belong. That which we advance to then in the next place, is, That the Light of
Reason, or the Law of Nature, as it is subjective in man, is no due measure for
the Regulating of Divine Worship. We do not deny but that Natural Light
instructs us, That God is to be Worshipped. That there is such a Homage as
Worship due from man to God, we need no other Assurance than what our Reason
gives us. Though the School of Epicurus differ from the rest of mankind in
their inducements of venerating the Deity, yet they acknowledge that we ought to
venerate Him. Never any that confessed a Supreme Being, but they also confessed
that such an honor as worship, ought to be paid him. This is indelible in
every man's Nature, and without devesting our selves of our faculties, we cannot
gainsay it. Nor do we deny in the second place, but that we may arise by the
Light of Reason to that knowledge of God, Primus est deor^^ cultus, Deos
credere, deinde reddere illi^ majestatem suam, reddere Bonitatem sine qua nulla
majestas est. Sen. Epist. 95.

Non tantum stoliditate, and monstrositate simulachrorum, sed and sacrificiis
homicidiorum, and coronatione virilium p^dendorum, and mercede stuprorum, and
sectione membrorum, and abscissione genitalium, and festis impurorum
^bscaenorumque lud^rum, Deos venerabantur. Aug. lib. 7. de civit. Dei, cap. 27.


as may sufficiently instruct us that some Media of Worship taken up by diverse,
are Unbecoming Rational Creatures to perform toward a Being of that Nature and
Perfections that God is. The Obscene Rites, and Lascivious Ceremonies of the
Heathen in their Worshipping of Bacchus, Pan, Flora, Cybele, etc. the Salvage
Sacrifices to Moloch, Saturn, etc. are justly therefore charged as repugnant to
Natural Light. Reason being derived from God as well as Scripture, whatever is
found contradictory to the true principles of that, is as unsuitable to tender
to God, as that which is expressly forbid by this. But that which I affirm, is,
that the Law of Nature as it is subjective in man, can give no certain
directions about the Worship of God: Nor can Reason define what outward mediums
of worship God will be pleased with. All who have believed the Existence of a
God, have supposed a declared Rule necessary for the manner of serving him. No
one ever judged that it was left to the arbitrary determinations of Humane
discretion, how God should be worshipped. Plato tells us that all Divine
worship must be (...), regulated by the Will and Pleasure of God, and that in
(...); Laws concerning Divine matters must be fetched from the Delphick Oracle,
Plat. de Leg. That Nation or People cannot be assigned, where any worship was
admitted, but what was founded on some pretense to Revelation. Greeks, Romans,
Barbarians have all of them attributed the Origin of their mysteries to their
Gods. It is true, they were all of them mistaken; but yet their Belief was
founded on Reason, viz. that none can conceive aright of God, much less serve
him as is meet, unless he be instructed and directed by God himself. If they
referred the invention of Arts and Sciences, and all things admirable to the
Deity; and celebrated their Legislators as receiving their Laws for the
regulation of civil Society by some inspirations, as indeed they did; hence
they believed Zaleucus the Locrian to have derived his from Minerva; Lycurgus
the Lacedemonian his from Apollo; Minos the Cretian, his from Jupiter; and Numa
his from Aegeria: We have much more cause to suppose they should believe the
immediate interposure of God in the communication of Laws, for the regulation
of Religious performances. It Is an observable expression that I meet with in
Jamblichus to this purpose, (...); It is not easy to know what God will be
pleased with, unless we be either immediately instructed by God our selves, or
taught by some person whom God has conversed with, or arrive at the knowledge
of it by some Divine means or other; de vita Pythag. cap. 28. This their
recourse to Oracles for the Regulation of their whole Sacra, does confirm
beyond all possibility of reply. And indeed where there is not some declaration
from God, warranting what we perform to him in Worship, none of our services
can be entitled Obedience; for Obedience is the Relative of Command. Hence
though we have cause to believe that God was pleased with the substance of the
Moral performances of the Heathen, as being grounded upon a Law communicated
with, and ingrafted in their Natures; yet as to what concerns their Worship,
being destitute of all command, auth^^izing either the Matter or the Manner of
it, it was odious and abominable to him: Nor upon any other account are some
parts of it liable to detestation, being performed no question out of a good
intention, and diverse of their Rites not materially Evil. The insufficiency of
Natural Light for the Regulation of Worship, might be farther confirmed by
these three considerations. (1.) The great disagreement both as to Matter and
Manner of Worship which we meet with among the highest pretenders to the
conduct of Reason. It is hard to be imagined into what diversity of opinions
and practices men left to the conduct of Natural Light, fell about the right
way of Worshipping God. The most Universal medium of honor, by which the Pagan
world made their approach to the Deity was Sacrifice.

Imprimis Venerare Deos, atque annua magna,
Sacra refer Cereri laetis operatus in herbis.
Imprimis; First, i. e. praecipue and ante omnia d^ operam sacrificiis; chiefly
and above all things, be sure to offer sacrifices, Servius in loc. Thence the
Philosopher accounts all other Religious performances null if they were not
attended with Sacrifices. (...); Sallust. (...)* cap. 16. And yet on the other
hand, some of the greatest improvers of Reason that ever the World had, seem to
have been no friends to Sacrifices in the Worship of God, (...); We do not
honor God by offering any thing to him, but by being fit to receive from him,
Hierocl. in Carm. Aur. Pythag. in verse. 1. and 2. (...); It is not decent to
Worship the Gods with the cost of Sacrifices: We only honor them by being
Virtuous and Religious our selves, Arist. Rhetor. Vis Deos propitiare? Bonus
esto; satis illos coluit quisquis imitatus est: Would thou appease and
reconcile the Gods? be Virtuous; He honors them enough, that inmitates them;
Senec. Ep. 95. And when the serving of God by Sacrifices had universally
obtained in the World, yet their disagreement was not at an end; but there
still remained endless differences about the things they were to offer, and the
manner of offering them. In the first Ages, Vid Porphyr (...) lib. 2.
only inanimate things were offered, but in afterages Animals were the
principal things which they Sacrificed to their Deities. And according to the
difference of their imaginary Gods, they made their approaches by Sacrificing
Animals of different Species. They offered Oxen to Apollo, Mars, Mercury,
Hercules, etc. Barren Cows to Proserpina, young Heifers to Minerva, Swine to
Ceres, Goats to Bacchus, Deer to Diana; concerning which Arnobius says
excellently, Quae est enim causa, ut ille tauris Deus, haedis alius honoretur
aut ovibus, hic lactantibus porculis, alter intonsis agnis: hic virginibus
bubulis, ille sterilibus vacculis: hic albentibus, ille atris: alter faeminci
generis, alter vero animantibus masculinis, lib. 7. advers. gent The like
diversity might be easily demonstrated as to all their other chief media of
Worship. The Ancient Nations used no Images, yea some abhorred them, whereas
latter Nations, especially the Grecians abounded in them. The issues of Right
Reason are Uniform, and therefore seeing the pretenders to the conduct of it
have been engaged in such different Methods and Mediums of Worship, it plainly
follows that the Light of Nature is not sufficient to instruct us about it.

The (2d.) Consideration may be grounded on the ridiculous Rites and Ceremonies
of which their Worship consisted. Instances to this purpose there are
innumerable. Amongst those I reckon first their battologies and reiterated
repetitions of the Names and Titles of their Deities, as if by Elogies they had
a mind to wheedle them. Of this we need no other proof, but what is recorded of
the Worshippers of Baal, 1 King. 18.26. And our Saviors caution to his
Disciple^ Mat. 6.7. But if any should desire farther information in this
particular, they may consult the Hymn sacred to Apollo recorded and illustrated
with Notes by Alexander Brassicanus. The ceremony of worshipping Hercules at
Lindos in Rhodes, is as notable an instance of foolery, distraction, and
madness, as any that History affords. The Homage consisted in the Priests
venting all the Reproaches he could against the supposed Deity, in bespattering
him with all the bad language he could think of, in railing at him in the most
scurrilous terms he could invent, and in wishing all the Curses and
Imprecations to befall him, that his Wit could suggest to him vid. Lact. lib. 1.
Instit. I know not whether some pretending to Sacred Orders, may not hereby
think themselves Authorized to treat their Brethren, as that Pontife did his
God. But if this be the pattern they write after, I dare say that Hercules was
not less concerned at the revilings of the Countryman, (which gave occasion to
the Sacra we have been speaking of) whose Oxen he devoured; Than the Gentlemen
whom they thus rudely handle, are at the ignominious titles bestowed upon them.
Was it not excellent to hear the Car^^s and Coribantes when they went in
procession, some of them drumming upon Kettels, some upon Bucklers and Helmets,
and others jingling Chains and Cymbals? Was not it pleasant to hear their
howlings and inarticulate yellings in the Celebration of their Bacchanals? and
to omit the Ceremonies of Whipping and Lancing of themselves, which they
usurped in their Sacra; was it not a pretty Rite of approaching their Deities,
all smut^ed and besmeared, peruncti f^cibus ^ra, Horat. de Art. Poet. Was it
possible that their Gods could deny them any thing, when they brought them
Nosegays, and decked their Images and Altars with Garlands. Who can forbear
laughing that considers the Media of their lustrations; -- Aliae panduntur
inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infestum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni,
Virg. Aeneid. 6. ubi vid. Serve.

A third Consideration for the eviction of the insufficiency of Natural Light
to regulate us in the Worship of God, may be this; That the whole of
Gospel Worship presupposes not only a knowledge of the condition we are brought
into by the fall, but of the means, method, and terms of ou^ recovery; and by
consequence, Natural Light being incompetent as to the instructing us about
these things, must needs be an insufficient measure of Religious Worship.
Whoever approaches God, ignorant of his own guilt, and of a Mediator, and of
our Reconciliation through Faith in his Blood, must needs make wild addresses,
and worship he neither knows Whom, nor How. A due Understanding of our
condition by Nature, and the Way, Means, and Terms of our recovery by Christ,
is that which can alone conduct us in a right honoring of God. Of the first of
these, the highest improvers of Natural Light understood but little, and of the
second nothing at all. There was not any Medium in the whole Creation that
could give them certain assurance of the Remission of Sin, much less of the way
and means of obtainta^ning the pardon of it. Upon the whole then of what we
have here discoursed, I cannot but reckon it a very strange expression which I
meet with in a late Author, viz. that in the Mosaic dispensation God took
special care to prescribe the particular Rites and Ceremonies of his Worship*
not so much by reason of the necessity of the thing it self, as because of the
sottishness and stupidity of that Age, Eccl. Pol. p. 103.

. 4 I suppose I have said enough for the discharging Reason from being the
measure of Religious Worship, and consequently from being the Standard whereby
the whole of Religion is to be Regulated. Nor does the present subject invite
me to say any more on this head. Yet for as much as an Enquiry into the first
Rise of Sacrifices may not only contribute to a farther enlightening and
confirming of our former assertion; but may also conduce to the decision of
another question of as great moment, viz. whether any thing ought to be
established as a part of Divine Worship* but what is authorized by some
Revelation from God, I shall assume the liberty of discoursing a little the
Original of Sacrifices, not so much because it is a pretty subject, Def. and
Contin. p. 421.
as because of the weight and consequence of it, and the affinity it has with
the subject I have undertaken to treat; and because I meet with a late Author,
who in order to the serving of an Hypothesis which he has espoused, viz. That
God has left the management of his outward worship to the discretion of men,
Eccl. Pol. p. 100. Is pleased to pitch upon Sacrifice, that ancient and
universal medium of Divine Worship, as a proof and instance of it. This outward
expression (says he) of Divine Worship, notwithstanding its Universality and
Antiquity, was only made choice of by Good men, as a fit way of intimating the
pious and grateful Resentments of their minds, and cannot in the least pretend
to owe its Original to any Divine Institution, seeing there appears not any
shadow of a command for it, Eccl. Polit. p. 101. We have the same assertion
renewed and repeated, Def. and Contin. p. 419. And an attempt made for the
confirmation and vindication of it from thence, 10 p. 439.

There are three opinions among learned men concerning the first Origin and
beginning of Sacrifices. Some derive them from the Obligation of the Law of
Nature: This way do most of the Romanists steer. See to the same purpose, Tho^.
part. 3. Sum. 9.60. Art. 3. Valent. lib. 1. de Sacrif. ^iss. cap. 4. Paul.
Brugens. in scrutinio Script. part. 2. did. 3. cap. 11:
Bellarmin tells us Sacrificia non ess^ in lege Mosis instituta, sed ex leg^
Naturae ortum habere* That Sacrifices are (...) enjoined or instituted in the
Law of Moses, but that the institution of them is to be fetched from the
Obligation of Natural Light, lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 20. That men ought to
worship God by Sacrifices, is primum quoddam principium a Deo nobis ingenitum;
a first principle ingrafted into our Natures, idem ibid: But though most of the
Divines of the Church of Rome be of this mind, yet I meet with some who are
otherwise persuaded. Nullum est natural praeceptum, ex quo sufficienter
^^lligi possit determinationem illius, ad talem (...), cultus sc* per
sacrificium, esse omnino ^ecessaria^ ad m^rum honestatem; There is no precept
of Nature, defining the mode of worshipping God by Sacrifices, to be a
necessary part of our Obedience, Suarez. part. 3. Sum. Theolog. Ar^. 1. did.
71. Sect. 8. The inducement leading the generality of the Divines of the Romish
Communion to derive the institution of Sacrifice from the Obligation of Nature,
is, that they may the better justify the Sacrifice of the Mass. Nor upon any
other account do they concern themselves in this opinion* one fable requires
another to uphold it; and indeed if we should yield them our being under an
Obligation from Nature, for our approaching God by Sacrifices; We must also
grant either the Sacrifice of the Mass, or we must substitute some other by
which we continue to pay our Natural Homage to God. For no supernatural Law can
repeal a Natural. Revelation builds upon the Law of Nature, but can vacate
neither the whole, nor any part of it. Whatever Obligation we are under by the
Law of our Being, is inseparable from, and of the same continuance with it. But
as there are no Rational arguments to engage our belief of the affirmative,
viz. that Sacrifices are appointed by the Law of Nature; so we are not
destitute of proofs both from Reason and Scripture for the defense of the
Negative. But this is not that which I am concerned in, for should the
approaching of God by Sacrifices be resolved into the Law of Nature, it does
not at all disserve us; for, as upon the one hand it does hence plainly follow
that the institution of them according to this Hypothesis is immediately derived
from God; He being as much the Author of the Law of Nature, as he is of any Law
prescribed to the world by supernatural Revelation: So it no ways follows upon
the other hand, that because the Law of Nature prescribes some parts of
Worship, that therefore it is the measure of all divine Worship.

The Second opinion is theirs, who deduce the Original of Sacrifices from the
voluntary choice of men: who by this arbitrary invention endeavor to express
the grateful resentments of their minds, for the obligations of Gods Love and
Bounty to them. Porphyrius, the only Pagan Philosopher who has designedly
handled the Original of Sacrifices, resolve's the first beginning and Rise of
them into the will and pleasure of men, who thereby intended to express their
thankfulness to God for the benefits He bestowed on them. As we (saye's he) by
some returns of bounty use to declare our gratitude for the kindnesses which
other men confer upon us, (...) ( i. e. (...)) (...); So ought we (says he) in
testimony of thankfulness to the Gods, to offer first fruits, to them. (...)
lib. 2. Grotius tell's us that many of the Jews were of this persuasion. Multi
Hebraei sentiunt sacrificia prius ab hominum ingenio excogitata, quam a Deo
jussa: lib. 5. de verit. Christ. Rel. Videatur etiam Seld. de jure nature. apud
Gent. lib. 3. cap. 8. Nor are they therein mistaken, for Abravanel assign's
this as the Reason of God's instituting Sacrifices, namely that the world being
accustomed to them, it had not been easy to have weaned them from them:
comment^ in Pentateuch. I have quoted these testimonies to show that they who
derive the Original of Sacrifices from the institution of God, are so far from
doing it because of the Authority of the Jews and Easterlings as a late Author
would persuade us def. and continuat, p. 426. That on the contrary the opinion
which himself embraces received its first countenance from them; And may
indeed be reckoned among the rest of the fables, of which they are impleadable
as the Authors. Of the same judgment were some of the ancient Fathers, as to
the Original of Sacrifices. (...): Chrysostom speaking of Abel; having (says
he) been taught by none, nor having any Law prescribed him, concerning the
offering of first fruits, of his own accord, moved only by the gratitude of a
thankful mind, he offered Sacrifice to God. (...). Of all those who
antecedently to the giving of the Law, sacrificed Beasts to God, no one did it
by a Divine command; though it be certain that God did both accept their
offering, and was well pleased with the offerers; in Resp. ad Orthodox. in
operibus Justini ad interrogatum 83. I need not add that the Socinians are
Universally of the same judgment, the Reason why they are so, being thoroughly
understood. Nor will I quote the testimonies which occur in Episcopius the
Arminian and others of his persuasion to the same purpose. For in matters of
this Nature naked testimonies signify only to tell us what men thought* and
ought to be of no further validity to engage our assent, than as they are
grounded on proofs and rational motives. Now when we weigh the grounds of this
opinion, we meet not with the least thing that can sway a Rational mind to
submit to it.

They who make Sacrifices an arbitrary invention of men to testify their
Homage to God, have but two things to alledg in confirmation and proof of it.
(First,) That Divine Worship being a Dictate of Humane Nature, and it being
agreeable to the Reason of mankind to express their sense of this Duty by
outward Rites and significations* there could be no symbol more natural and
obvious to the minds of men, whereby to signify their Homage and Thankfulness
to the Author of all their happiness, than by presenting him with some of the
choycest portions of his own gifts in acknowledgment of that bounty and
providence that had bestowed them, Def. and Contin. p. 421. For Answer, I
readily grant it to be a Dictate of Humane Nature, that God ought to be
Worshipped; And I withal acknowledge that it is agreeable to the Reason and
Sense of mankind to express their sense of this duty by outward Rites and
Significations; nor have any supposed Thoughts, Words, and Gestures to be alone
a sufficient expression of that Homage we owe to God. But two things I deny
(1.) that precluding supernatural Revelation, mankind (since the fall) have had
any sufficient assurance that God would accept any Homage and Service from them
at all. The principles on which that supposition is raised, are but two, and
both of them unable to bear that structure that is built upon them. The one is
the consideration of the Benefits which the divine Bounty confers on us; but
these being blended and outweighed with so many calamities, with which our
lives are attended, and there being other ends besides the ascertaining his
complacency in us, and our performances, for which God in his Wisdom might
confer them, can give us no assurance, either of the acceptance of our persons
or services. The other is the consideration of the Divine Goodness; But the
consideration of his Justice being as ponderous to the contrary, this is as
inept to beget an assurance of our acceptance with God as the former.
Conscience through being guilty, being also suspicious, will hinder us in our
expecting any thing from the Divine Goodness, by continually objecting his
justice to us. But supposing we were sufficiently furnished with Notices of the
Divine placability, and that he will accept a Homage from us; yet it still
remains to be proved, that precluding a supernatural Revelation we have any
rational ground of belief that he will approve our manner of approach to him by
Sacrifices. I know no perfection in the Divine Being to which they are
Naturally suited; It is true I find a Late Author insinuating that the Religion
of Sacrifices flows from the Nature and the Attributes of God, requiring no
other discovery than the Light, and no other determination than the choice of
natural Reason, def. and continuat. p. 427, 428. But I would fain know what
property in the Divine Nature, the Religion of Sacrifices flows from. God is
not capable of being fed or refreshed by the scent and smoke of them. (...):
lib. 2. Sect. 24.
Indeed Porphyry tells us that a great many thought so, but I am sure it was a
most foolish thought. And besides, whatever flows from the Divine Nature and
the Attributes of God, the obligation to it is indissoluble, nor can we be
superceded the performance of it. And by consequence the Worshipping of God by
Sacrifices should both have obliged mankind in the state of innocence, and
does still indispensably oblige us: Nor can the Christian Institution vacate
any Duty that flows from the Nature of God.

Indeed the mysterious and gracious Counsels of Gods will in reference to our
recovery from Wrath by the Sacrifice of his Son, which he designed the bringing
into light and the giving the world instruction about by this Medium, render
our being found in this Method of address to God, while the end proposed in it
continued, very rational and justifiable; but abstracting from that, the mind
of man can not entertain a more silly and ludicrous thought, than that we
should thereby honor God in a due and suitable way. That we should adore and
magnify the Goodness and bounty of God in all the benefits we partake of; and
that we should use them soberly and discreetly improving them into motives of
cheerfulness, humility and advantages of service both in communicating to the
wants of others, and being the more alacrous in obedience our selves, has the
authorisation of Reason for it, and becomes that habitude we stand in to God as
Rational Creatures: But to reckon that the presenting God with slaughtered
Animals, is the most natural Symptom of Homage that Rational Creatures can
express their thankfulness to him by, Naturalis Ratio si recta esset sciret
De^^ t^libus non indigere, neque ea a nobis requirere, R^vet. in cap. 4. Genesis
Exercit. 22.

Def. and contin. p. 431


I account it a sentiment only fit for them who never duly meditated what God
is. And in my conceit, the missing of such an invention would have been so far
from being flat stupidity that it would have argued a mind pregnant with
generous thoughts of God.

The Second thing produced in proof that Sacrifices took their beginning from
Humane Agreement, is because there appears not any shadow of command for them,
when they were first practiced* and to say that the expression of worship by
Sacrifices was commanded, though ^ is no where Recorded, is to take the liberty
of saying any thing without proof or evidence. Eccl. Polit. p. 101. v. def. and
contin. p. 428. To this I reply that it is not needful that every command
relating to institutions be expressly and in terminis recorded, it is enough that
it be colligible from the Scripture. I know no Logic that will allow the
sequel, That because the command of a thing is not registered in so many words,
that therefore the thing it self is not of Divine Original. The Reverend
Person, who reviewed and animadverted on the Ecclesiastical Polity told him,
that there was an Institution for the offering and burning Incense only with
sacred fire taken from the Altar, and that the Priests were consumed with fire
from before the Lord for the neglect of it: Yet there is no express command in
the whole Scripture where that Institution is in terminis Recorded, p. 272.
This our late Author takes no Notice of in his Def. and Contin. but passes it
in deep silence, as he does all the most material things in the said Reply. I
shall only subjoyn one instance more to the same purpose. The Observation of
the Christian or First day-Sabbath, will be allowed I suppose to have a Warrant
in the Revelation of the Word, yet there is not in the whole Gospel a Command
in express Terms for the keeping of it. There is indeed a precept in the
Decalogue for the observance of one day in Seven as a Holy Sabbath to the Lord;
and there is an express determination founded on Gods Resting from his Works,
for the keeping the last day of the Hebdomadal Revolution during the Old
Testament Economy, as a day of Sacred Rest. There are also various Arguments
taken from the Creation of all things in and by Christ; his Finishing and
Resting from all the Works of the New Creation in and by his Resurrection; his
declaring that a Day of Rest accommodated to his own ceasing from his Works,
remains now for Believers: Together with the Apostolical observation of the
First Day of the week as a Sabbath to the Lord; God's blessing his People in
their attendance on him from time to time on that Day; John Baptising it with
the Name of (...), the Lord's Day, etc. All which do evince the change of the
Day from the Seventh unto the First, to be of Heavenly Original, and founded in
Divine Authority: Yet there is not a Command (...) in the whole Sacred Code and
Register for it. In a matter of so great antiquity as Sacrifices when the Lord
instructed his Church by Dreams, Visions, mental Impressions, audible voice,
etc. To affirm that there was no Divine Command for the Religion of Sacrifices,
because the Command is not expressly delivered, is a very unwary and bold
assertion. It is enough for us if we can demonstrate that they acted not herein
without a Divine Warrant, though we cannot assign the manner in which it was
prescribed; and this we hope to make good to the satisfaction of all sober
inquirers, but to satisfy Scepticks and prejudiced persons who have no mind to
be convinced, is more than any man can undertake.

The third Opinion then concerning the Original of Sacrifices, is theirs who
deduce them from the Institution of God himself. And as this is the common
sentiment of Protestant Divines, so it is attended with as much evidence as the
Nature of a Thing at so great a distance does require. The First Argument in
confirmation of the Divine institution of Sacrifices may be fetched from the
Antediluvian distinction of clean and unclean Animals, Genesis 7.2. Of every clean
Beast thou shall take to thee by sevens, the Male and his Female; and of Beasts
that are not clean by two, Vid. Rivet. in Genesis 8. Exercitat. 55.
the Male and his Female. This distinction can have no other foundation, but
that some Animals were allowed Sacrifices, others not. Reason cannot instruct
us in the putting a difference in this particular, between one kind of Beasts
and another. Hence the Heathen, who herein pursued the conduct of Natural
Light, See Sa^bert. de Sacrific. cap. 23.
offered promiscuously of all sorts, Horses, Mules, Camels, Asses, Dogs, yea
Mice, etc. were all one to them in this matter, as other Brutes, yea Swine were
preferred to Oxen and Sheep.

-- Prima putatur
Ovid. lib. 15. Metam. Hostia sus meruisse mori. --
Prima Ceres avidae gavisa est sanguine porcae
Ulta suas merita coede nocentis opes.
Id. lib. 1. Fast. We have ground then to conceive that whence the Patriarchs
had their light as to the Species and kind of Creatures which they were to
offer, that thence also they derived the institution of Sacrifices themselves.
Nor is there any cause to conecture that God having left the great and material
part of his Worship to their discretion, should confine them in minu^^ things,
or interpose in their direction about the Species of Creatures they were to
present him. That Discretion, Wisdom, and Light which was able to instruct
them that the best Medium of honoring God, was by the Sacrifice of Animals to
Him, was also able to tell them what kind of Animals he would accept at their
hands. The second Argument for the Divine Institution of Sacrifices, may be
taken from the consideration of their acceptance with God. And this may be
prosecuted (1) with respect to the acceptance that the Offerers promised
themselves with the Lord in and by them; or (2) with respect to their being
(...) a sweet savor, or an odor of sweetness unto the Lord. (1.) It Is certain
that mankind proposed to themselves acceptance with God in and by them; and
without such a persuasion they would never have engaged in the performance of
them. Now this they could have no indubitable certainty of, without a
supernatural revelation: For who has known the mind of the Lord, Romans 11.34.
Nor was it enough (as a late Author would make us believe, Eccl. Polit. p.
100.) to ascertain the Lords being well pleased with them, because they
presented him with a portion of the best and most precious things they had. For
First; This could give them no assurance that the offering these things by
destroying them, would be acceptable. There being other ways in which they
might be improved to his honor, and that more congruously to the Nature of God,
and the Relation of Rational Creatures which we stood in to him. Secondly, by a
parity of Reason, they should have offered themselves in the same manner, being
as much indebted to God for their own Beings, as for any other fruits of his
Bounty. And as I question not but that Humane Sacrifices entered in a great
measure at this Door, so I know no Reason if there be any solidity in this
plea, but that they are justifiable by the same pretense. We cannot but
apprehend that, whenever any Religious action is to be performed, the mind will
be in suspense whether it ought to be done or not. Let us then suppose the
first commencers of address to God by Sacrifice, deliberating what they were to
do. The Reasons in this case influencing their minds, behoved either to leave
them in suspense about it; and if so, they ought wholly to have forborne it, it
being better to forbear a thing out of fear to offend God, than to put it to
the chance of performing a thing which possibly may be well-pleasing to him.
Quod dubitas ne fecer^s is an unquestionable axiom. Or the Reasons impeaching
the thing as bad were the more ponderous; and if so, then granting the thing
never so excellent in it self, it were a crime to do it. For to commit what we
judge offensive to the Deity, tramples as much on the Respect we owe to God, as
if the thing it self were in the number of what is most detestable to him. He
that acts in defiance of his Conscience, casts off all Reverence of God whose
Deputy Conscience is* (...); Its all one whether things be really Evil, or only
appear so, for neither of them are to be done, says Arist. Eth. lib. 4. cap.
9. Or lastly, the motives inducing to believe the thing good, were more
numerous and weighty than the contrary: But even in this case it were
impossible to act without exposing themselves to irremediable perplexities. For
where there is not a convincing certainty that the thing performed is good,
which without an Institution they could never have, every sinister accident
afterward accosting them, would revive a suspicion in them that they had
offended, and cause them to repent of what they had done with incredible
remorse and regret. (2.) Let us consider Sacrifices not so much with respect to
that acceptance which men promised themselves in and by them, as with regard to
what God declares they were, viz. an Odor of sweetness unto him. And if we
will confine our selves here to the determination of the Scripture, I affirm,
had Humane agreement been the foundation of their performance, this they could
never have been. The reason of my assertion is this, because I find God
censuring the arbitrary inventions of men in worship with the brand of (...)
Will Worship, Col. 22.3. (...) est cultus seu modus colendi Deum arbitrio
humano, sine Dei praecepto suscep^us, Rivet in Exodus 20, V^x Gr^ca it^^ so^at,
q^asi quis dicat, spont^nea Religio, cum quis ul^ro sibi f^^git Religi^^em,
^rasm* in. Coloss. 2.23. Paulus Traditiones humanas (...) appellat, quasi
f^ctas ex cujusque arbitr^^^ religionis and piet^^is Regulas, Dan, Isag. Christ.
And (...) Superstition, Acts 25.19. Yea, when the worship was justly
reproveable for some intrinsical evil, either in the matter or form of it, or
in both; yet God in reproving it, takes no notice of either of these, but
insisted only upon this, that he commanded it not, see Jer. 7.31. and 32.35.
Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3. All which seem abundantly to witness that worship of humane
device or contrivement is of an unpleasing resentment with God; and by
consequence, the Religion of Sacrifices being of a sweet savor unto the Lord,
another original must be assigned it than men's own device and choice. The Third
Argument in proof of the Divine Institution of Sacrifices, may be fetched from
the consideration of that peace, welfare, inward consolation, etc. which in the
adoration of God by the offering of Sacrifices, all mankkind, especially the
Patriarchs proposed to themselves. There is in all men a Natural Consciousness
of sin, with an apprehension of punishment and Vengeance due for it. Hereupon
in all their addresses to the Deity, they endeavored the procuring the pardon
of sin, and peace with God, and the obtaining comfort in their own Consciences.
This must be at least the subordinate end of the whole Religion of Sinners; nor
otherwise do they act rationally with respect to the estate they know
themselves in. Now they must promise themselves the attainment of these things,
either in the virtue of the Action it self, or else through the application of
some promise of God entitling them to such mercies upon a due performance of
such services. If the Latter, then Sacrifices must necessarily be of a Heavenly
Original. For where the Thing signified depends upon the alone Will and
Pleasure of God, there the Symbol and sign of it depends upon his sole Will and
Institution also. Though the sign materially may have a Being in Nature, yet
formally considered as it is the representation of such a gracious design, and
of such a voluntary and free benefit; it is perfect nonsense to imagine that
Natural Light can give any direction about it. But if they expected pardon of
sin, and peace with God, and in their own Consciences from the bare Action it
self, and in the virtue of the mere offering; They did that (1) which God
expressly declares his abhorrence of. The Lord upon all occasions testifies his
Detestation of Sacrifices, when Trusted to for Reconciliation and Remission of
sin, Psalm. 40.6. and 50.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Mic. 6.6, 7. Heb. 10.1, 2, 3* 4. (2.)
They acted repugnantly to Natural Light. Our Reason how much soever
distempered, clouded, weakened, can still instruct us that the blood of sheep or
Oxen is too mean a trifle to satisfy for an offense against God. He has
indeed mean thoughts both of God and Sin, who thinks that the Justice of God
can be attoned, or the guilt of Sin expiated by the blood of a Calf or Lamb.
What either proportion or Relation is there betwixt Men and Beasts, that the
Lives of the One should commute for the Lives of the Other! Men might sin at an
easy rate, could the Death of a brute Animal satisfy for the offense. He is
generally supposed to have been a Heathen, however he clothes himself with the
Name of one, that said; Quum sis ipse nocens moritur cur victims prote?
Cato lib. 4. distich. 5. Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem*
Ne credas placare Deum cum c^de litatur.
a part of the 39 did:

The Fourth Argument in justification of our assertion concerning the Rise of
Sacrifices from the Institution of God, I take from that of the Apostle Heb.
11.4 By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain etc.
Abel and Cain may be reckoned among the First that made their approach to God
by Sacrifice: At least the first Notice we have of applying to God by this
Medium of Worship is in them. And the Reason here a^^igned by the Holy Ghost,
why the Lord when he rejected the Sacrifice of Cain had regard to that of Abel,
is, because Abel offered his Sacrifice by Faith. If we can then evince that the
Faith here spoken of had respect unto the Testimony, Revealing, Commanding and
Promising to accept them in that way of Homage and address; we shall in so
doing, fully demonstrate that Sacrifices owe not their rise to Humane choice,
but that they began upon the Warrant of a Divine Institution and precept. This
we shall therefore attempt to make good by two Topics. First, The Faith
attributed to Abel, from which he receives the testimony of having offered an
acceptable Sacrifice to God; must be of such a Nature and kind to which the
Definition of Faith verse 1. may agree. The Apostles Description of Faith in
the first verse, is, that which he plainly intends for the Regulation of the
several Instances of it in the whole ensuing part of the chapter. Let us view
then the definition of Faith there laid down, and we shall find it to be (...).
(...). By (...) we may either understand Expectation according to that of the
Seventy Psalm. 39.7. (...). Expectatio mea in te est; And the^ the sense will
be, that faith is the expectation of things hoped for, which sounds better than
our translation by Substance. Or we may render it Confidence agreeably to the
import of the word 2 Cor. 9.4. 2 Cor. 11.17. Heb. 3.14. And then the meaning
will be, that Faith is the Confidence of things hoped for. It is much at one
which of these significations we here admit, either of them will render the
definition of Faith clear and congruous: Whereas o^ rendering it by Substance,
makes it both obscure and harsh. (...) Evidence, Argument, convincing
demonstration as Hi^rome renders it: Certa ac clara intuitio, ^ sure and clear
evidence (...) of things not seen, not discernable either by sense or Reason:
Things out of the view of whatever is natural in us. Now this definition is
that which must Regulate every Instance of Faith in the whole Chapter; and by
consequence every act ascribed to it, must have a Revelation, Command or
promise of God for its foundation, otherwise it should not be (...), which the
Apostle expressly affirms it to be. (2.) The Faith ascribed to Abel is of the
same Nature and kind with the Faith of others whom the Apostle here mentions.
Whereas then the Faith of every other Worthy recorded in the Chapter, does
infallibly suppose a Divine Revelation as that on which it is bottomed, and by
which it is warranted; If we will speak coherently, we must likewise acknowledge
that Abels Faith had the same Authority to rest on. Not only the tenor of the
Apostles whole discourse induces us to this belief, but we have a plain
testimony, verse 39. to indubitate it to us, All these having obtained a good
Report through Faith, received not the promise. The same kind of Faith is
predicated of all. And by their not receiving the actual exhibition of the
thing promised, which is the meaning of (...), is plainly intimated that they
had a Divine Command or Promise to rest on in all these exercises of Faith
there celebrated. A fifth Argument in Confirmation of the Divine Original of
Sacrifices might be taken from the consideration, that every Priest ought to be
ordained of God, and that no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that
is called of God, Heb. 5.1.4. and consequently that the Patriarchs were
authorized of God, otherwise they had never assumed the Sacerdotal Office,
which they did by their offering Sacrifices, these two being Relates. But I
find I have been already too prolix upon this head, and they who can withstand
the force of the foregoing Arguments, are not like to be influenced by any
thing I am further able to subjoyne.

. 5. We have already shown that the whole of Obedience which we owe to God,
belongs either to Worship or Manners: We have also declared the insufficiency
of Natural Light for the Regulating of Worship. Our next task is to demonstrate
the defectiveness of it as to the conduct of Manners. Manners are either such
Duties as in themselves are acceptable and good, or such as derive all their
goodness from a Command; with respect to the first, revealed Laws are only
declarative of the goodness of the Duty; The Absolute Bonity of it having an
antecedent foundation in the Nature of God, the Nature of man, and the Relation
that man stands in to God. But with reference to the second, supernatural Law
is constitutive of the goodness of the Duty: There being nothing in the thing
it self previous to the Command rendering it so: And here though obedience be a
Moral Duty, yet the Law prescribing it is not properly Moral Law. For the
Morality of Obedience arises not from the Nature of the Command, but from the
Relation we stand in to God, and the Dependence we have on him; whereas the
Morality of Law has its Reason in the Nature of God, and the congruity or
incongruity of things enjoined or forbidden, to it. That there are acts of
Obedience distinct from Natural Duties, which yet are not properly acts of
Worship, might be demonstrated by innumerable instances. Of this kind there are
several Duties founded in personal commands, whereby none were obliged, but
only they to whom they were immediately given. Such was the Duty of Abraham's
leaving his Fathers House, being built on a precept wherein he only was
concerned. The like may be said of the Obligation laid on the young man in the
Gospel of selling all that he had, etc. Of this sort also there are several
Duties arising from Divine Laws which concerned only a particular Nation, and
yet emerged not from Laws properly Ritual. Of which number we may reckon the
Obligations proceeding from the Judicials given to the Jews, at least where the
Reason of them was not Natural Equity. By these Laws they came under
Obligations that the rest of mankind were not concerned in. Yea they became
bound to some things which setting aside the positive Law of God, could not
have been lawfully done; and which at this day no Nation or Person can practice
with Innocence, viz. The Marrying the Widow of a Brother, dead without Issue.
Such Laws Gods Dominion over all men as his Creatures, authoriseth him to make,
and that as a proof of his own absolute Prerogative, and for trial of his
Creatures obedience. Nor did God ever leave man since he first Created him
singly to the Law of Nature for the payment of that Homage he owes him; but
even to Adam in Innocence he thought fit to give a positive Law; a Law, which
for the matter of it, had no foundation at all in Man's Nature; further than
that he was obliged by his Nature to do whatsoever God enjoined him. Now these
Laws having their foundation in Institution, not in Nature: The Reason of them
being not so much the Holiness of God, as his Sovereignty; Natural Light can no
ways be supposed a due measure of them, nor able to instruct about them. All
that Obedience that resolves into the Will of God, must suppose Revelation in
that nothing else can discover its Obligation to mankind; says a late Author,
Def. and continuat. p. 427. How consistently to himself in other places, where
he tells that all Religion consists in nothing else but the practice of Virtue;
and that the practice of Virtue consists in living suitably to the dictates of
Reason and Nature; I leave to himself to declare. That there are positive Laws
of God now in being, and that in the virtue of them, we are under Obligation to
several Duties: I shall, God willing, evince when I come to show the
insufficiency of the Law of Nature as it is Objective in the Decalogue, as to
being the measure of the whole Obedience we owe to God.

. 6. That there are Natural Laws as well as positive; and that the latter are
but accessions to the former, we have elsewhere demonstrated. Now these Laws
being styled Natural, non respectu Objecti, not because of their object, many
of the Duties we are under the Sanction of by them referring immediately to God;
but respectu principii and medii per quod cognoscimus, because communicated to
our Nature, and cognoscible by Natural Light. If the Light of Nature alone be
of significancy in any thing, it is here. And indeed the Writings of Heathen
Philosophers such as Aristotle, Plato, Epictetus, Seneca, Plutarch, Cicero,
Hierocles, Plotinus, etc. The Laws of Pagan Commonwealths, especially the
Republics of Greece and Rome; the virtuous actions of persons not enlightened
by Revelation, of all ranks and qualities, such as Socrates, Aristides,
Ph^cion, Cato, and many others not easy to be recounted, show that men left to
the mere conduct of Natural Light can attain a better insight into the Duties
of Nature, than of Religion, and know more of Virtue than of Piety. For, as
both Amyrald and Sir Charles Wolseley, besides others, observe, Cicero wrote to
better purpose in his books de officiis, than he did in those de Natura Deorum.
Yea, even the Platonists, the great Refiners of Religious Ceremonies, who in
stead of obscene and barbarous usages, introduced civil and modest Rites;
discoursed much better of Virtue than Divinity. Their Sentiments for the
conduct of conservation being for the most part Rational and Generous, whereas
their Theological Notions are either obscure, uncertain, or romantic. If we be
then able to prove that Natural Light, or the Law of Nature as it is subjective
in man since the Fall, is no sufficient measure of Moral Duties, or of those
Duties we are under the Sanction of by the Law of Creation, we shall get one
step farther in our design; namely, that Natural Light is a very inadaequate
measure of Religion.

In confirmation of this, I might in the first place take notice; how the great
pretenders to the conduct of Reason prevaricated in all those prime Laws of
Nature which Relate to the Unity of the Godhead. Though not only the Being,
but the Unity of the Divine Nature be witnessed to by every man's Reason, and we
need only exercise our faculties against Polytheism as well as Atheism: Yet
the Universality of mankind, setting aside those who had the benefit of a
supernatural Revelation, not only sunk into the belief and adoration of a
plurality of Gods; but into the worshipping those for Gods, whom to acknowledge
for such is more irrational than to believe that there is none at all. There
was scarcely any thing animate or inanimate, but by some or other became
deified.

Quicquid Humus, Pelagus, Caelum, mirabile gignunt,
Id dixere Deos, Colles, Freta, Flumina, Flammas.
Aurel. lib. 1. contr. Symm. Whom one Nation adored for God, another derided
and treated as a brutish and senseless Creature.

(...);
(...),
(...).
-- (...)*
Thou adorest a Beast, but I Sacrifice it. Thou countest an E^l a Deity, but I
esteem it dainty food. Thou worship'st a Dog, but I beat him, Athen. Deipnos.
lib. 7. Quis nescit Volusi Bythinice, qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colit? Crocodilon adorat
Pars hac; illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin.
^ffigies sacri ni^et aur^a Cercopitheci,
Istic Aelur^s, hic piscem fluminis, illic
Oppida tota canem Venerantur. --
P^rrum ^c cepe nef^s violare ac fr^ngere morsu:
O Sanctas gentes quibus h^c n^sc^ntur in in hortis
Numina! etc. --
Juven. Satyr. 15. Thus Rendered by Sir Robert Stapleton. Bythinicus, who knows
not what portents
Mad Egypt deifies? this part presents
Devotion to the Crocodile; in that
Ibis, with Serpents gorged is trembled at.
The long-tayl'd Monkey's golden form shines there:
There Seafish, River-fish is worshipped here.
Whole Cities to the Hound, their prayers address.
To strike a Leek, or Onion with the edge
of the presumptuous teeth is Sacrilege.
O Blessed people, in whose Gardens spring
Your Gods. --
The great Gods whom they adored, they could tell a thousand debaucheries of
(...)*

Hence many of them from the example of their Gods, encouraged themselves in
all kind of Villainy. Eg^ homuncio id non facerem, shall not I do what Jupiter
did, says the fellow in Terence. Hence En^ius brings in Africanus boasting; Si
fas caedendo caelestia scandere cuiquam est,
M^ soli caeli maxima porta patet.
If killing can give title to the sky,
No man bids fairer for that place than I.
Others of them were hereby influenced to mock at all Religion: Vana
superstitio, Dea sola in pectore virtus.

And indeed as Arn^bius says, Recti^s multo est Deos esse non credere, quam
esse illos ^^les: It is much more Rational to believe that there are no Gods at
all, than that they are such as they proclaym'd them, vid. Plutarch. (...). Its
but to consult the Apostle, Romans 1.23. And he will inform us what excellent
Beings they were which men left to the guidance of depraved and darkened Reason
owned and worshipped for Gods. Nor do I question but that several persons
branded of old with the name of Atheists, were only contemners of the Gods of
their Countrymen; or at least it was the ill opinion they had of their own
Gods which led them to a total denial of the Deity; for being assured that they
were none, and being at a loss to substitute the True One in their Room, they
sunk into an imagination that there was none at all. Though I do not impeach
Natural Light as altogether insufficient to have instructed them better,
because herein they crossed the dictates of the Rational faculty, and
stupendiously prevaricated in what they might have known; yet it demonstrates
how inadaequate a Rule it is of the duties we were obliged to by the Law of
C^^ation, being inefficacious to regulate the great pretenders to the guidance
of it, in things that lay plainest before it. And indeed had not God disabused
the World by Revelation, we have ground to think that mankind, notwithstanding
the faculty of Reason, would have still persevered in these corrupt opinions.

For the Eviction of the ineptitude of Natural Light to Regulate us in the
Duties we are under the Sanction of, by the Law of Creation, I might in the
second place observe the degeneracy of men left to the guidance of Reason, in
the Matter of Worship, no less than in the Object of it. Nor shall I here
accuse them for prevarication in what they could not know, but for shameful
defection in what they might. Though Reason could not tell them by what Media
of Worship God would be honored, yet it could in great measure have told them
by what he would not. Ha^ they but consulted the Oracle in their ow^ breast^,
it might have resolved them tha^ God would not be served by such obsce^^ Rites,
as such who were sober among themselves were ashamed to be present a^ which
occasioned the Poet to say of Cat^.

Cur in Theatrum Cato severe venisti?
An ideo tantum vener as ut exires?
Mart. Epigram. lib. 1. Ep. 1. Suppose it were left to the discretion of men to
agree about the Sacra, by which they were to worship God; and suppose also it
were left to their liberty, that every different Nation might have its distinct
and different Ceremonies of Worship* yet there are still fundamental Laws of
Reason, to which if the Media and Rites of worship be not so exactly consonant,
yet they ought not to be repugnant to them. The consideration of the Nature of
God, the Relation that one man stands in to another, was enough to have
instructed the World, that Humane Victimes were so far from being well-pleasing
to God, that they were a great provocation to him. And yet this (...) prevailed
universally for a long time in the World. Not only the Scythians, Phenicians,
Carthaginians, and other less civilized Nations; but the Grecians and Romans
were immersed in the guilt of offering Humane Sacrifices. See Eusebius. Prepar.
Evangel. lib. 4. Dr. Owen 's Diatrib. de justit. Divin. cap. 4. and de Not.
Ort. etc. Theolog. etc. lib. 5. cap. 7. Saubert. de Sacrif. cap. 21. Grot. de
verit. Relig. Christ. lib. 2. I confess I do not in this particular so much
complain of their want of means of knowing better, as of their supineness and
sloth in not exercising their faculties to enquire into these impieties.
However this is enough to declare that Reason is a very lubricous, uncertain
and fallacious Rule of the Obedience we owe to God by the Law of Nature, when
it has not secured the Magnifiers and Courters of it from so unnatural
abominations. Yea, even those who in their private thoughts detested those
salvage Methods and Media of approach to God, do yet virtually commend them
while they advise every man to conform to the Rites and Religion of his own
Country, which I am sure the very best of them did: (...); Epict. Enchir. cap.
38.

In Justification of the former Assertion concerning the defectiveness of
Natural Light to Regulate the Obedience we owe to God by the Law of Creation. I
might in the third place, insist on the infidelity o^ some, and scepticalness
of other of the Philosophers about a future Life and State* It is certain that
without a persuasion o^ these things, we cannot expect that me^ should either
pursue Virtue, or avoid Vice. The Doctrines of an Immortality and Future Estate
are so necessarily presupposed to the practice of Virtue, that he who i^ not
assured of the former, will scarcely be ever found in an exercise of the
latter. Eradicate once out of the minds of men the belief of a future
existence, a judgment to come, and the persuasion of rewards and punishments,
and the issue will be that which both the Prophet and Apostle mentions; Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, Isa. 22.13. 1 Cor. 15.32. It will be
hard to find any that will avoid fleshly gratifications, who disbelieve an
existence after death. I cannot better express the result of such an opinion
than in the words of some of themselves.

Vivamus m^a Lesbia atque amemus;
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis h^ra,
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
Catul. Indulge genio, carpamus dulcia --
-- Cinis and Manes and fabula fies;
Pers. If we enquire then into the opinions of those who have given the best
attendance to Reason for the direction of manners: We find some in the total
disbelief of a future state, such were Epicurus, Pliny, Str^bo, and both the
most, and the chiefest of their Poets, who I am sure had a greater influence
upon the minds and lives of the vulgar, than the Philosophers had. Others speak
ambiguously and doubtfully of it: Aristotle, by what we can collect from his
writings, was hugely uncertain about it; Socrates, if we may believe Plato,
knew not how to be confident of it: Nor could Cicero get any farther, but that
he judged it the more probable opinion. And they who seem to be most positive
concerning it, describe the Rewards and Punishments of that future state under
such silly and wild Notions, as could have no great influence upon men's lives.
Their Infernal Regions were not very likely to disengage men from the pleasures
of Animal life; nor their Elysia^ Fields to prevail with them to a course of
mortification. And indeed though every man's Reason may tell him that there is
some future condition abiding us beyond this world; yet such a knowledge as may
indubitate us concerning it, and give us such an acquaintance with the Nature
and quality of the Rewards and Punishments of it, as may make us contemn the
pleasures of life, choose Virtue when we see it encompassed with the greatest
calamities, and avoid evil when we find prosperity attending it; Reason could
never have helped us to. But for this we are obliged to the Gospel, in which
Life and Immortality are brought to light, 2 Timothy 1.10.

I shall in the fourth place endeavor to show the insufficiency of Natural
Light, as to the being the measure of the whole obedience we owe to God,
according to the Law of Creation. By demonstrating its defectiveness in
conducting the Heathen world in things o^ the strictest and plainest Morality.
This we shall do by producing a few examples wherein their most renowned
Legislators, and famousest Philosophers have transgressed not only in the
practick, but mistook in the Theory of the most obvious Duties of Moral Good
and Evil. The Lacedaemonians (as I intimated before) not only allowed but
commended Theft. The Cyprians permitted young women to prostitute their bodies
for the raising themselves portions. The Cretians made a Law to countenance
Sodomie, nor does Aristotle (mentioning it) discommend it. The Romans gave
husbands liberty to kill their wives upon very frivolous occasions. And allowed
Creditors not only to slay their Debtors, but to Torment them to death when
they could not pay them. The Persians authorized Fathers to marry their own
Daughters, and Mothers their Sons. Both the Egyptians and the Athenians made it
lawful for Brothers to match with their Sisters. The Laws of the B^rbiscae
commanded the Sons to knock their Fathers on the head when they came to Dotage.
Hardly any Nation but allowed Robbery out of their own territories to be
lawful. Among some of the Indians their Princes are not permitted the conjugal
embraces of their wifes, till their Priests have deflowred them. Plato was for
establishing a community of women in his Commonwealth. Both Socrates and Cato
could make a trade of their wifes chastity, and let them out for gain and
profit. Aristotle and Cicero besides several others recommend Revenge not only
as just and lawful, but as generous and noble. The Stoics overthrew true
patience which consist's in an humble acquiescence in the will of God, by
stating it in an unpracticable Apathie. For Patience lies not in confronting
calamities and sinister accidents by a wilful stupidity; but in deeply sensing
them, yet bearing them with a due Reverence and submission to the Sovereignty
and wisdom of God who sends and order's them. The Foundations on which their
indifferency as to all foreign contingencies, and seeming bravery under the
most importunate evils bore; viz. that they are (...) not within the confines
of our power, and that murmr at them would be unprofitable; are too weak for
the structure of true patience to be raised on. For it is not enough that we do
not repine, because it will not avail us; but we are to forbear murmuring
because it is unlawful. Nor is it sufficient to justify submission, because
the things are beyond our power to alter, but we ought to acquiesce in them,
because they are the effects of a righteous providence, and carry in them a
design of Love and Grace, if we do not defeat them. Humility, one of the most
excellent and useful virtues, has not so much as a Room in all the Ethics of
the Philosophers: yea pride is recommended amongst their chiefest virtues. The
consideration of the infinite perfections of the first Being, and our
dependence on him both as to life and all the benefits of it, should make us
contract and shrink into nothing whenever we compare our selves with God.
Much more should the consideration of sin and guilt, familiarize us to
self-abasement and prostration. But alas! As man in general never more esteemed
himself, than since he was miserable: So they that have least to be proud of,
are most conceited. Of all men the Philosophers abounded in self-esteem and
boasting, and that not only to a degree of immodesty, but impudence. As if it
had not been enough for the Beggarly Stoic to vaunt himself the only Rich Man,
and that he alone was noble, he did not only vie perfection with God, but
preferred himself before him. The Indian Brachmans vouched themselves for Gods;
Yea the very Academicks who professed they knew nothing; and the Cynicks who
made it a great part of their business to deride the pride of others, abounded
in self-esteem. To this Pride which universally possessed them, I judge two
things to have contributed exceedingly. (1) An apprehension they were imbued
with, that the soul is a portion of the Deity (...), a piece clipped of from God,
as Phil^ Platonising styles it. (...), as An^toninus call's it, lib. 5. 27.
(...) a Divine particle, idem lib. 2. (...) a part of God, Epict. Divinae
particulae aur^, Horat. Sermon. lib. 2. And it was no question with respect to
this, that Cicero both i^ his Tusculan questions, and in his Book de Somn.
Scip. says, Deum scito te esse; Know thy self to be a God. A Second thing that
contributed to it, were the wicked and ridiculous stories which went concerning
the Gods whom they did adore: and indeed who would not prefer himself before a
Letcherous Jupiter, a Thievish Mercury, a Drunken Bacchus, or a Bloody Mars
etc. The Natural issue of worshipping such Gods was either to grow vile in
imitation of them; or to slight and detest them, as practicing that which every
man should be ashamed of. Shall I add in the next place, that the Authority of
Princes stood upon very unsafe terms, if the Obedience of Subjects were to be
Regulated by the opinions of Philosophers. There is no^ an assassination of any
man in power, but what may be justified by examples commended in the most
renowned Pagan writers. What Cicero who was no puny either in learning or
Morality plead's in justification of Brutus and Cassius for killing Caesar, may
serve to Authorize the Murder of any Magistrate, if the Actors can but
persuade themselves to call him Tyrant. Had we nothing to conduct us in our
Obedience and Loyalty, but the sentiments of Philosophers, no Prince could be
secure either of his life or dignity. The last Instance wherein the
Philosophers miserably prevaricated in a Matter of plain Morality, that I shall
mention, is, their allowing an (...) or (...), Men inflicting violent hands on
themselves. Holding our lives of God we are accountable to him for them; nor
can any be their own executioners without offending both against the
Commonwealth of which we are members, and invading the jurisdiction which
belongs to God, who only has power to dispose of us. I acknowledge that some of
them were better illuminated in this matter than others. Hence that of Plato
(...); The Soul is in the body as Soldiers in a garrison, from whence they may
not withdraw or fly without his order and direction that placed them there; in
Phaedon. Vetat Dominans in nobis Deus, injussu hin^ nos suo discedere; Cicer.
Tuscul. lib. 1. Therefore Aristotle says well, (...); To choose death to avoid
penury or Love or any thing that is calamitous, i^ not the part of a stout man
but of a coward; Eth. lib. 3. cap. 7. But the Stoics who of all the
Philosophers were the most renowned Moralists, held it not only lawful but an
act of the highest fortitude to redeem themselves from the misery of life by
flying to death for shelter. Si necessitates ultim^ inciderint, exibit e vita,
and molestus sibi esse desinet; If miseries encompass thee, fly to death for
Sanctuary: Sen. ^p. 17. Sapiens vivit quantum debet, non quantum potest: si
multa occurrant molesta, and tranquillitatem turbantia, se emittit, nec hoc
tantum in necessitate ultima facit, sed cum primum illi ceperit suspecta esse
fortuna. Nihil existimat sua refer ficiat finem, an accipiat; idem Epist. 70.
vid. Epist. 58.91.98. and M. Antonin. lib. 5.. 29. ac Epictet. lib. 1. cap. 29.
and lib. 2. cap. 16. Nor were their practices dissonant from their sentiments;
witness Democritus, Zeno, Cleanthes, Cato, Brutus, Cassius, etc. who all dipped
their hands in their own blood, acting therein both repugnantly to the instinct
of self-preservation all men are by Nature imbued with, and below that true
fortitude which all of them celebrated as a prime Virtue: For the
Epigrammatists censure of Fannius does perstringe them all alike.

Hostem cum fugeret se Fannius ipse peremit,
Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moriare mori?
Mart. By these few instances we may easily perceive what a miserable condition
the World had been in, even in reference to the most obvious duties of
Morality, had mankind been left to the sole conduct of Natural Light; and by
consequence that Humane Reason is not an adaequate Rule of Moral Virtue.

In further confirmation of the defectiveness of Natural Light for the
Regulatio^ of Moral Obedience, I shall in the fifth and last place observe, that
all who were under the conduct of mere Reason, mistook in the End of Obedience,
which is as much under the Sanction of Law, as the substance of Duty is. For as
Augustine says well* Noveris itaque non officiis, sed finibus (...) vitiis
discernendas esse virtutes; Virtues (...) not so much distinguished from Vices
by the entity of the act, as by the scope and intention of the agent; advers.
Julian. lib. 4. cap* 13. What Forms are in Natural Philosophy, that the End is
in Moral. A Respec^ to God specifies every Virtue and Duty^ and wherever he is
left out as the End, the Act is torn from its Moral Form. W^ might call it
Fortitude and Patience in C^^tili^e, that he could endure cold, hunger* and
much watchfulness to overthrow his Country, were not the End necessary to the
Moral denomination of every action. The first cause is the ultimate end of
every Being; of and through whom we are, to him we ought to be and act. Seeing
God is our Creator, Proprietor, Governor, and Happiness, all our actions ought
to be directed to the glorifying of him. Now where are any among the Heathen
Moralists, or among those that acted under the conduct of mere Reason, who
proposed as the end of their Actions the glory of God. Their opinions about the
Finis ultimus hominis, with reference to which Varro tells us there were 288
Sects of Philosophers, do abundantly evidence their faileur in this particular.
Some made Virtue subservient only to their own praise, applause and glory.
What the Poet says of Brutus's killing his own Sons, when they intended to
overthrow the liberty of their Country, Vicit amor patriae laudumque immensa
cupido; Is the most that can be pleaded as the aim of a great many of them.
Others pursued Virtue in order to pleasure, and only admired it on that
account. Now supposing the pleasures they proposed to themselves were not so
gross and sensual as is generally conceived, (though I know not how to acquit
the School of Epicurus in this matter, notwithstanding all the Apologies that
are made for them) yet their opinion is sufficiently culpable, in that they
confounded the intention and scope of the Agent, with the consequent of the
actio^ and made the Reward annexed by God (...) Virtue, to intercept the Glory
which in (...) their thoughts and deeds they should have endeavored to bring
to Him. Those who spoke most magnificently of Virtue* held it desirable only
for it self; affirming that the actions and offices of Virtue were to be
pursued merely for the beauty and honesty that essentially belonged to them ^
Interrogas quid petam ex virtute? ipsam^ nihil enim est melius; ipsa pretium
sui est^ Senec. de vit. beat. vid. etiam de Clement* cap. 1. and Epist. 113.
But first, it is (...) palpable contradiction that any action or habit should
be Morally beautiful, otherwise than as it respects God, whose Nature and Will
is the measure of all its Moral pulchritude; and therefore it ought to be
referred to the honor of its Model. Yea* not only the Will of God, but his
Nature requires, that whatever derives from him, either as its idea or source,
should be ultimately resolved and terminated in him as its Center. Secondly, It
is most false that either Habit or Act can be Rationally chosen, or finally
rested in for it self: But either some benefit to our selves and friends, or
the honor and glory of some other must be proposed and intended by them. For as
all Habits are desired in reference to actions and operations, so if in every
action we design not an end in order to the attainment of which we so act, we
declare our selves brutish and irrational. Though Brutus was as far tinctured
with a persuasion that Virtue was its own End and Reward as any man else
whatsoever; yet it is most certain that he reckoned upon the accruement of
something else by it, whereof judging himself disappointed, he proclaimed
Virtue to be but an empty Name; (...) I shall shut up this with a sentence or
two of Austin, Virtutes cum ad seipsas referuntur, nec propter aliud
expetuntur, inflatae ac superbae sunt: When Virtues are sought only for
themselves, they degenerate into Pride, and become Idols, and the prosecution
of them is Idolatry. Proinde virtutes, quas sibi videtur habere homo, nisi ad
Deum retulerit, etiam ipsa vitia sunt potius quam virtutes; Therefore the
Virtues which a man thinks he has, if they be not referred to God, they are
Vices rather than Virtues, de Civit. Dei lib. 9. cap. 25. vide Jansen. de Stat.
Nature. laps. lib. 4. cap. 11, 12, 13. It appears then from the whole of what we
have said, that the Law of Creation, or of Reason, as it is subjective in Man,
is so far from being the Rule of Religion in its utmost latitude, that it is
not a sufficient measure of Moral Virtue.

. 7. We come next to consider the Law of Nature, or Right Reason as it is
Objective in the Decalogue, which we have declared to be a transcript of the
Law of Creation, chap. 2.. 4. and have also demonstrated its perfection and
sufficiency for the Regulating the Duties we are under by the said Law, chap.
2.. 13. We cannot without very unbecoming though^s of the Wisdom of the
Legislator, but judge it a complete Measure of all Moral Offices and
performances, seeing God designed it for a Law of Morality. For, as Plato says,
it belongs to a Lawgiver not only to have an eye to a few things, (...), but
to have an Universal respect to all, and to every Virtue: de legib. 10. Nor can
this be denied of the supreme Rector (presupposing him supernaturally to reveal
a Law of Manners) without reflection both on his Nature and Government. We will
allow the Orator to complain, latius patere officiorum quam Juris Regulam, That
there is more belongs to our Duty, than ever was enacted by any Civil Law; but
we dare not entertain the like thoughts of the Divine Law, especially when it
was given by God for this very end, that we might be illuminated and conducted
by it in the offices of Morality.

It is no part of my concern at present, to enquire whether the Decalogue
comprehend any more in it than a transcript of the Original Law; or whether
besides its being a Collection of Natural Laws, there may not be some positive
precepts as well as arbitrary appendices added to it. It is enough to me that
it contains an Epitome of the Dictates of Right Reason, and that it is a
compendious Draught and Model of the Law of Nature; nor will I at this time
interest my self in that Controversy, whether there by any thing else required
in it yea, or not. I withal readily grant, that Obedience to all the Duties of
Instituted Religion is bound upon the Soul by the Law of the Ten Commandments,
seeing that obliges us to obey God in all the declared Instances of his Will.
As there is nothing in positive Religion repugnant to any principle of Nature;
so these very duties which do immediately fundate in Gods Will do challenge our
obedience in the Virtue of a Natural Law.

I crave also to have it observed, That the Decalogue may be considered either
as it is a mere Draught and Delineation of the Law of Creation; or as having
annexed to it a Remedial Law, to which in its most exacting Rigor it was made
subservient. Though the Law of the Ten Commandments for the matter and
substance of it be one and the same with the Law of Creation; being in this
respect only Renovatio antiquae Legis, not Latio novae; and still Natural with
reference to the things enacted, though positive as to the manner of the
promulgation: Yet, as given by Moses, there is a Law of Grace couched in it,
which no wise appertained to it as communicated at first with our Natures.
Hence the Lord in the very Preface of the Decalogue, treats with them as their
God, Exodus 20.1. i. e. as their everlasting Benefactor, which in the Virtue of
the Covenant of Works, and in Reference to the mere Law of Creation, he neither
was, nor could be since the first ingress of sin. In this sense David takes the
Law in most of his Encomiums of it. And in this acceptance I acknowledge the
Law to be the measure of all the main Duties which we owe to God, either in the
way of Natural, or Instituted Religion. It is true there are some Duties of
peculiar New Testament institution; but those as they are in themselves of a
subordinate Nature to the great demands of the Law of Faith, being chiefly
stipulations of our performing the conditions of it; So both the constituting
and practicing of them had been unsuitable to the Old Testament oeconomie. The
like may be said concerning those obligations which we are manumitted and set
free from, which the Mosaic Church were under the Sanction of.

That which I undertake the Justification of is this, that the Decalogue as it
is a mere transcript of the Law of nature, or right Reason, is not the measure
of the whole of Religion; nor, as it is Christian, of the most momentous parts
of it. Nor can the contrary be affirmed without renouncing of the Gospel, which
I am afrai'd too many, as being weary of it, are ready to do. For, First, if
the Decalogue as it is a mere new Edition of the Original Law of nature, be the
sole and only Measure of Religion, then the New Covenant is nothing but a
repetition of the Old. Yea, there is no such thing as a New Covenant with
respect to the Terms of it, only it is so called with respect to the manner of
its Promulgation. For where the Terms and conditions vary not, neither do the
Covenants vary. It Is their differing in their Demands, that gives them the
Denomination of distinct Covenants. To assert a coincidency as to the whole
preceptive part betwixt the two Covenants, is in effect to bid us disclaim a
great part of the Bible. What tendency some expressions of a late Author have
this way, I shall refer to the judgment of others. As in the State of Innocence
the whole Duty of man consisted in the practice of all those Moral Virtues,
that arose from his Natural Relation to God and man; so all that is
superinduced upon us since the fall, is nothing but helps and contrivances to
supply our Natural defects and restore us to better ability, to discharge those
duties we stand engaged to by the Law of our Nature, and the design of our
Creation. etc. def. and contin. p. 315, 316. The supposition of sin does not
bring in any New Religion, but only makes new circumstances and names of old
things, and requires new helps and advantages to improve our Powers, and to
encourage our Endeavors: And thus is the Law of Grace nothing but a
Restitution of the Law of Nature; ibid. p. 324. Secondly there are several
duties incumbent now upon us, which also constitute the chief part of our
Christian Obedience, that the Decalogue as 'its a transcript of the Law of
right Reason or of Nature* is perfectly a stranger to. For proof of this I
shall only insist on Repentance toward God, and Faith toward Jesus Christ. I
suppose it will be granted by most, that Repentance in all the parts and
branches of it, viz. conviction of sin, Contrition for it, and conversion to
God from it, are Duties we are all under the obligation of. I said by most,
because of some expressions in a late Author which I can hardly reconcile with
the account which the Scripture gives us of Repentance, or with that modesty
which we ought to exercise in the things of God. The Fathers and first
preachers of the Christian Faith, did not fill peoples heads, with scruples
about the due degrees of Godly sorrow, and the certain symptoms of a
through-Humiliation; def. and contin. p. 306, 307. And a little after, They
(says he, meaning the Noncomformists) examine the truth and reality of men's
conversion by their orderly passage through all the stages of conviction; And
unless a man be able to give an account of having observed and experienced in
himself all their imaginary Rules and Methods of Regeneration, (i. e.
conviction and contrition etc.) they immediately call into question his being a
Child of God, and affright him with sad stories of having miscarried of Grace
and the New Creature; And he is lost and undone for ever unless he begin all
the work of conversion anew, and he must as it were re-enter into the Womb, and
again pass through all the scenes and workings of conviction; in which state of
formation all new converts must continue the appointed time, and when the days
are accomplished, they may then proceed to the next operation of the Spirit, i.
e. to get a longing, panting, and breathing frame of soul, upon which follows
the proper season of delivery, and they may then break loose from the
Enclosures of the Spirit of Bondage, and creep out from those dark Retirements,
wherein the Law detained them, into the light of the Gospel and the liberty of
the Spirit of Adoption: p. 309, 310. However I can justify the forementioned
steps and degrees of Repentance both by Scripture and Reason. Now this, the
Moral Law as it is a mere summary of the Law of Nature neither know's nor
allow's; I confess the Law of Creation obliging us to love God with all our
Heart, Soul and Strength, and in all things to approve our selves perfect
before him, does by consequence in case of the least faileur oblige us to
sorrow. And thus men wholly strangers to the renueing grace of the Covenant may
repent: witness among others Judas as to the act of betraying Christ. But to
encourage us thereunto by any promise of acceptance, without which no man will
ever be found in the due practice of it; Heb. 11.6. Or administer help for the
performance of it; this it neither does, promises, nor can do or promise. For
being once violated, it know's no other language but the thundering of wrath
against the transgressour. Now one and the same Covenant can not be capable of
two such contrary clauses, as denouncing an inevitable curse on whosoever shall
not observe the Law in all points, and promising mercy to those that repent of
the transgressions which the do commit. They like may be said of Faith. This is
the great condition of the Gospel, Gal. 3.22. Act. 13.29. Romans 10.9. One of the
principal Duties we are now obliged to; 1 John 3.23. Joh. 6.29. Now this as
it is the condition of Gospel-pardon, the Law is utterly unacquainted with;
know's nothing at all of it. It is true there is a general Faith terminating on
the Existence, Authority, and Veracity of God, which comes under the Sanction
of the Law of Creation. But Faith, as respecting a Mediator, and Gods treating
with us through him, the Law is both ignorant of, and at enmity with, Gal.
3.12. The Law is not of Faith, Romans 9.32, 33. Israel which followed after the
Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness; wherefore,
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. I
know not whether it be upon this account, because Faith comes not smoothly
enough within the compass of being a Moral Virtue, that a late Author is
pleased to scoff at Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, not only by stiling it in
mockage, the dear darling Article of the Religion of Sinners, Def. and Contin.
p. 322. but by representing what the Scripture everywhere ascribes to it in
such terms of Drollery, Scorn, and Contempt; that I tremble to transcribe them.
They make (says he) a grievous noise of the LORD CHRIST, tell fine Romances of
the secret amors betwixt the believing Soul and the LORD CHRIST, and
prodigious stories of the miraculous feats of FAITH in the LORD CHRIST; Reproof
to the Rehears. Transpros. p. 69. See also Def. and Contin. p. 135^ 140. But
while men believe their Bibles they are not to be jeered out of their Duty and
Happiness. And this is all I shall discourse of the first Instrument of
Morality, viz. the measure of it; and I hope it appears by what has been
offered, that the Law of Creation (which is the Alon^ Rule of Moral Virtue)
whether we take it subjectively, as it is in Man since the Fall; or
objectively, as it is in the Decalogue; neither is, nor can be the Rule and
Standard of the whole obedience we owe to God.

CHAP. IV.
(1) The Principle in the strength of which Moral virtues are acquired, and
moral actions performed, taken into consideration. Determined by the
Philosophers to be nothing but our Faculties and the improvement of them by
objective helps. (2) The same affirmed by the Pelagians. (3) The Judgment of a
late Author as to this particular Inquired into, and found coincident with the
former. (4) Several Things laid down in order to the better discussion of the
extent of the promised power. (5) What we may arrive at in the mere strength,
and through the improvement of our Natural Abilities distinctly proposed. (6)
The deficiencies that occur in those Duties which Men in the virtue of the
foresaid Principles do perform. (7) several Duties to which by the best
improvement of Natural Abilities we cannot arise. (8) The Necessity of an
infused Principle inferred thereupon and further demonstrated. (9) The whole
concluded.

. 1. The Rule and Measure of Moral Habits and acts was in the former Chap.
Enquired into; and if the reasons there produced hold good, they yield us this
result, viz. that in order to our conduct in the Duties of Religion there needs
an other light than that of Nature. We come in the next place to consider the
other great Instrument of Morality, namely, The Principle in the strength and
power of which Moral Habits are acquired and Moral actions performed. Now the
Philosophers knew no other Principle of Morality but innate ability and Natural
Power. Natura beatis omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognov^^it uti. Claud.
Iudicium hoc omnium mortalium est, fortunam a Deo petendam, a seipso sumendam
esse sapientiam; all men are agreed that as we are to ask external good things
of God, so we are to trust only to our selves for the acquisition of virtue,
says Cicero. de Not. Deor. (...), The adeption of virtue is in our own power,
says. Alex. Aphrodis. lib. de fato 27. As men attain skill in Trade's by
discipline and exercise, (...), In the same manner do we attain Habits of
virtue; idem ibid. There is nothing more absurd, says Tully, than to affirm
that men may of their own accord be vicious and also not virtuous; Academ.
Quest. lib. 4.. 39. And therefore he tells us elsewhere Neminem unquam acceptam
Deo retulisse virtutem; propter virtutem enim jure laudamur, and de virtute
recte gloriamur, quod non contingeret si id donum a Deo non a n^bis haberemus,
That no man ever thankt God for being virtuous, etc. de Not. Deor. That this
was the general opinion of the Philosophers, we have demonstrated more fully,
chapt. 1.. 3. Being unacquainted with the Revelation of the Word where
supernatural and divinely communicated strength is only promised and unfolded;
no better could be expected from them, nor do I know upon what ground they
could have laid claim to more. As for those expressions which we meet with in
the Platonists, concerning the Divine Infusion of Virtue; It may be easily
replied, that they had these Notions either immediately from the Sacred Oracles,
or from some who understood the Jewish Traditions, or else that being convinced
of their own ineptitude to Virtue, and not knowing whither to betake for
relief, they referred themselves to the supreme cause, tanquam (...), as one
who only could relieve them at a dead lift.

And if this answer be not thought sufficient, I dare undertake to produce as
many testimonies out of the Platonists for the acquisition of Virtue as for the
infusion of it; which argues that they were wholly at a loss about the
attainment of it; And that they alleged a Divine Communication of it, not
because of any foundation they had in the light of Nature for such a
persuasion, but because they knew not how else to satisfy themselves in their
enquiries about the adeption of it. It Is true, all the Philosophers contend for
objective helps, by which we may be excited to exert our Natural strength for
the adeption of Virtue; but for any active subjective Principle of it besides
connate ability, they were so far from allowing it, that they looked upon it as
rather meriting scorn and laughter. Yea those very objective helps which they
applied to, were nothing else but the effects of their faculties, improving
Natural Light and the first principles of Reason. Hence Seneca having said that
we are more indebted to Philosophy than to the Gods, for as much as we owe only
our lives to them* but are obliged to Philosophy that we live virtuously; he
adds, cujus scientiam (puta Philosophiae) nulli dederunt, facultatem omnibus,
whereof they have communicated the actual science to none, though they have
given faculties and powers whereby it may be attained to all, Ep. 90. The great
Objective Medium they trusted to, for the getting of Virtue, was Moral
Philosophy, as we have demonstrated, chap. 1. 3. Now this, take it in all the
parts and kinds of it, whether Dogmatick, wherein the Aristotelians excelled;
or Exhortative, wherein the Stoics were most eminent; or Characteristical,
wherein the Pythagoreans and Platonists transcended, was nothing but the
product of Humane Reason improving Natural Light and congenite Notions. But for
any subjective Principle besides their mere faculties they knew none.

. 2. With the Philosophers do the Pelagian as to the substance at least of
their Dogmata agree; Philosophy being the seminary of the Pelagian Heresy, and
their chiefest notions being derived from thence. Virtutes non infundi
divinitus, sed been vivendi consuetudine parari contendunt Pelagiani; The
Pelagians affirm, says Austin, that Virtues come not by divine Inspiration, or
Infusion, but that they are acquired by a sober course of life, Epist. ad
Demet. and lib. de gestis Pelag. cap. 14. Non esi liberum Arbitrium, si Dei
indigeat auxilio, quoniam in pr^prid voluntate habet unusquisque facere aliquid
vel non facere; Did we need any internal subjective assistance from God, humane
freedom would be overthrown, a power of acting and not acting belonging
essentially to the Will; decima propositio affixa Pelag. in Council. Diospolit.
It Is true, they pretended to own Grace, but as Austin says, it was ut Gratiae
vocabulo frangerent invidiam, That they might avoid envy and contradiction, and
escape these imputations that they were justly liable to; lib. de Great.
Christi. cap. 37. For by Grace they understood no more than Natural Power. Dei
Gratiam (says Austin concerning Pelagius) non appellat nisi Naturam, qua
libero Arbitrio conditi sumus; lib. de Not. and Great. Notwithstanding the
several alterations and amendments which they seemed to make in their opinion,
yet as to the point of an inward subjective principle they never granted any
more than the Essential faculties of our Nature. Both the adjutorium legis and
the doctrina and exemplum Christi, with which they palliated and glossed their
opinion concerning the Grace of God, and which was the highest they ever arose
in the explication of the Doctrine of Grace, are only external Moral
Principles: Neither the one, nor the other have any alliance to an inward
physical Principle. Which made the Fathers of the Council of Carthage say
justly of them, nullum relinquunt locum gratiae Christi qu^ Christiani sumus,
that they left no room for the Grace of Christ, etc. ad Innocent. Pap. And
others say of them, totum quod Christiani sumus nituntur evertere; that they
endeavored to overthrow the whole, by which we are Christians, Patres Council.
Milevit. ad eundem. apud August. Epist. 93.

. 3. With these does the opinion of a late Author seem to coincide. Now for as
much as this seems a charge of very great consequence, if it be found true, we
shall search a little the more into his own writings for the proof of it. I
know not whether we are to ascribe it to a design in the Author of clouding his
Sentiments, or to an affection of a declamatory and flourishing way of writing;
but I am sure it is come to pass, that as well in this particular, as in some
others, he has not declared his conceptions with that accuracy, perspicuity
and clearness that was fit. But (...) The Die is thrown, we have entered our
charge, and it is incumbent upon us to make it good. Some possibly may think it
enough to justify the foregoing imputation, that our Author making the whole
of practical Religion to consist in Moral Virtue, and that Grace and Virtue are
but different names of the same thing, That therefore, seeing the Original
Authors of those terms will have all Virtue to proceed from the strenth and
improvement of our Natural abilities, he ought, if he will speak either
consonantly to himself, or to them, to affirm the same. Others may perhaps
reckon it for proof enough, that there are diverse expressions scattered up and
down his writings, which seem calculated for no other end, but to reflect tacit
scorn and contempt upon the Spirit of God and his Work on the minds of men;
such is that passage, Eccl. Polit. p. 57. Of the Worlds being filled with a
buzz and noise of the Divine Spirit, and that Def. and Contin. p. 343. That the
Spirit of God, and the Grace of Christ, when used as distinct from Moral
abilities and performances signify nothing. And that other, Reproof to the
Rehears. Trans. p. 101. That it is an impertinent foppery to think of
reconciling Gods Method of begetting Faith in the Elect by a power equal to
that wherewith he Created the World, and raised up the Dead, with the power of
Election and Free Will. But this method of proceed I wave, and therefore
forbear producing several other expressions of a much worse complexion. The
same candidness I desire from an Adversary in the representation of my own
opinion, I profess my self ready to show in the taking the measure of another,
and therefore avoiding all collateral accidental expressions, how much so ever
accommodated to serve my design, I shall confine my enquiry to those parts of
his discourses, where he purposes and designeth the giving an account of his
Sentiments in this matter. Virtues (says he) in the first ages of
Christianity, were styled Graces, because they were the effects of mere favor,
whereas now they are the joynt-issues of our own industry, and the Spirit of
God cooperating with our honest endeavors; and therefore they cannot now with
so much propriety of speech be styled Graces, because they are not matter of
pure infusion, though they may be allowed the title still in some proportion,
because they are in some proportion produced by the special Energie and
cooperation of the Holy Ghost. In the same manner as these Abilities bestowed
upon the Apostles without the concurrence of their own industry were called
gifts, though now they might be more properly expressed by other Names,
notwithstanding that we owe them to the Blessing of God upon our studies and
endeavors. And what was then the gift of Tongues, is now vulgarly called skill
in Languages, and what was then the gift of utterance, is now the Art of
El^quence and Rhetorique; Def. and Contin. p. 329, 330. If these expressions,
being duly considered, do not justify what I have entered in charge against
the said Author, I shall be ready not only to acknowledge my own ignorance in
judging of the sense and meaning of the commonest proposition, but to crave him
pardon for having injured him in a matter of so great import, and to such a
degree. Surely, if Grace be not a matter of pure infusion, as our Author
expressly affirms that it is not* it can be nothing but an effect of our
Essential powers, and of the improvement of our Reasons and Natural abilities.
There is no other way besides one of these two, in which it can be obtained. To
pretend any special Energy of the Holy Ghost in the production of Grace,
distinct from an infusion of a new principle determining, elevating, and
adapting our faculties to concur as vital principles in the performance of
those acts, to which they were antecedently inept, is to allow Him at most but
a Moral influence, which consists only in Objective Motives, in the begetting
of it. It Is true, greater external helps do even in this respect fall to the
share of those who live under the Gospel, than the Heathen were privileged
with. The inducements to Virtue laid down in the word, vastly exceeding those
proposed by Philosophers. But as for any active inward principle of Obedience,
There can be none according to the Hypothesis of our Author besides Natural
Power. Again, If Graces be no otherwise attained, than skill in Languages, the
art of Eloquence and Rhetorique are; and if that be the reason why in propriety
of speech, those ought not now to be called Graces, no more than these ought to
be styled Gifts; as our Author plainly affirms: It necessarily follows, that
the only Principle of Grace and of all the obedience that proceeds from it, is
nothing else but Natural Power, and connate ability of mind; for as much as no
man lays claim to any higher principle for the acquisition of Arts but his
Faculties. Men become not Philosophers or Physicians, etc. by inspiration, nor
are any infused principles pretended as necessary thereunto. The Blessing of
God upon our studies and endeavors, implies no such thing as the communication
of Habits, of Learning and Science to us, but is by all that I know of,
otherwise sensed and explained. Though this one passage be enough to lay open
the mind of the foresaid Author in this matter; yet because to discover some
men's sentiments is sufficient to refute them; for as Hierome says in a like
case, Ecclesiae victoria est vos ^perte dicere quod sentitis, sententias
vestras prodidisse, super^sse est: Ep. ad. C^esiphon. I shall therefore subjoyn
a few exp^essions more which I meet with to the same purpose in the foresaid
book; In short (says he) the whole state of this Question (being discoursing
about the identity of Virtue and Grace) is plainly this: That in the days of
the Apostles, the Divine Spirit proved it self by some clear and unquestionable
Miracle, and that was the rational evidenc^ of its Truth and Divine Authority;
but in our days it proceeds in an humane, and in a rational way joining in with
our Understandings and leading us forward by the Rules of Reason and Sobriety,
by threatenings, and by promises, by instructing our faculties in the right
perception of things, and by discovering a fuller evidence and stronger
connection of Truths, ibid. p. 334. Though any learned person will easily
discover the drift and intendment of this passage, yet it being so proposed,
and containing such a mixture of truth and falsehood bended together, that it is
difficult for a common Reader to discern the leaven and poisonous ferment that
is wrapped up in it; I shall take a farther survey of it. There are some men so
accustomed to twist and interweave things of a heterogeneal nature one with
another, that it requires considerable skill to make a due separation and
disposal of the several ingredients of their composition to what they are
shapen and designed to subserve. In the first place, I know none of all the
Assertors of supernatural infused Grace, who pretend the overthrow of the Rules
of Reason and Sobriety by Gods working immediately and effectually upon the
Souls of men. We attribute no such violent motion to Gods Spirit upon ours, as
overthrow our powers and faculties. By a Communication of a vital principle,
the Soul is attempered in its inward frame to the things its moved to. Through
the introduction of the New Nature, our faculties are connaturalized to their
duty. The Soul being irradiated with a Divine Light, and having a new strength
transfused into it, is carried to its object out of choice, and upon
conviction. Nor do I know any in the second place that preclude the use of
promises and threatenings, or who affirm that the Spirit of God in the
Regeneration and Renovation of Sinners, acts abstractedly from, and
independently on the Word. No; the dispensation of the Word, is Gods power unto
Salvation; the vehiculum spiritus, the Chariot of the Spirit; the Seal by which
he impresseth his Image. An attendence to the Reading and Preaching of it, is
what they press every man earnestly to, and that all impulses be examined by
it. That which I except against in this Paragraph of our Author, is this, that
all allowed to the Spirit of God in his dealing with the Souls of men, is, that
he acts only Objectively in ministering Arguments of Conviction to them: For
that was the alone end of miracles, and that is our Authors intendment by the
Spirits proceeding in an humane way. Now this supposes the whole subjective
power to reside naturally in our selves, and that all the assistances of the
Spirit, serve only to excite it, and to awaken us to exert our natural
abilities: nor is this new; There are some others in whose writings our Author
seems not a little conversant, who have gone before him in these apprehensions.
Novas autem qualitates creari, seu produci non est necesse. It is not necessary
that any new qualities should be created or produced in us; Stoinski coetus
Racov. Minister ad Crell. Nonne ad credendum Evangelio, Spiritus S. interiori
dono opus est? Nullo modo; Is not the inward operation of the Holy Ghost
necessary in order to our believing (he means savingly) the Gospel? by no
means. Cateches. Racov. Est autem probitas nihil aliud quam recte agendi
studium, a recto rationis judicio pr^fectum; Holiness is nothing but an
endeavor of living uprightly in the strength of, and in the pursuance of Right
Reason; V^lkel. lib. 4. cap. 1. Causa proxima* probitatis est ipsa voluntas seu
arbitrium nostrum, cujus ea est vis ac potestas, ut in quam velit partem libere
se i^clinet: The immediate cause of Holiness, is the Will it self, whose Power
and Ability is such, that it can determine it self to Good or Evil, as it
pleases, Crell. Eth. Christian. lib. 2. cap. 2. Non est Spiritus Sanctus qui
necessario requiritur ad vim and efficaci^m ^verbo Dei conciliandam, quippiam
diversum ab ipso verbo; The Holy Spirit that is required to make the Word
effectual, is nothing but the Word it self; Socin. de Justif. p. 27. Homo
audito and intellecto Dei verbo sine ulla alia, nedum sol^ speciali Spiritus
Sancti operati^ne, potest se reipsa ad Deum convertere; Men through the help
and assistance of the word heard and understood, may convert themselves to God,
without any other, much less special operation of the Holy Ghost; Schlichting
cont. Meisner. de Servo Arbitrio. p. 88. Non requiritur supernaturale lumen,
potentiae superinfusum, mentem elevans ad intelligendum and credendum
Scripturis; There is no supernatural infused light necessary for the
understanding and believing of the Scriptures; (he understands a Salvifick
knowledge and belief of them) Episcop. disp. 5. These. 3. An ulla actio Spiritus
immediata in mentem aut voluntatem necessaria sit aut in Scriptur^s
promittatur, ad hoc, ut quis credere possit verbo extrinsecus proposito?
negativam tuebimur; whether besides the external Promulgation of the Word,
there be any immediate operation of the Spirit upon the Understanding or Will
necessary? We undertake the defense of the Negative; idem in These. privatis ad
Disput. 46. Corol. Nihil obstat quo minus vel sola grati^ Moralis homines
Animales Spirituales reddat. Nothing hinders, but that men may be regenerate in
the alone Virtue of Moral suasion; Grevinchov. Vim suam exerit Dei Spiritus qui
illuminare mentes nostras dicitur, non quod novum lumen iis infundat. Volzog.
de Script. Interpret. p. 254. Gratia neque nobis neque Scripturae novum lumen
inserit, Velthuis. de usu Rationis, p. 70. Regeniti and non regeniti cognitio
de rebus and mysteriis fidei non differt luminis ratione, idem. ibid. p. 9. I
have been the more prolix in these citations, that we may the better understand
whom in this matter we have to conflict withal, and from whom these Notions are
derived that are with so much confidence obtruded of late upon us.

If it be excepted that the person contended with, seems to allow a subjective
principle of Grace distinct from* our Natural faculties; For he expressly
affirms, That if he did not believe the influences of the Spirit upon the minds
of men, he behoved to explode the Lords Prayer it self as a foolish and
insignificant Form, seeing the greatest part of its Petitions are things of
that nature, as that they cannot be accomplished any other way than by the
efficiency of the divine Spirit upon ours. Def. and Contin. p. 334. I Answer.
(1.) It Is not unusual with some men both virtually and formally to contradict
themselves: And the Author whom we are replying upon seems to be endowed with a
particular faculty that way, as might be justified in many instances. (2) It Is
known that both the Pelagians and Socinians profess themselves the Friends and
Patrons of Grace, and yet those who are acquainted with the mystery of their
Principles, know that, saving the Revelation of God in the Scripture, they
meant no more by Grace, but Nature and the Humane Faculties. -- Front placent
quae fine latent.

We readily grant that the Arguments proposed in the Scripture, may in a
certain sense be styled Grace, but what affinity has this to the inward
ingraft principle that we are inquiring after? It were too plain a defiance of
the Gospel to renounce all inward Grace in express Terms; and yet as some, who
seem to extol grace exceedingly, explain it, no less is intended. See this
proved by Mr. Trueman in his Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency, a page
60. ad page 69. and in his other discourse concerning the Rectifying of some
prevailing Opinions, a page 244. ad page 259.

. 4. Having declared the Apprehensions of the Philosophers and Others,
concerning the Principle of Moral Virtue, namely, that both Habits and Acts
proceed from the strength and improvement of our Natural Abilities. Before we
come to inquire, how far Natural Abilities seconded with the assistance not
only of Philosophy* but of Revelation, may carry men in Practical Obedience.
There are several things of great import, both for the vindicating the Divine
Goodness and Justice, and the convincing us of our Guilt, notwithstanding any
Impotency which we labor naturally under, which I design a little to unfold as
well as to propose. First then;

Notwithstanding any Congenite Original impotency that men labor under, They
might do more in the discharge and performance of the Duties of practical
obedience, were it not for contracted Evil Habits and customs. Custom in any
thing is commonly styled another Nature, and not much amiss, the power and
efficacy of it being so great. (...), Custom is an ascititious Nature say both
Aristot. and Galen. Tanta est corruptela malae consuetudinis ut ab ea tanquam
igniculi extinguantur a Natura dati, exorianturque contraria vitia: so great is
the infection of evil custom, that the seeds of virtue communicated to us by
Nature are choked by it, and vices contrary thereunto begotten; Cicer. A Habit
in any thing is as Galen calls it (...), a lasting and hardly dissolvable
disposition. (...). Long use and exercise becomes at last Nature, Evenus in
Aristot. Consuetude in sin does so corroborate men in it, that a vicious person
cannot do well (...), even if he would; (which I suppose is no more but that he
cannot obtain of himself to do it) Arist. ad Nicomach. lib. 3. Through an
inveterate inclination of Will, men become so addicted to Evil, and so averse
and disaffected to Good, that no Arguments to the contrary weigh with them.
They grow so alienated by impure Habits, that all Virtue becomes distastful and
wickedness grows a pleasure. Much of our Impotency to good is derived upon us
by a familiarity with sin. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard
his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do Evil, Jer. 13.23.

Secondly, They that have the Gospel are thereby brought into a considerable
capacity of doing more than they that want it can. Nor do I mean this only
extensively, that they are instructed about those duties whereof these are
wholly Ignorant. For in that case God will proceed with men according to the
measure of light that every one has; and as Austin says of those with whom the
knowledge of Christ and the Gospel never arrived, veniam habebunt propter
infidelitatem, damnabuntur ver^ propter peccata contra naturam; and a greater
than Austin tells us, That as many as sinned without Law, shall also perish
without Law, etc. as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the
Law, Romans 2.12. But I understand it with relation to those very Duties which
the Heathen had some light concerning, and various helps for the performance
of. For with respect to these, We, unto whom the Light of the glorious Gospel
is come, have advantages infinitely beyond them who never enjoyed that
vouchsafement. The Declaration of our Duty is more clear as well as full. The
Religion of Nature, and precepts of Moral goodness are unfolded with more
perspicuity and plenitude in the Scriptures, than in any, or all the writings
of the Philosophers. Moral Virtues were never so established by the Light of
Reason, as they are by the Laws of the Gospel. Here is no crooked line, no
impure mixture, nor Vice obtruded for virtue. In a word, it is only the Bible
that gives us a complete systeme of the Laws of Nature, and therefore, we who
live under the dispensation of the Gospel, have an advantage even of Moral
Obedience ministered unto us, that the Pagan world never had. Our Obedience is
also endeared to us by nobler promises than the Pagan Philosophers were ever
made acquainted with; and th^se promises are attended with all the motives of
credibility. It Is likewise enforced under severer penalties than either Virgil
or Homer in their Romantic description of Tartarus ever dreamed of. Nor is
there in all the Ethics of the Grecians and Romans such an inducement and
incentive to practical Obedience, as the incarnation of the Son of God is; nor
such a matchless pattern of Universal Virtue, as the life of the ever blessed
Jesus sets before us. So that upon the whole, we, who have the light of the
Scripture, are more inexcusable in our faileurs and criminal in our
miscarriages, than those who lived under the conduct of mere Reason were
capable of being.

Thirdly, How great soever the inability derived to, and entayl'd upon us by
the Fall be, yet no man ever did what he might have done. We complain of
weakness, but who acts the power he is imbued with? We palliate our
disobedience by pretenses of Impotency, but where is the man that ever exerted
to the utmost the strength he had? We put fallacies upon our Souls by seeming
to bewail our want of strength, when in the mean time we neglect to exercise
the Ability we are endowed with. Though we cannot acceptably perform obedience,
save from a renewed principle, yet may we not be found in the discharge of the
Material part of Duties? Though we cannot act holily as Saints, yet we may act
Rationally as Men. Though we be merely passive in the reception of the first
Grace, yet may we not be found in an exercise of means prescribed by God in
order to it. We may read the Bible as well as a Romance, and hear a Sermon as
well as see a Play. Do we serve the Providence of God for the obtaining of
outward supplies, and may we not serve his promise for the receiving of Grace?
Can we ask bread of God, and can we not beg his Spirit? It will be then
seasonable to plead our weakness, when we have acted up to the utmost of our
strength. Where is the man that can acquit himself from Omissions, which he
might have prevented, and Commissions which he might have avoided. As for the
Heathen Philosophers, some of which are thought to have acted Natural Abilities
to the utmost of what (with no better objective helps) they could arrive at; it
were no difficult undertaking to demonstate, that as they wonderfully
prevaricated in what by a due exercise of their Faculties they might have
known, so they no ways answered what they knew and professed. Were Lucians
testimony of any significancy, the very best of them were stark naught. However
I think there was neither slander nor immodesty in that censure of his, that
comparing their lives with their moral instructions, he found no harmony
betwixt the one and the other; (...) in Menippo. Nor do I know any of them in
reference to whom that of Anaxippus may not be admitted, that how wise soever
they were in their Doctrines, they were at best but Fools in their Practice.

(...)
(...)
(...) apud Athene.
What Seneca fastneth upon others of them, Quod probi esse desierunt cum docti
evaserint, that they ceased to be Moral when they became Learned, I am sure
holds true in an eminent degree of himself. I am not willing to offend the
Manes of those ancient Heroes, otherwise I could not only from Poets and
Satyrists, but from Historians of credit, produce enough against them. So that
Fourthly, There is no room for that question agitated with so much warmth
betwixt the Remonstrants and Anti-Remonstrants whether Grace be due to those
that improve Natural strength, for as much as never any did, or will improve it
as they ought and might? It is true, it were not hard to be proved, that
supposing men to do what they could, yet no one can challenge Grace upon the
foot of desert; and that God does no where promise to give it upon the account
of any antecedent either condignity or congruity in us. Meritis impii non
gratia, sed paena debetur. Austin. Epist. 105. To him that has shall be given,
Math. 13.12. carries in it a plain other intendment than some men of
prepossessed judgments would wrest from it. It relates at most to a bestowment
of more of the same kind. Were the right and due use of the Talents of Nature,
the rule and measure according to which God proceeds in the dispensing of
Grace, it would by the Rule of contraries follow that those who either through
supiness or compliance with the inescations of the Animal life, fail in a due
improvement of them, are to have no lot nor inheritance in any supernatural
Donation. God promises sinners pardon if they believe, but in the Covenant
made with us, he neither absolutely nor conditionally promises the Grace of
believing to any. His purpose of giving Grace to some, amounts not to a promise
claimable by any individual person. And as for the promise of a seed made to
Christ, it respects as the condition of it, what He did, not what We do: Nor is
it possible to understand who are within the verge of that promise, but by the
event. But were there no other Obex to hinder our challenging the communication
of Grace, our neglect to improve the power we are naturally vested with, is
enough to stop the mouths of all Mankind. It Is plainly to trifle to dispute
about the Consequent of a Hypothetical Proposition, relating to life and
practice, when it is easy to know that the Antecedent which is the condition
of its truth and establishment, will never come to pass.

5. Whatsoever men, notwithstanding their impotency, whether congenite or
contracted, neglect to do in way of Duty, or practice in way of Sin, they do it
upon Motives which to them seem Rational. The Will is (...) a Rational
appetite, and always chooses or refuses upon grounds and motives, though they
often prove slight and fallacious, though the understanding and ^ill be not
Faculties either really distinct from the Soul, or from one another, but one
and the same entity clothed with different names from the diversity of its
operations. Yet the acts with respect to which the Soul is styled Will, are not
only different from those acts with reference to which it is called
Understanding, but also dependant upon them. Nor does the Soul under the
denomination of Will either choose, or pursue any thing, but what it first under
the appellation of Understanding judges good, nor does it refuse or decline
any object, but what it first judges pro hic and nunc evil. And if it were
otherwise, the Will were not a Rational Faculty, but should act bruitishly in
all it does. Accordingly (...) is well defined by some to be (...), a
consider^^ion of things future so far as expedient. Hence no man desires or
declines an object, but he can give a Reason for it. Whatever men do as men,
it is upon Arguments and Reasons that prevail with them. Those actions are not
Humane, and so not Moral which fall not under the conduct of the Understanding.
As it is impossible we should choose or refuse that whereof we have no idea at
all ( ignoti enim nulla cupido, nullum odium) so it is as impossible that we
should choose and prosecute what is represented to us as Evil, or refuse and
shun what is commended to us by the Understanding as Good; and therefore
Sixthly.

Notwithstanding the servitude that wicked men are in to Brutal Lusts and
sensual inclinations and desires, yet they still retain that Liberty and
Freedom of Will which belongs to them as men. It is one thing to discourse
against the Moral Rectitude of the Will, and another to impugn its Essential
freedom. The contending against Pelagianisme does not necessarily run us upon
Manichaeisme. We readily acknowledge, that if we stood arrested with an
impotency impeaching our freedom of acting, Quis non clamet stultum esse
praecepta dare ei, cui liberum non est quod praecipitur facere? Aug. de fide
cont. Manich. cap 10.
we could be no longer subjects of Moral Government. For as Austin says, It is
a ridiculous thing to impose praecepts upon him, who enjoys not a liberty
adapting him to obey them; and as he there adds, It were an Unrighteous thing
to condemn us for doing that which we could not help. I am not ignorant what
invective language, scurrilous reproaches, and satirical terms some are
accosted with, as if by asserting the necessity of the succors of Divine
Grace, and the inability of men to Good precluding the subjective influence and
effectual assistance of the Holy Ghost, they overthrew humane Liberty and
introduced a Fate more irresistible than that of the Stoics and Chaldeans.
Whereas the whole of those men's declamations builds upon a gross prevarication
and mistake concerning the Nature of Liberty; They suppose Humane Freedom to
consist in an aequilibrium to both extremes, or in an absolute indifferency of
acting or not acting, or doing this or the contrary; Whereas it stands only
in an acting conformably to the judgment, and in doing whatever one apprehends
that he ought. Nor did the Ancient Philosophers either own or know any other
notion of liberty: For they understood by liberty only a Rational spontaneity,
and therefore they make Freedom all one with Voluntariness. (...), Voluntary is
that which has its principle in him that acts it, who likewise understands
the particulars of what he acts, Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 3. Nor does he
understand any more by the (...), by which he explains liberty, but that these
things are in our power, and we are free in our actings about them, to which we
are carried by a Rational spontaneity, and a voluntary motion. That is
voluntary which moves and inclines it self conformably to its judgment, say
the Platonists. (...); Andr^n. Rh^d. lib. 3. cap. 1. (...) Arist. lib. 1.
Metaph. (...); Andr. Rh^d* ubi sup. H^c quisque in potestate habere dicitur,
quod si vult facit, si non ^ult, non facit; Aug. lib. de Spirit. and lit.
Liberum Arbitrium est re; sibi^placitae spontan^us appetitus, Prosp. lib. de
great. and liber. arbit. contra Cassian. Illu^ in potestate habemus, ad quod
aliena violen^ia cogi non possumus, Rich. de Sancto Victore. Nor did the Greek
Fathers mean any more by their (...), etc.
Determination to one Species of Moral actions does not at all impeach our
Freedom. God is the prime Free Agent of all, and yet his liberty consists not
in an arbitrary indifferency to the love of Good and Evil; but he is so
determined by the Rectitude and Sanctity of his Nature to a delectation in what
is Good, that he is not capable of the least propension to an allowance of
Evil. Numquid, says August. quia peccare non potest Deus, ideo liberum
arbitrium habere negandus est? Shall we say that God is not a Free Agent,
because he cannot sin? de Civit. Dei lib. 22. cap. ult. God is most Free,
because he is most Rational, and always acts suitably to his own infinite
Understanding. The obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ being highly meritorious,
behoved likewise in an eminent manner to be voluntary. (For no man praises or
rewards an action that is not spontaneous; no more than we do the fire for
burning) and yet his Will was only and ever determined to the choice and
pursuit of Good, nor could he fall under the least inclination to Evil without
ceasing to be what he was, which was impossible. The same may be said of the
Elect Angels, who through a confirmed Sanctity, are unchangeably Good, and yet
they practice obedience with the highest Freedom, because upon the most
rational conviction that they should do so, and that it is not only their duty
upon the account of the Sovereignty of God, who commands it, but because it is
most congruous to, and becoming their Natures, and the Relations they stand in
to God as intellectual Creatures. The Demons also are by a self-Determination
obdurately and irreclaimably wicked, and yet hereby do not cease to be Free
Agents. Again, when the Saints arrive at consummated purity, and are actually
stated in glory, is it to be imagined that they shall remain in a dubious
suspension between Good and Evil, or in an equal propension to both? No! But
though the liberty of our Souls be then dilated to its utmost dimensions, yet
we shall from an eternal Principle steadily adhere to God; the perfected
Understanding influencing the whole man to an entire subjection to the Divine
Will. For, as Austin says well, Voluntas Libera tanto erit liberior quanto
sanior, etc. Epist. 89. The beatified Soul discovers that repugnancy in sin to
the Rational Nature, that it can never be any more reconciled to it, or cast
one favorable glance upon it. Once more, If the Essential idea of humane
Freedom were an aequilibrious Disposition of the mind, then by how much holier
any man becomes, by so much the less Free he is, and by how much we grow
disinslaved from sin, and breath in a freer air of holiness, by so much should
our obedience receive the les^ praise of God. Yea, the more Habituated in Evil
any are, by so much should they be the less criminal; a decrease in point of
culpableness and guilt necessarily ensuing upon every detraction from our
Essential Liberty: In a word, liberty of Will is an Essential property of the
Soul of man, and a necessary adjunct of every Humane action. If we Will a
thing, we Will it freely; si enim volumus, libere volumus; as Austin says. To
Will, and to be Unwilling to Will, is a plain contradiction; for as Austin
says both acutely and solidly, non vellemus, si nollemus. We never do any
thing, which at the same time we would not do. The manacles by which we are
held and enslaved, are nothing but our Practical judgment and choice; Coactus
tua voluntate es, Thou art fettered by thy own Will, Aug. so that Seventhly;

These considerations that men choose to be wicked, love aversation from God,
and approve themselves in the disaffection of holiness, is vindication enough
of all the judicial procedures of God against sinners, whatever their Connate
and Congenite impotency be. I wave at present the plea of Gods withholding
nothing from men that he is bound to give, and that there is nothing kept from
us that belongs essentially to the Rational Nature; nor shall I plead, that
whatever is now wanting to our perfection in esse Morali, is a just punishment
of Adams sin, and comes entayl'd upon us as a Righteous Fruit of our first
Fathers Apostasy. Though all these be true, and may be justified against any
opponent; but that which I insist on is this, That it is our Sloth and Enmity
which the Lord threatens and punishes, not our Weakness and Impotency. It is
our Will-not, nor our Can not that arises in judgment against us. It Is our
contempt, not disability that we shall be arraigned for. We are so infatuated
in the love of sin, wedded to the blandishments of the world, and enamoured on
the titillations of the Flesh, that neither the suggestions of Reason, the
Promises of the Gospel, nor the Threatenings of the Law have any prevailing
influence upon us. It is our obstinacy and wicked aversation that undoes us.
Wicked and Sloathful is the due Character of every Unregenerate Sinner, Math.
25.26. They would not that I should Reign over them* Luc. 19.27. Those who were
invited would not come, Math. 22.3. They hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord, they would none of my Counsel, and despised all my
Reproofs, Prove. 1.29. Sinners are so passionately in love with the inescations
of the Animal life, that they are resolved upon pursuing the gratifications of
it. Is it not upon this account that both the Promises and Threatenings of the
Word are proposed to us under the Reduplication of our being obstinate and
rebellious? but alas! such is our loathsome wickedness and affected wilfulness,
that neither the one influence our Dread and Fear, nor the other our Love and
Ingenuity.

. 5. Having dispatched these preliminaries, we come now to state the extent of
Natural Power, and to declare what in its highest improvement it may arrive at,
and as a clear fixing of this will be a service of some significancy in it
self, so it will exceedingly contribute to our better proceed in what is
behind, and facilitate the proof of the necessity of a superadded infused
principle in order to our acting in the Duties of Practical Religion, so as to
be accepted with God. First then,

There is not only a passive capacity in our Faculties of receiving grace, but
they are also capable of being elevated actively to concur as vital Principles
in the exercise of Faith, Hope, Love, etc. Brute Animals are in neither sense
capable of Grace; They can neither receive such Qualities as may dispose them
for such operations, nor are they possessed of such Faculties as can become
vital Principles of Religious acts. The potentia obedientialis lata, of many of
the Schoolmen whether active or passive, is an irrational figment, and invented
only to subserve the Dogm's of Transubstantiation, and the Sacraments producing
Grace ex opere operato. But the Soul of Man, without the addition of any new
Natural Powers, is both capable of receiving Grace, and of being elevated to
concur as an Active vital principle of holy and Spiritual operations. There is
laid in our Natures as we are men, a foundation, which through the
Communication of a Divine Seed may be improved to the highest and holiest
employments. There is a Radical disposition in us for Grace, nor does the
Divine Image overthrow, but perfect our Intellectual powers. Posse habere
fidem, est naturae hominum, says Austin, de praedest. Sanct. cap. 5. As Grace
was originally due to our Natures, so it is still agreeable to them. But though
the Soul by being elevated and perfected by Grace becomes an active Vital
Principle of holy operations; yet in the reception of the first Grace it is
purely passive, not cooperating in the least to the restitution of the Divine
Image, no more than it did to the production of it in the primitive Creation.
Nor does this hinder, but that we both ought and may act in order to the
obtaining of it, by being found in the exercise of those means prescribed by
God for the Communication of it.

Secondly; The abilities of Nature prudently managed, and industriously
improved, may carry men to a performance of the material parts of the Duties of
the second Table. This we at once acknowledge and praise in many of the very
Heathen; Their infidelity out-doing here the Faith of many Christians,
according to that of Minucius; non praestat fides quod praestitit infidelitas.
Besides the experience of all ages, we have the Testimony of the Apostle in
justification of this, Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
Nature the things contained in the Law, as the Light of Reason informed them
what they ought to do in most cases of this kind, so nothing obstructed but
that they might have done it. As many excellent instructions are to be met with
in the writings of the Philosophers to this purpose; so the Heathen World
(especially Greece and Rome) has produced a vast number of persons eminent, if
not in most, at least in some one or other instance of Moral Virtue: Aristodis
is famous for justice; Epaminondas for Prudence; Curious for Temperance;
Thrasibulus for Integrity and love for his Country; Cimon for beneficence and
liberality though of a low fortune; Timoleon for Moderation and Humility in a
prosperous condition, etc. It were easy to expatiate upon this theme, and to
create matter and occasion of shame to Christians, who suffer themselves to be
thus outdone by Pagans. Our Religion comes behind their Morality; and our
pretenses of Grace are outshone by their Virtue. Suppose their ability and
strength proportionable to ours, yet our outward and objective helps so vastly
exceeding all the means which they had of exciting and improving Natural
Powers, to equal them only in Virtue, is a high dishonor to God, and an
enhancement of guilt upon our selves; and to come behind them in any of the
branches of Morality, is openly to affront the provisions of the Gospel, and to
cause that worthy Name by which we are called to be basphemed. Nor does our
profession of Christianity, while attended with a neglect of Moral
performances, serve to any better purpose but to dishonor Christ and damage
our selves. And as we readily acknowledge, that men in the alone strength of
Natural Abilities may proceed thus far in the practice of Moral Honesty and
Righteousness, so I know no man that decryes these performances as things not
only useless, but dangerous if void of Grace. As a late Author falsely suggests,
Eccl. pol. p. 73, and repr. to the rebers. p. 55.
Or who affirms that it is better to be lewd and debauched, than to live an
honest and virtuous life. No! we ascribe all due praise to them, and press them
upon the Consciences of those we have to do with, both from the authority of
God, the pulchritude and beauty that is in them, and their exceeding usefulness
not only to others, but even to the Authors of them. Nor do I know any that
make Moral Goodness the greatest let to Conversion, or who say, that Virtue is
the greatest prejudice to the entertainment of the Gospel; and that Grace and
Virtue are inconsistent, Idem. Def. and contin. p. 34. Eccl. pol. p. 73.
or that the Morally Righteous man is at a greater distance from Grace than the
Profane. No! we are so far from affirming, that the acting up to the
principles of honesty is of it self an obstruction to the Conversion of any,
that we reckon it to contribute exceedingly to the promoting of it; in that it
begets a greater serenity and clearness in the mind for the discerning the
excellency of the Doctrines and Duties of Religion, which men of Debauched
lives are indisposed for. For sensuality and fleshly Lusts do debase the minds
of men, darken their Reason, tincture their Souls with false colors, fill
their Understandings with prejudice, that they have not the free use of their
intellectual faculties, nor are they disposed for the Exexcise of the acts of
Reason about objects of Religion. Whereas persons disentangled from the tyranny
of Lust and Passion, have not only their animal spirits purer and finer for the
exercise of the noblest acts of Reason, but their minds are emancipated from
many prepossessions and prejudices that sensual persons are in bondage to.

Two things indeed the persons reflected upon do openly affirm and declare;
first, That if Moral Righteousness be trusted to, and relied on for the
acceptance of our persons with God, and acquisition of a title to life, that
in such a case it will not only infallibly hinder submission to the
Righteousness of the Gospel, but that it will directly overthrow it. Secondly;
That diverse men brought to an observation of the Duties of Morality, raise
their whole expectation of Salvation from thence; and both these they are ready
to demonstrate the truth of from Scripture, The first being also evinceable
from Reason, and the second from Experience. Thence it is that they advise men
not to think it enough that they are blameless before the World, but that they
would look after the being reneued in the spirit of their minds toward God.
Thence also they earnestly entreat them not to place their affiance in Moral
Righteousness, and withal tell them, that there is more hope of scandalous
Sinners than of such; for as much as those will sooner be prevailed with to
leave their sins, than these to renounce their own Righteousness, in which they
take Sanctuary to a neglect of the Righteousness of Christ by Faith. This I
confidently affirm to be the sum of what is to be met with relating to this
matter either in the Writings or Sermons of sober Non-Conformists; and I
challenge the Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity to deduce Logically from
hence any of those scandalous Propositions which with so magisterial a
confidence he affixeth to them.

Thirdly; Men as well destitute of the Word, as of Grace, may by a due
attendance to Natural Light, and a careful improvement of first Notions,
proceed likewise far in performing the substantial part of the immediate Duties
of the first Table. Now the Duties of the first Table being such as refer
immediately to God, they either arise from the consideration of his Nature, or
the consideration of his benefits bestowed upon us. Of the first sort are
Veneration, Fear, Humility, Trust, Submission to the Divine dispose upon the
account of the Sovereignty of God. Of the second sort, are Prayer, Gratitude,
Patience under the loss and withdrawment of temporal enjoyments, etc. It is
true, no man in the alone strength of Natural abilities either will or can
perform any of these, or of the former with all that dueness of circumstances
as to obtain therein acceptance with God, yet with respect to the Material
part of the Duties, they may be performed by men in their own strength without
any special assistance of the Grace of God. If the Disciples of Epicurus,
though they neither admitted God to be the Author of the World, nor the
Governor of it, did yet plead a veneration to be due to Him for the alone
excellency of his Nature; Have we not much more cause to believe that those
Philosophers, who not only acknowledged his excellent perfection, but withal
confessed him to be the Maker, Preserver, and Rector of all things, would be
thereon induced to adore his Omnipotent Power and Infinite Sapience, etc. If no
other Homage were to ensue on the cogitation of the Infinity of the Deity,
admiration attended with humility would naturally flow from it. Nor did
Socrates by his (...) intend any thing else save a due sense and acknowledgment
of our meanness, in the consideration of the infinite perfection of God. The
Philosophers seem to have distinguished the perfections of God into Moral and
Physical. The first kind may be expressed by Optimus, the second by Maximus.
Now the consideration of the perfections of each of these sorts in God, did no
question influence the Heathen Philosophers to performances in some degree
suitable. Mercy, Truth, Justice, Holiness, etc. are conceived in God under the
Notion of Moral Virtues, and the most refined of the Philosophers made it their
design to imitate God in respect of those Moral perfections. (...) assim^lation
to God in these things was their scope and dr^ft. They reckoned that no man
honored God, who did not thus imitate and resemble Him. (...), Hierocl. in
carm. aur. (...)* God ought in all things to be our Rule and Pattern says
Plato, de legis. lib. 4. It were easy to enlarge on the (...) which we meet
with in some of the very Heathen, and which the consideration of the Moral
perfections of God led them to. Power, Immensity, wisdom, Sovereignty etc. are
conceived in God under the Notion of Physical Perfections, and though these be
not imitable properly by us, yet a due consideration of them beget's an
impression of trust, Subjection, Resignation etc. in the mind. And men by the
very conduct of the Light of Reason, and in the strength of Natural Abilities
may arise high in operations correspondent to a belief of such properties in
God. That of Epictetus is remarkable to this purpose, you are to believe (says
he) (...). Concerning the Gods That they are, and that they wisely and
Righteously Govern the World, and that therefore they ought to be obeyed and
submitted to cheerfully in all things. Seeing every thing is administered
according to excellent counsel, Enchir. cap. 38.

There are others Duties referring immediately to God, which formally respect
and arise from the consideration of his benefits, and these, as I intimated
before, are Prayer, Gratitude, Patience under worldly losses and the like. And
here, as a firm persuasions that whatsoever we either are or have proceed, from
the Divine Bounty and Goodness, will affect us with resentments of Love and
Thankfulness, so the same persuasion will induce us in all our straits to make
our wants known by prayer to God, nor is there any consideration more adapted
to quiet our minds under loss, than this likewise is. I do not now say that
any of those duties (no more than the former) can be performed as they ought,
without the special assistance of Grace, but this I say, that not only men
destitute of Grace, but without the Revelation of the word, have been found in
the exercise of many of them, and may be said to have discharged the material
part of them; instances with respect, to diverse are at hand. (...). etc. Never
say thou have lost any thing, but that it is returned. Is thy son dead? he is
only restored. Is thy inheritance taken from the? that also is returned. Epict.
enchi. cap 15. And elsewhere (...), Let every thing be as the Gods think fit
cap. 79, Excellent is that passage of Hierocles concerning the seconding all
our own endeavors with prayers to God and the pursuing our prayers with
diligent endeavors of our own, (...). In Carm. aur. More Testimonies both in
these and other particulars might with facility be produced, but that we are
obliged by resolution unto brevity. Only I desire to subjoin that as there were
many of the Heathen yea of the very Philosophers who neither improved their
light, nor ability to the performance of any of these Duties, so there was not
one of them who was found in a discharge so much as of the Material part of
them all.

Fourthly, persons living under the dispensation of the word may not only
without renewing Grace arise to a performance of the foregoing Duties in the way
expressed, but they may be also found in the exercise of all the material acts
of instituted Religion. They may not only assent to the Divinity of the
Scripture in general (and indeed it is accompan^ed with so demonstrative
evidences of its being divinely inspired, that who ever denies God to be the
Original Author of it, must first renounce his Reason) But they may both
Grammatically understand and Dogmatically believe the particular doctrines of
it. I do not say that they can spiritually either understood or savor the
great things of the word, but I know nothing to the contrary why they may not
Historically understand and receive all the Dogms of Religion. The Bible as it
is sufficiently plain to every unprejudiced capacity in all the points
necessary to salvation, so is there no part of it in it self unintelligible.
Though there be several Doctrines in the Sacred Scriptures which we can neither
comprehend, nor it may be reconcile to every received axiom of Philosophy, yet
we may be easily convinced that they are the declarations of God; and that the
meaning of the particular places where they are revealed, can be no other
(supposing God by the revelation of the word to have designed our instruction)
than what the generality of Christians contend for; God (if he please) can
deliver his mind in as intelligible terms, as any of his creatures can; Nor is
it consistent with Divine Goodness and wisdom to leave these things
Unintelligible, which he has made it our Duty to know. It Is true, God having
so framed the Revelation of his will as to invite all enquirers, it was but
convenient that as the Weakest have enough to instruct their ignorance; So the
Acutest should have enough to exercise their parts: according to that of
Austin, Magnifice, and Salubriter Sp. S. Scripturas modificeravit ut locis
aptioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem fastidia detergeret: de doctr.
Christ. cap 6. The Obscurity therefore charged upon the word is both a false
and blasphemous imputation. The fault is only in us, not in the word, if it be
not understood. We are either Slothful and do not apply our selves to a
diligent use of means for acquaintance with the great and mysterious truths of
it. Or we mistake in the means, that we have recourse to; or we impeach the
plainness of the word, while in the mean time it is our enmity at the purity of
it that lies at the bottom: (...) Plat. in Phaed.
The Tyranny of passions, the prejudices of education and sensual entanglements
Eclipse in us that Light of Reason which the Fall has left, and then having
put out our eyes we complain that we cannot see, Just so as if one should
accuse the sun for want of Splendour, because the blind cannot discern it. Or
lastly, we judge things to be obscure in the Revelation of the Word, when all
the obscurity lies in the greatness of the things Revealed. The declaration may
be plain, when the things declared may be such as our Finite Understandings
cannot form adequate Notions of them. And this I take to be the import of the
(...), 2 Pet. 3.16. (...) relating to the Neuter (...) the things whereof Paul
had discoursed, not to the Feminine (...), Epistles where he had treated of
them. Notwithstanding what has been here asserted, I readily grant, that
besides the spiritual perception of Divine Truths that the Regenerate Soul is
adapted for, to which the Unrenued mind is totally inept; The Soul imbued with
a Divine Unction, is wonderfully advantaged even for the Historical perception,
and Dogmatical belief of the Doctrines of the Scripture, beyond what the mere
Natural Man is. Partly in that the renewed mind is defecated from those impure
fogs which hugely prejudice the Understanding in the perception of Natural
Truths, much more of Supernatural; partly in that Grace begets an (...) a vital
cognation with Truth in the Soul, which wonderfully conduces both to an easy
perceiving, and a steady adhearing to it. The Soul finding the Counter part of
that in the Word, which through its having received the (...), it has upon it
self, becomes hereby qualified to a clearer discerning of Scripture Doctrines
than otherwise it could be. Moreover, men may not only in the mere strength of
their Natural Abilities read and Historically understand the Scripture, but by
comparing the temper of their own hearts, with what both Reason and Scripture
instructs them of God and their Duty, and being awakened through the Arguments
of conviction administered especially in the Word, they may make a judgment of
their own state, and perceive the indisposedness and disaffectedness of their
hearts to God and Holiness; and thereupon, may not only make essays toward the
changing the frame of their minds, but finding their own inability to a through
effecting of it, they may bewail the deplorableness of their case, make their
addresses to God for relief, implore his assistance, and attend upon those
institutions, appointments and means, in the use of which, God communicates his
Grace and Spirit. We may go to Church as well as to the Exchange; attend upon a
Sermon, as well as on a Lecture of Philosophy; apply our thoughts to search out
and discern the state of our Souls as well as the state of our Trade; beg
relief of God under inward distresses, as well as when encompassed with outward
calamities. All these things are possible to, and lie within the verge of
Natural Power. And herein lies our guilt and folly, that we stand complaining
of our want of Power to do what we ought, while in the mean time we neglect the
performance of what we may. Men would rather lodge their sins any where, than
charge them upon themselves. Hence they Father that upon the infirmity of
Nature, which proceeds from their sloth and wilful choice. Yea, they that
complain most of the unsuitableness of their strenth to Duties, never concern
themselves to try whether they have strength to perform them yea or not. We
resolve, first, not to practice, and then complain for want of Ability.
Slothful and Wicked Servant is the sentence we are all obnoxious to. Under
color of not being able to get rid of all sin, some men will set themselves
against none.

. 6. The extent of Natural Power being briefly declared, and having granted
what ought not to denied, neither is by any who understand themselves or this
controversy: We are in the next place to discourse the imbecility of Nature,
and to deny what ought not to be granted. For our more distinct proceed in
this, we shall first treat the defects that occur in those very duties, which
as to the substance of them, men in the alone strength of their Natural
Abilities, either do, or may discharge; purposing afterward to enquire,
whether there be not also some duties incumbent upon us, which even with
respect to the Matter of them, men in the mere Virtue of the foresaid
principles can no wise arise to a performance of.

The inward frame and disposition of the Soul, as it is the vital principle of
Moral actions, is that which God in order to his acceptance of them, mainly
measures them by. Hence that of Christ himself, That a Corrupt Tree cannot
bring forth good Fruit, Mat. 7.18. and that of the Apostle, that they who are
in the Flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8. But that to the unclean all things
are unclean, Tit. 1.15. and that the end of the Commandment is Charity out of a
pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. which occasioned Austin to say, non been facit bonum
qui non bonus facit; he performs not an action, though never so materially
good, well, who is not first Good himself, contr. Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3. And
again, Quid enim potestis facere boni, de cord non b^n^? What Good can you do
who are not first Holy? Austin. lib. 4. ad Bonif. cap. 6. and again, non enim
in te placet Deo nisi quod habes ex Deo, quod autem habes ex te displicet Deo
94 Sermon. de temp. Though the Quality of the Principle be extrinsecal to the
Physical entity of an act, yet it is of its Moral Essence, and is as much of
its Ethical Nature as any thing else whatsoever is. So that a late Author
proclaims his ignorance, not only in Systematical Divinity, but in Christian
Ethics, while he laughs at the difference assigned between the Duties
performed by one born of God, and the Material actions of the same physical
kind done by one unrenued in the Spirit of his mind; telling us that this
relates not to the Nature of the things themselves, but to the Principles from
whence they issue; as if the principle had no influence upon the Moral
denomination of an action, Def. and Contin. p. 335. Of the same complexion, and
betraying the same ignorance, are those other expressions of his, where not
only, with all imaginable contempt of a learned man, but with the highest
irreverence toward the Word, he introduces Paul as one, who if he should
again revisit the Christian world, would stand aghast to find his Epistles
brought upon the Stage to decide the difference between Moral and Physical
Specification; Reprof. to the Rehers. p. 99.100. Surely the thing is not so
foreign, either to other Sacred Writers, or to Paul himself, as that he should
have cause to be startled at it. It was this alone that constituted the
difference between the Sacrifice of Cain, and the Sacrifice of Abel, Heb. 11.4.
Does not he inform us even with reference to himself, that whilst he was
blameless, as to the material part of Duties, both of worship and manners, that
yet through want of being performed from a due principle, they were loathsome
to God, and became so afterward to himself? Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. So far is it from
being destructive of all true and real Goodness (as the same Author charge
it, Eccl. polit. p. 73.) to affirm that a man may be exact in all the Duties of
Moral Goodness, and yet be a Graceless person; That abating the word exact,
which is ambiguous, and the term all, seeing no man ever was, or will be so
without Grace, I do undertake to justify the denial of it to be no less than
Gross Pelagianism.

Now that considered, with respect to our mere faculties, and the best natural
improvement of them, we are without that Rectitude of heart, and conformity to
the holiness of God implanted in his Law, which we ought to have; we shall, for
the further manifestation of what we have asserted, endeavor to lay open and
evince. That over and above our being possessed of intellectual powers, we were
also imbued with superadded principles, commonly, and that according to the
Scripture, styled the Divine Image in us; and that the design of God in the
communication of this to us, and the implantation of it upon our Natures, was,
that we might be adapted to live to him; and that for the reaching and
attaining this great End, such concreated principles were naturally due, has
been in all its several parts and branches demonstrated, chap. 2.. 5. Of the
loss of this Image, and what thereupon ensues, we have in part also treated in
the same chapter,. 10. Something farther remains yet to be subjoyned; namely,
That by the loss of the Divine Images, there is immediately and formally in us
an unanswerableness to the holy Nature of God, a difformity both to the
holiness implanted upon the Law, and that Sanctity that wa^ at first imprinted
in our Natures. God himself is the first Exemplar and Original Idea of all
Holiness; He is the (...), the first Beauty. Holiness is in him essentially,
And from him it is Transcribed on the Law, which is Holy, Just, and Good, Romans
7.12. There is in the Law, as in a Copy, a Transcript of the Holiness of God.
Answerable to both these, there was at first a Rectitude and Holiness implanted
in, and impressed upon our Natures. There was a concreated similitude in us to
God, Genesis 1.26, 27. It Is true, That in us was not Univocally the same with the
Holiness that is in God. There cannot be an Identity in any thing between God
and Creatures. But there was an Analogy betwixt the one and the other.
Holiness is in God as his Nature and Essence; in us, as an accident
adventitious to our beings, yet so, as that Originally it was both due to us,
and that we were thereby fitly laid to be like him. Plato rightly styles it
(...), a sensible Image of the intelligible God, in Timaeo. Now this being
concreated with us at first, the same Philosopher calls it (...), The Old
Nature, in Crit. Now upon the loss of this implanted Rectitude and Image, we
became formally and immediately impure and unclean. The mere loss and want of it
is the very Deformity of the Soul. Hence the Scripture reports us to come all
Unclean into the World, Joh. 14.4. and be born Flesh, Joh. 3.6. and to be
shapen in Iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. From this, even abstracting from any thing
else, there results a loathsomness in our persons to God, and that does
naturally and by necessity infer a detestation in God of what ever proceeds
from us. Hence Austin expressly affirms privationem malam esse and per eam
immundum fi^ri Spiritum. The very privation of Rectitude to be an Evil, and
that thereupon the Soul becomes actually defiled and unclean, lib. 1. de
civitat. Dei cap. 10. And again, Naturae in tantum vitiosae sunt in quantum ab
ejus a quo factae sunt art discedunt, That so far as our Natures recede from
what they were at first, so far they become tainted and impure, idem de lib.
Arbitr. lib. 13. cap. 15. Yea, Bellarmin says that carentia doni Originalis,
macula mentem Deo invisam reddens appellari potest; The loss of Original
Rectitude is a stain, rendering our Souls loathsome to God; de Amiss. Great. and
Stat. peccat. lib. 5. cap. 17. This serves to perstringe a late Author who
tells us, that a decayed and ill-addicted Nature, is not a Crime, but an
Infelicity; That being an act of Gods Will, it can be no fault of ours, and
that to impute to our selves as a Crime, what was intended merely as a
punishment is new, at least, crud^ Divinity, Def. and Contin. p. 198. That it
is not New, were easy to show by innumerable Testimonies out of the Ancients.
The Fathers generally being at an agreement herein. And for the Crudeness of
the Divinity of it, it is as defensible as the imputation of Adams particular
offense, which our Author contends for, and which is more, therein with
Pighius, Salmeron, Catharinus, and some Arminians States the whole of Original
sin, which even the Jesuit Bellarmine styles a heresy. But for the thing it
self, viz. that the want of the Divine Image, is not only an infelicity, but a
Crime, I shall (...) produce a few arguments in proof of it. (1.) The Scripture
which uses not to Baptize things with undue names, expressly sti^es it so, see
Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.17. Heb. 12.1. (2.) That which renders us unclean, and by
consequence loathsome and abominable to God, is in the strictest propriety of
speaking a sin, seeing God hates nothing simply but sin, nor any thing but upon
that account. Mere disasters render us the Objects of Gods pity and
compassion, not of his Wrath and Hatred. Now that we are impure and hateful in
the sight of God, upon the account of the want of an inherent Rectitude has
been already declared. (3.) That which is opposite to Righteousness, can be
nothing less than sin, these two only being immediate contraries; for
punishment formally, as such is not in the same praedicament with
Righteousness, and so cannot in propriety be its oppositum. (4.) The want of
that which the Law requires, and which is naturally due and suitable to our
Faculties, must necessarily be sin; for as much as only sin is a transgression
of the Law. Now that the Law requires Habitual Holiness or Rectitude of
Nature, does necessarily follow upon the consideration that the Sanction of it
does not only reach the outward and external Action, but the Heart and
Principle. (5.) Every Innocent, Holy, and Undefiled Nature is at the least a
subject suitable and disposed for Communion with God here, and Fruition of Him
hereafter; but that Naturally we are not so, is written as with a Sunbeam,
Romans 8.8. Heb. 11.6. Joh. 3.6. (6.) That which dissolveth the subordination of
the Rational Creature to God, and the Regular Harmony of the Soul in its
actings, is surely sin, it lying in plain opposition to what we are especially
obliged to; Now the imputation of Adams mere single transgression, precluding
the corruption of our Nature could have no influence upon this, no more than
the Rebellious act of a Father in the forfeiture of whose Estate the Son is
involved, can have upon the Son, to the alienating him from his loyalty. But
that the due subordination of Man to God, and the Harmony of the Soul in its
actings is dissolved, every man's experience will inform him; and if he please,
he may learn it from the Philosophers, who generally tell us that it is (...),
Natural to men to sin. Many more arguments to this purpose lie in view, which
to avoid prolixity, I at present wave. And as to our Authors Objection, That
what is a Punishment cannot be a Crime. (1.) What if a clear solution could not
be given to it? Shall we therefore renounce a truth so strongly confirmed?
Nunquam ideo negandum quod apertum est, qui^ comprehendi non potest quod
occultum est, says Austin, lib. de persev. Sanct. cap. 14. Turatiocinare ego
credam. idem. I know not one Truth in Natural Philosophy, but I could muster
some one or other objection against, that I think would puzzle our Author
clearly to answer? Does it become us to be more immodest in our Divinity, than
in Human Sciences? (2.) What if I should say that it is only a Crime, and not
at all a Punishment? I have no less person than Placeus, not to name others,
preceding me in it. Adam sinning, did thereby shake off his dependence on God,
prefer a subordinate Good to him, and thereby divest himself of that rectitude
of Nature he was vested with; upon a mutation, as to his chief End, there was a
change in all his Moral Principles; And thus becoming corrupt himself, it was
impossible that any but such as are corrupt should be begotten by him; That
which is of Flesh, is Flesh; nor can any bring a clean thing out of an unclean.
Nor supposing Adam to have sinned, could it fall out otherwise without the
substitution of a New Protoplast; and subversion of the designed and declared
order for the propagation of Mankind. But (3.) What hinders, but that one and
the same thing materially considered, may under different formal respects be
both a Sin and a Punishment. Was not Achitophels and Judas's hanging themselves
both the one and the other? Does not God frequently threaten upon the
commission of some sins, to relinquish men in way of judgment to more; see 2
These. 2.10, 11. Romans 1.21, 24, 26, 28. Not only Philosophers will have sin to
be also a punishment, but the very Poet could say, Invidia Siculi non invenere
Tyranni.
Majus tormentum. --
What absurdity to say, that Adam divesting himself of the Divine Image, God
thereupon suspends the immediate Universal perfect restoring of it either to
him, or his Posterity; and that as the denying to restore it is an act of
Righteousness and Justice in God, so the want of it is nevertheless a sin in
us. Is there any thing more easy to be proved, than that according to the
tenor of the Old Covenant, it was impossible that it should be restored, and
yet that by the tenor of that very Covenant, the want of it is chargeable as a
crime upon us. It is only in the virtue of the Remedial Covenant made in Christ
as the Head of the New Creation, that we are renewed to the Image of God again;
And yet had there never been such a Transaction, it had been still our Duty to
have had it, and our sin to have been without it.

Having now made appear, that God in the taking the measure of us, and our
actions has a regard not only to the matter of them, but the Rectitude of the
Principles whence they proceed; and having laid open the pollution of our
Faculties, and their unanswerableness to the holy Nature of God, and the
Holiness implanted upon the Law, it is easy to infer an ataxy, disorder, taint
and moral defect in those very duties, which, as to the substance and matter of
them we are in the Discharge of. This lies so plain, and does so naturally
ensue upon the premises, that he must be of very mean intellectuals that does
not perceive and discover it. Yet that I may not be altogether wanting to the
service of a Truth of such import, I shall briefly intimate what necessarily
ensues hereupon, both with reference to the Credenda and Agenda of Religion, so
far as we are conversant in the Duties of either of them. First, with respect
to the Credenda of it: Though in the alone strength, and through the
improvement of our Natural Powers we may Grammatically understand, and
Dogmatically believe the Truths delivered in them: Yet (1.) We understand them
not in that spiritual manner as we ought, for as much as nothing can act beyond
its own sphere: Nor is there a due proportion between spiritual Objects and
Natural Light. This made the Apostle say, That the Natural man cannot know the
things of the Spirit of God, because they are Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.14. Hence notwithstanding the acknowledgment of an Objective perspicuity in
the Scripture, Divines generally assert a Subjective darkness in the mind, and
besides the Light impressed upon the Word, require an infusion of a principle
of Light and sight into the Understanding. Without this, says Luther, Ne jota
quidem unum videri potest in Scripturis, ea perspicacid quae salutaris est. Not
one jot in the Scripture can be understood in a saving way, apud Rivet. Isagog
ad Script. S. cap. 22. Hinc tantum quisque de sensu scriptuarum assequitur,
quantum de spiritu qui eas inspir^vit participat; So far only as we partake of
the Spirit, who indicted the Scriptures, do we attain the true and spiritual
sense of them, Paraeus in pr^aem. ad 1 Cor. 1. Therefore Baronius in his
Philosophia Theologiae ancillans tells us, that Notitia Rerum Theologicarum qua
praediti sunt impii and non renati, non est Theologia proprie dicta, sed
aequivoce dicitur Theologia. Exercit. 3. Art. 30. (2.) These very Truths which
unrenued men are in the Historical belief of, they do not spiritually savor
them. Believers are endowed with a Gust that others know nothing of. They are
otherwise affected by and with Gospel Truths, than men of mere Natural
Principles either are or can be; Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis; The same food has a different relish with one and the same person
according as the Organ of Taste is well or ill affected. How insipid are the
most comfortable doctrines of the Word to an Unrenued Soul, they find no relish
in them, whilst on the other hand the mind in which there resides a Vital
Principle, feels and experiments what he Historically believes, see Psalm.
119.103. 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 8.16. (3.) The mind being unrenued in its Habitude,
frame, and disposition, remains thereupon not only dark, ignorant, subject to
mistakes, error, vain imaginations, but liable to skepticism, unsetledness, and
at last a total disbelief of the things of the Spirit of God. The certainty of
spiritual sensation and experience being not only beyond the certainty of
Reason and Argumentation, but that which alone gives a clear comprehension of
Divine Mysteries, and which only indubitates the Soul concerning them. He that
hovereth in the profession of Gospel Truths, and finds nothing of the Reality,
Power, and Experience of them in himself, becomes thereby wonderfully disposed,
not only to question the Truth of them, but totally to reject them. Nor is it
imaginable how it should be otherwise, when he experienceth nothing of all that
he reads, hears, professes, and has been by education or force of Rational
Arguments in the belief of. Being told that the Death of Christ will mortify
sin, and that men are Sanctified by the Word, and finding nothing of this in
themselves, they are not only under a temptation hereby to disbelieve these
particular Truths, but to disclaim the whole Revelation of the Word as a Fable.

And as these things, through the loss of the Divine Image, and that pollution
which ensues in the Soul thereupon, do naturally accompany us with reference to
the Credenda of Religion, notwithstanding our being in the Historical belief of
them; so there are several things deducible from the same premises, with
Relation to those Agenda of Religion in the performance of the material duties
of which we are found. (1.) Nothing of all that is done, or performed, has its
rise in, or proceeds from a sincere, effectual, superlative love of God. That
this ought to be the principle motive and inducement of our obedience, I
suppose few will deny; and that where the foresaid pollution and disorder of
Soul, through the loss of the Divine Image, is, this sincere superlative love
to God is not, is of easy demonstration. I know some of the late Jesuits in
their casuitical Divinity, affirm it to be enough if we be in the observation
of the Commandments, though without any affection toward God, or the
Resignation of our hearts to him, provided that we do not hate him. But I hope
no Protestant is yet arrived at this, and indeed I wonder how any, professing
himself either a Christian or a Man, can entertain a persuasion so subversive
of all Religion, and repugnant as well to Reason as Scripture. I do not say
that any man on earth hates God to that degree, as those in Hell do; nor do I
assert that there is an explicit hatred of God in every act of an unrenued
person; I believe otherwise: But this I affirm, that love to God is not the
Universal governing Principle of an Unregenerate man, nor is it exalted to that
Degree in any action he performs, as to give him the denomination of a lover
of God. Now it is the sincerity, prevalency, and perfection of love that among
other things gives the Moral specification to Obedience. Whatever resemblance
the performances of one destitute of this Love may have of holy and Religious
obedience, yet all is loathsome to God, as wanting one chief ingredient of its
constituent form. Nor is this love in any one, in whom the Spirit of Christ
dwells not, Gal. 5.22. 1 John 4.7. Faith in Christ is the only root on which it
grows, Gal. 5.6. (...), Faith is the alone Foundation of a Good Work, Clem.
Alex. Strom. lib. 5. (2.) Through the loss of this Image of God, and the
disorder which necessarily ensues in the Soul thereupon; There is in all that
we perform antecedently to our being renewed to this Image again, a
prevarication with respect to our true great and ultimate End. That the end of
an action is under the Sanction of the Law, as well as the substance of the
Duty, I have shown before Chap. 3.. 6. God being our Author, is our Ultimate
End also. It is impossible for God to produce a Creature that is not according
to its Nature and Qualifications, to be to Him, and for Him. The lapse not only
involved in it, disobedience to God as our Sovereign, but Apostasy from him,
both as our Chief Good, and in point of seeking his Glory before our own
gratification. Now till the Divine Image be restored, and a rectitude Recovered
in our Souls again, we never so far return to God, as to make our selves, and
all that we do refer to him as to our End; but there is still either some base,
low, or crooked aim in all that we address to. Men's Ends will not rise higher
than their Principles: He that acts only from self, will only act for self. The
object of an action does materially adapt and qualify it to the being to Gods
glory, but it is the Principle and intention of the Agent that makes it
formally to be so. And though I will not affirm that an explicit intention of
Gods glory is either necessary, or indeed possible, in every individual act;
yet I say that there ought to be an habitual tendency in the Soul after it, in
every thing we apply to. Though the Traveller do not every step he takes, think
of the place whither he is going, yet his aim is still at it, and it often
revives upon his thoughts. Now through a prevarication, less or more, that is
in the actings of every Unregenerate person, with reference to his End; the
utmost of what he does, is but Obedience in an Equivocal sense. Their Virtues
are but Virtutum similitudines, the Counterfeits of Virtues, Quicquid boni fit
ab ^omine and non propter h^c fit, propter qu^d fiert debere vera sapientia
praecipit* et si ^fficio videatur bonum, ipso ^on recto fine peccatum est, Aug.
cont. Jul. lib. 4.
and differ as much from Genuine Virtue, quantum distat a veritate mendacium,
as a Lie does from Truth, Prosp. lib. 3. de vita contempl. Hence Vossius tells
us out of the Ancients, especially Austin, that the Virtues of the Heathen
Philosophers nomen bonorum operum amittunt, si per bonum intelligatur quod est
utile ad Vitam aeternam, Loose the name of Good Works if they be judged by
their Usefulness to the obtaining of Eternal life, Hist. Pelag. lib. 3. part.
3. These. 11.12.

. 7. Having treated the defects which occur in the best actions that Natural
men can perform, and declared their Unacceptableness to God thereupon; It
remains to be shown in the next place, that there are also some Duties under
the Sanction of which we all are, which even with respect to the matter of
them, no man in the mere virtue of Natural Principles can arise to a
performance of. And of this kind I shall only mention that great Duty incumbent
upon us of making to our selves new hearts, with what depends thereupon. That
the Sanctifying of our Natures, and the being renewed after the Image of God, is
prescribed to us in way of Duty; The Scripture plainly and fully testifies: And
yet, if we consult either the Scripture, or our own experience, we shall
understand how totally unable we are for the discharge and accomplishment of
this great Duty. Though the New Creature be only an additional to our Natural
Being, yet as to the Physical production of it, it lies as far out of our
sphere, as the production of the Soul does out of that of an organized body.
Was man merely passive in the reception of the Image of God impressed upon him
at first, and is there not greater reason to be persuaded that he is merely
passive in the new production and reception of it? Hence to testify our
impotency, the Scripture reports us to be dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians.
2.1.5. and that no man can come to Christ unless the Father draw him, Joh.
6.44. That we are neither begot again of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh,
nor of the will of Man, Joh. 1.13. We owe not our Regeneration either to the
efficacy of others, nor to the workings of our own wills. Hence the great Work
and Duty of circumcising our hearts is expressed by such phrases, which, if
they signify any thing, do import us merely passive in it. Of this complexion
are the expressions of our being begotten again, Created, Quickened, etc. Did
the scattered Atoms of matter frame themselves into the Machine of the Humane
Body at first? Or do those Rudimental Principles conveyed for the formation of
the Faetus in the Womb, dispose themselves into that orderly, admirable variety
of texture, which fills us at once with amazement and thankfulness? Shall the
dispersed particles, and corpuscles of dust, rendevouse and reassemble
themselves into their former frames, without the Physical interpose of a
foreign Agent? If none of these be either true or possible, no more is it so,
that man can convert himself. Were we disposed qualified, qualified and suited
to the accomplishment of this work, would God take it out of our hand, and rob
us of the praise of it? Does He not again and again proclaym us inept and weak
for the effecting of it? Does he not entitle himself the Author of it? Is not
the Holy Spirit purchased by Christ, and promised by the Father to this End?
The Scriptures bearing Testimony to this, are innumerable; see among others,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Jer. 31.33. Jam. 1.18. Ephesians. 2.10. Tit. 3.5, 6.
Phil. 2.13. etc. Now notwithstanding all this, to argue for an Ability in us to
perform it, merely because it is prescribed us in way of Duty, is childish and
trifling; is it not enough to justify the prescription of it in way of Duty:
(1.) That such a frame of heart ought to be in us, and that the want of it, is
as much our sin, as our misery. (2.) That being awakened by the consideration
of our duty, to a perception of our weakness. We ought thereupon to sue to God
for strength. And therefore it is, that all precepts to this purpose are
attended with answerable promises. Finding that thou can not change thy
sensual earthly heart, thou art to implore his help, who is not only able, but
willing to relieve and succor thee.

(3.) That God hereby excites us to do what we can, and to wait upon him in all
those ways and means, which he has promised upon our sincere exercise to make
successful. (4.) That these commands and exhortations of washing and making us
clean, of getting a new heart, etc. are not so much suited to us as weak as
they are intended to us as stubborn, nor so much prescribed to us under the
reduplication of our being unable, as of being Rebellious.

Si quis per Naturae vires bonum aliquod quod ad salutem pertinet vitae
aeternae cogitare aut eligere, sive salutari, i. e. Evangelicae praedicationi
consentire posse confirmat, absque illuminatione and inspiratione Spiritus
Sancti qui dat omnibus suavitatem in consentiendo and credendo veritati,
haeretico fallitur spiritu, non intelligen^ vocem Dei in Evangelio dicentis*
sine me nihil potestis Council. Araus. Can. 7.
. 8. From what has been delivered in the two preceding Paragraphs we may
safely now infer the necessity of a superadded infused Principle in order to
our living to God in the whole of practical Religion, and our being accepted
with him. Nor is there any thing that the Scripture declares in more Emphatical
terms, the Holy Ghost foreseeing contradiction that would be made hereunto. And
by the same acts and methods that men endeavor to avoid the force of
Scripture-Testimonies in this matter; there is not any Article of Faith that
can be secure, but what ever the Holy Ghost has delivered for the confirmation
of the greatest Doctrines of the Christian Religion may with the like subtilty
be perverted to another Intendment. Had God designed the declaring the Doctine
of an infused Subjective principle; I challenge any man to show me how it could
have been more clearly and fully expressed than it is already. The causes both
Moral and Physical, the way and manner of its production and communication; the
intrinsic subjective change that is thereby made and wrought in the frame,
temper, and disposition of the Soul; the capacity that we are thereupon brought
into of communion with God here, and enjoying him hereafter, together with the
effects that proceed thence in our Conversation and course of Living, both
toward God and Man, are all held forth in the Scripture in terms most plain,
full, and emphatical. Nor are the Prayers and Thanksgivings, with reference to
renewing and assisting Grace, which I suppose all Christians are found in the
performance of, reconciliable with the denial and negation of such a Principle
and so conferred. Surely in our applications and addresses to God, we pray not
for Rational Faculties, nor merely for the enjoyment of the Gospel, but we pray
especially, That God would Create in us a clean heart; that he would renew us
in the Spirit of our minds; fulfill in us the work of Faith with power; work in
us both to will and to do; all which argue a necessity of something more than
either Essential Powers or Objective Light. Therefore Austin says well
concerning the Pelagians, destruu^t orationes quas facit Ecclesia sive pro
infidelibus, and Doctrinae Dei resistentibus, ut convertantur ad Deum; sive pro
fidelibus ut augeatur iis fides and perseverent in ea, Haeres. 80. and again,
cur petitur quod ad nostram pertinet potestatem, si De^s non adjuvat
voluntatem; idem de gr^t. Christi lib. 1. cap. 15. and once more, Quis optat,
quod in potestate sic habet, ut ad faciendum nullo indigeat adjumento? idem de
peccat. Merit. and Remis. lib. 2. cap. 6. The same may be said of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God, with respect to Grace. For if there be no insused
Principles; it will necessarily follow that while we pretend to bless. God for
quickening us when we were dead in Trespasses and Sins; for making us willing
through a day of power; for the exceeding greatness of his power exerted
toward us who believe; for the sanctifying us wholly in our Soul, Spirit, and
Body, etc. We do but mock and flatter him; For as Austin says, Pro^s^s non
gratias Deo agimus, sed nos agere fingimus, si unde illi gratias agimus, ipsum
facere non putamus, Epist. 107. ad Vital^m. Shall I add, that to deny the
infusion of a supernatural Vital Principle, or to affirm that the Spirit of God
acts only toward us in way of Moral suasion, yea to grant no other inward
operation, but what is Resistible and may be withstood, is in effect to ascribe
all the difference that is betwixt one man and another to our selves, contrary
to the express words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from
another? and what have thou, that thou did not* Receive. But having already
treated this, Chap. 2.. 15. and seeing if what we have delivered in this
Chapter hold good, this naturally follows; and being obliged to make an End, I
supercede all farther prosecution of it.

. 9. I have now done with the theory and polemical part, and thought to have
proceeded to a practical improvement by way of Use of what has been said; but
the discourse being already drawn out and increased beyond what I at first
intended: I shall therefore wave all that I had in that way designed to say.
However I hope, that as I have finished what I mainly purposed, so I have in
some measure performed what I undertook; namely, have justified that Moral
Virtue and Practical Religion are not universally coincident, but that there is
something else necessary in order to our living to God in all the Duties of
obedience incumbent upon us, besides either Moral Virtue, or the instruments of
it; and that those who pursue the acquisition of Grace and Spiritual Holiness
over and above the common Virtues of Morality, do not engage their main
industry and biggest endeavors in the pursuit of Dreams and Shaddows, as we
are told, Def. and Continuat. p. 338. If any now upon the one hand, by
obtruding a notion, and definition of Morality, supposing and including all
that we have been contending for as necessary to Christian Obedience, shall
thereupon affirm Morality and Holiness to be all one, as I find some learned
men do; I shall take the liberty to say that however sound and Orthodox* by
virtue of such an explication they manifest themselves to be in Divinity, they
do not declare that skill in Philosophy, which they would bear the world in
hand that they are furnished with. It is Institution and vulgar use of Terms
that ought to fix and determine their signification; and whoever he be that
retaining usual Terms will yet assume a freedom of affixing what sense he
pleases to them, as he Usurps an Empire that is neither just not reasonable;
so he not only makes way for endless L^g^machies, but leaves a president for
confounding and changing the state of any question in the world* and his
Authority will be produced, when he is dead and gone, to the disservice of
Truth; nor will it be difficult for witty men to render the sense he now
pretends to use the Terms in, ridiculous and unmaintainable. If any upon the
other hand, submitting to the common and received signification of the Words
interested in the state of the Question we have been debating, shall still
persevere in confounding Morality and Holiness; I dare now leave it to the
judgment of the intelligent Reader, whether it ought not to be ascribed to a
wilful obstinacy, and an unreasonable humor which neither Authority nor
demonstration were ever intended to conquer. I expect therefore no Proselyte
where my Adversary is resolved to be peremptory and confident: It is sufficient
I have said enough to shame and baffle him, and so I leave him to feast himself
with his own disease. Perit judicium cum res transit in affectum; Where the
Understanding i^ bribed by Prejudice, Pride, and Interest, we cannot expect an
impartial award. (...); We embrace Opinions because of their affinity to the
complexion of our minds, and their agreeableness to our life's and manners,
says Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. To shut up all, let me entreat those who contend
for, and are in the belief of the necessity of an infusion of a New Vital
Principle in order to our living acceptably to God, to labor to feel the
power, and to express the efficacy of it in their hearts and lives. Let us make
it appear that we plead not for Grace, that it may be a Sanctuary either for
ill Nature, or ill Manners, and that we do not intend it for a shelter for
those vices which Philosophy would banish; nor design to protect Lusts and
Passions under the privilege of it; as a late Author is pleased to charge us,
Repr. to the Rehers. page 60.61. Nor let us think it enough to have the frame
of our spirits by some initial principles attempered to obedience; but let us
act Faith on Christ for continued fresh supplies of the Spirit of Grace, both
for the actuating and drawing into exercise the already in^used and instilled
Principles, and the farther confirming, strengthening, and consummating the
Elemental Seeds, knowing that we have not already attained nor are already
perfect, but that we are still to reach forth unto those things which are
before us, if by any means we may attain the Resurrection of the dead. To this
purpose see Joh. 15.4, 5. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 6.10. Phil 4.13. (...); Being born
of God, and implanted in him, let us abide in him, as in our Root, seeing
Streams, Plants, and Branches dry and wither, if separated and cut off from
their source and stem. Demophil. the Pythagorean Philosopher.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Besides several Errata's of lesser moment, which the Author is not Solicitous
about; there are some that spoil the Sense, which thou art Entreated to Correct
as follows:

PAge 21. line 13. read (...). p. 23. l. 8. r. know. p. 24. l. 24. r. footing
in p. 40. l. 17 r. dele Comma after (...). p. 61. l. 12. r. (...). p. 73. l. 2.
r. than. p. 75. l 7. r. an angry. p. 77. l. 28. r. animantia. p. l. 22. dele
Colon after Natural, and place it after contraria p. 81. l. ^. dele comma after
Nature. p. 86. l. 13. r. a multitude. p. 89 l ^. r. darkened, p. 101. l. 7. dele
that, p. 111. l. 21. dele or, ibid. l. 23 r. (...), p. 117 l. 7. put a period
after Natures, p. 149 l. 3. r. (...). p. 152 l. 17 r. Pelagians, p. 176 l. 12
dele in, p. 214 l. ult. r. conversation, p. 224 l. ^ r. of the, p. 226 l. 25 r.
to murmr, p. 228 l. 17 r. particula aurae, p. 229 l. 25 r. Men's, p. 243 l. 21
The like, p. 269 l. 26 r. (...), p. 270 l. 5 r. (...), ibid. r. Athen. p. 276
l. 3, in the Margent, r. Est rei sive, p. 213 l. 19 r. Aristides.

BOOKS Sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry.
Folio.
THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious K.
Edward the First; wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all Causes, is asserted and vindicated: With an
exact History of the Popes intolerable Usurpation upon the Liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the Ancient Records
in the Tower of London, by W. Prin, Esquire of Lincoln's Inn, and Keeper of his
Majesty's Records in the Tower of London.

A Description of the Four parts of the world, taken from the Works of Monsieur
Sanson, Geographer to the French King; and other eminent Travelers and
Authors; to which is added the Commodities, Coyns, Weights and Measures of the
chief places of Traffic in the world; illustrated with variety of useful and
delightful Maps and Figures. By Richard Blome, Gent.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of those Excellent
Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in our late
intestine Wars, from the year 1637, to 1666; with the Life and Martyrdom of
King Charles the First. By David Lloyd.

The Exact Politician, or Complete Statesman, etc. By Leonard Willan, Esquire.

A Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles
the Second in Holland.

Mores hominum, the Manners of Men described in sixteen Satyrs. by Juvenal;
together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, and the Latin and
Greek Histories. By Sir Robert Stapleton, Knight.

A Treatise of Justification. By George Downham, Dr. of D.

Fifty one Sermons, Preached by the Reverend Dr. Mark Frank, Master of
Pembroke-Hall in Cambridg, Archdeacon of St. Albans, etc. To which is added a
Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, Anno 1641. and then commanded to be Printed by
King Charles the First.

Bentivolio and Urania, in six Books. By Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D.

The third Edition, wherein all the obscure words throughout the Book are
interpreted in the Margent, which makes this much more delightful to read than
the former.

De Jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae, or three Books of the Rights belonging
to an Uniformity in Churches, in which the chief things of the Laws of Nature
and Nations, and of the Divine Law concerning the Consistency of the
Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, are unfolded, by Hugh Davis, Ll. B. late
Fellow of New College in Oxon.

An English, French, Italian, Spanish Dictionary, by James Howel.

Observations on Millitary and Political Affairs, by the Honorable, George,
Duke of Albemarle.

The manner of Exercising the Infantry, as it is now practiced in the Armies of
his most Christian Majesty.

Quarto.
A Letter from Dr. Robert Wild to his Friend, Mr. J. J. upon occasion of his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Together with his Poetica
Licentia and a friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist.

The Dutch Remonstrance concerning the Proceedings and Practices of John de
Wit, Pensionary, and Ruwaert Van Putten his Brother, with others of that
Faction; Translated out of Dutch.

Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, in Thirteen Sections, by W. Prin.

A Plea for Indulgence* by W. Prin.

Index Biblicus: or, an E^^ct Concordance to the Holy Bible, according to the
last Translation, by John Jackson, Minister of the Gospel at Moulsea in Surrey.

The Christian Man's Calling: or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business:
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious duties, Natural
Actions, particular Vocations, Family directions; and in his own Recreations,
in all Relations, in all Conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the
choice of his Company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from
morning to night; in visiting the sick, and on a dying-bed, by G^o. Swinnock.

Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel-Remission; or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs.

An Exposition of the Song of Solomon. By James Durham, late Minister in
Glasgow.

The Real Christiaen: or a Treatise of Effectual Calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the Holy
Scriptures; some things required by our late Divines, as necessary to a right
Preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles Firmin, sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah: or a Prospect of Heaven; being an Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Tho. Case,
sometimes Student in Christ-Church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel.

The Virtue and Value of Baptism. By Za. Crofton.

The Quakers Spiritual Court proclaimed; being an exact Narrative of a New high
Court of Justice; also sundry Errors and Corruptions amongst the Quakers, which
were never till now made known to the wo^ld. By Nath. Smith, who was conversant
among them fourteen Years.

A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence, occasioned by the twelve Months fasting
of Martha Tailor, the faim'd Darby-shire Damsel; proving, that without any
Miracle the texture of Humane bodies may be so altered, that Life may be long
continued without the supplies of Meat and Drink. By John Reynolds.

A Grave for Controversies, between the Romanist and the Protestant, lately
presented to the French King.

Large Octavo.
The Life and Death of that Excellent Minister of Christ, Mr. Joseph Allin.
Also his Christian Letters, full of spiritual instructions. Published by
several Ministers.

Death Unsting'd: A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Mowsley an
Apothecary, who died July 1669; with a brief Narrative of his Life and Death,
also the manner of Gods dealing with him before and after his Conversion, drawn
up by his own hand, and published by James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel.

Memorials of Gods Judgments, Spiritual and Temporal: or, Sermons to call to
Remembrance. By Nich. Lockier, Minister of the Gospel.

A Plat for Mariners, or the Seamans Preacher; delivered in several Sermons
upon Jonah's Voyage. By R. Ryther, Preacher of Gods Word at Wappin.

The Gentlewomans Companion; or, a Guide to the Female Sex: containing
Directions of Behavior, in all Places, Companies, Relations, and Conditions,
from their Childhood down to Old age: With Letters and Discourses upon all
occasions. Whereunto is added a Guide for Cook-maids, Dairy-maids,
Chamber-maids, and all others that go to Service: The whole being an exact Rule
for the Female Sex in general.

The present State of Russia, in a Letter to a Friend at London; Written by an
Eminent Person, residing at the Great Tzars Court at Mosce, for the space of
Nine years: Illustrated with many Copper Plates.

Lazarus Redivivus: or, a discovery of the Trials and Triumphs that accompany
the work of God, in and about his people; with an Essay, tending to clear up
those Mistakes men have about it; laid open in several Sermons. By Nicho.
Blaky, Minister of the Gospel.

Heaven on Earth: or the best Friend in the worst times; to which is added a
Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Mowsley Apothecary. By Ja. Janeway.

The fulfilling of the Scriptures: or, an Essay showing the exact
Accomplishment of the word of God in his Works of Providence, performed, and to
be performed; for confirming the Believers, and convincing the Atheists of
these present times: Containing in the end a few Rare Histories of the Works
and Servants of God, in the Church of Scotland.

The Morning Seeker; showing the benefit of being good betimes; with Directions
to make sure work about early Religion. By John Rither.

A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-peace and Unity; with the
Occasions and Reasons of present Differences and Divisions about things Sacred
and Religious. By John Owen, D. D.

Small Octavo, and Twelves.
The Life and Death of Mr. Thom. Wilson, Minister of Maidstone, in the County
of Kent. Drawn up by Mr. George Swinnock.

Hieragonisticon, or Corahs Doom; being an Answer to two Letters of Inquiry
into the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

The Comparison of Plato and Aristottle, with the Opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrine, and some Christian Reflections; together with Judgment on
Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch and Petronius, out of the
French.

Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil: a Discourse representing the
Excellency of those Works, and the Perfection in general of all Heroic
Actions, out of the French.

Published this Term, A somber Inquiry into the Nature, Measure, etc. of
Morality, and it is distinction from Gospel Holiness; in Answer to Eclesiastical
Policy, Continuation, and Reproof to the Rehearsal Transprosed. By R. F.

Fellowship with God, or 28 Sermons on the first Epistle of John, chap. first
and second. By Hugh Binning, late Minister in Scotland.

The mystery of Faith opened, or some Sermons concerning Faith. By Andrew Gray
late Minister of Glasgow.

A Token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway.

The Mercury-Gallant, Containing many true and pleasant Relations of what
passed at Paris, from the first of January 72. till the Kings Deparure thence.

An Explanation, of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, wherein all the Answers
are taken abroad in, under Questions and Answers, the Truths explained, and
proved by Reason and Scripture; several Cases of Conscience resolved; some
chief Controversies in Religion stated, etc. By Tho. Vincent.

The Experiences of God's gracious declining; with Mrs. Elizabeth White, as
they were written with her own hand, and found in her Closet after her decease.

A serious Caution against Impenitency, under Gods Correcting-Providences. By
James Sharp.

Justification only upon a Satisfaction. By Robert Ferguson.

The Christians great Interest: or the trial of a saving interest in Christ,
with the way how to attain it. By W. Guthry, late Minister in Scotland.

The virtue, vigor and efficacy of the Promises displayed in their strength and
glory. By Tho. Henderson

The History of Moderation; or the Life, Death, and Resurrection of Moderation,
together with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred, and Character, Friends
and also her Enemies.

A Guide to the true Religion: or, a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion Men venture their Salvation upon. By John Clappam.

Rebukes for sin, by God's burning anger; by the burning of London; by the
burning of the world, and by the burning of the wicked in Hellfire; to which
is added a Discourse of Heart-fixedness. By T. Dolittle.

Four Select Sermons, upon several Texts of Scripture, wherein the Will Worship
and Idolatry of the Church of Rome is laid open, and confuted. By William
Fenner.

The Life and Death of Dr. Ja. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of
Ireland.

A most Comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul. By W.
Cooper Bishop of Galloway.

Mr. Ferguson on the Epistles to the Galatians and Ephesians.

Justification only upon a satisfaction, or the Necessity and Verity of the
Satisfaction of Christ, as the alone grounds of Remission of sin, asserted and
opened against the Socinians. By R. Ferguson.

The Canons and Institutions of the Quakers, agreed upon at their General
Assembly, at their new Theater in Grace Church Street.

A Synopsis of Quakerism: or, a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. By Tho. Danson.

Blood for blood; being a true Narrative of that late horted murder committed
by Mary Cook upon her Child. By Nath. Partridge, with a Sermon on the same
occasion.

Six several Treatises. By Nich. Lockier Minister of the Gospel.

Bonastis Vapulans: or, some Castigations given to Mr. Durel, for fouling
himself and others in his English and Latin Book: By a Country Scholar.

A Discourse written by Sir G. Downing the King of Great Brittain's Envoy
Extraordinary, to the States of the United Provinces: Vindicating his Royal
Master from the Insolences of a scandalous Libel, Printed under the Title of [
An Extract out of the Register of the States General of the United Provinces,
upon the Memorial of Sir Geo. Downing, Envoy, etc.] And delivered by the Agent
de Heyde for such, to several Public Ministers. Whereas no such Resolution was
ever communicated to the said Envoy, nor any answer returned at all by their
Lordships to the said Memorial.

Whereunto is added a Relation of some Former and Latter Proceedings of the
Hollanders: By a meaner Hand.

The Assemblies works in 12o, with the large and smaller Catechisms.

Scotch Psalms alone, or with the Bible.

THese are to give Notice, That the Psalms of David in Meeter are newly
Translated, and Diligently Compared, with the Original Text and former
Translations, more smooth and agreeable to the Text than that of Tho.
Sternhold, John Hopkins, or any other Extant in English; and do run with such a
fluent Sweetness, That the Ministers whose Names are here-under Subscribed,
have thought fit to Recommend it to all with whom they are Concerned; some of
them having used it already, with great Comfort and Satisfaction: These Psalms
are to be sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's A^mes in the Poultry, at One
shilling Fourpence Price.

John Owen, D. D. Tho. Manton, D D. William Jenkyn. James Jnnes. Thomas Watson.
Thomas Lie. Matthew Poole. Jo. Milward. John Chester. George Cockayn. Matthew
Meade. Robert Franklin. Richard Mayo. Hen. Langley, D.D. Thomas Doolittle.
Thomas Vincent. Nathaniel Vincent. John Ryther. William Thompson. Nicholas
Blaky. Charles Morton. Edmund Callamy. William Carslake. James Ganeway. John
Hicks. John Baker.

