A Remonstrance reference to the Act, to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles, Super verba, Being a Subject of this Realm. Which shows, that
by the said Act it seems, as if the Magistrates did, as it were, unadvisedly
and incompetently proceed against the Subjects of Foreign Princes, as namely,
the Germans, Dutch, Frenchmen, and the like, contrary to the said Act: And so
charge the Government of England with a Prejudice, not to be slighted. Conf.
Act. 22.25.

By Albertus Otto Faber.

London, Printed in the Year 1664.

A REMONSTRANCE in reference to the Act, to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles, super verba, Being a Subject of this Realm, etc.
1. THe Title ( al. Rubrica or Rubrum) is this; An Act to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conventicles.

2. The Text (al. Nigrum) following declares in substance, that For providing
of speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of seditious
Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of Tender
Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections: it is enacted, That
if any person, [being a Subject of this Realm] shall be present at any
Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, above four persons, under color or pretense
of any exercise of Religion, then the Magistrate shall commit every such
Offender to the Goal or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprise, for any time, not exceeding the space of three months, unless such
Offender shall pay down such sum of money, not exceeding five pounds for the
first Offense. And for the second Offense, he shall incur the said penalty of
Imprisonment, not exceeding six months, or pay down such sum of money, not
exceeding ten pounds. And for the third Offense the Magistrate shall commit him
as aforesaid, until the next Sessions, which shall happen first, where he shall
be proceeded against by Indictment, in order to lawful Conviction and
Transportation: and in case of escaping or returning unto this Realm of
England, Dominion of Wales, [and] Town of Berwick, the party so escaping or
returning, shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer Death as in case of
Felony, without benefit of Clergy.

3. Three things are generally to be proved here, ere any one can be convicted
by the said Act; 1. That any one has been at a Conventicle, such as is defined
in this Act. 2. That he be a Subject. 3. Of this Realm.

4. As concerning the definition of a Conventicle, such as is defined in the
said Act, mark first; what says its Title or Rubric, viz. To suppress
Seditious Conventicles. So all public and open Meetings or Assemblies; as for
instance, those of Stage Players and Bear-baitings, etc. are excluded here,
because all what in the Act following shall be spoken, must strictly
(especially being a penal Law.) be understood only of Conventicles, according
to the principle of Laws, viz. Interpretatio Nigri fluit ex Rubro, quae in
paenalibus strictior and benignier est, that is, When some one, looking upon
the sign of a house where is written, Here is Coffee to be had, he knows that
Sack or Rhenish wine is excluded, as not to be sold there. So accordingly is
this the definition: A Conventicle is an unlawful Assembly, or Meeting of
seditious Sectaries and other disloyal persons, being Subjects of this Realm,
who do contrive Insurrections, under pretense of tender Consciences, and
exercise of Religion.

5. As concerning that [being a Subject] it is true, when the words of the Act
were written down in the general, thus; If any person shall be present at any
Conventicle, etc. it would include all generally, as well Foreigners or
Inhabitants in this Realm, as the Subjects of the same. But being, of set
purpose, limited and restrained upon the Subjects of this Realm, all
Foreigners are thereby evidently excluded.

6. Nay, by so much the more, that the Act stands not only restrictively upon
the Subjects, but adds, [of this Realm] And so excludes all Irishmen and
Scottishmen too.

7. Therefore all this ought to be proved first, ere any proceeding against any
person, upon that account may be legal and justified in the sight of the world:
Provided always, that a particulari ad Universale non valet consequentia. And
therefore Verba generalia secundum Naturam subjectae rationis restringenda
sunt. Neque enim quae in odium paucorum introducta sunt, ad omnes extendi ratio
and jura permittunt, presertim in statutis, quorum verba semper stricte sunt
accipienda and secundum communem loquendi usuns.

8. Wherefore it is quite contrary to the Principles, especially those of penal
Laws, to extend the word Subject beyond its natural sense, because Juditium
penale non excedit casum, sed ut in statutis, it a multo magis in paenalibus
and odiosis verba Legis in benigniorem partem accipi debent, that is, the penal
Judgment exceeds not the case, but the words of the Law are to be understood
according to their strict ( viz. most common and natural) signification, to
save men's lives.

9. And it might be inquired for, in all the Laws of England, if any where the
word Subject is ever said or spoken of any other, than such as are Englishmen
or Naturalized. If so; to what purpose serves the Naturalization? If not, why
must it now in this odious matter be forced beyond its strength, as to include
generally all that are in the Kings protection? That would seem to the Aliens,
as if they under the suffering of this Act should purchase the Naturalization;
Or justly might be required, What then those words, being a Subject of this
Realm, did imply, for as much as all that are in England, are in the Kings
protection? But I verily believe, that in case a German upon such an account,
as being a Subject of this Realm, would buy some Land, and make use of the
Privileges of Englishmen, the Judges would soon find him not capable.

10. Therefore the case is plain, if men would but prevail with their Reason,
lest under pretense of Executing the Law, they are found guilty of Oppression,
and fall into the Condemnation of the Most-High.

11. For if the Judges (and Jurymen) sit on the Bench to save men's Lives, when
the Law in any respect is not broken, might it not, in case they endeavor all
what they can to take away men's lives contrary to the Law, justly be answered;
as it is written: Sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to
be smitten contrary to the Law? Such like Judges methinks might well be
suspected, and consequently by the Authority of the Law, recused.

12. And furthermore, The reason of these restrictive words, [Being a Subject,
etc.] will make it up: for, 1. because the issue of the Act is, Servitude and
Transportation to the Kings Plantations beyond the Seas; which penalty, as
being unfit to be executed against a Forreigner, caused this Restriction of the
said Act, referring it self upon the Subjects alone; and therefore to make it
evident, these words [being a Subject of this Realm] have been inserted of set
purpose.

13. Whereby Evidence is given, that the King's intention by the said Act is
only carried on to a Reformation of his own Subjects first of all, before those
of other Nations, not willing (in the first place) to countenance the
Foreigners sooner, than he may have brought to a Conformity his Own.

14. Which being performed, the Foreigners (it might be supposed) would not be
looked upon as men of Reason, in case All Subjects of this Realm were brought
to an unanimous Uniformity, they would rest without it, and yet be Inhabitants
of this Realm.

15. And therefore I bid all men consider, if the inferior Magistrates do not
according to what is here declared, deal prejudicially to the King and
Government of England, when they imprison men, in order to Servitude and
Transportation, and cannot afterward, when it comes to Trial, sentence or
execute them, according to Law and Reason of the same? And do they not wrong
foreign Kings and Princes? and become guilty of false Imprisonment?

16. So this may give Evidence enough, that Foreigners by the Act to suppress,
etc. are proceeded against unjustly and contrary to the said Act. It is
therefore in vain, to say, they must execute the Law, when they do more than
any Law requires to be done, making only, of what they say is a Law, a Cover of
their Intentions, in complying with, or repairing unto that, which binds them
not, by which the Inexcusableness of men shall be evident at that time, when
the Lord shall judge them, however they seem now to be, as the Prophet Esdras
says, 2 Esd. 12.72. Paraenesis ad quorum Interest.

17. But be it known herewith to all concerned in this matter, that if the
Principle the Quakers are possessors of, be from God, then no power of men can
overthrow them, let them stir and bustle and clamor and rage and banish and
persecute whatever they can.

18. And if the Principle the Quakers are possessors of, be not from God, let
them worship and pretend and color and meet, and suffer Persecution,
Imprisonment, Banishment, yea, Death it self, all will not keep them standing,
but they must fall, without all such bustling or any man's power. So,

19. This is the old Principle of Gamaliel, true, and never found false, or
there could be no Christians.

20. And will stand, when there are no Persecuters any more, or there would
remain no Christians.

21. Mark here, ye that are Atheists, if the Foundation of the Christian Faith
were but a Device of men, by what reason may ye think that it might be
possible, that by no power of the world they could be overthrown in these 1664
years? Tell me, could ever any thing in the world, by what wisdom of men
soever, thus be established, that it should stand so long as the Christians
have done, and cannot be weakened as yet, although battered by all Ages? Would
they not dye outright by themselves, like as other things have done, that ye
reckon to be more real and reasonable? Nay, have not always all powers, that
endeavored what they could to overthrow them, been overthrown themselves, and
have perished? Have they not all been like a Ship, that hits against a Rock to
split it, and have they not been split themselves? If not, where are they then?
let them come forth, that we may see them: Because I see the Christians are
still in being and alive. But they are all gone, and lie in their graves, and
are rotten, and shall never see the Light again. But the Christians stand in
battle still, as ready to fight, yet to kill no body, but rather to dye. Yet
they must live, and those must dye that will kill them.

22. What is then the best, to fight against God, and perish; or yield unto his
power, and be saved?

23. O pitiful undertakings, that are beyond men's strength! If a Child should
adventure to carry a Millstone to the top of Paul's Steeple, would you not laugh
at it? And yet you encounter greater difficulties. Be not angry, but consider
if Truth be not spoken here.

24. Moreover, Have ye ever stated the case of the Jews against Jesus; When
first Jesus came and showed his Power in Miracles, doing many good works, he
was very welcome and beloved amongst the Jews, except the Priests. All people
ran after him, and wondered at him, except the Priests. And no man spoke ill of
him, (...) well, except the Priests. Because no man found any thing in him, nor
in his Life and Conversation that was reproachful, and the Priests neither. But
when Jesus began to reprove the Priests, their hatred, envy, maliciousness
arose in them, and Persecution began, till finally unto death it self. All
people (the sober sort of them) pitied Jesus and wept. But the Priests drew
the most cruel sort of the Nation, and they joined, and blamed, and stirred up
the people, and cried out against Jesus, until they had brought the whole Realm
of the Jews into a commotion and confusion. There Jesus must be a Seditious
Man, a Seducer, a Blaspemer, a Devil, and what not? And all this by the
Priests. And the more Jesus did reprove them for it, in meekness, in patience,
in truth, the more they grew bad, shrewd, envious, till at last they resolved
to kill him; Because (said they) all people drew after him. And here the
Priests uttered their chief cause. Then assembled together the Arch-Priests,
the Lawyers, and the Senators of the Nation, in the Palace, and said, What do
we? for this man does many Miracles; If we let him thus alone, all men will
believe on him, and the Romans shall come, and take away both our place and
Nation. Therefore they consulted, how they might take Jesus by subtilty and
kill him. Now, to make a new Law on purpose, they needed not, because they had
a Law of God himself, which they could find him guilty of, according to the
very letter; and this was the Law, He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he
shall surely be put to death, Levit. 24.26. And so Jesus being in the eyes of
the Arch-Priests, Lawyers and Senators, but a poor silly Carpenter of Nazareth,
who did teach publicly, That all that would be saved must believe in him, for
he was God's Son, sent to the end he should be their King: Tell me, wisemen,
what evidence needed they more to find him guilty? For as to be convinced
otherwise by his Miracles, such like had been wrought by many Prophets of old,
who never-the-more did amount to that highness, of professing themselves Sons
of God. And as concerning his Miracles, they did not reprove him for, but as it
is written, for Blasphemy, and because he being a man, made himself a God, Joh.
10.33.

25. So tell me, all Judges and Jurymen, if Jesus should come at this very day
before your Bar, must ye not find him guilty, according to the express letter
and evidence of the fact? If so, wherefore do ye chide and tax the Jews, who
had such a Godly old Law, not made by men, on purpose: a Law, whose letter and
reason of the same did so well agree together, that they found themselves
strictly, (and not hypocritically, as to please men) bound to take the
execution of it, as being by so many sad experiences oftentimes most sadly,
both by Wars, Captivity, and other Plagues, warned and reproved for the
neglecting of the Law of God?

26. If now, provided the expressedness of the Law of God, and the evidence of
the fact, the Arch-Priests, Lawyers and Senators of the Realm of the Jews, and
the universal multitude of the then Jewish Church, notwithstanding their far
more (by divine Authority expressedly sub paena Capitis, Deuteronomy. 17.8.)
authentical Infallibility, did most fundamentally err and mistake, and so
deceive notoriously the whole Nation, bringing them into (at this very day)
endless misery, to be left without excuse; what will become of such as scarce
can pretend a Law, though made on purpose, one after another, yet still by
reason of the same they cannot hit the mark, nor will their Witnesses agree
together, Mark. 14.56, and 59. And yet they will still foot upon, and show
themselves as it were bound to the Execution of it, where neither Evidence of
the Fact, nor the leas^ reason of the same may excuse them. Therefore if the
green tree is cut off, think what shall be done in the dry, Luke 23.31. So
loving Friends, find out the cause which made the Jews to stumbles, and it will
show you your own case, like as in a Looking-glass.

Isa. 51.7, 8, 9. and Chap. 66.5.
London, 14th of the 7th month, 1664.
THE END.

