A LETTER TO THE Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench; OCCASIONED By the Noise of a PLOT.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

A LETTER to the Right Honorable My Lord Chief Justice HOLT, occasioned by the
Noise of a PLOT.
MY LORD,
THE Character which you bear, and the Office which you have several Years
discharged with so much Credit to the Government, Reputation to your Self, and
Justice to the Nation, have rendered You both the Object of all Honest Men's
Esteem, and the Sanctuary to which they fly and retreat, when either through
the P^que and Revenge, or the Jealousy and Credulity of Ministers of State, and
their Subordinate Officers, they find themselves assaulted ^n their Lives,
persued as to their Estates, or deprived of their Liberties, upon the
Depositions of a few Necessitous, Bribed and Suborned Fellows. And seeing it is
not possible that any can be illegally Prosecuted, unduly Convicted, or
unjustly Condemned, without your coming to suffer both in your Honor, which
you so sensibly value, and to forfeit that Integrity which is accounted natural
unto You, Pray suffer one, who is your most real, though unknown Servant, to
lay such Things with all Humility and Deference before you, as may serve to
prevent your being surpised and circumvented to do any Thing unworthy of your
Self, or injurious and destructive to Innocent Men.

With what Blushing and Grief do those imbued with any degrees of Wisdom and
Virtue, reflect^on the Ignominy and Guilt brought upon the Nation by Oats and
his Accomplices, who, ^s they were the first Pack of Witnesses the Kingdom was
ever acquainted with, that were established under the Encouragement of Salaries
and Pensions, to be Standing Evidence in Capital and Criminal Cases, so the
dismal Effects of that method of administering Government, and executing Laws
were soon felt, not only by the Advantage which other Miscreants endeavored to
make of that mischievous Preceden^, in setting up to imitate them, upon
prospect and hope of the like Profit and Reward, but through their own growing
emboldened to invade the Reputations, and attaque the Lives of High and Low, in
order to merit the increase as well as the continuance of the Price of Blood,
upon which they projected to subsist, and which one of them has the Fortune
still to enjoy: But whether it proceed from the Generosity of the Government,
or be owing to the Wisdom of it, as reckoning it to be serviceable to its
Interest, I shall not presume to determine. Nor will I deny but that those
State-Witnesses of the first Muster and Enrollment may be allowed to have sworn
truly in some Particulars, but it must withal be acknowledged that they
perjured themselves in many others: So that my Lord Chief Justice Scr^ggs, who
had raised them to the Reputation of being held Credible Persons, by giving
Faith Himself to their Testimony in some Trials, and thereby gaining and
reconciling others to do the like, was, upon observing the impossible as well
as improbable Things they grew up into a Confidence of deposing, and how they
could not only Perjure themselves without Shame or Remorse, but with an Air of
Assurance and Sincerity, forced to detract from, and lessen their Credibility
in future Trials as much as he had raised it in former. Though he could not be
unsensible that the best Returns he would meet with from many for this
After-Game of Candor, Probity and Justice, was to have his Discretion and
Righteousness reflected upon for the Sentences he had pronounced before, upon
no other or better Testimony than that of those whom he found it needful at
last to render Infamous.

Nor can it escape your Lordship's Remembrance what Convulsions the Kingdom was
thrown into, by a Set of Mercenary Rascab, Anno 1681, who wanted nothing but
the obtaining Belief to their Testimony against the Earl of Shas^^b^ry, to the
involving vast numbers of Protestants, of all Qualities and Degrees, under the
Guilt of a Horrid Conspiracy against His t^en M^jesty's Person and Government:
For the Villains having been Trained up ^o swear Men out of their Lives,
without the least regard to their being Guilty or Guil^less, all that they
minded was whom the influencing Ministers were ready to Start, being ready to
Halloo and pursue them to Scaffolds and Gibbets, if they might be but
plen^ifully paid and rewarded for it: And having Breakfasted on those of one
Party, they were prepared to Sup on them of another. For being habituated to
Blood, it was indifferent to them whom they murderously destroyed; and all that
obtained a Room in their Thoughts, was the being assured beforehand in whose
Slaughter they should make the better Meal: Yea it was but for any to out-bid
those that trained them up, and the Cannibals were ready to fly upon them that
bred them to devour, upon the first Prospect they had of doing it with
Impunity, and of finding their Interest in it; Which, upon observing what had
befallen others, I wish some at this Time may take warning by. Only permit me
to tell you, that the Interposition and Influence which some of King Charles's
Ministers had, both in forging and forming that pretended PLOT, (in 81) and in
Suborning Miscreants to support the belief of it by Falsehood and Perjury, was
that which gave Provocation and Encouragement to the designed Insurrection in
1682. For when Men cannot find Safety in their Innocence, they will seek to
obtain it by their Swords. And if the Laws be not sufficient to cover and
protect them, they will be tempted to try what Back and Breast can do. Nor is
it unworthy of your Lordship's Reflection, that though several Persons of
Quality and Virtue had the Misfortune to suffer for what they had then
contrived, and were ready to execute; yet the Justice of their Endeavors has
been abundantly vindicated ^y the R^peal of their A^tainders since this
Revolution: And the Combination in which they were embarked, upon the Motive
and Necessity o^ being (through the Subornation of Wit^ess^s against them);
deprived of all other mean^ of Safe^y, ha^h had the Comm^ndation of this
Government, in the many H^nours and (...) bestowed not only upon the Friends
and Relati^^^ but on the Surviving Accomplices of those that perished. Nor is
your Lordship's Memory so weak and unfaithful, but that it will furnish you
with Memoirs of the Barbarous Infamy which a certain Zealous and Credulous
Gen^leman, endeavored upon weak and trivial Suggestions to have fastened upon
the late King Charles, the Duke of York, and diver^ other Persons of the First
Figure and Quality, by charging and accusing them of being conscious and
accessory to the murder of the Earl of Essex: And it is not without Shame and
Detestation, that Men of Discretion and Probity reflect upon, and call over,
the groundless and malicious Rumors upon which the whole Court, especially his
then Royal Highness, were impudently slandered, the Nation strangely alarmed,
and the Peace of the City and Kingdom attempted to have been shaken and
disturbed. Nor will it be easy for a certain Sort of People to wipe off the
Blots and Aspersions they deservedly brought upon themselves, of wanting either
Sense or Integrity, by their giving belief to those weak and ill-invented
Su^gestions, which nothing but Folly mixed with Rancour could feign, nor any
receive and give credit to but those of a strange Bigotry, and of parallel
Disaffection and Disloyalty: For besides the wounding Princes, and several
Noble Peers, in their Honor by them, which the Laws are framed to protect with
an equal Tenderness, as they do the Crown, the Constitution, and the Lives of
the most valuable, innocent and deserving Subjects, Who can conceive, or
apprehend without Horror, the many other mischievous Eff^cts which those
malicious Accusations were adapted to have produced, had not they who
administered Justice in that Court, where your Lordship, to the Conten^ment and
Joy of the whole Nation, now does, unravelled that whole Mystery of audacious
Villainy, and with a Wisdom, Zeal and Fortitude becoming their Places, both
detected the Conspiracy against the Honor of those that had been ^raduced, and
punished it in the credulo^s but feeble Supporter of it? Nor does the
Righteousness of their Procedur^ in that Matter need any other Justification,
nor ^e Innocence of that Prince, who was d^^amed with so much Insolency and
Falsehood, require a more convincing and satisfactory Vindication, than to
observe with what Scorn, Contempt and Ridicule the House of Lords treated and
dismissed that Affair, when with a revived Malice it was staged before them,
and enforced with an Art properer to mislead than to inform, since this
Revolution, For it cannot be imagined, but that it would have been very
grateful to those who had divested King James of his Royal Power and Dignity,
to have found him sullied with a Crime that would have contributed more toward
the supporting the Equity of their proceeding against him, than all he has
been loaded with besides, as the Motives to his Abdication. And forgive me, my
Lord, if I presume to add, that as King James's Innocence, in reference to the
Death of that unfortunate Peer, cannot receive a more Illustrious, as well as
Public a Vindication, than by the House of Lords dismissing that Criminal
Accusation with a Derision of the presumptuous and groundless Vanity of it,
after they had for many Days inquired into it with all the penetration they
could, and that by a Committee of their Members the most and longest alienated
in their Affections from him of any of that House; so it cannot escape the
Observation of thinking and indifferent Persons, how that barbarous Aspersion,
which the Malice and Industry of some Persons had fastened and continued upon
him, influenced as much to this Revolution, and all the Calamities which have
attended him upon it, through having sunk him in the Love, Esteem and
Confidence of his People, as any one Thing whatsoever whereof he has been
accused. Nor was it difficult to deprive him of his Crown, and drive him from
his Throne, upon very little and weak Pretenses, when by an Accusation so
calumnious, as this appears now to have been, they had cast and kept him out of
the Hearts and Veneration of his People so long before. And for Mr. Braddon to
persevere after this to slain King James with the Murder of the Earl of Essex,
or with any thing relative to his Death, does serve only to discover his
Vanity, accompanied with an implacable Malice, and gives occasion to the most
modest and reserved Censurers of Persons and Things, to judge that his
cherishing himself, and studying to obtrude the Belief of it upon others at
first, was not so much from a weakness in his Understanding, which is no
disparagement to him to think him capable of, as from a Crime in his Will,
which rendereth him a very bad and wicked Man; whereas the former would have
only published him credulous and silly: And it argues a great deal of
Impudence and Pride, as well as of inve^era^e Rancour and Spleen, for him to
fancy that more credit ought to be given unto him, upon his daring and bare
Aspersions, than either to the nearest Relations of that unfortunate Lord, or
to the House of Peers, in disclaiming and stifling the slanderous Accusation in
the manner they did. However the Miscarriage in this one Adventure, of
blackning King James, makes it violen^ly suspected what unsuccessfulness they
would have had in the Proof of other Imputations, with which he has been no
less rudely than audaciously charged. It is true, his Dispensing with some Laws
is too notorious to be denied; but at the same time it is very questionable,
whether he had not a Right by his Prerogative to do it; and it is most certain
that he had the Opinion of the Judges that he might, who were the only known
Expositors of Laws, and the living Oracles of the bounds and limits of
Sovereignty in the Intervals of Parliaments: And if there be any ground to
blame him for giving us an Original, in this Matter, of Royal Authority and
Power, I am sure it has since been Copied over and over, by a barefaced
departure from the Laws, in things more out of reach of Majesty than any in
which he pretended to supersede the Obligation of the Statutes of the Realm.

And whereas my Lord, among the many real or pretended Grievances, which upon
this Revolution we hoped to be delivered from, there was none so mischievous in
it self, and from which we with more assurance promised our selves the being
redeemed, than that of holding our Lives precariously, and being kept in daily
Jeopardy of loosing them, by the Perjuries of Suborned and Hired Villains,
notwithstanding our quiet and peaceable Deportment toward those seated in the
Throne, which we thought that we might with the more Confidence expect, having
been rescued from it during all the Reign of King James; it having, until now,
been a Reproach and Disparagement peculiar to the Government of his Brother
King Charles; being unknown in all other Reigns* but unhappily introduced and
too much practiced to his Dishonor and his Subject's Danger and Vexation,
while he sat on the Throne. But it seems, that upon this as well as many other
Accounts, his Reign, which gave occasion to all the Mischiefs that have since
ensued, is chosen to be the Pattern of Administration and Management under
this. For among other Disappointments we have met with under the late Change,
and our being frustrated in Things of the vastest Moment, which we expected to
have seen redressed, it is with extreme Sor^ow that we find that Crime unknown
to Turks and Heathens, as well as to all Nation prosessing Christianity besides
these, namely, not only of countenancing mercenary and infamous Rascals, to
swear quiet and innocent Men out of their Lives, but of bribing, instructing
and training them thereunto, still kept up with all the scandalous Openness
that it heretofore was, yea better encouraged and rewarded, and thereupon more
frequently and audaciously practiced, than ever it had been in the Reign o^
King Charles, of which we have wi^h so much Reason complained. How scandalous
does it look, And what Dishonor and Infamy does it derive upon this
Government, to find the Emissaries of our Statesmen and Ministers hawking up
and down for Indigent and Necessitous Jacobites, and accosting them with a
Commiseration of their poor and starving Condition, and how willing they are
not only to relieve, but to render them happy and opulent, provided they will
only make themselves capable Subjects of Favor and Bounty, by detecting what
they know against the Government, and discovering whether they be not conscious
of the Criminal Designs of such and such, and prepared to depose and swear
against th^m^! Which, considering their Poverty, together with that decay of
Morality as well as Religion, and that strange growth not only of Practical but
of Speculative Atheism in the Nation, much occasioned by late Practices and
Transactions, is equivalent to the tempting those miserable Wretches to
forswear themselves for Bread, and is the giving them aim in the murdering of
whom they may do the most meritorious Act to the Government, and make the most
advantageous Bargain to themselves: And if this does not prevail upon those
indigent Creatures, whom Poverty and Irreligion have disposed for the
Impression of the weakest Temptation, the next Assault upon them is, under the
pretense of relieving their Want, to give them a Crown or an Angel, and then to
call it Levying and Subsistence-Money; and thereupon to necessitate them either
by Perjury to destroy others, or to fall and perish themselves, upon the
Accusation of those that pretended charitably to supply them. Nor can it seem
strange or astonishing to your Lordship to find such Courses and Methods
persued toward the ruining particular Men, when you observe the ways that are
notoriously taken to make Members of Parliament so treacherously and
feloniously destroy the Kingdom: For besides the many Members of the House of
Commons, with which the beginni^g and original Grants of all Money for the
Support of the Governmen^ is undisputably lodged, who have Places and
Employments equivalent to Pensions, and by which, as the standing and
meritorious Qualification that entitleth them unto, and gives them an
indefeasible Title in their Posts, they are biased to give whatsoever is
demanded, there are many others purchased by Gratuities, Gifts and Salaries, to
concur in and promote all public Aids, which they too readily do, without the
least respect to the Welfare and Safety of the Kingdom, upon the mere foot of
finding their own Interest wrapr up so eminently in what they give. And it is
beyond all contradiction, that whosoever will hire and bribe Members of
Parliament, to subvert and destroy the Constitution and murder the Kingdom,
which the Practice I have laid before you palpably and uncontroulably does,
such Persons will never scruple the ruining individual Persons, by the worst
and most infamous Arts, if it be but subservient to their revengeful, haughty
and covetous Ends. And while there is so general a failure in Virtue, as well
as a departure from all Honor, save that of Parchment, it is a wonder that
instead of a few little Miscreants, (who in the best and most innocent Ages
would have been reckoned amongst the Refuse of Mankind) they have not furnished
themselves with a multitude of Witnesses adorned with Titles, and distinguished
from the Vulgus, by Names and Characters which used in times of Morality and
Religion to be of some Esteem and Veneration. I shall not descend to a
particular mentioning of those that have withstood the Temptation, upon their
being caressed and menaced, in order to their being gained and disciplined for
Evidences, as judging it will be more useful to reserve the Declaration of them
to a Parliament; and the rather because diverse of them have been questioned
about the Guiltiness of some Members of both Houses, which is in effect the
telling them that they would have such and such destroyed, and that they shall
be plentifully rewarded if they put on an Eff^ontry with a little speciousness
to do it. I will not, my Lord, be so rude and uncivil as to ruffle you on ^he
account of those that have suff^red since this Revolution, for the Crimes of
High Treason against the Government, seeing that might not only be interpreted
a want of Deference and Respect to your Lordship's Honor and Integrity, but
accounted an impeaching and arraigning the Justice of the Nation: Yet suffer
me, with the utmost Modesty of one that highly esteems you, and who would both
promote your Repentance toward God, for any hasty and indiscreet Excesses that
are past, and prevent your falling into any thing that may savor of
intemperate and unrighteous Zeal for the future, to call over* and bring to
your remembrance, the Four Antecedent Trials and Condemnations of this kind,
and to tell you with the Candor and Fidelity of your faithful Servant, how
little the Credit of those that sat upon them is raised at present, or their
Memory likely to be embalmed hereafter, by the Wisdom and Justice displayed in
the manage and conduct of them. I acknowledge that your Lordship's Access to
the obtaining the Conviction of Persons Arraigned uses to be less than that of
some others joined in Commission with you, and your Depor^ment during the
Trials is more decent and becoming your Character than that of diverse of your
Assessors. Yet a little Reflection on the Trials I am now to mention will
quicken your Remembrance, Whether th^re was that Scrutiny about, and Enquiry
into the Credibility of the Witnesses, which so important a Case as the Lives
of Men, and the forfeiting their Estates, to the impoverishing their Families
and Posterity, does require: And whether all that Help and Assistance was given
to the Arraigned which the Law does allow, and makes incumbent upon the Judge
to yield. For to begin with the First, which was the Convicting and Sentencing
the Chairman to Death, For Levyi^g War to disturb the Tranquillity of the
Nation, and to Dethrone and Dispossess King William; which had it not been
trans^ct^d in a Court of Justice, would have looked rather like a Banter upon
the Government than a Testimony of Loyalty and Zeal to support it. I do very
well know, that all for which he was found Guilty and Condemned was expr^s^,
swo^n against him; But can it obtain cr^dit with any, who allow themselves the
liberty seriously to think, that one of his Meanness had either the Interest,
Power o^ Treasure to make the least Commotion in the Kingdom; or that a Person
bred all his Days to so inferior and servile an Employ as he was, had either
the Courage and Boldness to muster Forces or ^he Sauciness and Vanity once to
imagine^ that he could overturn Thrones, and wrest Scepter^ out of the Hands of
Princes? Had he been accused and convicted for designing to have Assassinated
either of the Two vested with the Supreme Authority, there might have been some
probability in it, as being practicable, and of the like whereof the Records of
former Times have furnished us with Instances and Examples: But for a poor
Creature ^o be thought capable of enrolling Troops, and commencing War against
a Prince encompassed with a large disciplined Army, and that in the Honey-Month
of his Government, when the Nation generally was fond of him, may be reckoned
among the last of Incredibles; and seems obtruded upon the Faith of the Kingdom
merely to expose our Credulity. And I have often observed, that your Subo^ned
Fellows do, either out of too much Haughtiness, or too little Sense, make the
same sport at the Majesty of Courts of Judicature, and at the Understandings of
the ^ell of Mankind, that they do with the Lives of those they are hired to
murder. In a word, all that with the least shadow of Truth can be conceived of
what the Man was accused of, is, that he had been charitable to those he
apprehended in greater Distres^ than himself, which administered occasion to the
ungrateful Wretches that received it, to gain a Reward from those at the Helm
of Affairs, through their stiling and swearing it Levy and Subsistence Money,
And as for cross the Kentish A^torney, who was Tried and Condemned for going
aboard the French Fleet, when they lay upon the Coast; it is known that he was
as passionate and violent a Williamite as was in the Kingdom, and that he went
thither merely out of Curiosity, conceiving it no Crime, nor apprehending any
danger by it, and not upon a disloyal and treacherous account: For what better
Testimony could be given of the poor Man's Zeal and Affection for the
Government, than praying with that Heartiness that he did, for the Preservation
and prosperous Reign of William and Mary, at the time and place of his
Execution, when and where none, without being highly uncharitable, can imagine
that he would dissemble. And were the Jacobites capable of taking tha^ Pleasure
in the Ruin of innocent Men, which your scandalous W^igs and too many of your
bigoted Phanaticks seem to do, his Execution was a thing wherein they would
have thought themselves extremely gratified: And they will at all times reckon
your Severities of that kind, if not Favors they take Pleasure in, at least
Actions which will neither provoke their Resentment nor Indignation: Nor is it
unworthy of your Observa^ion, that the unhappy Man was halloo'd and persued to
Death, by Persons who valued themselves heretofore for being in a Faction, of
which few are Loyal to Monarchs out of Principle, but solely for Interest; and
of whom there are t^o many, who out of Devotion to their Idol of a Republic,
will be ready to sacrifice, and give up to Scaffolds and Gibbets, all that are
addicted to Kingship, whosoever be the King. As for Mr. Ashton's Ca^e, the
Severity he met with has been already represented in Print, without any Reply
hitherto given, in Vindication of the Justice of the Nation, to what is there
declared and laid open. And it is sufficiently known by all of any Conversation
at White Hall and about the Town, that he was not so much condemned for what
was produced against him at the Bar, as for what was concealed, being unfi^ ^o
be discovered: For the Papers concerning the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales,
which he was carrying over to King James, first for his P^rusal, and then for
his Approbation, in order to have presented them to the Parliament* was that
which influenced more to his Destruction, than all besides whereof he was
accu^ed, which in the Opinion of very wise and impartial Men were but trifling
and insignificant Things, and which as they did not deserve so hard a Fate, so
they would never have prevailed upon an unprejudiced Jury to have found him
guilty, without a very strange and labored Misleading. And pardon me* my Lord,
if I bewail the Suppression of the forementioned Papers, and take the liberty
to tell you, that the refusing the Nation the favor of seeing, them, renders
it very much suspected, That the last Invasion was not, in all things alleged
as the Motives to it, founded in that Justice and Honor which we were made to
believe. But to wave that, I shall only presume to subjoin, that though the
Providence and Judgments of God are inscrutable, yet it ought not to be let
pass without Observation, That the only Judge at that time on the Bench, who
treated him with uncivil as well as uncomely Malice, and who by his whole
Behavior seemed to have an unquenchable Thirst after his Blood, died soon
after wallowing in his own. Nor is it to be imagined what recommended that
Person to the Bench, after his having promoted and hastened the Execution of so
many in the West, Anno 1685, unless it was, that having given so signal a
Testimony of his inhuman and implacable Cruelty to those of the same Party and
Interest of which he pretended to be, he was thereupon taken and held for a
Person that would be no less barb^rous to all such of another Faction, as
should have the Misfortune to fall within the Circle of his Power and Rage: For
it is most certain, that though Jefferies underwent the Clamor, and bore the
blame of those Executions, yet most of the Guilt lay upon Pollex^en, of whom I
have been speaking. And for Anderton, who is the last that since the Revolution
has been Executed for High Treason of this kind, there needs no more to show
both the Perjury of the Witnesses that swore against him, and the Severity and
hastiness of his Conviction and Cond^mnation, than that a Person arraigned and
condemned since at the same place, has openly confessed and avowed, that he
Printed and Published the Book, for which poor Anderton was Cast and Executed.
Nor is it for the Credit of those that sa^e as Judges, or were upon the Jury,
that so infamous a Fellow as Stephens was the principal Witness at the Trial,
and the Person upon whose Testimony especially the arraigned was cast: For
besides his being universally known for a Rascal that will be purchased to
perpe^rate any Villainy, provided he may find Impunity in doing it, his whole
Behavior at that time when he gave his Evidence was so e^cessively Rude and
^ancorous toward the Prisoner, as might give any indifferent M^n a just c^use
to believe, that he was provoked by Malice, or swayed by Command and encouraged
by Reward to what he did. My Lord, I do not design by this brief Recollection
of these Trials* to detract from your Prudence and Moderation, and much less ^o
charge you with Injustice, as to the Portion and Share you had in them; but the
whole I propose, is humbly to represent, that there seems to have been a
Bl^m^ableness somewhere; and particularly, that as Juries are generally too
credulous in such Cases, and many times prepossessed and prejudiced upon the
Motive of Party and Faction, so the Witnesses are oftentimes too Mercenary and
Revengeful to be easily believed. And among other Examples of the Corruption of
Witnesses, and of the ^asiness of Juries to be imposed upon, and the rigorous
Excesses which (through their being of a different and opposite Party to the
Prisoner before them) they are liable to be hurried into, the Conviction of
Mrs. Merrywether is one that has sensibly affected you, and has furnished you
with an Occasion of testifying your Goodness, Compassion and Forti^ude, as well
as declaring your love and regard to Justice, in your cooperating with others
at first for her Reprieve, and recommending her since as a Person whom it is
for the Reputation and Honor of the Government to pardon: And your stiling her
Conviction Summum Jus (as you frequently have done) is equivalent to your
pronouncing, that there was Summu Injuria in it. My Lord, In what I have been
calling over to you, I have written with the Temper and Deference, which a
regard to the Honor and Justice of the Nation, after Persons have been
convicted and sentenced, exacteth from me: But I cannot forbear being a little
more Pi^quant, in laying before you the Dangers which many of all Ranks, since
the Revolution, have (notwithstanding their Peaceableness) been subject unto,
by means of Suborned, Bribed and Infamous Miscreants, through whose Perjuries
great Numbers were to have been destroyed, had not the villainous Conspiracies
against high and low been seasonably detected. Nor is it needful I should be
large in telling you, to how many, and of what Quality, the murderous Design of
Fuller extended; and of what Esteem he was with diverse of the Ministers, as
well as with many other People, upon the hope and prospect of the Slaughters
they should have been enabled to make by his Discoveries: And for his
Encouragement to enlarge his Accusations, and maintain them with Assurance, he
was the Darling both of diverse Members of Parliament, and of several Officers
of State: Your A. and C. vouchsafed him frequently their Company to raise hi^
Credit; and their Eloquence was employed wheresoever they came. In proclaiming
his Praise, and in extolling his Ingenuity and Presence of Mind; yea, whilst
the Government was running daily into Debt to those that industriously and
substantially served it, Money was plentifully lavished out to embolden and
reward him: Nor did their being conscious how prodigally he wasted it on his
Lusts, discourage them from esteeming him a very credible Witness; for to gain
b^ Falsehood and Perjury, and to consume in Luxury and Whoredom, are equally
overlooked by some People, when they have proposed an End and formed a Design
wherein they want to be served. And though there is too much Reason to believe,
that they who gave Countenance to the Rogue, as well as they who managed him,
knew from the beginning that whatsoever he told them was Sham and Fiction, yet
they not only filled the City and Kingdom with the Noise of the mighty
Discovery of a horrid Plot, but hoping to have imposed upon the Parliament (as
had been done in a parrallel Case) they took the Confidence to bring it into
the House of Commons; where the Rascal telling his Story with the utmost degree
of Boldness and Assurance, and giving an amazing Coherence to those Things he
had impudence to say, the belief of a PLOT was greatly strengthened and
increased* But the Villain having told the House of concurring Witnesses whom
he had, but whom (after all the Sums he bubbled some People of) he could never
produce; and having slandered and accused several Persons of Condition, whom he
no ways knew, or had at any time obtained an Access unto, his Credit at first
dwindled by degrees, and at last, his having forged whatsoever he had said,
became notorious: Upon which the House, for the vindication of its own Honor,
but to the Grief of many without Doors, and of some within, not only voted him
an Infamous Person, but ordered that he should be prosecuted, which after a
long Delay, (the reasons whereof they are best able to assign who were guilty
of it) he was before your Lordship, and, upon being convicted, was adjudged to
the Punishment which the Law appoints and allows, but not what the Crime
deserves, through a fatal defect in the Rule^ of our Government: For whereas by
the Laws of Nature and Revelation, as well as by the established Sanction of
all other Nations, a Villainy of this high and horrid Nature is made not only
punishable with Death, but a Death accompanied with all the cruel and infamous
Circumstances which the calumnious Conspirators would have brought upon
innocent Men; it is the Disgrace and Reproach of this Kingdom, which with a
ridiculous Vanity so much boasts of the Excellency of its Constitution and
Laws, that it is made only obnoxious to the Chastisement which ^he pet^iest
Transgression subjecteth Offenders unto. And whereas we hoped upon the
Revolution to have been relieved against this, as well as many other
Gri^vances, yet to our Disappointment and continued Calamity, and to the
Dishonor of those who are become possessed of the Throne, we have not (by
reason of the Influence of the Government upon some bigoted and revengeful,
and other Pensionary Members of Parliament) been so much as able to procure the
passing of a Bill for giving us the common Favors, Help and Assistances in
Trials of High Treason, which we are allowed in Pecuniary Matters, and in all
other Cases: And who, with Industry, Vigor and Spleen, opposed and hindered our
obtaining of it, but your Rich's, ^oung's, Clark's, Arnold's, etc. that both so
much needed and bewailed the want of it heretofore, which, in the Righteousness
of God, they or their Posterity may do a sin, and by a just Retaliation be
refu^ed? Now this that I have laid before your Lordship, of the audacious
Conspiracies of Fuller for the destruct^on of innocent Persons, ^ully shows
that necessitous Miscrean^^ are capable of attempting, and what countenance the
worst Barbarities may meet with from some, who, by their Places, as well as by
their Characters and Quality, should not only discourage, but endeavor by all
means to have them punished. And it does withal serve to instruct you not to be
too credulous, nor to believe every one guilty, whom indigent and immoral
Fellows have the impudence to swear against. And that you may be further
informed, as well as forewarned, how little Men's Innocence signifies to the
^kreening and covering them from Danger, I crave liberty to remind you, what
Young the Parson, in conjunction with Blackhead, had contrived, in order to the
murdering several of the First Quality in the Kingdom, besides diverse Gentlemen
of lower Degree: For these Fellows judging it too little and mean, for Persons
of their transcendency in Villainy* merely to swear that such and such had
conspired and combined to Restore and Re-establish King James, they had the
audacious and unpresidented Impudence, to forge an Association, and to
counterfeit and affix the Hands and Names of Honorable Peers and Worthy
Persons unto it, importing their having mutually and jointly undertook to
dispossess K William, and to bring back and readvance K. James. And though it
was morally impossible as well as altogether incredible, tha^, had there been
such a Design, and so concerted and stipulated, Wretches of the meanness of
Young and Blackhead should have been admitted upon a Secret of such Importance
in it self, and whereof the Discovery would have rendered those concerned liable
to the loss of Life, Honor and Estates: Yet not only with what Easiness, but
Leachery, was the belief of it entertained by diverse of our Supreme, and
reputed wise Ministers; and notwithstanding its being, in the whole matter of
it* more Ludicrous than Farce, or Bartholomew-Fair-Shew, and fitter to amuse
Gaping MOB, than to be staged before, and to be entertained by Statesmen; yet
with what Seriou^ness and Gravity was it brought to the Council Board, and
received there as a Subject worthy of weighty and solemn Debate; Whilst in the
mean while, the very har^ ^^specting that the Persons, whose Hands were forged
to that inven^ed and supposititious Paper, were capable of being guilty of so
weak and silly a Thing, could not miss deriving upon the Government the Stain
and Reproach of Simplicity and Folly, as well as of Ingratitude and Injustice:
For as the two Reverend and Learned Bishops were secured by their Virtue,
Modesty and Prudence from all just Suspicion of having been in the least
accessory to that whereof they were accused: So my Lord Marlborough's hahaving
contributed so eminently and effectually to the Revolution, was enough to
render his Loyalty to this Government unquestionable because necessary; and his
return to K. James's Interest incredible, by reason his Reception into the
Grace and Favor of that Prince is impr^cticable. Nor could the Ministers be so
great Strangers to the infamous Characters of the Wi^nesses (whose many and
notorious Crimes had sufficiently published them before, through the whole
Nation, as Rascals who had forfeited all Right to be believed and credited) as
to hope to have their Integrity and Righteousness just^fied in seizing and
prosecuting any upon their Testimony: And yet had it not been for the missing
of the forged Paper, when it was at first so narrowly searched for at the Bp.
of Rochester's, where one of the Rogues traitorously and feloniously lodged it,
it is scarce to be conceived, how some of our Statesmen were prepared to have
pushed on that Affair to the Impriso^ment of sever^l. But that Misadventure
together with the Defenses which the aforesaid Eloquent Bishop, after his
Apprehension, made at his being examined before the Council, rendered them more
slow and wary in their Proceeding: And thereupon through the gaining the Respit
of a little time, there was an Opportuni^y ob^ained, no^ only of discovering
and laying open the many infam^us and horrid Crimes whereof the Rogues sad at
other times been guilty, but of fully de^ecting the Forgery of the Association,
and where they had secretly laid it in the Bishop's House, in order to have
destroyed him and others, in case it had been found by the Clerk of the Council
and the Messengers, when it was so industriously sought for. And truly, My
Lord, had not Young labored under a strange defect of Morals, he was
incomparably qualified in all other respects to have been a select, singular
and standing Witness for the State: For as he has a sufficiency of Wit and
Presence of M^nd, to be able to give things the best Gloss and readiest Turn of
Thought; so he is furnished with a larger Stock of Impudence and Assurance than
most Men in the World are: Of which your Lordship was an astonished Witness
when you had him before you at the Bar, to be tried for the Forgery which I
have mentioned, and to be condemned to the too gentle and feeble Punishment
which the Law has ordained for it: For with what Confidence did he stand, not
only under the Load of a Thousand infamous Actions, of which all the Court (by
the Perusal of the Bp. of Rochester's two Books) knew him to have been guilty,
but under the fullest and clearest Proof of the malicious Forgery for which he
was then Arraigned: Yea, with what Effrontry and air of Impudence, to the
Amazement of all there, did he continue to assert his own Innocence, and
persevere in his crimination of others? But that which fills Men most with
Sorrow in reference to that Transaction, and which keeps them under disquieting
Fears ever since, is, that though Young and Blackhead were Instruments in it
yet people of another Figure must have been the first Contrivers and Authors of
it: And the handing Money to Blackhead, while kept i^ Custody by Allen the
Messenger, and conniving at his Escape from thence, gives us more than a
Suspicion of it, and little less than a moral Certainty: For that Rogue having
been the Tool employed too with Young by the superior Managers, and having
threatened to squeak in case given up and abandoned to a public Punishment, it
was so ordered, that he might not only be permitted to get away, but be
sheltered and maintained in Ireland, whither he withdrew; and from whence the
Government might have easily brought him back, were there not a Mystery in that
Affair which it is not for some Peoples Honor to have unrav^ll'd. Nor was the
Messenger, out of whose House and Custody he made his Escape, ever punished for
his Carelessness and Neglect; but after a little menacing and Reprimand, which
was mere Grimace, he has been treated all along since with more d^stinguishing
Favors than fell to the Share of his Fellow-Officers. Neither durst so mean
and creeping Wretches a^ ^oung and Blackhead (how impudent and malicious soever
they are) have attacked Persons of the Earl of Marlborough and the Bishop of
Rochester's Rank and Quality, and who had merited so well of the Government,
and were believed at that time to stand in all terms of fairness with it, had
they not been prompted, guided and encouraged to it by Persons of Authority,
Grandeur and Eminency. And had the Villains acted merely under their own
Conduct, and by the Influence of Personal Malice and Avarice, they would have
singled out such to be accused, as are held indiscreet, talkative and rash, and
with whom it might have been likely for them to have had some Conversation; and
not Persons of the grea^est Prudence, Circumspection and Reservedness of any in
the Kingdom, and into whose Society it was morally impossible that any should
judge them to have been admit^ed, nor so much as into their Presence, unless as
Beggars and indigent Supplicants: So that this Conspirac^ by suborning two
infamous Rascals and of obtaining thereby Credit to a Plot, upon the Belief of
which several Noble, Reverend and Worthy Persons were to have been involved
under Guilt of Ruin, may serve to instruct your Lordship not to be hasty and
forward in giving Credit to the present importunate and noisy Clamours, and to
make you extremely wary how you proceed to the Conviction and Condemnation of
those that are accused and threatened to be arraigned. Nor will it be enough,
either for your Absolution when you appear before the Tribunal of God, which
you must shortly do, or for the Vindication of your Justice and the Support of
your Honor before Men while you are here, to leave Things to a Jury* unless
you enqui^e with the utmost Care and Penetration into the Credibility of those
that depose and swear, and upon what Motives and by what Means they are
prevailed upon and are brought to do it.

Nor can it, my Lord, be now any matter of Wonder, if (after two such repeated
Experiences as I have mentioned, of some men's having designed to destroy a
quiet, innocent and peaceable People, upon invented and forged Conspiracies
against the Government, supported by the Oaths and Testimonies of Merc^nary and
Bribed Fellows) the greatest Zealo^s for K. William and Q Mary, as well as they
who are not (...) f^nd of their Sovereignty* a^e become ^ug^ly suspic^ous, That
the Alarm now given ^o the N^tion by the (...) of a fresh PLOT, has no other
Foundation than some Sha^-contrivance of some little Ministers, who would make
themselves valued and necessary, and raise Fortunes out of the Ru^n^s of those,
with whom, upon D^stinction of Factions and Contrariety of Principles, they are
displeased: For it is not enough to involve Men in the Crime, of designi^g to
destroy the Government, that they connot obtain Leave of their Consciences
vigorously to support it. How many are there who cannot nicely distinguish
themselves from under the Obligations that they owe to King James, that are
nevertheless willing to remain quiet under the Power that is over them, and to
sleep in whole Skins! And I am inclinable to bel^eve, that had not those styled
Jacobites been made all of them uneasy in their Fortunes, and many of them
impoverished, by double Tax^s, because they cannot renounce all the Religious,
as well as Political Princip^es, with which your Tillotsons, Burnets, Sher:
locks, etc. imbued them, but that they would sit as silent and quiet under this
Administration as any others whatsoever, though they cannot equally approve and
commend it. And were it not for the Respect that we are obliged to pay to the
Wisdom and Authority of Parliaments, most Persons of Prudence and Temperance of
Mind, would acknowledge this to have been as foolish a Project, as it is peevish
and ill-natured; seeing all it amounts unto, is only the revenging themselves
on their Neighbors upon the naked account of Opinion, and must have this
effect, that they who are thus distinguishingly oppressed would be glad of a
Change, how little soever they cooperate to i^, Nor was it ever found a
successful Method, to render any sort of People either affectionate to a State
or quiet under it, to single them out from the rest of a Community, to be the
Objects of Severity and ill-Usage. The most that wise Governments have used to
do, has be^n only to preclude those from Places of Honor and Profit under them
that have not been zealously affectionate to them: And though they have
sometimes found Incapacitating Laws necessary; yet they have always held such
as are oppressive to b^ no^ only unwise bu^ unrighteous: And as this of ours is
a President of the first Impression; so it is possible that, sooner or later,
it may come to be copied and imitated upon some of them that have set the
Pattern. But to dismiss this, I shall proceed ^o tell you, that the Jacobites
do not only decline Plotting, because of the Hazard and Danger that attend it,
but because they judge it needless and unnecessary: For this Government is
hastening to Ruin, through the Folly, Lavishness and Kn^very of those that
serve it; so that it were superfluous for any to expose their Lives in
attempting to subvert it: Through ill Conduct and Mismanagement, it is come
almost to an Impossibility of supporting it much longer, and at the same time
of preserving the Kingdom; and under that Dilemma, few will hesitate which of
the Two i^ to be dropped and abandoned: For notwithstanding all that huffing and
^^^utting of the Ministers about the Steadness, Streng^^ and Greatness of the
Government, it m^st nevertheless be owned, that whilst it remains engaged in
the (...)* it is but in a Go-Cart, it walks and stands by the help of
Leading-Strings, and can no longer subsist than as it is shoared and
underpropt; and when the Expense of sustaining it grows insupportable, ^t sinks
without any Man's running the Hazard of giving it a Push, by the mere
withdrawing and witholding the Means by which it was sustained; which Poverty
will reduce its greatest Partisans to do, notwithstanding all their Bigottry
and Zeal: For it is now uncontroulably evident, that after the greatest Fund
and Expense which was ever granted by Parliament, toward the raising and
maintaining a more numerous and brave Land-Army than we have at any time had*
and supported: And after all the united Strength of these three Kingdoms, in
Conjunction with all the utmost Power which our good Allies the Dutch and our
other Confederates are able to afford and furnish, that yet all we are in a
Condition to do in the Spanish Netherlands, is by securing our selves in
Trenches to make a defensive War, and to come Home crowned with the Honor of
doing nothing. And that while we are priding our selves upon our infesting the
French Coast and the burning a Fisher-Town, at an Expense, Charge and Loss
vastly above the worth of it. We have not only abandoned our Merchant-Ships to
the Mercy of the Privateers, but while we thus employ our Fleet, have suffered
the French to possess themselves of Jamaica, which (as it was the most
profitable of all our Plantations, so the loss of it, added to the Interruption
and Destruction of our Trade from all other Places) will necessitate the whole
Kingdom to grow weary of the Government, and to think of subverting it, to
preserve the Little that remains, rather than to lose all, by studying longer
to support it: And for that Devastation we have in the mean time been making on
the French, it seems merely designed to provoke them to Revenge, seeing it is
certain that they can make Reprizals on any parts of our Coast when they
please. I confess, my Lord, that for the Jacobites to argue at this Rate does
not savor of too much Decency, but I am sure it is a way of reasoning, though
possibly weak, as well as rude, is admirably adapted, and extremely proper, to
restrain them from Plotting, and to keep them quiet: And the Folly and
Unmannerliness of it may be better dispensed with, seeing it speaks them upon
these Hopes and fanciful Prospects, wholly alienated and at a distance, from
promoting Disturbances: For however Enthusiastic and Chymerick this Reasoning
may be in it self, as it will not escape being accounted so by others, yet it
has the same Influence upon them to continue peaceable as if it were
Apodictical and Oracular. But suffer me, my Lord, to descend to some
Particular^ relative to this PLOT, which after all the mighty Noise concerning
it, and the Imprisonment of so many, and the looking after more, upon Pretenses
and Allegation^ of having been embarked in it, do wholly destroy the C^edit of
it with me, and I doubt not when represented to your Lordship, will very much
enfeeble and detract from the belief of it with you. And to begin wi^h Hugh
Speak and Harry Baker, to whom is entrusted the mustering and levying of
Witnesses, as well as the conduct, instruction and Management of them; the One
is such a Compound of Folly and Knavery* and the Other an Abridgment of
Falsehood, Treachery and all sort of Villainy, that it i^ impossible, where they
are known, to conciliate Faith either to any thing they say or any Discovery
they are concerned in: And whosoever they are of the Ministers; that have
either advanced them unto, or do give them Countenance in this Post and Emp^oy,
they are more guil^y of a PLOT against the Honor of K. William and Q Mary, the
Reputation of the Privy Council, and the Credit of the Justice of the Nation,
than any Jacobites whatsoever (yea even Colonel Parker himself) can be, in a
Conspiracy against the Safety of the Government and the Tranquillity of the
Kingdom: And in truth it is a Lamooo^ upon the State, to have it reported that
any thing is conveyed by their Means, or through their Hands, either to the
Secretary, or to the Officers of Justice. As for Mr. Speak, he has never been
otherwise looked upon, by reason of his Folly, accompanied with Vanity, than as
the Sport of Society, and the Buffoon of the Town; having ^nly this to value
himself upon, that answerable to the measure which God has denied him of
Understanding and good Sense, he is proportionably furnishe^ with Conceit,
which does as well to his satisfaction. The Prank he played upon the Earl of
Essex's having Assassinated himself, and the Trou^le and Distress which by his
Imp^dence and Folly he was then brought under, does sufficien^ly serve both to
call him to your Rem^mbrance, and to give your Lordship the Character of the
Man. Nor needs there more to expose as well as decipher him, than that he, who
was ready a while ago to h^ve sworn h^mself off upon the Statute, for Nine
Pounds he owed to a poor Woman near Grays. Inn, for Bread, Cheese, and Pots of
Ale, is of lat^, since he turned Witnessmonger, no^ only become Rival to the
greatest Peers of the Realm ^n Grandeur of Living, but out-doeth them in
Expense and Magnificence. And if he receives the Money, needful to support and
defray so vast a Charge, out of the Treasury, as is believed he does, having
been heard ordering his Servant to go tell Harry Guy that he expected his Money
should be ready for him by Four of the Clock such an Afternoon, then either the
Treasure of the Nation is not so well disposed and expended as it should, or
else there must be some terrible Prospect and Design on foot against the
Jacobites, which they are forced to be at all this Expense to cherish and
ma^urate. However it is very surprising, and possibly will not be very gra^eful
to a Parliament when laid before them, that all our Troops in Flanders should
two Posts ago, have wanted a Fortnigh^s Subsistence-Money, save what they
received out of the private Purses of their Officers, and we in the mean time
be so prodigiously squandering and lavishing it away here upon Rake-Hells, who
have not Virtue and Fortitude to make them capable of deserving a Shilling for
a brave and generous Action. But some may think that the liberal paying of one
Company of Witnesses at Home, may give us the Credit of a more glorious
Campaign, against a few naked and disarmed Jacobites at the Old Bailey and
Westminster Hall, than all our vast and chargeable Forces are in a condition of
obtaining against the starved and cowardly French in ^rabant. But to wave
Pleasantry, the Subject being too tender and grave well to admit it, and which
I should not have used, but that being obliged to re-encounter Hugh Speak* I
cannot forbear falling into some of that Jocoseness, which all Persons are
accustomed unto, when he is cast into their Company; for God has made some
Creatures to excite and humor our R^^ibility, as he has made others to gratify
and exercise nor Reasoning and Intell^ctual ^aculties: But how contemptible
soever Hugh Speak is in himself, and how much he appears ridiculous to all Wise
Men, yet the more dangerous he is if countenanced and supported, and the more
hurt he ^ay do, if any be so weak and wicked as to believe either him, or those
under his Conduct. And upon the Encouragement, together with the large Sums of
Money which have been already vouchsafed him, he is swelling to that excess of
Vanity, as not only to equal himself to the wisest Ministers about the Court,
in the knowledge of the Art of Government, but to prefer himself infinitely
before them, calling them in his common Discourse Punies in Politics in
comparison of himself: And is also arrived to that menacing and dangerous
Arrogance, as to declare in open Companies that he had several of the Privy
Counselors at his Mercy and under his Power; which as it overthrows the
Credit of all he either says himself, or instructs and suborneth others to
say; so it renders it the less inc^ngruous for him to boast what he can do
against meaner People, who are not so well skreened from his extravagant mad
Rage, as the Noble Persons may hope to be; th^ugh in justice he ought to be no
more believed in reference to the latter, than he is to be accounted worthy to
be in relation to the former. It is not credible how far the frantic Man's
Ambition stretches since he has been entertained an Enroller and Trainer up of
Witnesses: For he fixes no narrower Bounds to what he is immediately to grow up
unto, than the getting himself possessed of Four Thousand Pounds per Annum,
besides a small Additional of ready Money about forty Thousand pounds. Now how
many Confiscations, Forfeitures, Attainders and Murders must this Man have
projected and designed, in order to compass so much to himself, besides what
the Crown is to have, and the several Shares that are to go to others? Surely
the poor Creature needs Hellebore and dark Lodging, and is fitter to have a
Chamber assigned him in the Palace at Moor-Fields, under the rare Guidance of
those that have the Oversight and Ruling of the Lunatic, than at an exorbitant
Expense to be riotously maintained by the Court, in order to lay Gins and
Snares for the Lives of innocent Men, by decoying and disciplining of
Witnesses^ And as for Harry Baker, who is not only the other Conductor, but the
Suborner of the Evidence-Tribe, and who values himself upon their encompassing
him at his Levees and Couchees with their Caps in their Hands, and in the being
attended and guarded by them in his Journeys to Cheshire and Lancashire, where
he lately went vested with a more than Despotical Authority, not only over his
^anditi and murdering Slaves, but over the Messengers of the Council, who were
ordered to act with an implicit Obedience to his Directions and Commands: This
Fellow is too notoriously known to your Lordship for his Cheating, Defrauding,
Suborning and ignominious Course of Life about the Town for many Years, that
you should need his infamous Character conveyed unto you by me. And the Memoirs
of his Life, under the Title of the English Gusman, being preparing for the
Press, in order to the Instruction as well as Diversion of Mankind, it were but
to anticipate what is so well and amply said there, to interrupt your Lordship
in your weighty Affairs, by giving you any long Detale of his fraudulent,
enormous and infamous Practices: Only let me recommend your Lordship to the
Right Honorable my Lord M^untague, who no doubt will vouchsafe to give you
such an Account of him in reference to his Carriage toward, and Transactions
in the Affairs of his Lordships Sister, my Lady Harvey, as will not only fill
you with Astonishment at his enormous Roguery, but sufficiently antidote you
from being imposed upon and misled by any Persons whom he has the Conduct of,
and influenceth and governs in their Informations, Nor is it improper to lay
before you, what Disquiet and Trouble this brazen-faced Fellow gave to most of
the Vintners in and about the Town, a few Years ago, for drawing Wine in
Bottles instead of drawing it in Pots; and how after he had compassed a great
deal of Money to himself, by secret and clandestine Compositions, he eluded the
Statute which had been made in that case, defrauded the Government* and became
obnoxious to the Penalty and Punishment appointed in the Act: For it is known
to Thousands in City and Suburbs, that whosoever were the little Scoundrels
that appeared above-board in those Informations and Prosecutions, yet that it
was he that (...) and hounded out the Rascally Fry, of whom several, upon his
Advice and Persuasion, perjured themselves, as well as made themselves guilty
of all sorts of sharking, dishonest and opprobrious Tricks. And who, my Lord,
but this Harry Baker has for diverse Years been giving Vexation to several Roman
Catholics in many parts of the Kingdom, in order to rob, and get them divested
of very large Parts, Shares and Proportions of their Estates, under Pretense of
their having been bequeathed unto and settled upon Popish Fraternities and
Religious Houses, or their being some way made over and conveyed to
Superstitious Uses. And this Barretor and Harpie growing sensible, that the
infamous Witnesses whom he had lev^ed and suborned to attest and swear to those
Disposals, would, by the indisputable Evidence of Persons of Rank, Quality and
unsuspected Credit, he proved guilty of Perjury the next Term, he has thereupon
changed the Scene, and to prevent that Infamy from falling upon his Witnesses,
he has directed, swayed and influenced them to swear High Treason against the
Gentlemen ^ That so upon Loss of their Lives, their Estates becoming forfeited,
he and his Miscreants may obtain a Share of them that way, after their
despairing of getting it the other: And it is upon the prospect of this, that
(...) boasts to his Friends, and feeds himself with the criminal hopes of
commencing suddenly a Man of Quality, and of living to the height of his
lascivious and riotous Appetites. But in the interim, until he can attain to
those Possessions, which through ^uborning of Witnesses he is about purchasing
by Murders, how disgracefully does it reflect upon the Government, and what
indelible Reproach does it fasten upon some in the Ministry, that not only a
Person of his infamous Character, but against whom there are so many Actions
for Debt, and Executions in the hands of Attorneys (it being his Principle,
though never so well stocked with Money, to pay no Man if he can avoid it)
should be so plentifully furnished by those who are trusted with the disp^nsing
and issuing out of the Treasure of the Nation as to be ab^e not only to live at
the splendid and riotous rate he does, but be in a Condition to feed and supply
so many notorious Cormorants and Beasts of Prey, as a^tend him upon the
Drudgery of Hallooing and Forswearing Men to Death! But, my Lord, it would be
to paus^ate and offend you, as well as to stain and pollute my self to rake
longer in this Sink and Kennel: And I dare refer any for obtaining a further
Account of him to most of the Whiggish Zealots for the Government about the
Town; to all whom he is sufficiently known for Frauds and Treacheries, and to
none for his Truth, Probity and Justice: Yea, I can venture your Lordships
being better informed of him to the Testimony of Mr. A. Smith, who (however
zealous he be in Prosecutions for High Treason, and affectionate, warm and
steady a Partizan for those on the Throne) has more regard for his own Credit,
and more Concernment ^or the honor o^ the Justice of the Nation, as well as
more Comp^ssion and Tenderness for the Lives of guil^le^s, innocent People,
than to represent him as a Credible Person; or not to tell you (if you will do
your self, Mankind and the Na^ion that Right as to require it of him) that
Trick and Falsehood are to be suspected and feared in all that Harry Baker does
dip or intermeddle with. Nor would I be hopeless, but that Mr. Secretary
Trenchard would concur with the rest of his old Acquaintance in branding Harry
Baker for a Fellow unworthy of the least Credit in any thing where in he expects
to find his Advantage and Interest; but that Mr. Secretary may be apprehensive,
that what, upon the Calculation of his Nativity, was told him long ago, may be
true, namely, That his Prosperity and Honor should commence at the time they
did; and that after he had been easy and flourished Six Years, be should about
the Period and Expiration of them, fall into Trouble and Disgrace, if he
escaped other Distresses. And if it be in order to obviate and prevent his
threatened (...): Fortune, which according to that Prediction must be
approaching and near, that he is so busy in finding PLOTS where there are none,
and in trading with a Company of Villains, whom he encourages to reveal what
he is sensible they never knew, nor could, he may by that means both accelerate
his Mortification and augment his Sufferings: However, this I am sure of, that
such a Method in the Administration of his Office will render the worst that
shall overtake him the more just, and him the less pitied under it. And were he
as much a Christian as he pretends to be a Statesman, he would know, that it
is Equity and Justice which fix the Nail in the Wheel, to hinder it is rolling,
and not Artifice, Tricks and Politics calculated to destroy such whom Laws are
enacted to preserve. And it would not misbecome him to imitate the Pattern of
Moderation and* Goodnature, which the very honorable Person in the same Post
with himself does daily set and yield unto him, and not to outrun and exceed
it with so much fiery and undiscreet Heat: For as that truly Great Man
contributed more to the Revolution, and the Establishment of this Government,
than he had either In^erest or Courage to do; so that Noble Peer wants not
Integrity, Z^al and Fortitude to support it by all honorable, righteous and
proper Means, though he cannot meanly and indecently stoop to the unrighteous
Methods or doings (which God will certainly blast) which others seem so fond
of, and to practice wi^h so much Valuation of themselves upon them.

My Lord, that which remains to be laid before you, e're I put an end to the
Trouble that I have assumed the liberty to give you, is to aff^rd some little
account of those Witnesses whose Names I have been able to attain, after the
best and most diligent enquiry I can make: But this may seem altogether
superfluous, after the Representation given of those that have procured, and
continue to manage them; seeing none but the most despicable, and most infamous
of Men, as well as the most indigent and necessitous, can put themselves under
the Power and Conduct of the Blades I have taken the pains to unmask. No^
indeed is it easy to learn who all the Witnesses are, there being so much Art
and Industry used to hide and conceal them, which I am sure casts no very
honorable Aspect upon the Government, though it looks extreme unfavourably
upon those that are accused: For the making it so great a Secret, who they are
that inform, intimates that they are sensible they are of no good Reputation,
and therefore dare not venture the having their Credibility ^i^ted and inquired
into: Nor was it ever found, but that labored Concealments of this kind argued
the weakness of Legal Proof, not the strength of the Nature of the Government
against those that were to be prosecuted. Some talk as if many of them were
Scotchmen, and as if those of that Nation, in the Administration of Affairs
about this Court, were desirous that their Kingdom should have a share in the
Glory of yielding a Pack of standing Evidence for the State as well as England
and Ireland have done: And if the Character of Cunning, which is too justly as
well as commonly given to the Scotch holds true, in those that are to be hired
at this time to be Witnesses for the Government* it looks a^ if there were a
formed Design of doing a great deal of Mischief, and that they have chosen
their Tools accordingly: But then if we add to this the Character of False,
which the English too commonly fasten upon many of that Kingdom, there is the
less danger, because it is hoped none will believe them. And therefore, as to
all the present Evidences of the Scotch Nation, I will leave it upon that
issue: For not knowing who they are, but upon uncertainty and at random, I will
detract from the Honesty and Faith of none, though it were easy to overthrow
the Credibility of all that are suspected But let this or that Man's Reputation
be never so bad, yet I will not expose them unless there be a very great
necessity for it; and then there is, when the leaving them in the possession of
a Credit, which they have justly forfeited, gives them the encouragement as
well as opportunity of murdering innocent People, by coming in falsely as
Evidence against them. But that your Lordship may have some knowledge of the
whole Herd of Briars, by giving you a view and survey of some that are styled
the best of them; I shall both attempt and speedily dispatch it, without
importuning your Patience much longer. And to begin with your Dandys, your
Omballs, and your Lunts, etc. which swore first against the Lancashire
Gentlemen to deprive them of their Estates, and have done the like since to
destroy their Lives; it is but your being acquainted with their Quality and
Course of Living, and you will not only think it a Weakness, but criminal to
believe their Testimonies: For Dand^ he is a Converted Priest, or if you
consider the Motives upon which he abandoned the Popish Religion to embrace the
Protestant, which were to have ^^ope for his Lusts of all kind, as the whole
Series of his Life ever since has abundantly testified, you will rather call
him an Apostate one: And it would have been for the Credit of our Church (for,
my Lord, I am a Protestant, and will never sacrifice my Religion and Country
to any Man) if he had never entered into the Communion of i^, and more for the
In^amy of Theirs* if with allowance he had continued where he was: For since he
became a Member of the Church of England, he has wallowed in all the most
scandalous Immoralities, and to defray the Expense of his Debaucheries, has
pil^ered and stole where he could, till he fell upon the more safe and easy, as
well as more gainful Trade of Informing And I can better compare him to no Man
than to the ancient Evidence Smith, alias Barry, who having by Perjury fleshed
himself upon the Papists, turned at last a perjured and false Witness against
Protestants; which undoubtedly this Fellow will be ready to do (when he finds
his Profit and Interest in it) against all Williamit^s, Whiggs and Phanaticks,
who now cocker and cherish him, as he does at present against the Jacobites of
all Religions, that he is hounded at, and ^ed with Bread for. As to Omball, he
is a broken Carrier, who by Sloth, Riot and Neglect, having brought himself to
Poverty, has set up to repair his Fortune out of Gentlemen's Estates, by
forged and forsworn Depositions against them. And as for Lunt, he was first
Coachman to my Lord Carington, where he either Married or Contracted himself,
and then becoming a Granadier in the Guards, he married another Woman, or (...)
her as his Who^e, but (...) the Life of this Second, he went and demanded his
First Wife: And this profligate Wretch going afterward into Ireland, while K.
James was there, he would have imposed upon that Prince, that he had been a
Trooper in the Guards; but a Gentleman that knew him informing the King what he
had been, he was thereupon refused the being admitted into the Troop, which K.
James was then re-establishing: And most surely, he who has the Impudence, and
dare be so criminal, as to lie to his Prince, will never scruple doing the like
to your Lordship, and to a Court of Justice. At last the Rake-Hell came from
Ireland into Lancashire, where being so necessitous as to be ready to starve,
he received Relief from several charitable Families, whom he so ungratefully
requires, as perjuriously to swear them out of their Lives and Estates. Pray
now, my Lord, do but vouchsafe to reflect upon the Civil and Moral Conditions
of these Fellows, and judge whether it be possible, and much less likely, that
they should be made acquainted with the Disposal and Conveyances of Gentlemen's
Estates, and least of all, that they should be admitted upon so important and
dangerous a Secret, as Men of Quality's Plotting and Conspiring against the
Government; which if any Gentl^man shall be so weak and foolish as to allow, I
will say, that instead of being put into the Tower and Chester-Castle, etc.
they should be confined unto, and shut up in Bedlam, and be treated as Madmen,
not as Traitors. But the many Persons of Este^m, Virtue and unsuspected
Reputation, who are ready to prove the Wretches perjured in reference to their
Depositions about the Gentlemen's Bequeathments of their Estates, will thereby,
if they would say no more, merely through having made them appear forsworn in
that Case, overthrow their Credit, and render them infamous in every Thing else
which they have the Impudence to depose. And suffer me upon this Occasion to
tell you, how barbarous and unpresidented (save during the Reign and Rapine of
Sir William Waller) as well as illeg^l and in^olent, the manner of apprehending
Gentlemen, and of searching their Houses, ha^h been in Lancashire: For not to
insist upon the going about and performing it, guarded and assisted with Dutch
Horse, whom we have no need to keep and maintain in the Kingdom, being
furnished with so large an Army o^ British Subjects, and of whom (according to
the P. of Orange's Declaration dated at the Hague, in the Year 88) we should
have been rid and delivered long ago: But it is the Policy of this Government
to observe and perform no part of that Declaration, in order to prevent and
hinder our believing the Declaration of any other Prince after it, and thereby
make the Restoration of King James impracticable; there being no other way, at
least in their Opinions, to render it feasible but the recovering and
reconciling the Subjects again to their Subjection and Duties, by the
Concessions and Promises which he makes in a Declaration. Nor is it improbable,
but that our Ministers having read, or at least heard (for all of them are not
much conversant with Books) how one of the Monarchs of France, coming from a
Dukedom to a Sovereignty, said, that being King* he was not to revenge the
Injuries he received as Duke; they may thereupon imagine, that King William is
not obliged to perform the Prince of Orange's most Sol^mn Promises. But that
which I call barbarous as well as illegal, is, that in many places whither they
went, they plundered and violently took away whatsoever they were able to lay
their Hands upon: For not being contented to apprehend Persons and seize Arms
of War, they carried away Walking-Swords, Hunting* Saddles, S^affle-Bits,
Servants Clothes and Oats out of the Barns and Granaries; and which is more
prejudicial to the Gentlemen than all the rest, under pretense of searching for
Papers they robbed them of, and carried away with them the Writings of their
Estates; which if the Gentlemen do not receive Relief in, and others be covered
from the like in time to come, it is easy to imagine that besides the
Dishonor* redounding to the Government it will come to produce worse effects,
and be followed with those fatal Consequences which I need not to foretell. For
a Rumor diffused through the Kingdom, for the entertainment whereof it is pretty
well disposed, that the Dutch are every where robbing and plundering, may
occasion as general a flying to Arms, and with more Mischief attending it, as
the false and groundless Repor^ (...) in 88. when it was spread through the
whole Nation in one Nighf, how a few broken, scattered and disarmed Irish were
burning Houses, and cutting Throats in all places! And suffer me to tell you,
that for the Ministers to pretend to disallow these Things, but not to punish
them, is both to encour^ge the Soldiers again to do ^he like, and to tempt
others to think that it is very well approved of, though it be not yet
convenient to commend and justify it. However, it gives occasion for the old
Tories to say, that all the Complaints of the Whigs of the rigorous Oppressions
of the former Reigns, was only because they had not the privilege to practice
them; and that it is not the doing ill things that di^pleaseth them, but that
they have not the applying of the Royal Authority to do all the Mischiefs they
would. And it gives a very odd Id^^ of a certain Gentleman at Court, that when
Hopkins the Messenger was complained of the other day, for having kept Sir Thomas
Stanley, whom he had in Custody, without Meat eight and forty Hours, all the
Punishment the murderous and bloody Villian received, was only a gentle
Reprimand, But as this does not satisfy the Kingdom, much less will it give
Contentment to a Parliament, before whom it will be brought In company of many
other Oppressions and Grievances the next Sessions; when possibly our national
Dishonours and Losses, both at Home and abroad, may dispose them to hearken
better than they have done to private and personal Complaints. And I may assure
you, that ^f either the Messenger be not turned out, or Mr. Secretary Trenchard
for continuing him in, which in the modestest Language is a conniving at his
Crime, all men will believe, that whosoever is taken up and lodged in a
Messenger's hands, is in a fair way to be destroyed without the Formality of a
Trial or the Privilege of being judicially convicted and condemned* My Lord,
there remains one Witness more, whose Name I have learned, and who is said to
be of the best Reputation of any they have, and that it i^ upon his Testimony
they depend more than upon any other, for the Proof of this horrid PLOT; and
therefore knowing his Character so well as I do, I shall convey him to you in
his natural Colors, that by his Hue, you may judge of the Complexion of all
the rest. The ^^llow is one Kingston, who styles himself a Parson of the Church
of England, who being emulous of the Glory of the Dignified Clergy, who are
laboring to prevent the Restoration of King James, and to support this
Government by all their Wisdom and Eloquence, and whatsoever other Means they
can, save the opening their pur^es^ to the measure they have stretched those of
the Jacobites, is desirous also to contribute his utmost Endeavors toward it,
and being incapable of doing it otherwise, offers to perjure himself in favor
of so blessed Ends. It is somewhat surprising, and detracteth very much from
the Character of the Ecclesiastical Order, and has lessened that Esteem and
Veneration the World used to have for them, that there can scarce be the
Discovery of a PLOT, or a Trial for High Treason, but a Parson must be the
Informer, and put in for a Place among the Witnesses; for though it may be
sometimes honorable as well as necessary to be in a PLOT, otherwise so many of
our Religious Clergy would not have so early and deeply concurred unto, and
been concerned in the Descent of the P. of O. yet it has been generally
accounted disreputable to be a Di^coverer, and to assume the Title of an
Evidence^ And it is not only so, but likewise infamous, when all that is
pretended to be discovered is forged, and whatsoever is deposed is perjurious
Falsehood, as it is in the Case of this Scandalous Fellow's Information; who
having begun with forging his own Priestly Orders, conceives he may as well
forge Treason against harmless and peaceable Men: And as the doing the former
renders him suspected of doing the latter; so it makes him infamous to all
Intents and Purposes, and precludes him from obtaining belief in any Judicial
Court, how much soever it be prepossessed in prejud^ce of those he has the
Impudence to accuse: And that this celebrated Witne^s did so, your Lordship
will not only receive full Proof of it, both by an authentic Copy of his
Conviction, duly attested out of the Episcopal Register o^ Bristol, where he
was convicted of the Crime of doing it, but by the Deposition of the present
Bishop of Bristol to be given J^dicially before you; That R^ght Reverend
Prelate, having been Dioces^n o^ Bristol where ^t was done. So tha^ having
represented this unto ^ou, it were to weary your Patience and not to inform
your Judgm^nt, to give your Lo^dship an account of his Polygamy, as we^l as o^
his other most prodig^ous and criminal Offenses, whereof you will have a large
account both from Citizens and Countrymen, whenever they whose Office i^ is
to prosecute Transgressors, shall have the Confidence and Indiscretion to bring
him before you as a Witness Only let me recommend your Lordship to Sir Samuel
Astry for further Information concerning him, who has reason to know him, through
having been defrauded by him of several hundred Pounds. So that I hope by this
time the groundless and empty Noise about a PLOT I, made sufficiently appear,
and that it is not for the honor of the Government to continue making so great
a bu^^le about it, or to persevere in the apprehending so many Persons upon
that account. Nor can my Lord Keeper, who has hitherto enjoyed among all Men
so fair an Esteem, expect long to preserve it, if he go on to give that
coun^enance, which he is said to do ^o such infamous Wretches as come before
him to make Discovery. Neither will he be thought fit to keep the King's
Con^^^ence, who is not more tender of his own than to believe them: Nor does it
very well b^come his Place and Character, to have dipped and entangled himself so
much in this Busines^, (...) some represent him to have done. For we^e there
some Irregularity, or undecent Excess in here and there a Jacobite, yet it is
not for him, who by his Office is to moderate the Rigor of the Law, to have
the principal Hand in stiling little Faults Treasonable Crimes: And instead of
that Equity which should only slow from him, to put on (upon the meet Score of
Faction and Party) an immoderate and unrelenting Severity. And all Mankind
would believe, that he should reckon the Province belonging to his Title large
enough, without launching into that of the Secr^tary's, and A^torney General:
But I hope all that is said of him is nor Truth, and that his Palace where he
should decide Chancery Causes, is not dwindled into an Office of Intelligence;
and that being satisfied with his own Place, he will not break in upon Mr.
Aaron Smith also. My Lord, I have been ^oo tedious and prolix to leave Room for
a Complement at last; and therefore I will conclude without one, and only tell
you, That by Inclination and choice, as well as upon the Motive of your own
Merit, I am

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble an^ Obedient Servant, T. N.
Aug 2. 1694.
FINIS.

