A LETTER to a Person of Honor, concerning the Kings disavowing the having
been Married to the D. of M's. Mother.
My Lord,
AS you cannot but have seen his Majesty's Declaration, wherein he Renounceth
the having been Married to the D. of M's. Mother; so I believe you will not be
displeased to have an account of the sense of the Thinking men about the Town
concerning it. And this without either disguising, or concealing what is
publicly discoursed, I shall, as becomes your Lordships servant, address my
self to give you.

And in the first place; They say it is no surprise to them, that seeing the D.
of Y. has gotten the Ascendant of the King, he should hector him into, or at
least extort from him the foresaid Declaration. For, can any imagine, that he
who for some time renounced his own Wife, and had provided Persons to swear a
familiarity with her which made her unworthy of being Duchess of York; should
scruple to importune the King to do as much by Mrs. Walters, tho it were never
so demonstrable that he was married unto her. The course he practiced himself,
he may without any breach of Charity be thought ready to prescribe to others.
And it may be, he thinks it will be some extenuation of what he did himself, if
people can be brought to believe that it is a Disease natural to the Family,
and which runs in a Blood. Now we all know, not only with what Asseve^ations
the D. disclaimed his Marriage with Mrs. Hide, but with what reflections upon
her Chastity he did it. And yet the Proofs of the said Marriage were so
evident, that he was necessitate at last to acknowledge it; and to own her for
his Wife, after he had by himself, and many others, Proclaimed her for no
better than a Common Whore. And I Am sure it left this Impression upon most
Persons, That his Faith to Men was not very far to be relied on, seeing he made
so slight of that Faith which he had plighted i^ an Ordinance of God to a
harmless Lady.

Secondly, Most men do observe this difference between the Kings Renouncing
Mrs. Waters, and the Dukes Disclaiming Mrs. Hide; That what the Duke did, was
an Act of Inclination and Choice, whereas it is apparent, that what the King
has done, is the result of Dread and Fear. For, to use his Majesty's own
expression not long ago, He was harassed out of his Life, by the importunity of
his Brother; and as He added, He could rather choose to Die than Live so
uneasily as he did, while he withstood their daily Solicitations in this
matter. And as nothing made the Duke honest to Mrs. Hide, but the interposition
of his Majesty's Authority, from a sense of the Justness of the Ladies
Complaint; so they believe the King is only Injurious through the Influence of
others, and that when rescued out of ill Hands, and left to himself, he will
return to be Just. For though his Majesty be a Prince of that clearness of
Understanding, that they cannot baffle him by false Reasonings, yet he has so
much of James's timidness, that they can huffe and overawe him to things most
opposite to his Judgment, as well as cross to his Interest. And let me upon
this occasion remind your Lordship of a Story, of a Scots Nobleman to my Lord
Burleigh, upon that wise Statesman's desiring a Character of King James, long
before he ascended the English Throne. If your Lordship, says the blunt
Scotsman know a Jack-a-napes, you cannot but understand, that if I have him in
my hands, I can make him bite you, whereas if you get him into your hands, you
may make him bite me.

Thirdly, The whole Town is apprehensive, that the King through endeavoring by
this Act to secure himself in the Grace at least forbearance of the Duke and
Popish Party, will find in the Issue that instead thereof, he has left himself
naked and exposed to their wrath and malice. Nor is there any thing more
probable than that what the King calls and intends only for a Declaration to
serve his present Occasions, they will transform into his Last Will and
Testament, to accomodate theirs. If Queen Elizabeth, when tempted to declare
Her Successor, declind it with this saying, That such an Act would be the
digging (...) Grave before She were dead; have we not great Cause to apprehend
that the King having by this Act dug his own Grave, his Brother, or the
Jesuits, under whose Government he is, will find hands to bring and put him
into it, least through delay something should intervene that would fill it up
again. It Is a pity, that none would call to his Majesty's Memory, that saying
of Tacitus, Suspectus semper invisusque Dominanti qui proximus destinatur.
Which* by varying a little from the Latin, I will English thus; That he ought
to be always suspected, and carefully watched against by the Ruler, who most
ardently hopes, and thinks himself in likelihood to succeed him. Statesmen in
old Times reckoned it for a Maxim in Polliticks, that, Ne mentio fieret
Haeredis vivo adhuc Principe; That while the Prince lives, there ought not to
be so much as a mentioning of any whose right it was to come after. For as
subtle Tiberius upbraided Macro, that he forsook the setting Sun, to worship
the rising; so King Charles, may have in time, if he have not already, cause to
object the same to some about him. That crafty Emperor knew more of the Art of
self-preservation, than Crowned Heads in our days seem to do. For tho he had
adopted Germanicus at the Command of Augustus* of whom he received the Empire,
yet having a Son of his own, namely Drusus, He would never declare in favor of
either so long as they lived, but Judged his own Safety to consist in leaving
it doubtful whose Title to the Universal Monarchy was best. However (say most
of his Majesty's Subjects) tho we have not been able to prevent the King from
this unwary Act, by which he has stak't his Life to the pleasure of his
Enemies, yet we will be kinder to him than he has been to himself, and
contribute all we can to his Security, and that is by letting the World know,
That we'll Revenge his Death, by sacrificing the whole Popish party upon his
Grave in case he should come to an untimely End.

Fourthly, This Declaration would be received with less hesitation in the minds
of People, if Kings and Princes were not made of the same mould with other men,
and liable to the like failures and moral Prevarications that the rest of the
Sons of Adam are. And therefore observing how common it is for Persons upon a
lower ground to renounce their Wives, and most sacredly disclaim their
Marriages; they conceive it is not impossible but that these who move in higher
spheres, may upon strong Temptations do the like. Yea, our own History
furnishes us with an Instance of a great King, and one who swaied the English
Scepter, who is transmitted to us with this blot in his Scutcheon* The Person I
mean is Edw. the fourth, who being a sprightly and amorous Prince, was suddenly
Contracted and Married to Elianor Talbot Daughter of the Earl of Shrewbury, and
that not only without any witnesses save Dr. Thomas Stillington Bishop of Bath,
into whose hands the Contract was made, and who officiated at and celebrated
the Marriage, but besides the poor Doctor was strictly enjoined by the King to
conceal it; and you may easily suppose the timorous Prelate would not fail in
his duty to Majesty, at least so long as he knew the King in a condition to
punish and avenge the Discovery. Now Ed. 4. finding thereupon admission into
the embraces of the Lady, and having satiated himself a while by secret
enjoyments, and withal reckoning that none could or at least durst detect by
what holy ties he was bound unto her; he did some years after (notwithstanding
the Person to whom he was Affianced still survived) both deny what was so
solemnly transacted in the ptesence of Almighty God between them, and withal
Married another Woman, namely my Lady Eliz. Gray. Your Lordship may see the
story both in Buck's Life of Richard the Third, page 16, etc. and in Comines's
History of ^ewis the 1^ th. And without making any application of it to the
present Case, I shall crave liberty to make these Remarks upon it.

I. That it is possible for Princes, especially such as have accompanied with
many Women, to have weak Memories, and to forget upon what Terms they
contracted their first Friendships with them. For finding how their Familiarity
arose with others of that Sex, they may grow by degrees into a kind of
persuasion that their Interest in all was established upon no better terms. Or
if they should not be supposed so forgetful as this amounts, unto, yet the Love
of change may make them stifle their knowledge, especially when the Objects of
their fre^h Amors cannot be otherwise brought to entertain their flame, but
with a provision for their own Honor.

2. That the denyals of Kings are not to be subscribed unto with an implicit
Faith, but that we ought to use the same discretion in believing or not
believing what they say, that we esteem our selves privileged to use toward
others in the credit which they require we should give unto them. For though
Princes be not liable to be impleaded in our Courts, nor be subject to
Penalties that transgressing Subjects are; yet seeing they may be guilty of the
same facts, which would both leave a reproach upon common men, and make them
obnoxious to punishments, it cannot rationally be expected that their bare
words should restrain the freedom of our Thoughts, or give law to our
Understandings in the Judgment that we are to make of Cases and Things.

3. I would observe, That though the Judicial Courts could not, and the
Parliaments during Edwards Reign, would not take cognizance of that Kings
contemning and violating the Ordinance of God, by disclaiming his lawful Wife;
yet the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth in a little while after
animadverted severely on the Offense. For not only his two Sons, whom he had by
the Lady Gray, were murdered by their Uncle, but the Kingdom was translated
from his Family, and not only bestowed upon the chiefest enemy of his House,
but upon one who among all that for a long series before had been Rivals for
the Crown, had the weakest Title.

4. It is not unworthy also of our Notice, that notwithstanding King Edwards
denying his first Marriage, and assuming another Lady unto his Conjugal Bed;
yet all this could neither prevent the future enquiry into this matter, nor the
Parliaments recognizing the Marriage with Elianor Talbot, 1. of Rich. 3. And
besides the imputation of a Bigamist which is thereby stamped upon him to all
Ages, his Children by the second venture were Bastardised by Statute, and an
occasion from thence taken so place the Scepter in the hand of Richard.

Fifthly, Nothing in this Declaration can preclude the Duke of Monmouth, or any
other true Englishman, from enquiring (when time serves) by legal and due
ways into the truth or falsehood of the Kings marriage with Mrs. Walters. For
the D. cannot be denied the same right which appertains to every person in the
Kingdom, namely the justifying his own legitimacy in due course and form. And
should he choose to sit down with the imputation of a Bastard with all the other
Losses which attend it; Yet there are those in the Nation who preferring their
duty to God, their Country, Themselves, and an injured Gentleman, before a
Reverence to one man, especially acting under the Influence of a Popish
Brother, will bring that whole business into an impartial examination before
such, where a single Negative will not be allowed as a sufficient proof to
invalidate affirmative Testimonies, providing such can be had. And should that
marriage hereafter be authentically proved, how ill will they be found to have
deserved both of the King and Kingdom, that have either surprised, cajoled, or
threatened his Majesty to bring such a slur upon his Honor and Reputation, as
this Declaration will to all Ages Entail. And, my Lord, Is it not strange, if
there was never any such Marriage, that Mrs. Walters should not only when in
travel with the said D. but at many other times, particularly in her last
hours, when in the Prospect of approaching Death and ensuing Judgment, affirm
it with that positiveness which she did? And is it not more surprising, if
there had been no such Marriage, That Dr Fuller, late Bishop of Lincoln, should
so often, and in Verbo Sacerdotis, declare to diverse worthy Persons, That he
Married them. Nay, What should bias the Inkeeper at Liege to make it the great
Mystery with which he entertained his English Guests, That the Marriage was
cellebrated and consummated in his House, and that both he and his Wife were
eye and ear Witnesses of it. Moreover, if it were such an Idle Story as the
Declaration represents it, how came it to pass, that when some persons lately
examined about the Black Box, declared that they had heard of such a thing as
the Kings being Married to that Gentlewoman, they should be immediately
commanded to withdraw, and told that this was not the business they were
interrogated about. Besides, My Lord, as all who were abroad with his Majesty
at that time, knew the Passion the king had for that person; so some of us can
remember, how through immoderate love to her being reduced to a condition that
his Life was dispaired of, and the late Queen his Mother recieving intelligence
both of his Disease and the Cause of it, she consented to his espousing of her,
rather than that he should consume and perish in his otherwise unquenchable
flames. Moreover as there were few had better opportunities of being acquainted
with this whole affair than my late Lord Chancellor, Hide; so I Am sure the
advantages likely to accrue to his offspring by the seclusion of the Duke of
Monmouth from all Title to the Crown, may be judged sufficient inducements to
have prevailed with him, if not to have asserted the said Dukes Bastardy, yet
to have been silent in the case, and not to have proclaimed the Legittimacy. And
yet that very Lord being in danger of an Impeachment in Parliament for advising
and persuading the King to a Marriage with Queen Katherine, excused himself
from all sinistrous ends in that affair, by affirming, That his Majesty had a
lawful Son of his own by a former Marriage (specifying by name the D. of M.) to
succeed to his Crown and Dignity. Now though it may be supposed that a person
may sometimes lie for his Interest, yet no man can be thought to do so in order
to the prejudice as well of himself as his whole Posterity. And if we believe
men speaking falsehoods in subserviency to their Honor and Profit; Shall we not
give credit to them when they speak Truth to their own damage, and that of all
those who are dear unto them? Certainly the positive Confession and Testimony
of this one Person, being against the Interest of his whole Family, of more
weight than the denyals of any number whatsoever, when merely to promote their
safety and advantage, or to serve the Exaltation of the Papal Cause. These are
but few of the many particulars I could acquaint your Lordship with relating to
the confirmation of a Marriage between the King and Mrs. Walters; But it is a
piece of necessary wisdom at this juncture to know what not to say, as well as
to understand what to say. And to tell you plainly, I Am more a Servant and a
Friend to my Country, than by pretending to plead the Dukes Cause, and to be
useful to the Nation, to discover the Witnesses which are in reserve, or betray
the farther Evidences which are to be produced when this matter shall come
before a competent Judicature.

Sixthly, It Is matter of no small trouble to such as truly love his Majesty,
that the Kings Integrity and Honor should be brought to stake, in a matter
wherein both the present Age and the succeeding, may take occasion to question
and bring into examination his Truth and sincerity. For though it is not
impossible but that Princes (considering the Temptations with which they are
surrounded) may sometimes through inadvertency, and at other times upon State
Motives endeavor to impose upon the credulity, if not abuse the Faith of their
People; Yet, the veracity of a Supreme Governor is of that importance to
himself, and so necessary to the Veneration, which his People ought to maintain
for him, that he is not to bring his Credit to Pawn, unless it be in such Cases
wherein his People may, if not apologize for, yet connive at the indiscretion
and weakness of their Ruler, should he be found to delude them. Nor has any
thing obstructed the affairs of Princes more, and prevented their Peoples
believing them when they spoke their most inward thoughts, than the forfeiture
of their Credit in matters wherein their Subjects relied upon the Honor and
Truth of their Word. For they who do not mean as they speak when People are
prepared to hear them, must not expect that their words should be much relied
upon, when their Tongues are the true Interpreters of their minds. And let me
tell your Lordship that this last Declaration has caused multitudes of his
Majesty's best Subjects to reflect upon and take a view of many of his former
Declarations, that from them they may be furnished with reasons for justifying
themselves in the suspension of their assent to this. And I wish there had not
been that cause administered by foregoing ones, which may with too many lessen
the value of the Royal Word in that bearing date the second of June.

The first of this kind he ever published after he came in view of being
restored to the Sovereignty over these Kingdoms, was that dated at Breda, the 4
th. of April, 1660. wherein he promised Liberty to all tender Consciences and
engaged the sacred word of a King, That no man should be disquieted, or called
in question, for differences in matter of Religion, provided they did not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. Now though I will not dispute about the
sense wherein this Declaration was meant, nor concerning the End for which it
was calculated and framed; yet this I may be allowed to say, that there are a
great many of his Majesty's Liege People who have tasted dealings directly
repugnant unto it, and may justly complain of some faileur in the
accomplishment of it.

It Is true his Majesty is not originally to be blamed that it had not the hoped
for effects; but withal that Prince that can be over-ruld to recede from a
Promise which contributed so much to his happy and peaceable Restoration, may
be supposed capable of such Impressions from men of ill minds, as may make him
venture his Royal Word in other cases beyond the measures of Justice. But
seeing it were a business of too much Fatigue to call over all the Declarations
since his Majesty actually occupied the British Throne, I shall therefore
remind your Lordship only of two more. Whereof the first is that of January the
second, 1671, wherein the King upon shutting up the Exchequer, Declares on the
Word of a Prince, That the restraint put upon payments out of the Treasury,
should continue no longer than till the last of December. 1672. And yet the
fulfilling of this is still Prorogued, though it be now above Nine Years since
the Royal Word was pledged for making it good.

The other that I shall refresh your memory with, is that of the the Twentieth
of April 1679. Wherein his Majesty having shrived himself and craved absolution
for all past matters, solemnly declares that he would for time to come, Lay
aside the use of any single Ministry, or private Advices, or Foreign
Committees, for the general direction of his Affairs; and that he would
afterward Govern his Kingdoms by the Advice of that Counsel which he had then
chosen, together with the frequent use of his great Council of Parliament, as
being the true and ancient Constitution of this State and Government. Far be it
from me to blame his Majesty for the disappointment of those hopes which the
People had so universally conceived upon that Declaration which was so full of
ingenuity and candor, and so adapted to the Honor, Safety, and Interest both
of King and Kingdom; but this may be said without the least umbrage of
irreverence, that the same pestilent men who were able to cause his Majesty to
violate such a Declaration wherein he spoke the most like a wise and good
Prince that ever he did, may be also able by the same ascendant influence to
wrest an unadvised and bad one from him. The same Councils which prevailed upon
him to go against both his Royal Word, and all the Maxims of Policy with which
he is so richly endowed; may they not likewise be conceived to have over-rull'd
him in this to speak against his knowledge and those moral Principles of Truth
and Justice, with which when left to himself he appears to be imbued. Nor do I
doubt but that among other things they had in prospect to compass by this
Declaration, they hoped to shut his Majesty out of the love of his best
Protestant Subjects, so that when brought to fall by their Traitorous
Conspiracies, his death may be at once unlamented and unrevenged. But let them
not flatter themselves, for if there be any thing false or unjust in it, we
ascribe it all to their rage against our Laws and our Religion, and do only
complain of the Kings facility in suffering himself to be so openly abused.

Seventhly, But whereas there is one thing in the Declaration by which men of
honest and easy minds, being unacquainted with the Practices of the world, are
apt to be somewhat startled; namely, The Kings calling Almighty God to witness,
and affirming upon the Faith of a Christian, that there was never any Marriage,
or contract of Marriage, had or made between him and Mrs. Walters; I think my
self obliged to lay before you the sense and apprehensions which wisest heads
have of that Protestation and solemn Appeal.

If, say they, neither the Eye nor Dread of God, nor the Faith of a Christian,
are effectual to restrain a person from Adulteries and promiscuous Scatterings,
Can we have any security that they will prevent such a one from the guilt of
other Crimes? He who neither trembles, nor blusheth to Proclaim his
Uncleanness to all the World, will he forbear sins of any kind or hue out of
Principle, though he may possibly omit them by accident, and in compliance with
Interest?

It was a Maxim of an ancient Ruler, that as Children are to be coussened with
Nuts, so Men are to be deluded with Asseverations and Oaths. And upon this
occasion they call to mind the Character fastened upon Charles the ninth of
France, namely, that the surest Symptoms by which it was known when he spoke
falsely, was the endeavoring to confirm what he said by the most dreadful
Imprecations, and execrable Oaths. And what our own Historians leave upon the
memory of his Royal Majesty's own Grandfather in this point, I had rather you
should learn from Wilsons History of King James, than be told by me. Besides,
say others, who knows but that the King through the like Impression of fear,
under which he lifted up his Hand to the most high God at Scone when Crowned in
Scotland, may have been influenced and overaw'd to make this late Appeal and
Protestation.

He who has done one such thing, and especially with that solemnity and
profession of sincerity wherewith he took the Covenant; can it be otherwise
apprehended but that he may do the like again, if there be sufficient Cause for
the same passion which biased him against Knowledge and Conscience then. Nay
the utmost inducement that swayed and determined him contrary to his Judgment
and Light, to Swear by the great God, in terms so August and awful in Scotland,
was merely an apprehension of being otherwise Secluded from his Right over that
kingdom; but it is more than probable, that no less than a dread of loosing his
Life, as well as three kingdoms, has necessitated him to this which he has
now done. Now it is but considering the seasons when the several Declarations
pronounced first in Council and at last published to the World, were made; and
you will be soon convinced that they* were extorted from him partly by the
necessity of his Affairs, and partly by the frightful ascendancy which his
Brother has obtained over him. For the first which we are here in the Print
told of, was that made the sixth of January, 1678. when the condition and
posture wherein things then stood, made it indispensably needful that the king
should oblige his Brother to withdraw, and which the D. of Y. (though he knew
that his stay here at that time, would have in all likelihood involved his
Majesty under inextricable difficulties) refused to comply with, till he had
wrested that Declaration from him.

And for the second, which was made also in Council, March 3. 1678. it is
obvious to every considering man, and demonstrable to all the World, that it
was the effect of that necessity which his Majestis Affairs had reduced him
unto. For the Parliament being to meet the sixth of that month, and it
appearing by the several returns of the persons Elected to fit, that we were
like to have a House of true English Gentlemen, who would not only inspect the
late Popish Plot, but enquire into the miscarriages of public Ministers.
Hereupon as the Duke threatened to return, unless the king would make some fre^h
Declaration, whereby, being pronounced and represented as next Heir, he might
be skriend from the angry but just recentments of the Nation. So diverse persons
at home who knew themselves unpardonably criminal, applied their thoughts to
find out a method, by which a misunderstanding might in a short time arise
between the king and his Parliament. And apprehending that the D. of Y. could
not possibly escape the animadversion of the House, all the Treasons and Crimes
whereof others were only guilty in their respective parts and proportions,
meeting in him as so many Lines i^ their Center; they accordingly by threatening
to m^ke their own compositions, and to lay open all those matters which they
conceived his Majesty to be most solicitous to have concealed, brought the king
to make that Declaration. Whereby having in effect signified the D. of Y. to be
the next in right to succeed, they reckoned they had wrought him to such an
espousal of his Brother, as must needs break all measures of fair
correspondency with his Parliament. And as this was the principal thing they
aimd at, so by denouncing still to provide for their own security, in detecting
whatsoever they knew, they kept him to an adhesion to the Declaration which he
had made, and thereby not only embarassed all his Affairs, but so embroiled him
with the House of Commons, as that in a few weeks they compassed the
Dissolution of the Parliament.

Having thus briefly represented unto your Lordship under what influence of
necessity and fear, these Declarations were at first made in Council, I need
not tell you through what impressions by the uncessant Importunity, and daily
Hectoring of his majesty by the Duke, now at Windsor, they come at last to be
Printed and Proclaimed to the World. The king pore Gentleman, is willing to buy
his Peace at any rates, and has here stak't his Honor, not to say his
Conscience, for it? But as you know that neither Concessions, Declarations nor
Alienations made by a Person in duress, or under threatenings, or swayed by
apprehensions of the hazard of his Life, can oblige others, tho they be such
as are wrapped up in or concluded by him in all Cases wherein he is supposed
free; so in plain English, the generality of the People and those of the best
sense, hold themselves no wise affected or prescribed unto by these
Declarations. For we who knew the tenor of them when they lay concealed in the
Council Books, and yet thought our selves at liberty to believe as our
Judgments conducted us, are not likely to have our minds altered by the bare
Printing of them. But how far the Conscience of the king is concerned or
defiled, I leave to those of the Theologick Faculty to resolve, only I judge
that the same Casuistical Divinity whereby they salved the Conscience and
vindicated the honor of the king in case the of the Covenant, and with all
discharged him from the Obligation which it was supposed to have put upon him,
may whenever he thinks meet* stand him in good stead, and afford him the
same relief in the case of the late Declarations.

Eighthly, There is one thing further, that must not be omitted* because it
gives us amazement, and yet affords us pleasant diversion; namely the motive
they have brought his Majesty to allege for his making and publishing this
Declaration. I confess I could not read it without surprise and wonderful
emotion. And I dare say, when you think seriously of it, you will find pity
stir in your heart to your abused Prince, and your bood swell in your Veins
through indignation at some about him. For after the care they have suffered
him to take for preserving our Religion, Lives and Liberties from the designs
of the Papists, by dissolving two Parliaments, and so often Proroguing a third;
they bring him now to publish this Declaration to relieve the minds of his
loving Subjects from their fears, and to prevent the ill consequences which a
belief of his having been Married to the D. of M's. Mother, may have in future
times upon the Peace of these kingdoms. A most proper way to extinguish our
fears, by doing all that he can, to subject us hereafter to one who is the
professed Enemy of our established Religion and Legal Government. But that your
Lordship may the better comprehend how highly we are obliged to his majesty for
his love and tenderness to his People in all that they judge dear and
valluable, by designing so hopeful a Successor over them; I shall recount some
of those many particulars from which we esteem our selves capable of judging
what a gracious and desirable Prince this dear and beloved Brother is like to
prove.

1. He is a Gentleman that has renounced the Religion wherein he was not only
educated and which these Nations profess, but which he had consigned unto him
sealed with the Blood of his father, and entailed upon him and the whole Line
by no less then his Grandfathers Curse, in case any of old James' offspring
should depart from it.

2. He has made it his business to seduce his Majesty's Subjects to the papal
Faith, and to enslave them to a foreign Jurisdiction. And by his addresses,
solicitations, and preferments wherewith he is able to reward such mercinary
souls as are ready to make sale of their Religion, he has made more converts
to the Church of Rome than all the English Missionaries have been able to do.

3. Through the power which he has obtained over the King, he has procured
the chiefest places of strength in the Nation, and some of the greatest Trusts
as well Civil and Religious as Military, to be conferred upon known Papists and
sworn enemies to the Protestant Cause, and English Liberties.

4. He has been the principal promoter of Arbitrary Government, and of making
the Kings interest both distinct from and opposite to that of his People. And
this he has done in pursuance of Papal advice and in subserviency to the
Romish interest. For where the Monarch is absolute, and the Lives and Fortunes
of whole Nations are enslaved to the will and pleasur^ of one person; the mere
wheedling of a lustful, weak, or inconsiderate Prince, will go a great length
in the gaining vast multitudes to adore the Triple Crown. And for such as shall
prov^ stubborn and refractory, it is but meritoriously to kill them, and then
convert their Lands to the use of the holy Sea.

5. It was this darling and beloved One, that Authorized the burning of London,
and not only made his own palace a Sanctuary to the Villan's who were suspected
as instruments of that dreadful conflagration, but rescued and discharged
diverse who were apprehended in the very Fact. And this he did partly in
revenge, for as much as London had been both the Magazine of Strenth and
Treasure during the War with the late King; and partly to gratify his Popish
friends by destroying the bulwark of the Protestant Religion, and the chief
Receptacle of the Heretics.

6. It was this presumptive Heir that all along obliged his Majesty to neglect
the concerning himself in favor of the Protestants abroad, and did so order
it through his power over the King, that never any foreign Alliance was made
but what was abused to the betraying of them. And here let me call over a story
and perhaps a more Tragical one and accompainied with baser Treach^ry, then any
History is able to acquaint you with. One Monseiur Rohux a French Gentleman
coming into England to treat with the King concerning an Alliance between his
Majesty and Foreign Protestants merely for the preservation of their Religion,
and having acquainted the Duke of York with his errand, after he had in a
private conference or two transacted with the King about i^. This Royal Prince
out of his wonted kindness to the Protestants and the reformed religion, caused
Rouveny (Lieger Ambassador from France at this Court) to stand behind the
hangings at St James while he made this innocent Gentleman discourse over the
whole business. Upon which Mons. Rouveny being ob^iged to acquant his master
with it, Mons. Rohux (who upon some ^ntimation that the Duke had betrayed him)
had withdrawn ^ence to Switzerland, was there seized by a party of French Horse
and brought to the Bastile, whence after some times imprisonement he was
carried to the place of Excution and broken upon the Wheel.

7. It was through the Duke of Yorks means that both the first and second Wars
were commenced against the Dutch; and that ^n order not only to weaken the
Protestants by their mutual de^troying of each other, but in hope to have
turned the victorious Arms of the King upon the Heretics at home and the
patrons of English liberty.

8. It was this zealous Prince for the honor and safety of Britain that
adviced the breaking the Tripple-League, which was the wisest conjunction and
most for the glory of the Kings Reign and the preservation of his Dominions,
that ever he entered into. And this he did not only to gratify France whose
Pensioner as well as whose confederate he has been, but to leave the
Protestants here naked to the attempts of the papists. For he knew that while
that League continued firm, the king of Sweden and the States of Holland would
have construed all designs upon the Protestants in England, as done against
those of the same religion with themselves and in favor of whose profession
they had entered into that Alliance.

6. He has not only mantained correspondence with Foreign Princes, to the
betraying the Kings councels, but has confederated with them for the
extirpation of our religion, and overthrowing our Legal Government. And besides
many other evidences of this which it is not convenient to mention at present.
The depositions which arrived with the Commitee of Seceresy during the Session
of the late Parliament, together with Colemans letters and that which he wrote
in the Dukes name and indeed by his command, do uncontrolably demonstrate it.

10. He was consenting to and has cooperated in the whole Popish Plot, for
both his Confessor and Secretary did with his knowledge and approbation Seal the
Resolves for the Kings death.

11. It was the Duke, who, when the King had revealed the first discovery of
the Hellish Romish Plot to him immediately communicated it to Father
Beding-field, that so the conspirators might know to how secure their papers
and abscond themselves.

12. It was he who through his command over the Post Office prevented the
intercepting the letters From St^ Omers and others Foreign Seminaries, whereby
that whole damnable conspiracy would have been more fully detected.

13. He employed his own Duchess to transport several of the Traitors to
Holland, that so they might escape the search that was made for them and the
punishment which they had deserved.

14. It was he who suborned, encouraged and rewarded the vilest Miscreants to
frame and swear a Plot against the Protestants; and this he did to beget a
disbelif of the Popish conspiracy and in order to destroy such of the Nobility
and Gentry as were the chief assertors of the Reformed Religion and English
liberty.

15. It was he who advised the several prorogations and dissolutions of
Parliaments, whenever they were either considering the bleeding condition of
the Protestant interest abroad or supplicating the King to an Alliance with
Protestants Princes for its protection and preservation.

16. It was he in whose favor the Dissolution of the last Parliament was
procured, and who has prevented the sitting of this after Eight several times
appointed for their meeting* And all to hinder the Trial of the Traitorous
Lords in the Tower, and to obstruct the further search into the many Hellish
Plots wherein himself and the rest of the Papists are engaged, for the
subversion of our Religion and Laws, and the destruction of the lives of his
Majesty and People. And how much he has lessened his Majesty's interest in the
hearts of his Subjects, and weakened their confidence in his Royal word, by
obliging him to treat this Parliament as he has done, seeing in his speech to
both Houses March 6. 1678. he had so solemnly declared his resolution to meet
his people frequently in Parliaments; and into what straits and wants, they
have thereby also reduced him, I shall rather leave your Lordship silently to
consider, than take upon me at this time to unfold.

17. It was he who after he had for so many years promoted the aiding and
succoring of France with English Forces till that aspiring Prince was ascended
to a power and greatness not to be in any probability withstood or controlled,
did at last engage his Majesty in making the general peace which is a thing so
highly prejudicial to all Europe, in the unavoidable consequences of it.

18. It was he who countenanced and enlivened the late Traitorous Combination
of Prentices and Ruffians, and who together with the Lords in the Tower Issued
out the Money both for the expenses of their entertainments, and for the
providing them with Arms to distrube the peace of the City and Kingdom, and
assault the Houses and Lives of his Majesty's Liege People.

19. It is he who has enrolled and secretly mustred men in all Counties of
England, and who besides the English Papists whom at this time he has called
from all parts of the Nation, to London, is also provided of a great number of
Irish who formerly washed their hands in the blood of Protestants or are the
genuine offspring of those that did. Now being thus furnished and environed he
is resolved (unless God in his providence miraculously interpose) to put all to
a venture and play over the same game in England that was heretofore acted in
Ireland.

20. It is he who cherishes in his bosom and exalts to the highest Trusts
such as Coll. Worden, who betrayed his Majesty's secrets to the usurping
powers, particularly to Mr. Scot. Nay himself may be charged with many things
in those times whereby we may apparently discover both his treachery to his
Majesty, and his ambition to have usurped the Crown from him. For when a Loyal
party of the English Fleet had espoused his Majesty's Right and Title against
the enemies of his Crown and person, the Duke who being then aboard should have
encouraged and ventured his Life in conjunction with them, did instead thereof
by a most shameful and ^isloyal deserting of them both discourage them in their
fidelity and so far as in him lay obleige them to compound for themselves with
a ^eclusion of his Majesty's intrest. Yea besides this, when the Scots were
treating the King at Breda in order to the establishing him in the Throne of
that Kingdom, the D. of Y. was at that very time transacting with such as
remained faithful to the Kings Title here, that they would renounce his elder
Brother and choose him for their Sovereign. Nor do I believe that his Majesty
can forget the occasion and design upon which the Duke forsook him at Bruges
and withdrew to Holland, so that the King was necessitated not only to command
him upon his allagience to return, but was forced to send the Duke of Ormond
and some other persons of quality to threaten as well as persuade him, before
he would go back.

21. It is he who not thinking the declaration enough to facilitate his
ascension to the Throne, or to secure him from resistance in the attempts he
purposes upon our Lives and Liberties, has been and still is endeavoring to
be admitted and let further into the Government, and accordingly has accosted
the King by my Lord Durass in that matter. This is the more surprising
forasmuch as one would think that it is not possible he should be further let
into the Government having Berwick, Hull, Langer point, Shereness, Portsmouth,
and the Magazine of the Tower (Leg being now Master of the Ordnance) in the
hands of his sworn vassals and creatures; and having also the superintendency
of all civil affairs in him, unless by taking the Scepter actually into his
hand, he should confine the King to a Country House and and an Annual pension.
And his partisans about the Town talk of no less than the having the Duke
Crowned during the Kings life, as Henry, the 2. (tho upon far different
reasons) was Crowned in conjunction with King Stephen. And I wish that what the
Brother of the King of portugal has of late years, effected against his
Prince, did not awaken our jealousy to fear that the same may be attempted by
a dispensation from the infallible chair elsewhere. However they have taken
care should they accomplish this design that they may not be obliged to
entetain our Katherine, as they in Portugal did the French Madam Married to
Alphonso, for as much as the best part of the portion with our Princess, namely
Tangeir, is through the courage and conduct of my Lord Incheqine one of the
Dukes greatest confidents as good as disposed of* But should they proceed in
this design against his Majesty, it becomes all his Majesty's good Subjects to
endeavor as one man the rescuing him from under their power, seeing the very
designment of such a thing is a Treason of so high a Nature against the King
that we should be wanting in our Allegiance, should we not apply our selves in
the use of all possible ways and means to punish and aveng as well as prevent
the excution of it. Now my Lord these are but few of the many particulars by
which we are sufficently enlightened concerning the Duke of York, and we may
abundantly learn from these how much we are indebted to his Majesty for his
Grace, Favor, and care in appointing such a one after him to succeed over us?
Do not all our fears hereupon immediately vanish and die; and Hope, Joy, and
Gladness revive in our hearts on this prospect which the King has given us of
so good an Heir? But poor Prince, we at once compassionate and forgive him,
knowing that this proceeds not from his inclination, but that he has been
hurried and forced to it. Nor do we need any further assurance of the inward
propensions of his Majesty's heart, and the dislike his breast is filled with
for what he has done, but the endeavoures which he used (under daily and
manifold importunities to the contrary) to have avoided it, and the sadness
which appears in his countenance since overawed to publish this Declaration.
And as for the Duke of Y. let him not deceive himself, for as he may percieve
by this that we fully understand him and know the kindness he entertains for
us, so, we are prepared for him and resolved to return unto him and his in the
kind they intend to bring. For having both Divine and Humane Laws on our side,
we are resolved neither to be Papists nor Slaves, and consequently not to be
subjects to him who has vowed either utterly to extirpate us, or to reduce and
compel us to be both the one and the other.

Lastly; For the Issuing of all this Controversy concerning whose Right it is
to succeed next after his Majesty, men here about the town accustomed to
discourse, think that there need but two proposals, and those very rational
ones to be made. The first is that the Parliament being admitted to sit, they
may examine this Affair, whereof they alone are competent Judges. Whatsoever
Declarations may otherwise signify, yet it is a principle which can never be
oblitterated out of the minds of English Men, That they are neither binding
Laws nor can alienate or extinguish the Rights of any. Shall the Son of a
common Person be allowed the Liberty to justify his Legittimacy, in case his
Father prove so forgetful, or so unnatural as to disclaim him; And shall the
Duke of Monmouth merely by being the Son of a King, forfeit this just and
universe Privilege. If his Majesty was indeed Married to that discountenanced
Gentleman's Mother, he is by our Laws the Son of the Kingdom, as well as the Son
of King Charles. And therefore it is necessary as well as fit, that the People
should in all due and Legal ways understand whether they have any Interest or
not in him, before they be commanded to renounce him, or resign it. All
therefore we desire is, that this matter may be impartially and fairly heard,
and that before those who alone have right to be Judges of it, and as no other
course but this can satisfy the minds of People; so it cannot be expected that
upon the Authority of a Declaration, especially gotten as this was, they should
sacrifice the share (which for any thing yet appears) they have in him as their
apparent Prince and next Heir to the Throne. And unless this be obtained; the
People will undoubtedly think their own Rights invaded, whatsoever the said
Duke judges of his.

The second thing we would humbly beg, as well as propose is, That the
Parliament being called to sit, the Duck of York may be legally tried for his
manifold Treasons and Conspiracies against the King and kingdom. For if he be
innocent, and that the Right of Succession be his, all Men will quietly
acquiesse under him but if he should prove guilty (as we no wise qvestion but
that he will) shall his Treasons when a Subject qualify him to be a King, and
Pave the way for his rising to the Throne. According to all Equity as well as
Law, he ought first to justify himself from all traitrous attempts and Acts
against the King and People, before he be allowed to have his claim heard
concerning any title that in time to come he may have to rule over these
Nations. I shall subjoyn no more at present, save that I am,

London, June the 10th. 1610. My Lord, Your most obedient Servant*


