Four Profitable TREATISES Very Useful FOR CHRISTIAN PRACTICE.

Viz.
I. The Killing Power of the Law. II. The Spiritual Watch. III. The New Birth.
IV. Of the Sabbath.
All which are printed in Folio, but these Small Pieces are intended for those
that cannot go to the Price of the greater Volume.

By the Reverend, Mr WILLIAM FENNER, Late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxey for J. Rothwel at the Fountain in Cheapside, and
Tho. Parkhurst at the Three Crowns, against the great Conduit in Cheapside.
1657.

Christian Reader,
THe good acceptance which other Tracts of this worthy author have found with
thee has drawn these pieces to the Press. Pieces which are indeed minima
mole, but maxima virture, little in bulk, great in efficacy and usefulness.
Four subjects here are, every one of great concernment to Christians. First,
Here Is the use of the law in a sinners conversion, which is much every way. And
that is the best argument to overthrow that soul-destroying Doctrine of
Antinomianisme. 2. Here is the Doctrine of watchfulness, which, of how great
importance it is, the many and woeful Instances of back sliding and misearrying
Christians, occasioned principally by the neglect of this great duty, are
convincing demonstrations. 3. Here is that foundation doctrine of regeneration,
which is none other but the gate of heaven without the knowledge and experience
whereof no salvation is to be had, If thou have it here thou may read the
discoveries of it to thy consolation, If thou want it, hence thou may be
committed to thy caution and excitation. Lastly here is the Doctrine of the
Sabbath that great commandment the custos utriusque tabulae the keeper of both
the tables, which therefore God has made a frontire commandment, bordering
upon them both: In a word all of them deserved such a writer, and he such
subjects, and both the writer and subject call out for thy profiting thereby
both in knowledge and in grace which is the intent of the publisher. Farewell.

Imprimatur

Ed. Calamy. Simeon Ash. Matthew Pool.


THE KILLING POWER OF THE LAW.
Romans 7. 9. For I was once alive without the Law, but when the Commandment
came, sin revived, and I died.
IN these words the Apostle shows The Division of the Text.
Two things; First, What a jolly man he thought himself to be whilst he was a
Pharisee, before the Lord wrought upon him by the Law: Secondly, What a
miserable wretched creature he saw himself to be when the Lord took him in
hand, and discovered his sins unto him, before the Law came home unto him, and
convinced his Conscience; he thought himself to be alive, but when the
commandment came, sin revived, and he died.

1. In the former we may observe Two things:

First, The jolliness of the Apostle, he thought himself to be alive; I was
alive without the Law, I was a Pharisee, and thought my self to be alive, I
fasted twice a week, and prayed every day, and made long prayers each day; when
he considered how he walked thus in all the Ordinances of God, he thought if
this was not to be alive, he knew not what it was to be alive; I was alive once
without the Law.

Secondly, We have here the cause why he had this good conceit of himself, it
was because he was without the law, the law of God had not convinced him, it
had not discovered his miserable and wretched estate unto him; though he had
some understanding in the literal sense of the Law, yet the Law was not yet
come home unto him, he was as yet without the law, and that was the reason of
that good conceit he had of himself, he did esteem himself to be alive.

And then again in the latter part; When the commandment came, sin revived, but
I died. There we may also observe Two things.

First, The law showed him what a wretched estate and condition he was in, for
all his self conceitednesse, sin revived and I died: though I thought before I
was alive, yet when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died; I saw I was
a dead man, when the Lord took me in hand, to deal with me, and let me see how
my case stood before him. Howsoever I thought my self to be in a good case
before, now I saw I was but a dead man; I did not see such evil, and such a
mass of corruption before; but when the Lord discovered my self unto my self,
and when I saw the Spiritualnesse of the law, then I saw that sin was alive in
me, and I died; when I saw how I ought to behave my self in my affections, and
in my inward man, then sin revived, and I for my part was a dead man, I was
fain to come down from those high conceits, and imaginations I had before.

Secondly. We have here the cause why he was thus brought down, it was because
of the commandment of God which came home unto him, the law of God came home
unto his conscience, and discovered unto him, how it was with him, and it made
him to shake in the apprehension of his own estate, that he was but a dead man,
and that he had gone to hell, and perished everlastingly, if he had continued
in that estate and condition.

I intend at this time to treat of the former part, Without the law I was once
alive: and here Two things must be opened: First, what does the Apostle mean,
by without the Law: Secondly, What does he mean when he says, I was once alive.

1. For the first, When the Apostle says he was without the law, he does not
mean simply, that he did think himself without the Law, that is, without the
binding Authority of the Law, for so no reasonable creature is, yea, indeed no
creature at all is without the law of God, for there is a Law of Obedience
imposed upon all the creatures and the unreasonable creatures do keep the Law
that is imposed upon them by God; and howsoever reasonable creatures depart
from this law and break it, yet they are under the binding power of this Law;
therefore the Apostle does not thus mean that he was without the Law, therefore
we must know, that to be without the law is taken Four ways:

First, To be without the Law, is meant, to be without the promulgation and
publishing of the Law, and so the Heathen only are said to be without the Law,
as we may see Romans 2. 12. there the Heathen are said to be without the Law:
that is, without the promulgation of the Law, it was published only to the
Jews upon Mount Sinai, and so Paul was not without the law.

Secondly, It is taken in regard of the literal knowledge of the Law, and so
ignorant people are said to be without the law of God; they know not the Law of
God; and in this sense Paul was not without the law, he was trained up in the
law, he was learned in the law, for he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
Acts 22. 3. so that he had the logical meaning of the law, and was able to
speak of the points of Religion, better then a thousand millions of carnal men,
he had the literal knowledge of the law.

Thirdly, It is taken in regard of the moral obedience to the law, and so
wicked men are said to be without the law, as we may see, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The law
is not given to a righteous man, but to the lawless and disobedient; wicked men
are lawless, they live as if there were no law, drunkards and profane persons,
as they are said to live without God in the world, so they are said to live
without law, as if there were no law to bind them; they are people that are not
to be held within any compass, they take notice of no command to rule in their
hearts, and rectify their lives; and in this sense Paul was not without the
law neither, for he lived after the most strict and exact sect of the
Pharisees, Phil. 3. 4, 5. If any man think he has whereof he may trust in the
flesh, I much more, circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the
tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law, a Pharisee;
he was one that fasted and curbed himself, yea, he kept two Fasts a week, (as
those Pharisees did, that were of the better rank) he prayed daily, and
performed the duties of Religion, and there was no outward ordinance of the
Law, which he performed not; he was one that was conformable to the letter of
the law, according as he understood the Law; he was morally obedient to the
Law; he was no extortioner, nor unjust person; no, he did the works of the Law,
and those things contained in the Law; nay, there was no body that could
challenge him with any blame; none that were familiar with him, could say any
thing to tax him withal, when he was in his ignorance, and blindness; therefore
in this sense he was not without the Law.

Fourthly, Therefore in the Fourth place, we are said to be without the Law in
regard of the spiritual sense of the law, and so Paul was without the law; he
did not clearly understand the divine and spiritual sense of the law; he did
not see the glory and the beauty of the law of God, how it did discover all the
breaches of righteousness, how it reached to all the inner parts, how contrary
the law of God was to all his nature; thus Paul understood not the spiritual
nature of the law, he had not the spiritual understanding of the law, and thus
he was without the law.

2. Now for the other words, I was alive once;

1. It is meant here spiritually toward God; he does not mean naturally, for
he was alive naturally, both before and after the commandment came; but the
meaning is, he did not think himself to be such a wretched cursed creature as
he was; he thought he had the fear of God in him, and true obedience in him; he
thought he had a spiritual kind of life, as we may see Romans 6. 11. Ye are dead
(says the Apostle) to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ. And, Romans 7.
13. Give not your members as weapons unto sin, but give your selves unto God,
as those that are alive from the dead. i.e. As those that have the pure and
spiritual life of grace in them: so Luke 15. 24. This my son was dead, and is
alive again; that is, spiritually alive again; he was a dead creature, he was
departed from his father, which is the fountain of life; he was dead in sins
and trespasses, he was a dead man, but now he is alive again, he has spiritual
life again.

2. To be alive is taken to be conceitedly so, alive in his own conceit, he
has not true life in him, yet he does imagine that he has life in him, he
thinks he has life, and is dead, Rev. 3. 1. I know thy works, thou have a name
thou live, but thou art dead: Here the Church of Sardis did imagine she was
alive, and others conceived so; she seemed to be alive, and yet notwithstanding
was dead, she had no true life in her: she seemed to be alive, not only in the
sight of others, but in her own apprehension; she seemed to be alive, and yet
was dead; now this is the meaning of the words, without the law I was alive
once; that is, I thought my self to be alive; I apprehended my self to be no
dead man, no damned man; I thought not my self to be under the wrath of God,
and one that should perish evermore, if I continued in that estate wherein I
was; I hoped better things of my self, I saw these signs of grace and life in
me, and I thought I was alive indeed, till the commandment came, till the law
of God was pressed upon my conscience, and showed me the contrary; I thought my
self to be a very live man, and one that had some hope of eternal happiness,
and one that might enter into glory, I took my self to be alive; thus we see
the meaning of the words.

Now the Point I intend at this time to insist upon, Obser.
is the liveliness of a carnal man's heart, before the law comes home to him,
and is pressed to him, and shows him his damnable estate, and that he is dead
in sins and trespasses, he has some color of righteousness, that he is moral
and civil, and orderly, and he has something that is like grace and life, he
has some hope toward God, and has some kind of obedience, he seems to be
obedient to the commandment of God; before he is humbled by the law of God, he
is a live creature. Here St. Paul shows it by his own example, Without the law
I was once alive, noting out unto us, how it is with every unhumbled man, with
every unmortified man, that is not yet converted to God, he has many things to
say for himself, but he does not understand the pureness of the law, the law
has not yet killed him, it has not yet pulled him flat down before almighty
God: a man that is unhumbled by the law of God is a live man, he will not be
persuaded, that he is a dead, damned creature; he does apprehend and hope he
has life, it is so with men, before their conversion, they will not believe
that they are damned creatures, and they think it uncharitableness in any to
say they are damned creatures, and dead creatures, they will not believe it; so
long as the law is not charged upon their consciences, so long as they see not
how it is with them, they do verily apprehend that they have life in them,
their hearts are not killed, their spirits are not dead within them, they are
not pulled down in the apprehension of their own cursed estates before Almighty
God: this is the thing I intend to insist upon.

2. For the Proof of the point, we may see, 1 Timothy 5. 5. there the Apostle
speaking of Widows that lived in pleasure, says, She that lives in pleasure,
is dead while she is alive; that is, dead in pleasure, dead in sin, dead in the
vanity of her own heart, and yet such a Widow lives, she lives not only a
natural life, but she is alive in her own conceit in regard of a spiritual
life; for if she conceived she were a dead creature, a damned creature, it
would kill all her pleasure, it would kill the heart of any creature under
heaven, it would break the neck of all her pleasure, but in that she took her
pleasure, it was a plain token that she was not killed.

Now for the Opening of the Point, I will do these Three things:

First, I will show what this liveliness is, and wherein it consists.

Secondly, I will show what the effects of it are.

Thirdly the Uses.

First I will show what this liveliness is, and it consists in these Three
things; I could branch them into Four, but I will reduce them into Three Heads.

1. First, It consists in the nonappearance of a man's dead, and damned estate:
So long as a man's dead and damned estate does not appear unto him, so long a
man thinks he is alive, and that he is not a dead man, he is not a man that
has the sentence of condemnation lying upon him, so long as the law has not
come, and showed a man his wretched estate, and made his damnable estate appear
in its own colors unto him, why he is a live man, he conceives himself to be
alive because the law of God has not convinced him of the contrary: if the law
of God does seize upon a man's heart, and in its own colors appear to a man's
eyes, and hold it self as a glass to a man's understanding, and shows him his
wretchedness, and what a cursed estate he is in before God, this will kill his
very heart, and break the liveliness that is in him, and make him burst out
into outcries, Oh! I am a dead man, I am a damned man; so that the liveliness
that is here spoken of, consists in the nonappearance of a man's dead and
damnable estate: As for example, an Adulterer, his damnable estate does not
appear to him, he knows not that he is a dead man, as Prove. 9. 18. He knows not
that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of hell: when he
goes to lie with his Whore, and commit his wickedness, he does not think that
they are dead and damned men that are there, nor that they are in the pit of
Hell. Though his Conscience may tell him, that he is wicked, and sinful, and
wretched, and that he is half dead; yet he is not a dead man, he is not
absolutely a dead man, he does not know this: It may be he will confess it,
Lord, I am a dead man, Lord, I am a damned man; it may be he will confess this
in his prayer, because he has some light, but yet his heart is not taken down,
the liveliness of his heart is not killed. I will prove it to you: for let
another man, a Minister of God, or a child of God, say he is a dead man, a
damned man, one that lies under the wrath of God, he will deny it, and say he
is uncharitable, and judges hardly, and why may he not be a live man, and a
good Christian? he hopes he is, he does not know that he is a dead man; as the
wiseman speaks, Prove. 14. 12. There is a way that seems right to a man, but
the issues thereof are death: that is, there is a way that seems to be a way of
life, and a man seems to be alive that walks in that way; but the truth is, it
is a way of death, and a man that goes in that way is a dead man, and a damned
man; but yet in the mean time, while he walks in that way, it seems to be a way
of life unto him; there is a nonappearance of the deadness, and damnednesse
of a man's estate and condition that walks in that way, and therefore it seems
to him to be a right way, and a way of life, and there is great hope in him
that he shall live for evermore, and many men do walk in that way, and
therefore it seems to him to be a right way, and a way of life; it seems right
to a man, but the end thereof is death: and this is the First thing, wherein
this liveliness consists, the nonappearance of a man's dead and damned estate.

2. Secondly, It consists in Performance; he is able, as he conceives, to do
the duties that God commands; he has wisdom and ability at home to go about
his affairs; he has understanding and supply at home; he has life, and
sufficiency to go about these and these duties and performances; let the law
tell him, he must be sober, he has life to avoid the Alehouse, and if he
commit a Drunken Act, he would have you think he has grace to be sorry for it;
and let a man tell him, he is a dead man, he has no grace in him, no life in
him; he will tell you, he does thus and thus, he hears Gods Word, and he Prays
to God, and he Trusts in God, and he Believes in God; your telling of him this,
does not kill his heart, he thinks he is alive for all this; nay, let the law
of God, come and tell him, He is a dead man for all his doing; this will not
kill him neither, so long as the Lord himself does not open his eyes, and clear
his eyesight, and discover his sins, and convince his Conscience; though the
law say he is a dead man, and a damned man, this does not kill him, he can wait
upon God and perform these and these duties. Then let the law of God say, He is
a dead man for all this, he must deny himself: why so he will; I confess,
Lord, I am an unrighteous man, a wretched man, a sinful creature, and all my
righteousness is as menstruous rags; and now he thinks all is well, but the
law of God, has not yet come home unto him, and showed him his heavy estate,
but he is alive in regard of the performance of the duty, and thinks verily he
has life at home in him; whereas, if the law of God did come home and charge
his estate upon him, and show him, what obedience the law requires, what
severity, and truth in the inward parts, it would break a man's heart, and kill
him, notwithstanding all performance: but in the mean time that a man's heart is
not killed, and the law has not given him his deaths wound, he thinks he is
alive: Cry aloud, (says God) lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people
their transgressions, and the house of Israel their sins, Isai. 58. 1. there
the Lord looks upon the people as dead, wretched sinners, and abominable
people, but yet notwithstanding they thought they were alive in performances,
as we may see, verse. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways,
even as a nation that did righteously, and had not forsaken the statutes of
their God: they ask of me the ordinances of Justice, they draw near to me,
saying* We have fasted, and thou regardest it not. We see here they take
delight in approaching unto God, they take delight in Gods Ordinances, and seek
God early, they can do thus, and thus, and are alive in all performances; but
that man whose spirit the law has pulled down, and the Lord has convinced him
of his infinite inability to perform the law, he cannot see any liveliness in
him, unto any performance. Let any duty come, it kills his heart: I should now
hear the Word of God, but my heart is unprepared, and my ear uncircumcised, and
I cannot hear aright. Let an opportunity be offered to pray, it kills his
heart; I should now call upon the Name of the Lord, but I have such a cursed
heart I cannot pray, I cannot speak one right word before God. Let an occasion
be offered of holy conference, it kills his heart; alas, says he, I want pure
language, my tongue was never touched with a coal from the Altar, my lips have
not ability to drop forth savoury speeches, I am not able to speak one syllable
aright to Gods glory; it kills his heart, he sees no life at all in him,
unless he can have life from without, and ability from without, he is dead,
all is nothing to him, the law has taken away the liveliness that was in him:
But he that is not humbled by the law, he is alive, he has life in himself, it
is nothing with him to Pray, and go to Church, and hear Gods Word, it is
nothing, but thrusting to do the duty; he has life in him to do duties, and
wait upon God in his ordinances, but when the law comes home to him, it plainly
lets him see that he has no life in himself to do any good, he must seek for
life and ability from without, else he is a dead man, he can do nothing in this
case: David in this case cannot lookup: Mine iniquities are gone over my head,
I cannot look up, Psalm. 40. Moses, he is a man of uncircumcised lips, and
cannot speak unto Pharaoh; Paul cannot do any thing that is good, In me
dwells no good thing, Romans 7. And so for the rest of Gods people, when the
law has killed them and laid them dead, in regard of any performance, they
must have life from without, there is no life at home, no grace at home, no
understanding at home, they must go out for all: but a carnal man, he is alive
unto all performances. Many a man is like unsavory salt, good for nothing, but
to throw upon the dunghill. He never received the Holy Ghost, and yet he will
be inducted into a living, and take Pastoral Charge upon him, as if he were
able to perform the Duty of a Minister, and take the Charge of Souls upon him.
So Ananias will be a husband, and Saphira a wife, Athalia will be a Queen, and
Nimrod a King, and Abimelech a Judge; they are alive to discharge all these
duties: thus men are alive, the Law of God has not killed their hearts, and
pulled down their spirits; it has not made it appear unto them, what wretched,
cursed creatures they are. This is the second thing, wherein this livelynesse
consists.

Thirdly, This livelynesse consists in a presumptuous hope; he conceives that
he is justified before God, and that God will not damn him, but forgive him his
sins. There is nothing can make a man's heart more full of life, then to think
that he is righteous before God, and that God will not impute his sins unto
him: there is nothing can make a man more alive, then this. If they think they
are justified before God, they have then a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. blessed be
God, says the Apostle, even the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, to a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. So these men have a hope, that makes
them lively, and full of life; as a poor man that has some grounded hope of an
Earthly inheritance, it makes the heart lively: Poverty deads the heart; he
that has nothing to maintain himself, and those that belongs unto him, it
deads his heart; but if he has some hopes of an hundred pound a year, and his
hope is grounded, if he has sure hope of it, and he makes no doubt of it; it
makes his heart full of life: so when a man does believe that he is in a good
case, that he is delivered from death, that he is in the estate of grace, when
he has some probability that God has justified him from sin; this breeds an
hope in him of an eternal Inheritance, and this hope, the consideration of it,
makes the soul full of life; There is nothing can make a man more lively, then
a hope that he is justified before God, and that God will not impute his sins
unto him. Now when a carnal man conceives he is righteous before God, and that
God will forgive him his iniquities, that God will not damn him, nor count him
a dead and a damned man; so long as a man does imagine this, he must needs be a
lively man; he is alive in his own apprehension; nay all the delights in the
world, cannot make a man so full of life, as this hope. It is not men's following
their pleasure, that makes their hearts so full of life; as to have hope that
the Lord does not account them dead men, that they are justified men, and
righteous men, that they have salvation to show for, heaven and Eternal
happiness to show for, that they shall go to heaven. But if now the Law were
charged upon a man, if he knew that he were a dead man, a damned man, it would
pluck down his spirits, and make his spirits dead, for all his pleasures. It is
the conceit that men are justified, that makes them so full of life; so long as
the Law does not come home to a man, and point him out in his colors, and make
it appear to him, that he lies under the wrath of Almighty God, that the Lord
does account him an abominable, wretched creature, so long as he does not
apprehend this; especially if he have any good gifts, and parts, and qualities,
and moral obedience to the Law; doing good duties, and a general laying hold
upon the promises, and a hope they belong to him; this makes him alive, Phil.
3. 9. Paul when he was a Pharisee, and did Moral Duties, and performed Moral
Obedience to the Law of God, he thought he had righteousness of his own; he
calls it there, his own righteousness, he so apprehended of himself; now this
is that which makes men alive, when they conceive, that they have some
Religion, and some Grace. You shall have many men and women that hate the
Servants of God, and yet think they are godly men, and have Grace and Life in
them. We may see it Acts 13. 50. there it is said that the Jews stirred up
certain devout and honorable women, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts: Though they hated Paul and
Barnabas, yet they are said to be devout, and honorable women. They imagined
they were very Devout, they conceived they were Religious; How many men and
women are there, that think they are righteous, and they will do many duties,
and take many good courses; in so much, that it would pity a man to think they
should go to hell? they will be very Zealous, they will be very Earnest
against Drunkenness, and cry out against the abominations of the times; they
are mavelous devout and godly, and yet a man that is Devout and godly in
truth and in deed, they cannot abide him, but hate him. Now if the Law should
come home unto them, and discover how indeed it is with them; it would humble
their souls, and pull down their spirits, and make them dead; so that this
presumptuous hope, that men are in good terms with God, and that God will be
merciful to them, and forgive them their sins; this makes them to be alive.

2. We come now to the Second thing, and that is the Effect of this
livelynesse, what Effects it works in the heart; and the Effects of this
Livelynesse are Four.

1. First, It makes them sound and heart-whole, like a boil unlaunched, it is
yet sound. The true sight of sin, and wrath of God in the soul, is able to
break the heart of any man; it is able to dead his spirit, and kill all the
livelynesse that is in him, and make him have little life to go on as he does.
But so long as the Law of God is not come home to a man, though he have no
title to heaven, though hell be the portion of his cup, yet he is as sound as
can be, as heart-whole as may be: let carnal comfort come, he can take it; let
pleasures come, he is able to delight himself therewith, and go on in his
course as if he ailed nothing, Prove. 18. 14. the Wise man says, the spirit of
a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? When
the Lord comes to wound a man's heart with the sight of his sins, and the
fearful condition he is in, what a cursed creature he is, having no mercy, and
being out of Christ; having no pardon, no grace, no holiness, but lies under
the curse of God: If the Law thus come home, and wounds his Conscience, he is
not able to bear it; this man, let carnal comforts come, he is not able to take
them; it kills the heart. Look as it is with the Stomach, if it can take meat,
and digest it, it must needs be alive; for if the Stomach be dead, it can
digest nothing. So for the taste, if a man's palate, and all the instruments of
the taste be dead, he takes no delight in any meats; so there is a kind of
soundness in the Soul, that is the reason why a man can delight in carnal
pleasures, in Drinking, and Sporting, and in Profit, and Gain. There is a kind
of soundness, and liveliness in the heart; the heart is not yet broken: If
the Law come, and take the hearts life away, this will pull down the heart, it
will make a man's heart even break, it will pull down his spirit: But a man whom
the Law has not yet humbled, and showed him his damned estate, his heart is
yet whole, and sound. When the Law of God had but a little killed Ahabs heart,
you might see it in his very gate; he went softly, he could not tread so
confidently upon the ground, as he was wont to do; it tamed his very steps, it
is wonderful how his heart was broken; it appeared in his very going up and
down. When the Law comes home to a man, it is able to kill his heart, and makes
him Soul-sick, and makes him cry out, O the wretchedness of my heart; it makes
a man sick at the heart, it lies like a heavy Plague upon the heart and
conscience, it will make a man sick of his sins, it will make him even at
deaths door with his sins; it will make him say with Paul, when the Commandment
came, sin revived, and I dyed. But another man though he has evident
demonstration, that he is a dead man, yet the Law of God has not pulled down
his heart; sickness will pull down a man's Stomach; so when the Law of God
comes home to a man's Conscience, and makes him sick, it makes him yield, and
pulls down his Stomach. Many men are crazy, and sickly; and yet they lie not by
it, but walk up and down, and go abroad; but if they were heart sick, it would
pull them down, and make them lie by it. So many a carnal man, may have some
qualms of sin, but yet their hearts can go abroad after profits, and pleasures,
after vanities, and delights; they can go abroad for all this. But when the
Law comes home, it will pull down a man's spirit, and make him heart-sick. This
is the meaning of that place, The whole need not a Physician, but the sick,
Mat. 9. 12. Every carnal man, so long as he is not humbled, and broken under
the sight of his sins; his heart is yet whole, his spirit is yet sound, he is
not yet wounded; as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isa. 1. 6. from the crown of the
head, to the sole of the foot, there is nothing but wounds, and swellings, and
sores full of corruption; there is no soundness in him: He is indeed full of
wounds, but the skin is yet sound, it is not broken, he feels it not; the Law
has not yet discovered his estate unto him. This is the first effect of this
livelynesse, it makes men to be sound, and heart-whole.

2. The Second effect of this livelynesse, when a man is alive in the
nonappearance of his dead and damned estate; alive in performance, alive in
presumption, and self-justifying, and self-hopes; The effect of it is, that he
is fearless; the more lively, the more fearless. First, the Object must dead
the heart, before it can make the heart fear; so long as the heart is stout,
the livelynesse that is in the heart, is able to keep out fear: So the
liveliness of a sinner, makes the heart fearlesse and secure. A man would
wonder how any creature durst provoke God; it is almost beyond the reach of
true reason, how any creature should dare to provoke God; to consider what
infinite danger he is in, to have the wrath of the God of heaven and earth to
hang over his head, to be under the hand of revenging Justice, to pull down all
the Woes, and Plagues, and Comminations of God upon the Soul; that a man should
do this, and yet be secure, it would make a man wonder at it. But a man that
has this livelynesse, he can provoke God, and yet be secure, as Job 12. 6.
those that provoke God are secure, the reason is, the Law of God has not taken
down their hearts, the Law of God has not deaded their spirits; they are alive
in presumption, and imagination, and therefore though they provoke God, they
are secure, and fear nothing. It is the disquietnesse of a man's heart, that
makes him fear; therefore so long as a man's mind is quiet, and is not
disturbed, he is fearlesse: So long as the Law has not disquieted a man's mind,
nor broken the rest of a man's Soul, nor disturbed his conscience, but tells
him, go on in quiet; he spends his days in security, he fears nothing;
whereas, fearfulness, and trembling, and horrible dread, would overwhelm him,
if the Law of God should come and take away his life: it is fear that deads a
man's heart, as we may see Matthew. 28. 4. when the Angel of the Lord roled away
the stone from Christ's Sepulcher, it is said, For fear of the Angel, the
Keepers trembled, and became as dead men: There is the effect of fear; if the
law did but open men's eyes, and paint out before them how it is with them; how
they are liable to Gods wrath, and under the sentence of condemnation: if they
were once thus feared, it would make them seem as dead men: the drunkards would
be so afraid, that they would become as dead men: All wretched men, all
ungrounded Christians, all that are not truly alive toward God, it would make
them become as dead men; and it is the deadness of the heart that makes men
fear, and such a man cannot be secure. Carelessness and fear, are two
contraries, as Ezekiel. 30. 9. In that day shall Messengers go forth from me in
Ships, to make the careless Ethiopian afraid, and great pain shall come upon
them: The Prophet there makes these two contraries; they shall be full of fear,
to rouse them out of security: so the cause why men are carlesse to get
repentance, careless to get deliverance from sin, carlesse of their walking
with God; the reason is, because of this damnable liveliness that is in their
hearts, they are not yet deaded by the law.

3. Thirdly, Another effect of this liveliness is this, it makes the heart
stiff; what a deal of stiffnesse is in the hearts of carnal men; let God
forbid sin, they are stiff, and will still continue in their sins, as the
Prophet speaks, the hearts of this people is waxed stiff, their hearts are
mavelous stiff; the reason of it is, because the law of God has not taken
away their liveliness, it has nor humbled their hearts, and pulled down their
spirits, whereas if the law had past upon them, and the consideration of their
estate were rooted in their minds, it would make their stoutness to yield, and
their stiffenesse to come down; infinite is the stiffnesse of a man for want of
this work of the law: tell a vain gallant of his locks, how stiffly will he
reason for it? Tell a profane person of the lewdness of his course, how
stiffly will he argue for it? This is for want of this killing work of the law.

4. Fourthly, The last effect of this liveliness is this, it makes the heart
peark, and brisk; what a deal of brisknesse, and pearknesse do we see every day
in the hearts of men, because their hearts are not taken down? I will give you
two or three Instances, If a man have a little knowledge more then others, he
is proud, and brisk, and peark, and he will be somebody, he will be talking,
and thinks he has such a deal of knowledge: what is the reason of this, that
he is so peark? It is because the law has not made it known unto him, that he
knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. there says the Apostle, If a
man thinks he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to know. If the
law of God did show him he were a beast, and a bruit for all his understanding;
if it did discover unto him, his blockishnesse, and blindness, and ignorance,
that he knows nothing of the mysteries of Grace and Salvation, this would pull
down his pearknesse; take another man that has more knowledge, and can speak
better a thousand times, if the law has showed him his estate, and truly
humbled him, all his brisknesse is taken away, the law has taught him such a
lesson, that he cannot be peark, Oh! says he, I know nothing, there is no man
more foolish then I, I have not the knowledge of the most high in me; though he
have never so much knowledge, and gifts, and parts, yet the law has discovered
his estate unto him, and pulled down the pearknesse of his spirit. Again,
another man is ready to carp at every word, every little occasion will make him
on the top of the house, his heart is so brisk, that it is up upon every little
occasion, but when the law comes home unto him, this will pull down all his
pearknesse; alas, he angry at a word speaking? The law has told him how he
has offended God, and provoked his Spirit from time to time, he is now cooled,
from being so peark, to be angry at every word. So take a man that is full of
pleasure and voluptuousness, and is ready to be vain and foolish, every
pleasure puts life into him, but now let the law come, and be charged upon his
conscience, and then all his pearknesse is presently down, he is not able to
look up, he sees so many sins, discovered by the law, that he is not able to
look up: Jam. 5. 1. Go to now ye rich men (says the Apostle) weep and howl
for the misery that shall come upon you. If the law were charged upon rich men,
it would make them weep and howl, rich men are fullest of pleasure and
delight, and farthest from weeping and howling, but if the law were charged
upon their consciences, it would make them weep and howl, and have little
heart to be so pleasant.

I come now to the Uses, and the First Use is Use. 1
for Instruction, to show us the reason, why there are so many men and women
among us, that think themselves alive, that are so secure, and fearlesse, and
careless, that have their hearts so sound, and their spirits so unbroaken, the
reason is, because the law has not yet come home, and killed their hearts, 2
Cor. 3. 6. The very letter of the law is able to kill as many of us as are in
this estate and condition; therefore the cause of this liveliness, and
security, is because we are strangers from the law of God, our eyes were never
open to behold it, the law of God never came home unto our hearts.

The Second Use is this, When we find our Use. 2.
hearts to be brisk and peark, let us pray unto God, that he would be pleased
to charge his law upon our Consciences: Let us buy precious eye salve, that we
may be able to look into the law of God, this will make our hearts that they
will not be so wanton, and our spirits, that they will not be so brisk; though
they would never so fain mind earthly things, they cannot. If the Lord would be
pleased but to charge his law upon the heart, it would make the stoutest spirit
to yield.

Thirdly, This takes away the imputation that Use. 3.
is laid upon the Word of God; many think hardly of the Word of God, it takes
away the spirits of men: the preaching of the Law, it pulls down the spirits of
men, and breaks men's hearts, it makes men have no spirits, as they said of
Jeremy, thou make the knees feeble: so the law infeebles the knees, and takes
away the spirits of a man; why here we see that the law of God will do so, it
is the property of the law to do so, wheresoever it comes, it kills the heart,
and pulls down all the pearknesse of it. The law, it will ever break a man's
bones, as David speaks, Let me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice, Psalm. 51. The Lord had broken his very back bone
by the law, and now he could not rejoice, Isai. 57. 15. I the Lord dwell with
him that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble: when the law of God has broken a man's heart, and made him contrite, he
is a dead man, till the Lord comes to revive him, and raise up his spirit.

I come now to the Second part of the Text, The latter part of the Text opened.
When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died.

Here also, as in the former part are two things to be expounded:

First, What does the Apostle here mean by reviving? When the Commandment came,
sin revived.

Secondly, What does he mean by dying; I died?

When the Law and Commandment came, and discovered me to my self, and showed me
what a damnable thing sin was, and what a wretched dead creature I was for
committing the same, and how I lay under the guilt thereof, sin revived, and
I died. Therefore, what does the Apostle mean by sin revived? I Answer, The
Apostle does not mean here, as if sin were indeed dead in him, before the
commandment came: for sin is alive in every carnal man's heart, before the
commandment comes, and therefore he cannot mean thus, when the commandment came
sin revived, as if it were truly, and really dead before; for his sins were not
dead in him, when he was Pharisee, his sins were not mortified, when he was in
his unregenerated estate and condition sin was not dead in him, that cannot be
the meaning, as if sin were dead before, and now revived: But he speaks of the
Appearance of the death of sin, though it were not dead before, yet it did
appear to be dead; as a Snake in cold weather, though it be alive, yet it
appears to be dead, the life of it is in a swound; though it has life, yet the
cold benums it, and keeps it from appearing: So before the commandment came,
sin was in Paul, but it seemed to have no life but when the commandment came,
and discovered plainly, what a dead creature he was, then the life of sin came
indeed to be manifested.

Now the Law of God does manifest the life of sin Three ways; it manifests
three life's of sin: There are three life's of sin, that appear to the soul, when
the law comes.

1. First, There is the life of Aggravation; the Law of God does aggravate and
point out sin to the full life of it; it makes sin appear in the true
nature of it: the true nature of every thing is the life of the thing: the
nature of a man is the life of a man: Now the law did show him the nature of
his sins, it painted them out to the very life, in their lively colors; this
made him see how his sins were aggravated: what a cursed and damned thing sin
was, and what a person it was committed against, this made sin appear unto him
in the very life of it; therefore in the 13. verse. of this Chapter, the Apostle
says, Sin, that it might appear si^, wrought death in me, that sin might be
(...) measure sinful by the commandment: that is, when the commandment comes,
and is manifested to the soul, it makes the life of sin appear, the life of sin
is then manifested, the Law of God like a glass, does show the life of the
Commandment, and the very nature of all sinning, and transgressing. Now before
the Law came thus home unto him, he could not thus see sin; he could say, he
was a sinner, and had committed these, and these sins: But what these sins
were, and the exceeding sinfulness of these sins, he did not see that. He had
a dead kind of picture of his sins before, but the life thereof was not
manifested; but the Law of God did make his sin revive, and made him see his
sins in the life of them.

2. Secondly, There is the life of irritation, as I may so call it; or of
itching, and egging a man. This is another life of sin, whereby it is full of
operation, and working in the Soul; the operation of a thing, is the life of a
thing. Now before the Commandment came, sin seemed dead, it wrought indeed many
evils in him, but he did not think his heart had been so full of life, and so
full of activity against Gods Law and commandments. Sin seemed to lie dead
before, but now when the Commandment came, and set upon his heart, and began to
charge him with better obedience; now his heart grew itching, and mavelous
full of life unto lust. Hereupon sin egged him the more on to lust: It is like
water, when a man goes about to stop it, it runs the more violently. So it is
with sin in the heart, the more the Law of God goes about to stop it, and
hinder it, the more eager it is, and the more full of life and working, as the
Apostle speaks, ver. 8. without the Law, sin was dead: there was no such
working of sin in my mortal body then: but when the Commandment came, when the
Law was charged upon my heart, then sin took occasion hereby to be the more
violent, and work in me all manner of Concupiscence: before I committed sin
without any check, I had vain thoughts, and foolish courses, and many a lust in
my soul, and I went to it as if it had been a good thing, not as if it had been
evil: But when the Law of God came to show me the slacknesse of my obedience,
and to control me, and convince me, and to stop the course of sin, it wrought
all manner of Concupiscence in me; it wrought before in Paul, for it wrought
all his security, and all his hardness of heart, and all his vain thoughts and
imaginations: but this was but a dead kind of working, in comparison of that
which it wrought after the Commandment came. There are none that have such
active Rebellions against the Law and Commandment of God, as those to whom the
Law comes; it eggs a man forward, and maks him itch unto Rebellion. If a man
had asked Paul before, whether he had such a devilish heart against God; he
saw no such matter, he never meant God any hurt when he went on in his course,
he thought not that he was so stubborn and rebellious, he did not feel this
stubbornness and rebellion; But when the Law came once, it showed him the
venom, and cursed nature of his sins.

3. The Third life of sin is the worst of all; and that is, the life of
Imputation; for here sin is so full of life, that it is not only able to
discover unto him, that he is a sinful wretch, and an abominable creature; but
to bind him over to wrath and send him to hell, and everlasting destruction.
Now it is the Law of God that discovers this life of sin: before the Law
comes, a man has many vain hopes, that God is merciful, and Christ dyed for
sinners, and that God will forgive him his sins; he does not see the imputation
of sin: the imputation of sin lying upon the Soul is not clearly discovered,
before the Law come; for where there is no Law, there is no imputation of sin,
Romans 5. 13. there says the Apostle, unto the time of the Law, was sin in the
world; but sin is not imputed, while there is no Law. Before the Law is charged
upon the heart, the heart never dreams of the imputation of sin, as if he
should answer for sin, and be damned for sin for ever: He thought the contrary
before, but now the Law discovers the life of sin unto him, and sin revives,
and appears to have life to damn him for evermore. Sin now appears to have life
to cast him off from God, and to bind him over to Everlasting vengeance. Thus
it was with Paul, when the Commandment came, sin revived; I saw sin was alive
indeed, and I saw the life of aggravation, I saw the hellish nature of sin, it
was painted out to the full; I saw the life of irritation, I saw the infinite
egging, and itching of sin, how it did work in me; I saw the life of
imputation, how all my sins were imputed unto me, and did all lie upon my
conscience, and so sin revived, that is the meaning.

Now for the meaning of the Second word, I dyed, that is, I saw I was a dead
man; I saw plainly, and clearly, that I was but a dead man; I thought I was
alive before, because I did good duties, and walked in the Ordinances of God;
and I thought that I might go for a Christian, and servant of God, as well as
another. I did not think I was a dead man, I thought I had some goodness in
me, some hope of eternal life in me; I did not conclude that I was a dead man.
But when the Law of God humbled me, and discovered my estate plainly unto me;
then I saw I was a dead man indeed, my heart failed me, and the livelynesse
that was in me before, departed from me. I saw I was a dead man, and had not
the Spirit of Christ come and quickened me, I had been a dead man to all
eternity; I now saw that sin began to revive in me, and I began to be a dead
man. Thus we see the meaning of the words.

Now the Theme I propounded to you was this, namely, how the Lord converts the
will; and the first work that prepares a man hereunto, is the work of pulling
down the will, and the pulling down of a man's heart; for the will of man is
full of obstinacy, full of livelynesse against the truth, and Commandment of
God; full of livelynesse in sin, and conceives it self to be in a better estate
and condition, and so the will is obstinate still. Now when it pleases God to
convert a man, first he pulls down the will of a man, and pulls down his
Spirit; now here is a Doctrine to make way for this.

Namely, that when the Lord takes a man in Obser.
hand to pull him down, to pull down his will, he does show him what a dead
Creature he is. The Lord by pronouncing a man in his own Bosom, a dead man, a
damned man, one that can no way help himself; he is dead, absolutely dead in
his own estate, and in Gods account, all his hopes are rotten; he is merely, a
dead, damned man: hereby the Lord pulls down his will. We may see this in Paul,
before his Conversion; his will was full of obstinacy and rebellion against
God, he would go and make havoc of the Church, he would not submit to the will
of God; but when the Lord came to work upon him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks: What will thou that I
shall do Lord, says he, Act. 9. 6? Now his will is come down: but mark how the
Lord puts him off; go to such a place, (says he) and there it shall be told
thee what thou shall do. The Lord puts him off, and would not give him an
answer presently, what he should do; as who should say, thou have as yet an
obstinate will, thou will not do as I command thee: I will not tell thee as
yet, what I will have thee to do; but go to such a place, and I will Arrest
thee there, and charge my Law upon thy Conscience, and show thee thy dead, and
damned estate. And now his will is come down; he bids him be Baptized, and he
was so; he bids him go and Preach the Gospel, and he did so; now his will is
come down. So the prodigal, his heart was mavelous obstinate against his
Fathers commandment; he would be gone from his father, he could not abide to
stay in a house where there were such strict courses, he would have his goods
and patrimony in his own hand, (as it is the property of every carnal man) he
would have his Inheritance in his own hand; he would have power, and strength,
and ability, and these gifts and parts in his own hand. But when he is humbled
by the Law, he is content to have all in Gods hand, he is content to have all
his wisdom there, that he may come thither for it; he is content to have all
his righteousness there, and all his ability, strength, and sufficiency there,
that he may come thither for it; all is there, and he sees himself a beggar, if
he comes not to God, and keeps close to God, and keeps fast to his Covenant, he
is a very beggar. But this man would have all in his own hands, and go and
squander away all upon his lusts and pleasures, and he would not stay at home
with his father. Now when the Law of God came home to him, to show this man to
himself, when he came to himself, as the Text says (his father did esteem him
a dead man before,) But when he came to himself, and saw he was a dead man for
going away from his father, the Father of life; Now his will is come down, I
will go to my father, and say, Father I have sinned against Heaven and against
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. Luke 15. 17. Here his will is come down; he would be gone from his
father before, he could not abide to be held in so strictly, he would fain be
gone, and be at liberty; he had no mind to stay in his fathers house: But when
he came to himself, when the Law showed him, he was but a dead man, for going
from his father; and going after his lusts and pleasures; now his will is
brought down, and it submits, and yields; and now he will go to his father, and
humble himself before his father, and say, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, etc. Now I desire here to show you Three things, as I
did in the former point.

First, Wherein this deadness consists.

Secondly, What be the effects of this deadness, and how it pulls down the
heart. And

Thirdly, The Uses we are to make of it.

1. For the First, Wherein this deadness consists: and it consists in Three
things.

First, In deadness in being.

Secondly, In deadness in Gods account.

Thirdly, In deadness to all doing.

1. First, It consists in deadness in being. When the Law comes, it shows a
man indeed to be a dead man, 2 Cor. 3. 6. the letter kills, says the
Apostle: the very letter of the Law; without the Spirit of life, which Christ
does inform it with, when he comes to work upon his children; The letter alone,
without the Spirit of God, kills a man: now when a man is killed, he is a dead
man; he is then fully dead, he has the very being of a dead man, he is a dead
man; that is his Estate and Condition. So when the Law of God comes home to a
man, it shows him indeed that he is a dead man. The property of the Law, when
it is let in to work upon the heart, is to slay a man, I have flain them by the
words of my mouth, Hos. 6. 5. The Law which proceeds from Gods mouth, is able
to slay a poor sinner, and kill him at the heart, and lay him for dead before
Almighty God, that he can strive no more; the reason is, because the Law does
charge the truth of God upon a man. Now the Truth is, that every sinner is a
dead man, this is the very Truth of it, Romans 8. 6. To be carnally-minded is
death: That man is a dead man; there is the very death of sin, and hell, and
condemnation in that man, that is a Carnal-minded man. Now the Law of God when
it comes, does Charge this Truth upon the Soul, it discovers a man to be in
this estate and condition, wherein in truth he is.

2. Secondly, It consists in deadness in Gods account. For all a man's
presumptions, for all a man's vain hopes that he is justified; for this is the
nature of man, before he is convinced by the Law of God, to justify himself, (
you are Luke 16.
they that justify your selves,) not that he is indeed justified; but he
falsely applies justification to himself, and he hopes he is justified before
God, he is apt to pronounce this hope unto himself, let a Minister tell him of
his sins, here is his Salve, God is merciful, and Christ came to save sinners.
Let Sermons beat upon him from day to day, to humble him, he cannot imagine
that he is in a damnable estate; Preachers are too harsh, and censorious, and
the like. But when the Law comes, it shuts up a man that he cannot get out, as
the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. 22. The Law has concluded all under sin: that is
the nature of the word of God, to shut up a man, that a man is not able to get
out: before the law is charged, the heart has a thousand starting-holes.
Denounce hell, and damnation against it, it has this starting-hole, that
Christ dyed for sinners: discover plainly that he is a dead man, he has these
starting-holes, he hopes he shall have peace, and he hopes he is not so vile
before Almighty God, and he hopes he has better righteousness then you would
bear him down with; and so he has an evasion to get out: but when the Law
comes, and shuts him up, this will tame him. As we use to tame Lions, and
Bears, and such like fierce and cruel creatures, by shutting of them up, so the
Lord tames the heart of a poor creature, when he would pull him down, he shuts
him up, and lays him in the prison, and in the Jail, and he has no way to
get out; he is a dead man, and there is no way to get out, no evasion to
escape; but still he is a dead man, and a damned man, he cannot open his mouth
any more, Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never
open thy mouth any more, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God. The Law indeed works thus in the Regenerate,
though the Lord be pacified toward them, yet they shall never open their
mouths, never cavil against Gods precepts more, never be so brisk any more. But
so long as a man is in his sins, the Law does not only convince him that he is
dead in himself, but that he is also dead toward God; that God accounts him a
dead man, that God is not pacified toward him, but he lies under the wrath of
God, and this pulls him down, and stops his mouth. A carnal man's mouth will not
be stoped, but he will have some thing to say, some vain hope, or confidence or
other, some pleading, or excusing or other. His mouth will never be stoped,
till the Law of God comes; and when that comes, that will stop his mouth, and
make it appear, that he is guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. the Apostle says,
Now we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are under the
Law, that every mouth might be stopped, and all the world may be culpable
before God. But before the Law comes, a man's mouth will not be stopped. Genesis
20. 3. God came to Abimilech by night, and said, Thou art but a dead man,
because of the woman which thou have taken, for she is a man's wife: He was a
dead man, but he little thought it; he would not believe that he was a dead
man; As the Text there speaks of temporal death. So it is true of the other,
carnal men are indeed dead men, but they will not believe that they are dead
men, and damned men; they hope for mercy, and cry, peace, peace to their souls;
but when the Law comes, that knocks off all men's hopes, and lays them for dead
in Gods account.

3. Thirdly, This deadness I here speak of, it consists in regard of all
manner of doing; when the Law of God has charged it self upon the conscience,
and discovered to a man, that he is a dead, and a damned man. It makes it now
appear unto him, that he is utterly unable to do any thing; he is in the depth
of misery, and he is unable to cry mercy aright, he is not able to make a
prayer, no more then a dead man: he sees he can no more keep a Sabbath as he
ought, than a dead man. So for any duty of Religion, he sees he has no more
life to do it, then a dead man has to do the actions of the living: as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 2. 19. I am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.
God made St. Paul alive unto him, but first he charged his Law upon his
Conscience, and made him seem to be a dead man to the Law: That he had no life
or activity to do any thing pleasing to God: but when the Lord made him alive
to himself, then he could do something, nay, he was able to do all things,
through the Lord Jesus Christ that strengthened him. But in himself, both still,
and before, he was altogether dead to the Law of God; so that when the Law
comes, and shows a man's estate unto him, it shows him his utter inability to
the performance of any good duty. The Pharisee will to the Temple as well as
the Publican, Saul will sacrifice as well as Samuel; Profane people will take
up the Ordinances of God, as if they had life to go through them, as well as
the people of God. But when the Law comes, it plainly convinces a man; it
makes him feel and understand, that he has no activity, or life to perform
any thing pleasing to Almighty God; a dead man can do nothing, he is cut off
from all the actions of the living; dead men they cannot devise ought, they
cannot purpose ought, they cannot work ought. So when the Law of God is charged
upon a man, and shows him that he is but a dead man, and a damned man, now he
sees, he can as well create a world, as make a prayer; he can as well remove a
Mountain, as do any thing acceptable to God. Such a man will say, I am a dry
tree, and cannot grow; I am lost in the wilderness of sin, and cannot get
out again. Thus we see wherein this deadness consists.

2. Now I come to show you the Effects of this Deadness, how it pulls down the
heart: this will pull down the heart of a man marvellously, when the Law
charge this upon him, that he is but a dead man; though the will of man be
infinitely unruly, it is wild, it is like the mad man in the Gospel, that the
Divil was in, no man was able to bind him, no Chains were able to hold him, no
Creature could tame him, Mark 5. 34. So it is with the will of an unregenerate
man, his will is mavelous wild, he breaks all bonds, and snaps all cords in
pieces, and casts off the yoke from him. Let God bid him do this, he will not
do it; let him be in a good mood, he is presently out of it again; let him be
convinced of his vain hopes, and let him see what a wretched creature he is, he
will have vain hopes again; his will is infinitely unruly, and desperately
wild, the very Devil in hell has the rule of it; it is full of life against
God and his Commandments, and will never yield while the world stands, till now
the Lord comes with his Law, and shows a man, that he is a dead man, and a
damned man, and shows him that he is under the wrath of God: the Law is able to
do this, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 4. 15. The Law causes wrath, It makes a
man appear to lie under the wrath of God, under Gods everlasting displeasure,
and in the mouth of hell and damnation; and if God be not merciful to him, and
more merciful then to a world of men, he sees he is a dead man, utterly lost,
and undone for ever; now this will make his spirit yield, and make his heart
begin to come in; as the Psalmist speaks concerning Princes, He shall cut off
the spirit of Prince, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. 12.
Kings and Princes have stout Spirits; now when the Lord sends but a little
terror into their hearts, he is able to snib their spirits, for all their
security, and for all the height of their magnanimity; he is able to cut off
all, by sending his terror into their hearts, so the Law sends terror into
the heart. Can there be a greater terror then to have the Law denounce a man
to be a dead man? and that the wrath of God is gone out against him? and that
he lies in the very mouth of all the Canons of the fury of the most High? This
will break the heart of a man, if his heart were made of brass, this would
break it. Look as it was with the Moabites 2 Samuel 8. 2. They were stout against
David, and would not yield and submit unto him; but when David smote them, and
measured them with a cord, and cast them down to the ground; when he measured
them with two cords to put them to death, and with one full cord to keep them
alive; then says the Text, the Moabites became David's servants, and brought
him gifts. So it is with a profane creature, whilst God lets him go on, he
is stout, and will not serve God, but his will is altogether cross, and
contrary to Gods will and Commandments; he will not take up those courses that
God commands, he will not submit himself to the preciseness of the Gospel, his
will is infinitely cross in this kind, and mavelous obstinate. But if the
Lord takes him in hand, and charge his Law upon his conscience, he puts such
terrors into his heart, that he is willing to submit unto God upon any terms.
I confess the Law cannot do this of it self; it cannot thus bring down the
will of a man, and mortify a man's sins: For if the damned in hell were let
loose again, to live here upon earth, they would forget all their former
Plagues, and Torments, and sin would revive again in them. The Law of it self,
can only lay some in a swound, it will up again if it be loose: the law cannot
do this of it self; but I speak now of the law, as it is Gods Instrument.
Hereby he pulls down the heart of a man, and pulls down his Spirit; labor will
pull down any man's spirit: when a man is in labor, and pain, and affliction,
it will make a man's Stomach come down; as we may see, Psalm. 107. 11, 12.
Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord, therefore he humbled their
heart with labor and heaviness; then they fell down, but there was no helper:
Before they were stout against the Lord, and would not hearken unto him, and
obey his Commandments; now the Lord brought down their heart. But how did he
bring them down? he pulld them down by laying labors upon them; labor, and
torment, and heaviness pulled down their hearts. So when the law makes the
heart labor under the wrath of God, it lies laboring, and quaking, and
shaking, and weltring, and bleeding under the wrath of God; this pulls down the
will. And now I come to speak of the Effects it works, in doing of it.

1. The First Effect is this, it casts the heart into those woeful privations we
read of; there are abundance of comfortable things, which the man which is
alive in his own conceit, thinks himself to have. Now when the law comes to
dead him, it knocks him off from all those comfortable things he seemed to
have; whereas he seemed to have some admittance to God in prayer, he could pray
to him before, but now he sees he is an outcast, and dares not lift up his
eyes to heaven: Before he hoped that God would have merey on him, and that he
had some interest in Christ, and hope of salvation; but now he sees he is
lost: Before he seemed to have liberty, and freedom; he could do this, and
that, and had a thousand evasions; but now he sees himself a mere captive:
before he thought he had some riches, some goodness, but now he sees he is
but a poor beggar; before he had some Fig Leaves to cover him, but now he sees
he is altogether naked; before he was heart-whole and sound, he had peace, and
comfort, and quietness within him, but now he is altogether broken. This is
the effect of this deadness, it brings all these privations into the soul;
death is a privation it self; and it brings a hundred privations with it; even
a privation of all the privileges of the living: this the Law does when it
comes. All this while the Soul is lost, and captived, and poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked, and an outcast; it is utterly undone, and altogether
unable to help it self; and this, as it does make a man an object of the
Gospel, one for whom Christ dyed, as it points out such a man; so there is a
Finger of the Gospel in it also, when the soul understands the goodness of the
Gospel, and sees it self to be lost for want thereof; yet notwithstanding the
first stroke is given by the Law; the first stroke that casts the soul into
this privation is done by the Law, and if the Lord means to convert, there the
Gospel begins, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to
heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering
of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are bruised. When
the Law has humbled a man, and thus brought down his will, then begins the
work of the Gospel. As we use to say of natural Philosophy, where natural
Philosphy ends, there Physic begins; So where the Law ends, the Gospel begins.
Thus we see the first Effect of this deadness.

2. Secondly, When the Law has done this, when the deadness the Law has
wrought, has produced this effect; then the next Effect is this, the Law holds
the heart there: when a man is dead, the effect of death is to hold a man
there. There is no redress, no return, without the Almighty power of God:
there is no return to his former life. So when the Law has deaded a man, it
holds a man there, though a man would never so fain get out, he cannot; he will
be snatching at a Christ, and looking at the promises, and be presuming that
there is mercy for him; he would fain be brisk again. But if the Law has
killed him, and made him a dead man, he cannot get out. Romans 7. 6. the Apostle
says, We are delivered from the Law, being dead unto that wherein we were
holden. St. Paul could not get out to his livelynesse again, but the Law held
him. So it is with the Law, when the Law of God has humbled a man, and made
him a dead man, it holds him there; let the Devil come with all the comforts he
can, there is no evasion; let his vain neighbors bring what Scriptures they can
to cheer him, there is nothing can lift that soul up: let all profits and
pleasures come, they cannot take off his heart, they cannot make him alive
again, unless it please the Lord to quicken and revive him.

2. The next Effect of this deadness is, that it makes the heart stiff: when
the body is dead, all the members are stiff, the beatings of the pulses cease,
and all are stiff. So when a man is killed by the Law, it makes his head stiff,
it breaks off all his arguing, and reasoning, and disputing against the Law of
God; That is against my profit, and that is against my pleasure and that is
against my credit; thus the heart is full of life and activity before. But when
the Law comes, and shows him he is a dead man: now he is not able to stir, now
he can say, what if it be against my profit, and pleasure? what if it be
against my credit? what if men make a mock at me? I am a dead man if I live not
in this course, Psalm. 36. 12. there says the Text, They are fallen that work
iniquity, they are cast down and shall not be able to rise. So when the Law of
God comes, and preaches righteousness to a man, and shows him against whom he
has sinned, it makes him a dead man, he cannot stir any more; if the Devil
bids him reason for his lusts, he dares not do it; if his old company persuade
him to his former life and conversation, he dares not do it, Isai. 41. 21.
Stand to your cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the
God of Jacob. You could be reasoning, and pleading for your lusts, let us now
hear your strong reasons, and arguments. Now this man is a dead man, and a
damned man; he has no reason, no plea to allege, to go on in his former
course, this man is killed now.

4. Fourthly. This deadness makes the heart yield; before the Law comes, the
heart is mavelous obstinate, but now when the stiffnesse of it is gone, and
the Law has made him a dead man, now he will yield, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. As
Hezekiah speaks; Be not now stiff-necked as your fathers, but give the hand to
the Lord, and come into his Sanctuary. So when the Lord has broken the neck of
a man's stiffnesse, and has broken his backbone, that he cannot stand stiffly
out, and has taken away his livelynesse, which was his whale-bone as it were,
to uphold him in his strength, and courage, and in his sins. Now his heart is
made to yield to God, he cannot now but yield to the Lord. Thus it is with a
poor creature, when the law works upon him, he cannot stand out any longer: It
is most true, before the Lord converts a man, he does take away his stiffnesse,
and make a man a dead man. But you will say, when a man is dead, all his joints
are stiff, his body is cold, and grows stiff, but when a man is alive, his
joints are lithe and lively. I Answer, It is true, the law of God cannot take
away a man's natural stiffnesse, but his voluntary stiffness is taken away. The
voluntary stiffnesse is taken away when he is dead; when a man was alive, he
could shut his hand, and hold it so; he could stretch out his arm, and hold it
so: but when a man is dead, he cannot do so. So it is in this case, although
the stiffnesse of nature remain still, yet the voluntary stiffnesse is taken
away; the will and heart of a man is out of life; It cannot be stiff toward
God. I confess the Lord does not take away all stiffnesse, no not out of his
Saints; but he takes so much stiffnesse out of the heart, as to make it a
prtient, he shall not be voluntarily stiff, he shall not be overcomingly
resisting. Divines use to say, That in the first conversion of a sinner, he is
merely a Patient; first the Lord makes him a patient, and then converts him,
Jer. 31. 19. After I was converted, I repented, after I was instructed, I smote
upon the thigh, etc. first God made him a patient, and instructed him, and
afterward converted him.

The Use of the Point is this, Is it so that the law of God does make a man a
dead man? Then here we may observe the wonderful power of the law; a man has
so much livlinesse in him, so much life and activity, and so many strong
conceits, that it is wonderful hard to make him dead; therefore the word of God
is mighty. It is said of Apollo, that he did mightily convince the Jews, Acts,
18. 28. for he was mighty in the Scriptures, there had need be might in the
Scriptures to do this. What strong reasons had they in regard of flesh and
blood that Jesus was not the Christ? What, he the Christ that was born in a
manger, and has none but a beggarly company to his kindred? Are not his
brethren and kinsfolk with us? None but the tag-rag and refuse of the Country
follow him. What, he that had no form or beauty in him, the Savior of the
world? The Word of God was mavelous powerful, that could convince them of
this; so a man that goes on in his sinful estate and condition, it is a
mavelous hard thing to convince him that he is a dead man: he hears the Word
constantly, and goes on in his Calling diligently, and he hopes that Christ
died for him; he is afraid of sin, and his heart trembles to commit sin, and he
is sorry for his sins, he is thus, and thus: he that has so many things to
plead for himself, what, he a dead man? It is impossible. Therefore if the law
of God be able to convince a man, and make a man a dead man that is so full of
life, the law must needs be mighty that can do this; to dead this man, and kill
this man, is a mighty work. So that we may say, as the Psalmist says of the
Sea and the Mountains, Psalm. 114. 5, 6. What ayled thee, O Sea, that thou
fleddest? O Jordan, why were thou turned back? Ye Mountains, why leaped ye as
Rams, and ye Hills as Lambs? So I may say, What ayleth this poor man that he is
now driven from his former courses, and like the Sea, out of his own Channel?
what ayls those Mountains of lusts and corruptions, that were settled upon his
soul, as a Mountain upon his Base, what ayle these to move, and stir, and fall
away? What ayls the man that was so full of life before, that at one Sermon he
is killed? What ayls the man? he came brisk and peark into the Church, and who
but he? He was immovable from his sinful lusts, and corruptions, and he had
this Plea, and that confidence, and was full of life, but by one hours
discourse (which it may be another heard as well as he, and went away as brisk
as before, but this man's spirit is deaded, and his heart taken down; what ayls
the man now? why the law of God has done it: See therefore the mavelous
power of the law.

I told you formerly, That when the Law comes home to a man's soul, and is
charged upon his Conscience, it casts the heart into all those woeful privations
we read of in Scripture; a man before he is thus deaded by the law, thinks
himself to be possessed of abundance of comforts, but now he sees himself to
be an outcast, and utterly lost, to be a captive, and poor, and miserable, and
blind, and naked; he lies under all these privations: And as the Philosopher
says, That Privation is one of the Principles of Nature: Every body (says he)
has Three Principles, Matter, Form, and Privation: No natural thing can have
this or that Form put into it, but it must be deprived of all other Forms, as
if fire be turned into air, first the form of fire must be taken away, before
it can be turned into air, so it is in Grace, Privation is one of the
Principles of Religion; before the life of Christ can be brought into a man,
there must first be a Privation of all other contrary life's: the life of the
flesh, that cursed liveliness of the flesh, the life of sin, and the life of
the world, whereby a man lives unto the world, and the things of the world. A
man must be deprived of all other life's, of all other forms, he must have a
Privation of all other forms, before the life of Christ can be formed in him.
As for example, Take a man that is wordly wise, put him upon civil Affairs, he
is wise enough to order all his business; in eating, and drinking, he is wise
enough not to distemper himself, wise enough to keep a good diet: Put him upon
matters of Religion, he is wise there too, he will not be so precise as some
are, that are more nice then wise; he will be moderate, and wise in the Service
of God: Tell him, that he is one that does not please God, that he walks to
hell-ward, that he has no care of his Salvation; he thinks that he is wiser
then so. Would you make this man a wise man indeed? you can never make him
truly a wise man, till you bring a Privation upon him, till he be first
deprived of all that wordly wisdom that is in him; If any man among you seem to
be wise (says the Apostle) let him become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor.
3. 18. Let him have first a Privation of all the seeming wisdom he has, of all
the wisdom of the flesh and carnal reason, he must first be a fool, or else
true wisdom is not able to enter into him: So if a man would be high, he must
be first humbled, and brought low; before he can be truly high; a man must be
naked; before he can be clothed; a man must be lost; before he can be found;
there are none of you that live in your sins, but you must be stripped of all
the forms that are in you; there must be a Privation come into you, before true
Grace can be formed in you. Privation is one of the Principles of Religion, and
unless you be deprived of all other forms, you cannot have the essential form
of Religion come into you; it is the poor that receive the Gospel: when a man
is deprived of all other forms, then is he fit to receive the form of the
Gospel. When a man is deprived of his own wisdom, he may then receive the
wisdom of the Gospel; when a man is deprived of his own selfconfidence, of his
own strength, and sufficiency, then he may receive the strength of the Gospel;
when a man is deprived of all other contrary liveliness, and contrary forms
that are opposite to all these, when a man is deprived of all these, he is
capable of the true life of Christ, and the Gospel. I will Instance only in one
thing which I named before, and that is poverty: a man can never receive
Christ, or any impression of the true form of Christianity, till first his
Heart be emptied, and his Will and his Mind be emptied, and his Conscience be
emptied, till all other forms be voyded out, and he begins to be made poor and
nothing in himself, till every room in the soul be naked, and empty, there is
never a room for the kingdom of God to come into the soul; the kingdom of God
is a great thing, and will take up a great deal of room where it comes,
therefore the Heart, and the Mind, and the Will, and the Affections must be
emptied: the soul must be rid and void of all other things, or else there is no
room for the Kingdom of God. As our Savior says Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for they shall receive the Kingdom of God: Then there is room
for the Kingdom of God, when the heart is made poor, and all is voided out, the
world, and the flesh, and all carnal delights, and pleasures, and all
self-conceitednesse, which the heart was full of. When it was full of the
world, there was no room for Gods Kingdom; but when a man is made poor in
Spirit, when he has a Privation of these things, wherewith his soul was
filled; now there is room for the Kingdom of God; the reason is, because a man
can never be brought to Christ, till he is pinched with these Privations;
before he can never come to Christ, his heart can never be brought to bid so
much and stake down so much for Christ, as he must do, if ever he come to
attain him: unless his heart be pinched with poverty, unless his heart be
void of all these high imaginations he had of himself, he will never come to
Christ. It is plenty that brings down the market, and scarcity that makes it
rise: plentiful years, will make Corn of no price almost, but if there be
famine, and scarcity, and no bread almost to be had, but men are ready to dye
for hunger, then they will give any thing, they will give ten shillings a
bushel, twenty, nay forty shillings has been given for a bushel of Corn, as I
have read in Chronicles; it is poverty that makes men come to a price. So must
the heart be pinched with Spiritual poverty, else it will not come to Christ;
men will give nothing for the Kingdom of God, they will not part with a single
groat for Christ; the profane Gallant will not part with a lock for Christ;
the proud vain fool, will not part with a foolish lace, a foolish fashion for
Christ; the drunkard will not foregoe a pot for Christ, men will not part with
any thing for Christ; they will not part with a paultry lust, or base affection
for Christ: People will not stir, they will not open their purses, they will
not open their hearts to give any thing for Christ; the reason is, their hearts
are full already. People count their profits, and pleasures, and lusts, and
vanities, and delights, their Jewels; a man must be poor, before he will part
with his Jewels; but if a man be thoroughly pinched with poverty he will part
with his old Gold, and Rings, and Jewels, and all; but he will never part with
his Jewels, till he be forced to it by extremity. So all the lusts of the
heart, all the things of the world, that the mind and affections run upon, men
account them their Jewels, and they will not part with them, till they be
pinched with poverty. Thus it was with the Jailer, Acts 16. 30 when he was
pinched with this poverty, he cries out, Men and brethren, what shall I do to
be saved? When his heart was pinched with this poverty, he was content to part
with any thing, he was willing to do any thing, to hearken to any terms that he
might have mercy: So that it is necessary for a man to have all these
Privations wrought in his heart, and be made poor, else he will never take
Christ upon those terms whereupon he is offered.

Secondly, Suppose a man should conceive worth to be in Christ; suppose he
should put a great price upon him, yet if a man be not under these Privations,
if he be not pinched with poverty, with Spiritual need and want; he will never
use all means for the attaining of the Kingdom of God. He will never take
himself to all those courses that God has commanded himself to be sought in.
It was need that made Ahab send up and down all Countries, and Soiles for
water; it was need that made the rich Woman of S^unem, to hazard her self, and
her family, and household in a foreign Country; she would not have gone a mile
of that Journey, but for her poverty, as Divines use to speak. Let two men go
to the Market, the one has need, the other has not; he that has need, will
go whatsoever the weather be, though the weather be never so foul, he will go;
bread he wants, and bread he must have, and bread he will have; and if he
cannot have it at an easy rate, he will part with any thing; he will pawn his
very clothes from his back for it. Why? because he, and his wife, and his
children want it. But the other, he will go according as he likes the weather;
if the weather be answerable to his mind, it may be he will go, it may be not;
and when he is there, it may be he will buy, and it may be not; according as
the price goes, because he has no need of it. So it is in Grace, let two men
be called upon to seek out for Grace; one does not feel any great need, he is
not pinched with the want of Faith and Repentance, and Pardon, and Peace of
Conscience: though he want these, yet he is not pinched with the want, his
heart is yet full, he is not yet come to this Spiritual poverty. It may be he
will come to a Sermon, it may be not; it may be he will part with a Lust, and
it may be not; it is according as the bargain pleases him; he will never use
all means, nor take up all courses that are prescribed: But a man that is ready
to starve for want of Christ; as Sisera said, Give me drink or else I perish:
so, give me Christ or else I perish: This man will take any course, use any
means, he must have Christ, and will have him; when he comes to the Word,
Christ he wants, and Christ he will have, and must have; all Sermons, and all
hearing, are but as Oil to the fire, they do but pinch his Soul so much the
more, till Christ comes; he must have Christ in his Ordinances, because he is
sensible of his Spiritual poverty. So that it is he which is lost that will be
found, it is he which is a captive that will be freed, it is he that is blind
that must have his sight, and it is he that is naked that must be clothed; he
that lies under these woeful Privations, he must have the form, he looks after
it, he cannot be without it. Thus we see that Privation is necessary for
Religion, the true life of Religion can never come into a man, till he be laid
under all these woeful Privations we read of in Scripture.

But now here is a question which will arise, Quest.
which those that are godly would be glad to have resolved, and that is this:
Whether these Privations that the Apostle here speaks of, makes a man the
formal Object of mercy? St. Paul was alive once before the Law came, but when
the law came, and was charged upon his Conscience, it deprived him of his
livelynesse, and made him a dead man; I dyed says he. Now the Question is
this, Whether is such a man the formal Object of mercy? When the Law has
deprived a man of his conceited riches, and made him a poor man, and has
proclaimed him a bankrupt, and a beggar, and made him a captive, that he is not
able to stir one foot, he is not able so much as to think a good thought; but
he lies under wrath, and is not able to get out: Whether is such a man the
formal Object of mercy? I mean, whether is he such a one, as the Gospel has
promised deliverance unto? When a man by the law is made a dead Creature, and
is altogether deprived of life and health; he has no life actually, and there
is no life actually to be had for him, (for so the law leaves him without any
hope of getting any life.) Whether is this man the formal Object of mercy?
whether is he such a one as the Gospel does make promise to of quickening, and
enriching, and gathering, and finding, and saving, and comforting, and the
like? whether is this man the formal Object of mercy? Every man is the Object
of mercy, but whether has this man got those properties that belong to the
actual Object of mercy? The reason why I propound this Question, is this,
Because the Scripture seems to make such a one the formal Object of mercy, such
a one as mercy is promised to, such a one as the Gospel looks upon, as the
proper and actual Object of mercy; for the Gospel is said to quicken the dead,
and to give them life, it is the Letter that kills, and the Spirit that
gives life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. It gives life to him that was before a dead man, to
him that was killed by the letter. So for poverty, Luke 4. 18. To the poor the
Gospel is preached, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me that I should
heal the broken hearted, and preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering
of sight to the blind: So that when the law has made a man a poor man, and
has stripped him of all his conceited riches, and has made him a beggar, it
seems that Christ is anointed to preach mercy to such a one; it seems that such
a one is the formal Object of the Gospel. See Psalm 147. 2. He gathers the
outcasts of Israel: when the Law has made a man an outcast, it seems he is
the formal Object of mercy: The Gospel undertakes to gather such people so far
lost. The Son of man is come to save that which is lost, Matthew. 18. 11. he is
come for that purpose, it is his Commission, he is sent to save that which is
lost; when the law has made a man to be a lost man, that he sees he is
utterly undone without mercy, Christ is come to save such people, and to look
upon them as the formal Object of mercy.

So for death it self, when a man is made dead by the Law; The hour shall come
says our Savior, and now is, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God; and they that do hear it shall live, John 5. 25. It seems that the
Scripture makes such as are made dead by the law, and poor, and blind, and
naked, and wretched, and miserable, by reason of the Law being pressed upon
them, and pulling them down with terrors and conviction; it seems such a one
is the formal Object of mercy, such a one to whom mercy is promised. I do not
mean that he is the formal Object of the invitations of the Gospel, that is
most certain, there is no question of that, Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and you shall find rest to your souls. Come unto me, all you
that are poor, and blind, and naked, and dead, and I will give you life; have
you a hard heart, that you cannot free your selves from, come unto me, and I
will free you from it; have you no power to repent and believe, come unto me,
and take mercy upon my terms, and believe in me, whatsoever weakness is in
you, I will strengthen you; whatever discomforts and wants lie upon you, I will
relieve and cheer you. This is certain, the more a man sees himself a dead
man, the more he is the formal Object of the invitation of the Gospel. But the
Question is, Whether he is the formal Object of the promises of the Gospel.

I Answer No; There is a great deal of difference Answ.
between legal Privations, and these Privations as they are evangelical, as the
Gospel makes them before it quickens a man: there is a great deal of difference
between a man that is dead, and poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable by
reason of the law; and a man that has these privations wrought in him by the
power of the Gospel: when a man is made dead by the law, and sees himself a
lost creature by reason that the law plainly shows him his estate and
condition, this man may be a reprobate for all this, and go to hell; there is
no promise in the Word that God will quicken him, and raise him up; Christ is
free from any promise in this kind, he may quicken him if he will, and not
quicken him if he please. I may say in this sense, as Christ himself says,
Joh. 5. The Son of man quickens whom he will; He is free to quicken whom he
will, though a man be made a dead man by the law, and cry out he is a dead man,
and a damned man, though he has the works of the law, and be terrified, and
gastered, and humbled by the law, yet Christ is free from any promise he has
made to these people; there is never a promise in all the Word, that Christ
has bound himself by to these people to quicken them: they cannot say there is
such a promise in the Word, that Christ will quicken them. There are plain
places in the Scripture, wherein the Lord invites such people, upon condition
they will come and believe, and submit to the Gospel; there is a conditional
invitation upon these terms: But that these people shall be quickened, and shall
have eternal life given them, there is no such promise; the Lord is free, the
Lord has not bound himself to it; but when a man is dead according as the
Gospel makes a man dead before it quickens him, and when a man is poor
according as the Gospel makes him poor, and when a man is blind according as
the Gospel makes him blind, now a man is within the compass of Gods promises,
he is one that is the formal object of Mercy, he is one that shall have Mercy,
and shall have Salvation, and Redemption by Jesus Christ; these dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and shall live; the tongue of these stammerers
shall speak plain, the eyes of these blind shall see, these outcasts shall be
gathered, these naked shall be clothed, these lost shall be found, these poor
shall be enriched; when a man is dead, so as the Gospel deads a man, before it
quickens a man (for the Lord damns a man before he saves a man, and kills a man
before he quickens him) like a good Surgeon, that cuts before he cures; or like
a good Physician, that kills a man almost with Physic, so the Lord does bring
a man to deaths door before he quickens him; it is the Gospel that truly
humbles him, and works these privations; and now he is within the compass of
the promise: now he has a promise that he shall be quickened, and have supply
in regard of all these Privations, but so long as these Privations are only
legal, he has no promise that he shall be quickened, for many are humbled and
made dead as it were by the law, and yet shake it off again, and go to their
pro^^ts, and pleasures, and delights, and hardness of heart again; many a man
has been gastered by the law, and cried out of his damned estate and
condition, and yet has got up again, and recovered himself by the world and
the things of the world; and it was ever so of old, as we may see in Cain, the
law had discovered him to himself to be a dead man, and a damned man: I see my
sins are greater then can be forgiven, or are forgiven, or shall be forgiven:
he saw his punishment was intolerable, his condemnation was more then he was
able to bear; From thy presence am I cast out, and a Vagabond shall I be upon
the face of the earth, Genesis 4. 14. Yet he was not the formal Object of mercy;
the Gospel did not quicken him, nor convert him: he was not the formal Object
of mercy, for he shook off these terrors again, as we may see in the very same
Chapter, and went to building of Cities, and inventing of music, and other
arts and sciences; and this quickened, and revived him again: but he never came
to true life. So it is with many men, though they be terrified, and gastered,
and humbled, and cast down by the law, yet they get up again, and run after the
world, and after security, and hardness of heart again; so that such a man is
not the formal Object of mercy.

2. Again, we see that many, though they be wrought upon thus by the law, and
their eyes be enlightened, and their Consciences awaked, and they see that they
are in a wretched and damned estate; yet they scrape together a company of vain
hopes, and so heal themselves again. When they have been terrified by the law,
they seek presently for promises, and how they may get up again, and they would
fain get up; and they lie at catch at every Sermon, and at every Chapter, and
at every Word which a good man speaks; and if they can get any hold they catch
at it, and so get up a gain and go on: And when they have got a little comfort,
and think they shall do well, they are as careless, and as stubborn, and as
secure as ever they were; they may go on in the profession of Religion, but yet
their latter end is worse then their beginning: The unclean Devil may be cast
out, but the Devil transforms himself into an angel of light, and enters into
them, and they go on in doing good duties, but they never have the power of
Religion.

Again Thirdly, Many that are humbled by the law, they run away, and never come
to Christ, as Judas when he saw he was condemned, he went and hanged himself,
Matthew. 27. 3, 5. Some expound it of Christ, when he saw Christ was condemned;
but others expound it of himself, when Judas saw himself was condemned, and
that seems to be the meaning of the place; for Christ was not condemned, nor so
much as accused; there came not any witness against him, till Judas had hanged
himself, as we may see if we read that Chapter. But whether that be the meaning
or no, this is true and certain, he saw he was a dead man, he saw he lay under
the guilt of his sins, and he despaired of mercy, and went and hanged himself.

Again Lastly, If such a man were the Object of mercy, then all the damned in
hell were the formal Objects of mercy; for there is never a man in hell, but
the law has its work to the uttermost upon him; it can work a man no lower, it
can sink a man no deeper, it can make a man no more miserable, then those that
are in hell. Now if a dead man by the law should be the formal Object of mercy,
then the damned in hell should be the formal Object of mercy, which cannot be;
for from thence there is no Redemption, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared Mat. 25.
for the Devil and his angels; there is no quenching of that fire. So that we
see, the legal killing of the law, does not make a man the formal Object of
mercy. But yet such a man has a great deal of advantage, he is before a world
of other men, that live secure; if men were in this estate, they were in a
thousand times more likelihood to be saved. If I could hear of people that were
gastered, and cast down by the law; that saw themselves without Christ, and
without mercy, in the power of Satan, and in the bond of iniquity; if they
cried out, I am a dead man, and a damned man, if I dye now at this present, I
shall go to hell; if people were in this estate and condition, there were more
hopes of them a thousand times: there is no hope of people that do live secure
in their sins; so long as the Trumpet of the Law has not sounded in their
ears, so long as the Hammer of the Law has not sounded upon their hearts,
there is no hope of mercy for them. Therefore now for the clearing of this a
little more, let me show you

First, What it is to be dead, according as the Gospel makes a man to be a
dead man.

Secondly, What is the difference between Legal Privation, and Evangelical; and
when these Privations are Evangelical, and put a man under the actual Title to
mercy, under an actual interest in the promises.

Thirdly, What Use we are to make of it.

For the First, What it is to be Evangelically dead: To be legally dead, is not
to be half a quarter so much dead, as to be Evangelically dead, so as the
Gospel makes a man dead before it quickens him. When a man is Evangelically
dead, it makes him more dead by a thousand degrees, then all the law in the
world can make him, it makes him more dead by odds; when a man is Legally dead,
and sees himself to be a damned creature, and whereas he hoped to have mercy,
he sees now he has none, and whereas he hoped to go to heaven, he now sees
the gates are shut against him; and whereas he hoped he had some good in him,
now he sees he has nothing in him: a man would think this were a dead man, but
his livelynesse is only in a swound, the law lying upon him, will not let his
livelynesse appear, and if the law should lie upon him for ever, it would never
let his livelynesse actually appear; but yet he is not thoroughly dead all this
while: as for example.

1. Self-conceitednesse, it is not deaded when a man is killed by the law, you
would think his conceitednesse were gone: he was conceited he was a good
Christian; but now he sees no such matter: he was conceited before, that he
would repent, and God would be merciful to him, but now he sees, he is utterly
deprived of mercy, and lies under the wrath of God; you would think now that
all his conceitednesse was gone; but it is but only in a swound all this while,
he lies for dead as it were, but he is not dead. So take a man that is in hell,
all his good conceits of mercy, and of himself and his profits, and pleasures,
and vanities, and delights, they are all gone now. What does pride profit me?
what good do riches do me? what have all my pleasures, and delights, done me
good? all my labor is vanity, and all my delights folly; one would think all
his conceits were clean gone; but they are only in a swound. If a damned man
were out of hell, if the Lord should take off the lash of his law from him, he
would have as good a conceit of his profits, and pleasures, and riches again,
as ever he had; and he would have his carnal reasons against the strictness of
Religion again, as rief as ever he had; they are only laid in a swound, indeed
there they shall lie: a man can never get up again, because the law lies
continually upon him, he is continually under the lash of the law; and the law
holds this picture before his eyes, and shows him his damned estate and
condition: but upon such a supposition, that he might come out of hell, his
conceits would rise up again. Prove. 5. 12, 13. Solomon there brings in a man
wrought upon by the law, the law discovered him to be a dead man. How have I
hated instruction, and despised correction, and have not obeyed the voice of
them that taught me, nor inclined my ear to them that instructed me? His
carnal reasons are now all gone, they are in a swound; they were true
instructions that I have hated, they were true reports that I have despised,
and they were base and damned courses which I have followed. How have I lived?
one would think all his foolish conceits now were gone, they are in a swound
indeed, and cannot get up. But the Gospel will give a man his deaths wound; a
man can never have that good conceit of himself he had before; nor of his
lusts, and vanities, and profits, and delights; his self-conceitedness has now
got his deaths wound.

Secondly For self-confidence, when the law has humbled a man, his
self-confidence is only in a swound; when he lies in hell under the lash of
the law, he seems to have no power in himself, no life, or activity to any
duty. He sees that he is poor, and weak, and rotten, and wretched. A poor
creature he is, he sees it plainly, and all his self-confidence seems to be
gone, but yet there is a great deal of self-confidence actually in hell, for
though they are in hell, yet they think if they were alive again, what they
would do; I would hear the Word, and call upon God; I would repent and not live
insin, and not do as I have done; they think they would do thus, and thus, as
it was with Dives, Luke 16. 30. I have five brethren says he, if one should
come to them from the dead, they would repent, and not come where I am. If they
knew but as much as I know, they would repent; I am sure if they were in my
case, they would, if they were in hell where I am, if they knew how certain it
is, that they shall come to hell where I am when they dye, unless they do
repent at the preaching of the Prophets, and hearken to the voice of Gods
Ministers, and yield and submit to God; they would do it: I would, if it were
my case. This is self-confidence; for self-confidence is only laid asleep in
hell, and it cannot rise again. It is true, the law may dead a man, and give
him three* deaths wounds. There are three wounds that the law gives a man.

First, It makes it appear that a man is worthy of death, and guilty of death;
the law makes him see his guiltiness.

Secondly, The law pronounces upon a sinner the sentence of death, as Paul
says of natural death, I received the sentence of death, 2 Cor. 1. 9. that is,
I was a dead man, I took my self to be a dead man. So the law does make a man
to be a dead man, it pronounces the sentence of death upon him; it does not
only make it appear that he is worthy of death, (for so it may do, and yet he
may have hope of mercy) but it makes a man receive the sentence of death, and
to be a dead man: if a man be once condemned, if the sentence of death be
passed upon him, then he is without hope that the Judge will save him, because
the sentence of condemnation is passed upon him. A man may see himself worthy
of death, and yet hope for mercy, Romans 1. 31. Therefore the law does pronounce
the sentence of death upon him, and makes a man in a second degree dead.

Nay, Thirdly, The law makes a man see there is no hope of return; as it is
with a dead man, when a man is truly dead, there is no return from death, there
is no rising again: as the Wiseman speaks of the strange women, Prove. 2. 18,
19. Surely her house tends to death, and her paths unto the dead, they that
go unto her return not again, neither take they hold of the ways of life. Here
the Wiseman sets forth the infinite misery, and damnable estate of such a
creature, and the irrecoverableness of such a person, without the extraordinary
mercy of God. Ordinarily, such persons are seldom, or never brought to
repentance: ordinarily they are irrecoverable. So the Law makes a man see he is
guilty of death, and it passes the sentence of condemnation upon him, and it
makes him see there is no repeal of that sentence: thus the law leaves him. Now
a man would think, Can a man be more dead then thus? How can a man be more
dead? Yet he may be a thousand times more dead; for the livelynesse of a man is
but in a swound all this while: a man cannot be brisk, and peark, and
self-conceited, he is now laid in a swound, but is not stark dead. But when a
man comes to be Evangelically dead, he is more dead a great deal. And I will
show you it in these three things.

1. First, He is most dead that is hardest to recover: Now when a man is
legally dead, it is easy to recover that man; let but the lash of the law be
taken off, let but God let him alone; and the profits and pleasures of the
world, will make him alive again; his friends, and vanities, and delights, will
put life into him again, it is an easy matter to recover this man; but let a
man be evangellically dead, when the Gospel has deaded a man, he is a thousand
times more dead and a great deal harder to recover, nothing can recover that
man but Christ; let all the profits in the world come, they cannot cheer him
without Christ; if the devil should come and put into his mind all good
conceits, and the good opinion of the world: If the Ministers should tell him
he is in a good estate, they cannot quicken his heart, he is dead still, he is
harder a thousand times to be revived then the other, as the Apostle says,
Col. 3. 2. 3. Set your affections on things that be above, not on things that
are on earth; for ye are dead, and your life is hid in Christ. The Gospel has
made you dead, and you cannot be revived by any thing but Christ, your life is
hid with Christ; do not you set your affections on things that are below, they
can never put life into you, therefore let not them take up your minds and
affections any more, for your life is in Christ alone.

2. Secondly, He is most dead that life it self, cannot make alive: When a man
is but legally dead, the law has made him a dead man, and killed him, and
showed him he is a damned creature; this man, let him have but a little life,
or any thought of life come into him, let him have any affections toward God,
any seeming desires, it will make him think I am alive: But if the Gospel once
have made a man a dead man, life it self cannot quicken him, Christ himself
cannot make this man a live man in himself, though life come into him, and
though he has life from God, yet he himself is dead. I am dead through the
law, (says Paul) that I might live unto God; thus I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and that life I now live in the flesh, I live by Faith in
the Son of God, Gal. 2. 19, 20. When the Gospel had made him dead (for that is
the meaning of the words) he was not only dead by the law, but by the power of
the Gospel working by the law: Now, says he, though I have life, and Christ be
come into me, and lives in me, yet I do not live: I live, but not I, but it is
Christ that lives in me: I live, yet do not mistake me, I am a dead man, I
have no life, it is Christ that lives in me: when a man is evangelically dead,
it makes a man content, that God should keep life in his hand, and keep the
purse in his hand, and all in his hand, it makes him content to be without
strength and ability, and to have nothing in his own hand, but to have all from
the Lord; and he says, I am a dead man, and if I ever have comfort, I have
none in my self, I must go to Christ for comfort, and life, and strength, and
ability: and so for power and activity, and riches, and means, and maintenance,
and every thing; it is not my parts and gifts that can help me to them, but I
must go to Christ to fetch them; now it is the desire of man's heart to have
life at home, he cannot abide to have life in another hands: and though the
law, and hell it self proclaim a man a dead man, and make a man see himself a
dead man, yet it cannot kill this Principle, a man would have life and strength
in his own hand, and ability, and sufficiency in his own custody; we may see
this Principle in Gods own Children, though this Principle be begun to be
killed, yet it rests partly in Gods children, there is still a secret lust in
their hearts, to have life, and grace, and strength in their own keeping; and
if any child of God be negligent in coming to God, it is because of this
Principle that remains in him.

3. Thirdly, He is most dead that death has most power over: Now when a man is
legally dead, and the law has made him a dead man, though he be a dead man,
yet death has no power over him, his heart is stubborn still, and will not
look toward Christ and the Gospel, he is still as stubborn as ever he was; he
will roar and howl, and hear every Sermon, but still he has a hard heart, the
law has not power to break his heart to powder, and to soften his heart: but
when a man is evangelically dead, when the Gospel has made him dead, as it
does before it quickens a man, it breaks the sturdinesse of a man's heart, and
shatters a man all to pieces; that is the meaning of that place, Psalm. 147. 3.
He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores: Now he
is thus made a dead man, it makes his heart to burst under the weight of his
sins, and it beats him to powder: but a man that is only legally dead, he is
heart-whole still, and his spirit is as stout against the kind working of the
Gospel as ever it was, nay, worse a great deal; there are none more hardened
then those that see themselves dead, damned creatures, by the power of the law,
without the power of the Gospel. But when the Gospel comes, it breaks the heart
to powder, Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and lofty one, He that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, and with him
who is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart. This man is the object
of Mercy that is evangelically dead, he is the formal object of mercy: why?
because he is dead with such a kind of death as has gotten power over him,
power to break his heart, to make it an humble and contrite heart: now says
the Lord, I will revive such a man. This man is the formal object of mercy* and
into him eternal life will come.

2. The Second thing I promised to show you, is the difference between these
two, between legal and evangelical Privation. Between one that is legally dead,
and one that is dead as the Gospel deads a man before it quickens him.

1. First, He that is legally dead lies all along in his death: but when the
Gospel makes a man a dead man, it makes him stand up that he might have life,
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee life: He does not mean, stand up from being dead, but stand up
from the dead, and then Christ shall give thee life; he means such a standing
up from the dead, as before Christ gives him life: the Gospel does thus far
awaken a man, though he be more dead a thousand times, then he that is dead by
the law, yet thus far it quickens him, that he stands up from his secure
estate: when the law comes and shows a man that he is a dead man, he still lies
under his sins, he is a dead man, and cannot stand up that Christ may give him
life. That is the First thing.

2. Secondly, He that is legally dead, made dead only by the law, he is deaf to
the Gospel: but when a man is evangelically dead, it boors his ears and makes
him hear the voice of the Word, and not only so, but the voice of Christ in the
Word, Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ears and come unto me, hear and your soul shall
live: He calls those that were evangelically dead, hear, and your soul shall
live; they are made able to hear: Let their profits, and old courses, and old
companions come and tempt them to walk as they have done, they are deaf of that
ear, they cannot go that way to work, no, now their ears are open heavenwards,
seek the Lord, and you shall live, Amos 5. 6. They are made to seek the Lord,
thus much life they have: though they are more dead in regard of their own
misery, then one that is dead by the law; yet thus much life they have put into
them, that they will go and seek unto God in the use of the means, and follow
him up and down, and nothing will satisfy the heart but Christ, they leave no
stone unroled, they seek up and down everywhere.

3. Thirdly, He that is legally dead, it is a kind of death to love; but he
that is evangelically dead, it is a death of love; when the Church in the
Canticles was but sensible of the countenance of Christ, she was presently sick
of love, I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my well beloved,
tell him that I am sick of love, Cant. 5. There is a great deal of difference
between sickness and death, death is a total privation of life; sickness is
but a partial privation: now when the Gospel has wrought upon a man that he
has some of Christ, and is not deprived of all, that privation makes him sick
of love; but when the Gospel makes a man see he is dead, and altogether
deprived of Christ, now he is dead of love: when a man is legally dead, this is
his death that he is damned, and must go to hell; this is his death that he
has no mercy, not that he has not grace, and holiness, and Christ; but if a
man be evangelically dead, this is his death, that he has not Christ.

The Use is this, If there be any that the law Use.
has made dead, rest not there but labor that the Gospel may make you dead
also; when thou art humbled by the law, thou may think that mercy is
prepared for thee, but thy lusts may recover again, and that damned life that
is in thee may recover again; therefore labor to be more deaded by the Gospel,
that thou may have a total death begun in thee, that thou may have thy
deaths wound given thee deep, not only to be in a swoond, but to be dead
indeed. Joh. 11. Christ staid four days after Lazarus was dead before he would
raise him, because he would have him irrecoverably dead before he would raise
him: Lord, (says Martha) he stinstinketh, for he has been dead four days,
verse. 39. If he had raised him sooner, his glory had not been so great, so thou
must labor to be dead indeed, and to be buried, and to be loathsome and
abominable, and then Christ will quicken thee: It is certain that Gods Children
have some of this death wrought in them, before they are quickened at all; for
death is before quickening in order of nature: there must be a corruption of one
thing before there can be a generation of another; there must be a privation of
one form, before there can be an introduction of another: A child of God must
be dead before he can be quickened. Now then, if he will have more life, he must
labor to be dead more and more: now thou must labor to have this death truly
begun to be wrought in thee, thou must labor to have the love of this world
and self-conceitednesse altogether dead in thee. Hos. 6. 2. After two days
will he revive us, and the third day will he raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight: A man may be alive, though he have been seemingly dead twenty four
hours; therefore it is a good custom among us to keep men near two days before
we bury them, that we may be sure they are thoroughly dead; for there are many
have been buried alive: so after two days he will revive us, and the third day
he will raise us up: when a man is dead indeed, and has his liveliness
thoroughly killed in him, then God will revive him; if he should revive him
before, his glory would not be so great, if he should revive him before he were
quite dead; when Ahab 1 King. 21
humbled himself, and put on sackcloth, and went softly, a man would have
thought he had been dead; but in the next Chapter we may see he is alive again.
So Ananias, and Sapphira, one would Acts 5.
have thought their covetousness had been dead, (whether they were any of the
three thousand that were pricked at Peter's Sermon, I dispute not) but they were
pricked and made sensible of their damned estate, and pretended to lay down all
at the Apostles feet, one would have thought their covetousness had been dead,
but yet it was alive: therefore labor that the Gospel may make thee thoroughly
dead.

The Spiritual Watch.
2 Timothy 4. 5. Watch thou in all things
IN the verses going before we have 1. The charge that the Apostle gives to
Timothy, ver. 1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that
shall judge the quick and the dead. There are many duties we are loath to come
unto, and are tempted from; so that we have need of all strong cords to draw us
to them.

2. We have the thing he gives him this charge for; and that is, ver. 2. Preach
the word in season, and out of season, etc. which duty strongly lies upon the
Ministers of the Gospel, to hold forth the Word of God, to edify and convert
men's souls.

3. Here is the reason why he gives him this charge, and that is in the third
and fourth verses, For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, etc. The more danger there is among people, the more instant should
Ministers be, to preach the Word unto the conscience. Now in the verse I have
read unto you, the Apostle persuades Timothy to watchfulness; as who should
say, Though others be careless and negligent, yet I would have thee to be
watchful, consider, thou art a Watchman. Every Christian is to watch over his
own ways, and those that are committed to his charge: but Ministers are
watchmen over their people, therefore here is a double reason to move him to
watchfulness; both in regard of his own soul, and the people he was set over,
Mark. 13. 37. our Savior says, What I say to you, I say to all, Watch. And
what Paul says here to Timothy, I may say to all Christians, Watch in all
things.

For the better handling of this point, I will show you,

First, What it is to watch.

Secondly, The things we must watch.

Thirdly, The reasons of it.

First, What it is to watch. And to watch in What it is to watch, Literally.
Scripture is taken two ways, Literally, and Spiritually.

First, Watching sometimes is taken Literally, and then it signifies a waking,
when the time, or nature calls not for sleep; for there is a difference between
watching, and waking: we are all awake at this time, or else ought to be, but
yet we cannot be said to watch; but this is to watch, when time or nature calls
for sleep. When a man awaketh all night, or the greatest part of the night, as
Luke 2. 8. The Shepherds were watching their flocks by night: And this is two
fold, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary,

Ordinary watching is contrary to immoderatenesse Ordinary.
in sleeping. As when a man is sober in eating, and drinking, and other lawful
things; so we ought to be sober in our sleep, for it is a dangerous thing, if
we suffer immoderate sleep to fall upon us.

Now Extraordinary watching is contrary to Extraordinary.
sleep it self, as ordinary watching is contrary to sleepiness; for it takes
away our natural sleep, which otherwise we are to have. And this is for two
reasons:

The first is for a Civil end, when we watch with For a Civil end.
those that are sick, as a duty of Charity; it is fit that those that are well,
should break their natural sleep and rest, to be helpful to those that are
sick; this is a Civil end.

Secondly, There is a Spiritual end of extraordinary For a Spiritual end.
watching, and that is, when a man is not only moderate in sleeping, but abates
himself of that rest he may lawfully take, for a Spiritual end. As Saint Peter
says, Watch unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. and the Church, Lament. 2. 19. watched
to humble their souls under Gods hand. For sometimes we have need to break our
very natural rest, for the good of our souls. Though we be never so careful,
and conscionable in the day time, yet it may so fall out, that the day will not
be enough, but we must entrench upon the night also, to seek the Lord
extraordinarily; but this watching is not here meant, though it be sometimes
required. But a Spiritual watching is specially meant, which Spiritually.
includes three things in it.

First, It does note a readiness of mind to be It implies proneness to be
drowzy.
drowzy; for as in natural and literal watching, it does note a natural
proneness to be drowzy, either through the darkness of the night, or the heat
of the weather, or the like; so this spiritual watching signifies unto us,
that we are naturally subject to be secure spiritually, and vain, and idle, and
negligent, and have need to be rouzed up: for indeed all Commandments since the
Fall, are such as do not agree with our nature: as when he commands us to seek
the Lord while he may be found, that intimates, that we are by nature apt to
put it off, and to be careless of making our peace with God; and when the Lord
says, pray always, it does imply, how backward we are to that duty, how apt
to neglect it, or to shuffle it over, and to be lukewarm in it: before the
Fall when God did bid man do any thing, the bidding of him did imply, that if
he were not careful, he was in a possibility of breaking the commandments; it
did not argue a proneness to break them: but since the Fall, the commandments
of God, whatsoever God has commanded us to do, either for matter or manner of
it, it implies, how backward to, and untoward we are in doing it.

Secondly, Watchfulness does imply a labor Endeavor to stir up our selves.
and endeavor in our selves, to take off this sinful pronenesse to evil that
is in us, and to be seriously stirred up, to look after our duty whatsoever it
is, both toward God, and toward man, we ought to shake off all untowardnesse
of spirit, whereby we are unfit to watch; watchfulness implies this also,
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead: as who
should say, Shake off thy drowzinesse, and labor to break off this folly of
heart, whereby thou go dreaming on, and rouse up thy spirit, and stand upon
thy guard.

The Third and main thing: This watchfulness It is an intentive Consideration
in all Cases.
does include some further business or duty to bedone that is not yet
performed; for watchfulness is an act to help forward some further act: As for
example, We are bound to remember God in all our ways; the want of this, is
the reason we so often sin against God; now if we did remember God, if we did
remember his Holiness, if we did remember the greatness of his Power, and the
strictness of his Justice against Sin, if we did remember our Death, and what
account we are to make before him, this would be a great help to keep us from
sin; now if we would remember this, a special way to help us, is to watch, as
Acts 20. 31. Watch and remember, says the Apostle; he being desirous that they
should remember the admonitions and exhortations which he had propounded, he
lays down this as a special means to help them hereunto, to watch: So we are
to be watchful, that we may be sober in eating and drinking, and all lawful
things; for how suddenly do distempers break in upon us, unless a man look to
himself? now watchfulness is an excellent help to Sobriety, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Let
us watch and be sober: We had need to watch whatsoever we go about, that we may
be sober in it; whatsoever wordly business we go about in our Callings, we had
need to have this watchfulness, that we be not overwhelmed, and over head and
ears in the world, that we may not be intemperate in our eating and drinking,
that we may not give our selves too much liberty and freedom in talking and
discoursing of the things here below; so we are bound to keep our garments,
that our nakedness may not be seen, that the sins that are up and down in the
world do not defile them, that the temptations, and alurements, and occasions
we meet withal, and the examples of the times, and such like, do not take away
our righteousness from us: now watchfulness is an help hereunto, as we may
see, Rev. 16. 15. the text says, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments: So that watchfulness is an excellent help for a further act to be
done: when a man has some duty or other to be done, which the Lord requires
should be done with care and diligence, watchfulness is a help thereunto, as
Hab. 2. 1. the Prophet knowing there was some Prophecy to be bestowed upon
them, the Prophet labored to be in a fit case to receive it; and that he might
so be, I will watch says he: in a word, watchfulness, is an intentive
consideratenesse of the heart, when a man does consider how he is to do every
thing, lest he be surprised either by Satan, or the world, or by his own subtle
flesh; when a man is considerative, and takes heed to himself, to his thoughts,
and his words, and all his actions, as our Savior says, Take heed, Watch, and
Pray, Mark. 13. 33. When he would describe watchfulness, what it is, he sets
another phrase by it to open it to us, take heed, watch, and pray. There is a
kind of heedlessenesse that is apt to cleave to the heart, whereby the heart is
careless what snares are before it: now watchfulness does take off this, and
makes a man to take more heed in whatsoever he does, so that there can be no
opportunity of doing good, but he takes it; no good motion is suggested, but he
lies at catch to receive it, for this is watchfulness. Prove. 8. 33. Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates: here you may see
watchfulness is expressed, when a man comes into the presence of Christ,
waiting to hear whatsoever shall come from Christ, and there is nothing that
drops from the Minister that concerns him, but he is ready to receive it; when
a man waits to be ready to obey whatsoever commandment the Lord delivers, and
to take heed to avoid whatsoever the Lord forbids. This is watchfulness.

Now the second thing is, what we must watch? What we must watch
I Answer, We must watch our selves, and all the duties of Religion, and time.

First we must watch over our selves. Ponder Our Selves
thy paths, says the Wise man, Prove. 4. 26. as who should say, Look to thy
self; take heed to every step that it be ordered aright: How soon may a man be
turned out of the way? How soon was David carried away into those two great
sins of Murder and Adultery? How soon was Peter put besides his Resolution in
the high Priests Hall, for want of watchfulness? If he had watched and
remembered our Saviors item, he had never denied his Master: A man is
mavelous ready to be carried away, therefore we must watch our selves.

First, And in particular we must watch our own Our Thoughts.
thoughts: naturally all our thoughts are idle and unprofitable, our minds are
apt to spend themselves upon that which will do us no good: we had need
therefore to watch over our thoughts, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware (says the text) that
there be not an evil thought in thy heart: Take heed that vain thoughts come
not into thy mind, idle thoughts, or wordly thoughts will dead us, and dull us
to the service of God, and poison the heart, and no good thing can dwell in us;
if we do not look unto our thoughts, the eyes of the Lord are upon our
thoughts, therefore watch over thy thoughts.

Secondly, We should watch over the Heart it Heart.
self: The heart is the very spring, there be the very issues of Life and
Death, the actions flow from thence; therefore, Prove. 4. 23. the wiseman says,
Keep thy heart with all keeping: as who should say, Thy heart is deceitful and
desperate, it will make thee believe thou art going to heaven, when it leads
thee to hell; if thou be never so well affected for a time, this heart will fly
off, it is naturally so naught and reprobate to what is good; Therefore keep
thy heart with all diligence.

Thirdly, Watch over thy Words: Psalm. 141. 3. Words.
Set a watch, O Lord, before the door of my lips. We must watch our lips, and
have a care that our words be agreeable to Gods Word, and seasoned with salt,
and that we shun all manner of communication, that does not minister grace to
the hearers; we must take heed lest idle words proceed out of our mouths, for
which we must give an account at the day of Judgment; how many times do such
words proceed out of our mouths that we would give a world to recall again? only
because we do not watch over our words, that they may be such as may tend to
edifying, and express the grace that is within?

Fourthly, Again, we should watch over our Senses, we should make a covenant
with our eyes, Senses. Eyes.
as Job speaks chap. 31. 1. not to look upon a maid; when our eyes are looking
up and down, though they be not caught with adultery, or such grosssins, yet
there is danger to be caught one way or other; for when a man looks upon the
objects of the world, as good, and the like, how ready is his mind to be
carried after it? men are led by their eyes, they carry the mind and heart with
them, therefore we should have a care, that whatsoever comes to our eyes, we
make a good use of.

Fifthly, Again, we should set a watch before our Ears.
Ears, we should take heed what we hear, when we come in company, left we be
infected by what is spoken; we should have an hedge about our ears, to stop
them from unsavory things. Does not the ear taste words, says Job? we should
have tasting ears, that should be able to taste and relish the good words that
are spoken, and hate the contrary, and distaste them.

Lastly, We should watch our selves, over the Whole selves.
whole man: Only take heed to thy self, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. As who should say, This is
the only thing; have a care of, watch over thy self, lest thy self undo thy
self; there is no enemy so dangerous unto us as our selves: the Devil in hell
cannot do us so much mischief. How many corruptions are there in us, to draw us
from God, and incite us unto sin? There are abundance of corruptions lying in
the heart of man, to make a man unfit for any thing that is good; that is,
idleness in the understanding, it cannot abide to take pains, and exercise it
self in Divine matters. There is in the will and affections, covetousness, and
abundance of corrupt inclinations, that if a man look not to, it will break
forth: So that this is the thing we must watch over, our selves.

Secondly, We are to watch over the duties of Religion; as for example, we are
to watch unto Duties of Religion.
prayer, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 4. 7. we are to watch to meditating, and
reading, and hearing of the Word of God. Otherwise though we do them for the
matter of them, yet we cannot for the right form, and manner of them: though
our hearts be in a pretty good tune for the present, yet we cannot hold this
frame, if we watch not thereunto. Rev. 3. 3. is an excellent place, If you will
not watch, says the Text, and hold fast, I will come against thee as a thief
in the night: As who should say, Stir up thy self and watch, that thou may
hold fast; if thou have got any hatred of sin in thy heart, hold it fast; if
strength against corruption, hold it fast. How shall I do that? why watch says
he, or else Christ will come against thee as a thief. If a book be in a man's
hand when he is drowzy, it will fall out, he cannot hold it fast; So when a
man's heart is drowzy, and secure it will let go comfort, and any thing that God
has bestowed for the good of the soul; therefore we ought to watch: if we have
any sweet disposition of heart, to go on in the Service of God, and in the
duties of Religion, we may go on if we be watchful. And now to branch this into
particulars.

First, We must watch before the Duty.

Secondly, We must watch in the Duty.

Thirdly, We must watch after the Duty. Before Duty.


First, We must watch before the Duty. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy, Exodus 20. 8 So I may say, remember Prayer, to keep it holy; remember
Meditation, to keep it holy; remember all the duties of Religion, to keep them
holy, and perform them in an holy manner: think of them before you go about the
performance of them; we cannot pray unless we watch unto prayer, unless we be
careful, and have our eyes in our heads, before we go about the duty.

In the morning as soon as we awake, we should think of prayer; and when
tempted to sin, we should think of prayer. If I sin, how can I pray unto God? I
have ever and anon need to pour out my prayers before God; now if I commit
these and these sins, how can I look up to heaven, when my conscience does
reproach me for sin? So when we hear the word of God, look to thy foot when
thou come into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. that is, Before thou go
into the House of God to hear the Word of Salvation, see into thine own heart,
think whose word it is thou hear; and that thou go to hear the Word, that
shall judge thee at the last day. When thou come into the presence of God,
take heed lest thou hear as fools hear; and take heed lest thou prayest as
fools pray; and come to the Sacrament, as fools use to come; we should watch
before the duty, that all things may be in a readiness, before we come to the
performance of it, that we may prevent all things that may hinder us, and be
fitted with all things that may help forward the duty; that time, place and all
advantages may meet together for the better doing of it.

Then secondly, We must watch in the duty, as In Duty.
well as before the duty. As the Apostle speaks concerning prayer, so I may say
concerning all other duties, Continue in prayer, and watch therein with
thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. As we are to watch before, that we may have
preparation, so we must watch in the duty, that we may rightly discharge it;
for though a man has been watchful before the duty, and has been prepared in
some measure, and fitted, yet you are not without danger. But when you are in
prayer, and when you are at the Lords Table, or any other duty; for all your
former preparation, if you be not watchful now, you may fail in some kind or
other, and so mar the duty; therefore we should watch in the duty, that our
hearts may be waking in it, and our mind attentive upon it, that our hearts may
be fixed upon that we are about; my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, says
the Prophet David; he was a joyful man, he repeats it again and again; as if a
man should be jocund, and say, I have got it, I have got it. We should get
hearts fixed upon the duty, that so we may not have wavering hearts, half off,
and half on the duty; but that the whole man may be employed about it.

Thirdly, We should be watchful after the duty, that we may not lose the
benefit, and reward of the duty, lest the subtilties of Satan, and the wiles of
our own hearts, do rob us of the fruits of it; though a man hears very
attentively, and pray, and perform all other duties very enlargedly, yet when
he has done all, he may lose the comfort and reward of the duty. Therefore
when we hear the word, we should watch over our hearts, that the souls of the
air may not pluck it out again, that if we have any quickening, we may not lose
it again; if we have heard any thing that has helpeld us forward in Grace, we
should take heed that we lose not the ground again; As the Publican, as soon
as he had prayed to God, and performed an Ordinance aright, how careful was he
not to lose the benefit thereof? He went to the Temple to pray, and he was
watchful before the duty; thinking, I am now going to pray, and power out my
soul before God. He was watchful in the duty, for you may see how humbly, and
feelingly, and penitently he did pray; standing a far off, and smiting upon his
breast, and not lifting up his eyes to heaven, bewailing the hardness of his own
heart, and rowzing it up, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: and when he had done
this, he was careful afterward, for the Text says, Luke 18. 14. As he had
prayed for mercy, so he was careful to carry it along with him. He prayed that
he might be justified, and as he prayed for it, so he was careful to carry home
justification in his bosom. So when we are at a Sermon, we should watch, that
we may go home quickened, and bettered: and when we are at conference, we should
watch that we may return home with the firuit, and benefit of the duty; So for
all other Ordinances, we should be careful and watchful, that we may not lose
the reward, for the Devil is crafty, and our own hearts are ready to betray us,
therefore we had need be watchful; and that is the second thing, we should
watch, the duties of Religion.

Thirdly, We should watch times and seasons; Time. Present time.
God knows what miserable things are a coming, therefore what time the Lord
allots us, we had need improve it to the best advantage, that we may redeem the
time. How many hours do run from us, before we are aware? How many days, and
months, and years, have we let slip away, and we are little the better? Our
time is a special thing, and therefore we had need to watch it, that we may
improve it to the best advantage, that we may be no longer fools, but wise in
the employing of it.

Secondly, We should watch all the times of Time of Gods wrath.
Gods anger and displeasure; it is a miserable thing when a man passes on like
a fool, and Gods anger come forth, and a man is not provided, has not a
defense for it. There be days of anger, and visitation, when God comes to
visit people for their sins; to visit a parish, to visit a family, to visit a
person; and what a woeful thing is it, for a man to be drowzy and negligent,
when Gods anger bursts forth, and so he has no evidence of comfort to his
soul; he knows not how to meet God in the field? But when the wrath of God
breaks out in any kind upon his Goods, or Wife, or Children, or Body, or
Friends, or any thing, he is at a loss, and knows not what to do; he is fain
to sink under the hand of God, and has no refuge to fly unto; therefore we
should watch against the day of Gods anger.

Thirdly, We should watch over the times of Time of Grace.
Grace, for there be gracious and acceptable times, as the Apostle calls them,
2 Cor. 6. 21. Many times good motions come in: Now if we do not watch, to keep
them, and nourish them in our hearts, the Lord will pass us by at another
time, and we shall not be moved. Sometimes God affects thy heart at a Sermon,
and puts in a good resolution to forsake sin, and lead a new life; now have a
care to keep these resolutions, and let them not perish in thee, and go out
like lightning. The Lord has given many a blessed season, and opportunity of
mercy, the water was moved, if he would have but stepped in, if he would but
have taken hold of the mercy, he might have had it; but afterward, he may go
mourning, and thirsting, and longing, and never have the mercy offered more;
and it is well if he can be humbled for missing of that mercy, by his neglect,
and watch for the future the times of Grace.

Again we should watch the times of Death; Death.
we are all mortal men, must die, and Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord
when he comes shall find him so doing, Mat. 24. 5. If any of us should dye,
before we are converted, and brought home to God, we perish for ever: Whosoever
thou art, if thou die in thy sins with thy dead, hard, unsanctified,
unregenerate heart, thou art damned, thou go to Hell. Therefore watch for
the coming of death, that so when it comes, it may not be the King of Terrors,
and an amazement to thy heart.

Again, We must watch for the day of Judgment; Judgment.
as Death leaves us, so Judgment will find us: Therefore we should consider
with our selves seriously, the strictness of the account we are to give at the
dreadful day of the Son of man, when all works shall be brought to a
Touchstone, and all secrets shall be Preached on the House top. It is an
excellent thing, when a man does consider these things before hand; when a man
has looked upon his thoughts, for they shall be Judged; and upon his speeches,
and upon all his ways, for they shall all be brought before the Judgment Seat
of God; and according as a man has done, such reward he shall receive for
evermore.

The next thing, is, the Reasons why we are to Reasons.
Watch.

And the First Reason is, Because we are mavelous Our proneness to be drowzy.
prone to be Drowzy in Spiritual things. In temporal things we are watchful
enough; for Covetousness, and Pride, and the like, we are very watchful, but
in Spiritual things, how subject are we to Drowzyness? Paul himself was fain to
complain, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, Romans
7. 18. Is thy heart better then Saint Paul's? If he were left to himself, he
should be as miserable, and proud, and untoward as another; and have as vile an
heart as another: and therefore that made him watch. Therefore we had need to
watch, for how loath are we to be brought to watch? and how unwilling to take
such an hard piece of service to do? we are mavelous apt to be secure. If
Jonah had watched, if he had had a watch over his heart, he would have gone to
Nineveh; but for want of watchfulness, he ran away. Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, says
the Church, it was not like the sleep of the wicked, and ungodly, for her heart
waked, but she was asleep, she was proud, and mavelous secure; there was a
great deal of untowardnesse of spirit grew upon her: And as we are untoward to
that which is good, so we are prone to that which is evil; we are glued
naturally to the world, and the things of this life, it is an easy thing to
draw us away into evil, therefore we had need to watch. As it is said of the
Disciples of Christ in regard of temporal drowziness, so it is with us, in
regard of Spiritual drowziness, Mat. 26. 43. He came and found them asleep
again, for their eyes were heavy: Though Christ had awakened them, and jogged
them, yet they were asleep again, for their eyes were heavy; So though the Lord
has awakened us, even now we were awakened by a Cross, by Sickness, by a
Sermon, by a Reproof, something or other God has been pleased to waken us by;
but all on the sudden we fall asleep again, for our hearts are very heavy: as
it is with an heavy brain, what a do he has to keep himself awake? though he
pinch himself, and rowze up himself, yet he has much ado to keep his eyes
open; so the heart of man is so drowzy, that he has much ado to keep any
Grace alive in himself; we are so apt to be so secure, that we had need to
watch. Zech. 4. 1. the Prophet complains of the drowziness of his heart, The
Angel that talked with me, came again and waked me, as a man is wakened out of
his sleep: when God was talking with him, he fell into a sleep. So when we are
in Prayer, we have much ado to hold out in the duty, we have such vile
natures, and cursed dispositions. How ought we then to watch over our selves?

Secondly, Another reason why we should be watchful, is, because our life is a
Warfare, and Christians life is a Warfare.
we do not lie like two Armies in a field, removed one from the other; but we
lie in the midst of our enemies round about us, and so they are ready to
surprise us. The greatest means of doing us mischief, The world an enemy.
are most commonly those things we have need of; as our meat, and drink, and
affairs, and callings; we cannot go to prayer, but worldly thoughts are ready
to entangle us; we cannot go to the House of God, but a man is in danger to be
intrapped. There is danger in every thing we go about, by reason of the worlds
powerful enticements, therefore we had need to stand upon our Guard, and be
careful, for else how can we avoid to be suprized, and led away? this is the
reason, why so many sink into Perdition: Many that have given good hopes, many
that have promised excellent things, have come to nothing, but have fallen away
as the fall of a leaf. Whence comes this, but because they have not been
careful and watchful?

The Devil is watchful, to ensnare and entrap us, The Devil
therefore we should watch to avoid his snares; As the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5.
8. Be sober and watchful, for your Adversary, the Devil, goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: The Devil is always busy, and
therefore we had need watch and busy our selves, and be careful at all times:
when we are secure, and consider not God, and consider not the good of our
Souls, and the peace of our Consciences; Satan presently has advantage against
us: If the Devil had any thing else to do, it were something, but the Devil
has nothing to do, but to hurt us, and lay Siege against us; All his practice,
from the beginning of the world to this day, is to go roaming and ranging up
and down to do mischief, it is all his employment, from the beginning of the
day to the end thereof; If he get us alone, he will ensnare us there; if not
there, he will ensnare us in company; if he cannot get us there, he will get us
in a Sermon, and if any thing falls against our lusts, he will cause our hearts
to rise against it. Now when we do not watch over our selves, we are led away
by Satan, therefore we had need be careful, for the Devil is always watchful,
therefore we should labor to be always provided to resist him.

Again, we have the flesh that is continually about us, it is an enemy within
us, it is that which does betray us to the World, and the Devil, even our own
hearts do betray us, and therefore we had need be careful; we have enemies from
without, and our own hearts within, and all to undo us. Take a man that is in a
good way, and has all means, and helps to make him Godly, though there be no
temptation from without, yet he may de damned from his own heart, if he be not
delivered from it. Jam. 1. 14. Every man is tempted by his own lusts, and Jam.
4. 5. The Spirit that is within us lusts to envy, and covetousness, and
security, and vanity, and carnal ease, it lusts after these things, and
therefore we had need to watch.

A Third reason is, Because it will do us a great The certain advantage of
watchfulness.
deal of good: for as if we do not watch we are easily surprised, so if we do
watch it is an easy thing to stand: all our miscarriages in the duties of
Religion, lie in security; whereas if we were watchful, and would walk with
eyes in our heads, and would consider the snares that be laid for us, and
consider Gods threatenings, and Commandments, the duties of Religion would be
easy: For if we do not watch the Devil, and the World, and the Flesh have
advantage against us; but if we do watch, this is as it were a fence to the
heart, to hedge a man in to keep him safe. Rev. 3. 2. there is an excellent
place, Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain; it is the strength
of the soul. When a man watches, let a man have but a little grace, suppose a
man be marvellously fallen off, and has but a little good remaining, a few
graces in him; a little faith, a little hope, a little sanctified desire; he
has but a little strength to go on against sin, if a man does but now watch,
if a man do but husband this little, how strong will he be? A little Faith is
able to overcome all the Devils in Hell, well managed: a little hope is able to
keep a man above water from sinking: a little strength is able to maintain the
Combat: a little affection to goodness, if a man have a careful heart to
improve it to the uttermost, will go a great way; if a man did but watch, it
would strengthen the things that remain. Though a man were never so infeebled,
and come to never so low an ebb, watchfulness is a stay and strength to the
heart.

Fourthly, Again if we do not watch, we cannot so much as pray to God to
forgive us, our consciences We cannot else expect help or pardon.
tell us, unless the Lord save us, we cannot be saved; now how can we expect
that God should save us, if we do not pray unto him? and we cannot pray to him
to save us, unless we watch: it is to tempt God, to pray to him to preserve us
from evil, when we do not watch over our selves; it is to tempt God, to pray to
him to quicken us, when we deaden our selves; to entreat God to give us an
holy mind, when we our selves let in vain thoughts. Therefore see what
Christ speaks Mar. 14. 38. Watch and pray, that ye fall not into temptation: as
who should say, You cannot pray that you may not enter into temptation, you
tempt God if you entreat him to do any thing, if you do not vvatch over your
own souls. Though a man has no Activity to do any good, yet God will have
him be vvatchful; if he mean to purify a man, he will make him purify
himself; if he mean to keep him from pride, he will make his own heart resist
pride: therefore watch, that thou enter not into temptation, if thou mean to
pray to God, not to lead thee into temptation.

But you will say, All a man's watching will Object.
do no good, except God watches over him, Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord keep
the City, the Watchmen watch in vain.

I answer, It Is true indeed, unless the Lord Answ.
keeps a man's soul, all a man's watching is nothing. But I tell thee, If thou
watchest, thou have two watchers, thou have God to watch over thee, and thy
self to watch over thee; thou have God to watch over thee, and keep thee in all
thy ways, and then thou watchest over thy self, and art sustained by God, so
that thou have two watchers, God above, and thy own soul within thee employed
about this work.

A Fourth reason is, Because this is the very Gods appointment
means prescribed by God to do us good: It is the very remedy that the Lord of
heaven has appointed unto us to save us from danger, and keep us from falling;
the Lord has sanctified this means to this very end and purpose: therefore
when our Savior Christ would dissuade his people from carking and caring for
the things of this life, Luke 21. 36. see what means he prescribes and lays
down to do it, Be watchful (says he) and pray: the world is ready to get in,
therefore watch (says he) and pray always, that you may be accounted worthy
to escape these things: So that we see this the means prescribed by God
himself, to escape the falling into sin.

Fifthly, Again, We should be so much the None can Watch for us.
more careful in this watch, because no other can watch for us: in outward
things one man may watch, while another sleeps; as in sailing, when all the
rest are asleep, there is one watches; so in war, when all the Soldiers lie
in their tents asleep, it may be some few are watching, that the rest may take
their rest: but it is not so in regard of our souls, one man cannot watch while
another man sleeps, but every man must watch over his own heart: If we do not
watch our own souls, we shall perish; and if we do not perish everlastingly, we
shall have miserable temptations, and evils, and many inconveniences we shall
be exposed unto.

But some may say, Are not Ministers to watch Object.
over us? How then is every man to watch over himself? Ministers are watchmen:
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the house of Israel, says the
Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel, and Heb. 13. 17. The Apostle speaking of
Ministers, says, They watch for your souls?

I Answer, The word in the Original is not for Answ.
your souls, but over your souls; to watch for a man, is to watch for another
that he may not watch; as when a man watches for his neighbor that his
neighbor may not watch: but the Ministers are not so to watch for the people,
that the people may not watch; but the Ministers are to watch over the people,
that they may watch: as when a man watches Deer, or Hawks, he watches them,
that they may watch and not sleep, that so he may tame them: as a man that
watches with a man which is sick of the Lethargy, which is such a Disease,
that if a man be let sleep, he goes away in his sleep, therefore their friends
stand about them, to watch over them, that they may not sleep, knowing that if
they do sleep, their lives are hazarded; and if they see them but to slumber,
they awaken them, lest in their sleep they die, and go away: So it is with the
Ministers of the Gospel, we ought to watch over your souls, that you may not
sleep: for you are all sick of the Lethargy of sin, and if ye sleep, you go
away, if you be not careful for heaven, and heavenly things; if you follow
vanity and security of heart, and do not take heed to avoid sin, your souls
will die, therefore the Ministers are to watch over you, and keep you from
sleeping, and show you the danger of it, and labor to awaken you, and keep
your eyes waking.

The First Use is, To condemn the infinite security Use. Condemning the
general neglect of Watchfulness.
that is grown upon people: that though it be so excellent a duty for a man to
watch, yet where is the man almost, that is careful of it? They put this duty
over to God, as if it did not belong to them, they will watch over outward
things, for plowing, and sowing, and reaping, and the like; but for the good of
their souls, they never acquaint themselves with this watching; their hearts
are like the wilderness, as the wilderness is open for all wild-beasts, so
their hearts are open for all temptations, that is the reason they have such
dead hearts, and cold affections, that is the reason they look so little after
salvation and eternal life, because people never look after this duty of
watchfulness; nay, they are so far from watching how to be saved, that they
watch how the devil may take them; when a man sins, he wishes the Devil would
help him to more sin: a covetous man is so far from watching over his sin, that
he would have more opportunities, and more occasions of getting; the Devil
cannot come fast enough to fill his heart with these things: So if a man be
given to pleasure, he thinks he cannot have enough, but would have more still.
Thus people would have the Devil put more corn into the hopper: they are so far
from watching for good, that they watch for evil, they devise evil upon their
beds, as the Prophet Micah speaks, they are possessed with the spirit of
slumber, they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not, hearts and
understand not; they do not know what watchfulness is, if they do, they are
the less excusable, because they practice it not, they do not watch and wake
unto Prayer, that they may not enter into temptation, but are carried away with
the world and sin.

The Second Use is, To them that are Godly in Reproving the godly's too great
neglect.
some measure; that we cannot say they altogether do not watch, yet how
negligent are they in this duty? Many Christians are there among us that have
some goodness in them, yet how does this duty lie unpractised? whence come all
the vanities in our minds, and untowardnesse in the Ordinances of God? whence
comes all unfruitfulness in our meetings, and unsettlednesse in our
Consciences? it is because we do not watch: Whence comes it that we are no more
ready to good duties? When we are called forth on the sudden to pray or do any
thing for the good of Gods Church and People, that we are so unfit to do it,
and so backward; it is for want of watchfulness. Nay, what is the reason that
we perform not the Worship of God in our Families better, but because we do not
watch, the very regenerate themselves, what a world of mischief do they do to
their own souls, for want of this duty of watchfulness? How do they swell in
sin, and are slack in goodness, and slubber over Gods service? How do they
favor themselves too too much, and suffer the dishonor of God, by the wicked?
and suffer their own hearts to dishonor him too too much.

Thirdly, The next Use shall be to show you the Directing how to watch.
Rules that are to be observed in watching, and the Rules are these: If you
would watch over your selves.

First, Count watchfulness your very life, and Account watchfulness our life.
think if you let watchfulness go, you let your life go; for if once
watchfulness go, how dead are you in Prayer, and hearing the Word of God? So
that the security of the heart, will be the death of the heart; wherefore if
we would go on in watching, let us labor to keep this Holy disposition;
count it your very lives, and think with your selves, I let Life go, if I let
Watchfulness go. We use to say of Sleep, that it is the brother of Death, and
1 These. 5. 6. we may see the Phrase used by the Apostle; where waking is put
for living, and sleeping, for dying, that is the meaning of the words. So that
as sleep, natural sleep, does lively represent death; so it is with Spiritual
sleep, which is the death of the soul. Therefore do thou find thy self to be
out of frame, and not vvatch over thy vvayes? then think with thy self that
thou art a dead man, and take up thy vvatch as fast as thou can again.

Secondly, Thou must let thy watch stand Catholically, Watching in all things
universally in all duties, and all times; vvatch thereunto, and persevere
therein; we must not only watch, but Persevere. Be careful in the morning how
we may begin our vvatch; in the day, how we may spend it; at night, how we
may end it. So we must vvatch in all duties; when we go to Prayer, we must
vvatch in prayer; when you go about your Callings, vvatch about them; when
we are alone, we should be vvatchful; and when we are in Company, we
should be vvatchful, for the Devil, and our own souls, plot a great deal of
mischief against us, we must vvatch in all places; in our houses, and without
doors, and in the fields; we are still in danger wheresoever we are.

Thirdly, We should proportion our watch, according Proportioning it to what we
are about.
as the duty is we take in hand, so our watching may be; there is one kind of
watching for one kind of duty, another for another. If we be to go about our
callings, then our watching must be against distrustfulnesse, and
covetousness, and distracting cares; that so we may not be over head and ears
in the world. If our duty be prayer, we must have an eye to the promises, and
take hold on the Lord Jesus Christ, and come in his mediation and his only. So
whatsoever duty it be, if it be hearing of the Word of God, there is a
watchfulness to be proportionable to it. A man should think, the word will
do me no good, unless the Lord meet with my lusts: I have an unmortified
heart, and unless the Lord work upon me, I shall never lie down under him.
Therefore we should be vvatchful, that we may practice, and be able to apply
whatsoever is spoken to us; we are to keep a due watchfulness, for that
which is due to one thing is not due to another; that which is sufficient for
one, is not for another. Avoiding hindrances.


Fourthly, Take heed of all things that may hinder Watchfulness.

And first, Take heed of vain Company. If we Vain company.
will be watchful, we must exercise our selves with those that are godly. To
be with secure Christians, is the way to be secure; this will hinder a man:
A man had better be alone, then be in bad Company, as the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 102. 7. I watch and am alone as a Sparrow on the house top: he was alone,
and yet he was watching. A man when he is alone may be watching, rather then
when he is in such Company: a man can never look to himself well, unless he
prize the Communion of Saints.

Secondly, A man should be sober; Take heed of Spiritual drunkenness.
Spiritual Drunkenness: Take heed of the cares of this life, and that you be
not immoderate in any lawful thing; we should stand upon our guard, and keep
our hearts with all manner of keeping; if our hearts grow drowzy and idle, and
if we neglect Sobriety, then we are gone, therefore in Scripture these are put
together, be sober, and watch, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. I do not mean
Drunkenness with Wine, for there is a Drunkenness, and not with Wine, as the
Prophet speaks, a man may be drunk with the love of the Creature: if thou
love thy ease too well, or any thing in the world too well, thou art drunk
with it, thy heart is giddy, thou art no more able to Pray, or do any thing
that is good, then a drunken man is.

Fifthly, If thou will Watch, then set the Lord Setting God before our eyes.
always before thy eyes: Set the watchman of Israel before thy face, God is
called a watcher, Dan. 4. 23. Now if thou will watch over thy self, set God
before thy face, as David did, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set God before mine eyes; so
always set the Lord before thine eyes.

Now I come to the last thing, which is an Use Use. Exhorting to watchfulness.
Motives
of Exhortation; To exhort us to be careful of this Duty, and there is great
need of it.

First, We all desire to do well. Now how can we do well at last, unless we
watch well all our life Because otherwise it will be ill with us at last.
time? What is the reason that many are without comfort, not like the Servants
of God, full of horror, and fear, and quaking? it is because they do not
watch, as it was with the Five wise Virgins, they were something wise, not like
the foolish, but they slumbred too; Now when the bridegroom came, there was a
cry; they made an outcry, and a skrieking, and an howling, they were undone,
the bridegroom was come: one would have thought, they should have rejoiced that
the bridegroom was come. What godly Christians, and Religious People, when the
bridegroom comes to fall a howling and a crying? This was because they
slumbred, whereas if a man be watchful over his life, and careful to keep an
humble heart, and to honor God, and study how to die comfortably at last, he
may rejoice at the coming of the bridegroom; but because they were in a
slumber, there was a cry, therefore as the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. 7.
The end of all things is at hand, therefore be sober, and watch unto prayer;
the Apostle brings this as an Argument: so I may say, the e^^ of all things is
at hand, therefore be sober, and watch; as a Traveller, when the day is almost
spent, and he has a great way to go, he puts spurs to his Horse, and rides the
faster; so the end of all things is at hand, therefore we had need to be the
more diligent and watchful, that we may have all things ready; the end comes
upon us: We have had the Gospel a long time, and God knows how soon we shall
have an end thereof; therefore how ought we to be careful, as a man that is to
write a Letter, may be at first he is something careless, and writes his lines
something broad, but when he comes near to the end, and has a great dea! to
write, he writes his lines close, and crowds them together: So now when we are
coming toward an end, we cannot look that God should alvvayes strive with us,
we should now therefore labor to write close, and to make our Duties thick,
and to be enquiring after Grace, wheresoever we come, we think the time is
long, but we may justly fear it is shorter then we imagine; as when an
hourglass is almost out, a man that sits below, will think there is a great
deal to run, but the sand is hollow, and is run out before a man is aware; so
the Lord so carries himself toward people, that they may think there is a
great deal of Patience more, and a great deal of Mercy more to be extended
toward them, but when all comes to all, they shall find it lies hollow, and
will be out before they are aware.

Secondly, Consider how sickly and diseased our Because our souls are sickly.
Souls are; how apt they are to fall into sin: Sickly men are most careful; Now
our Souls are sick of sin, sick of Pride, sick of Covetousness, and
Earthly-mindednesse, easily carried away with the sins of the times; they are
sick of pronenesse to do evil, and indisposednesse to that which is good,
therefore we had need to watch over our souls, we had need be our own Porters.
Matthew. 13. 34. our Savior Christ does compare every Christian to a Porter; The
Lord of the house takes a great journey, and commands the Porter to watch: We
should all be Porters, and keep the gates of our Souls, for we are always in
danger.

Thirdly, Consider that God has awakened many We are already awakened.
of us already, and therefore it is a miserable thing for us to sleep again:
wicked and ungodly men that were never converted, and healed, and awakened, and
wrought upon, they go to Hell and damnation in a sleepy security; but when a
man has been once awakened, and has shaken off sleep, and God has made him
look about him, to see how he might be saved; if this man fall a sleep again,
it is a most miserable thing; the latter end of that man will be worse then his
beginning.

Fourthly, Consider the badnesse of the Times, Badness of the times, and
carelessness of the most.
and Places, and Families we live in; they are all secure, and therefore we had
need be so much the more vvatchful; and you know it is a very hard thing, for
a man not to do as others do; therefore the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. would not
have them sleep as others do, as who should say, Others do so; and therefore
you have so much the more need to look to your selves, that you may not do as
others do.

THE NEW BIRTH.
Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, but that which is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit.
MY Purpose is to speak of the several Works of Gods holy Spirit in the hearts
and minds of his chosen; they are Gods peculiar people, and therefore he will
work greater Mercies for them, then for any else: Now the First grand
distinguishing work of the Holy Ghost in the Elect is Regeneration; he is the
Author of Spiritual life in them, they are born of him, though by nature they
are born of the flesh, and so are flesh; and in that estate can never enter
into the kingdom of God: yet when the Spirit of God comes to regenerate them,
they come to be Spirit, they come to have a new life, and the Spirit of God
gives it them: it is true that Christ is the Author of this life, he procured
it by his death, he quickens whom he will, as he told his Disciples, Joh. 14.
19. Because I live, ye shall live also: Life is derived by Christ to all the
Members of Christ; for as all in Adam died, Adam is the general root of all, in
his loins, and by him they come to be dead in sin; so Christ is the Second
Adam, and all that are in his loins, all that are in him, he is a quickening
Spirit to them, 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the
second Adam was made a quickening Spirit: Christ is the second Adam, and is a
quickening Spirit to all that are in him; God the Father has appointed him to
be the Prince of Life, as Peter tells his Hearers, Act. 3. 15. The Lord Jesus
Christ, he is the Prince of life to all the people of God: and therefore Saint
John says, He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has
not life, 1 John 5. 12. He is the Father of this new Birth, and he is the daily
and continual Father of it: He is not a Father for one, or two, or diverse
years, but Isa. 9. 6. he is called, an everlasting Father, to regenerate a
people to God; and he does it by his Resurrection, 1 Pet. 1. 3. This must needs
be granted, That Christ must be the Author of this new Life.

Now you will say, Then why is it attributed to the Spirit? The Text gives it
to the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost; now if Christ be the Author Regeneration
attributed to the spirit.
of this new Birth, and the giver of this new Life, and God the Father has
appointed him to be so, Why is it then here said, That the Spirit does it?

I Answer: It is given to the Spirit for Three Because Christ does it by the
spirit.
Reasons:

First, Because Christ does it by the Spirit: Whatsoever Christ does without,
he does it by the Spirit: when he cast out Devils here upon Earth, he did it by
his Spirit; all the outward Works that he wrought, he wrought them by his
Spirit; and therefore the Spirit is called, the Finger of God, Luke 11. 20. Now
if Christ do this Work by his Spirit, if he do Regenerate all his people by
his own Spirit, there is reason why they should be said to be born of the
Spirit.

Secondly, Another Reason is, Because though Spirit is the bond of union
between us and Christ
this life be all from Christ, it is he that begets it; (it is he that is the
soul of every Believer, as I may so speak) yet it is the Spirit that is the
Bond of Union; it is the Spirit that joins Christ and them together, it is the
Spirit that tyeth the knot, it is the Spirit that unites and puts them together
into one; though Christ be life, and eternal life, yet notwithstanding they are
all Aliens from Christ, they are all out of Christ, that the Spirit does not
join together with Christ: they that have not the Spirit of Christ, they are
none of his; they are all out of Christ, they are like dead branches out of the
Vine; it is the Spirit that is the bond of Union between Christ, and those that
are Christ's.

Thirdly, Another Reason is, Because the Spirit Because the spirit quickens the
word whereby we are born again.
quickens the Word, whereby this is done: The people of God, the thing that
they are born of again, it is the immortal seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1. 23. You
are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible; Now this seed is
sown in all men's hearts, scattered among all the Congregation, but yet it does
not Regenerate all the Congregation; the Reason is, where the Spirit comes,
that makes it fruitful, and that makes it to quicken the heart; and thus you
see the meaning of the words, That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

Now here are Two Points:

First, That the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost, Regenerates all the people
of God; whosoever is born again, is born of the Spirit.

The Second Point is this, That all that are Regenerate, all that are born of
the Spirit, they are Spirit; that is, they are spiritual, they are like the
Spirit.

The First is, That it is the Spirit of God, the That the spirit of God does
regenerate all the Saints.
Holy Ghost, that does Regenerate all the people of God; this is that which
makes them to be new Creatures, to be new men, to be altogether different from
that they were before; this is that which does distinguish them from
themselves, even as much as white from black; this is that which does alienate
them from the courses of the world; this is that which does make them to be
singular and odd fellows, as if they were of another mould; this makes them
lead a different kind of life, and follow a different kind of way from all
their neighbors, because the Spirit of God works in them; as Ishmael and Isaac,
though Ishmael was born after the flesh, yet Isaac was born after the Spirit,
as the Apostle alludes, Gal. 4. 23. that is, one took one kind of course, the
other another; one was born one way, the other another way; the Spirit begat
one, the Flesh the other; and this made Ishmael to persecute Isaac, because
Isaac could not abide his courses; they were of different Natures and
Dispositions, one was born after the Spirit, the other after the Flesh.

Now here be Six Things I would show unto you:

First, What Regeneration is.

Secondly, Why it is so called.

Thirdly, Wherein it consists.

Fourthly, The Reasons why the Spirit of God only works this work.

Fifthly, How he works it.

And Lastly, The Uses.

First, What Regeneration is: And it is thus What Regeneration is.
much, namely, The renewing of the whole man, and by degrees completed after
the Image of God in Jesus Christ: This is Regeneration; and there be Five
Things to be opened in it:

First, That it is the renewing of a man; It is A Renewing.
not every change, there may be abundance of changes and alterations, and yet a
man for the main may be the same man he is; a man may be changed from a
Drunkard to be sober; from an Adulterer to be chaste; yet still he is the same
man he was before, though there be changes wrought in him: but Regeneration is
the renewing of a man, the making of a man another man, as the Apostle speaks,
2 Cor. 5. 17. Old things are passed away, and all things are become new: The
Lord does take away the old frame, and the old affections, and the old
inclinations, the old acquaintance, the old course and conversation; all these
things pass away, and the Lord puts in new things in the room thereof, till
all things become new; thus it is in this work, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.
5. According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; the Lord removes the old rubbish, and puts a new
fabric in the room; as a Goldsmith, he takes a vessel of dishonor and melts
it, and makes it a vessel of honor; God does undo the old workmanship, and
makes a new: as David says, Create in me, O Lord, a clean heart, etc. Psalm.
51. 10. David thought he had lost all, therefore he prays to God that he may
be new cast, that he may be taken all to pieces, as a VVatch-maker takes a
VVatch that is out of order, he takes it all to pieces, and sets it together
anew again; so he prays God to deal with him, he had lost all in sense and
feeling, and would have God make him a new workmanship, it is called the
renewing of a man, Ezekiel 11. 19. there is an excellent place, I will give them a
new heart, etc. The Lord puts out, and he puts in, even just as a Suister does
when she works cutworks, she puts out the cloths own threads, and puts in
needle work; so the Lord puts out the old heart, and puts in a new heart; he
takes out that which was stark naught, and puts in that which is good and
agreeable to his mind: the old heart is corrupt, and the old man is stark
naught, there is nothing good in it; these the Lord takes out, and puts in all
new: A man is altogether naught and reprobate before; what poor creatures are
all people that are not Regenerate, they are all proud, and vain, and foolish,
and wordly, and earthly, and harden their hearts, and are careless of Gods
ways, they have no fear of God before their eyes, they are altogether rotten,
how ill-favouredly do they pray? how worldly do they go on in their callings?
how unfruitfully do they come to Church? they are all rotten and refractory,
they do nothing that right is; now when the Spirit of God does make them up, he
puts out all old things, and makes them new. This is the First thing,
Regeneration, is the renewing of a man.

Secondly, As it is the renewing of a man, so it A Renewing of the whole man
is the renewing of the whole man: It is not only in some things, for Saul was
another man in some sense; but Regeneration is the renewing of the whole man,
as the Appostle says, The God of peace sanctify you throughout, in body,
soul, and Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. it is a work upon the whole man; our Savior
Christ compares it to leaven, which a woman took and leavened the whole Lump:
It is like unto Original sin, as Original sin infects the whole man; so
Regeneration does repair and renew the whole man; it is as general and
universal, as original sin: the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians.
5. 9. It is in all goodness; in the goodness of a man's mind, and in the
goodness of a man's affections, in the goodness of the inclination and
disposition, in the goodness of the whole man; the fruit of the Spirit is in
all goodness; indeed it begins in the goodness of the mind, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 4. 23. Be renewed in the Spirit of your minds: Where he calls
upon them for this new work; Put off the old man (says he) and be renewed in
the Spirit of your minds; that is the First thing, when a man has a new mind
given unto him, a new knowledge put into his understanding, a man is renewed in
knowledge, Col. 3. 10. This is the first thing, when God renews a man's
knowledge and apprehension of things, when a man begins to know the plagues of
his own heart, and the evils of all his own ways, now a man begins to see
through these things, and now he begins to see the ways of God; and to dive
deep beneath the irksomeness of them, to know the amiablenesse of them, the
sweetness of them: the delights of them are hidden from a man, so long as he
is unregenerate; but when God does begin to regenerate a man, now he begins to
discover them to him, that a man sees what they are: he could say before that
the ways of God were good, but he could never taste and find them so; but when
a man is renewed, now he sees the luster and amiablenesse of them: so also, he
sees the ugliness of sin, this was covered before, sin deceived the heart,
and carried him after it; but now sin begins to be laid stark naked, and a man
sees the deformity of it, here begins Regeneration in the mind; for the
understanding is the key of the Soul, the key of all the Faculties of the Soul,
it is like a sluice or flood-gate, pull up that, and the water goes out and runs
all abroad; so when the Lord does pluck up this sluice, and lift up a man's
heart, and mind, and understanding: now the waters of life flow into the soul:
this is against them now, that have plenty of knowledge, and yet
notwithstanding go no further, that have new minds, and old wills and
affections, there is a new brain, but an old heart; this is not regeneration,
regeneration (it is true) begins in the understanding, but it runs along in all
the soul, it descends into heart and mind, and all the whole man; and therefore
it is called a new creature; whosoever is in Christ is a new creature; Behold,
I make all things new, (says Christ) Rev. 21. 5. As Regeneration is the
renewing of a man, so it is the renewing of the whole man.

Thirdly, It is done by degrees: Though Regeneration By degrees perfected.
be in all parts, yet it is not in all degrees at once; the spirit of God does
renew more and more, and beget a man more and more; there is of the old birth a
great while, but he does eat it out more and more, as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 3. 18. And we all with open face, etc. Mark here, he calls this change
glory, because it is a glorious creature; as long as a man is not renewed, he
is a base creature; but when he is renewed, he is a glorious creature: Now
says he, when the Lord does this, he does it from glory to glory, from one
degree to another; as this is done by the spirit of God, so he does it more; he
proceeds from little beginnings to greater perfections; it was not so with
Adam, God made him in his full stature at the first, he was a man at the first
dash; but this new creature, is as a Babe conceived in the Womb, it begins
there, and so grows up; As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word.
1 Pet. 2. 2. He is a babe first, and so grows, though it be not a starveling
but grovvs, yet it is but a vveak one at first, and must grow and come to its
strength more and more: it is like a good husband that begins with a little,
and arises up to a great estate in the end; so Regeneration, makes a man a
good husband; puts a little stock into his hands, and makes him rise to a great
matter.

Fourthly, This is according to the Image of According to Gods Image.
God: It is not all kind of Renewing: A man may have a new work that he had not
before; but the work of regeneration, as it is a renewing, so it is a renewing
after the image of God; man had quite and clean lost the Image of God, which
consisted in Righteousness and Holiness; Now when Gods Spirit comes to
regenerate a man, that renews him according to this Image: As the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 4. 24. That ye put on the new man which is created after his
image: and how is that? In Righteousness and Holiness. As it is in Nature,
though a man be never so godly when he begets a man, he begets him after his
image, as he is by nature polluted and unclean: Genesis 5. 3. So Adam begat Seth
in his own image: so when the Spirit begets a man again, he begets him after
his own image, he makes him merciful as his heavenly Father is merciful, Luke
6. 36. and perfect as he is perfect. Matthew. 5. ult. There are none regenerate
and born again, but those that are like God, the Lord stamps upon them his own
similitude, and makes them like to himself.

Fifthly, This is the Image of God in Jesus In Jesus Christ
Christ; who is the express image of his Father; he is the pattern after which
this frame is made: nay, God did order it should be so from eternity, Romans 8.
29. Whom he did fore*know, he did predestinate, that they should be conformed
to the image of his Son: It Is true, this similitude is not presently made out,
it is but by halves as it were; it is but a poor first draught, and never
perfect in this life, but it shall be made perfect, 1 John 3 2, 3. We know when
he appears, we shall be like him, and shall see him as he is; then we shall be
perfectly like him, and see him as he is, and know him as he is; as Paul says,
Col. 3. 2, 3. You are dead, and your life is hid in Christ, etc. Here the work
is hardly come to its glory, there is a great deal of baseness and old rubbish
still, but it shall be glorious before God has done, it shall come to be
perfect then, in the mean time, it is but by degrees; but the work of
regeneration puts a man to go to Christ, and believe in Christ; You that follow
me in Regeneration, etc. says our Savior, Matthew. 19. 28. When a man is
regenerate, regeneration puts a frame into a man's heart to be like unto Christ,
and to follow his steps, and his example, that as he has done, so he may do
more and more: this is the work of regeneration, That the Spirit of God works
in Gods people, conforming them to the Image of Christ: Yea, Regeneration does
more than repair a man, more than reduce a man to that estate wherein he was in
Adam's loins before the Fall; it is the ingrafting of a man into Christ, and
the estating a man into the Merits and Privileges of the Lord Jesus Christ, it
is a greater matter, then the bare restoring of a man to that which he lost, it
is the restoring of a man to a better estate; this differences it from
Sanctification. Thus we see what Regeneration is.

Now the Second Thing is, Why it is so called? Why called Regeneration.
Why this same blessed work of the renewing of the whole man after the Image of
God in Christ Jesus is called Regeneration. There be Two Reasons of it.

First, To show us how marvellously we are corrupt To show the great Corruption
of Nature.
by Nature: Until the Spirit of God take us in hand, a man is quite rotten,
there is no soundness left, there is nothing in him will serve, it is not a
little melting will serve the turn, it is not a little plaistering, or
patching, or piecing will do the deed: though there be a thousand changes in a
man, yet if a man be not another man, if he be not a new creature, it is to no
effect, it will never bring a man into the kingdom of God; what says Christ,
Joh. 3. 3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God: As who should say, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, a man is all to shatters, all to pieces, all rotten, and unless he
be born again, and made a new creature, it is impossible he should enter into
the kingdom of God; though a man be never so much altered, he is not in the
estate of Grace till he be a new man, till the Lord has given him a new frame,
and a new inclination: except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God, he cannot see the kingdom of Grace: that is the first dowry of the kingdom
of Grace, to give a man a new Being that he never had before: a natural man is
just like an old rotten house, that has not one piece that will serve the
turn; but a man that will make it an habitable house, must take it all down to
the ground, and build it up from the ground: so it is here, there is not one
piece will serve the turn; though ye see admirable things in men, though they
seem excellent in the eyes of men, yet they will not serve the turn, they are
rotten and stark naught; there is an absence of all Good, Romans 7. 18. Nay
besides, there is an universal indisposition in a man, like to a thing that is
all rotten and marred, and can never be made up again, except it be made spick
and span new; and so it is with a man, he is altogether corrupt, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 1. from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, nothing
but bruises and putrified soars; take a man that is never so civil, and of fair
carriage, so long as he is not a new creature, this is nothing for the entering
into the kingdom of God, and being amiable in his sight: Nay, Genesis 6. 5. the
Text says, The thoughts of the heart of man are only evil continually, there
is nothing sound in a man, though he daily think of Grace, and think of God,
his thoughts cannot be said to be good, for the mind whereby he thinks of these
things is rotten, and unsavory; though he speaks of never so good things, the
same things the Saints of God speak of; though he does the same actions the
people of God do; though he hears the same Word, and receive the same
Sacraments, he cannot do them aright, they are abomination in Gods sight,
therefore when God regenerates a man, he must make him another man then he was
before. This speaks natures corruption. The work well expressed by the Name


Secondly, Because the things of Regeneration are admirably set out by way of
this similitude: Natural Generation is generally, sweetly answered in this
Work of Regeneration.

First, As a man cannot come into the World Father, both in Natural and
Spiritual Generation.
without Parents, but he must have a Father to beget him, so it is in this new
Birth: as in the other there was an earthly Father, so here is an heavenly
Father, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, Heb. 12. 9. How much rather shall
we be subjected to the Father of Spirits? There are two Fathers, an earthly
Father, the Father of the natural and corrupt man, and God the Father of our
spirits, that is the Father of our spiritual Nature, as many excellent Divines
do expound it: though it may be expounded the Father of our Souls; yet this is
more likely, because here is an opposition between the Father of the Flesh, and
the Father of the Spirits: God himself is the Father of this new work.

Secondly, Here is a Mother too; That Jerusalem A Mother in both.
which is from above, is the Mother of them all; they are all Zions Children,
here is the Womb that these new creatures lie in, Christ's Spouse; the Lambs
wife is their Mother; though the world hate them and her too, yet they love
her; nay, though the woman be thrown out into the wilderness, yet their hearts
run after her; the Regenerate only, are the true born, this is their Mother.

Thirdly, As it is in the Natural Birth, There is First, Conce^tion, and th^^
Birth.
a shaping in the Womb, before their is a coming into life: so it is here, as
the Apostle says, there is a conceiving of a man in the womb, before he is,
Gal. 4. 19. My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth, till Christ be
formed in you; There is the Conception; it is true, wicked men have many
Conceptions, but they do not bring forth, Christ is not formed in them; they
may have many stirrings that way, but they perish in the Birth; but Zion
travels and brings forth Children, Isa. 66. 8.

Fourthly, Again, As it is in the Natural Birth, ^ain accompa^ies both Births.
None is brought forth, without the pains of travel; So there be pains in this
new Birth, legal terrors which the Reprobate are killed with and die under,
but the godly come forth from under them safe and bettered.

Fifthly, Again, As it is in the first Birth, the Both come to a Being they had
^ot.
Child that is born and comes into the world, he comes from no Being to a
Being, from no Existency to an Existency; so it is hear in this new Birth,
those which were no people, are now made the people of God; those that had no
being in Christ, now have a being in him; they are come into a new world, into
a new heaven and a new earth; others live in this world, but they live in a new
world.

Sixthly, Again, As it is in the first Birth, A New Kindred follows both.
m^n comes to have Children, to have Brothers and Sisters; so in this Birth, a
man comes to have new Kindred, all the Godly in the world are of his
Consanguinity; though they be counted the Puritans of the Parish, yet they are
of his blood, and Christ himself is their Brother, and Abraham is their Father
(under God) and Sarah is their Mother; there is a new Kindred. Indeed here is
the difference, that the Children of the first Birth they are visible, and
their lives and courses are visible, and their alliance and kindred is visible,
and all that they are and do is visible; but the Children of the second Birth
are not visible: indeed their persons are visible as well as others, but their
life is an invisible thing; their excellency, their glory, this new creature in
them, this is invisible, it is like that River in Spain, which runs fourteen
miles under ground; whence they have a Proverb, That the Bridge over the River
is fourteen miles long: So there is a River in Surry that is just the like, it
runs under the ground invisible, they cannot see it; so these new creatures
they cannot be seen, their lives run under ground, their lives are hidden with
God, indeed their persons, and outward actions and courses may be seen; nay,
wicked men may do those very outward actions which they do; they may Pray
together with them, and come to Church together with them, but this new
workmanship they cannot see, that runs along under ground, the world sees it
not, neither can they know it, because they know not Christ the Author of it:
Thus we see the second thing, namely, Why it is so called.

Now the Third Thing is, Wherein this blessed Wherein Regeneration consists.
Work does consist: and it consists in Two Things, Joh. 1. 12. The Evangelist
says, To as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God.
Here be Two Things, and both these Regeneration consists of:

First, A Passive receiving of Christ, Whosoever receives him.

Secondly, An Active Title to God, as to a Father, They have power to become
the Sons of God.

First, A Passive receiving of Christ; To as Passive receiving Christ.
many as received him: for he came to his own and they received him not; his
own, even his own Elect, would not receive him, till he made them receive him;
but as many as received him, as many as were made passively to receive him, did
receive him also actively: so that this word implies the Passive receiving of
Christ; for there is none can receive any thing, except it be given him from
above, Joh. 3. 27. That is, except there be first a passive reception of it: It
is a strange phrase, No man can receive Christ, till Christ is first received
of him; he can never take Christ, till Christ come into him, till Christ
ingraft himself into him, and him into Christ; this is an act of God, it is a
passive receiving of Christ: the reason is, because all the Graces, and all the
Activity of Gods people flows from this, their Faith, and all; for Faith is an
act, which receives from the passive receiving of Christ, as Paul speaks to the
Colossians, As you have received Christ, so walk in him; Faith receives Christ,
that is an active receiving of Christ, but there was a passive receiving of
Christ first; for a man is in Christ first in a passive manner, before he is in
him in an active manner, Christ has taken him already, before he can take
Christ actually: This is the first Thing wherein this work of Regeneration
consists, The Passive receiving of Christ.

Secondly, It consists in having an active power ^n active po^^r to become
child of God.
and ^itle to become a Son of God; together with Jesus Christ; These are the
Two Things wherein Regeneration consists. I know many Divines branch it
otherwise, and make Regeneration to consist otherwise:

First, Of Mortification.

Secondly, Of Vivification.

First, Of Mortification: Whereby the Spirit kills the Lusts of the Flesh more,
as Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the
Spirit mortify the deeds of the Flesh, ye shall live: Mark; here is
Mortification, and it is done by the Spirit; if you through the spirit mortify
the deeds of the body.

Secondly, There is Vivification; that is, when a man does not only die unto
sin, but rise up again to a new life, Romans 6. 11. Likewise reckon ye your
selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
This is the other work of Vivification, when a man is made alive unto God, and
is made able by the spirit of God to be alive unto God, and to wind himself out
of death into life, by the spirit of the holy One. These be the Two Parts
whereof many Divines make Regeneration to consist of; but though they beat at
the same thing, yet I rather make them the Effects and Consequents of
Regeneration, as flowing from Regeneration; this passive work goes before, a
man never goes on in mortifying the works of the Flesh, and never raises
himself up to this heavenly life till he be Regenerated; so that regeneration
is the first ingrafting of a man into Christ, whereby he is alive, that he may
do all these things; it is a power put into him whereby he may believe and
repent, so that Believing, and Repentance, and Mortification, and Vivification
are acts of the new creature; a man must therefore be a new creature first, now
this is by Regeneration, so that Regeneration consists only of these Two
Things: First, Of a passive receiving of Christ the Son of God. Secondly, In
having a title to be the Son of God; and Regeneration does not only bring a
relative change, but a real change to a man: If you would know the meaning of
the phrase, A relative change is this, when there is a change in a man, from
that he was before; but the change does not lie in a man, as the change of
Justification: before he was not Justified, now he is Justified, the man is
changed, but he is not changed in himself, but it stands only in Gods
imputation; he is not just in himself, but by imputation just. Now the real
change is, when God does purify and make up the defects in a man more and
more, that is a real change; so that I say, Regeneration is not only a relative
change, whereby God accounts a man as a child; but it breeds a real change in a
man, it gives a man a spiritual Being; for the Spirit of God when it comes to
work this work, is a fruitful principle of all good in that man more and more:
Therefore the Apostle says, The fruits of the Spirit, are joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. Gal. 5. 22. It Is true, the Spirit does not bring forth
these Graces till after a man is regenerate, but by working that Regeneration,
which makes the soul to bring forth these fruits, and making the heart an
honest heart, and so a good ground to bring forth these seeds; the Spirit is a
fruitful principle of all good in that man. Thus you see the Third Thing, viz.
Wherein Regeneration consists.

Now the Fourth Thing is the Reasons of this Reasons why the Spirit works
Regeneration.
Point, Why the Spirit of God does work this work of Regeneration.

The First Reason is, Because it is merely according It is the good pleasure of
God
to the Will of God: Man has no power at all, man has no activity, it is
merely at the pleasure of God, whether he will do it or no; Jam. 1. 18. Of his
own Will begat he us; he only had an hand in it, he only did it, and it was
merely at his good Will and Pleasure, he might have chosen whether he would
have done it or no; it is no fruit of our liberty, it is no brood of our
breeding, it is merely the free act of God in a man, Joh. 6. 44. No man comes
to me except the Father draws him; There Christ shows it, this bringing of
a man to be in Christ, it cannot be from any man, except the Father draw him;
except he send forth his heavenly Spirit, he can never come to Christ; all our
sufficiency is from God, we cannot so much as think a good thought, we cannot
renew our thoughts, we cannot renew our inclinations, or our wills, or our
affections; we can do nothing of our selves, it is only his work; therefore
seeing it is such a special work* it must be only the Spirit of God that must
work it; it is a glorious work, a supernatural work; this new Birth, is such a
Birth as comes from above, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power, etc. says the text, that is, all that are born of God, they are
brought forth in the day of Gods power, in the day wherein God is pleased to
put forth his power in them; therefore they are called the seed of Christ, Isa.
53. 10. They are his seed, but unless he begets them by his Spirit, they can
never be so; Therefore if we consider the greatness of the work, it shows
plainly, it must needs be the effect of the Will of God, and his good Pleasure
toward man, and therefore must be wrought by the Spirit.

Secondly, Another Reason is, Because it is not No other agent can do it.
a work of this world: It is a work of another world, it is none of the
creatures of this life, it is beyond the sphere of the activity of any natural
agent, they cannot reach it, Joh. 1. 13. Which were born not of the will of the
flesh, nor of blood, etc. It is not of man's Will, he cannot so much as Will it,
or Desire it effectually, he cannot wish it truly, nay, his heart had rather
have the world; nay, says he, It is not of the Will of the Flesh, that is, a
man may go and beget another Child in the world, because it is of the Will of
the Flesh, it is in the power of the Will of the Flesh, Gods power going along
with him, but this is not so, whatsoever a man be, though he has never so many
excellent parts, it is not in the Will of the Flesh to do it: Then again, it is
not of Blood, it is no terrene or earthly thing, this new creature is otherwise
made, than any new creature in the world besides, therefore he concludes, it is
only born of God, it is God only that is the great Author of this great work,
it descends down merely from above.

Thirdly, Because it is so far from being Man is totally against it of himself.
wrought by any power in man, or any counsel in man, or any endeavors in man,
it is so far from that, as that a man is totally against it; A man is an enemy
unto it, a man has reluctance and repugnancy against it, he would not be
regenerate; when a man does think he desires heaven, and to be regenerated of
God, he does apprehend Regeneration in a wrong way, and heaven in a wrong way,
so as he apprehends it, he does Will it; he thinks of heaven as of a fine
place, and a place full of pleasure, and therefore desires it, but that he
should always be with God, that he should always be praising and thinking of
God, and minding of God, and have his heart weaned from all other things, and
set it on God, this is heaven, but he hates these things, and so hates heaven,
so he Wills that which he apprehends to be Regeneration; but Regeneration, is
when a man has a new heart, and when he is a new man: he was wordly before,
but he is now brought to be spiritual, he was proud before, but he is now come
to be humble, but the heart cannot abide this, therefore let the Lord fling in
abundance of throws into a natural man's heart, to begin some preparatory work
this way, to make a man begin to look out toward heaven, he flings all away,
he is weary of them quickly; as a man at a Sermon, perhaps may have throws
concerning the new Birth, but the corruption of his heart will throw all way,
he cannot endure them, they are contrary to the corruption of a man's nature;
nay, when God comes to work upon his own people, what a deal of pleading is
there with the world, the flesh, and the Devil, that they may not be cast out:
Therefore when Peter saw that through the grace and power of God, this work was
wrought in those he wrote unto, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Mark how he speaks, Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead: He lifts up his hands to heaven, and blesses God that ever this
work was wrought; he saw so much ado, and such a stir, and such a deal of
opposition; this is a plain sign that it is not of man, it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God which shows mercy, Romans 9. 16.
Neither can man Will, neither can he run, neither go, nor stir toward it; nay,
though God make him go, how apt is he to laggar in the way, and draw back
again? So you see the Fourth Thing, Why it must needs be the Spirits Work.

The Fifth Thing is, How the Spirit of God How the Spirit works Regeneration.
works this Work. It is after an unspeakable manner: Who can declare the noble
acts of the Lord? The works of God in Nature are mavelous. David himself,
when he looked upon his natural Birth, the Conception of him in the Womb of his
Mother, he wondered at it, Psalm. 139. 14. That was a wonderful work, how much
more is this unspeakable, and unutterable? as it is said of our Savior Christ,
Who can declare his generations? So may I say in a lower sense, of this Work,
Who can declare this Regeneration of his people? But yet thus far the Scripture
does authorize, and warrant us to go.

First, That he does it by the word of Life; By By the Word of Life.
the Gospel of Salvation, by the Preaching of it, or otherwise according as he
pleases, that is the immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, etc. And as Paul
says to the Corinthians, Though you have ten thousand instructers, yet you
have not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. As who should say, You are begotten and born again, and
you are born again by the Word, and I was an instrument under God of your new
Birth, by the Word which I have Preached among you; and therefore, 1 Timothy 1. 2.
he calls Timothy, His own Son; So Tit. 1. 4. he calls him, His Son in the
Faith: that is, he was an instrumental Father under God, by the Doctrine of
Faith, to bring him to be a Child of God: so that I say it is done by the Word,
Of his own Will has he begotten us by the Word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. The
Spirit of the Lord sanctifies the Word when he is pleased to convert a man, the
Word shall show him what a miserable creature he is by nature; it shows him
that flesh and blood cannot enter into the kingdom of God; it shows him that
he is utterly forlorn in himself, and past all recovery, and shows him where
life is to be had* namely, in Jesus Christ, discovering his worth, and
excellency, and necessity, and that all Grace and good is in him, and shows him
the freedom of this gracious offer: Thus the Spirit of God, when he propounds
the Word to the soul, holds it before the eyes and conscience, and sanctifies
it, and puts a power into it, to enter deep into the soul, that it may Conceive
in the soul.

Secondly, The Lord does it by an unspeakable By a secret and supernatural
power.
working: There is a Divine work which the Lord works; The spirit comes into
the soul after the manner of water; as Christ says, Joh. 3. Except a man be
born again of water and the holy Ghost, etc. that is, unless he be born of the
spirit, which works in the spirit of a man, as water does in working upon a
foul thing. Now what this working is we cannot tell; but we can tell you the
effects of it: whereas the soul was rotten and naught before, and impotent to
all good; now it begins to have a better disposition and a new power: and
whereas it did savor of the things of this life before, now it savours of the
things that are above: but this is a secret kind of working in the soul,
therefore it is called the washing, and the laver of it: And the Apostle
speaking of the Corinthians, what miserable creatures they were before
Regeneration, he named Drunkards, Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. and all manner of
filthy persons, Such were some of you (says he) before your Regeneration, but
now you are washed, and justified, and sanctified in the Name of Christ, 1 Cor.
6. 11. That same washing there, he means by that you are Regenerated; so that
Regeneration, it is a supernatural, an unspeakable kind of washing of the soul
by the holy Ghost, whereby the soul has its Corruption washed from it in part,
and made clean in part, and way made for all the Graces of Gods spirit to come
in now, and all the fruits of the spirit to be brought forth: Thus the Spirit
of God works this work, he works it in an ineffable manner by the word of Life
and by a secret kind of washing.

I come now to the Application of this Point: Use. 1. Of Confutation of
Pelagians, etc.
And first of all, If the Spirit of God be the Regenerater of Gods people, then
we may here see the error of the Papists, Pelagians, and others; That set up
the Will of man, and put any activity in the Reason, and Judgment, and Wisdom,
and Election of man; This Doctrine of theirs is unsound, and contrary to the
working of Gods holy spirit: If it be such a work as God sends his own Spirit
to do it; What man can do it? It is called Regeneration, and this shows it is
not of man: who is able to beget himself, and shape himself in the womb, and
dispose of his own body in the belly? Nay more, Can any man beget himself
again? The very name of again, shows that it is a work only of God, none but he
can do it; and we see it plainly, it is wrought no where, but where God himself
does it, and they that have it are able to speak it, that they did not choose
God, but God chose them; I was found of them that sought me not; all the souls
of his people will subscribe, That it was not in them that willed, or in them
that ran, but in God that showed mercy: It is God only that is the Author of
this thing, and none but he.

Secondly, Again, This should teach us to consider Information. Of our
continual need of the Spirit.
that we have always need of the Spirit of God: If the Spirit of God has
begotten us again, then we have always need of him* it is not in this as in
the first Birth; when the Child is born, though the Father be gone, the Child
may subsist; but it is not so here: but the Spirit of God as he begets a man,
so he is fain always to stand by him and bear him up, and give him supplies of
Grace from day to day: as it is with the Air, the Sun does not only enlighten
it, but it does every moment give light to it: for suppose the Sun should shine
four or five hours in the day, yet if the Sun should withold its light, the
Air would be dark presently; it is not as it is with Fire, let a man heat the
water, though he take away the Fire, the water will keep its heat a while
after; but do but withold the light of the Sun, and all is gone in the same
moment; so it is with this new Creature and the Spirit of God, he does dwell in
the soul, as the Sun in the Air; his presence warms the soul, and quickens the
soul, and inables a man to good, and gives a principle of life, and enables to
all actions that are good; therefore how should all Gods people carry
themselves toward this Spirit? They should have a care that they quench him
not, nor go against him in any particular.

The Third Use is for all Gods people, in whom Exhortation 1. Not to grieve the
Spirit.
God has wrought this blessed work; the Spirit of God has regenerated and
begotten them again. I say to all such persons, Let them endear this Spirit of
God, let them not grieve, or offend, or displease him, seeing he is such a
gracious worker in them: Ephesians. 1. 13. The Apostle makes this very Inference,
in whom after ye believed ye were sealed by the holy Spirit of Promise: that
is, whereby you were Regenerated; Regeneration is the first seal of the Spirit,
whereby he seals Gods good will to a man. Now, has the Spirit of God sealed
you? Then do not grieve him, nor cause him to take any indignation against you;
for though he will never depart from them, whom he has made new Creatures, yet
notwithstanding he may hide his face for a time if we displease him. Yea,
Consider, Will any natural Child willingly displease his loving Father? The
Spirit of God is thy Father, therefore we should have respect to him.

Again, This should be a Motive to Gods people, 2. To do any thing for God.
to be willing to do any thing for God; because he has made them, as David
says, Psalm. 100. 3. This very Consideration, That God has made us, and
re-made us, he has done that for us that all our own wits could never have
done, that the whole world has not the like (the Lord generally lets the whole
World sink in ruin and damnation) should be a Motive to you, to be willing to
serve him gladly, and to call upon his Name, to be ready pressed to execute any
of his Commands, to enter into his presence upon all occasions, seeing it is he
that has made us, and not we our selves.

To them that are Unregenerated: Here we see 3. To the Unregenerate to pray for
the Spirit.
where to have Regeneration; it is only in God, and in the Spirit of God, to
renew a man, and make a man up again: as David prayed when he had the Spirit,
Lord, take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. 11. So when a man has not
the Spirit of God, he should pray to God, Lord, Give thy holy Spirit to me, and
send down thy holy Spirit into my heart, that may work this work in me. But it
may be many of you will think that you expect this, and desire it, and wish it,
and use some means. I Answer, Then show it by thy coming unto God for it, from
day to day; will any man say, That Noah did expect that God should deliver him
from the Deluge, if he had not took that course which God appointed? If he had
not built an Ark, certainly we may justly say, That he did not look that God
would deliver him. Therefore it is said of Noah, That as he did expect that God
should keep him; so being warned of God, he built an Ark, etc. Heb. 11. 7. So
when a man shall say, That he looks that God should deliver him from his
natural estate and condition, that God should renew him, by his Grace and
goodness, yet if a man will not prepare an Ark: if when a man is Commanded and
directed by God what to do, yet he will not come to God, to do that which
should be done for him, these men do but deceive their own souls, and treasure
up indignation against themselves. I remember the story of Moses, Exodus 14.
when the Children of Israel were in Pi-hahiroth, and the Egyptians were behind
them, and the Mountains were on the side that they could not pass, and the Sea
was before them, and there was notable crying out, Oh! that God would deliver
them, now they were dead men, the Egyptians were come out to destroy them, the
Mountains were on the side, and the Sea before them: Now mark what an Answer
God gives to their cry; cause the people to go forward, you keep a crying to
me, I pray go forward, you are not yet at the red sea, but go to the red sea,
and when you are there, then cry to me; you are idleing, and lazing, and
mistrusting me; though the red Sea be before them, yet cause them to come
thither, and when they are there, then cry for help to me: So thou say thou
desire that God would Regenerate thee, and quicken thee, and turn thy heart,
and vouchsafe thee his holy Spirit, do you so? I say it is very well, the thing
is very good, but if the desire be sincere, you will take that course God bids
you, art thou come to the utmost difficulty? Are not many things to be done
which thou refusest to do? Must thou not seek God, more and more carefully? Go
forward, go forward, if thou meanest to have help and aid from God, otherwise
it is in vain: if thou would go on in the ways of God, and do what God
Commands thee, thou should be quickened and renewed.

Fourthly, Another Use is for Examination: Of Examination, whether regenerated,
or no.
To examine our selves whether the Word of God has wrought this for us, yea or
no. And the first sign is this, If thou be born again, if thou have First
Sign, When doing good is natural*
this new Nature, then it is natural to thee to do good duties, to follow good
courses, and to yield obedience to the commandments of God; it is not enough
for a man to do good duties: a natural man, an unregenerate man may do them,
but whether is it natural to thee? A proud man may do the actions of humility,
a proud man may pull off his Hat, and give the time of the day, and speak
meanly of himself; a proud man may suffer another to do him wrong, and put up
base language, he may do these things, but the man is a proud man still, he
has no humble nature; but the question is, whether it be thy nature to do
this? May be thou do these things for fear, or some by-respects: A worldly
man may speak of heavenly things, but is thy nature heavenly? A man may think
of God, but is thy nature godly? Here is the thing, If a man be regenerate,
there is Grace got into a man's nature, Jer. 31. 33. when God regenerates his
people, he says, He will write his laws in their inward parts* he does not
only say they shall do these duties, but their very hearts shall carry them,
their very hearts shall go to a Sermon, their very souls shall go about the
duties of God; as it is with the fire, water may heat, but not by nature; but
it is the nature of fire to heat: So if a man be Regenerate, it is natural to
him to do good duties, Romans 2. 14. A man by nature may do the things commanded
in the Law: but here is the question, Whether he does them with this new
nature, this heavenly nature? The old creature may hear, and pray, and be
sober, and moral, for by nature the Heathen did the things contained in the
Law: But if a man be Regenerated, as he does the things contained in the Law
and Gospel, so he does them with a new nature; as Deuteronomy. 5. 29. when the
Children of Israel had spoken admirable speeches; All that the Lord says to us
we will do; they made goodly professions: now mark what God says, Oh that
there were an heart in this people to keep my commandments! As who should say,
These are very good words, and I know that you think what you speak; but Oh
that this were written in your hearts, that this were natural to you; this will
not hold, your hearts are not carried this way.

Secondly, If the Spirit of God has Regenerated The heart's a good soil for
Grace.
a man, then the heart begins to be a good soil for Grace, and the heart begins
to be suitable, so that the heart is fit for Grace; A natural heart is not a
proper soil for Grace: As if a man should bring a Plant from Spain, and set it
here in England, it cannot thrive, unless a man meet with a soil that is fit
for it: So Grace, if it come into the heart, and the heart is not a soil for
it, it can never thrive there, unless the heart be Regenerated, and unless
there be a new nature: there may be admirable things in a natural man,
excellent good purposes, and resolutions; God may come to him, as a Passenger
that lodges for a night, but he is gone the next morning; he may come as a
sojourner, to endure for a while, but here is no dwelling for him, these
resolutions, and purposes, and desires cannot last long, that heart will
squander them away; it is like the putting of a new piece into an old garment,
Matthew. 9. 16. When a man puts a new piece into an old garment, a fine new
purpose into an old heart, a new good desire into an old mind, the rent will be
worse, for that man will return back again, and will have his lusts, and will
be worse then he was before, for the heart is not able to hold these: it is
true, in the best hearts of Gods people, is a great deal of unnatural soil for
Grace; but there is some of this good new soil, that Grace now can hold, and
shall hold, so that the gates of Hell shall not prevail; it is not for any
goodness of the heart, but for the goodness of Grace in the heart: there may
be transient acts of goodness in a wicked man, as Prayer, and suchlike
transient acts; but when the transient act is done, there is a conclusion: but
nature is permanent and an enduring thing, it is not only to come to Prayer,
and then be dead; to come to a Sermon, and then be dead; but it is a permanent
thing, a man is godly between Prayer and Prayer, and religious between Sermon
and Sermon, and in all his ways he sets himself to be good, and well disposed
all his days. God complains against those that give him transient acts of
goodness, Oh Ephraim! what shall I do to thee, that art as a morning cloud,
etc?

Thirdly, If the Spirit of God has made a He cannot live in Sin.
man a new nature, then he cannot live in sin, as the Apostle says, 1 John 3.
9. He that is born of God, sins not, etc. he is born of God, and it is
against his nature to go on in sin; a man cannot go against his nature; it is
true, a man for a little time may go against his nature, as Moses though his
nature was mild and meek, yet he was transported very much, Hear ye rebels, and
shall I bring water out of this rock? he was carried away in his passion, but
he could not hold on in that strain, for it was against his nature; so if a man
be overcome with any other sin, yet when a man is renewed, as a Spring clears
it self of the mud, so this new nature is so opposite and contrary to sin, that
he cannot go on in sin.

Fourthly, If the Spirit of God has wrought It is pleasant to do the will of
God.
this work in thee, then it is pleasant to thee to do the will of God; Look
what a man is naturally inclined to, it is mavelous pleasant to him to follow
it: As for example, If a man's nature be gluttonous, how pleasing is it for him
to satisfy his Appetite? And if a man's nature be given to Intemperance, how
pleasing is Excess unto him? And if a man's nature be proud, how pleasing is it
to be flattered, and spoken fair, to be reverenced and respected at every word?
A man loves these things a-life, because they suit with his nature: So if a man
have a new nature, and partakes of the divine nature, how pleasing will Prayer
be? And how pleasing will the Word be? how pleasing will Counsels and
Exhortations be? how pleasing to be corrected and reproved for sin? How sweet
are thy words unto my mouth, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 103. As our
Savior says, Joh. 4. 34. It is my meat and drink to do his Will that sent me:
So I have longed for thy Commandments (says David) I have loved to know
wherein I might glorify thee, and be serviceable to thee: Now when it is
irksom for a man to obey, he cannot abide strictness and preciseness, and he
counts it a disgrace to him to deny himself in such a thing, and he goes to
duty like a Bear to the Stake, and he has no forwardness, it is a sign he
has no new nature.

Fifthly, If a man be born again, Grace will Grace gets the upper hand.
get the upper hand; when a man meets with lusts, and concupiscence of Soul,
though they may exceedingly bear a man down for a time, and transport a man
beyond himself, yet in the end Grace will have the victory and prevail, 1 John
5. 4. He that is born of God, overcomes the world, all temptations of the
world, all pul-backs and drawbacks, he that is born of God, he will have the
mystery; so 1 John 5. 18. the Apostle says, The wicked one cannot touch a man
that is born of God, that is, with a deadly touch, as he touches wicked men;
he touches wicked men so, as he infects them, and poisons them, and carries
them away.

Sixthly, He that is born of God, he is one that He loves the people of God.
loves the Children of God: If there be any Saint in the parish, any Child of
God, there is his affection and bowels most; I speak of spiritual affections,
for otherwise Grace does not take away nature, but set it up, having refined
it. But I speak of spiritual love, if a man be born of God himself, he loves
all others that are born of God, 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God; and he that loves him that begat, loves him also
that is begotten. If a man loves God that begets, he must needs love them that
are begotten of God.

Lastly, If a man be born again, then a man He loves Spiritually to profit
others.
labors to do good, and to spread the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, to the glory
of God: He loves to be communicating that he has; he that has this Spirit,
loves to be breathing upon others, and would fain seatter his sweet things up
and down where he goes, and would fain leave a sweet savor of himself
wheresoever he comes; this is the nature of him that is born again and
regenerate, to beget others: That man is unworthy to be born, by whom another
is not born, as we say; when a man is born again, he labors to beget others to
God, to be generative, and fruitful, and abundant in doing good up and down, he
labors to beget his Children, and Family, to God; and to draw his neighbors
and acquaintance unto God: he would fain have people know Christ, and obey him,
and submit unto him. Thus you see the signs whereby we may know, Whether we be
born again, or no?

CHRISTIANS Ingrafting into CHRIST.
1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Grecians, whether we be bond, or free, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit.
WE have spoken of Regeneration, which is a work of the Spirit, and the first
implanting of a man into Christ: Now we come to speak of a new work of the
Spirit, The implanting of a man into the Church, the Body of Christ, when the
Spirit makes a man to be a Member of the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ; and
this is done all under one; for being once ingrafted in Christ, we come to be
Fellow Members with all those that are Christ's; and this we have here in the
Text, By one Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, etc. The Apostles
meaning is this, All we that are the people of God, we are all one Body; and
the efficient cause of this, is the Spirit of God, it is by the Spirit that we
are made thus, and the instrumental cause, though it be not here expressed, yet
it is employed, and that is Faith; and the means of confirming this Faith are
the Two Sacraments: First, The Sacrament of Baptism, we are baptized into the
same Body. Secondly, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, intimated in one part
of it, namely, the Cup, which is put for the whole, and are made all to drink
of the same Cup, we are all of one and the self same Body; as many as are in
Christ, are endued with the same Spirit; not one endued with one Spirit, and
another endued with another Spirit, but by one Spirit we are Baptized into one
Body; our Baptism is one, and our Food one; it is altogether one, though our
condition in the world be never so different, bond, or free, though our
Country, and Nation, and Parish be never so various one to another, one of
one, and another of another, Jews and Gentiles, we are all baptized into one
Body, and this is done by one and the self-same Spirit.

Now to speak of the putting of a man into the Body of Christ: We will show you
these Five things.

First, What this Body of Christ is.

Secondly, What this putting of a man into it is.

Thirdly, That this is done by the Spirit of God.

Fourthly, How the Spirit of God does it: How a man is made part of the Body of
Christ.

Fifthly, The Application of the Point.

For the First, What is this Body of Christ, What this Body is.
which the Spirit of God does ingraft his people into? In a word, It is the
invisible Church of God: which is a peculiar company of men and women, out of
all Nations under heaven predestined to eternal life, gathered together by
the Word, and made all one in Christ: This is the Body of Jesus Christ: so that
here are Five Things that are to be opened.

First, It is the Church of God; as the Apostle The invisible Church of God.
says, Col. 1. 18. He is the Head of the Body, the Church: So that the Church
is the Body of Christ, that same peculiar company of men and women, as Saint
Peter calls them, You are a chosen generation, a peculiar people, a royal
priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The Author to the Hebrews calls them, The Assembly of
the first born* Heb. 12. 23. And Christ himself calls them A little flock, in
regard of the multitude of other people that is in the world, and are not of
this brotherhood: Now I call this invisible, for though their persons, and
courses, and manner of life be seen and known, and they may be known who they
are, yet all of them were never known, nor ever will be; there may be more then
we can tell, and fewer then we think of; The foundation of God is sure, having
this seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord had seven
thousand in Israel that had not bent their knees to Baal, when Eliah could see
never a one: So that this is the First Thing; it is the invisible Church of God.

Secondly, It Is such a company as is gathered out Gathered out of all Nations.
of all Nations under heaven; As Saint John speaks, Rev. 7. 9. After this,
behold and lo, I saw a great multitude of all Nations, and Countries, and
Tongues, etc. Though it be a little Flock in respect of the Reprobate; yet it
is a great multitude considered in it self: and they stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, with long white Robes, and with Palms in their hands:
This white Robe is the Righteousness of Christ Jesus imputed, which begets
another Righteousness which is inherent in some measure; and the Palms in
their hands, is the sign of Victory over Sin, Death, and Hell; and this is a
great multitude* and it was out of all Cities, and Nations, and Kindreds of the
world; and therefore our Savior Christ, speaking of his own taking of this
company home unto himself at the last day, see what he speaks, Matthew. 24. 31.
He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather
his Elect from the four Winds, from the one end of the Earth to the other: The
Lord gathers here one, and there another, as a man would gather a Posie in a
Garden, here a flower, and there a flower. This is Another Thing in the Body of
Christ: it is a Company gathered out of all Nations, and People, and Places, at
one time, or other.

Thirdly, This same godly Company, are a Predestined unto life.
Company of Predestined men unto Eternal life. For there are none but the
chosen of God that are the true Body of Christ; this is a company only of Elect
men, and women, and babes; therefore they are called Elect, Romans 8. 33. They
are such a company as are written in the Lamb's Book of life, Rev. 21. 27.
Therefore all those that seem to be of God, and go a great way with the people
of God, and yet turn back, as Orphah from Naomi, Ruth 1. They were never of
this number, 1 John 2. 19. They were not of us, they went out from us; if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us: So that it is only the Elect
of God that are of this Company, that are the Members of this Body.

Fourthly, It is such a godly Company as is gathered Begotten again by the
Word.
by the Word of God: The Word of God gathers them together; they, as well as
other people by nature, are of another Body, of another Corporation, as vile,
and as wretched, and as miserable in themselves, if left to themselves; but God
found them when he passed by them, and said to them, Live; they were defiled as
well as others in their blood, but the Lord turned their hearts by the Word,
and does beget them again thereby: This is that immortal seed whereby God does
beget them again unto eternal life.

Fifthly, They are such a company as are made one, knit and combined together
in Christ; though themselves are never so many, and never so remote and distant
from one another, may be they never saw one another, nor ever heard of one
another, one lives in one Country, another in another* one in one parish,
another in another, and have little bodily communion, and are not known one to
another; may be some of this company are in heaven already, and some upon
earth; yet they are all one in Christ, they all meet together in one heart and
soul in Christ Jesus, they are all of one mind in him, as being all one body,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and they are all one seed, Gal. 3. 16.
Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made. He says not, To seeds, as
if they were many; but, To thy seed, as of one, that is Christ: that is, which
is Christ, and all that are Christ's; they are one seed, the seed of the woman;
indeed all men come forth of the woman's loins, the wicked as well as the godly,
only here is the difference, The one is the seed of God, the other of the
Serpent: Now Christ, and all that are Christ's, are one and the self-same seed;
though they are different in Place, different in Country, different in estate
and condition; some Jews, some Gentiles, some Bond, some Free, some Noble, some
Mean; yet they are all one in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle says, Gal. 3 28.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. It Is true, you are
different among your selves, one is a master, another a servant, one is a rich
man, another a poor man, so there is a difference; but they are all one in
Christ Jesus, they have all one and the self-same Faith, they have all one and
the self-same Father, there is but one Lord, and one Spirit to quicken and
unite them all: Thus we see what this Body of Christ is.

Now in the Second place, What it is to be put What putting into this Body is.
into this Body; to be implanted into it, to be knit into this Body: I Answer,
in a few words it is this:

It is a part of a man's Ingrafting into Christ by Faith, whereby a man is
ingrafted into the Body of Christ, having one common life with all the rest of
the Members for mutual consent, and profit, and care, and help, and sympathy,
or fellow-feeling.

First, It is a part of a man's ingrafting into A part of our ingrafting into
Christ.
Christ; For the ingrafting of a man into Christ, and into the body of Christ,
are not Two things, but God does them by one and the self-same act, as you may
see, Romans 12. 5. We being many are one body in Christ, and every one Members
one of another: that is, by being Members of Christ, and by being ingrafted
into Christ, we come to have fellowship, and conjunction, and joining one with
another: it must needs be the same work, for the putting a man into Christ in
whom are the other Members, that very act makes a man to have fellowship with
Christ, together with all the other Members, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.
17. Though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive
tree, wast grafted in for them, and made partaker of the root: When a man is
ingrafted into this Olive tree, he is ingrafted with the rest of Christ's
Members, and he does partake together with the other Members of the same root,
and of the same Gifts, and Graces, God does both under one: Therefore though I
handle this after the other, it is because I cannot handle them both at once.
Saint John says, 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another; So that if a man be in Christ, he has
communion with the Body of Christ; if he has fellowship with Christ, he has
fellowship with the Body of Christ; so that you see the Spirit does both by one
and the self-same act, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye were at that time
without Christ, and aliants from the commonwealth of Israel: It is all one
thing to say that a man is out of Christ, and an aliant from the commonwealth
of Israel, without that corporation, without that Body, he is no Member of that
Body; therefore it follows on the other side, If a man be in Christ, and
ingrafted into Christ, then he is of this society, he is of the commonwealth
of the Israel of God: So that this is the First Thing, It is a part of a man's
ingrafting into Christ.

Secondly, This likewise is done by Faith: Wrought by Faith.
When a man is ingrafted into Christ, he is ingrafted into him by Faith: As the
Apostle says, Romans 11. 23. And they also, if they abide not in unbelief, shall
be grafted in, for God is able to graft them: As who should say, If ever they
have Faith, they are ingrafted into Christ; it is Faith that ingrafts a man
into Christ, and the same Faith that makes a man to be of the Body of Christ,
that puts a man into the number of the Members of Christ; as Paul says, To
Titus my Son in the common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. that is, it is such a Faith as
does not only ingraft this man into Christ, but the very self-same Faith,
another man having it, it does ingraft him into the Body of Christ too: So that
it is a common Faith, whereby one is ingrafted into the Body of Christ as well
as another, as Act. 2. 44. They were all of one mind, and one heart, they all
hung together as one body, they imparted their gifts, and the things they had,
even to their very Lands and Goods, one to another; here was a sweet communion:
but then, what was the reason of this? What was the Instrument that wrought
this? It was Faith; for the text says, they were believers, or else they could
not have done it: And therefore as we are said to come to Christ, so to the
Body of Christ, as Heb. 12. 22. But ye are come to Mount Zion, to the City of
the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable
Angels; and to the congregation of the first born, which are written in heaven.
You are come, he speaks of a spiritual coming by Faith: So that this putting
into the Body of Christ, is by Faith.

Then in the Third place, It makes a man have Making us have common life with
other Members.
a common life with all the rest of the Members of Jesus Christ: As you may
see, Col. 3. 4. When Christ which is our life shall appear, ye also shall
appear with him in glory. Christ who is our life; We that are the people of
God, Christ is our life, we have one and the self-same life, all one and the
self-same mind in the ways of God; As it is said, Act. 4. 32. The multitude
of them that believed were of one heart and one soul; all the people of God in
the whole world would quickly be acquainted if they were brought together, for
they are all of one and the self-same disposition and mind; As our Savior
speaks to his Father, Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou art in me,
and I in thee, so that all they may be one in us: As the Three Persons in the
blessed Trinity are three distinct Persons, and yet are all one; so in some
sense, the Members of the Body of Christ, though they be of several callings
and conditions in the world, yet they are all one, that they may be all one as
we are one, verse. 21. They all live by the same rule, and walk by the same
rule, they are all guided by the same Word, and swayed by the same Commandment,
they all walk in one Way, they all Pray by one and the self-same Spirit, they
have a life that is common: look as one lives so lives another; look as one
repents, so another repents; look as one believes, so another believes; and
look as one apprehends of God, and comes before him with affection, and fear,
and trembling, so does another; though they never saw one another, yet they all
meet in the same life, for they have the same root of life, the same cause of
life.

In the Fourth place, It makes a man to be of one It makes of one consent with
all the people of God.
consent with all the people of God every where; As you may see, Zeph. 3. 9.
For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon
the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. The Lord helps them all to
Pray after one pure language, and gives them all one pure consent in the
Service of God (though it is in different degrees indeed, one arises to an
higher pitch than another) therefore the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye speak all
the same things, that there be no divisions among you: As who should say, All
the Members of Christ are so, I beseech you endeavor to have this sign of
being Members of Christ, be all joined together in the same mind; it is true,
that this union, and consent, and agreement, and oneness of heart and mind (as
I may call it) is very imperfect, but in some it is more imperfect then it is
in other; some have attained to a further degree, there is a great deal of
unlikeness of affections, a great deal of unlikeness in Prayer, a great deal of
unlikeness in Obedience, there is a great deal of jarrings now and then through
weakness; but as the Apostle says, As far as we have attained, let us be thus
minded, Phil. 3. 15, 16. Let us walk by the same rule, and mind the same
things; the Children of God throughout the whole world, they are of one mind,
as far as they have attained, though in Faith, in Repentance, in new Obedience
they differ gradually in their seize, yet they all agree in this consent
of judgment, That sin must be hated, that a man must live in no sin, that a man
must yield Obedience to all Gods commandments, that a man must deny himself in
all things, that in all things God must be glorified; they all agree that we
are Members one of another, and that we must love one another, and forgive one
another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; they all agree in this,
They are all of one mind: and as one is mortified, so is the other; and as one
is meek and gentle, so is the other: It is true indeed, one has attained
further then another; but whereunto they have attained, they are all alike
minded: Now whereunto we have not attained, God will reveal it in his good time
unto us, says the Apostle: May be one sees such a thing is a duty, which
another does not, yet all see that it is their duty to fear God, and obey him
in all their ways, and they all set themselves to hate and oppose all manner
of known sins: As far as they have attained, they are all of one mind.

Fifthly, All this is for mutual profit, and help, For mutual care and help.
and care, and sympathy, as you may see delivered by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.
That it must be for mutual profit, see the seventh verse. The manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal: that is, when the Spirit of
God does manifest himself in one man one way, and in another man another way;
he gives one man (may be) the gift of Teaching, to another man the gift of
knowledge; some have excellent gifts in one kind, some in another (but all have
the gifts of new Obedience.) Now look whatsoever gifts they are, whenever the
Spirit does manifest it self to any Member of the Body of Christ, it is to be
helpful and useful to others, so that the Members of Christ need one another,
that you may see, verse. 21, 22. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee: nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee, etc. We cannot be
without the poorest, and vilest, and contemptiblest Member in the Body; nay,
the very life of the Body may depend upon the vilest Members.

So again, That they are to care for one another; That you may see in the 25.
verse, Lest there should be any division in the Body, but that the Members
should have the same care one for another. You see how it is in the Body of a
man, the head has care of the feet, it guides the feet, and the foot has care
of the head, to hold it up, and carry it up and down, and the hand is useful
for the relieving of any part, they have all the same care one of another, so
it is in the Body of Christ. And for a Sympathy, see it in the 26. verse,
Wherefore if one Member suffer, all suffer with it; and if one Member rejoice,
all rejoice with it; all have a fellow-feeling of one another necessities and
comforts. Therefore when the Spirit of God does implant a man into the Body of
Christ, it is all one with the implanting a man into Christ, he does give him a
common life, one mind and heart, he does give them all natural help, and
natural care one of another, for they have need one of another.

In the Third place we must show, That the Spirit That this is the Spirits work.
does this, And why he does it.

First, That it is the Spirit that unites and tyeth all these Members together;
This makes them hang together; therefore it is called, the unity of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 4. 3. He exhorts the Ephesians that were the Members of Christ to keep the
unity of the Spirit; because as the Members of Christ are united to Christ, so
they are united mutually by the Spirit; Therefore take heed (says the Apostle)
to keep the unity of the Spirit, that you may be of one mind, and one heart:
Therefore the Apostle speaking of the Body of Christ, he compares it to a
building; A building consists of diverse bricks, and stones, and timber, which
being joined together, make up an house: So the Members of Christ being joined
together, make up an house for God to dwell in: But who makes this? The text
says, the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 2. 22. The Spirit of God makes up this blessed
building, all the elect of God, all the faithful, all the heirs of Grace in the
world, are as an house or body. though there be never so many parts in it, yet
they make all but one body or house, so it is here; Now the Spirit unites
these, and lays them artificially together, so that they may prop one another.
Ezekiel. 11. 19. The Lord there speaking of his Elect, I will give them (says he)
one heart, and make them of one mind; How will he do it? I will put a new
Spirit within them; And so he makes them to be of one and the self-same mind.

Now the Reason, Why the Spirit of God does Reasons why the Spirit of God does
thus unite to the Body of Christ. None but the Spirit is able.
do this, is,

First, Because none else besides the Spirit is able to do it: For by nature we
are woefully and fearfully different from the Body of Christ, we are of another
nature, of another kind, of another life; nay, we are contrary to it: all the
Members of Christ they are as young sucking children; but wicked men, and all
men by nature are Lions, and Leopards, and Bears, and Tigers, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 11. 6* 7. Now the Prophet there speaking how Christ means to
effect it, is to unite these together, to make the Lion and the Lamb to have
communion together, to make the Bear and the Kid to lie down together: Mark how
he shows how Christ will do it, in the second verse of the same Chapter, the
text says, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; he speaks of Christ;
that is, whereas this requires a great deal of power to do this, to make a man
to be clean contrary to his nature; whenas a man's nature is carnal, and wicked,
and earthly, to make him of the Body of Christ; therefore says the text, The
Spirit of Might shall be upon him, etc. There is a great deal of Might required
to turn their dispositions: it is a mighty thing to change a man that is a
drunkard, a proud person, a wicked wretch; to turn this man topsie-turvy, to
make him mind other things, to make him clean another man; this requires
infinite wisdom: Therefore the Spirit of Wisdom shall rest upon him to do it;
and the Spirit of Knowledge, and the Spirit of the Fear of the Lord; that is,
the Lord Jesus shall put in the Spirit of Fear into men's hearts, and this will
turn them, this will alter men's minds, and conversations.

Secondly, There is none so fit as the Spirit of None but the Spirit is fit to
do it.
God to do it: For this Body of Christ, it is a company of Sons and Daughters
that God has up and down in the world, that are able to cry, Abba Father: now
who is so fit to do this as the Spirit of the Son? As the Apostle says, That
he might redeem them that were under the Law, that they might receive the
Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 5.

Fourthly, How the Spirit of God does this; and How the Spirit does Unite to
Christ's Body.
that is Two ways, as the Scripture reveals to us.

The One is, By being one and the same Spirit in By being one and the same
spirit in all Members.
all the Members of Christ: He comes into them, and dwells in them as one and
the self-same Spirit, and so makes up this union: The same Spirit that was in
Paul, was in Peter; and so all the rest of the Members of Christ one and the
self-same Spirit is in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple
of God, and that the Spirit dwells in you? Therefore look what Spirit of
Faith one man has, another comes to have the same Spirit of Faith; as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit of Faith with them, as
it is written, I believe, and therefore I speak; so we believe, and therefore
we speak.

Secondly, The Spirit does this by uniting and By tying a knot between all the
Members.
tying a knot between these Members: He does unite them, and make them hang
together in one; he makes them to be of one heart, and of one soul by knitting
and combining of their hearts altogether: Therefore this fellowship is called
the fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1. Though Paul were far off from
Phillippi, yet he could adjure the Phillippians by the fellowship of the
Spirit. But you will say, How can this be? Can the people of God have communion
and fellowship one with another when they are so far asunder one from another,
and may be never saw one another, may be never heard one of another? how can
this be? I say, Very well: for the Spirit of God has a long arm, and is able
to make the people of God shake hands, though they be a thousand miles sunder;
it is the Spirit that tyeth this knot, and unites them together: As Paul
speaks, Col. 2. 5. Though I be absent in the Flesh, yet I am present with you
in the Spirit; and methinks I am in your company and meetings; when you meet
together; I see you in my mind methinks, and I joy in your order: The Spirit
makes the communion between the people of God; and hence it is that they can
love one another, because all the Members are tied together by one knot; and
they come to help one another, and do any thing one for another; even by the
very love of the Spirit which they have one toward another, Romans 15. 30. The
Apostle had some need of the good Romans to help him: Now see how he does
entreat help from them: he desires them by the love of the Spirit, to pray
heartily for him: he knew that the love of the Spirit would be a great motive
to them: you know you and I are joined together by the same Spirit, for the
love of the Spirit pray for me. Thus we see,

First, What this Body of Christ is.

Secondly, What the putting a man into this Body is.

Thirdly, The Reasons why.

Fourthly, How the Spirit does it. Uses. The want of the Spirit is the cause of
difference.


Now I come to the Uses.

And First, Is it so that the Spirit of God does unite all the Saints of God
together in one Body? Then here we may see the reason of the difference of men
in the world: The difference of our Congregations; some companies that hang
together are of one mind, another of another mind; the reason is, they have a
different Spirit; but all the Saints of God have the Spirit of God which makes
them hang together; and the wicked, they have another Spirit.

Secondly, Does the Spirit of God join all the Let none put asunder what the
Spirit joins.
Saints of God together in one Body? Then that which God has joined together,
let no man put asunder. It is spoken in regard of man and wife; if it be such a
horrible thing to part man and wife, then what a horrible thing is it to part
Saint and Saint that are joined together by the Spirit of God; this blessed
communion of the Spirit, what a fearful thing is it for a man to root it out?
When there shall be heart-burnings and strivings between those that are the
children of God, what a fearful thing is this? Is the number of those that fear
God so great, that we can spare any? Or are the Graces of Gods Spirit
Wilderness Graces, that can walk alone and need no help from, or can do no good
to others? Therefore the Apostle prays God in the behalf of the Corinthians,
That the Members of Christ may be of one mind, and live in peace, 2 Cor. 13.
11.

Thirdly, Here we may see how to try our acquaintance, To try our acquaintance
hereby.
and whether the company we join our selves unto, be good or no: If our company
be right, the Spirit of God tyeth the knot; therefore the Apostle will tell
you, whether you have the right communion and fellowship, or no; try the
spirits, whether they be of God or no, says he, If the fellowship we have one
with another be not of God, if the Spirit of God do not knit us together, our
fellowship is not right. 1 John 1. 3. there is an excellent place, That they
may have fellowship with us (says he) and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: As who should say, We would fain have
you have fellowship with us; and I tell you what kind of fellowship you must
have, if you be acquainted with us, you must have fellowship with the father,
and with the Lord Jesus Christ, for our fellowship is with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ: so that we may see, whether our Company be right or no, by
this.

The Last Use is this, Is it so that the Spirit of To stir up a sympathy
amongst the Saints.
God joins all the Saints of God together in one Body? Then we should have a
fellow-feeling with all the Members of Christ: Do not say thou art a Member of
the Church of England, and not of France, or Germany; do not say thou art a
Member of this Parish, but not of another; do not say so, for if thou art a
Member of Christ, there is one Body, and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. If there be one
Body, there must be one Spirit; and therefore we should have a fellow-feeling.
How to work, maintain, and express this sympathy. By informing our selves
concerning one another.


But how shall we have a fellow-feeling with the Members of Christ?

I say, First, We must inform our selves as much as we can concerning one
another; As when the Ark of God was among the Philistims, old Eli, though he
gave way too far to his Sons wickedness, yet was he very careful of the Ark
and people of God; and therefore (1 Samuel 4. 13, 14.) he went out and sat in
the highway, that so he might hear, in the first place, what was the news; and
you know how his heart trembled when he heard that the Ark of God was taken: So
it was with David, when any came out of the Camp of Israel, he says to them,
What is done I pray thee? 2 Samuel 1. 4. So we should enquire concerning one
another.

Secondly, We should visit our fellow members: By visiting our Fellow Members.
As it is said of Moses. though he were a great Courtier in Pharaoh's Court,
yet he went out to look upon his Brethrens burdens, Exodus 2. 11. he would be
ever and anon steping out to see how his brethren fared, and how did this
affect his heart with their trouble?

Thirdly, We should lay to heart their Afflictions: By laying to heart their
afflictions.
It is a strange thing how the people of God in all ages, have been affected
with the Afflictions of the Church; nay, though they have not seen it, but only
foresaw what would be afterward; as Elisha wept when he foresaw what cruelty
Hazael would use toward the People of Israel, 2 King. 8. 11, 12. So Daniel,
Dan. 8. 27. when God revealed the Afflictions of the Church to him two hundred
years before it should come to pass, yet when he heard of the Affliction that
should fall out, the text says, that Daniel fainted; and how can we think that
the Spirit of Christ has united us into one Body, when we have not this
disposition in our souls?

OF THE SABBATH.
Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.
THAT which I intend to speak concerning the Sabbath at this time, I will cast
into these Propositions:

The First is this, That there Proposit. 1. A set time for worship.
must be some set time for the Worship and immediate Service of God.

Now the Reason why there must be some set time for Gods immediate Worship, is,

First, Because all Actions cannot be done at Reas. 1.
once, but by succession; first one, and then another: for a man to perform the
duties of Gods Worship in an instant, and to get down the knees of body and
soul before his Maker in an instant, this cannot be. Eccles. 3. 1. There is an
appointed time for every Action under the Sun: Then if there be a time for all
actions, surely there must be a time for the Worship of God.

Secondly, There must be a set time; Because Reas. 2.
such is our dullness in the duties of Gods Worship, that we had need to have
times set apart for Gods Worship; there is a great deal of ado required to fix
a man's Thoughts upon heaven, to have a fixed apprehension of the Presence of
God, these do not only require time, but a great deal of time.

Secondly, The Second Proposition is this, That Propos. 2. Some set time for
worship every day.
as there must be some time for Gods immediate Worship, and Service* so there
must be some set time every day, all the days of our lives; there must be some
defined and determinate time for Worship of God every day, at the least morning
and evening. David, though he were employed in great affairs, yet he had three
times a day to glorify God in, in his holy Ordinances; Three times in the day
will I praise thee, Psalm. 55. 17.

The Reason of this is, Because men live like Reas. 1.
Beasts without daily invocation upon God, 2 Chronicles. 13. 10, 11. Abijah there
speaking against Jeroboam the King of Israel, though himself had no great
goodness in him, he says, The Lord is our God, and we offer sacrifices, and
burn sweet incense every day; Every day they did it; as who should say, it were
a sign that God were not amongst us, if we did not this: he takes it as a
principle written in the conscience, though he were a natural man, yet he does
reason thus, that where there is not every day some time for Gods Worship, God
is not amongst them.

Another Reason is, Because every morning Reas. 2.
God renews his Mercies, and every evening they are continued to us, as the
Church says in the Lamentations chapter 3. 23. Every morning his mercies are
renewed to us, and in the evening his compassions fail not; therefore every
morning we are to set our selves before God, to ask of him the forgiveness of
our sins; every morning and evening we are to do this. Psalm. 92. 1, 2. David
says, It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, to sing praises to thy
Name, O thou most High; To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and
thy faithfulness every night.

And then again God is the Alpha, and Omega, Reas. 3.
he is the beginning, and the ending of all things, and of all actions we do;
God should therefore have the beginning and ending of every day, that the
Worship of God may have the start of all other actions; it is necessary it
should be so, when a man first awakes in the morning, God should be the first
thought that should come into his mind; As David says, Psalm. 5. 3. My voice
will I lift up unto thee in the morning; as soon as ever he awakes in the
morning his heart is lifted up to God: so it is good for a man to make the
first part of the day holy, that the rest of the day may be thereafter: and so
as we are to begin the day with the solemn Worship of God, so we are to end it
in the evening, that we may reckon up all our accounts, and make even with God;
as the Apostle says, Ephesians 4. 26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath: so
let not the Sun go down upon a dead heart, upon a carnal heart, upon a worldly
heart; but as the Sun goes down upon our bodies, so let the Sun of
Righteousness set upon our hearts, that we may lie down in peace, having all
our reckoning made even, and all scores cancelled.

The Third Proposition is this, As there must Propos. 3. Every day in some sort
a Sabbath.
be some time for Gods immediate Service, and there must be every day some set
time, at least morning and evening, so likewise every whole day, all the days
of our lives, should be in some manner a Sabbath day to the Lord, we should be
holy every day; The Apostle finds fault, Gal. 4. 10 That they observed times,
and seasons, and days, and months, and years; we must not be earthlyminded one
day, and heavenly-minded another; but we must be every day holy to the Lord.

The First Reason is* The Covenant which God Reas. 1.
has made with us does require it: that is the end why God saves a man from
his sins, and brings him into the kingom of Christ, he takes a solemn Oath from
him, That being delivered from the hands of his enemies, he shall serve him
without Luke 1. 74, 75.
fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of his life: Every day must
be a Sabbath day, whenever a man gives himself up to God, there is an Oath
hangs upon him, and he breaks this Oath, if he set not upon it with all his
might, that every day may be a Sabbath day; he is to be careful to live godly,
and religiously in all places, and at all times, and in every action he puts
his hand unto; a man is not only to make conscience on the seventh day, but
every day of his life.

The Second Reason is, Because not to make Reas. 2.
every day an holy day, is the brand of an Hypocrite, it is hypocrisy, Job.
27. 10. Will he always call upon God? To be holy sometimes, and not at another
time, is the trick of an hypocrite; will he always call upon God, will that
man always obey God and worship him, will he always set himself to keep close
with God? No, an hypocrite will not do so* You may know an hypocrite, he has
his fits, and his pangs, and his moods; but a godly man, a sincere hearted man,
is one that does compose himself to keep a constant course in Gods worship; as
Act. 24. 16. There says Paul, Herein do I exercise my self to keep a good
conscience always, both toward God and toward man: And as it was the
practice of Paul, so of all the Elect people of God, of all sincere Christians
in the world, Act. 26. 7. all the Elect of God, all the beloved of God, they
did instantly serve God day and night.

Thirdly, Because blessedness does consist in Reas. 3.
this, In keeping every day in some kind as a Sabbath day, as the Holy Ghost
does pronounce him blessed, that fears the Lord always, Prove. 28. 14. and
that does righteousness at all times, Psa. 106. 3. It is true, the Servants of
God are sometimes out of the way, they have their swervings and failings, but
their resolution is to keep a constant course in Gods Worship, and they do
strive to humble themselves under the hand of God for their failings, and to be
the more wary because of them.

Lastly, This is the Sum and Scope of all the Reas. 4.
Law of Righteousness; it is the very drift and end of all the Ten
Commandments, the Lord has set down in the Decalogue his whole Will and
Pleasure, what we are to do all the days of our lives, this day, and that day,
as long as we live; and there is no set time, but that we should always obey
it; and this is the practice of the godly, always to keep his Commandments, as
David, Psalm. 16. 8. He set the Lord always before him; that is, every day he
did make it an holy day, that he might walk as in Gods presence, and live as in
Gods Courts, that he might do all his worldly business as in the presence of
God.

The Fourth Proposition is this, As there must Propos. 4. A particular ^pecial
day for Gods worship.
be a set time every day, and we are to keep every day as a Sabbath day in some
sense, so there must be a particular special day, set apart for Gods immediate
Worship and Service: This is the next Proposition I will prove unto you; for
though every day is to be a Sabbath day, yet we have particular callings, and
we have business in the world to employ our selves about, so that we cannot be
every day hearing of the Word, and employing our selves in Prayer and spiritual
exercises, though every day we are to keep it holy, yet we cannot be vacant
wholly and totally every day; Now therefore I say, That there is a set day that
the Lord has called for to be devoted unto him; the very Schoolmen themselves
do acknowledge this, and the very Heathen have found it out, They have set a
day apart for the Service of their Gods, which they call their holy day,
wherein they lay aside all other business, and set themselves a part to honor
and worship their Images and Idols, according to their manner. Now I will make
this good by many Arguments, that God will have a set day, besides the every
day Sabbath, he will have a set particular Sabbath for his Worship and Service.

The First Reason is, Because he will have a little Reas. 1.
emblem and picture of the kingdom of heaven among his Saints and Children in
this* life; in the kingdom of heaven there is no buying and selling, no eating
and drinking, no worldly business, there is nothing but praising and
glorifying of God, and speaking of God, and singing of Halelujah unto his holy
Name; there is nothing but enjoying communion with the Lord, and feeding upon
him continually, there is nothing but this in the kingdom of heaven; Now God
will have a little picture of this among his Saints here upon earth: You know
there remains a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. It is an express place,
the word in the Original is, There remains a Sabbath for the people of God. As
who should say, There is a glorious Sabbath that all the Elect of God shall
have, and they are preserved for it, and that is reserved for them, and they
shall enter into it, when this body of death is laid down, and they shall enjoy
God face to face, to all eternity, they shall behold him as he is, and have
communion with him; now the Lord will have a little picture of this here in
this life; we cannot have it altogether in this life, for we have mortal
bodies, that must be fed, and clothed, and stand in need of the creature; for
man's sin is not yet purged away, but there is a great deal of rubbish still
left, therefore this cannot be complete here: but yet God will have a little
picture ot this, even in this life, and that is the Sabbath day, wherein they
are to lay aside all the works of their ordinary callings, and rest from all
servil labors, this is Gods day, and we must now call upon him, and hear what
he says, and wholly employ, and occupy our selves about him, as near as we
possibly can; but now, this we cannot do every day, for we have Children to
look after, and Families to provide for, and there be an hundred occasions to
call a man away; it may be a man thinks to go into his Closet, and seek God in
private, and one occasion or other calls him aside, that he cannot go on; but
the Lord will have a little emblem and expression of the kingdom of heaven upon
the Sabbath day: therefore the Apostle says, It remains for us, scil. in the
life to come.

The Second Reason, why the Lord will have a Reas. 2.
set day for his Worship and Service besides the every day Sabbath, is because
the honor of God does so require, it does require that there should be a
solemn day for Gods Service; as Kings, though their subjects are to obey them
every day, and keep their Laws every day, and if a subject transgress the Laws
at any time, he is in danger of the displeasure of the King* but he will have
one day of solemnity to his Majesty: So God Almighty, though every day we are
to tremble before him, and stand in aw of his Word, and take heed we do not err
from his Commandments, yet he will have one solemn day for the honor of his
Name, he will have a solemn day, wherein his people shall have nothing else to
do, but to set themselves apart for his Worship; therefore this set day is
called, The honorable of the Lord, Isa. 58 13. that is, we must count the
Sabbath day an honorable day, a day of honor, wherein Gods Servants should
from morning to evening fall down before him, and confess that great is the
Lord God: We should wholly dedicate it unto him, seeking of him in Public and
in Private, that we may store up holy affections for all the week following.

Thirdly, Because God sometimes calls for an Reas. 3.
extraordinary day, and an extraordinary day has ever relation to an ordinary;
if I say this is my extraordinary food and diet, I imply that I have ordinary
diet: so if the Scripture tells us that God calls for extraordinary days, it
is an evident Argument, that there be ordinary days which he calls for.

Now that God calls for extraordinary days, it is plain.

1. First, He calls for extraordinary days of rejoicing; when God compasses
us about with songs of Deliverance, and works wonderful Mercies for us, we
ought to set a part a day for rejoicing, and delighting in his goodness and
favor toward us, and this day is to be an holy day, as Nehemiah 8. 9. This
day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not, nor weep; So that when we are to
rejoice toward God for any spiritual favor toward us, we ought to keep this
day an holy day, we ought to employ the hours of the day in laboring to affect
our hearts with his kindness, and laboring to make his goodness to have
impression upon us, that we may with cheerfulness run over all our days
afterward, that we may adhere unto him the better all our life time.

2. Secondly, As he calls for extraordinary days of rejoicing, so he calls for
extraordinary days of Fasting and Humiliation, and that in Four Cases.

1. First, When we fear some heavy judgment to come upon us, or else when
some judgment is already upon us: may be some heavy judgment is upon us, or
else we fear it to come upon us, and now we are to set an extraordinary day
apart to seek the Lord; as 2 Chronicles. 20. Jehosaphat proclaimed a Fast, when the
Land was in danger: Suppose the Lord should take away the Gospel, and the feet
of those that bring glad tidings should be turned from us, then should we Fast
in those days, we should grieve before God, and bewail the loss of his Mercies
and Favors; that we may have his Goodness to quicken us, and keep us, and
uphold us in the want of them.

2. Secondly, In case that we want some Mercy that we cannot well be without,
in such a case as this, if ordinary seeking will not do the deed, we ought to
set apart an extraordinary time to prevail with God; as Ezra, he was in danger
of the enemy, and if he should go to Jerusalem, the enemy would set upon him;
now, thought he, if I should go to the King, though he were very great with the
King of Persia, at that time, yet thought he, if I should go to the King for a
Band of Soldiers, he would think our God were a weak God; I have told him what
a strong God we have, and that he is ready to help all those that trust in him;
now if I should go to him for a Band of Soldiers, he might think that our God
were not able to deliver us, and it would be a great dishonor to God;
therefore he set a day a part for a Fast, and labored to get aid and help from
heaven, Ezra 8. 21. So when a Child of God is exceedingly afflicted with any
cross or temptation, and he shall wonderfully dishonor God, and cast a snare
upon them that fear his Name, in this case he is bound to seek God
extraordinarily, and if the ordinary means that God has appointed will not
prevail, he is to set a part a Fast to seek him extraordinarily.

3. Thirdly, If we be assaulted from hell, and Satan, and our own hearts, with
strong temptations, then we are to seek God extraordinarily, as it was with
Paul, when the Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, when he lay under
some heavy temptation, either unto Pride, or Lust, or Uncleanness, some prick
in the flesh, that the Lord sent upon him, and let him be encountered withal;
then Paul sought God in a solemn manner, more then ever he did at other times,
2 Cor. 12. 8. For this I besought God thrice.

4. Fourthly, In case a man is to do some notable service, he is to enter into
some new Calling; or if the Lord does put him upon some new service, that does
require some more then ordinary help, now a man is to seek God by Fasting and
Prayer, as you may see it was with Barnabas and Paul when they entered into the
Ministry, Acts 13. 3. Now the reason why I name these things is to show you,
that sometimes God will have an extraordinary set day for his immediate worship
and service, when we are to lay aside all other business, and set our selves
apart, to call upon his Name, and seek him. The thing I gather from hence is
this, If there be an extraordinary set day, then there must be an ordinary set
day for Gods immediate Service.

Another Argument is taken from the Equity of Reas. 4.
it, and that stands Two ways:

1. First, It is very equal when as we have six days to provide for our
selves, and for the maintenance of our bodies, God gives us diverse days for
that; now Equity does require that we should give one day to him, we having
several days; it is equity that he should have at least one for himself:
Therefore this does aggravate our sins exceedingly, if we give not this day to
God. Did not this aggravate the sin of Adam, in eating of the forbidden fruit?
in that God gave him liberty to eat freely of all other trees in the garden,
and for bad him only the eating of that one? Now what excuse could Adam have
for not abstaining from that one? So here, God having given us diverse days for
the good of our bodies, and for means and maintenance of the things of this
life; equity requires, that we should not touch Gods day, nor set our foot upon
it, nor turn our eyes away from it, we ought to remember it; as Joseph said in
regard of his Mistress, when she enticed him to folly; mark how he answers the
temptation, My Master has put all things into my hands that are in the house,
he has withheld nothing from me but only thee his Wife, and that is equal,
and reasonable, how therefore shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? Genesis 3. 9. So should we say, when we are tempted to break the Lords day,
we should say, The Lord has not imposed any day besides, the Lord has given
us all the six days for our use, how therefore shall I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God with worldly thoughts, and speeches, and
actions upon that day? It stands with very good equity that it should be so.

2. Secondly, It stands with equity, in regard of our Souls; if our bodies
which are the worser part, have several days for their use, then how much more
should the soul have one day, which is a thousand times more worth then the
body? You know what Christ says, What will it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16 26. Our souls are more worth then our
bodies, and we have more need to seek out for Holiness and Grace for them, and
to be well provided for in regard of them, then for any thing in this present
world; if we want meat, we can but starve; if we want clothes, we can but
famish; if we want outward things, we can but temporally perish; but if we want
Grace and the Favor of God, we perish for ever. Now if there be six days
allowed for the good of our bodies, how much more should we be willing to have
one day for the good of our souls, specially considering what need we have
thereof? This Argument our Savior Christ uses to prove the Sabbath, Mark 2.
27. The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath: The Sabbath was made
for man, as meat was made for the body; and a man cannot be without food, no
more can the soul be without the Sabbath; so that we see, there must be a
solemn day set a part for Gods Worship and Service.

The Fifth Proposition is this, That as there Propos. 5. One day of Seven to be
set apart for Gods worship.
must be a set day for Gods Worship and Service, so this day must be one of
seven, not one of eight, or nine, or five, or four, but one of seven; and this,
though it be not naturally moral, yet it is positively moral, though it be not
natural, written in the heart of man, as a man: if he had no teaching, his
conscience would find out that he should not be idle, and steal, and commit
murder; the Conscience will grope out these Ordinances and Statutes of God;
and the Conscience will find out that there must be a set day for Gods Worship
and Service; the light of nature will find out that, but that it must be one
day of seven, that it cannot find out; but I say, that it is the positive law
of God, that it must be one of seven.

Now, Because it is not written in the heart of Reas. 1.
man, but in the Commandment of God positively delivered to us, and required of
us; I can give no other Reason for it, but only the reason taken out of the
Scripture; there can be no reason taken from the judgment of man, as other
Laws, the very law of Reason will enforce them; but there can be no other
reason for this, but only out of the Word of God. The Lord has commanded, six
days thou shall labor, and being his Will, it must be performed; for God
might require six days for himself, and leave us but one day; God might have
ordained it so; but God intending we should live by the sweat of our brows the
Lord was pleased to allow us six days; now he giving us six days, does
reserve unto himself one of seven.

Secondly, Another Reason is this, As the Lord Reas. 2.
has commanded this seventh day, so he says it is his day, The seventh day,
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; Now then if the seventh day be the Sabbath
of the Lord our God, then we must not divert any of the hours, or any part of
the day away; when our minds run into the world, we must curb them, and
remember that the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord our God.

Thirdly, Another Reason is, That our Cattle, Reas. 3.
and Servants, and Children, may rest as well as our selves, they are to labor
six days, and one of seven they are to rest.

Another Reason is, Because he has sanctified Reas. 4.
it; therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. Now then, if
the Lord has sanctified the seventh day, and appointed it, if he has set it a
part for that purpose, for spiritual employments, and not to be filled up with
any thing else, we are guilty of Sacrilege, if we do not give him this, as
Levit. 27. 28. the Lord says, Whatsoever is devoted unto the Lord, that is
most holy unto him; now God says, he has devoted the seventh day to himself,
therefore we are to keep it holy: Nebuchadnezzar, a very heathen, when he knew
that the Vessels came out of the Temple of the Lord, he would not employ them
to a common use, Dan. 1. 2. He put them into the house of his god; which was
the holiest place he had.

Fifthly, This is necessary, because we are apt Reas. 5.
to be worldly, and carnal, and non-resident from Prayer, and from the Word,
and serious humbling of our selves before God, if we be never so little taken
off; how suddenly do our minds cleave unto the world, and grow vain, and unfit,
and distempered? Now if God should not once in seven days, have a day to take
us off from the world; as six days are employed in worldly affairs, so if
there were not a seventh day to take us off, there would be no hoe with us;
therefore there must be a whole day to accustom us, and habituate us to the
Service of God, otherwise we should drown our selves in the world.

The Sixth Proposition is this, That as it must be Propos. 6. That day of the
seven to be kept holy, on which God rested.
one of seven, so it is not indifferent which of the seven days we keep holy,
but it must be that day whereupon God rested, therefore it has the name of a
Sabbath; Sabbath is nothing but rest: The reason of the name is Twofold,
First, Because God rested upon that day; And Secondly, Because we are to rest
upon that day.

The Seventh Proposition is this, That all that Propos. 7. All that is in the
Fourth Commandment, is not essential to it.
is in the fourth Commandment, is not essential to the Commandment, the fourth
Commandment delivers only these Two things, First, That God will have a seventh
day; Secondly, That this seventh day is to be the day of Gods rest: This is the
whole meaning of the fourth Commandment: now all other particulars in the
fourth Commandment, are not essential to the fourth Commandment; as that God
made Heaven and Earth in six days, and rested the seventh day, etc. It is not
essential to the fourth Commandment, but because at that time when God
delivered the Decalogue, there was no greater work then the Creation; and the
rest from that work, was the rest from the greatest work in the world;
therefore it was kept upon the last day of the week, upon which God rested from
the Creation: Now the meaning of the fourth Commandment, is in the eighth
Verse; all the other particulars, are but Commentaries to open it to the Jews,
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; this is the fourth Commandment: The
Sabbath, that is, the day that God rested on and the day that we are to rest
upon: this is the holy day that is devoted to the Lord; now it was kept upon
the last day of the week, because God created heaven and earth, and rested upon
that day; and the Creation of heaven and earth was the greatest work that God
then had done.

But then you will say, Why does the Commandment Quest.
say, That in six days God created Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh
day?

I Answer, It is no strange thing, to see some Answ. 1.
things in the Commandments which are not essential to them, because the
Commandments were delivered to the Jews: though they concern the whole world,
yet the persons, that actually stood before God, when the Decalogue was
delivered, were only the Jews, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. God spoke to the Jews; now no
wonder, God speaking to the Jews, did speak diverse particulars according to
them, and in their phrase, which if we had been alive, and they to succeed us,
God would have spoken according to us, as he did according to them.

2. Secondly, We see plainly, there are some things in the Commandments, which
do not concern the whole world, but only the Nation of the Jews, as in the
first Commandment, I have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of Bondage: [ Thou shall have no other gods but me:] That is the
Commandment; but though they, together with the other, were put into the Tables
of Stone, yet it concerns only the Jews. It Is true indeed, it is a type of our
deliverance, that we are delivered from Hell, and Sin, and Satan, as they were
delivered out of Egypt, and the house of Bondage; but literally these words
belong only to the Jews; and the Commandment is this, Thou shall have no other
gods but me; So it is for the fourth Commandment.

Again, There is something in the Fifth Commandment, that does not concern us,
but only them, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. [ That thy days may be
long in the Land which the thy God gives thee] that belongs only to the Jews,
it is meant particularly of the Land of Canaan. This then is the effect of the
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the Land of Canaan. So that the first words are the Commandment, and the latter
part belongs only to the Jews: So Deuteronomy. 5. 14. the Fourth Commandment, it was
put into the Tables of Stone thus, Remember the seventh day to keep it holy,
for the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall do no
manner of work, thou nor thy Son nor thy Daughter, etc. that thy manservant,
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou; that belongs to us, as well as to
them; but then it follows, Remember thou were a servant in the Land of Egypt:
Here you see the Jews have another Argument, besides the Arguments that we
have; but though we have not that Argument, yet the Commandment stands still,
and the Commandment is only thus much; namely, That there must be a Seventh
day, and that seventh day God rested upon: now whereas the Jews kept the last
day of the week, that was only by a temporary Commandment, because the making
of heaven and earth, was the greatest thing that God had then done, and God
rested from that upon that day; but now if God work a greater work then the
Creating of heaven and earth, and rest from that, then by virtue of the fourth
Commandment, we are to keep that day holy, upon which he rested from that work.

Now I come to the Eighth Proposition, That Propos. 8. The fourth Commandmen
continual, always to abide in the Church.
this Fourth Commandment, concerning a Sabbath day, concerning the keeping of a
Seventh day holy, it is a continual Commandment, always to abide in the Church
of God; I will prove it by diverse Arguments, that it was not to continue only
in the time of the Jews, but it is to abide always in the Church to the
coming of the Son of man; there is not a jot of Ceremony in the fourth
Commandment.

The First Reason is, Because God did institute Reas. 1.
the Sabbath before there was any room for Ceremonies; it was commanded to Adam
in his Innocence: Now all Ceremonies did prefigure Christ; and before Adam
fell, there was no Promise of the Seed of the Woman, nor no need of it, and so
no need of a Figure to represent it; but before Adam fell, the Sabbath was
prescribed, Genesis 2. 2, 3. On the seventh day God rested from all that he had
made, so that God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: So that you see
God having rested upon this day, he sanctified it, and put holiness upon it;
therefore we are not to name that Common, which he has named Holy; now though
we do not read of Adams keeping this day, nor Abels, nor Enochs, nor Noah's, nor
Abraham's, nor Isaacs, nor Jacobs; yet it does not follow it was not kept: for
Moses does not take in hand to set down the actions of the Fathers, but only
generally: for you see what a short story we have of Methushelah a good man,
though he lived a thousand years almost, yet we have scarce Three Syllables
concerning him. Now since Moses did not undertake to set down all that they did,
therefore they might keep the Sabbath, though he did not set it down: neither
afterward does he set it down for 319. years, and 111. years, which 430.
years, to the time of the Judges, we have nothing spoken of concerning the
Sabbath; therefore seeing God did Institute it to Adam in his Innocence, that
is enough; but what though the Fathers had not kept it holy, does it therefore
follow that we must not keep it holy? They had many wives, does it therefore
follow that we must have many wives? So, suppose they did not sanctify the
seventh day, (though we can see no proof that they did not) yet this is enough,
That God did sanctify it before any Ceremony was.

Again, Though we do not read that they practiced this, yet the Scripture does
intimate to us that they did it.

The Second Argument to prove this, is out of Reas. 2.
Exodus 16. 23. before the Law was delivered upon Mount Sinai, before the
Commandment was spoken from Horeb; yet you may see that the Sabbath is spoken
of, and the Lord does find fault with Israel, for not keeping of it, which
intimates it was a day they well knew, and the Lord says afterward to Moses,
How long will ye refuse to keep my Laws and Statutes? As in the 28. verse. the
Lord there speaks of a Sabbath, as a day well known unto them, that it was
commanded to be sanctified by them, and this was before the delivering of the
Ceremonial Law; therefore it is not a ceremonial Law, but a positive Law,
equipollent with the moral Law.

A Third Reason is, Because it was written by Reas. 3.
the finger of God in Tabels of stone and put into the Ark, Exodus 31. 18. and
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. the Commandments were written upon Two tables of stone, and by
the finger of God; Now all Divines, in all ages, agree upon this, that the
writing of this Commandment in the Two tables of stone, is an evident Argument
of the morality of it. For as a Reverend Divine says, Not to think the Fourth
Commandment to be moral, is the way to all Atheism, for if one should say the
Fourth Commandment is not moral, but ceremonial; another might step up the next
year and say the Second, and the Fifth, is not: So that whereas the Law is
written by the finger of God in tables of stone, if we root it out of the
tables of stone, we shall root it out of the heart of man; therefore the
writing of it in the tables of stone, is an evident Argument of the morality of
it to all ages.

A Fourth Argument is this, The Lord does urge ^eas. 4.
this Commandment, more then any other Commandment in the Decalogue; so that a
man may question the First, or Second, or any of the Ten as well as this; for
first we know that God has made this Commandment larger then any of the rest:
Secondly he has made it stronger, and urged it with more arguments then any
of the rest. 3. he has fixed a memento, remember before it: As who should say,
Be careful of this, and take heed of forgetting it, take heed of those that
shall teach you the contrary, that this Commandment is not moral. 4. It is
negatively delivered, and affirmatively; the other delivered only one way;
either affirmatively only, as the Fifth, Honor thy Father and Mother: or else
negatively only, as all the rest: There is never a Commandment delivered both
negatively and affirmatively, but only the Fourth, as, Remember the Sabbath
day, to keep it holy; there it is delivered affirmatively: And afterward it is
delivered negatively, In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, etc. The Lord has delivered it both ways; noting, that this
Commandment is equal and equipollent with the other: and the Lord did this in
infinite wisdom, because he had not written this Commandment in the heart of
man by the light of nature, therefore the Lord did urge it more with Arguments,
that what was wanting in the light of nature, might be supplied by the pressing
of Arguments.

5. Another Argument is, Because if this be Reas. 5.
not moral, then we have not Ten moral Commandments, there are but Nine: now
this is false; for the Scripture tells us, that the Commandments are Ten, as
Deuteronomy. 10. 4. it is not an Ecclesiastical thing, but the Lord has said it, as
you may see there: And he wrote upon the Tables according to the first writing,
the Ten Commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount, out of the
midst of the fire. The Lord spoke Ten Commandments; now if the Fourth
Commandment be not moral, there be not ten Commandments: And you may as well
deny the Articles of the Faith, and the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, as the
ten Commandments.

The Sixth Argument is this; Christ tells us Reas. 6.
plainly, that it is a moral Commandment, Matthew. 24. 20. Pray (says he) that
your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day. Our Savior Christ
here prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem, which was forty years after
Christ's Ascension, when all Ceremonies were ceased, as Paul had proclaimed
before the destruction of Jerusalem, That if any man would Gal. 5. 2
be circumcised, Christ should profit him nothing, Galat. 5. 2. That is, if he
would keep the Ceremonial Law: Now Christ bids those that should live forty
years after the Ceremonies were ceased, I would have you have a care of the
Sabbath, and delight in hearing of the word of God, and meditating upon it, and
so forth; and if any occasion come that you fall into the hands of your
enemies, pray that your flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day: as
who should say, If it be in the Winter, that will do hurt, and be troublesome
to your bodies: and so if you fly upon the Sabbath day, that will trouble your
consciences, if you regard Gods commandment and the good of your own
consciences; if you regard or fear Gods name, it will grieve you to fly on the
Sabbath day, whereby you shall be deprived of the Congregation of Gods Saints;
therefore pray that your flight be not upon that day: Intimating, that it was
Moral; for if it had been Ceremonial, he would not have wished them to pray
that it might not be upon that day.

Now whereas our Savior does so often condemn the Pharisees in regard of their
strictness of the Sabbath; it is not as if he did disallow the keeping of it;
but they were foolishly precise, they strained at a gnat, and swallowed a
camel; they crowded out, and regarded not Mercy and Judgment, they would not
pull a poor beast out of a pit, or relieve a poor man upon the Sabbath day:
they found fault that a man should be helped from deaths door by our Savior
upon the Sabbath, this was their folly. Now our Savior did not condemn strict
keeping of the Sabbath, but he did condemn their Superstition; for ever since
Adams time, it was lawful to do works of Mercy on the Sabbath, it was Lawful to
pull a beast out of the pit, and do works of Mercy, and Necessity upon the
Sabbath day. And, whereas the Law says, The Jews might not kindle a fire Exodus
35. 3
on the Sabbath day, if we were in their case, we might not neither; for they
were in the Wilderness, in an hot Country, where they needed no Fire, and
having their Food provided to their hands. And being in an hot Country, if
they kindled a Fire, it was out of wantonness; but if it had been a cold
Country, in Adams time, and Abraham's time, and in all times, it was lawful to
kindle a Fire.

Again, another Argument is this, The very Reas. 7.
Heathen themselves have ever kept a Sabbath day, though they could not tell
which the day was; some kept the Eighth day, and some the Ninth, yet they ever
kept a Sabbath day: Yea, it is certain, many of the Heathen themselves kept the
Sabbath after their manner. Alexandrinus, a godly Father, that lived but a
little after Christ, says, That the Heathen did count the Seventh day, an Holy
day. And it is related of Alexander Severus Emperor of Rome, though he were a
Pagan, and Infidel, yet every Sabbath day, he retired from his Warlike
affairs, and went up into the Capitol to worship his gods. And it is reported
again in Heathen Histories, our boys go not to School upon the Sabbath day,
neither are Humane Arts taught on that day; but we have a Rest upon that day:
Nay, some of the Heathens tell us, That they keep it from the Creation;
therefore Philo tells us, That the Sabbath day, is the Creation day: and diverse
other poor people, that never had Scripture, or Prophet, or Minister among
them, but went merely by the light of Nature, and what they had learned from
their Ancestors and Fathers, they did keep the Sabbath day. Nay, one of them
says, That on the Seventh day, all the Host of Heaven and Earth was finished.
Therefore seeing the very Heathen have learned to keep this day Holy, it is an
Evident Argument, that this is a Moral Commandment. I conclude the Proof of
this Point, with the saying of our Savior Christ, Mat. 5. 18. Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but not one jot or title of the Law shall pass away: Mark,
our Savior says there, that there shall not one jot or title of the Decalogue
pass away. As for the Ceremonial, and Judicial law, they stand not still, but
the whole compass of them is removed, the Ceremonial Law is quite and clean
abolished; and the Judicial Law, in many particulars; therefore our Savior
meant it not of those two Laws, but he speaks of the Decalogue, and he says,
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot of it shall pass away, much
less an whole branch be rooted out. And Gal. 3. 10. the Apostle says, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in this Law to
do them: not only he that continues not in the first, or second, or third
Commandment, but he that continues not in the fourth, and fifth, and all the
rest. And Jam. 2. 10. the Apostle there says, If a man should keep the whole
Law of God, and be guilty only in one point, he is guilty of all. Suppose thou
did keep the Three first Commandments, and all the Six last, if thou keep
not the Fourth Commandment, thou art guilty of the breach of all the
Commandments.

I let this pass, and come now to the last Proposition, Propos. 9. The first
day of he week was the Lords day, and so to continue to the end (...) the world.
which is this, That though the last day of the week were kept for the Sabbath,
till the coming of Christ, yet the first day of the week, that seventh day, is
now the Lords Day, and is so to continue to the end of the World: I frame it
thus, The change of the seventh day, to the first day of the week, is not by
Ecclesiastical Law, or by the Law of man, or Apostolical Tradition, but it is
by the Institution, and express Commandment of God.

The first Argument to prove it, is taken out of Reas. 1.
Psalm. 118. 24. It is an Argument used by the Church of God in all Ages, ever
since twelve hundred years ago. Saint Austin did use it in his time, the
Psalmist Prophecieth of the Resurrection of Christ, the Stone which the
builders refused, ver. 22. 23
is become the Head-stone of the Corner, this is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. (Our Savior Christ, Mat. 21. does expound it of his
Crucifying, and Resurrection) This is the day that the Lord has made, we will
be glad and rejoice in it. The Psalmist speaks here of the Resurrection of
Christ; now speaking of this very day, says he, This is The day that the Lord
has made: And we for our part, that are godly, and desire to be built upon
this Corner Stone, we will be glad, and rejoice in it; we will keep it as a
glorious day; a day of Thanksgiving, and Rejoicing in God. The thing is plain,
see Isa. 56. 1, 2 the Prophet Prophecyeth of the Day of Christ, and says, They
are blessed that keep the Sabbath, thus says the Lord, Keep Judgment, and
Justice, for my Salvation is at hand to come, and my Righteousness is to be
revealed: Blessed is the man that does this, and keeps my Sabbaths. This is a
Prophecy of the day of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and he pronounces a
blessing upon those that keep the Sabbath in those days. Again, Isa. 11. 10.
it was Prophesied of old, that the first day of the week, should be the Sabbath
day, the Lords day: In that day, there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall
stand up for an Ensign to the people, and the Nations shall fly unto it, and
his Rest shall be Glorious: Not only the Fathers Rest shall be glorious, when
he had Created Heaven, and Earth, and rested the seventh day, but Christ's Rest
also shall be glorious; for all Divines agree, that the Prophet speaks of the
Rest of Christ, from the work of Redemption; now his Rest shall be glorious. As
God the Father Rested from his work, and his Rest was glorious for four
thousand years together; so Christ's Rest from his work shall be glorious, there
shall be glory and honor put upon it, as well as upon the Rest of the Father,
when he Rested from making of Heaven and Earth.

Secondly, Another Argument to prove this, Reas. 2.
is out of Rev. 1. 10. there Saint John speaking of the first day of the week,
the Spirit of the Lord calls it the Lords Day, I was in the Spirit on the Lords
Day, so that it is not by Apostolical Tradition only, but by the Institution of
God himself, he does call it the Lords Day, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords
Day; he calls the first day of the week the Lords Day, by the same reason that
the Sacrament is called the Lords Supper. Now the Sacrament is so called,
because the Lord Instituted it, and therefore it must be Holy: so the Lords Day
is called so, because the Lord Instituted it, and therefore it must be kept
Holy.

Another Argument is this, Our Savior Christ Reas. 3.
himself does Entitle himself to be the Lord of the Sabbath, and therefore able
to alter it, and change it, and appoint what business is to be done, and what
not to be done, upon that day; he does openly profess, that he is Lord of the
Sabbath, Mark 2. 28. and John 5. 23. he says, They shall Honor the Son, as
they Honor the Father; As they honor the Father with a Sabbath, in regard of
his Rest from the work of Creation, so they shall honor the Son with a
Sabbath, in regard of his Rest from the work of Redemption, which being
compared with Rev. 1. 10. where it is called the Lords Day: These two being put
together, do plainly prove it.

Fourthly, Christ himself did command his Reas. 4.
Apostles to keep this day, it was not by the Apostles counsel, as if they
would set up this day in the Church, as some would have it, but Christ did
command them so to do; for the Apostles did deliver nothing Generally to the
Church, but what they received from the Lord, as Paul says, What I have
received from the Lord, that I declare unto you, 1 Cor. 11. But I will prove it
was the Commandment of Christ to them, by this Argument, Because the first day
of the week was always kept for the assemblies of the people of God, before
the Apostles durst order any thing in the Church: the Apostles never durst
undertake to set up any order in the Church, until the Holy Ghost fell upon
them in fiery tongues, and that was forty days after. Now the first day of
the week was kept long before this, John 20. 19. they kept the first day of the
week: and again the next week, ver. 26. they kept the first day of the week;
and Luke 24. they kept the first day of the week. And if you compare three or
four places of Scripture together, as Mat. 28. 16. 20. together with John 20.
19. 26. we shall see plainly in John, that they did meet upon the first day of
the week, and in Mat. 28. we shall see that Christ appointed them so to do, it
was by his Commandment.

Fifthly, Another Argument to prove that it Reas. 5.
is by Divine Institution, and not by Humane Ordinance, is this, Because the
Wisdom of Jesus Christ, would never have committed such a weighty thing as
this is to the Judgment of man. Certainly the Lord Jesus Christ, before his
ascending up unto his Father, would never have left things so raw, and
uncertain, and imperfect, as to leave such a Branch of such a Sacred Ordinance,
to be at the Arbitrament of men, being so apt to take liberty, and so negligent
to keep any day Holy, surely the Lord would never have left it to the
Arbitrament of men. Therefore we may well conclude, it is to be found in
Scripture by Ordination of God; for mark what the Apostle says, As* Moses was
faithful in all his house, so Christ is faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 2,
3. He proves that Christ is more faithful then Moses: Now Moses was faithful,
for he delivered the whole mind of God to the people of Israel, there was
nothing left out, for time, or place, or manner; there was not any Ceremony in
the worship of God left out, but he delivered all to them, he was faithful. So
Christ is faithful in his house, therefore seeing Christ knew how ready men
were to neglect, and profane the Sabbath, plain reason tells us, that he would
order it himself.

Again, Who should Institute any Ordinance Reas. 6.
in the Church, but only he that is the Head of the Church?

Again, Another Argument is this, It has Reas. 7.
been the Practice of all holy men since the Apostles days, to keep this day.
That it was the practice of the Apostles, that you will grant, that they kept
the first day of the week. Now if there were no Argument but this, that the
Apostles did keep it, this were enough to prove the change of the day, when we
find that the Apostles did sanctify this day, this were proof enough to stay
our minds; for certainly they had a more Infallible guidance and direction
then we have, and they insisted upon this day, 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. They, ordained,
and John the Divine kept this day, though he were in the place of his
banishment, where he could hear no Sermon, but was all alone, yet he would keep
the Sabbath, on the first day of the week, and the Lord rewarded his
sanctifying of this day, by declaring the Revelation unto him, to encourage all
good people to go on in keeping this day. But to leave these, and come to the
time of the ancient Fathers, immediately after the Apostles; they all agree
upon the first day of the week: Ignatius does so; and Saint Austin says, as
the Virgin Mary is among women, so is the first day of the week, among days;
as she was blessed above women, so is the first day of the week blessed above
days: No man that makes conscience of his ways, but shall find a blessing
upon every day; but God has blessed this day in a more peculiar manner, and
the soul that makes conscience of the keeping of it, may by the Covenant of God
expect a blessing.

Now to come to the dead times of Popery, If ever the Sabbath was out of
memory, and out of date, then was the time; for then there was a great falling
away, a great forsaking, a great declining, and people hearkened to Doctrines of
Devils, and Damnable Heresies, and the whole world groaned under Popery: Yet in
the dead times of Popery there were abundance of Prophets, the Lord did keep
their Judgments entire in this thing, as Gregory, and Silvester, and others,
though they were Superstitious Papists, yet they say, That the change of the
Sabbath, from the last day of the week to the first, is by Divine Institution.
Now to come to the times of Reformation, here we have abundance of Reverend men
beyond the sea, both in Germany, and France, that maintain it is by Divine
Institution.

Another Argument is taken from the Judgments Reas. 8.
of God; If men will not hearken to reason, and the examples of the Saints, and
Judgment of Divines in all ages, yet the Lord will make it appear from heaven,
that this is the Lords Day, and the Lord has sealed it.

First by his Judgments, for the wrath of God has been revealed from heaven
upon those that have profaned this day: the Stories in all ages show it. In
the Council of Paris, where Divines out of all Countries in Christendom were
met together, to consult about matters of Religion; Ministers stepped up, and
made complaint, concernining the Sabbath, Let us make a Canon for the
sanctifying of the Sabbath day, for to our knowledge, the Lords wrath has
broken out upon the Country for the breach of this day* and one related one
story, and another, another; as one told a Story of a Miller, that grinding
upon the Sabbath day, a fire brake out, and burnt Mill, and Man, and all.
Another, of an Husbandman, that going into the field to fetch home his Corn
upon the Sabbath day, thunder and lightning brake forth, and burnt him and his
corn. Many such stories were related in that Council, and the Magdenbergs have
a story of a Nobleman, that using to Hunt upon the Sabbath day, the Lord
brought it so to pass, that his Wife brought forth a child, with a head just
like a dog. I could relate abundance of Stories beyond sea, but we have enough
here at home; the Town of Stratford, in Warwick shire, as it is related in the
Practice of Piety, was Burnt three times upon this day. And the Story of the
Parris Garden, 1683. they were gathered together this day, to see the sport of
the Beasts fighting together, and the Scaffold fell down, and eight were slain,
and abundance hurt. So there are many more such Examples, I remember my self
above a dozen within this half year; the Lord has revealed his displeasure
from heaven, for the breach of this day.

Secondly, Again the Lord has sealed this in the conscience of his people. For
who are they that break this day, but loose, and vain, and profane men? And
who make conscience of it, but those that most fear God, those that God has
most crowned with Righteousness and sanctification? they delight in this, and
Sanctify it, and count it Holy to the Lord; and the more a man fears God, the
more careful he is of the keeping of this day, and the more he is grieved to
see it profaned, either by himself or others, because he has experience of
the blessings of God upon the keeping of this day; no man does Sanctify this
day conscionably, but he shall find a blessing, therefore it is surely from the
Lord.

The First Use is this, Is the first day of the week Use. 1.
the Sabbath by Divine Institution? then here we see, that we are to keep a
whole day. The Devil, if he cannot make men keep no day, then it is his policy
to make them keep it by halves. Oh, say they, Do we not keep the Sabbath? Do we
not come to Church, and hear the word, and Divine Service Morning and Evening?
Is not this to keep the Sabbath? But if the Lord has Instituted this day, then
certainly he has Instituted a whole day. It is madness, and want of reason
for a man to think the contrary. Suppose I hire a man to labor with me for a
day, do I not make account he should work one whole day? Suppose I hire a
Servant for a year, do I not mean an whole year, though I put not in the word
Whole, yet I suppose he must dwell an whole year with me. And if I hire a man
for a day, it is for an whole day? so that in Grammatical sense, when the
Scripture says, Thou shall Sanctify the Sabbath day, it is meant a whole day.
It is not in this, as in other words; any piece of a stone, is stone: but in
things that signify the whole, it is not the same, as a day; a part of a day,
is not a day: the least part of water is water, or of fire is fire; but a part
of a day, is not a day; Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day; and, I was in
the Spirit on the Lords day; and, they met together on the first day of the
week: it is a day, therefore the meaning of the scripture is, that it should be
a whole day, and it is so in reason, and therefore we are to keep an whole day:
therefore we should not curtail the Lords day, as the servants of Hanun did the
garments of David's servants. You know what became of Ananias, and Saphira, that
brought but, part, when they should have brought the whole; they should have
brought the whole price of their inheritance, but they brought but part,
therefore the Lord smote them with death: so when the Lord requires a whole
day, and we give him but a part, we shall bring vengeance upon our own heads.

There are diverse arguments for it: First the 1.
week consists of seven days, and he has given six to us and reserves one
day to himself: now we will grant that we have not part of six days, but six
whole days. If you ask a man what, do you work all day? Why yea, the Lord
has given us six days, therefore six whole days. Now by the same reason God
must have an whole day; if we take any part of the seventh day then we have
more then six days, which is contrary to the scripture.

Another reason is this, God rested the seventh 2.
day: now look what time God rested, that time we must sanctify: now God
rested the seventh day, all of it, he left none of the creation to do upon the
seventh day; he had finished the creation in six days, and rested all the
seventh day, therefore we must keep the whole day. Thirdly, because this is the
nature of a Sabbath, 3.
to be 24 hours, not to be an artificial day, but to be a natural day 24
hours together, as you may see Lev. 23. 32. you shall keep the Sabbath from
evening to evening; then the days were reckoned from evening to evening from
the creation; though now under the gospel, because Christ arose in the morning,
they are reckoned from morning to morning.

Fourthly another argument is this, God never 4.
ordained days half-holy in his Church: indeed the Church of Rome have half
holy days, as Saint Blac^es day, which is to be kept in the fore noon: so they
have other days that are to be kept in the afternoon, but in the fore-noone
they may do what they list: so heathens did, as Ovid says, the former part of
the day is holy, the latter part of the day is not holy; the Lord has no such
days as these, but all holy days in scripture: if God ever appointed a fast,
or new moon, or feast of Tabernacles, whatsoever holy day, he did institute, it
was an whole day, and not a part of a day, therefore much more this solemn day.

Again, the judgment of all Divines in all ages 5.
has been concerning an whole day. I could instance in the fathers, as in
Irenaeus, who says, we are to continue in the Sabbath all the day long, for
the Lord has required all the day to be kept holy unto him, and the saints of
God have always kept an whole day: so Saint Austin says, It is not enough,
that we keep three or four hours of the day, but that we rest the whole day.
And what rest? not only to rest from our bodily labors, for the beasts keep
this Sabbath; nor the rest of sport and pastime, for that is the Sabbath of the
golden calfe, they ate and drink, and rose up to play: No, but that thou may
be vacant to God all the day in prayer and serving of him. So in the Council
of Mexicon, there was an assembly of ministers out of all nations in
Christendom, and they ordained a canon, concerning the Lords day, We ordain,
that people keep the whole Lords day holy, and that they set themselves the
whole day to pray to God, and delight in God, and hear his word: and if a
countreyman's servant break this day, his punishment shall be to be beaten
with severe blows, [ ictubus gravioribus, are the very words of the Council;]
and if a Lawyer offer to plead this day, he shall not have the benefit of his
pleading or case; and if a minister break this day, he shall be excommunicated
half a year, and thrown out of the Church, and shall not be received into the
Church again, but upon great humiliation. This was the judgment of Divines in
all ages, and it is the observation of a reverend Divine, Musculus, upon Exodus
20. God does not say, Remember the Sabbath, to keep it holy; he that keeps it
an hour or two, keeps it holy: but, Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy;
he will have a day kept holy: Nay Calvin, whom they take to be on their side,
to be a patron of their liberty, he himself writing upon Deuteronomy. 6. upon these
words, Remember the Sabbath day, he says, we are to keep this day, speaking of
himself, and all the people of God,) we are to keep this day; and not a part
of it, but all of it.

The second Use is this: we may hence see Use. 2
that sports and pastimes are not agreeable to the Lords day; for if the Lord
has forbidden our weekly works on that day, then surely he has forbidden
sports and pastimes.

The reason is good, first because our weekly works, are things Commanded at
other times, now sports and pastimes* are never Commanded by God, but only
permitted: now if things commanded, and things that are good at sometimes, if
these notwithstanding may not be done upon the Lords day, then much less must
those be done that are permitted only

Secondly, because weekly works do less distract a man from God, then sports
and pastimes. I appeal to any man here present, if he be not more heavenly and
better employed, and less distract from good thoughts, and gracious
affections, when he is plowing, or sowing, or threshing, then when he is
diceing, and carding; sports and pastimes beat a man further off from religion,
and let a man go to prayer after sports and pastimes, he shall (find himself
more unfit and unaffected a great deal, then he shall when he comes from the
works of his calling. Now if those things that do less distract from Gods
worship and service are forbidden upon the Sabbath day, then surely much more
those things that do more distract, must needs be forbidden upon that day.

FINIS.

