THE Knot Untied: OR, THE ASSOCIATION DISBANDED.

PROVE. XI. 21.

Though hand join in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished.

ISAI. VIII. 9.

Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it
shall come to naught, for God is with us.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, 1682.

The Paper which was Seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet, by Fran. Gwin,
Esquire one of the Clerks of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and Read
November. 24. 1681. at the Old Baily, before His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer.
WE the Knights, etc. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests
and Jesuits, with the Papists, and their Adherents and Abbetrors, have for
several years last past pursued a most pernicious and hellish Plot, to root out
the true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life of
our Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary
power and Popery.

And it being Notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their Expectations of his succeeding to the Crown, and that through crafty
Popish Councils, his Designs have so far prevailed that he has created many
and great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in
Church and State.

It appearing also to us, That by his Influence, Mercenary Forces have been
levied and kept on Foot for his secret Designs contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the appparent
hazard of His Majesty's Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had
not been timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces with
great difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense:
And it being evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver His Majesty from the Councils, and out of the power of
the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministry of State and others have been so
prevalent, that Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued, and Dissolved
when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill
Ministers of State their Assistants.

And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power, has procured
the Garrisons, the Army and Ammunition, and all the power of the Seas and
Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these three Kingdoms, to be put into the
hands of his party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and
Order of the last Parliament.

And as we considering with heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation
and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and Consumed, and
lost by the intricate expensive management of these wicked destructive Designs;
and finding the same Councils after exemplary Justice upon some of the
Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish malice, and desire
of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being Murdered to
make way for the said D's Advancement to the Crown, and the whole Kingdom in
such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and
Liberty, sad experience in the Case, Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws
to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince.

We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way by a Bill for the purpose
to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and to
Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the first
Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to Advise and Act for the preservation of His Majesty
and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the dangers
aforesaid are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by
solemn and sacred promise of mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person and Royal State, and our
Laws, Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to join our
selves for the same intent in a Declaration of our United Affections and
Resolutions in the Form ensuing,

I A. B. Do in the presence of God Solemnly Promise, Uow, and Protest to
maintain and defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate, the
true Protestant Religion against Popery and all Popish superstition, Idolatry,
or Innovasion, and all those who do or shall endeavor to spread or advance it
within this Kingdom.

I will also as far as in me lies, maintain and defend His Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavor entirely to Disband all such
mercenary Forces as we have reason to believe, were raised to Advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good people of the Land.

Moreover J D. of Y. having publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion,
and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Damnable and Hellish Plots of the
Papists against His Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Kingdom; I will never consent that the said J. D. of Y. or
any other, who is or has been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the Papists in
their wicked Designs be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England. But
by all lawful means and by forte of Arms, it need so require, according to my
Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavor to Subdue, Expel and Destroy him, if
he come into England, or the Dominions thereof; and seek by force to set up his
pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any War,
Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public Enemies of our Laws,
Religion and Country.

To this end we, and every one of us whose hands are here underwritten, do
most willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other, jointly and
severally, in the bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association, and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces we will
oppose and pursue unto Destruction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous ends of this Association; and Maintain, Protect
and Defend all such as shall enter into it, and the just performance of the
true intent and meaning of it. And lest this just and pious work should be any
ways obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any
evil-minded persons under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this
Association, should attempt or commit Disorders, we will follow such Orders as
we shall from time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it
shall be sitting, or the major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing
this Association when it shall be, Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such
Officers as shall by them be set over us in the several Countries, Cities, and
Buroughs, until the next meeting of this or another Parliament, and will then
show the same Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the Prosecution thereof
during our Lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and
suppressed as perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which pains and punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us, without benefit of any Color or Pretense to excuse us.

In Witnesses of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this
present Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and
admit any others hereafter into this Society and Association. SIR,
YOU have turned me to a hard Chapter; for so it is, to give you my opinion of
the Association, that lies under so great debate. I must tell you, it is a
Riddle not easy to be deciphered; The Assertors of it call themselves a
Society The Bond of one Firm and Loyal Society, after the Protest: And This
Society at the end.
, and twice for falling. This, Sir, is the Distinctive Character of the
Jesuits, and you must imagine an Instrument of such a Make, is full of Mental
Reserves and Equivocations; for seeing they have so auspiciously assumed their
Title and Appellative, 'twill be hard if you will not allow them to imitate
something of their Practice.

The Body of this Monster has already been most accurately dissected by skilful
hands, and ingenious Lectures read upon every Member, Vein and Muscle of it. If
you think there may be something yet in the Belly of this Trojan Horse, that is
worthy of your notice, at your command, I shall venture in to search it.

We the Knights: They were influenced (it seems) by one of the other House, in
whose Custody this Instrument was found, if he were not rather the crafty
Contriver of it. A person so well known, there is no need of any new Character
to describe him: How he has played fast and loose both with King and Subject,
needs no other instance to demonstrate than the shutting up of the Exchequer.
Having been at the head of so many Seditious Juncto's, Traiterous Cabals,
Councils of State, usurped and Tyrannical Jurisdictions, you may very well
conclude, though he has learned the Art of shifting sides, he is not
over-stockt with Loyalty. If any insolency in his carriage has made him jealous
that he is obnoxious to a high displeasure, no wonder the discontents arising
from such Reflections, should prompt him to the courses he has taken; It Is
natural for the wounded Deer to run into the common Herd for shelter. And such
is the Spirit of our little Hero, whatever stands in the way of his Ambition,
he will leave nothing unattempted to remove it. Let Religion sink or swim among
the States General, Delenda Carthago is his Motto.

But let us proceed: We the Knights, etc.] This [etc.] is a fatal Character, if
we can remember that Et caetera-Oath which made such a hideous noise in the
year 40.

Thou art the curled lock of Antichrist;
Rubbish of Babel; for who will not say,
Tongues are confounded in Et caetera?
Who views it well, with the same eye beholds
The old false Serpent in his numerous folds.
The Banes are asked, and now the times give way,
Betwixt Smectymnus and Et caetera.
Cleaveland.

Something certainly is involved in the subtle twirl of this Dragons Tail: If
they be True Protestants, in the sense of these Associates, they must be such
as Protest against the present Church of England, the Succession of the Crown,
and the British Monarchy. Here we have the very Spawn of the Presbyterian
fruitfulness, Independents, Ranters Quakers, with the rest of the Fanatics
(which proceed from the Presbyterian, by an equivocal Generation,) and without
all doubt, are comprehended within the bowels of this prodigious Character, all
Schismatics, Rebels, Traitors, Regicides, Tyrants and Usurpers, (who, by their
own proper Names and Titles, were by no means fit to be dignified or
distinguished, in such a Pious and Politic Association) were cunningly and
closely tied up together with those Knights in the Gordian Knot of this etc.

And they say, Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests and
Jesuits, with the Papists, and their Adberents and Abettors, have, for several
years last past, pursued a most pernicious and Hellish Plot, to root out the
True Protestant Religion, as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the life of our
Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary Power
and Popery.

Here we have a Mask of zeal made up of a double pretense, Pro and Con, (1.)
For The Protestant Religion, with the preservation of the Kings Life, our Laws
and Liberties. (2.) Against The Popish party, and their Abettors.

But that we may not be perpetually bewitched with these delusions, it has been
made apparent by a person of unquestionable knowledge and integrity A short
view of the Troubles, ^. 44. p. 588.
, That these great pretended Champions for the Protestant Religion, the Laws of
the Land, the liberty of the Subject, and privileges of Parliament, (for these
are taken in, too, in this Association) made use of those specious precences,
for no other end, than to captivate the People, and by that means get the power
of the Sword into their own merciless hands. And (as that Worthy Author
expostulates) were not there certain Propositions read in their House of
Commons, (where this Association P. 590.
was first spawned,) which were found in Mr. Saltmarsh his Trunk, near Hull:
First, That all means should be used to keep the King and his People from a
sudden Union. Secondly, To cherish the War, under the notion of Popery, as the
surest means to engage the People. Thirdly, If the King would not grant their
demands, then to root him out of the Royal line, and collate the Crown upon
some body else.

So that they served themselves of Popery for a pretense, and made the Priests
and Jesuits but their stalking Horse, while they aimed at other Game. If the
Popish Priests and Jesuits have a Design to retrieve what has been taken from
the Pope and that Church that depends upon him, are not these Associators
equally intent and zealous to make a spoil and booty of those Church Revenues
which are left? Is not their Religion and keenest zeal fed upon the
Churchlands, which they have got into their possession? And why do they stickle
so earnestly against the Pope, but to maintain that interest? If you could
secure their fears and jealousies in this point, assure your self, for the most
part of them, their Consciences are not so squeamish, but the Mass would go
down with them as easily as the Directory.

It Is very well observed, That the Rule for Doctrine, Worship and Discipline in
the Church of England, at the Reformation, A Vindication of the Primitive
Church, p. 275.
was at first received with universal joy and approbation, none but Papists
opposing it; But some time after, some few discontented men, under pretense of
zeal against Popery, took the part of the Papists against this Rule; and it is
observable (says that Author) that as one faction grew up and gathered
strength, so did the other; that ones right and left hand can hardly grow in
evener proportion; so that one would fancy, that either they advanced by some
secret Consent, or were nourished from the same common. Stomach; It may be
(says he) from him that Patawicini calls the Stomach, as well as the Head of
the Church, the Pope.

Have not these pretended Protestants and Et caetera's been eager (even to
Sedition and Blood) to throw down the Enclosure, to Repeal those Laws, and
subvert that Church Government which have kept out Popery ever since the
Reformation? Have they not given their Emissaries advantage by their Projected
Toleration and Indulgence, and sheltered the Priests and Jaesuites (whom they
pretend to Associate against) in their own Conventicles: Nay, to come home to
the business, have not these men Rivall'd the Papists in their Treasons? Have
they not emulated them in their practices of Conspiracy, and taken the Hellish
work of Destruction out of their Hands, and subverted both Church and State,
while they pretended the Popish party did pursue it?

For, if we put in Fanaticism instead of Popery, and change the Popish Priests
and Jesuits, into Presbyterians and Independents, with their Adherents and
Abettars, the design (they set on foot) has not only been, for several years
pursued; but effectually performed and really executed, as we very well
remember by sad and woeful experience. For did they not root out the True
Protestant Religion, established here by the Authority of pious Princes, as well
as the Blood of Holy Martyrs? Did they not take away the Life of our most
Gracious King, the most incomparable Prince of Christendom? Did they not
subvert our Laws and Liberties, and set up Arbitrary Power amongst us? All this
they did most accursedly accomplish to the astonishment of all Christendom:
And yet we have reason to believe, that such of these Associators as were
engaged in it (and perhaps they were not a few) never looked upon it as such a
pernicious and Hellish Plot, nor were touched with such Remorse and grief of
Heart, for that actual Guilt and Notorious Crime, as they pretend to have upon
the account of this, which is but their own jealousy and surmise.

That the most prudent and faithful Ministers of State cannot escape their
Malicious Insinuations, we are not at all to wonder at: It Is the frequent
practice of all Malcontents, when they become Seditious: For though it be the
Majesty of the Government they aim at, yet they think they can no way wound
That, with so much safety, and to so great effect, as through the sides of such
Worthy Ministers.

To traduce the Duke is the main Design of this Association. And indeed, if we
well observe it, it is an unusual strain of Modesty in them, that they do not
positively, as well as by implication, impute it to the Devilish Malice, and
desire of Revenge in his Royal Highness, that his Majesty is in continual
hazard of being Murdered, to make way for his own advancement to the Crown. For
they say expressly, That by his Influence, Mercenary forces have been levied,
and kept on foot for his secret Designs: Which, it seems, are not so secret but
they can, if not penetrate, yet conjecture and imagine them. But as the King is
most concerned herein, so has he best opportunity to examine it and find it
out, if there were any truth in it, or color for it.

Whereas it is suggested, that the levying of those Forces was unaccountable,
their Disbanding difficult; and at the Kingdoms great expense: There Is not a
little Malice coucht in that allegation. To what purpose those Forces were
raised, is not unknown to such as have a mind to understand; and the Service
which some of them performed, was not secret, but in the open Field, and so
eminent, that Foreign States and Princes will remember it to their Honor.

But let them ask themselves this question, were Cromwell's Forces Levied, or
kept up, or Disbanded, without the Kingdoms great expense? Or will the Forces
designed by these Associators be raised without money? and will not their
Officers and Conductors expect their Pay? and at whose charge must all this be?
and how shall they be Disbanded? do they Promise and Vow here, that They will
never Separate themselves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution
thereof during their lives? And (if they were once in Arms) we might believe
them, though they were not engaged upon such Temporal and Eternal pain as is
due to Perjured persons.

This Party has sometimes been very earnest to embroil his Majesty in a War
with the French King, but without any fond or considerable Subsidy to maintain
it. To what end this was projected, wise men will judge, but I shall forbear to
mention.

But because they cannot to easily embroll his Majesty abroad, they resolve to
do it at home. To this effect, several Plots have been set a foot, and they
have made their utmost advantage of them. And because the great obstacle (which
is their greatest Grievance too) is, The Militia in the Kings hand; They design
very dutifully (no doubt) to feize it without his leave, that they may have it
once again in their Power, to set up Committees of Publicans in every County,
to make Delinquents, and then to Tax, Decimate and Sequester, or make them
Compound for their own Estates at their pleasure: And what will follow but a
High Court of Justice, to bring whom they please, to (what they please to call)
Condign punishment, and at last to extinguish (as much as in them lies) the
Royal Family, and the Church of England, root and branch. And this shall be
voted the Defense of the Protestant Religion and our Liberties, without our
Properties, the Laws and Government, against the encroachments of an Arbitrary
Power. Yea, and the Janissaries they employ, shall not wear the name of
Mercenary Soldiers, but be rewarded, as Cromwell's were (for their good
service) and be honored with the Character and Title of English Freemen, and
the Godly Party. These are the Privileges of the Saints.

But we use to say, The Burnt Child dreads the Fire: And I hope this Generous
and Manly Nation is not grown too stupid to be taught by Proverbs, nor yet
become so infatuated as to forget so fresh and chargeable an experiment.

But they take it for granted, It Is notorious, that the Popish Priests and
Jesuits, with the Papists and their Adherents, have been highly encouraged by
the Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and
that He has publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion.

This they peremptorily averr: but it can hardly be imagined, that Any free
Prince, at this time of day, should be so fast asleep, or ill advised, as to
make himself the Pope's Vassal, to admit a Supremacy into his Realm paramount
to his own; To have his own Royal Authority confronted by the Check of foreign
Bulls from Rome, or the Treasure of his Kingdoms exhausted by such Engines of
Extortion, as can serve him to no other end, but to endanger, impoverish, and
inthrall him.

Consider but the Sense of the Greek Church, who will not brook that pretended
Supremacy in the lowest state of their Declination; or the present Posture and
Resentments of the French, who seem so weary of the Pope's Inchroachments and
Usurpation, that they kick and wince, as if they were in pain and Travel, to
throw his Holiness out of the Saddle, in those Dominions.

As for his Royal Highness, perhaps he may disdain to have his Integrity
questioned by a common Test: many times Great Spirits are irritated by such
Attempts, (which are therefore, for the most part, better let alone than put in
practice;) they will not be forced by such Screwed Engines to gratify their
Adversaries with an open profession of that, which notwithstanding, in their
Hearts they may most steadfastly believe.

Yet we cannot take it for a wonder, if his Royal Magnanimity, and the deep
Resentments he has for his Blessed Father's Sufferings under the bloody hands
of seditious Schismatics, will not suffer him to be hectored by them into an
Approbation of their Fanatical Delusions.

But his Royal Highness is so well satisfied with the Church of England, as by
Law established, that he professes a great Kindness and Veneration for it, for
the very Loyalty remarkable in her Religion above all others; and for that
Reason, upon all occasions he declares his Readiness to preserve and support it.

Nor have we only his Highness's bare Word or Resolution to rely upon, his
eminent Deeds are such a signal Exemplification hereof in Scotland, that the
Bishops of that Kingdom have made their Profession to my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, in these Words;

We should prove very defective in Duty and Gratitude, if upon this occasion we
should forget to acknowledge Edinburgh, March 9. 1682.
to your Grace how much this poor Church and our Order do owe to his Princely
Care and Goodness; that his Majesty and the worthy Bishops of England may from
you receive the just Accounts thereof.

Since his Royal Highness's coming to this Kingdom, we find our Case much
changed to the better, and our Church and Order (which through the cunning and
power of their Adversaries, were exposed to extreme hazard and contempt)
sensibly relieved and rescued; which, next to the watchful Providence of God,
(that mercifully superintends his Church) we can ascribe to nothing so much as
to his Royal Highness's gracious owning and vigilant protection of us.

Upon all occasions he gives fresh Instances of his eminent Zeal against the
most unreasonable Schism, which by renting, threatens the Subversion of our
Church and Religion; and concerns himself, as a Patron to us in all our
public, and even personal Interests; so that all men take notice of his signal
Kindness to us, and observe that he looks upon the Enemies of the Church, as
Adversaries to the Monarchy it self: nor did we ever propose or offer to his
Royal Highness any Rational Expedient which might conduce for the Relief or
Security of the Church, which he did not readily embrace and effectuate.

If Officers have been named and appointed by his Royal Highness, none can
blame it, but such as have an Ambition to get that Power into their own hands.
And, if it were lodged in the hands of these Associates, would the hazard of
the King's Person, or of our Religion and Government be any whit less, or less
apparent? Nay, we have learned by sad Experience, that the danger would be
greater, if their Ruin would not be inevitable.

But they say, his Highness has created many and great Dependents upon him, by
his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in Church and State. A great Crime
doubtless, in a Person that stands in that Relation the D. has to his Majesty.
The Church and State would be well served if all Offices and Preferments were
at their Disposal, which is that their Avarice and Ambition thirst and aim at.

But we hope his Highness has created no Dependents; that is, neither made
choice of any Servants for himself, nor recommended any Officers to the King,
but such as are according to the Standard of his Wise and Renowned Grandfather;
who advises his Son thus:

Choose such as come of a true and honest Race, and have not had the house
whereof they are descended, Basilicon Doron. p. 47. to 49.
infected with Falsehood; such as come of a good and virtuous kind. For it is
most certain, that Virtue or Vice will oftentimes with the Heretage be
transferred from the Parents to the Posterity, and run on a Blood, (as the
Proverb is) the Sickness of the Mind becoming as kindly to some Races as these
Sicknesses of the body that infect in the Seed. The King advises further;

See they be of a good Fame and without Blemish, and endued with such honest
Qualities as are meet for such Offices as ye ordain them to serve in; that your
Judgment may be known in employing every Man according to his Gifts.

But here I must not forget to remember, and according to my Fatherly Authority
to charge you, to prefer specially to your Service so many as have truly served
me, and are able for it: -- trusting and advancing those farthest whom I found
faithfullest. -- So shall ye not only be best served, but ye shall kyth your
thankful Memory of your Father, and procure the Blessing of these old Servants,
in not missing their old Master in you. And as I wish you to kyth your constant
Love toward them that I loved, so to kyth in the same measure your constant
Hatred to them that I hated; I mean, bring not home, nor restore not such as ye
find standing banished or fore-faulted by me: -- for how can they be true to
the Son that were false to the Father?

I hope, that both his Majesty and his Royal Highness may follow this grave and
sage Advice in the Choice of their Officers and Dependents, whether designed to
serve in Church or State; and then I am well assured, that few of these
Associators will hereafter be Candidates for Court-Preferments.

We shall see the Duke's great Fault at last will be only this, That he is wise
and valiant, just and well-beloved, steady to his Word, and faithful to his
Adherents; but that which is worst of all in the Opinion of these Associates,
is, That he is Presumptive Heir to the Crown, and will suffer no Republican to
pick out the Jewels, or pluck off the Feathers of it. But so long as he has so
high an Affection and Respect for the King's Person, and gives Countenance and
Encouragement to none but such as are truly loyal and serviceable to his
Majesty, I hope 'twill be no Crime in His Royal Highness to make much of such
as own and espouse his Hereditary Interest, after the King's Example.

While these men boast of their continual Endeavors to deliver his Majesty
from the Councils and out of the Power of the Duke, they do but upbraid the
King (as they did his Father of ever Blessed Memory) of Weakness, as not able
to discern what belongs to his own Interest and Safety, nor to distinguish
betwixt his Friends and Enemies.

Under favor, this is but a course Complement to his Majesty; the Wise Man
has taught us a better Lesson; That a Divine Sentence is in the Lips of Prove.
16. 10.
the King; (and) his Mouth erreth not in Judgment. Had it not been for this
Holy Oracle, we should have been many times surprised at the celebrated
Prudence of his Majesty's Conduct (when the Case has been most difficult) in
turning our Disappointments into a Satisfaction.

Has not his Wisdom appeared to Admiration, in stemming the Tide, and checking
the Waves of Popular Rage and Fury, when they seemed to threaten us with an
Inundation? Has he not taken the Seditious in their own Craftiness, and made
their own Tongues and Pens to fall upon themselves, till they have been glad to
take Sanctuary in an Ignoramus Jury?

That Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued and Dissolved, is another of
their specious Allegations: but herein his Majesty has given such ample
Satisfaction, as supersedes all attempts of the like Nature; For, What can the
Man do who comes after the Eccles. 2. 12.
King? He that cannot acquiesce with great Contentment in such a Gracious
Declaration, let him understand the Sense of all Loyal Subjects in their solemn
Addresses of Thankfulness upon that account. Do they not own it as an undoubted
Copy of that Original and transcendent Goodness which the Finger of God has
impressed upon his Royal Bosom? A Declaration so full of Princely Grace and
Wisdom, and generally so suitable to their Wishes, that it did but anticipate
what of Duty (as well as Interest and Inclination) should have been their own
Petition? and that it left them no room, but for the lively Expressions of
their Joy and Gratitude? And he that has not joined his Suffrage with his
Fellow Subjects in such a dutiful Acknowledgment, must certainly be a Member of
this Society, or a well-Wisher to it.

Though we have as great a Reverence for Parliaments as we ought, yet we cannot
but reflect upon it with Grief, that the Composition of those Assemblies have
not of late proved so harmonious as the state of Affairs required: which puts
me in mind of what the Author of that ingenious Essay upon the Reign of Henry
the Third has observed, Compendium politicum. pa. 36.
of such a Convention of those Times.

Thus (says he) Parliaments, that were ever before the most infallible
Medicine to heal up any Distempers or Malignities, are now grown worse, and
almost less desirous than the Maladies themselves, since malevolent Humors and
factious Spirits did most of all sway in them, and the well composed Tempers
had the least share and prevalency in all their Consultations. The Fruits and
Effects of their unlimited Session, who were called to Parliament in Forty One,
we cannot but with bleeding Hearts remember. And whatever respect they pretend
to have for Parliaments, it is (as formerly) but to serve their own ends: for,
(if they may have their own Will) according to the Project and Design laid in
this Association, all Parliaments for the future (as they were once already in
my own Memory) will be reduced (without a King or a House of Lords) to a select
Pack of well-flesh'd Rumpers, to do the Drudgery of their Army.

The Bill of Exclusion and Banishment is so unreasonable, and so absolutely
unjust, that we cannot look upon it as a means of the King and Kingdoms Safety.
And if the D. be of such a vindictive Spirit as they suggest, nay allow him but
the Magnanimity that becomes his Highness, or the common Resentments of
Humanity, and the passing such a Bill had been so great and just a Provocation,
it must needs have exposed the King's Person to great hazard, and the Kingdom
to the lamentable Fate of a Civil War, if not an inevitable Invasion thereupon.
And when we reflect upon the Rise and Progress of our late Confusions, (so
black and dismal in the Event, and so fresh in Memory) all good men cannot but
be deeply sensible of his Majesty's great Care and Princely Wisdom, in keeping
us from the more dreadful Rage of such a Rupture as the restless Malice of ill
men study to promote, whether for the Accomplishment of their own Ambition, or
the setting up of their Darling Commonwealth.

Whereas they say, They are persuaded in their Consciences, that the dangers
they suggest are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of
the best means in their power, to secure the Kingdom against them: We comfort
our selves, that they are no Prophets, (though it is no hard matter to foretell
what they do project, if it be in their Power to effect it,) and that this is
not the first time they have attempted very ill things, (if not out of Malice,
Ambition, and Design,) to make the best on it, upon the account of an erroneous
Conscience.

And whereas they say, They are entrusted to advise and act for the
preservation of his Majesty and the Kingdom: We are satisfied, that they are no
farther entrusted by the Laws and Loyal Commons of England, than may consist
with their Duty and Allegiance; that is, no farther than the King shall please
to require their Advice, and allow them to act by his Direction or Consent.
Whereupon, the so much Renowned Queen Elizabeth commanded the In the 35. of her
Reign. 1592.
Speaker to tell the (then) House of Commons (thus) in her Majesty's Name, It
is in me and Townshend's Historical Collect. p. 63.
my power to call Parliaments; and it is in my power to end and determine the
same; it is in my power to assent or dissent to any thing done in Parliament.

Consequently hereunto, though they call this Association the best means that
are in their power to secure the Kingdom, we are well assured, that it is not
in their Power at all when the King forbids it, and (as Sed tantum possumus
quod jure possumus.
in Reason and Justice in this Case he may and ought) declares it a Design to
subvert both his Prerogative and Government.

For to be plain with you, in this detestable Contrivance which is here
recommended under the specious Title of an Association, every man of Sense may
observe with half an Eye, what the Hypocrisy and Subtilty of those ill men
have projected, to set up themselves, upon the Ruins of the Royal Family, the
English Protestant Church and Nation. For,

1. To secure his Majesty's Sacred Person, they will disband his Guards, and
remove his Faithful Ministers.

2. To preserve his Royal State and Dignity, they will cut off the Succession,
and banish his dear and only Brother out of his Dominions.

3. To support his Crown, they will usurp the Government into their own hands,
and turn it into a Military State of Safety.

4. For the Honor of their Country, they will subvert that which (to all Loyal
Subjects, and in the Estimation of all wise and sober persons) is the happiest
Monarchy under Heaven.

5. That out Properties, Laws, and Liberties may be kept inviolable, they will
set up an Arbitrary Power, and some Regiments of Janissaries, to rule over us,
and make us Slaves to our Fellow Subjects.

6. To defend Religion, they will not consult a Legal and Learned Convocation;
but they will lay aside the decent and distinctive Garment of the Minister,
they will take away the Cross in Baptism, that ancient Badge of Cathollck and
Primitive Christianity; they will abandon kneeling at the Sacrament, with all
external Adoration; they will turn the Reverend Bishops out of the House of
Lords, and repeal those Acts by which Uniformity in the Worship and Service of
God, stands established; and so destroy (the Bulwark of the Reformation) the
best Protestant Church in Christendom. All which Particulars, here enumerated,
are the visible and avowed Designs of this Society and their Association.

To effect all this, they will wrest the Sword out of the King's hands, and
appoint Officers of their own, to levy, discipline, and conduct Forces (how far
they will be Mercenary we desire not to make experiment) without his Majesty's
Consent, and to pursue to Destruction all such as shall oppose them.

And for all this, we have not only their Lives and Fortunes engaged, under
their Hands and Seals; but their solemn Promise, Vow, and Protestation in the
Presence of Almighty God.

So that here is a Design and Train laid, to act over again the same Scene of
Treason and Rebellion which has once already (and within our Memory) turned
this our flourishing Kingdom into an Aceldama, and smothered the Glory of it in
Confusion.

An Association this is, so hypocritical in the Disguise, so devilish in the
Design, and so destructive in the Tendency of it, That what Knights or Et
Caetera's soever they be, that pretend to give it Countenance (in the Front of
it) we are sure it could no more be subscribed (or tendered to Subscription) by
Subjects that have any Sense or Conscience of their Duty, than assented to by
any Prince that has Regard to his own Prerogative, or the Welfare of his People
and the Church of God.

In a sad Resentment whereof, we find that all Loyal Subjects do humbly protest
their utter Abhorrence of the said Association, with all other Plots, Designs,
and Practices of the like Nature; and we see also, they resolve not only to
deprecate them in their Litany, (wherein we beg Deliverance from all Sedition,
Privy Conspiracy, and Rebellion) but also to engage their Lives and Fortunes
under his Majesty and his Lawful Successors, to suppress them.

It Is true, as you observe, the pretenses of Zeal and Piety (for Religion,
King, and Country) are too apt to gratify the good meaning of some, and to
impose upon the weakness of others. And I am not ignorant, that such
Insinuations have prevailed so far with many, as to make them ready to submit
their Necks to the same Yoke which galled us formerly, and to become Slaves a
second time to the Designs of Faction, and the Lusts of their Fellow Subjects.

But when a stupid Insatuation has prevailed with such easy men, to put on the
like Chains with their own hands, we esteem it not the least of our happiness,
that it is still in his Majesty's Power to knock them off, and reprieve us from
that Thraldom.

I tell you not my own single Sense, but the Sense of all Loyal and Sober men,
that being taught by so late Experience, that such as snatch at the Jewels of
the Crown can never think themselves secure of that Booty, till our Property
becomes their Prey too, (as it was in the late Rebellion, which began with an
Association) we are highly obliged to his Majesty's Fatherly Care and
Tenderness, that he will not more suffer an Arbitrary Power to insult over his
Subjects Liberty than to invade his own Prerogative.

And the Sense his Majesty is pleased to express of our sad Affliction or
Bondage under the late Tyranny of Hypocritical Reformers, gives us an assured
Confidence, that so Divine a Clemency (as shines in him) can never delight to
hear us groan under the like oppressions.

And His Royal Word to secure us against the Attempts of it in others, as well
as against the practice of it in his own Dispensations, is a Supersedeas to all
our Doubts and Scruples upon that account.

And having the same Security for the full Fruition of our Religion, in this
Church established, (the most steady and inflexible Prop and Bulwark of the
Throne, which therefore makes it no less his Majesty's Interest than his
Obligation and Piety to support it) we cannot conceive it in any Danger unless
betrayed by a Latitudinarian Neutrality, or our own froward Schisms and
Dissentions. And we should be secure enough in this point too if we could be
timely awakened to consult our own Safety, and unanimously agree to make the
known Laws the Standard of our Duty, as his Majesty has graciously resolved to
make them the Rule of his own Government.

After such Agonies as we have conflicted with through the neglect hereof, the
concurrent Practice of this Rule would be the best Atonement of our
Differences, and the Ensurance of our Concord. This would extinguish all our
present Plots, and prevent the Emergency of the like Projects for the future;
then the Kingdom would be settled in Peace, the Church in Order, and all sorts
of men become conformable in a due Obedience. Succession would be no more
disputed, the Government no more libelled, Loyalty no more defamed, nor the
Dutiful persecuted by the Tongues or Pens of the Malicious, the Pillow of the
Crown would be no longer stuffed with Thorns, His Majesty's Throne would become
safe and easy, his Sword victorious, and his Royal Scepter had in Veneration.

And seeing His Majesty has even prevented our most early Addresses, Peruse His
Majesty's Gracious Declaration.
in professing that to be his Royal Will and Resolution, which should have been
our Prayer and Option; and having his Sacred Word (published in the face of all
Congregations, before the Presence of the Almighty) to secure All we can
account dear to us; there remains nothing for us to Act but the part of Loyal
and Obedient Subjects, to enable His Majesty to triumph in a serene Felicity,
maugre the petulant frowardness and treachery of all undermining Factions.

To this end, our Gratitude and bounden Duty puts us under these several
Obligations.

1. To abandon those Fears and Jealousies which crafty and Designing-men
(whether out of Avarice or Ambition) are wont to suggest and raise, to poison
us with Discontents, and bewitch us into Tumults.

2. To reley upon His Majesty's Royal Word, His Princely Wisdom, and Watchful
Conduct to protect us in our Persons, in our Laws, in our Religion and
Liberties.

3. To assist His Majesty with due Supplies, and the utmost Endeavors that the
highest Loyalty and Affection can contribute to make his Reign Glorious.

4. To exalt His Majesty's Esteem and Grandeur, that He may still be courted to
hold the Balance, and to establish the General Peace of Christendom.

5. To make our Acknowledgments legible in our Practice, by a Regular and
Uniform Obedience, and a hearty Compliance with all emergent Advantages, that
may promote his Ease and Royal Satisfaction.

6. To supplicate on His Majesty's behalf, a long Life, and a vigorous Health,
and a Divine Assistance; that (for the good of these Nations) the thread of his
precious Life, (upon which our Happiness so much depends) may be twisted with
all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth, and drawn out in an even line of
Contentment, to the utmost extent and period.

Amen.
ISA. 8. 12, 13, 14.
Say ye not, A Confederacy, to all them to whom this People shall say, A
Confederacy; neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid.

Sanctisie the Lord of Hosts Himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread;

And he shall be for a Sanctuary.

FINIS.

