A New and Needful TREATISE OF SPIRITS and WIND Offending Man's Body.

Wherein are discovered their Nature, Causes and Effects.

By the Learned Dr. Fienus.

And Englished By William Rowland A. M. For the Improvement of Physic, and
more speedy Cure of Diseases.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Benjamin Billingsley and Obadiah Blagrave, at the
Sign of the Printing-Press at Gresham-Colledge-gate, near the Church in
Broad-street. 1668.

To the Royal Society the Virtuosi.
SInce the Evening preceded the Morning in the account of the first Day, and
the most precious of Lights sprung out of Darkness: as it much countenances
th^^ Philosophers Privation and their Veritatem in puteo, so it seems to tax
their presumption, who speak frequently of the Light, seldom of the Darkness
that is in them.

Whilst you the true Offspring of the first and purest Virtue, in your noble
and masculine Humility (though you had very large Accomplishments to boast of)
deemed it your highest Glory to obtain a Royal Commission from the most Heroic
Spirit of England, to dig (unitedly) for Truth and Knowledge, as for hidden
Treasure.

And this (not like those envious Monasticks, who what they found, would ever
have confined soly to their reclused Cells) but most ingeniously for dispersing
of it to the Universal Benefit of all Mankind without exception.

If then small things may hold Resemblance with greater, and the least Addition
of Knowledge to your own Country cannot but be matter of rejoicing to your
goodness.

I shall not cease to hope but this Translation and Contribution of this kind
of knowledge to the English, and its humble Dedication, will have a fair and
kind Acceptance with your Wisdoms.

Not in the least supposing either the Subject (being of Wind and Spirits) or
this Discourse, can be strangers to your general reading; but some what to stir
up your joint and inspective minds, to the advancement of these Studies to
farther degrees of Perfection: and if possible, to reduce them to the needful
use of Physic. Not only all Diseases, Pains, and Distempers, being of late
imputed to venomous Spirits generated in Man's Body, but their Cure also, to the
efficacy of those undescernable forces in Nature, benign Spirits. But may some
reflect, what must we now dig for Winds as for hidden Treasures? Seriously you
may without disparagement, it being no Solecism to admit of Flatum as well as
Veritatem in puteo. And indeed (in the sense of this worthy Author) Where may
not you find them? Or is it not rather a question, What can be performed
without them? Or rather (if once thoroughly understood) in their various
differences and properties, What may not be done by their assistance? And that
the Spirit of Spirits may constantly be your guide, shall ever be the earnest
desires of the Admirer of your generous Aims and Intentions,

William Rowland.

A New and Excellent TREATISE OF Wind Offending Man's Body.

In which is described the Nature, Causes, and Symptoms of Wind: Together with
Its speedy and easy Remedy*

By W. R. M. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Benjamin Billingsley and Obadiah Blagrave, at the
Sign of the Printing-Press at Gresham-Colledge-gate, near the Church in
Broad-street. 1668.

To all those whose Bodies are troubled with Wind, or any Diseases caused
thereby.
IT is confessed by all, that no temporal Blessing is better then Health;
therefore it is to be admired, that most men should so much slight and neglect
it: the worth whereof, if we consider, we must say with the Poet Amphion:

O blessed Health, with thee it is ever spring,
And without thee there is no pleasant thing.
She is the cherisher of all Wisdom, Science, and Arts, and the only solace
that we find in this Troublesome life. By the presence of health all humane
actions, and strength of body, beauty, riches, and whatsoever is esteemed among
men, do flourish: she failing by malignity of evil causes, all other things
fail, which were before in request, and a disease follows, which is the
forerunner of death. Now who can expel a disease but by avoiding and excluding
the causes that breed and feed it? nor can the causes be avoided, or excluded
before they are known. Therefore the chief way to cure a disease, is to know
the causes. And if we carefully consider them, it will appear, that no thing in
the whole world is more miserable then man, and (if you except his diviner
part, the Soul) nothing is more frail and obnoxious to the injuries of all
things. For what is there in the whole Creation, by which a man is not assailed
and opposed, and sometimes hurt? For the Heavens and the Stars by their
conversions and malignant aspects bring plagues, heats, and extreme colds, and
diverse inconveniences to Mankind: And the Elements are plainly perceived to be
more injurious then they. For the Air has been infinite ways pernicious to
Mankind, as by Hail, Rain, Storms, Thunder, and Lightning: And the Earth by
terrible motions, and quaking, and opening of it self, and by breathing forth
pestilent vapors from its Dens and Caverns: And the Water with stinking
vapors from Inundations, Fens, and standing Pools: And the Fire also by many
Conflagrations. Moreover all sorts of living Creatures by one unanimous
consent, seek the destruction of Mankind: nor are the Herbs, Shrubs, and Trees
with their fruit, freed from that pernicious Spirit. Besides all these, as if
they could not do mischief enough to Mankind, man himself is enemy to himself,
by Thefts, Brabling, Murder, and Wars, and many innumerable wicked actions:
And which is worst of all, man is so cruel to his own Nature, and so mad, that
he torments his weak body by inordinate lusts, daily and nightly riotings and
surfeits; so that he runs headlong into all manner of diseases, and defiles
his divine part, the Soul, and brings the wrath of God upon himself. Therefore
he said well, that compared man's life to a warfare upon the Earth. Hence it is,
that wise men to oppose so many mischiefs, desired nothing more then to invent
some Art to preserve them and theirs from the injuries of the things mentioned,
and free them from diseases. Therefore Apollo gave noble Principles at first to
the Art of Physic, which were after celebrated by Aesculapius, and then by
Machaon and Podaleirius; so that all did highly esteem them as Homer writes:
The learned Physician that can cure well,
Does all Professions in the world excel.
The Sons of Aesculapius delivered this Art to their Posterity, not by writing,
but by traditional instruction to the time of Hippocrates. Hippocrates that
came from Hercules and Aesculapius, grew so excellent in Physic, that he got
great Renown by his Works in Coos, and among the Thessalians and Athenians,
that gave him divine honor next unto Hercules. He was the first that committed
this Art to writing, and left us his Works, which Galen purged from thorns and
weeds, and put it into such Order and Method, that he made it almost complete.
But nothing in the world of this sort can be so exact, that it admits no
farther industry: therefore the Ages following and ours, according to the
ingenuity of the best in the time, did refine and digest into order those parts
of Physic that seemed imperfect: They cut off what was superfluous, and
supplied what was defective, and did all with such industry, that the Art
seemed to have a new face. For no part of Physic, though obscure and hard, can
now be concealed. For famous men have not ceased to study the Heavens and
Stars, with their motions, and the Nature of the Elements, and to search into
the bowels of the Earth, and to find out by great labor the force of Herbs and
all Plants, and to know all sorts of living Creatures; nay to search into the
bowels of Mankind by a kind of cruelty, that they might be preserved against
the storms of so many malignant Causes. This is the reason why we bestow our
labor and study for the Common Good, in writing this Book and others, and in
perusing Authors, out of which we have gathered this Treatise of Wind that
troubles the Body of Man. Men are of diverse ingenuities, and every one follows
that which his Nature and heat of Spirit draws him unto. Some follow Music and
the Mathematics; others Morality; others Religion, without any respect to
other Sciences: Some in obedience to their God, Belly, follow headlong after
lust, and spend more time and pains in pleasure and luxury, then in honesty,
and lay up treasure by any means, good or bad, to maintain their lusts. These
vain Wretches (having nothing but a body which shows their manhood) pass away,
and their memory rots: But such whose Souls dwell more nobly in them, and think
of the adorning of their Divine part, lose no time for meditation, that they
may declare things more clearly to Posterity, and be famous to Eternity. Of
this sort there are many in our Age, chiefly Physicians, who have so labored
to purge and adorn their Science, that no Age has done more. For no Science is
so absolute in all things, but there is something new that the Ancients did not
take notice of, or leave unfinished. For humane industry is fed by meditation,
and grows hot by an unwearied force: And a generous Soul submits his private
studies to the Judgment of the Learned, and grows more studious afterward. For
if his works are approved by them, he is more inflamed to go forward; if not,
he labors to recover his honor, and to hit that the second time, which he
missed at the first. Fall how it will, an ingenious generous Spirit loses
nothing, but gets much. This is the cause why we have taken in hand to clear
that part of Physic which treats of Wind, and is of great consequence to
mankind, that we may not live in silence, as if born for our selves: And the
rather, because there is no disease more usual and vexatious, chiefly in the
North, and less understood by Physicians, though indifferently learned, then
those of Wind. And there is no part of Physic more neglected by Authors; for
none has written exactly of Wind but Hippocrates, and he has written so, that
little benefit is to be gotten thereby. We confess the reverend old Man had a
wonderful Spirit in showing the Cause of every Disease: But he uses Arguments
far fetched, and such as teach rather the Wit of their Author, then the
knowledge or Cure of the Diseases that come from them. And he handles but
slightly the breeding of Wind from meat, drink of phlegm. He only speaks of the
force of the Air breathed in. Nor is it a wonder: For his Age was very
temperate, and no ways given to Luxury; Also the Country he lived in, chiefly
Cous, was a temperate Island, and did not breed these torments from Wind. But
our Age, from Gluttony and Drunkenness, affords few that are not tormented with
Wind. Therefore we shall provide that such as are troubled therewith may be
cured, and that by bad diet they do not relapse, and be again troubled
therewith. And we shall leave Hippocrates, who wrote on this subject more
learnedly then profitably, and discover for the Common Good those Principles
that we know by Experience to be profitable.

Farewell, W. R.

A Short TREATISE Concerning Wind in Man's Body.
CHAP. I.
That Wind is a Spirit; and of the Division of Spirits.
I Suppose none does question, but that that substance, whether it be air,
wind, or blast, which is strong, and to be heard or felt, though not to be
seen, is called a Spirit. For so Hippocrates calls them in his Book of Winds.
And Galen says they are spirits, Epid. 1. Com. 3. And in his Book of the
difficulty of breathing, and differences of breathing, and in his Prognostics;
and that a belch is a kind of spirit, and does after a sort communicate with
the spirits of breathing. Thus it appears by these sayings of Galen, that wind
is a spirit: now there are differences of spirits: therefore I shall show the
nature of all spirits, and begin from the chief to the meanest. Spirits are
either within or without our bodies. They without are of three sorts. There is
the spirit of the living God, and of universal Nature, and of the Soul. The
spirit of God shows his hidden Majesty and Power, and goes through all things,
and is every where comprehending all things: It has the minds and souls of all
in its power, and can carry them where it pleases. The spirit of Nature is
that which all the Philosophers and Poets so commend: Plato calls it the soul
of the world: Galen calls it a mind brought hither from above. Aristotle, Lib.
de mund. ad Alex. sets it forth more plainly by this definition, saying, this
spirit is an animate substance that generateth in Plants and living Creatures,
belonging to all; being largely extended, it contains all, rejoices all,
carrying the vital soul of the world with it, and Nature it self, and making
all things live that it gets into. Also there is a spirit under the form of
every mortal and concrete thing, which knits it to its thick body, being of a
mean condition between both; it joins things different, being like unto both:
and this spirit is governed and preserved by the other, which is the universal
spirit of all Nature. To these three differences of spirits Arist. Lib. de
mund. adds a fourth; saying, that wind arises from a dry exhalation, when it
is cast off by cold, so that it spreads abroad it self: so that wind is only
much air stirring about, and forced; and this is called a spirit also. For air
is strong, though not visible, but known by its effects and our apprehensions:
and Hippocrates in his Book of Wind, says that all that is between Heaven and
Earth is full of spirits. Also the spirits in the body are comprehended in
their several members; for they are natural, vital, or animal. All these are
called by the name of innate or imbred spirits: wind, or the flatulent spirit
(that the great and little world Man, might be alike) is joined to these. The
natural Spirit is made when the more pure or aerial part of nourishment turns
by concoction into thin blood, like a vapor. This takes force from the imbred
spirit in the Liver, and goes to the Heart by the hollow vein with the rest of
the blood; then by heat being more refined, it turns to a sort of air, and
becomes a vital spirit, which spread through the whole body by the arteries,
gives life: part of this carried by the arteries of the neck into the network
of the brain, and so into the ventricles, increases by the air received at the
nose, and by force of the spirit imbred in the brain, becomes animal; and being
sent to the whole body, gives sense and motion. The spirit we shall speak of,
differs much from these, and is the fourth spirit in our bodies, of the same
nature with wind, and it is so called. It is gross and not so aerie or thin as
the other. You may best know the nature of it, if you consider the air in a
South or North wind. The windy spirit in us is like the South wind, and the
natural is like the North. Let us leave the innate or imbred spirits, which are
well described by others, and speak of the flatuous or windy spirit.

CHAP. II.
Of the Analogy or Proportion between the flatuous Spirit and Wind, or the Wind
in Man and in the Earth.
THere are two things that chiefly blow up our bodies, and prepare them for
diseases; diet and the air. Food, though at first unlike, is at length made
like us, and turned into the substance of the body: Therefore by long use the
body will be of the same nature. For all Diet, though well concocted, keeps it
in a natural and genuine condition: therefore Lettice and other cold things,
though they be overcome by concoction, yet cool the stomach and whole body, and
produce cold blood. So Wine and Garlic produce hot blood: Fish, Cheese, and
salt Meats, gross blood. By which it is clear, that not only the spirits and
humors by which we are preserved, are changed, but the constitution of the
whole body. Therefore a cool diet prepares the body to breed wind, by
oppressing the native heat. Also too much of the best meats and drinks, such as
burdens Nature, cannot be well concocted or turned into good blood, but many
crudities will be, which will cause obstructions and rottenness, or corruption,
by which the natural heat is suffocated, as the wiek of a candle by too much
grease. This crudity and abundance of humors is gathered in all, chiefly the
Northern Inhabitants: these, as if it were too low a thing to slay with a
sword, or hang with a halter, or fight publicly, kill themselves with
kindness, they contend in drinking healths, and riot night and day, and add new
surfeits to the former, and leave not off, till they vomit what they take in,
or are ready to burst; forgetting the saying, That gluttony and drunkenness
kill more then the sword. When too much food is taken, it causes a disease. It
is no wonder, if such have many excrements and wind, which for their abundance
are not easily voided. Also the Country and air is of much force. For a hot
Country, as the Summer, inflames the spirits, dries the humors, and increases
Choler, which causes most acute diseases. But a cold and moist air, as it is
in the North, is like the Winter, stupifies the spirits, stops the Pores, and
burdens the body with many superfluous humors, and oppresses the native heat.
Hence the concoction is weakened, and there are crudities, and fluctuations of
food in the stomach, distillations, chronick diseases, stones, worms, wind, and
the like. These breed in Man the little world, as in the great, unto which
Aristotle compares him. For as in the great world there are four Elements,
Fire, Air, Water, Earth; so there are the same in the little: and as in all
those Elements are diverse substances bred, as in the earth stones and trees; in
the water, diverse Creatures; in the air, thunder, lightning, rain: so in man
there are bred bones as stones; and worms and lice as living Creatures; and
distillations as rain, and wind, or a flatus like the wind in the earth. To be
short, the image of the Universe is clear in man. For God, when in six days he
had wonderfully made the world, and set all things in order, so that nothing
seemed to be wanting, made man as the abridgment of all the rest, to extol his
Divine power and wisdom, and admire his works. Moreover, there is nothing in
Heaven or Earth, the like whereunto may not be found in man, if you diligently
search and consider the Soul is his God, the understanding and will are his
angelical Spirits; heat, cold, moisture, and dryness answer to the outward
Elements. In the heat appear diverse flashes and fiery representations,
Frenzies, Inflammations, Erysipelas, Fevers. In the moisture are distillations
and Nodes, that come from thence like hail. also the humors ebb and flow in
the veins and arteries. But the earthy Element of this little world is most
like the great, in which are stones, which our bones do resemble: and Ovid
calls the stones the bones of our great mother Earth. As the Plants, Corn, and
Trees are in the Earth, so are the hairs in man. As Galen says, hairs grow as
Plants. For as some grow by the art of the Husbandman, others by natural causes
only: so in animals the head is like a Wheat or Barley-field, and the hair in
other parts is like other plants in drier ground. What shall I say of the
Earthquake? when many exhalations are bred in the bowels of the Earth by force
of the Sun and Stars, from a moisture that is sunk into the Earth, and from the
matter of the Earth; when they cannot get forth by reason of the Earths closure
or the grossness of the wind, there must needs be an Earthquake in part. So
when flatuous spirits or wind is shut up in the cavity of the body, and strives
to get out, there is great trembling; as Langius says, if we may confer great
things with small, as wind shut up in the bowels of the Earth, makes it tremble
when it strives to get out* so a flatulent air or wind being kept in by the
covers of the Muscles and other parts that may be stretched, shakes them till
it breaks through the Membrane that covers them: the vulgar ignorant of this,
suppose this to be the soul or lifeblood. While it goes forth without doing
hurt at the Pores, there is no trembling; but if they be stopped, it hunts about
and gets into cavities, and strives to break through: so the wind striving to
get out, shakes the body.

There is another reason of this trembling. The wind shut up in the cavities,
being beaten back by the heat of the bowels and natural motion, grows hot by
reason of the want of freedom, and so thinner. This insinuates it self into any
part, even the principal parts, and falls swiftly upon sensible places, and
does not only disturb them with its quality, but pricks them with its thinness,
and stretches, tears, or wounds them: for all biting or sharp causes that are
moved, whether hot or cold, bring horror and shaking to a living Creature.
Thirdly, this spirit running to and fro, troubles the expulsive faculty, and
the parts, which provoked, contract themselves speedily to expel the offender,
and so shake and tremble. Therefore this wind in man being like other wind,
produces the like effects. Now we shall show what it is.

CHAP. III.
What this Wind in Man is.
NOne wrote better of this wind then Galen Lib. 3. de Symp. causis, who says
it is a vapor raised from a humor, or phlegmatic meats or drinks, or from
weak heat. But this is an imperfect definition: for diverse vapors go to the
brain from food in the stomach, as in Drunkards, and in sore Eyes, from consent
of the stomach, which are not called winds; nor are they such. But that
flatuous spirit that is bred in the Hypochondrion from a melancholy humor, is
truly wind. Therefore I would have this wind to be thus described more exactly:
A Flatus or wind is an abundance of vapors from spirits or meat or drink, or
phlegm or melancholy raised from a weak heat in the body. I say an abundance,
because a small vapor, which the best constitution is never free from, is not
a wind, or can puff up. As Galen Lib. 5. in Aph. 72. says they are windy;
according to Hippocrates, that have much wind in their bellies, that is voided
upwards or downwards, or stretches the parts that hold it. And Aristotle
says, wind is only much air fluctuating or moving, and stopped. You shall know
from Aristotle, and what I shall say after, why I call it an halitous spirit,
and not a vapor; for none can get any certainty out of Galen in this, that
calls a spirit, vapor, wind and blast, all one without distinction. Therapeut.
14. he says, a vaporous spirit is from juyces heated by degrees, and that a
vapor is an humor extenuated, de Sympt. cause. lib. 1. de Simpl. med. fac.
lib. 1. and Halitus is a mean or medium between the thinnest spirit and blood
that is finished, Lib. 3. de not. fac. All these signify the same thing,
therefore I shall not dispute them. Nor is that against my definition that
Galen says, if a greater heat fall upon a gross glutinous phlegm, it turns them
into a thick or gross wind. For though heat be strong, yet in comparison of the
quantity and quality of the humor, it may be weak; such as can raise a spirit,
but not lay it or dissolve it. It is so in those that by intemperate drinking
oppress the strongest heat. We shall now show in what parts this wind is bred.

CHAP. IV.
Of the place where Wind is bred.
IN the former Chapter we showed from Galen and Hippocrates, that those were
windy bodies that gathered much wind in their bellies, which is voided upwards
or downwards, or that stretches the parts that hold it. Hence it appears that
the stomach and guts are the place of its breeding; otherwise it could not go
forth upward or downward. So wind is bred in the Earth, which after rain being
warmed, as Aristotle says, from above and from it self, smoaketh; and in this
is the force of wind. For when the Earth takes greatest force from water, there
must be most forcible vapors, even as green wood burnt affords most smoke. The
stomach most resembles the Earth in man. Galen comparing them, says, that
Nature made the stomach in stead of an Earth to Animals, to be a storehouse,
as the: Earth is to Plants. For the veins that go to the stomach, such Chyle
out of it to nourish the whole body, as the roots of Trees do from the Earth:
it is a natural action in both. They are alike, but the Earth of it self is dry
and sapless; except watered, it produces no fruit; but being moistened, as
Virgil says, it produces winds also. So our stomach is membranous and dry,
and except it be moderately moistened with meats and drinks, it defrauds the
body of its nourishment, and it consumes: If too much drink be taken, there is
fluctuation and wind; for too much food oppresses the natural heat, and makes
it weak; but yet it will fall to work, or concoct: but being not able to do it
exactly, it raises vapors which it cannot discuss. Then by degrees the first
concoction being hindered, there are gross and phlegmatic humors, both in the
stomach and guts, chiefly the Colon. If the wind be thick, it stretches only
the stomach and belly; but when by degrees it is made thin by heat of the
bowels, that which was shut up begins to move and enlarge it self, and take up
more room, and stir about to get forth, and then all is well. But if a costive
body by hard excrements or tough phlegm in the guts hinder its passage, it runs
back and roars, rumbles, and pains the guts, and labors by force to get out.
For when the heat of the guts extenuates the vapors, they move readily and of
themselves, and so are thinner, and can pierce farther: they run about like
Thunder swiftly, and open small passages, and make solution of unity, and cause
pain in any solid part by their passage being thin. What Seneca Lib. 6. not.
quaest. c. 8. says of other wind, agrees with this, that its force is not to
be withstood, because a spirit is not to be conquered. They only can judge of
this wind who have been troubled with it, Therefore as the other wind is only
bred in the Earth, so this is bred only in the stomach and guts, as the caverns
of the Earth, and from thence goes to any part: for the body is thin and
previous, full of passages for the wind to go through; which when it is much,
and gets not forth, shakes the body, causes chilness, and great Symptoms after
to be mentioned.

CHAP. V.
Of the manner how Wind is bred in the Body.
WInd is bred from heat, which is sometimes great, sometimes weak; and is
raised from the matter, after the same manner it is discussed. For the strong
heat of the bowels discusseth it before it get force, and hinders it from
breeding at the first. Absolute cold raises no spirits, as appears in extreme
crudities. Therefore Hippocrates Lib. 6. says, that in a long Dysentery or
Flux, if there be sour belchings, it is good; because before belching there
was no sign of concoction, by reason of the decay of natural heat; which
beginning to revive, being but yet weak, by reason of the small concoction, it
raised wind which was belched forth. Therefore not great heat nor great cold,
but a mean between both makes wind, according to Galen de sympt. cause. lib. 6.
cap. 2. who says it breeds in the vacuities of the stomach, when phlegm there
contained, or food, is turned to vapors by weak heat. For as absolute cold
raises no vapors, because it cannot extenuate, nor dissolve, nor concoct; so
vehement heat overcomes for the most part what is comprehended, extenuates the
food beyond the generation of vapors, except it be such as easily turns to
wind. If the heat be weak, it dissolves the food, but does not concoct
perfectly, and hence comes wind. And as in external things, as a cold season,
chiefly when the North wind blows, makes the air clearer; and a very hot season
makes the air pure, but the middle constitution of air produces clouds: so it
is in Animals heat when very weak or very strong, does not cause wind, but the
mean between both. But Galen 12. Meth. med. says, that wind is not only from a
mean but vehement heat: as appears by their generation there mentioned, and by
his way of cure. For he says, if by any accident a vaporous spirit be joined
with gross glutinous humors, that cannot break forth of the body, there is
very great pain; and that from two causes, obstruction or heat. For obstruction
keeps the wind in, and gross glutinous matter, when it is hot, causes wind.
And a little after: how then, says he, shall we cure those pains which a cold
humor shut up in the guts, has caused? Not by Cataplasms and Fomentations
which heat violently: for all clammy humors that are gross and cold, are
discussed into wind by things that heat, except they also strongly digest.
Therefore they must be cut and concocted at the same time by attenuaters which
are not too hot. From these words of Galen, it appears that a vehement heat
does not hinder breeding of wind, or discuss them being bred, but will cause
them from the subject matter to breed anew when they were gone. Therefore Lib.
3. cap. 43. he says, we must beware of nothing more in the abundance of such
humors, then immoderate heat that will melt them, and turn them into wind, but
not digest them. The Italian Doctor knew this well, who (as Paul Aegineta
says) cured almost all Colicks with cold remedies: and Paul knew it when he
wrote, that pains from cold, clammy, and tough humors, are to be cured with
respect that the medicines be not vehement hot; for so they will be melted, and
turned more to winds. Also strong heat does not only make wind of phlegm, which
it cannot consume, but also of any overmuch moisture received; as in such as
have drunk too much Wine, or Beer, or Broth, or stuffed themselves with any
gross or clammy food, which the heat cannot consume. So vehement heat also
raises wind. This is clear in Fevers also, in which, though preternatural
heat abound, much drink swells the belly, because Nature is thereby restrained.
Therefore three things are required in the breeding and understanding of Wind;
heat naturally too weak, or so by oppression; that the part be sensible and
fit, and the matter proper to produce wind.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Differences of Wind bred in the Body.
THe wind is of diverse natures: one sort is quiet, another moved. The quiet is
gross, and of flow motion, cloudy and cold, that brings seldom any Symptoms but
a swollen Belly and Hypochondria, without much pain. This troubles such
commonly that drink thick sweet Ale, or Milk, or Water, between meals chiefly:
for that corrupts concoction, and weakneth the action of the stomach, as if you
should pour cold water into a boiling Kettle; and thence there will be cloudy
vapors and fluctuations that will swell the Belly like a Drum, which will fall
with sobriety and a stool or two. But if it stay long between the tunicles of
the guts, it threatens a dangerous Colic. A moved wind, because it is thin,
and running about with great pain, is like a changeable Proteus: It is either
cast out or retained, goes forth with or without noise, by the mouth or
Fundament. By the mouth the belch is sour, or smoak-like, and unsavory: by the
Fundament it is with or without noise. These are of so much concernment in the
body of man, as the Stoics according to Cicero Lib. 9. epist. epist. 22. said,
that a fart ought to be as free as a belch. And Claudius Caesar made an Edict
to give leave for any to fart at meat, because he knew one endangered by
refraining through modesty. Suet in vita Claudii, cap. 23. But when wind is
sent out at neither part, but detained, it causes a swelling: a Symptom of the
stomach not able through weakness to expel the abounding cloudy spirit. Also
Galen 3. Symp. cause. lib. 6. cap. 6. says, there are diverse parts of the guts
in which the wind moves, which though they have not distinct names; yet may
they so be declared, that any ingenious person may understand what kind, and
how much the excrement is, and in what part it chiefly moves. For if it sound
sharp and shrill, it is carried through the strait gut, and is more pure and
aerial. If it puff up, it will make a small noise while it goes through the
small guts, but not so sharp and shrill. All these noises are in the spaces of
the empty gut usually, and make the less noise the lower they go. Other noises
are humming, like that of Pipes, which cannot give a pure sound, by reason of
the matter they consist of; and the passage being large, makes the sound
greater. Such winds are in the thick guts, when they are empty; and if any
moisture be contained in them, it will cause a kind of Bombus, which is a
rumbling, which shows a moist stool to be at hand, because it is from Nature
moving; and it is moist, because it rumbled before. Also the noise that follows
the stool, if it rumbles, signifies more stools: but if it be pure and clear,
it shows that either the gut is empty, or that hard excrements are in its upper
part. That which is shrill, is from the straitness of the passages and little
moisture. We might here add the different sounds of the wind in the ear: but we
shall reserve that for the eleventh Chapter, where we shall speak of the pains
of the ears.

CHAP. VII.
How many kinds of Diseases are produced by Wind.
GAlen made three chief sorts of Diseases, a Similary, Instrumental, and a
Common, which is the solution of unity. A similary disease is that which
overthrows the natural constitution. An Organical or Instrumental is that which
hinders the fashion in conformation, number, magnitude, or composition. The
Common is, when unity is dissolved in part. Let us see which of these wind will
produce. Hippocrates, Lib. de flatibus says, when a body is full of food, and
much wind prevails, and the meat lies long in the stomach, and cannot get out
for abundance, and the lower belly is stopped or bound, wind goes over all the
body, and gets chiefly to the parts full of blood, and cools them: And if the
parts be cooled where the blood comes, there is chilness over all the body. For
when all the blood is cold, the whole body must be chill. Galen Meth. med. 12.
confirms this saying, that such diseases are in those that are stuffed with
gross clammy food that is cold, when the wind in the tunicles of the guts
cannot get forth. For the tunicles are double, and the humor being between
them is turned into wind, it is gross and cold, and of slow motion. When it is
detained, it stretches the tunicles, and the juice whence it comes cools the
guts it touches, and they are doubly afflicted. By these instances it is
plain, that wind by its coldness can make a similary disease that consists in
distemper, and also the solution of unity. For there is pain and stretching of
the tunicles, which cannot be without laceration. For there are two universal
causes of pain; one is an unequal distemper which comes suddenly, and another
when continuity is dissolved. For parts dissolved by a humor or wind, are
pained by the separation. Because if Hippocrates say, cold is biting to Ulcers
for no other cause, but it contracts, and condenseth, and constringeth all
parts it touches, and so twitcheth the soft parts of the continuity, and
dissolves it. Also if in acute fevers nervous bodies are most dried, and
therefore have Convulsion; and if too much repletion that pulls it up and down,
and makes it shorter, and so separates continuity, how much more difficulty of
solution of continuity will wind cause, which for that only cause produce such
strange Symptoms that require the whole care of a Physician. Thirdly, it will
appear by what follows, that the whole Abdomen or Panch swells by wind, as in a
Tympany; and the Liver and Spleen are wonderfully stopped thereby, and hard as a
Schirrhus and swollen, as also the stomach; and all these are instrumental
diseases: therefore organical diseases are also from wind. Also Galen de diff.
morb. says, when any part is swollen, and so its passage stopped, if that part
has no proper operation, that stoppage is only called a disease: but the
tumor is not, but only is the cause of obstruction. But if the part affected
has any proper office, then the obstruction and the tumor of the part are
both diseases. Therefore the three sorts of diseases, distemper of simple
parts, and disorder of instrumental, and solution of united parts, are from
wind.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Causes of Wind.
THere are few or none in the world but are troubled sometimes with winds: for
the stomach, which is the Kitchen for the first concoction, attracts the meat
by the Gullet as by a long hand, and embraces and keeps it, and changes it,
separating* the pure from the impure, casting the one into the guts; but the
Meseraick veins sucking the other, carry it to the Liver. When the stomach
through weakness embraces not the food attracted, nor contains it, it rumbles
and tosseth about, and then it cannot well concoct. For it must be strong, as
Galen says, which consists in an excellent temper of the four qualities, by
which it turns the food into the proper quality of that which is nourished, by
help of the bowels about it, the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Reins, Midriff, which
lie about the stomach, as a great fire under a Caldron. But sometimes a bad
diet (for none can be always punctual in the rules) or some external force
dissolves its strength, or weakens the fire, and then the virtue of the stomach
abates, and it alters according to the greatness or smalness of the cause. Also
outward cold, as in cold Countries and in Northern winds, piercing to the
inward parts, in thin and weak bodies, offends the native heat. Also too hot
Air casts out and disperseth the natural heat, and takes it from the bowels,
and then concoction is hindered, and wind bred. But strong natural heat
overcoming for the most part things comprehended by it, extenuateth the meat
more then that it can produce vapors, except it be of its nature windy. For
the stomach, though strong, and force of Nature flourishes, and the heat not
decayed, is offended often by food that* is proper to breed wind. Therefore all
Physic and food that is properly by its nature windy, or by its coldness or
multitude dissolves the strength of the stomach, and oppresses its natural
heat, is the cause of wind; as Pulse, raw Corn, and Fruits. All these Galen de
alim. fac. lib. 2. says, and such as we eat before they are ripe, are windy,
but they are soon digested: therefore he argues thus in the beginning of that
Book: All the food mentioned in the first Book were the seeds of Plants, little
differing from fruits: But all horary fruits are windy, and all seeds more or
less. And boil Beans as much as you will, they are windy: some add Onions to
prevent it, because hot and attenuating things correct wind. But fry them, or
any other pulse, and they are not windy, but very hard of concoction, and pass
away slowly, and make gross juice. But any way dressed, they swell the body. He
that will observe the distempers that follow every sort of food, shall perceive
a stretching of the whole body, as by a wind after eating of Beans, chiefly if
he have not used to eat them formerly, or eat up not well boiled. Pease, though
like Beans, are not so windy. These are with us plentiful and usual, and
therefore we perceive less the hurt they do. For what we eat freely, and with
pleasure, the stomach embraces closer, and retains better, and digests easier.
Fetches are windy also, but few desire them: it is good with any of these to
boil Calamints, Onions, Dill, or Pennyroyal. Lentils puff up the stomach and
guts. Also all Summer-fruits are like these: for they are crude and full of
excrements and unprofitable juice, especially when not ripe; they are also
phlegmatic and windy. Also if immoderately taken, by their cold and moisture
they abate the natural heat, so that the stomach cannot discuss the wind it
raises. Mulberries and Plums are the worst of these, chiefly green, and after
meat. All sorts of Cherries, chiefly the Spanish Cherries, and Melones,
Pompions, Cucumbers, Gourds, Apples, Pears, are alike: but boiled, they are
less windy, chiefly if eaten with seeds, or hot and dry extenuaters or
expellers of wind, Anise or Coriander. Figs, says Galen, lib. de aliment.
nourish more then other autumnal fruits, but are windy: but the wind soon
vanishes, because they are laxative. Chestnuts eaten plentifully, cause
Headache, swell the belly, bind it, and are hard of concoction. Also Roots,
Turnips, Radishes, and the like, are windy; and Corn, Milium, Wheat, chiefly
boiled Barley, but Rapes and Radishes are most windy. All Fish are the like,
phlegmatic and windy, chiefly the great; and the less that are slimy, as the
Eel and Salmon, Lamprey, Tench, chiefly if boiled, broiled, or fried, they are
not so windy, chiefly if the flesh be soft, as the Brook-fish. Though Celsus,
lib. 2. c. 26. says, they are not windy. All Pulse and fat meats do swell with
wind, and sweet things, and Broths, new Wine. Also Garlic, Coleworts, Onions,
and all Roots, except a Parsnip and Schirroots. Leeks and dry Figs are windy,
but the green most. Green Grapes, all Nuts, except those of the Pine Tree;
Milk, all Cheese, and whatsoever is taken crude. Hunting and hawking are good
against wind. Celsus says, all fat things are windy; for Galen says, they
overthrow the stomach, and are hard of concoction, fill and swell either by
wind that comes from them by a weak concoction, or by rarifying the fat, and
make it run thin. Also sweet things, chiefly if gross, are windy, and new Wine,
unless it pass soon through, fills with wind, is hard of concoction, begets
gross moisture, and causes Headache. Therefore Aristotle in his Problems asks
directly why it is dangerous for the stomach to drink new Wine? Answ. Because
it is undigestible, and therefore puffes up the stomach, and causes a kind of
Dysentery. Milk is an enemy to a weak head, and to the Hypochondria that are
blown up with wind from a small offense; it puffes the bellies of most that eat
it, as Hippocraies says. And Galen says, that people in health have headache
and wind from eating Milk; therefore it must needs be bad for such as are so
affected before. Therefore let windy bodies avoid Milk above all things. Also
Mead, and Perry, and Sider are windy, chiefly if not boiled. Hippocrates, lib.
5. aph. 41. bids you give Mead to women at bedtime, to know if they be with
child: for if her belly be griped thereby, she has conceived, otherwise not:
the pain is from wind that cannot get out, the Mead causes it; for raw Honey
swells the belly. Ale which is usual in the North is also windy, it is near
that which Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 80. called Zythus: it is worse new, or
when not well boiled. The thinner or cruder it is, the less it nourishes, but
it swells and cools more, being but a little hotter then water. Such are the
Drinks of Brabant, Holland, and England, they are commonly thick and ill
boiled, so that they stop the Ureters, and cool and cause Stranguries, breed
the stone, and short breathing, increase phlegm, breed wind in the belly, and
pains and Colicks. But old Ale that is clear, well boiled, and well malted,
which is made in private houses (not to be sold) do more cast off those
pernicious qualities, the nearer they resemble Wine. But when it is carelessly
brewed, being it is daily used, and very much, the Symptoms it causes are
wonderful, but chiefly great swellings and puffings up with wind: so that few
or none that drink this Ale, but are much oppressed with winds. But if the
belly be loosned by much of it taken, or by its sharpness, and that which is
superfluous be sent downward by stool or by urine, or vomited up, then you need
not so much fear inflation by wind. For it is better then water, being
moderately taken to quench thirst only, and wash down food, but not so good as
Wine. Also Galen says, that all the faults of water are from its coldness, by
which it lies long in the stomach, and causes fluctuations, and turns to wind,
and corrupts and weakens the stomach, so that it concocts worse. But Wine has
a nature adverse to these faults in water, it neither puffs up the belly, but
takes it rather down, nor stays long there, by reason of its moderate heat.
Therefore common Ale and Beer are a medium between wine and water, but nearer
to water: for they puff up, and stay long, being thick, but do not so much
destroy the natural heat as water, or weaken the stomach. The clear old Beer
that is well boiled is most near to Wine; for it opens the ways of digestion,
and quickly goes down, is of good juice, and fit to mix and concoct things in
the stomach and veins; it puffs up little, it is better then new or crude Wine,
and the liker it is to Wine, the farther it is from the faults in water. For
water, whether of Snow or Pond is not good, chiefly for cold stomachs, not for
Galens reason only, because if taken presently after meat, makes it swim by
putting it self between the meat and the stomach, and making a separation and
fluctuation: for Wine and the best drink may do that: But because it is heavy
and very cold, and choaks the natural heat, and hinders concoction, and hurts
the stomach, breast, and lungs, stops the urine, causes side-pains, Dropsies,
Colicks, and Iliacks. But wind is not bred only by this or that way, but too
much Wine, or Beer, or Milk, or Broths, or Water, though otherwise wholesome,
may cause wind, or any slimy matter that cannot be overcome by the native heat.
For too much weakens the stomach; and Galen says, the sign of a weak stomach
is noise and fluctuation. For the stomach being right, is close, and keeps
every little it takes in close wrapped, so that there is no space between. And
when there is a rumbling, there is vacuity, and it does not exactly embrace the
food: and this is a loose space which suffers the moist things received to pass
to and fro, and make a noise. Then the belly swells, and the Hypochondria, and
there is much crudity, phlegm, and gross humors bred. If this crudity be joined
with trouble of stomach, and the Patient cannot sleep, it is evil: For watching
and pain of stomach cause a tossing in bed, and wind, and belching. Therefore
crudity is from immoderate eating and drinking, and from crudity, come gross
slimy humors; upon which, if hot medicines, simple or compound, are given (as
often by ignorance they are) they cause wind from the matter. Also Wine, though
of the best, and such as by its nature expels wind, and any liquid thing, if
not by its force, yet by its abundance may oppress the natural heat, or by the
nature of the things it is mixed with in the stomach, may cause wind. Moreover,
of all things mentioned as causes of wind, none are worse then nightdrinkings
upon a full stomach, and going to bed with a belly full of drink, or drinking
between meals, or presently after meat. Aristotle, Meteor. lib. 4 cap. 3.
says, that such concoction is like boiling, chiefly when it is done by heat of
the body in a hot and moist subject; and some crudities are like meat half
boiled. For as when we cast much cold water into a boiling Kettle, the boiling
is stopped, and the heat interrupted, and thereby crudity remains; so if you
drink presently after meat, the concoction is interrupted, and there will be
crudities, which will cause fluctuation and inflation, and stretching of the
belly like a Drum. As Galen says, you must not presently drink after meat,
before it be concocted: For then the food will swim, and the stomach cannot
embrace them, by reason of the moisture between. Therefore (to be short)
inflations are from three causes, obstruction, heat, and a cold and moist
distemper of the stomach. For obstructions stop the wind, that it cannot pass
forth, and gross and clammy things, when made hot, breed wind; Gal. meth. 12.
and all that are so have swollen bellies, and whatsoever they take, is easily
turned into wind; and they are puffed up. A cold and moist stomach, whether by
nature, or acquired by oppression of the native heat by repletion, breeds only
wind. Therefore defend the stomach outwardly from cold air, and keep the feet
from cold; for nerves go from them to the stomach, and presently cool it, and
the Colic and all inflations are caused thereby sooner then any can imagine.
We have showed the causes of wind, we shall now show the signs.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Signs of Wind.
THe signs of wind are taken from the constitutions and matter therein
predominating, from phlegmatic diet, and windy, and stretching of the
Hypochondria without heaviness; from belching, rumbling, farting, swelling, and
wandering pain coming suddenly, and suddenly vanishing; from a clear tumor that
yields to the touch, and that sounds like a Drum. Often belching and farting
are also signs, and ease after breaking of wind does usually follow. Or if from
any cause the passage of the wind be stopped, it flies back, and there is a
stretching pain that runs about the body, and pricks like needles under the
breasts between the shoulders or membranes of the ribs, or other parts. But
these last not long, because they are thin, and easily turn to air. They dream
of flying or leaping over Rivers, sometimes of Thunder and Tempests. There is
often noise in the ears, beating in the flesh, yawning, and cramp in the legs,
arms, and fingers, and inclination to the Colic, and other windy diseases:
Pain about the Navel, loathing and vomiting of corrupt humors, chiefly of
phlegm. The belly is bound, and will not let out so much as wind. Sometimes
glassie phlegm, with great straining, is voided alone, or with some few hard
excrements. The dung is sometimes like that of an Ox, full of wind, and water
is on the top. Also the pain is not fixed to one part, but comes by fits, and
to many parts more grievous in one then an other. The same signs are not in
all. Some are tormented about the Navel, and the belly loose, having three
stools a day, and yet the pain abate not. It is a sign then that the wind has
gotten into the tunicles of the Colon, or that it is bred of the cold distemper
of glassie phlegm, or it is from its sharpness that comes from putrefaction, and
twitcheth the guts, or of mixture of Choler with phlegm, which does provoke the
expulsive faculty. Moreover, when the passages are stopped from much phlegm, the
excrements cannot pass, and then the obstruction increases, and the wind runs
about in the guts, and causes much pain, which we must not meddle with for
cure, except we first purge the glassie phlegm with Clysters, or flegm-purgers
at the mouth. But if the Colic come from wind without matter, there is greater
stretching and rumbling, quick pains, wind running to and fro to seek passage
forth, and they used windy meats and drinks. If gross and clammy humors do
melt by heat, and turn to wind (which is usual) the signs will be mixed of
both, and the pain will be greater, according to the cause. For the force of
conjunct causes is more then that of simple causes; and there will be, besides
that pain which is like a stake fixed, and comes from the coldness of the
glassieflegm, another vehement pain from stretching of the part that runs
through all the cavity of the belly, and disturbs the stomach as well as the
guts. For when the wind cannot get forth, by reason of the stoppages, nor
exhale or breathe forth, by reason of its thickness, or the thickness of the
body, or the coldness of the pores, and the guts cannot contain its abundance,
it goes back to the stomach, and hinders its concoction, by putting it self
between the meat and the stomach, and leaving a vacuity, which causes the
stomach not closely to embrace the meat. Hence comes fluctuation, and greater
swelling then the former, and heaviness and difficult breathing, the stomach
pressing upon the Midriff. This trouble and restlesness increases, if they
take meat or drink, chiefly milk or water before they are well; for then the
stomach is more distempered, and the fluctuating humor stretches and puffs it
up more. They are at ease when the meat descends to the lower parts of the
belly, and the wind is sent forth upwards or downwards; but it is seldom sent
forth while the distemper lasts, but kept in both ways: and if there be a belch
by chance, then it gives no ease. Sometimes the mouth of the stomach is
swollen: and the pain is sometimes in the back about the Spondiles, sometimes
about the breast, sometimes in both. We shall speak of the other signs, chiefly
the particular, that show the parts troubled with wind, among the Symptoms of
wind.

CHAP. X.
Of the Symptoms coming from Wind.
THere are also diverse Symptoms produced from the diverse places where the wind
is, being a large offspring of a fruitful Parent, the solution of continuity.
This causes pain. All pain, chiefly of the head, is in the Membranes, which if
not offended by distemper, heat, or cold, stroke, or bad scent, or sharp
humors, must needs be hurt by wind bred in the part (which is seldom seen) or
sent from other parts where it abounds (which is usual.) This wind gets between
the Skull and the Pericranium, or between the Skull and the Dura Matter, or hard
film, or between both the Meaninges or films, and twitcheth and pulls them
from the bone. Hence is intolerable headache. Sometimes this wind stretches
the ventricles of the Brain and the whole inward Membrane called Pia Matter,
like a bladder, and causes unspeakable pain. They complain that the head is
sometimes stretched, sometimes slackned. This gets into any part quickly by its
thinness; and if it has any malignant quality from the humors putrefying
below in the body, it disturbs the mind and reason, and causes terrible
dreams, melancholy, dotings, shakings of the head, and sometimes death.

The Vertigo or Megrim is, when the head seems to turn round. The Scotoma is,
when there is not only a turning round, but a mist before the eyes. Both are
from diverse causes. We shall speak only of that Vertigo which is from wind in
the fore-ventricle of the Brain, that moves disorderly. This wind causes
mists, and perverts the imagination; hence things seem to run round, and think
they run round themselves and fall. For a Vertigo is a turbulent commotion of
thick flatuous spirits in the fore-ventricles of the Brain. This wind sometimes
breeds in the Brain from an uneven distemper thereof; sometimes it is sent from
the stomach and Hypochondria, which you may gather from the Chapter
afore-going. Sometimes wind gets from the Brain to the Nerves, and fills them,
and twitcheth, and causes a windy Cramp in the Fingers and Toes, or Arms and
Legs, extending or contracting them.

Also this wind causes great pain in the Ears, when it is straightened about the
Membranes in the Organ of Hearing For finding no passage out, it stretches
them vehemently, and tears them from the bone. This distemper is known from
others; for there is neither heat nor heaviness (except there be flagm there)
but only a stretching with noise or ringing. Also it is of much concernment, if
it be much or little, thick or thin, move quickly or slowly. For if it be much,
thick, and move quick, it will be perceived like swift flowing water, or like a
drum, or such an instrument as makes a shrill noise, with a large blast of
wind. If it be little, or thick, and move quick, it is like the breaking and
falling of a tree, or an house, or a conduit. If it be much, but thin, and move
quick, it causes jingling or ringing, or ringing, or like the whistling of
wind in at the cranny of a door. If it be much, gross, and move not quickly, it
causes rumbling. If it be little, thick, and move slowly, it causes a
whistling, or Susurrus, whispering. When it is much, thin, and moves slowly, it
causes hissing. They that have it, are commonly dull both in the inward and
outward senses, chiefly in the hearing, by reason of the grossness of the
spirits, impurity and coldness, and the pain is not constant, but by fits.

Also wind gets into the roots of the Teeth, and stretches their Nerves, or
the Membrane of the Cheek-bone, and causes wonderful pain, almost not to be
assuaged. It is easily known, for it is not constant, nor alike all the fit, as
when humors logde there; but it is by fits worse, and has a quick motion like
a dart.

Though, as Galen says, the Lungs feel no pain; yet being stretched, there is
pain felt in the breast and back, from the membrane that compasses them, which
hangs from breast to back by fibers. As often then as wind stretches this
membrane by its abundance or quick motion, there will be a pain in the breast or
back; and which is worse, it sometimes breaks the veins, and causes a flux of
blood, and so a consumption, though seldom.

Wind often causes a bastard Pleurisy, and sometimes difficult to be cured,
as when it is between the skin and the ribs, or between the membranes under the
ribs, and pulls them from the parts they cleave to. This stops the breath, and
keeps it from large and free passage, because the side and the breast are
stirred up to move in breathing. Sometimes from pain it causes a dry Cough and
a Fever, and it resembles a true Pleurisy, which is from a Phlegmon: and many
ignorant Physicians that are content with a few signs, and such as show not the
disease, are deceived thereby, and cause dangerous Symptoms by false
directions. But this Pleurisy differs far from a true; and to show the signs
of a true, is not to our purpose: but the Pleurisy of wind is with a wandering
pain, not long in the same place, except it be a very gross and cloudy vapor.
It is milder by heat and fomentations, and is dispersed; it comes from too much
cold drink or milk, chiefly a great draught after exercise; from cold and wet
feet, or other windy causes, as we showed before.

Also palpitation of the Heart is from wind, when it gets into the Pericardium
through invisible passages, and cannot get out; it tormenteth by a vehement
Systole and Diastole, contraction and dilatation, so that when it extends the
heart, it intercepts the motion of the Artery. We shall know when this is from
wind, and not from a humor. For the humor will be much or little, thick or
thin. That which is much and thick cannot get through the thick membrane, and
be dissolved into air through the habit of the body. If it be much and thin,
though it may at length be dissolved and dried up; yet it requires longer
abode, it cannot quickly come and go, be violent and cease: this is a plain
sign, that then the palpitation of the Heart is from a windy substance. But if
it were little and thin, it would easily vanish, and not make that kind of
palpitation. Therefore it is probable, that there is a thick substance or a
cloudy wind, which the heart labors to shake off, because it oppresses the
vital faculty; and by its heat and continual motion extenuates the thickness,
and so disperseth it, and then the palpitation cease, which comes from
surfeits, idleness, bashfulness, or too much or sudden fear, as the evident
causes. But the palpitation which is from humors contained in the Pericardium,
is different. For it is perpetual, seldom intermitting; but in time of rest it
grows worse from motion, and continues often for many years, even till death.
Fernelius says, that sometimes it has broken the adjacent ribs, and put them
out of their place, and dilated the Artery outward as big as the fist. The
other from wind is troublesome; but comes by fits, and is not so dangerous.

There are no oftener or greater Symptoms from wind, then those that trouble the
stomach and gut Colon: the first is called Inflation, the second, the Colic,
from the part affected. Inflation is from a fault from the retentive and
embracing faculty of the stomach. For the goodness of the stomach consists in
the time of the embracing of the food, being equal with the time of concoction,
and when it so binds up the food, that there is no empty space between it and
the meat. But quick evacuation and corruption of meat in the lower belly,
follow an unfit time of retention; and a weak retention causes inflations.
These torment the stomach, and the pain descends to the back. For the stomach
lies under the Midriff, and begins at the Malum Punicum or Pomegranate, and so
tends to the left side: for the upper part bends chiefly thither; but the lower
part bends more to the right side. The hinder part lies upon the Backbone, to
which it is bound, cleaving as far as the first Spondil of the Loins. The mouth
of it is united, not to the Backbone, but to the Diaphragma, Liver, Heart,
Spleen, Guts, and other parts, by Membranes, Nerves, Arteries, and Veins. Hence
when the stomach is stretched with wind, those parts are pained that are joined
to the stretched part of the stomach. Therefore when the back parts are
stretched by wind, there is chiefly pain in the Loins and Kidneys, as if it
were the Stone, which deceives not only the vulgar, but the learned sometimes,
so that they think them to have the stone, which are stretched with wind in the
stomach. But this is chiefly in such as have the Colic, as shall be proved.
When the upper part of the stomach is extended, there is pain over the breast,
chiefly on the left side. When the lower parts are stretched, the Liver is
sometimes pained, or the other side. If the mouth of the stomach be stretched,
the Gullet has a Convulsion, as if it were contracted with hands, so that they
say, it is like a stick fixed, and they can scarce swallow. For as Galen Lib.
6. Aph. 39. says, as fullness stretch the body, receiving it side-ways, and
downward, and make the length of the part shorter; so it is in the inflation of
the stomach, the Gullet is contracted, and the sides and the bottom stretched.
Erasistratus says, that if the muscles be filled with wind, they grow broader,
but shorter. Moreover, when from plenty the whole is stretched, the effect of
distension is perceived all over; and because the Diaphragma is compressed (for
it is an instrument of respiration) the breath is difficult from the stomach
puffed up; and so this inflation sometimes so increases; that it makes a
tumor on the mouth of the stomach. These are allayed by stools, and breaking
wind upward or downward.

The Colic is next, which is not always in one part of the belly in all, but
as the Colon is moved, so it removes, now to the right, then to the left side,
sometimes to the Kidneys, Navel, or over all the belly, but chiefly the left
side. For the Colon is a thick Gut, through the hollow of the Liver on the
right side is carried to the left Hypochondrion upon the bottom of the stomach,
and lies upon the Spleen; then bending backward, it adheres to the left Kidney.
Therefore in what part the wind chiefly gets, there is greatest pain; but when
it fixes in one part, it is raised from a crude and cold phlegm shut up in the
turnings of the Gut; nor is the wind then wholly included. This phlegm corrodes
the Gut, and tears it, and is like an Auger that pierces it, which causes
great pain, and loathing and vomiting of phlegm, and it departs not after
breaking of wind. But a pain from wind without phlegm, is wandering in diverse
parts of the belly, and rumbles often, and being shut up close, will not break
forth above or below. This uses to breed much in the Colon; for Nature has
made no other receptacle for wind, which the first concoction in the stomach
has bred: therefore wind is lodged in this gut with great pain, chiefly when
by reason of obstruction from gross phlegm or hard and dry excrements, it cannot
get forth. The dung is hardened from diverse causes, chiefly from idleness, and
laboring to keep from the stool. Rest makes retention, as motion evacuation,
and binds, as motion opens; rest makes things unmovable, and motion moveable:
It causes vomiting, stools, sweat, urine, and all natural expulsions; and rest
hinders them. Some women complain that they have not a stool in five or six
days, some in eight days: These are idle, cold, gluttonous, and obstructed, so
that motion does not help, nor Choler, by reason of cold, provoke the Guts to
expel. Also the obstructions hinder the Choler from the Cuts, and a perverse
order in eating, binds the belly. Therefore it is no wonder women are more
windy then men. Also costiveness does not only cause the Colic, but other
great accidents; for the dung sent down by Nature, and by its heaviness falling
to the lowest parts, if from other business or urgent occasion it be detained,
it will grow hard, because being kept long, it drys by heat, and the Meseraicks
do always suck some juice from it, for they are in the thick as well as the
thin Guts. So the excrements being by degrees very dry, stop the passage
against themselves and the wind, and cause the Ileon or Convolvulus sometimes,
but the Colic often, and other great Symptoms. For when the wind cannot get
out, it flies from the bottom of the belly again to the stomach, and stretches
it, and twitcheth so the Weasant, and contracts it, that they can scarce
swallow or speak. Also because the mouth of the stomach is very sensible, it is
pained with Convulsion, so that the heat of the outward parts goes in to expel
what hurts Nature; and then they wanting their heat, are chill, and the Nerves
are contracted, the Legs weak, and the body in a great strait. Who would think
that such deadly and cruel Symptoms should come from a little wind? but I know
it to be so by long experience. The excrements voided in this fit are windy;
for they swim upon water, and are like Ox-dung, and there was crudity,
loathing, and vomiting before. This disease is like the stone in the Kidneys
fixed in the Ureters, and hard to be distinguished from it: Galen was deceived
by it in his own body, and knew it not but to be the stone, till he injected
Oil of Rue, and voided glassie phlegm, and was freed presently from all pain.

We shall speak next of windy Melancholy; it is bred from three causes, from
heat of the Liver and the Meseraicks, coldness of stomach, and a crude and
gross humor of phlegm or melancholy. A cold stomach desires too much, and
digests too little. A hot Liver attracts crude and gross meats before perfect
concoction. And because the second concoction, which is in the Liver, cannot
correct the defect of the first, the Veins of the Mesentery are obstructed by
gross Chyle, and much crudity is gathered in them. This boils by preternatural
heat, and sends forth filthy vapors that are not easily discussed, and there
are rumblings, and breaking of wind. Also Galen from Diocles says, there is
another disease in the stomach like the other, called melancholy or windy, as
when meat of hard digestion and hot, is taken, there is much spitting,
belching, sour wind, heat in the sides, not presently, but after retention.
Sometimes great pains of the stomach that reach to the back in some, cease
after concoction, and come again after meat. When the fit comes, the stomach
and Hypochondria are mise rably tormented, and not freed till the matter be
voided by vomit or stool, that extends the Hypochondria with wind. That which
is vomited because the stomach is cold and weak, is phlegmatic, clammy, and
crude, white, and sometimes without taste, or sour, or bitter. That which is
sent down is black and windy Melancholy; from this sometimes a black vapor
arises, and hurts the brain, causes troublesome dreams, and disturbs the mind
with doting.

This wind shut up in the stomach and guts, and striving to get out, gets into
the small veins and membranes of the Liver, on both sides cavous and gibbous,
and is like a Schirrus; or so stretches, that there is a tumor like a
Schirrus, only it is bred in a shorter time. It is so great sometimes, that it
fills the Hypochondrion, and you cannot feel the ribs there, nor put a finger
under it, and there is no shape of the Liver. This is known to be from much
gross vapors, because there is not only heaviness, but distention, as Galen
lib. 5. de loc. affect. says.

The Spleen is in like manner stretched with wind, as Trallianus, says: as in
other parts, so in the spleen, there is wind that grows to a tumor; it is like
a Schirrus, but thus distinguished: in a Schirrus, there is hardness not
yielding, tumor and heaviness in the left Hypochondrion: In a tumor from
wind, it does not strongly resist the touch, but yields to the finger, and the
spleen is pricked and extended, but without heaviness, and it comes sooner.
When vulgar Physicians understand not these two tumors of both Liver and
Spleen, how blindly do they go to work with thousands of Juleps! and they
protract the cure, that they may be largely rewarded, and when they have done
more hurt then good, they affirm it to be a Schirrus, and from Galen,
incurable. But they are very ignorant; for this cloudy wind fixed on the bowel,
in time by the natural heat, somentations, fasting, an extenuating and hot diet
given by women and Empericks, being discussed, the humor vanishes, and the
pain also, and the foolish Doctors contemned. I exhort therefore the ingenious
that love their honor and the truth, to search narrowly, and learn to know
Symptoms from those of other diseases. It is hard, but excellent: For many
Patients, as ready to dye for pain, cry out only from wind, which if corrupted,
and come from a putrid and venomous matter, and run through the members with
intolerable pain, needs an exact Artist to know the wind and the matter
producing it, and distinguish the disease from others.

To this belongs the Tympany, Dropsy, when wind gets into the membranes of the
belly with pain, and so into the spaces. Hippocrates Aph. 2. Sect. 4. speaks of
this thus. They that have pain about the Navel and Loins, that will not be
cured by medicines, will have a dry Dropsy. There are three sorts of Dropsies;
Anasarca, Ascites, and Tympanides, which Hippocrates calls the dry Dropsy.
Anasarca is a preternatural increase of the bulk of the body; here the feet
swell first, at night chiefly, after exercise, or when they have long hung
down; they pit with the finger, the body is all soft, loose, and pale, weak and
tired with the least pains; it is like the Green Sickness in women, only the
Dropsy swells the body, but in the other there is paleness, and trembling of
the heart in motion, and shortness of wind going up stairs, and the body is
heavy and sluggish. The cause is the same in both, too much cooling of the
Liver and Veins. The Liver cooled, the sanguification is hurt, then comes crude
and watery blood, which taken into the hollow vein, goes over all the body, and
there is Anasarca; and if the water from the Liver stretch the skin, without
there will be bladders. If these break, the water gets into that part of the
Peritonaeum which is by the lower belly, and then there is the second kind of
Dropsy called Ascites. With this by degrees the belly is filled, and it swells
unmeasurably, the skin being loosned, and the rest of the body pines away. If
the body or the belly be turned, the water makes a noise. But in a Tympany
there is no fluctuation of water, but the sound of a drum when you strike or
fillip the belly with your finger. For Galen aph. 12. sect. 4. says, in these
the air is beaten which is contained by the skin; as in this kind of disease,
the wind is struck by the skin which is below. Cold of the bowels and veins is
cause of all these Dropsies. The Ascites or watery Dropsy is from more cold,
the Tympany from less; for water cannot be turned to wind without heat. Great
thirst follows all, chiefly Ascites and Tympany: the first because the water is
salt and putrefied that is detained; and the other, because there is seldom
wind alone in the belly without water which putrefies; also the wind takes away
the moisture of the stomach, and then it is dry, and desires drink. This is
thirst, the desire of moist and cold, or both. In externals we see, that though
the Earth be very wet with rain, yet when wind comes, it dryes it wonderfully
in a short time, and consumes the moisture. The same is done in the body; for
one in a Tympany has a thirst beyond Tantalus, the more he drinks, the more he
may, and to satisfy the enemy in his bowels, he destroys himself with much
drink. Also they in the Colic thirst from the same cause.

Also wind swells the Cods and the Womb, it gets by invisible passages into the
cavity of them, or after Childbirth by the Orifice of the womb, or after
bathing or fomenting; or it breeds there from some other cause, and there is
straightened, and so it stretches the womb. If the stretching be in the upper
part of the womb, by force of the wind sent thither, it ascends and goes to the
Midriff and stomach, and lies like a ball there, and oppresses it. Hence it is
often driven down by the hands or fists, or by other solid bodies into its
proper place. But if either side of the womb be distended or stretched more then
the rest, it gets by a Convulsion into the right or left Croyn, the Pecten and
the lower belly are blown up and pained; sometimes a noise is heard all over
the body, there is belching, and swelling of the Loins, and pain in the Reins
and Hips, and when the belly is smitten with the fingers, there is a sound like
a drum, and the wind breaks forth at the mouth of the womb. Soranus said, this
was called a flatuous cold.

As wind gets into the womb of a woman, so it gets into the Cods of a man, with
a disease or without, and is a disease by it self. I have seen in a Tympany the
Cods of a man swollen as big as a Hogs bladder. For the wind which at first was
only in the membranes of the Abdomen and Peritonaeum, being now increased, and
requiring great space, breaks them, and gets into the Cods, and fills also the
whole body. Wind also extends the Cods without a disease in man, and chiefly
new born children, and makes the Hernia called Pneumatocele, or windy Rupture.
Sometimes it gets within the common membrane of the stones, and puffs up all
the Cods alike; but when it gets between the tunicles of either stone, called
Erythroides and Dartos, then one side of the Cod is only tumified. This tumor
is transparent, and not heavy as that of You may try it in the dark with a
Wax-candle held on the part opposite to your view.

Priapismus a Symptom of the Yard, has two causes; one is the fullness of the
Arteries of the Privities; the other is wind bred in the fistulous Nerve. This
fills the Nerve, so that it swells and makes the Yard stand without a venereous
desire. Galen meth. med. 12. says, there is another kind of Priapism, when the
Yard extends against desire: For the Nerve that makes the proper substance of
the Yard, being hollow, and filled with wind, causes it. So Priapism is a
permanent enlargement of the Yard in length and thickness, without desire of
Venery; and wind is the cause, as appears by its quick rise and sudden fall,
which no humor could make. But Palpitation goes before this Priapism of wind,
but not before that which is from the dilatation of the Artery.

We have showed how wind fills the internal parts, and what evils it causes;
we shall now show what Symptoms it produces in the habit of the body: For it
is thin, and not only fills vacuity, but dissolves continuity, tears the
membranes in themselves, and from the bones, and swiftly strikes like a dart
upon any part, causing great pain. Sometimes like cold air, it affects the
sensible nervous parts without great pain; but this is little and very thin,
and easily vanishes by the natural heat, and Fomentations. But it is harder to
be discussed, when it gets under the skin or membranes of the bones, being
thicker, and more, and swells them to a windy Impostume. Galen distinguishes
this from Oedema, which is from water, and yields to the finger, and pits deep.
But an inflation is from wind, either under the skin or membranes of the bones,
or under the Muscles. This pits not with the finger, but sounds like a drum
with a fillip. Sometimes it causes no tumor; but lying under the skin,
through which it cannot breathe, being thick, it only beats: this the Vulgar
call the life. And Langius in an Epistle wittily shows the arrogance and
ignorance of some Chirurgions, that when they see the Muscles of the Temples,
Forehead, Cheeks, or Jaws tremble by wind in the skin, and to swell, they say,
there is the soul or life, as in a prison: also without purging, which is less
dangerous then bleeding, they let blood, and beholding the blood to tremble in
the Porringer by reason of wind, they fear that life is gone forth with the
blood; and therefore they make the patient drink it off hot. Silly fellows!
that know not that air feeds the vital and animal spirits, gets not only into
the Arteries of the Brain, Lungs, and Heart, but into all parts by inspiration,
and the pores; and is mixed with the blood by the Anastomosis of the Arteries
with the Veins; and wind will breed from clammy humors, not only in the
Muscles and all parts that may be stretched (as the Stomach, Guts, Liver,
Spleen, Midriff, and Womb in teeming women) which move the womb, so that they
think the Child moves. And it causes a trembling, not only in the Muscles and
other members, but chiefly in the Heart. And as wind shut up in the bowels of
the Earth, shakes as it is ready to get forth; so wind in the body, being
comprehended in the muscles or other stretchable parts, shakes them till it
gets forth. Thus Langius and Galen lib. 2. de Art. curat. ad Glauc. confirms
him, saying, that that sort of wind which is gross, sometimes lies under the
membranes of the bones, sometimes under the Peritonaeum, sometimes in the guts
and belly, sometimes under the membranes about the muscles and the membranous
tendons, and the spaces of the muscles and other parts. Therefore the force of
wind is wonderful, that like Thunder passes through insensible passages into
private places, even into the bones and marrow, and causes pain; but being
between the bone and the Periostium, it teareth them asunder with great pain.
Hence many complain of pain of the Shins by fits, when there is no distemper
external, neither tumor nor pain when it is pressed, except there be much
gathered. So much of the Symptoms, now we shall speak of the Prognostics of
Wind.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Prognostics of Wind.
ALL diseases of wind in any part, are hard to be cured, if it cannot get
forth; the thicker and more close it is, the longer it remains, and causes
worse Symptoms. When it separates the parts, it causes pain, and pain causes
flux of humors, and the humor getting into the crannies of the part
stretched, causes a tumor, the tumor distends the skin and membranes, and
contracts them: hence, the blood being not cooled, comes corruption and
increase of preternatural heat. If this tumor be hard, and yield, red and
beating, it is an inflammation; if it be white, yielding to touch, and pit, it
is an Oedema; if it be white, yielding, and transparent, it is an inflation.
Sometimes wind makes a Dropsy, as Hippocrates lib. de Flatibus says, wind
gets through the flesh, and makes thin the pores, and then follows moisture, to
which the wind before had made a passage; and the body is moistened, the flesh
melts, and the humors fall down to the Legs, and then comes a Dropsy. They in
whom wind has long remained, are subject to all these diseases, as the
Aphorism says. They who have pains about the Navel and Loins, that will not
away with Physic or other ways, will have a dry Dropsy. This wind is not
discussed by medicines, or other things, by reason of the habitual distemper of
the part, which persevering, causes a Tympany, the worst of Dropsies: I never
knew it cured when confirmed. If then it be so dangerous, because the wind will
yield to no remedies, by reason of the cause that feeds it, Hippocrates
Prognost. lib. 1. said well, it is very healthful for wind to pass forth
without noise; but it is better to break with noise, then stay and move about,
and cause pain. If any from modesty, when they are sound, will rather dye then
fart, let them know that they dote, or must endure pain. If one fart willingly,
it signifies no ill, but only it were better to be voided without noise: For a
noise shows much wind or straitness of the vessels; but that noise which is
heard in new diseases in the Hypochondria, pains or swellings, is not bad.
Hippocrates lib. 2. Prognost. says, new pains and swellings in the
Hypochondria without inflammation, are dissolved by noise, chiefly if there be
stools and urine; and if the wind goes not forth, it is good that it goes
downward. These tumors being only of wind, are dissolved by their rumbling, it
shows wind joined with a humor, and sign fies good, that is, that the wind
will go forth with the humor it is mixed with; or if not, that it will go
downward, and the pain and tumor will cease. And Hippocrates Aph. 73. lib* 4.
says, they who have stretched Hypochondria with rumbling, and after that a
pain in the Loins, will have a moist belly or looseness, except they fart or
piss much. The Hypochondria rumbles and swells from wind alone, or mixed with
humors; and if it alone breaks forth upward or downward with the humor, it is
without danger, and the pain and tumor suddenly depart. For the Liver and
Spleen lying in the Hypochondria, if they be much pained, it is from strong
inflammation or wind; if from wind, a Fever coming, removes the pain. As
Hippocrates Aph. 52. lib. 7. says, they whose Liver is much pained, are cured
by a Fever; for the heat of it does discuss the wind. Now a Fever does not
follow an inflammation, but comes with it; nor does it take off pain, but
increase it. It appears that the heat of a Fever discusseth wind, because they
in the Jaundice seldom have fits of wind, because they are hot of constitution,
as Hippocrates Aph. 78. lib. 5. says, they in the Jaundice are not much windy:
For they are choleric, and Choler will not suffer wind to reign, but
discusseth it. But Phelgmaticks, and they of a moist and cold stomach, and the
sanguine, are troubled with wind, and easily have the Colic. And all know that
great pains of the Colic are more dangerous then less, and a total collection
of excrements and wind into one part of the Colon, is worse then when they run
about many parts. Therefore there is less danger when wind is broken by
Clysters, and the stools take away the pain, then when not. But if wind cause a
a doting, contraction of Nerves, fainting, cold limbs, cold sweat, constant
vomiting, stoppage of all excrements, as it does when it comes from venomous
matter, it is deadly, and there is a Convolvulus. It is best to be without
wind, or easily discuss it; but this cannot be without diligent caution and
good diet in the use of the six natural things.

CHAP. XII.
Of Diet to be observed by windy Bodies.
TO prevent breeding of wind by diet, or discuss it when bred, four things are
to be observed, chiefly in such as have bodies apt to breed it; Order, Manner,
Time, and Substance. The Order is, that they begin not dinner nor supper with
drink, nor drink a great draught, as the custom is after they have eaten a bit
or two: Drink is best, when you have taken most part of the food. Also let
liquid things be eaten before hard, and loosners before astringents, and those
of easy concoction before those of hard. The Manner is, that more food be not
taken then can be concocted without difficulty, by rising with an appetite, and
not drinking more then to quench thirst, and wash down the meat, which will
make the body lazy, and oppress the native heat. Some are never satisfied,
except they carouse exceedingly when they eat; some drink so, that they can eat
little or nothing: this causes fluctuation and inflation, because the stomach
cannot embrace the quantity. Time also must be observed, that they drink not
fasting nor between meals, or after supper, or in bed. nor eat before the
former is digested, nor sit long at meat. They must abstain from gross meats,
they stop the narrow passages, such as produce a clammy juice, hard of
concoction, salt Beef and Pork, from cold, and sour, and sharp things; and all
Summer-fruits, crude or boiled, Pulse, Sallets, Milk, and all Milk-meats, all
Junkets, as Fritters, Pancakes, Sweet-cakes, etc. chiefly that which our women
call Whitepots, or that made of Eggs, Butter, and Honey in a Drying Pan or an
Oven: And from that of green Cheese, Beets, Paste, Eggs, and Oil, which the
Italians call a Tart. Also the Italian Dishes are very hurtful, Turtellae,
Lasaniae, Macaroons, Worms, and the like, made fit for the palate. These fill
the body with gross humors, and so oppress the natural heat, that the stomach
concocts worse after, being not able to overcome the tough and clammy humors.
But some will devour such trash and junkets, and contemn better food, and yet
find no inconvenience, or very little. To which I answer: That all food made of
paste causes gross and clammy humors, and many excrements, and obstructions,
and matter fit to breed wind. But if they be taken by a good and firm stomach,
and well concocted (which I think scarce can be) and they find no hurt thereby
worth notice; it does not therefore follow, that they are of themselves without
harm: For all know, that to drink great draughts is an enemy to Nature; and
that a medicine of Hemlock presently killed Socrates. Therefore he concludes
nothing that says, therefore these things are not hurtful, and not to be
dispraised; because some Drunkards will drink off great bowls, and the Athenian
old Woman used to eat Hemlock, and because one or two make food of paste that
nourishes. For the stomach embraces sweet things, and such as are eaten with
great delight, more close, and easier digests them. Therefore three things make
food, which is of its own nature hurtful, to be innocent and milder; use or
custom, pleasure, and a strong firm stomach: For the best nourishing food hurts
the stomach, if it loath it; and Brook-fish cause trouble to it, if it be weak.
And let these men, if they will not be admonished by me, be moved with the
threatening* of Constantine, with which he affrighteth Gluttons, let them not
rejoice when they eat bad food; for though they are not hurt by them at the
present, afterward they will not escape. To this belongs variety of meats,
which causes many crudities and winds in the body: For many things of diverse
natures are confounded, and these being unequally concocted and distributed,
the natural heat must needs be put to it. You must avoid all great and
Fen-fish, and such as live in mud on putrefaction; their flesh is slimy and
clammy, cold, and has much excrement. Also let windy people abstain from wine
too much cooled, from water, and from great draughts of drink drawn from a cool
Cellar, chiefly when they are hot out wardly, or weary after exercise or
labor, and from all excess of air, chiefly cold, which presently reaches the
stomach, if not kept warm-clothed; and from cold and moisture at the feet.
Sitting long upon cold stones has often caused great Symptoms from wind. Let
him avoid idleness also and sleeping in the day; these raise vapors, but
discuss them not; set upon concoction, but bring it not to perfection: whence
comes crude phlegm, the true material cause of phlegm. When the stomach or guts
are distended or stretched with wind, let them abstain from meat and drink, and
feed very stenderly, and be sober. For when the usual diet is taken from the
body, or abated, the native heat is not so put to it to alter and concoct food;
but is active, and flourishes, and spreads it self, and shows its strength:
first it concocts crudities, and attenuates the gross humors, cleanses the
tough, takes away the cause that will breed wind, sends them for that the right
passages, and disperseth such wind as is bred, and keeps it from breeding. And
to be short, fasting alone is sufficient to cure any disease from crudity or
wind. It is true that there is more trouble from the flying about of wind in
the body that is empty, in such as fast and use a spare diet; but this will not
be long, for they will presently break forth, and free the patient from all
pain, and the sooner by use of exercise. For it is the Doctrine of Hippocrates
Epid. 6. agreeable to this my opinion, fit to be written in gold in every
house, That we ought not to eat to fullness, and to be ready to take pains. And
Galen de sanit. tuend. lib. 2. reckons up many sorts of exercises, Wrestling,
Fencing, Running, etc. which we shall not speak of, only let this suffice, that
moderate exercise at ball or fencing, running or walking, fasting, and after
the body has discharged the excrements, does wonderfully recreate all the
faculties, and spread the native heat through the body, concoct humors, and
make the members active for their duties, loofens the belly, and sends forth
wind so powerfully, that there is no remedy like it, and nothing safer nor
better then seasonable exercise with a spare diet. Eat therefore little, and
that with mustard, or other attenuating and heating sauce (except the
constitution be sanguine or choleric) Sage, Hysop, Savory, Fennel, Marjoram,
Pennyroyal, Calamints are to be used, and roasted meat with Spices, Sage or
Rosemary. Let his bread be well leavened, and with Fennel, Anise, Parsley or
Gith seeds. His Wine strong, when wind breeds from weak heat. If the body be
choleric or plethorick, drink little wine, and that with water. Let the
powders following be taken after meat presently, they do very much good: They
strengthen and constringe the stomach, and suffer not the vapors of the food
to fly into the head, stir up the natural heat, quicken concoction, digest the
Chyle, drive excrements downwards, and discuss wind exceedingly. As, Take
Aniseeds candied three ounces, Fennel seed an ounce and half, Coriander
prepared an ounce, Cummin, Caraway, Seseli steept in white Wine, each a dram;
dried Citron peel, gross Cinnamon, each four scruples; white Sugar twice as
much. Take a spoonful after meat, and drink not after.

Or thus, Take Coriander prepared, Caraway, Aniseeds, each an ounce; red Roses,
Mastich, each a dram and half; dried Mints a dram, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cubebs,
each half a dram; make a fine Powder, and add Sugar of Roses eight ounces: give
a spoonful after meat.

At night when concoction is almost finished, chew Elicampane candied, or
Ginger a dram, and swallow it, or Gentian roots, or Masterwort, candied Cubebs,
or two or three grains of white Pepper, only broken, they wonderfully help a
slow, weak concoction, and expel wind; and they do the like in the morning
fasting after going to stool. If the belly be bound, give Lenitives, as three
drams of Turpentine washed in white Wine, in Wafers before dinner, or half a
dram of Rhubarb chewed and swallowed, or a scruple of washed Aloes an hour
before supper; or Carthamus seeds husked with Figs: I allow not Cassia, it is
windy. Thus much for Diet; if it be tedious, and do not cure, take these
medicines.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the common Cure of windy Diseases.
SOme will wonder, that I shall order the cure of Symptoms mentioned, which of
themselves admit no Cure. But we do it for the profit of the Reader: For he
that discusseth wind, takes away the cause, he that corrects the distemper, and
mends the faults in conformation, and restores the solution of unity, cures the
disease: But he that cures the pains that come from the diseases, looks at the
Symptoms. Therefore we have called windy Diseases Symptoms, looking at the
pains they produce, for the better method, and then we have ordered the
mitigation of Symptoms, and the Cure of Diseases. The knowledge of the disease
gives the indication of cure. The disease is the distraction of the parts by
wind that stretches them, which pain does follow, as a shadow, and the disease
vanishes with the cause, and the parts come to their old natural habit.
Therefore diseases from wind are to be cured by three sorts of remedies. 1. By
diet that is attenuating, hot and dry. 2. By medicines that open obstructions,
and cut gross clammy matter, and purge, which you shall find in every Chapter.
3. The discussing of wind speedily before the strength abate by pain; which is
done by medicines of thin parts, which if there be pain, will abate it, and
strengthen the weak heat, and extenuate the thick spirit, and open the
thickness of parts. Also according to the difference of parts, the medicines
must be altered, because the faculty is stronger or weaker.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Cure of the Pain of the Head from Wind.
WInd tyranizeth in diverse places, as Galen de compos. med. secund. loc. lib.
2. says, wind breeds in the stomach and guts for want of heat, sometimes from
the nature of the food, and the organs are so filled and puffed up, by reason
of the weakness of the comprehensive faculty, that they stretch, and thereby
have pain; the same may be in parts of the head; for a vapor or clammy humor
that feeds it, may be so fixed in the strait passages of the Brain, that it
will require a long cure. First therefore, whether it be wind alone in the
passages, which is known from the motion of the pain from place to place, and
by stretching without heaviness and beating; or if there be much phlegm that
feeds it, and so there is heaviness with stretching, and sense of cold; or if
it fly to the head from parts below, it is much concerned as to the cure. Yet
we begin in all windy diseases the same way; partly by revelling from the head
to the body; partly by applying remedies to the part affected: we revel by
Clysters and Purges. You may make Clysters thus.

Take Mallows, Mercury, red Coleworts, Calaminth, each half a handful; Chamomil
flowers, Bran, each a pugil. Boil them to a pint and half, add Diacatholicon,
red Sugar, each an ounce and half; Species Hierae simple two drams, Oil of Dill
three ounces, Salt a little, make a Clyster. Give it before meat, not
lukewarm, for such things puff up, but hot, and that by degrees, lest by force
it drive the wind more upwards, and cause more pain. This is an excellent
medicine which without trouble opens obstructions, and empties out the hard
dung and wind, and draws it from the head. After this, give one of the
Carminatives or Wind-breakers.

Take Althaea roots two ounces, Mallows, Calamints, Pennyroyal, Rue, Sage, each
a handful; flowers of Chamomil, Stoechas, Rosemary, each a pugil; Anise, and
wild Rue seeds, and Cubebs, each three drams; Coloquintida a dram. Boil them to
a pint strained, add Electuary of Dates an ounce, Hiera Logodii two drams, red
Sugar an ounce and half, Oil of Rue three ounces, Sal Gem a dram: give it
before meat. It revels strongly from the head, expels wind with the excrements.
But if the Piles or distaste will not allow a Clyster, give this Laxative in
Costiveness.

Take Diacatholicon an ounce, species Hierae simple a dram; with Sugar make a
Bolus, or a Potion.

Take Lenitive Electuary six drams, Electuary of the juice of Roses a dram,
Syrup of Rose solutive an ounce and half: dissolve them in the decoction of
Flowers and Cordial Fruits. After Laxatives, if the head be full of gross
humors, give potions that attenuate and cut, of Hysop, Pennyroyal, Calamints,
Sage, French Lavender and Rosemary-flowers, with Syrup of Stoechas, Honey of
Rosemary.

Or, Take Hysop, Sage, Calamints, each a handful; flowers of Stoechas,
Rosemary, Chamomil, each a pugil; male Piony-seeds an ounce, Anise, Carrot,
Parsley-seeds, each two drams. Boil, and to a pint strained add Syrup of
Stoechas, Honey of Rosemary, each an ounce and half; Cinnamon a dram: make an
Apozem for diverse draughts.

The humors thus prepared, and the wind attenuated at least, purge with these
pills.

Take Pilulae aureae a dram, Troches of Alhandal three grains, with Syrup of
Stoechas; make five Pills: give them at midnight.

Or thus, Take Agarick two drams, Sal Gem, Ginger, Turbith, each half a dram;
infuse them in Hysop and Sage-water, each two ounces; strain and add Elect Ind.
Maj. two drams, Electuary of juice of Roses a dram, Syrup of Stoechas an ounce.

This done often, and the pain cease not, let us use Topics, as Galen lib. de
compos. med. sec. loc. says; sometimes wind or clammy matter is sometimes so
fixed in strait passages, that it requires long Cure: Therefore it must be
attenuated, and the part dilated, and the part strengthened, that no more come
or breed. Therefore after preparatives and purges, use cupping to the head
without bleeding, if blood abound not: or scarifie the shoulders, if blood
abound. This is very good. Or roast a Turnep, and take off the top, and apply
it hot behind the Ears, and then another, and so till the wind and pain pass
away: apply it to the side of the part pained, or to both, if the pain be all
over. This is good also for the Toothach from wind. Or use Castor or Scents
that pierce and extenuate, or Gith-seed steept in Vinegar: or anoint the
Nostrils and Ears with Oil of Castor or Spike, or Oil in which were boiled
Castor, Rue, Calaminths, Piony-seeds. Then use Masticatories to take away the
relics, and discuss the wind.

Take Mastich, Pellitory-roots, white Pepper, bark of Capar-roots, each half a
dram; with Vinegar of Squills make Troches to be chewed after a stool in the
morning.

Or, Take Roots of Pellitory, Stavesacre, each two scruples; Nutmeg, Ginger,
white Pepper, each half a scruple; Mastich two drams, with Vinegar make Balls:
or discuss wind, and evacuate with Neesings.

Take white Hellebore two scruples and half, Stavesacre, white Pepper, each a
scruple; Ginger, Cloves, Gith seed, each half a scruple; with Turpentine and
Wax make Errbines like great Cloves. Or snuff up the juice of red Coleworts or
Danwort roots, Orris, with Marjoram or Bettonywater and Honey. When we think
the Brain is cleansed, then dry and strengthen, and discuss wind with a
Lixivium. As Galen lib. 7. de facult natural. it is made of water and ashes,
one pound of ashes to three pints of water, take most ashes of Willows and
Vines, and fewer of Colewort and Bean stalks. This cleanses, dryes, and
consumes wind and tumors of phlegm, with Marjoram, Bettony, Asarabacca, Bay and
Juniper Berries, and Rosemary boiled in it. Or,

Take Wormwood, Sage, dried Rosemary, each a pugil; Frankincense, Milium
parched, red Roses dry, Chamomil flowers, each two drams; Juniper Berries and
Piony seeds, each a dram; Cloves, long Pepper, Cubebs, Wood Aloes, each a
scruple; make a Quilt of Silk.

Then give Diacyminum, Diatrionpeperion, Diacalaminth, or Confection of
Bay Berries fasting, chiefly if the wind be cold, or from a cold cause. But if
it be hot, as Galen lib. 2. de compos. med. sec. loc. first repel with cold
things, then mitigate and concoct with Repellers, then discuss with few
Repellers, by degrees ceasing from them till the medicine be most digestive and
attenuating, and less anodyne, and then discuss. Vinegar is a repeller,
attenuater, and a discussive, it is cold and thin like a clear North Wind: but
it must not be used along, being too strong, but with Oil of Roses, Purslane
juice, or Nightshade: or use Oil of Roses with the White of an Egg and Vinegar,
with Stuphes to the Forehead.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Cure of the Noise in the Ears from Wind.
IF wind gets into the Organof Hearing, and sticks there strongly (as by the
ringing, hissing, rustling, cracking, and murmur is gathered) after general and
particular evacuations, as in the Chapter before, use Cutters and Dryers to the
Ears, as Oil of bitter Almonds, of Castor, Cummin, Rue, Spike, with Vinegar and
Honey, if you will more discuss and attenuate. Aetius says, Castor and Spike
Oils with Vinegar and Oil of Roses, do wonders, dropped into the Ears, and juice
of Leeks with Breast-milk, or Oil of Roses.

Or, Take Nitre, Mirrh, each a dram; white Hellebore half a dram, Castor a
scruple: grind them with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, and drop it in. But first
sum with a Funnel evening and morning with this Decoction.

Take Calamints, Marjoram, Centaury the less, Rosemary, each a handful;
Juniper Berries a pugil, Bays and Wormwood, each half a handful; Lupines ten
or twelve, Earth worms washed in Wine and tied in a Clout half a pugil, Water
one part, white Wine two parts: boil and keep it for a Fume: then drop in the
former. Or this of Solenander, and stop with black Wool.

Take Oil two ounces, Oil of Leeks, bitter Almonds, each an ounce, juice of
Rue, Radish, each half an ounce; Sack an ounce and half: boil them in a glass
till the Wine and the juyces be almost consumed. Then add powder of Lavender,
Coloquintida, Castor, and Mastich, each two grains: Then stop the glass, and
set it three hours in Balneo: then set it in another vessel in the Sun till it
be clear: then strain it, add a grain and half of Musk. While the Fume is used,
chew Beans or Pease to open the passages of the Ears, that the Fume may
penetrate.

Or thus, Take juice of Garlic, Calamints, each an ounce; Aqua vitae, Oil of
Bays and bitter Almonds, each half an ounce; Aloes, Mirrh, each a scruple;
Saffron four grains: make a fine Powder; fill two great hollow Onions
therewith, cover them, and roast them under the Embers, and strain out the
juice, drop often some into the Ears, chiefly morning and evening after fuming.
Also Wine with flowers of Chamomil and Lavender boiled therein, discusseth wind
very well, if dropped hot into the Ears, and often, or a Bag made of the same,
and Rosemary and Lavender flowers, Wormwood and Calamints, and quilted, and
applied after the Fume and Ointment for all night: lying upon it all the time
of the use of these, use Clysters that are gentle at seasons to keep the belly
open, lest the binding in of the excrements should heap up more new matter to
cause the disease.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Cure of the Toothach from Wind.
WE showed that wind would move very swiftly, and in a moment go through the
thickest bodies: it is no wonder then, if it get into the Nerves under the
Teeth, and cause intolerable pains by stretching and by its coldness. Therefore
the Cure is to being with common Evacuations by emollient Clysters. As,

Take Diacatholicon an ounce and half, red Sugar an ounce, Oil of Dill and of
Chamomil, each an ounce and half; Salt a dram: dissolve them in the common
Decoction for Clysters a pint. If after the excrements are discharged, you
desire to dissolve more the thickness of the wind and revel, make this.

Take Rue, French Lavender, Beets, Centaury the less, each a handful; flowers
of Elder, St. John's Wort, Chamomil, each a pugil; Bay Berries, Cummin seed,
each half an ounce; Agarick, Senna, each half an ounce: boil them, and to a
pint add Electuary Ind. maj. Hiera Logodii, each four drams; Honey of Roses two
ounces, Oil of Bays three ounces, Electuary of Bays two drams: make a Clyster.

If they will not take Clysters, give Pills of washed Aloes, of Hiera, aureae
Cochic. after preparation and abatement of pain. But if pain be great, and the
matter small, omit preparation and evacuation, and fall upon that which most
disturbeth: therefore assuage pain speedily: apply a small Cupping-glass
without much flame twice or thrice to the shoulder, then take Gith, Cummin
seed, Pellitory and Parsley roots, each half an ounce; boil them in Wine to the
consumption of half, wash the teeth with it hot, it will discuss, and
attenuate, and amend the cold distemper, and draw out much slimy matter which
breeds wind. Or boil Pellitory roots half an ounce, white Pepper a dram in
Vinegar, and wash the mouth therewith: or you may make a Bag, and apply it to
the Tooth thus.

Take Calamints, Hysop, Chamomil, each a handful; Milium parched, Bran, Salt,
each a pugil; Cummin half an ounce: make a Bag. Then put a red hot Iron into an
earthen Jug, and pour into it three or four spoonfuls of Vinegar, and let the
Bag take the Fume at the mouth of the Jug. The Women hold it for a great Secret
to apply a roasted Turnep behind the Ears, for it revels strongly, and abates
pain, to my knowledge. I never allowed Narcoticks in this Disease, for they
thicken the wind too much, and make it fix like a cloud upon the Nerves and
roots of the Teeth, and congealing makes a little ease, but increases the
Disease. But if the pain be intolerable, to refresh Nature you must use
Narcoticks with hot things to abate their force, and look both at the Symptom
and cause. Thus,

Take Pellitory, Pepper, each a scruple; Opium half a scruple: bind them in a
Clout, and infuse them two or three hours in Vinegar, and apply it to the
Tooth. Or,

Take Henbane seed, Stavesacre, and Pellitory, each a scruple; and with Vinegar
make a Pill: hold it at the Tooth for an hour, it abates pain wonderfully, and
does no hurt, yet I could wish that only Discussers might remove pain.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Cure of a windy Pleurisy.
THe pain is great which is from wind in the side, when it gets into the cavity
of the Breast, or between the Membranes that are under the Ribs; for then, as
in a true Pleurisy, there is a Cough, restlesness, and sometimes a Fever,
thirst, and stretching pain, which may be distinguished from a true Pleurisy
by many signs: yet Hippocrates for better security, bids us soment with hot
things; and if the pain increase, it is certainly from a defluxion, and chiefly
of hot matter; if it abate, it is from wind, or a small defluxion which easily
breaks forth when the skin is made thinner by the Fomentation. It is not good
to use Fomentations only, but to give Clysters to make passage for the wind;
for in this disease the excrements are hard by idleness or dryness, when the
moisture is gone to the veins, or from much phlegm that is gross, which stops
the passages: therefore give a common Clyster first, then a stronger to purget
see the precedent Chapter. If he will not take a Clyster, give this Medicine.

Take Diacatholicon four drams; Electuary of Dates two drams, species Hierae s.
half a dram: with Sugar make a Bole. Or give this Powder in Cock-broth or Wine.

Take Senna four scruples, Rhubarb half a scruple, Diagredium two grains,
Aromaticum rosatum eight grains, Sugar a sufficient quantity. After Evacuation,
open the Liver-vein on the side affected, if there be much blood or great pain;
otherwise not: then use Fomentations, and the like, to the part.

Take Calamints, Pennyroyal, Rosemary, each one handful; Rae, Bays, each half
a handful; Juniper berries and Chamomil flowers, each a pugil; seeds of
Foenugreek, Line, and Bran, each three ounces. Boil them to half, then put the
Liquour and Herbs in a Bladder, and apply them; or use a Cloth or a Sponge dipped
in it: do this often. This concocts the thick and crude spirit, extenuates and
discusseth: after this anoint with Oil of Chamomil or bitter Almonds, and apply
a hot cloth. Or make a Bag of Rue, Thyme, Wormwood, Lavender, Rosemary,
Chamomil, Gith seed, Cummin, Carrot, Bay Berries, as in Chap. 16. When the wind
is thus discussed, it is good to apply a great Cupping-glass six fingers
breadth below the part without Scarification, but with a great flame twice or
thrice: this will discuss the wind easier, it would not at first be discussed
by a Cupping-glass. If this will not do, but the wind is bred still from clammy
phlegm, prepare it thus by Inciders and Extenuaters.

Take roots of Orris, Parsley, Elicampane, each an ounce; bark of Dwarf-elder
roots, and of Tamarisk, each four drams; Sage, Rosemary, Hysop, Roman Wormwood,
each half a handful; Dodder a handful, of the four great hot Seeds, each two
drams; Raisons stoned a pugil, Liquorish four drams: boil them to half, to a
pint strained add Syrup of the five Roots two ounces, of French Lavender,
Oxymel of Squills, each an ounce; and Sugar, and a dram and half of Cinnamon:
make an Apozem for four draughts to be taken twice a day. Then purge phlegm thus.

Take Agarick four scruples, Ginger half a dram: infuse them in Fennel-water
and white Wine twelve hours, strain and add Benedicta laxativa three drams,
Electuary of the juice of Roses half a dram, Syrup of Calamints an ounce. Or,

Take Turbith a dram, Ginger half a dram, Sugar two drams: give it in powder
with white Wine or Broth. Afterward repeat the Fomentations, Ointments, and
Cupping-glasses, and use Diacyminum, or Electuary of Bay Berries, or this
Confection.

Take Conserve of Borage flowers, candied Elicampane, each half an ounce;
species of Diacyminum, Dianisi, Bay Berries, each a scruple; Cinnamon half a
scruple, with Syrup of Citron peels make an Electuary: give a dram fasting in a
decoction of Chamomil flowers and Aniseeds in white Wine. It is good also to
foment with Spirit of Wine and Oil of bitter Almonds, and apply a hot clout.
You must do the like in inflations of the Lungs.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Cure of a windy Palpitation.
A Palpitation is a Symptom of the Heart, namely an elevation and depression of
it preternaturally caused by wind, and it is more dangerous then another
palpitation, because the part is most noble. For if it be strong, or last long,
it so weakens the vital faculty, that it turns to fainting or sudden death.
Therefore presently strengthen the Heart with good Diet and Physic, discuss
wind, and remove the cause. Let the air be clear, hot and dry, not stinking or
cloudy: make it so by art, if it be not naturally clear, and sweet by sweet
cordial things. Let him abstain from strong passions of mind, chiefly from
sudden fear and shamefulness, and from much Wine (but moderate does well) and
Venery, and sleep in the day, cold drink, and from all things mentioned in the
Chapter of prevention. Keep the Belly loose by Clysters, or Suppositories.

Take Marsh-mallow roots two ounees, the five Emollients, each a handful;
Aniseeds an ounce, Chamomil flowers a pugil, Agarick, Senna, each four drams:
boil them, to a pint strained add Diacatholicon, red Sugar, each an ounce;
Hiera with Honey half an ounce, Oil of Chamomil, Dill, each two ounces; Salt a
dram: make a Clyster. Or make a Suppository of boiled Honey, and a scruple of
Hiera simple; or for the tender sort make one of the Yolk of an Egg and Salt, a
Candles end, a Fig turned inside outward, or the like: All know (I suppose)
that little food is to be used, not too moist or windy, of good juice, and
easy concoction, chiefly roasted with Hysop, Fennel, Balm, Borage, Cloves, and
other hot and dry Cordials. Some object against bleeding that it weakens the
vital strength, which is weak before; nor can the disease be cured by it, being
not in the blood: but I answer with Galen lib. de loc. affect. 5. that bleeding
is a wonderful help in all Palpitations. And he says, that this palpitation
comes often suddenly upon young and old, without any manifest accident, and
bleeding does always good to such, and cures them if they use an extenuating
diet afterward. For bleeding does good, more by revulsion of humors from the
Heart, then weak and attracting by its motion, then by any other way, in regard
there is then a cold distemper, and the wind is cold. Open therefore the
Liver-vein in the right Arm, and bleed by degrees for revulsion; except there
be any hindrance from age, strength, or the like. Then use extenuating Diet and
cutting Medicines that expel wind, to correct the cold distemper of the Heart,
and strengthen it, and consume phlegm that breeds wind, and stir up natural
heat, and restore the animal and natural actions. Let Medicines be hot, and
such as strengthen the vitals, as Diacinamomum, Diacalaminthum, Dianisum,
Aromaticum rosatum, Diamoschu dulce and amarum, Mithridate, Treacle, with Wine,
or in Electuaries. As,

Take Citron peels candied an ounce and half, Conserve of Borage flowers an
ounce, Aromaticum rosatum a dram, Diamoschu dulce, Diacalaminth, each two
scruples; Citron and Melon seeds blanched, each half a dram; red Coral and
Coriander seeds, each a scruple; with Syrup of Borage make an Electuary: give
as much as a Walnut in Wine three hours before meat. Or make these Lozenges.

Take Aromaticum rosatum, Electuary of Bay Berries, each half a dram;
Cardamoms, Citron seeds, and red Coral, each half a scruple; Diacyminum a
scruple: make Lozenges with Sugar dissolved in Balm water of a dram weight:
give one three hours before meat, and another at bedtime, with four ounces of
Wine: or this Hippocras.

Take white Sugar four ounces, Cinnamon three drams, Ginger half a dram,
Electuary of Bay Berries and grains, each two scruples; strong Wine two pints.
Filter it, or give every day four hours before meat half a dram of Treacle,
with Wine wherein Mace and Cinnamon are boiled. Anoint the Heart, or make an
Epithem of Oil of Spike with Amber and Musk; or with Wine in which Balm,
Rosemary, Cummin, Bay Berries were boiled, with Oil of sweet Almonds, and
Cloves powdered, Nutmeg and Cinnamon. This is for the richer sort.

Take water of Balm and Citron flowers, each half a pint; Sack three ounces,
Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, each a dram; Diambra four scruples, Citron and Basil
seed, each two drams; Saffron a scruple: make an Epithem, apply it hot before
meat. Or use this Bag.

Take Rosemary flowers, Borage and Chamomil flowers, each a pugil; Citron
seeds, Wood Aloes, Cinnamon, each a dram; Cloves, Cubebs, Cardamoms, each half
a dram; Saffron a scruple. Beat them gross, and make a quilted Bag, sprinkle it
with Sack, and apply it to the Heart. Thus must you cure a palpitation only
from wind without a cause that feeds it. If there be gross phlegm that breeds
the wind, first prepare thus.

Take Balm, Borage, Bettony, Calamints, Rosemary, each half an handful;
Stoechas, Peach flowers, each a pugil; Aniseeds, Cardamoms, each two drams;
Raisons stoned a pugil. Bruise them, and steep them twelve hours in Rhenish
Wine and Balm-water, each half a pint in a glass; then boil them in Balneo
Mariae three hours, stopping the glass. Clarify it, and add Syrup of Citron
peels and Bysants, each two ounces; cordial Species a dram: give it for four
mornings. Then purge thus.

Take Agarick a dram and half, Ginger half a dram. Infuse them twelve hours in
the decoction of Balm, Dodder, Calamints, and Hysop: then give it three or four
boils, and strain it, add to four ounces an ounce of Syrup of Stoechas, Elect.
Indi. maj. Benedicta laxativa, each two drams: give it at five in the morning.
If the matter be so clammy and thick, that these will not do, prepare it four
days longer with such as do more extenuate and cut, as with Oxymels, Syrup of
the five Roots, water of Balm, Scabious, Hysop, or with the Decoction of Organ,
Calamints, Hysop, Pennyroyal, Bettony, Rosemary; or give with the Syrups two
scruples of Treacle or Mithridate, or a dram of Dianisum or Diacalamints, and
then purge against thus.

Take Turbith a dram, Diagredium two grains, Ginger half a dram, Sugar two
drams. Powder them, give it with Chicken-broth: in the morning after these
preparatives and purges, give the former strengtheners. If the wind that
causes palpitation come from a melancholy humor, as in the Hypochondriack
Melancholy, prepare it with Syrup of Fumitory, Apples, juice of Borage,
Epithymum, or of Citron peels in the Decoction of Fumitory, Pennyroyal, Borage,
Dodder, tops of Hops, Wormwood, roots of Polypody and Bugloss: and purge with
confection of Hamec, Diasena, and Diacatholicon: or with the Syrup of John
Montanus that is very excellent, which is here described.

Take of all the Myrobalans, each half an ounce; Polypody, Senna, Epithymum,
each an ounce; Liquorish, Cloves, seeds of Citrons, each two drams; black
Hellebore half an ounce. Bruise and steep the Myrobalans twenty four hours in
seven pints of Fumitory water, or in seven pints of the juice: then add the
rest, and boil them to half, strain, and divide it into six parts, and add to
each of Syrup of Fumitory an ounce and half, Syrup of Citron peels half an
ounce, so that there be six ounces of the Decoction, and two of Syrups. This is
Montanus his Apozem against Melancholy. Give the other things mentioned,
Electuaries and Lozenges, and Epithems in the order before mentioned.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Cure of the puffing of the Stomach.
THe inflation of the stomach is a preternatural extension of the Membranes of
the stomach by wind, with pain. In this the proper action of the stomach is
frustrated, which is concoction, in regard the faculty of embracing the food
does not every where compass it, by reason of weakness; but there is a vacuity
between the stomach and the meat. This pain is sometimes before meat most,
sometimes after. Before meat, because there is a gross clammy phlegm, with a
cold distemper, which oppresses the heat, and it labors to conquer it, and
so causes wind that stretches, and is disturbant. This pain is allayed by
belching, or vomiting phlegm. It is worst after meat, when it is only from a
cold distemper without matter. For the natural heat being weak, or oppressed
with cold or windy meats, does dissolve them, but yielding to the burden, does
not concoct them, and thence arises wind. For the Cure of this, the first
intention is to evacuate what is preternatural. The second is with thin and hot
medicines that extenuate wind to abate it: and after good diet, the first thing
is to keep the belly loose by a Lenitive or a Suppository: then if there be
gross phlegm at the bottom of the stomach, vomit with Oxymel of Squills, or the
decoction of Radish, Dill, Arrage, sometimes before, sometimes after supper, as
the Patient is easy or hard to vomit. As,

Take Radish two ounces, stamp them, add Mead, or decoction of Dill, strain,
and drink it warm (for lukewarm things provoke Vomit by relaxing.) Or,

Take Dill seed, Radish seed, each an ounce and half; Agarick a dram in Powder.
Boil them in water to half, to six ounces strained add Syrup of Vinegar or
Oxymel of Squills (if the matter be very thick) an ounce, then give, and tickle
the throat with a feather. If by straitness of breast, or the like, he cannot
vomit, prepare the phlegm with Honey of Roses, Oxymel, Syrup of Stoechas, and
the Decoction of Rue, Pennyroyal, Calamints, Hysop, Organ, great hot Seeds, and
purge phlegm with Pil. aureae, of Hiera with Agarick, or simple Hiera, Electuary
Indi major. Benedicta laxativa, or the like: after phlegm is purged, use to chew
Ginger or Elicampane candied, but chiefly roots of Masterwort, to which I give
the Prerogative in this disease. Then use Diatrionpipereon, Diacalaminth,
Dianisum, Diacinamomum, Electuary of Bay Berries, Mithridate, Treacle, or the
Powder of Cummin with a little Salt and Chicken Broth or Wine; or Chamomil
boiled in Wine with Anise, Cummin, Nutmeg, and Oil of sweet Almonds. I suppose
there is no Remedy like it: also Castor half a dram, Cloves half a scruple
drunk in Wine, or Poli montane in Wine, or Oxymel or Vinegar of Squills, which
cuts vehemently, given an ounce twice in a day in Wine. Aegineta says, that
the bone of a Hogs foot burnt and drunk, discusseth wind. Also Cinnamon water
of Mathiolus alone or with Aqua vitae: or Sack with Cinnamon, Galangal, or Wine
with Rosemary, Carrot seed, Cummin, Caraway, Bay and Juniper Berries: or give
this Hippocras to dainty palates.

Take Sugar four ounces, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Galangal, Ginger, each a
dram; long Pepper half a dram, Cinnamon four drams, Sack two pints: strain
them. But remember to use very hot things very seldom, whether simple or
compound, before the gross phlegm be purged or vomited: For all sharp things or
that are very hot, if they fall upon clammy phlegm, do raise wind, which they
cannot discuss; and instead of Cure will do hurt: and that which is good after
purging is bad before. Beware then you use not too weak Remedies that cannot
overcome, or too strong out of order; and so cast the Patient into a Tympany.
It is good outwardly to bind the stomach strait, to hinder wind, and further
concoction, and to foment the stomach with Oil, with Rue, Calamints, Rosemary,
Cummin, Anise, Smallage, Carrot seed, Bay Berries boiled in it: or boil them in
Wine, and foment, or use Oil of Mace or Cloves. These by their thinness open
the skin, and extenuate, discuss the wind, and strengthen, and warm, and
restore the suffocated heat, and refresh by a propriety of substance. You may
make of these an excellent Ointment, thus.

Take Oil of Mace by expression six drams, Oil of Wormwood, Mastich, each four
drams; Wood Aloes, Nutmeg, Cubebs, Cloves, each half a dram; Musk, Benzoin,
Saffron, each six grains. Make a Powder, and with Wax make an Ointment: anoint
with it hot before meat: after the former Fomentation and Ointment, apply a Bag
of Feathers, or this.

Take Organ, Wormwood, Mints, each half a handful; Milium, Aniseeds parched,
each half an ounce; Chamomil, Lavender, Rosemary flowers, each a pugil;
Bay Berries a dram, Nutmeg half a dram. Powder them grossly, and quilt them in
thin red Silk, sprinkle Wine on it, and apply it hot to the stomach. Also a
large Cupping-glass applied three or four times without Scarification to the
belly, so that it may comprehend the Navel, does often make a perfect Cure. Or
a hot Tile in a double cloth wet in Wine, changing it when cold. Thus much of
the inflation of the stomach.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Cure of windy Melancholy.
THis is hard to be cured for diverse causes. For besides the vehement
obstruction of the Meseraicks with gross crude Melancholy and phlegm, which
constantly send up wind, there is a great distemper of the bowels. Hence come
great accidents, namely stoppage of excrements from a hot Liver that drys and
sucks up the moisture, difficult breathing from the stomach swollen and
pressing the Midriff, pain of stomach from wind that stretches, and a cold
distemper; belchings, vomitings, and putrefaction from obstruction in time, by
the venomous vapors whereof the Soul faints, and there is a doting. This
inequality of parts has contrary indications for Cure. For the heat of the
Liver requires cooling, and the cold of the stomach heating. And it is plain,
that the medicines that cut gross humors, and extenuate and prepare, and
evacuate and discuss wind, must be very hot, and hot things increase the heat
of the Liver and the veins; and heat abounding, disperseth what is thin in the
humors, and thickens the rest, and fixes it more, and makes more wind from
that humor. On the contrary, cold things by congealing to thicken the matter,
stop the passages, and abate the natural heat of the stomach, hinder
concoction, cause crudities and wind. Therefore the only way is to cure by
moderate Preparatives and Purges, and because moderation does little good in so
great a disease, it is very hard to be cured. But let not difficulty frighten,
but begin valiantly with this Clyster.

Take Polypody roots, Senna, each an ounce; Mallows, Pellitory, Beets, red
Coleworts, each a handful; Chamomil flowers a pugil, Aniseeds six drams: boil
them to half, to a pint strained add Diacatholicon and red Sugar, each an
ounce; Oil of Dill two ounces, with a little Salt make a Clyster. Or give this
Potion.

Take Senna four drams, Agarick a dram, Ginger and Asarum roots, each half a
dram. Infuse them twelve hours in Succory water, then boil them with Aniseeds
bruised, to four ounces strained add two ounces of Manna, Syrup of Roses an
ounce: Or if he be poor, Confectio Hamec, Electuary of Dates, each a dram;
Syrup of Roses an ounce: give it in the morning.

The next day, if there be no hindrance, open the Basilica on the right side,
or on the left, if the Spleen be stopped, to five or six ounces, or according to
strength. Then prepare the matter with this Apozem against Melancholy and phlegm.

Take Succory roots, Elicampane, Polypody, each an ounce and half, Germander,
Dodder, Ceterach, Hysap, each a handful; flowers of Elder, Chamomil, each a
pugil; Cappar barks and Tamarisk, each six drams; Liquorish half an ounce,
Anise four drams, Raisons a pugil: boil them to a pint and half, strain and
clarify, and add Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, Oxymel, each two ounces;
Diatrionsantalon, Cinnamon, each a dram: make an Apozem for four doses in the
morning: After this preparation, purge thus.

Take Rhubarh and Agarick, each a dram; Senna two drams, Ginger and Spike, each
half a seruple; Cardamoms half a scruple: infuse them in Chicken-broth twelve
hours, and strain and add Confectio Hamec, Diaphoenicon, each a dram; Syrup of
Roses solutive an ounce. Or give this Powder.

Take Senna four scruples, Rhubarb half a scruple, Diagredium two grains,
Aromaticum rosatum eight grains, Sugar two drams: give it in Cock broth. The
next day give half an ounce of this Electuary, and four ounces of Mead, or
Capon-broth after it; or make it into Lozenges.

Take Dialacca a dram, Confection of Bay Berries, Diarrhodon, each a scruple:
with Sugar dissolved in Borage water and Wine, make Tablets of a dram weight:
give one in the morning: at noon give Cock-broth made with Polypody and Borage
flowers, Rosemary, Calamints: or half an hour before dinner this Ptisan.

Take Barley four ounces, Smallage, Fennel, Succory roots, each three drams;
red Pease, Pistacha's, Currants, each an ounce; Hysop half a handful: boil them
to a pint and half, strain it with six ounces of white Wine, and add Cinnamon a
dram, and Sugar. This is good also before supper. Four days following prepare
with the Apozem mentioned, in a strong body give it twice a day, and if there
be a very soul body, give every other night two or three of these Pills.

Take Pill aureae foetidae, each half a dram; Troches of Alhandal four grains,
with Oxymel make five Pills. These do wonders in carrying of the prepared
matter. When the Syrups are spent, purge with Confectio Hamec, Pills of Agarick
foetidae, etc. Also Montanus his Syrup, Chap. 18. is excellent. After the body
is sufficiently purged, correct the distemper of the bowels outwardly: if the
Liver be too hot, foment the right side with Oil of Roses two parts, Oil of
Wormwood one part, and a little Vinegar: Or with Wormwood, Plantane,
Waterlillies, red Roses, Sanders boiled in Oil. If the obstruction of the
Spleen be the chief cause, foment with this.

Take Dwarf-elder roots, Madder, each two ounces; Calamints, Pennyroyal,
Ceterach, Bays, Chamomil flowers, each half a handful; Agnus castus seeds,
Bay Berries, each an ounce; Wormwood a handful. Boil them in Forge-water, and
foment, then anoint with Oil of Capars and bitter Almonds: Or this Liniment.

Take Ammoniacum, Bdellium, each two drams; Galbanum half a dram: dissolve them
in Vinegar, and with Oil of Capars, Dill, and Goose grease, each six drams,
make a Liniment. And while these are done, regard the stomach, and wind there,
from the Chapter of the Inflation of the stomach. Or thus,

Take Mints a handful, Calamints, Organ, each half a handful; Chamomil,
Rosemary, Stoechas flowers, each a pugil; Wormwood half a handful, Mastich a
dram, Cinnamon, Cloves, Wood Aloes, Galangal, red Coral, each a scruple: make a
Quilt for the stomach, sprinkle strong Wine on it, and apply it hot. Give every
day a Lozenge prescribed with the Syrups, to open and expel wind, and Clysters
that extenuate wind, and open.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Cure of the Colic.
I Shall speak by way of Presace. First, expect not any other Cure then that of
wind alone, or joined with glassie phlegm. Secondly, be careful, lest it turn to
a Joynt-gout, as Hippocrates lib. 6. epid. part. 4. aphor. 3. says, one that
had the Colic had a Gout, and then his pain of the Colic ceased, but returned
when the Gout ceased. Thirdly, bleeding is good, if the disease be vehement,
and there be Plethory or Fever. Fourthly, beware of strong heaters, chiefly
before phlegm is evacuated. Fifthly, let the chief means be Clysters. Sixthly,
cupping does little good, but in season and in a fit body. Therefore consider
first whether the pain be from a flegmon in the Guts, or Choler that corrodes
the inward Membranes, or glassie phlegm, or from wind that stretches. If so,
then observe if the pain be vehement or moderate, with or without a Plethora or
fullness. If there be much blood with great pain, presently after a Clyster open
a Vein, lest great pain attract blood, and cause an Inflammation or a Fever.
Then use strong Clysters of Hiera Indi major, Hiera Logodii: for no medicine
can better purge phlegm from the Guts. For Galen lib 5 meth. says, that nothing
taken at the mouth can come with its full force to the Guts, but a Clyster
without trouble reaches them: therefore a Clyster is best; for things taken at
the mouth must needs be hot (for the disease is cold, and contraries are cured
by contraries) and must be given in great quantities at the mouth, if they do
good. But all hot things being of thin parts, easily pass through the
Meseraicks, and bring hot distemper to them and to the Liver, and make the
blood flow. Also heat melts the clammy phlegm, and makes more wind, and a good
medicine abused, becomes venom. Therefore I advise Physicians to be wary in the
use of Mithridate, Treacle, Diacalamints, and other Heaters in Colicks, before
she glassie phlegm fixed in the Guts be purged, and then use them not often. The
best way is by Clysters first emollient, to carry the common Excrements. As,

Take Diacatholicon ten drams, Hiera simple with Honey half an ounce, Sugar an
ounce, Salt a dram and half: dissolve them in a pint of the Decoction of
Mallows, and the five Emollients, Chamomil flowers, Bran, and red Pease. Then,
as Galen lib. 2. ad Glauc. says, inject Oil of Rue, Bays, or common Oil, in
which are boiled Heaters that extenuate, as Cummin, Smallage, Parsley, Aniseed,
Seseli, Lovage, Carrot seed, Rue, and Bay Berries, adding Bitumen. Or this
which is stronger.

Take Calamints, Pennyroyal, and Tansey, each a handful; Chamomil flowers a
pugil, Cummin, Carrot seed, each three drams; Bay Berries half a pugil: In a
pint of the Decoction strained, mix Oxymel of Squills an ounce, Oil of Ru^
three ounces, Electuary Indiamajor six drams, Hiera Logodii a dram: make a
Clyster.

If these do not cure, repeat them, or others, according to the greatness of
the disease, plenty of phlegm or wind, or weakness of the patient: remembering
that still after the Clyster, he lie on the side pained. In the mean while give
things moderately hot at the mouth, as the Decoction of Chamomil flowers in
white Wine, or of Cummin, which are excellent; with an ounce or two of Oil of
sweet Almonds, Lineseed, or common Oil. Or give new Oil of sweet Almonds warm
three ounces. Or,

Take Rhenish Wine four ounces, Oil of Nuts a dram or two scruples, common Oil
a spoonful: give it hot with Sugar. Oil is anodyne, and supples the parts, and
stops the mouths of the vessels, and weakens the attractive faculty, and makes
the anodynes and correcters of cold, and discussers of wind to pierce sooner to
the part; nor can they be so soon taken in by the Veins. For this disease is
loathing, and many do vomit: for such,

Take tops of Wormwood half a pugil, Cummin seed two drams, Chamomil and
Rosemary flowers, each a pugil; Cubebs half a dram: boil them in Wine, strain,
and give it with Cinnamon and Sugar, or half a dram of Castor in Wine with
Cinnamon and Saffron. Such as have the belly much swollen, and are tormented,
and have the Hickets from cold clammy humors or gross wind, must take it in
Vinegar and Water. If the disease be very stubborn, and they will take no
Clysters, or phlegm falls from the whole body into the Guts, use flegm-purgers
after preparatives; they are mentioned before. If you will use Narcoticks with
Purgers,

Take six drams of Electuary of Indi majoris, Troches of Alhandal, Castor,
Opium, each four grains; with Sugar make a Bole. Or give this Infusion.

Take Agarick four scruples, Ginger a scruple: infuse them in the Decoction of
Pennyroyal, Hysop, Rosemary, Chamomil twelve hours, strain, and add
Diaphoenicon three drams, Philonium Persicum a scruple, or half a dram if it be
old, with Sugar.

Or, Take Pills of Hiera with Agarick two scruples, Cochy one scruple,
Diagredium, Castor, Opium, each three grains: with Wine make seven Pills. By
this means phlegm is purged, wind discussed, and pain abated. Galen lib. 2. ad
Glauc* gives Narcoticks alone: if, says he, pain remain, give Opium; you may
not fear it, though it may do some hurt to the part afflicted: you must oppose
that which most urges; it is good to save a dying man with a small hurt, for
the day following you may repair it. You may give half a dram or two scruples,
or a dram of Philonium Persicum in Wine, or the Pills of Rondelet, which are
these.

Take Powder of Galangal, Aromaticum rosatum, each two drams; Castor half a
dram, Euphorbium ten grains, Opium prepared with a hot Pestel, and dissolved in
Sack, a scruple and half, Pepper, Saffron, Mirrh, each half a scruple; make ten
Pills of a dram: give four or five; or if the pain abate not, nine or ten. They
must be small and soft, that they may be the better dissolved, and sooner give
ease, and stay less while in the stomach. But give no Opiats before
Evacuations, and that before meat fasting, and in extremity, and when other
Anodynes do no good. A Colic from wind only requires neither preparatives nor
purges, but only Clysters that allay pain, and discuss wind: as,

Take Lineseed Oil, Decoction of Chamomil flowers and Cummin seed, each half a
pint; Confection of Bay Berries two drams, Diacatholicon and red Sugar, each an
ounce; Sal Gem two scruples. This is good against pain, but this expels wind
more.

Take Elicampane roots three ounces, Calamints, Pellitory of the Wall, each a
handful; Anise, Cummin, Cardamoms, each three drams; Juniper and Bay Berries,
each a pugil: boil them to a pint, strain, add Sack four ounces, Diacolaminth
three drams, Oil of Rue or Nuts three ounces. Or,

Take white Wine with Cummin, Aniseeds, and Bay Berries boiled in it a pint:
give it hot.

In this of wind the medicines at the mouth may be hotter then in the Colic
from phlegm; as Confection of Bay Berries, Diacyminum, Diatrionpipereon.
Cupping-glasses are good, if the pain be from wind only, and the belly not fat
and swollen. I have a thousand times found them in vain, where there is much
glassie phlegm: For the pain which is like a fixed stick, is from a cold phlegm,
which will not away while the phlegm is there. But a Cupping-glass evacuates no
phlegm, therefore takes not away the pain. In a fat belly the Cupping-glass is
soon filled with flesh, and cannot reach to attract the Guts, and the passage
of the wind is stopped; and when there is a Tympany, the hardness hinders the
attraction. But if it be seasonably applied, being large, and with much flame,
it will do wonders. Also make Bags of Milium, Bran, Lavender, Chamomil flowers,
Dill, Calamints fried with Wine or Vinegar sprinkled on; apply them one after
another: Or make a Pultis of Horse-dung with Lineseed, Chamomil, or Dill, Oil,
Dregs of Oil, Wine, and Lavender-Cotton in a Drying Pan, apply it hot: Or apply
hot Tiles in clothes dipped in Wine; or hot Bread. But Fomentations, Baths,
Cataplasms, if not used in season, they do hurt: as Galen meth. med. lib. I.
says, it is not always safe to heat the belly with Cataplasms and Baths, but
only in such whose bodies are clean; it is very dangerous to others, and how is
the pain in the guts from a cold humor fixed in them, cured? not by Cataplasms
and Baths that are very hot; for all tough humors that are gross and cold are
melted to wind by hot things, except they digest strongly. Therefore they must
be cut and concocted with attenuaters, chiefly if they be not very hot. And
such are best that most discuss wind, and dry, the forms of which are declared.
There are also Amulets that help by propriety of substance, as Galerita, a
Swines Ankle-bone burnt and drunk, the guts of a Wolf dried with Wine, his skin
applied to the belly; also Girdles made thereof; and the white Dung of a Wolf
drunk in Wine, or hung about the Neck to the Belly in a Nut-shell. I shall name
no more, though Authors abound with them.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Cure of the flatuous Obstruction of the Liver.
OBstruction is common to all Bowels, but most to the Liver and Spleen. It is
when a gross humor, phlegm, or melancholy stuffes the small branches of the
gate which are in the Liver; also a gross vapor sometimes swells the Liver,
that it is like a Schirrus. And it is no wonder, that wind should so swell the
Liver, when it cannot get out, because the Veins there are very small, in
regard the largest Guts are so stopped by wind, that nothing can pass by stool.
Therefore the Arabians say, that a very gross vapor is thinner then Chyle, as
wind is thinner then water; but thin Chyle concocted as it ought, does not
obstruct the Liver; therefore wind cannot: but this is simple; for hence then
it should follow, that the Guts should never be obstructed by wind, which is
against Experience, when they send forth the thickest dung. Therefore the Liver
is obstructed by wind alone, or mixed with clammy humors. But we must beware,
lest we take the Liver to be obstructed with wind, when the fault is in the
Colon: For the Colon lies on the right side, and is sometimes so stretched with
phlegm and wind, that the whole Hypochondrion is swollen But it is hard to
distinguish these; therefore for brevity sake we shall show the Cure. If then
it be from phlegm with wind, prepare the matter with this Apozem.

Take Elicampane roots, Madder, and Asarabaccaroots, each six drams; bark of
Danewort roots, and Capar roots, each four drams; Germander, Ceterach, Hysop,
each a handful; Roman Wormwood half a handful, Carrot and Aniseeds, each three
drams; Juniper Berries and Currants, each a pugil: boil them to half, to a pint
strained add Sugar, and a dram and half of Cinnamon for four Doses. Or,

Take the Decoction aforesaid four ounces, Syrup of Calamints an ounce, Oxymel
of Squills two drams: and so for the other three Doses.

Then, Take Dialacca two scruples, species of the Electuary of Bay berries,
Diarrhodon, each half a scruple; with Sugar dissolved in Fennel-water and Wine
make Tablets of a dram weight: give one with the Syrups. After preparation
purge phlegm thus.

Take Turbith two scruples, Ginger one scruple, Senna powdered half a dram,
Sugar two drams: give it in Broth fasting. Or,

Take Agarick four scruples, Ginger half a dram: infuse them fourteen hours in
three ounces of Bettony water, strain and add Electuary Indi major, three
drams, Syrup of the five Roots an ounce: give it in the morning. The day after
give this Electuary.

Take old Treacle half a dram, Conserve of Rosemary flowers and of Borage
flowers, each a dram. If any matter remains, prepare and purge again: in this
way of acting you shall cure the wind, and strengthen as well as evacuate the
phlegm. Moreover the stretching of the Hypochondrion is not long without phlegm;
for pain attracts it, and the extension of the passages receives it, and its
coldness hinders the Liver, so that crudities are by degrees laid up: therefore
consider both, but that chiefly which urges most. When it is from wind only,
give a Clyster, or a Lenitive rather then a strong Purge, and cutting Apozem,
and the Tablets mentioned, to unstop them: And discuss wind with Wine wherein
Cummin, Anise, Cubebs, Juniper Berries, Cardamoms, and Cinnamon were boiled, or
in which Diacurcuma and Treacle, each half a dram are dissolved: Or this
Hippocras.

Take Treacle a dram, Cardamoms, Cubebs, each two scruples; Cinnamon three
drams, Sugar four ounces: strain them. But use hot things warily, if there be
Plethory or a hot Liver. Foment the Liver with the Decoction of Wormwood,
Pennyroyal, Bay Berries in Wine, or with Oil wherein Rue, Wormwood, Cypress
roots, and Galangal are boiled, and apply Bags, and apply large Cupping-glasses
twice or thrice with much flame, but not before phlegm is perfectly evacuated,
otherwise the phlegm will be more fixed, and cause a true Schirrus.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Cure of the flatuous Obstruction of the Spleen.
GAlen says, the Spleen does often return to the touch, although it be not
schirrous but windy: this is cured as the Liver; but it is often more stubborn,
and requires peculiar Medicines, and stronger, both Apozems and Purges, if
there be gross humors, as often there are: As Bark of Capar roots, Tamarisk,
and Dwarfe-elder, inward bark of the Ash-tree, Ceterach, Hart's-tongue, Centaury
the less, Polypody; hot Seeds, as Agnus castus, Epithymum, Senna, Vinegar of
Squills, Oxymels, Syrup of Fumitory, and the like: of which you may make
cutting Apozems that discuss wind, and then purge with Confectio Hamec,
Diasenna, and Electuary Indi majoris. Use strong Fomentations, chiefly if the
vapors be gross, of strong Wine with Wormwood, Bay Berries, Rue, and hot Seeds
boiled therein; or of Vinegar (as I do) with Agnus castus seeds, Rue,
Calamints, Bay Berries, Horebound, Centaury, Broom flowers, roots of Danewort
or Orris boiled in it. If these do not suffice, foment with a Lixivium of the
ashes of Coleworts, Oak, or Beans, adding Aqua vitae and Oil of bitter Almonds:
Then apply a Plaster of a mixed faculty, as that of Sulphur and Alum. But if
the wind be not much, and that thin, and without matter to feed it, and the
body thin, you must use gentler Medicines both inwardly and outwardly: And
sometimes a Cupping-glass alone will do the work. If you desire more, read the
former Chapter.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Cure of the Tympany.
THe Tympany is the third sort of Dropsy, and is from wind bred from a weak
natural heat. It is superfluously gathered between the Peritonaeum and the
Omentum or Cawl, and gets into the other Membranes of the Abdomen or Paunch,
and stretches it violently all over, till it be very great, and is known by
the noise, rumbling, and sound like a drum when struck with the finger-nail. At
first it was only a wind that could not be discussed, then it grows thicker
like a Cloud, and at last turns to water, whence a humor is gathered with the
cloudy wind. The Cure, after good order of diet, which you may find before, is
by concoction of the humors and their evacuation, bewaring lest with strong
Remedies, as Mesereon, Chamelaea, Coloquintida, Briony, Spurge, or Antimony,
which many use, you destroy the natural heat. For it is manifest, that such
Medicines do shake the strongest bodies, if afflicted with a long and old
disease, and bring dangerous pains, destroy strength, and disperse the spirits.
But labor to strengthen the natural heat, that it may overcome and expel what
hurts Nature: Therefore prepare the matter thus.

Take roots of Masterwort, Elicampane, Madder, bark of the roots of
Dwarfe-elder, each three drams; roots of Orris, Asarabacca, each two drams;
Organ, Calamints, each a pugil; Soldanella or Sea-bind-weed an ounce, Gratiola
or Hedg-Hysop two drams, Aniseeds and Bay Berries, each half an ounce. Boil
them in two parts of Wine and one of Water, or in Wine alone three or four
hours in Balneo, strain, and add Sugar, drink a glass morning and evening; then
purge with these Pills.

Take Pills of Hiera with Agarick, Turbith, Rhubarb, each two scruples;
Soldanella a dram, Asarum roots a scruple, Troches of Alhandal, Elaterium,
Nutmeg, Galangal, Cinnamon, Pepper, Cubebs, each half a seruple. Powder them,
and with Juice of Orris make a Mass, and with Oxymel of Squills make five Pills
of a dram: give them at midnight: Or give our Pills of Soldanella good against
all Dropsies: as,

Take Pills of Agarick a dram, Troches of Alhandal half a scruple, tops of
Soldanella, Gratiola, Cinnamon, each a scruple, with juice of Orris make five
Pills of a dram: give two or three at the most at midnight, and repeat the
Apozem before mentioned, sometimes with the Pills; for the one discusseth wind,
making it thin, and the other prepares and purges the humors: and let the
stomach and other parts be strengthened with these Electuaries.

Take juice of Orris four drams, Cinnamon, Galangal, each two drams; Cloves and
Mace, each a dram; Zedoary two scruples, Soldanella half an ounce. Powder them,
and with Honey make an Electuary: give as much as a Nutmeg every day, or other
day. Or this.

Take Electuary of Bay Berries four drams, Conserve of Elicampane roots two
drams, Dianisum, Diagalanga, Diacyminum, each a scruple; Oil of Juniper a dram,
with Syrup of Stoechas make an Electuary. Or give this Potion.

Take Cinnamon water two ounces, Aqua vitae four drams, some drops of Oil of
Aniseeds: give it fasting. There are also Powders to be taken after meat, to
warm the stomach, and make it concoct, and discuss wind: as,

Take Aniseed Comfits three ounces, Fennel seed an ounce and half, Coriander
prepared half an ounce, Cummin, Caraway, Seseli steept in Wine, each an ounce;
Citron peels, Cinnamon, each four scruples; Sugar of Roses as much as all the
rest. Make a powder, give a spoonful after meat, and let him not drink more at
that time. After the humors are purged, and the strength restored, discuss the
wind with this Decoction, which does wonders.

Take Album Graecum, Barley, each an ounce and half. Boil them gently in three
or four pints of French Wine till the Barley break, strain it, and pour off the
clear part, then boil it to half, then clarify it, and add Cinnamon and Sugar:
give five ounces thereof thrice a day fasting, and he shall break wind
wonderfully, and his belly fall. Also the Confection of Bay Berries,
Diacyminum, Diagalanga, Diatrionpipereon, Diamoschu dulce, discuss wind. But as
I said, use these moderately, or they will do much hurt, as may appear by this
Example. A Woman had a Tympany, and went to her Physician, he only minded the
discussing of wind, without giving other things before, gave a hot Electuary,
she felt a greater rumbling after, and worse pain, and breathed worse, and her
belly swelled more, and it was all over her breast, and the tumors were diverse
at distance. I coming, said, death was at hand, and therefore no more was to be
done, and she died the third day after. I judge the hot extenuating Medicine
made the cloudy vapors thin that were in a little place, and they made larger
room. For such is the force of heat, that by attenuating gross bodies, it makes
them moist, and they turn to vapors. For gross things contained in a small
place, if they grow hot, take up more room, as appears by Milk, half a Skillet
full hot and extenuated, swells to the top. So it is in the Tympany, when they
use much heat. Therefore use moderate hot things which strengthen within and
without, and stir up natural heat. Anoint the stomach with this Liniment.

Take Oil of Spike, of Mastich, each three drams; Oil of Nutmegs and of Mace,
each a dram; dry Mints, red Coral, Mastich, Cummin, each a scruple, with Wax
make a Liniment: anoint the stomach hot therewith. Then chaff the belly with
hot clothes, or hands, till it be red, that the pores may be opened for the
wind to get out, then bathe with Brandy-wine and Oil of Rue: or apply this
Plaster.

Take Emplaster of Bay Berries half a pound: mix it with Goats or Cow Dung and
Wine, apply it hot. Or make Bags of Wormwood, Mints, Rue, hot Seeds,
Bay Berries, Lavender, Elder, Chamomil, Rosemary, and Stoechas, Milium, Bran,
and Salt. Fry them with Wine, apply them hot; when they cool, heat them over a
vessel with a hot Iron and Wine in it, and apply them again. I shall add
nothing more of cupping, they are famous against all wind, but here I value
them not. Carminative Clysters expel wind sometimes; but I shall omit these,
and admonish this, that exercise, if strength permit, thirst and sweat, are
chief Cures for this, and the other two sorts of Dropsies.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Cure of the Inflation of the Womb.
INflations or windy Swellings in the Womb, do use sometimes to cause Abortion
in the second or third month, and wind in the guts does torment women with
child, because the weight of the womb compresseth the strait Gut, and suffers
no wind to get forth Hippocrates lib. de not. mulieb and lib. de morb. mulieb.
says thus of the wind in the womb: If there be wind in the womb which
rumbleth, and the feet and hollow parts of the face swell, and the color be
lost, and the Terms stopped, and the seed flow, and she be short-winded, and sad,
and when she wakes from sleep, she breathe with a straight neck, and whatsoever
she eats or drinks, troubles her, and she sigh, and her Nerves are contracted,
and if her womb and bladder be pained, and will not be touched; these are the
Symptoms of an inflation of the womb: All which come from these three,
distension, compression, and consent with principal parts. Therefore when it is
thus (says Hippocrates) give a Purge.

Take Syrup of Mugwort three ounces, Syrup of Stoechas two ounces, decoction of
Mugwort, Motherwort, Pennyroyal, Savin, Juniper Berries, Anise and Carrot seed
a pint: make an Apozem to prepare with two drams of the Confection of
Bay Berries. Then purge thus.

Take Pills of Agarick two scruples, Pil. aureae a scruple, Troches of Alhandal
four grains, with Syrup of Mugwort make five Pills: give them at midnight. Or
if she cannot swallow Pills, give some Potion abovementioned, and repeat, if
need be. The day after purging give a dram of Treacle or Mithridate. And then
anoint the stomach and womb with the Ointment in the former Chapter to
strengthen, or foment with Oil of Rue, or this Liniment.

Take Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Rue, and Brandy-wine, each an ounce. Or use
the Bags, Cataplasms, and Plasters in that Chapter, of Smallage seeds, Fennel,
Carrot, Caraway, Cummin, Bay Berries, Bean flour, Sheep or Cow Dung with Wine
and Oils. Or Electuaries, Lozenges that heat and strengthen, and Hippocras Wine
with Spices, or Sack with Oil of Juniper or of Aniseeds. Or a Pessary of Figs
bruised a dram, Cummin two drams, Nitre a dram, steep it first in Milk: or
syringe into the womb the Oil of Rue with the Decoction of hot Seeds, and roll
the belly. Also Cupping is here good, as in all windy diseases.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Cure of a windy Rupture.
AS we said in the eighth Chapter, a windy Rupture is with or without a
Dropsy. If it be with it, it is cured with the Cure of the Dropsy. If without
it, it has two intentions curative: the one belongs to the antecedent cause,
which is phlegm: the other to the conjunct cause, which is wind in the Cods or
Tunicles of the Stones* The first intention is performed by Medicines that
evacuate superfluous humors, and strengthen: see for them Chap. 17. and 18.
The latter intention is performed by Topics, chiefly by Fomentations: as,

Take Organ, Calamints, Pennyroyal, each a handful; the four great hot Seeds,
Agnus castus seeds, Bay Berries, each two drams; Salt two ounces. Boil them in
French Wine to half, foment twice a day. Or,

Take Lixivium, or Sudds of Barbers four pints, Cummin, Bay Berries, each two
ounces; Bays, Rosemary, each half a handful; Salt four ounces. Boil them, and
foment the part with a new sponge twice or thrice a day hot, dry it, and anoint
with this.

Take Oil of Castor, Rue, Euphorbium, each six drams; Vnguentum Martiatum half
an ounce. Or lay on this Plaster.

Take Bean flour half a pound, Cummin and Carrot seed, each half an ounce;
Bay Berries three drams, flowers of Chamomil and Lavender, each a pugil; Salt a
pugil and half. Boil them in Wine to a Pultis, and apply it. Or this.

Take Cow Dung two pound, Sulphur, Cummin, each three ounces; with Honey make a
Cataplasm. I have cured many Children by often heating them against the fire,
and with dry Fomentations with hot clouts often applied.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Priapismus, taken out of Aetius.

I Shall add nothing of mine own, because I never cured this disease, and none
writes shorter and better of it, as Galen lib. 4. meth. says. He says, that
Priapismus is a standing of the Yard swelling in length and breadth, without
lust from heat, and wind with pain. It is called Priapismus from Priapus the
Satyr, who is painted with such a Yard as natural. It is from the mouths of
the Veins and Arteries stretched in the Privities, or from wind. Galen says,
it is from both, but oftnest from the Orifices dilated. Some have it from want
of Venery, having much seed, and that used Venery, and abstain from it, and do
not by much exercise abate the blood. It chiefly comes to such as dream of
Venereal fancies, and the pain is like the Cramp; for the Yard is as in a
Convulsion, being pufft up and stretched, and they dye suddenly, except cured,
and then the belly is swollen, and there is a cold sweat; as in other
Convulsions when they dye. Therefore against the pain and inflammation,
presently open a Vein, and use a small Diet three days, and foment the parts
about and the Yard with Wool dipped in Wine and Oil: give a gentle Clyster not
sharp, and feed him with a little Corn and Water. If it last long, cup and
scarifie: if there be much blood, use Leeches to the part, and Cataplasms of
Barley flour: loosen the belly with Beets, Mallows, and Mercury boiled. And
give the Decoction of Shellfish: use no strong Purges, and beware of
Diuretics or provokers of urine. Use Corn-food that attenuates gently without
manifest heating. Lay Coolers to the Loins, as Nightshade, Purslane, Housleek,
Henbane. Let the space between the Fundament and the Yard be cooled with
Litharge of Silver, Fullers Earth, Ceruss, Vinegar, and Water. A Cerot of
Rose-Oyntment washed often in cold Water, and applied to the Loins and
Privities, does much good. He must lie upon one side, and lay under him things
against the emission of Sperm: And he must see no Venereal pictures, nor hear
no wanton discourse.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of an Inflation or windy Impostume.
INflations come from Wind under the skin, or the Membranes of the Bones or
Muscles, or gathered in fleshy parts. Now (as Aegineta says) it is either from
the thickness of the members, or grossness of the wind. A gross vapor distends
the place that contains it, by its plenty, and makes a tumor, not such as is
loose, or will yield to the finger when pressed, or pit like an Oedema. The
common way of Cure of these tumors, is to evacuate what is preternatural,
wheresoever contained. Now it cannot be evacuated, except that which is gross
be relaxed, and the thickness of the vapor be extenuated. Both are done by
Extenuaters, and things potentially hot. I have showed that Oil which is of an
extenuating quality, wherein Rue or hot Seeds are boiled, does cure the stomach
and other bowels stretched by wind. Now I shall show how other parts, as Joints
and Muscles, or Membranes about the Bones, are cured when stretched with wind.
This is sometimes with pain, sometimes without, and that from a single cause,
namely a weak heat, or a contusion. For an inflation without pain (according to
Galen lib. 4. meth.) a Lixivium with a new Sponge will cure it. As,

Take Rainwater or Wine, let Ashes of a Fig Tree or Juniper be infused therein
twenty four hours. Or thus.

Take Bay Berries, Orris roots, each an ounce; Bay leaves, Rosemary, Nip, each
a handful; Lavender flowers a pugil, Cummin six drams. Boil them in Water to
half, in four pints infuse ashes of Fig Tree, Beans, or Coleworts; foment
therewith with a new Sponge hot. It cleanses, drys, consumes, and discusseth
wind, and the tumor. If there be pain, use no Lixivium (for by sharpness it
will increase it) but use relaxing Oils, as that of Dill, Rue, or Chamomil. If
Diseases come from Contusions, when the Muscle or the Membrane of the Bone is
bruised, then lay the Sponge aforesaid upon the Membrane of the Bone. But when
the Muscles are pained, use a more mitigating or asswaging Remedy. To these we
use not Lixivium alone, but add to it boiled Wine and Oil. It is best at the
first to use no Lixivium, but Wine and a little Vinegar and Oil with Wool, to
foment the part. And if pain be great, use more Abaters or Asswagers of it. If
there be no pain, oppose the Inflation by stronger Medicines, as Lixivium,
Vinegar, and then Wine: And when you are not to assuage pain, put in more
Lixivium and Vinegar. For such Inflations as by neglect are worse, first use
things made of a Lixivium, then some Plaster, such as that which is made of
Sweat from men's bodies: But the use of that being forgotten in our Age, we
order instead of it the Plaster of Bay Berries, or this.

Take Melilot Plaster and that of Bay Berries, each three drams; Nitre,
Cummin, Sulphur, unslak'd Lime, Salt, each a scruple; Oil of Bays and Wax as
much as will make a Plaster. If the wind that makes this Inflation be
smoak-like, evil, and corrupt, and from a venomous matter, with great pain and
heat running through the members, it is best when it is settled, to tie the part
above and beneath, and to open the Inflation with a Lancet or hot Iron, that
the venomous vapor may get out. Then fill the Orifice with Aloes and Bole
Armenick dissolved in Oil of Roses and Vinegar. After three or four days, fill
the wound with flesh, and heal it up. And in this case of a venomous Inflation,
use a slender diet, and purge, and give a little Treacle sometimes.

HItherto (Courteous Reader) I have showed according to my abilities, the
Nature and Effects of Winds, and the Diseases from them, and their Cures, for
the good of the Ignorant, and help of the Diseased, and that learned and
ingenious persons may take occasion from hence to write better. Therefore take
it in good part, for it was written for profit to all, and not for contention.
If you accept of these first fruits, expect better hereafter.

The CONTENTS of the Chapters of this Book.
CHap. 1. That Flatus is a Spirit; and of the Division of Spirits. Fol. 1 Chap.
2. Of the Analogy or Proportion of Flatus with Wind. 4 Chap. 3. What the Wind
in Man is. 9 Chap. 4. Of the Place where Wind is bred. 10 Chap. 5. Of the
Manner how Wind is bred in the Body. 13 Chap. 6. Of the Differences of Wind
bred in the Body. 16 Chap. 7. How many Kinds of Diseases are produced by Wind.
18 Chap. 8. Of the Causes of Wind. 21 Chap. 9. Of the Signs of Wind. 30 Chap.
10. Of the Symptoms coming from Wind 33 Chap. 11. Of the Prognostics of Wind.
52 Chap. 12. Of the Diet to be observed by windy Bodies. 55 Chap. 13. Of the
common Cure of windy Diseases. 62 Chap. 14. Of the Cure of the Pain of the Head
from Wind. 63 Chap. 15. Of the Cure of the Noise in the Ears from Wind. 68
Chap. 16. Of the Cure of the Toothach from Wind. 71 Chap. 17. Of the Cure of a
windy Pleurisy. 73 Chap. 18. Of the Cure of a windy Palpitation. 76 Chap. 19.
Of the Cure of the Puffing of the Stomach with Wind. 82 Chap. 20. Of the Cure
of windy Melancholy. 86 Chap. 21. Of the Cure of the Colic. 91 Chap. 22. Of
the Cure of the flatuous Obstruction of the Liver. 98 Chap. 23. Of the Cure of
the flatuous Obstruction of the Spleen. 101 Chap. 24. Of the Cure of the
Tympany. 102 Chap. 25. Of the Cure of the Inflation of the Womb. 107 Chap. 26.
Of the Cure of a windy Rupture. 109 Chap. 27. Of Priapismus, taken out of
Aetius. 111 Chap. 28. Of an Inflation or windy Impostume. 113
FINIS.
An Advertisement of Books worth buying, sold at the Printing Press in
Broadstreet, London, by Benjamin Billingsley and Obadiah Blagrave.
1. The History of the World, or an Account of Time, compiled by the learned
Dionysius Petavius, and continued by others: Together with a Geographical
Description of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, in Folio. 2. Mr. Nicholas
Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer, his last Legacy left unto his Wife, being
the choicest of his Secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery; newly reprinted, with an
Addition of above 200 choice Receipts lately found, not extant in any of his
Works before. 3. Culpepers Translation of the London Dispensatory. 4. Culpepers
English Physician Enlarged. 5. Culpepers Directory for Widwives, both Parts. 6.
A Touchstone for Physic, directing by evident Marks and Characters to such
Medicines as without Purgers, Vomiters, Bleedings, Issues, Minerals, or any
other disturbers of Nature, may be securely trusted for cure in all extremity.
7. Dr. Manwaring on the Scurvy. 8. The Morning Exercise methodized at St. Giles
in the Fields, being 28 several Sermons preached by several eminent Ministers
of the City of London, upon the chief Heads of Christian Religion: with their
names to each Sermon. 9. A complete Collection of Farewell Sermons preached by
the London and Country-Ministers, containing 42 Sermons, with their Prayers,
being the most exact as has yet been printed. 10. Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs Rare
Jewel of Christian Contentment: wherein is showed what Contentment is, the holy
Art and Mystery of it, several Lessons Christ teaches to work the heart to
Contentment, the Excellency of it, the Evils of Murmuring, the Aggravations of
the sin of Murmuring. 11. Dr. John Mayer his Exposition on the whole Bible, in
six Volumns, Folio. 12. Downhams Christian Warfare against the Devil, World and
Flesh, Folio large. 13. Hudsons Vindication of the Essence and Unity of the
Church Catholic Visible, and the Priority thereof, in regard of particular
Churches. 14. Observationes Astrologicae, or an Astrological Discourse of the
effects of a Notable Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and other Configurations
concomitant. From whence is rationally predicted the Quality and Time of the
Principal Transactions that are probably to ensue in England, and several other
parts of Europe. To which is prefixed a Brief Institution, or Tutor to
Astrology, for the better understanding the following Discourse, or any other
of the like Nature: And also added a most ingenious Discourse of the true
Systeme of the World. By Richard Edlin Student in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences. 15. The Posie of godly Prayers, fit for every Christian to use.
An Advertisement of a new Book in the Press now printing.
16. An Epitomie of the whole Art of Husbandry, comprising all necessary things
belonging to the Countryman, as Plowing, Sowing, Gardning; how to cure any
Disease in Cattle; how to order Bees, etc. 17* A large and curious Bible
printed at Cambridge, with Service, Apocrypha, and a new large Concordance
thereto. Dr. Pierces and Buckworths famous Lozenges for cure of Colds, Coughs,
and all Diseases incident to the Lungs.
All sold by Benjamin Billing sley and Obadiah Blagrave, at the Printing-press
in Broadstreet, near the Church, by Gresham-Colledge-gate. Where you may also
be furnished with several sorts of School-Books, Bibles, etc. and
Stationary-ware, and the best Ink for Deeds and Records.


