The Fidelity of a ^^^al Subject, of the Kingdom of England: OR, An honest Act
of Fidelity to King James, King William, and the whole Kingdom.
THE Oath of Fidelity, which is sworn by the Subjects of this Kingdom to the
King, is sworn to him not as he is a Natural Person (and no more) but as a
Political person and Principal Member, or Head of a Great Body Politic, the
Kingdom; and comprehends Fidelity to the Whole Body, and to all the constituent
Parts of it, to the Common Interest of the Lords, and to the Common Interest of
the Commons: So that who ever sets up for a Separate Interest of any One, to
the Prejudice of any of the other, is no Faithful Subject of this Kingdom, but
a Traitor, and violates his Allegiance to the whole: Nay, though it be in
Appearance or Pretense for the King, it does in effect but betray his true
Interest, so that he may justly be punished as a Traitor for it.

One, and a considerable part of true Fidelity, is to assist, as much as may
be, to the Discovery of all such things, as are of great Concern, either to the
whole Body, or to any of the Great Parts of it, to be fully and plainly
Understood. And therefore having with some Pains and Study made a plain
Discovery, in my apprehension, that the Whole is in a very evil and Dangerous
Case in respect of Religion; and that the State is likewise in a very Bad Case
in some things, and in a very Doubtful Case in others of greatest Concern to
the Whole; and Considering this Obligation aforesaid, I have thought it my
Duty, in Discharge of my Fidelity, to impart my Discoveries in the most proper
manner, and to the most proper Persons, I could: That is, What concerns matters
of Religion to the Assembly of the Clergy; and what concerns matters of State,
to such as are in Authority in the State; as Privy Counselors, and Members of
Parliament. And I have begun to do what I could, as occasion served in both.

Upon a Review of the Reformation I observed that King James had been very
hardly used, in my apprehension: and thereupon writ a Letter to an Honorable
Person of the Privy Council, as follows,

My Lord,
HAving lately had special Occasion to review the Proceedings of the
Reformation here in England, and consider that matter more particularly than
heretofore I had done, I did observe not only a great deal of indirect,
Illegal, Arbitrary and unjust Dealings, and so much Corruptions brought in
instead of what was pretended to be Reformed, as made that which was a good
Cause at first (For there was great need of a Reformation;) an ill one by ill
Management; but moreover that the Principles of the Reformation, upon which it
was acted (though false in themselves, yet being made Law) do plainly justify
King James, as to a considerable part of the matters alleged against him; And
the rest being neither Proved, nor so much as brought to a fair Examination;
and his Abdication being not Voluntary, but only Fuga Metus causa, I, who have
hitherto asserted King Williams Right upon the Principles of the True English
Government, not minding the Innovation made at the pretended Reformation, am
now quite at a loss what to think, and what to do: Only, if the things alleged
be true, though there be no Proof, God knows it, and I can be content to sit
still under his Providence. But if they be not true, it will be in vain to
presume upon the ^^^e Peace: For there remains an Apparent Cause for a Civil
War: And the Righteous God, who Restored King Charles the 2 d. can as easily
Restore King James the Second. And therefore I conceive it not only an Act of
Justice to King James, but of Fidelity to King William, that he be imminded to
consider in time What is fit to be done in this Case, as well as of Providence
for Preservation of the Peace of the Nation, least some Unexpected Occurence
should surprise him with a sudden Change of the Minds of the People. I would
not have him be deceived by Trusting to his Possession, or his Forces, or the
Prejudice of the People against Popery, but take Care that Right be done, and
that the Peace of the Kingdom be preserved, at least that there be nothing
wanting in him to either. This I thought my Duty to acquaint his Majesty, or
some of his Council with, and none more fit than your Lordship, and my Lord
Archbishop, to whom I have written more largly concerning other matters of the
Reformation, and something of this in Conclusion. And now I think it is time
for me to take leave of Church and State, and to retire.

15 Jan. 97/8. Your Lordships humble Servant.


I had before, as is said in the Letter, written to the Archbishop to the like
purpose, in the Conclusion of a long Letter concerning matters of Religion; but
it came not to his Hands till long after. But upon 6 May last in a Booksellors
shop I unexpectedly met with the Brief History of the Times, by which I was
Convinced, That the pretended Popish Plot was nothing but a very Wicked and
abominable Contrivance of Dr. Tongue and Titus Oats: And by that, and farther
Inquiry into the whole matter, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey did undoubtedly fall
and Cool in the Place and Posture he was found in; and was not Strangled by any
other Hands, as with much ado in more than 2 days time was found by the Jury
persuaded by the Coroner and two Chirurgions, procured by his Brothers, who
desired to Save his Estate. And therefore that the Nation is concerned to be
Cleared of the Guilt of much Perjury and Innocent Blood. Afterward as
unexpectedly came to my Hands the History of that Plot, for which the E. of
Essex was committed, and the Lord Russel suffered, by which I was likewise
convinced of the Reality of that Plot, but whether, or how far those Noble
persons in particular were concerned in it, is not Necessary to be re-examined,
or the Earls Death farther inquired into. And about the same time meeting with
some of Mr. Lobbs acquaintance, I understood by them something of what he had
Informed them concerning some Caballs of the English in Holland, and what part
was acted here at the Court in England: And though I will not say I was convinced
by Reports, which I had only at the second hand, yet that there was a very
Notable Part acted here in the Court of King James, is so apparent, as makes me
much Suspect, That it was not Popish Councels, but most Abominable Protestant
Treachery, by which he was induced to those things, which were designed to
Ensnare him; and that the Success of that Wickedness has been a very Great
Temptation to diverse privy to it, to their Excesses even to Infidelity and
Apostasy, and all manner of Impiety and Wickedness, which have appeared more
monstrous and Impudent in this Reign than ever before.

And this Suspicion is confirmed by this, that besides those Overt Acts, into
which he was thus Trapan'd, if it was so, there is not any thing charged
against him, which has been made Good, or so much as brought to Public
Examination. Even that which in the Declaration is alleged for One of the
Principal Motives of the Expedition, and was referred to Inquiry by a
Parliament, and was notoriously a Principal Means to move the Hearts of the
People so unanimously in the Case, has not all this while been brought to
Examination, though King James himself, as it is said, in a a Letter to the
Convention did conjure the Lords and Gentlemen then met to make a thorough
Examination of it; I mean the Birth of the Prince of Wales, as we must take him
to be, after so much Evidence upon Record, and nothing proved to the contrary;
but such bold Offers of Proof by futer rejected.

Nay, if things be, what there is such Cause to suspect they are, take it with
all its Circumstances, Antecedent, Concomitant, and Consequent, and
particularly amongst others, the Death of King Charles I. the desperate Plot
against both his Sons, the Profane Flattery of King William at the first, and
the Diminution of his Majesty by Indignities offered him in the last
Parliament, designed, and introduced with the Old false Pretense of the Groth
of Popery, probably not more against his Person, than against the True English
Government it self, it is what may justly be feared will render the English and
their Protestant Religion, very odious in the apprehension of all other
Nations, upon a Moral Consideration: but if it be considered according to the
Principles of true Religion and Conscience, it is so great a Sin against the
Omniscience, as well as Justice, of Almighty God that there is little Hope of
Salvation for any, who are knowingly concerned in it, without Giving Glory to
God by Public Confession, and their utmost Lawful Endeavor for Complete
Restitution, though with Hazard of their Lives; or for the Nation to escape
some terrible Judgment of Divine Vengeance answerable to so Great Wickedness,
unless due Care be taken to expiate it in time.

Besides, if there was nothing in this, there is at present a very Considerable
Opportunity to make both this Nation and our Neighbors Happy; the Neglect of
which if it should be neglected, I can hardly think would escape without
Considerable Evil Consequences. There are Two pernicious Factions, by which
Multitudes of People are carried in different Streams, the Papal and the
Protestant, between which True Christianity is Crucified as Christ himself was
between the Thieves. They are like two Mastif Dogs worrying one the other, and
neither can get the Mastery because both alike are faulty: But would either
amend their own Cause, the other would not be able to stand up against it. Here
I am asured are many who see many Faults, which they wish were amended, and
would see more, if some Temporal Respects and a Servile Fear of the Civil Power
did not becloud them: And in France I have been informed by Intelligent
Travelers, are diverse Worthy Persons among their Clergy who have like
Apprehensions of Faults amongst them: So that there seems a fair Opportunity
and Advantage for the adjusting of Matters in Religion, which have no small
influence upon our Civil Concerns, if proper Persons be inploy'd on both sides,
and much for the Honor of that side, which begins. And for Settling Matters of
State the Opportunity is so manifest, as needs not Words to declare it. Other
matters I have to declare, but such as may be Communicated to all in due
Season; but this, though in Print, is only for the Consideration of proper
Persons, such as mentioned before.

FINIS.

