OF THE DIVISION BETVVEEN The ENGLISH AND ROMISH Church UPON THE REFORMATION.

By way of Answer to the seeming plausible Pretenses of the ROMISH Party.

Much enlarged in this Edition: By H. FERN D. D.

ACT. 24.14. After the way, which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my
fathers, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1655.

To the READER.
GOod Reader, This Treatise was intended for private Satisfaction, but falling
under the View of some, that were able to judge, and liked well of it, (better
than it deserved) it was thought not unfit for more public use. And the Author
(then far off in the North) was importuned, not only to give his consent to
the putting it forth, but to help it forward himself, by prefacing something to
it, for the fairer bringing it forth into Open light. Know therefore, (Good
Reader) and well consider it, that these are such times as the Apostle
foretold, 2 Timothy Perilous (difficult and troublesome) times, 2 Timothy 3.1. Times
in which it would be hard for good Christians to know how to behave themselves
with safety; the dangers of these days threatening, not only the outward
estate or worldly concernments, but attempting Conscience and Religion it self,
and that on the one hand and on the other.

They of the old Romish Superstition pretending Antiquity, and a present
flourishing condition of a Church: They of the new persuasion boasting
success, and holding forth New lights to carry aside.

As in the day of Jerusalem, both the Children of Edom and of Babylon cried,
Down with it, down with it, Psalm. 137. They saw the trouble of Jerusalem, and
were glad that the Lord had done it, Lam. 1.21. So it is with the true
Protestant Church in this Land, now troubled and distressed. The Enemies on
either side rejoicing, that the Lord has done it to us.

A pitiful thing it is, (and one argument more for Lamentation, than Jeremiah
had for his) that the enemies of a Christian Church, should be such on both
sides, as profess themselves Christians, acknowledge One Savior, look for one
Hope; and though agreeing all in the main, yet because of different persuasions
in Religion, can be content, yea and rejoice to see a Christian Church to fall,
and to be (if they might have their will) thrown quite off from the Foundation,
on which they profess themselves to be built, rather than see it stand there,
otherwise, than just as they do, and according to their frame.

How much were it to be wished, and to be prayed for, that the Lord would roll
away this reproach of Egypt, Jos. 5.9. from off the name of Christians, this
uncircumcision, this hardness of heart? that he would take away this perverse
Spirit he has mingled among us, (as Isa. 19.14.) from whence arise such
Debates, and contentions, not only about the things of Earth, but of Heaven
too: the Affairs and business of the State, and of the Church too.

As for those of the Romish persuasion, when I look at those points of Religion
controverted between us, which concern not the special and politic
concernments of that Church (such as Universal Jurisdiction, and that which
follows on it, Universal Subjection, and that which must maintain the former,
Infallibility, and the like) I cannot but think, there might be a possibility
of some peaceable and fair Christian agreement. Yea, and were there Reason and
Equity in men, instead of that pretended Infallibility, to agree and stay upon
the due Authority of free General Councels, and instead of the now exorbitant
power of the Bishop of Rome, to be content he should have only the Ancient
Patriarchal Primacy allowed him in the first General Councels, I should not
despair of agreement as to these points.

But when I consider, how nearly the Guides of that Church take themselves to
be concerned in these Politic Interesses, and what a numerous society there is
of Jesuits devoted to maintain them, I must needs say, that hope seems vain,
and conclude them engaged to hold where they are, and to condemn all other
Christians, and Churches to the Gates of Hell, that will not acknowledge the
Church of Rome to be the only Church, against which the Gates of Hell have
not, nor can prevail by any error in Faith or Worship.

He that will look into the business of Religion before, and at the beginning
of the Council of Trent, will easily see by the several Colloquies held between
Protestants, and Romanists, what agreement some points were brought to, and
what further condescension might have been, had not the Interesses of the Court
of Rome disturbed all. Or if he look into those Relations and Histories we have
of the Council of Trent it self, he will see by the several discourses had upon
the points controverted, what moderation there was in many learned men, but
rendered ineffectual, by reason that the Arcana Imperii, those forementioned
politic concernments of that Church, as they might not be once disputed, so
they wholly overruled the other points of Religion, and excluded all
Moderation in the Definitions of that Council.

All the Christian World sees, how long the poor distressed Eastern Church has
lain under that heavy condition, unpitied by Them of the Romish Communion; and
how They have stood affected to us since our Reformation has sufficiently
appeared by their several practices against us; What hand they had in our
present troubles is not unknown to some; what joy they now take in them, let
their own heart tell them; but what advantage they make of them for perverting
of many, that is it we are to take notice of, and to withstand. I have opposed
this Defense, such as it is, against their general plausible pretenses: framed
indeed both for Matter and Form, most-what according to the scruples of Those,
that occasioned it; but may generally serve to give some stay in these
tottering Times to those, that have not a more able hand to hold and keep them
steady.

As for the Particular Doctrines of the Romish Church, some of the chief of
them, (as Traditions, Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory) are spoken to, as concerning the Trial of Antiquity, toward the End
of this Treatise. Where it is by diverse instances shown, that they could not be
doctrines of the Ancient Church. I may happily find time (with Gods help) to
make a fuller enquiry upon these, and other their novel Articles; that it may
appear, what is justly and necessarily controverted between us, either in
matter of Faith or Worship: What may be waved, as needlessly quarrelled at, or
agreed, as needlessly contended about: And of the controverted Points, which
Doctrine, Theirs, or Ours, will upon the trial of direct Scripture, prove more
Apostolical: which upon principles confessed by us both, will appear more safe
and reasonable, and also more agreeable to true Christian humility and piety.
But of this hereafter, as it shall please God to give opportunity, and ability.

It remains, I should speak to that seeming advantage they would make of our
disturbed condition, to the abusing of unwary Protestants into a persuasion,
that we have no Government, no Communion, no Church. Something is said to it,
in the Body of this Treatise, upon the point of Schism and Division. But to
give the Reader farther satisfaction, it must be considered, First, It is no
new thing to see a Church under the power of the Sword, oppressed by the hand
of violence, persecuted, scattered, and so deprived of the peace, order, and
comeliness it had: Nor ought any Man to think, that he is not therefore in the
Bosom of the Church, because he cannot lie in it quietly and at ease, as
formerly; or that it is best for him to stay no longer in the Ship, (as they
thought, Act. 27.30, 31.) because it is tossed to and fro, with a heavy and
tedious storm. The Romanist, that judges much of things spiritual by the eye of
sense, cannot well like of Christian worship, but when it is pompous and highly
Ceremonious; nor of a Christian Church, unless it be gloriously conspicuous
for outward splendor, and undisturbed order. But then is Truth of most price,
when it is bought at a dear rate, and not sold upon any terms; when it is
sought out with great difficulty, and held upon as great disadvantages; and
then is Faith most precious, when it is most tried, and stands under the
greatest prejudious.

Secondly, Consider, what has happened to us, is fallen upon us for Trial, and
Humiliation: to the end, that they, which are approved, might be made manifest
among us, (1 Cor. 11.19.) for the Truth they hold to, and the Faith they
profess; and that All might be humbled and corrected, the Sons of Levi
especially refined and purified, Mal. 3.3. Our troubled condition therefore
does not justify the Church of Rome, nor ought to confirm any in the error of
that persuasion; but it condemns only our iniquities, in being unanswerable to
that Pea e and Truth we enjoyed: and calls for, not a forsaking of that way of
Worship and Religion we were in, but of those sins by which we provoked this
wrath.

Thirdly, Consider, what has happened to us, has to the same end and purpose
often befaln the Church of God, without a dissolution of it. If the Lord has
now covered this Church with a cloud in his anger, it is but what he did to
Zion, Lam, 2.1. If in the indignation of his wrath he has despised both the
King and the Priest, it is that which Jeremiah lamented in the sad condition of
Jerusalem, Lam. 2.9. If destroyed his places of Assembly (as there complained
of) it is not the destruction of a Church, but the want of that freedom it had
of more public Worship and Communion. Look we into the Christian Church, how
it was trained up for some hundreds of years in such a low and distressed
condition: under perilous and dissicult times for the most part, which seldom
afforded them a secure liberty of due and orderly assembling together. We see
the Church at first falling under persecutions, and all of them scattered
abroad, but some few that held together privately at Jerusalem, Act. 8.1. and
cap. 11.19. and in the next Chap. we see their meetings were very close and
secret, cap. 12.12, 13. And so was it often with the Church, during the
persecutions of the first 300 years, often put to have their meetings before
day, and in caves, or secret places; yet so they maintained the Communion and
being of the Church. Why then should any think it strange to see the like
disturbance of peace and order happen to a National Church? But to come yet
nearer our Case; When the Church under the violence of Arrian Emperors was
persecuted, scattered, Bishops driven from their Sees, and all good Christian
people (that would not communicate with Heresy and Schism) driven from the
public places of Worship, and put to meet as they could, and where they could;
yet so they continued the Communion of the Church.

Now during those perilous times, there was nothing done in the Way of the
Church, for Worship or Discipline, but it is or may be done in this Church. And
if any can say, it is not so done, he does but speak the necessity of Times, or
at worst but the fault and failings of men, not the want of any thing necessary
in the Constitution of this Church. For notwithstanding the attempts of
violence, there is the same Doctrine and power of Discipline remaining, the
same Liturgy and form of worship, the same Government by Bishops and other
inferior Pastors; and were there the same Zeal, as was in the Christians of
the Ancient Church under the Heathen or Arrian violence, there would be no
cause of complaint, no occasion of reproach, as there is now with some by
reason of Communion and Discipline, not yet so regularly provided for in the
present disturbed condition of this Church.

Indeed this may be said toward an excuse, that such has been the Conjuncture
of Affairs for these last years, such the uncertainty of Occurrences in
relation to Church and State, that it made the Times very difficult for those
that had lawful power to know, or resolve how to use it lawfully, and to the
best advantage. The Winds in this storm have blown so contrary and from such
several quarters, and the Waves, which beat upon the Ship, have been so broken
and uncertain, that it was hard for those that were at the Helm to stear, or
bear up against them. And if our Pilots tired out with the storm, did think it
best (as they did, Act. 27.25.) to let the Ship drive a while, out of hope the
Wind would cease of it self, or some other more favorable blast arise from
some other quarter: This indeed might be prudence for the then pressing
Exigency; yet must not they or any else, because the storm lies still upon us,
think (as they did, Act. 27.30.) of flying out of the Ship, But rather take
courage after long abstinence, and provide for safety as well as the difficulty
and distress of the Times will permit.

There laid a heavy storm upon the Church, when it was under the Heathen, or
Arrian violence; yet if compared with the condition of our Times, it will
appear to have been in better capacity of holding the Communion more regular
and distinct, by reason the opposition was more regular, certain, and apparent:
The Civil power was the same, no alteration of State to trouble them, but only
the will of the Prince changed, and for the time bent against them: the
business also of Religion was clear, and easy to resolve, for, whether we
consider the Heathen Superstition, or the Arrian Heresy: both so apparent,
that the temptations of compliance were less forcible, and so the means of
holding Christians together, in a distinct Communion more ready and easy.

The condition of our Times has indeed been more difficult, which though it
might persuade forbearance a while, and excuse it: yet now it calls for the
more courage and zeal, in providing for that which seems to have been too long
neglected, (a more regular Church Way of Communion and worship) that which the
Apostle calls for, and minds the scattered Hebrews of, Not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10. ver. 25.
as the manner of too many among us is, who are either careless of meeting at
all for divine worship, or indifferent where or with whom they meet: nothing
scrupling that promiscuous Communion, which is yet seen in too many places, and
should (I confess) be provided against. If any ask how? how, but by the power
of the Keys, which the Sword of violence cannot cut in sunder, nor the Church
loose, unless they that hold them, cast them away? The use of that power is to
separate or take forth the precious from the vile, (Jer. 15.19.) the tender
Sheep from the violent Goats, the peaceable Christian from the factious
Schismatic: And he that is filthy let him be filthy still, (Revel. 22.) and he
that will contemn, let him mock on still, but God is not mocked. And were this
done, as it might be done according to the present distress of these Times,
there would be no occasion for the Adversaries to mock, or for other to
complain (as the Prophet Isa. in the behalf of Jerusalem, chapter 31.18.) There is
none to guide her of all the Sons whom she has brought forth, neither is there
any that takes her by the hand, of all the Sons that she has brought up. But
the Adversaries that have afflicted her, and said to her, Bow down, that we may
go over, would for their mocking have cause to fear what the Lord threatens at
the 23 ver. I will put the cup of trembling into their hand.

And now Good Reader, if thou be (or would show thy self) a good
Churchman, that is a good Christian, abhorring Idols, and hating to commit
Sacrilege, desiring to keep thy self pure from Superstition in divine worship,
and from Faction and Schism in Church Communion: Beware then of false Teachers,
Beware of the Concision, (Phil. 3.2.) both New and Old; Suffer not thy self to
be cut off from thy former Communion, either by any new Sect, or by the cunning
of any Romish persuasion: Let not these troublesome Times, which are for thy
trial, and manifesting of what is approved in thee, be unto thee an occasion
of falling. God, whom thou servest in the spirit, is able to make thee stand.
To his grace I commend thee.

HEN: FERNA.

Of the Division between the English Church and Romish upon the Reformation.
IT cannot be denied, that every Christian is bound to learn and know upon the
best Evidence he can, what it is that God will have him believe to Salvation,
and how he will be worshipped by him. To this he stands obliged, both by the
end of his hope, Salvation, if he will attain to that, and by his Vow, at his
entrance into Christianity, the promise he made, to Believe, and Do all, etc.

Now when differences are among Christians about Faith and Worship, we are more
concerned to use care and diligence in seeking after the Truth: not to follow
all Guides, or take all on Trust, but, as S. Jude bids us, Earnestly to contend
for the Faith once delivered, Jude ver. 3.

Many years have we contended with the Church of Rome about the Faith once
delivered, impleading her of innovating in Belief and Worship to the
introducing of gross Errors, and Superstitions: And still we have more cause
to contend with them of that Church, because more busy now in working upon the
distempers of the Times, and in drawing away some unwary and unstable
Protestants, by plausible pretenses of seeming advantage to the Romish Church,
in comparison of the now disturbed condition of the Church of England.

Our work is therefore to strive with them, not out of the spirit of
contention, to the multiplying of Controversies, or enlarging the Rout which
(God knows) is too wide already: but only to the necessary defense of our
selves, our Faith and Worship, of which we are always ready to give an
account. And as to the charging of them, however they deal with us, we are
willing to excuse in them, what is excusable: Yet so as to make appear, what is
deceitful in their general plausible pretenses, and what is hurtful or
destructive to the Catholic Faith, in their particular Doctrines.

This is certain and not to be denied, that a Doctrine of Faith was delivered,
the true Profession of which, makes or constitutes a Church: also that there is
and will be, to the Worlds End, must not be taken as the Romanists do, as if
one and the same Church of one denomination, as Roman, or Ephesian, or English,
should do it; or, as if those Pastors, which are chief in place should do it;
but that it shall be done in some part or other of the Catholic Church, and by
such of the Pastors in the Catholic Church, as it pleases God to use for the
preservation of his Truth: a Church, in which, and by which (as the Pillar of
Truth) that doctrine shall be preserved and upheld: and in that Church a
succession of Pastors and Teachers to deliver down that Doctrine of Faith once
delivered by our Lord and his Apostles.

The Romanist, when he is to contend for his faith, is not willing to come to
the Trial of particular Doctrines, but rather stays in the Generals of a
Church, a visible succession, and the like, seeking by these (which make a
plausible noise to the Unwarie) to prove the continuation of the Doctrine
rather, than to defend his Church by the Doctrine she delivers; and to make a
clamor of Division and Schism (odious Names) rather than to examine upon due
consideration of that purity of Faith and Worship (which every Church ought to
hold) where the cause is, and whose the fault, that we now stand divided.

We begin with the Generals. Where, upon the seeming advantage of the former
pretenses, they charge us with setting up a New Church, when we reformed; and
as consequent to that, with Schism or breach of Communion. We deny that we set
up a New Church, or made a Schism, or that we stand guilty of this breach of
Communion.

CHAP. I. We set not up a new Church, but were the same Christian Church before
and after the Reformation.
IN order to the first, they usually put the question, Where was your Church
before Luther? A Question that carries a charge very plausible to the
unlearned, who cannot distinguish between the face, and the body (or rather
soul) of a Church: between that which makes a Church, and that which makes it
such a Church. We answer therefore, our Church was there where now it is, and
where it always was; the same Christian Church, as before the Reformation,
having lost nothing that made it so. But say they, The Church in England before
the Reformation was their Church, holding and practicing what they did. Be it
so, that the Church of England generally held and practiced so, yet may it
remain the same Christian Church, when it ceased to hold and practice so. For
we may likewise put the Question to them, Where was your Church for diverse Ages
of the Primitive and first Times? They will answer, where it is now, at Rome
and elsewhere. But we say, that was our Church, holding and practicing (for the
main) as we. For where was there for those firster Ages, a Romish Church
holding and delivering the Canon of the Scripture, as they do now? or
pretending to an Infallibility, as now? or challenging Universal subjection, as
now? where was there a Romish Church for 500 years, that held Purgatory a point
of Faith? that taught Invocation of Saints for Catholic doctrine? or that
practiced it in the public Liturgy for about that time? or that taught, or
practiced Image Worship for a longer time? or where was a Roman Church that
taught and enjoined Communion under one kind, for a 1000 years? This is most
notorious to them, that are but reasonably acquainted with Antiquity. Nor is
Cardinal Peron's 18 cap. lib. 1. against the King, touching the Agreement of
the Ancient and Modern Church, any proof against it, but a flourish only. Now
if they, notwithstanding these and many other errors and corruptions by
(degrees crept in upon that Church) will say, Their Church is still the same
with the ancient Roman Church, they must give us leave to say with more reason:
We, notwithstanding we have cast off those corruptions, are the same Christian
Church; yea, and say it with more truth and advantage, in as much as that which
made the Romish or English Church before the Reformation to be a Church, we
have retained, without the accrewing corruptions, and so much more like the
Church which was at Rome, and in England in the first and purer Ages. We say
therefore, we are the same Christian Church, having lost nothing that made us
so, but only cast off many things, that endangered our being so, viz: those
many errors and superstitions that tended to the destruction of that Christian
faith, which made us a Church. As a man recovered from some pestilential or
dangerous disease, is the same man that before, has lost nothing that made him
so, only now freed from the corruption, that endangered his being so. We set up
then no new Church, but reformed that which was, freeing it from former
corruptions. And this makes a different Church, but not a New Church; a
different Church I say, according to accidental differences, by which the same
body may differ from it self at several times, and the parts of the same body
from one another at the same time: so one Church may differ from it self at
several times, and from other Churches, yet they and it be parts of the
Catholic Church; but not according to Essential differences, which constitute
a Church as part of the Catholic, and make it differ from another, that is not
so. The English Church differed from it self as before and after Reformation,
yet the same Christian Church; only before it had a Romish face, and garb, and
apparel suitable, and a body full of spots and sores: After, it appeared
otherwise, yet still the same body, the same Church, not lost any thing of that
which made it so; but only cast off accessory accidental corruptions.

For thus it stood between the Church of Rome, and the Church of England,
before the Reformation. They were both parts of the Catholic Church, both
built upon the same foundation, that Catholic Faith, which had been delivered
down in all Ages: that into which they and we are Baptized into, (they not yet
daring to baptize into any points of their new faith) that which they and we
yet agree in, which makes them a Church, and part of the Catholic, because
they retain that Faith still, though clogged with many dangerous errors and
superstitions in belief and practice. While the Church of England was in
Communion with them, it also admitted of many superstructures, Hay, stubble and
worse: Errors and superstitions, which by degrees crept upon the Foundation,
and pass at this day in the Church of Rome (to the great abuse of poor
Christian Souls) as Catholic Faith. The work of Reformation was to retain the
foundation, and whatever was Christian and Catholic, and only to throw off the
superstructures, that burdened and shaked it.

These errors and superstructures after they appeared, were complained of in
all Ages, by many that still held Communion with the Romish Church; and History
also assures us of many in several Ages, that did actually cast them off, and
suffered themselves to be put out of the Romish Communion, rather than admit of
them; and how many thousands more must we suppose to have been not recorded,
when 7000 were in Israel, not so much as known to Eliah? This we note, not as
if we were bound to seek the Church only in those Reformers, which were of a
divided communion from Rome, or to deny the Church to be in those of the Romish
Communion, but to show, that however those errors were for some Ages delivered,
as Catholic Doctrine, by the greater and more prevailing party in that Church,
yet were they not held for such by many that continued in that communion, and
rejected actually by many thousands besides.

CHAP. II. The demand of Professors in all Ages. We can show it better than
they.
WHen therefore they call upon us to name Professors of the Protestant faith in
all Ages; though it belongs to them rather to show the Professors of their
faith in all Ages, (their part being the affirmative, asserting what we deny)
and it be a thing they are not able to do for the five first and best ages (as
was above insinuated) yet we answer them: If by such Professors they mean those
that held a distinct communion from the Roman Church, it is not necessary to
name such, because the faith was preserved still in that Communion, though with
a great mixture of errors: yet after those errors and corruptions grew to a
height, we can give examples in all Ages after, of such Protestors against
them, divided from the Romish Communion, and persecuted because of them; and
more abundant examples happily of such we might have had, but that little is
come down to us of those poor Christians, beside what has come from or through
the hands of their professed Enemies. Now in those examples we have so many
instances, not of new Churches set up, but of the former reformed; and
representations of the Catholic Church in some part more pure, in some part
(and that generally the greater) more unsound.

First, it is not necessary, there should be such, so professing in all points
as we do: For here is a latitude of Truth, and several degrees of Purity,
within which God is pleased to preserve his Church, as both Reason, and
Experience, demonstrate.

2. There might be such so professing, though not so visible and known as to be
recorded.

3. There were such, so far as the preservation of Truth and purity in
doctrine in such a degree was necessary for the continuance and propagation of
the Church: Else what could Eliah have said, if he had been challenged to show
Professors at that time within the Kingdom of Israel? or after, if they that
held the true worship in King Ahaz his time had been challenged to show them in
the Church of Israel or Judah? for as to his point of preservation of necessary
Truth and due worship, there is no difference betwixt Jewish and Christian
Church, the continuance of Gods Church being as necessary before Christ as
after. But we may see how the Romanists are fain to plead for their Faith and
Religion by the uncertain Records of History rather than by the known and
confessed Writings of the Prophets and Apostles; yea, to hang all upon a
negative Argument from the Records of History, rather than to rest upon that
which is positively affirmed in Scripture; For thus runs their Argument. We do
not see this or that doctrine professed in all Ages, therefore it cannot be
Apostolical; whereas it is far more safe to argue, This Doctrine or Religion
we see is Apostolical, plainly delivered in Scripture, therefore it was
professed in all Ages; professed I say, though not always so numerously and
openly, as they expect; nor so fully as is by Protestants in all points
asserted: yet at least so professed as was necessary to the preservation of
saving Tr(...), and continuance of the Church. Their negative Argument is far
more forcible against themselves, their Doctrines being Affirmatives, and they
bound to show them professed in all Ages: Whereas our difference from them
being in the Negative of what they erroneously affirm, must needs suppose the
Errors in being before there could be any Protestors against them; and render
it a vain challenge, to show Protestants, as Protestants in all Ages; when as
many Ages passed before the Errors got head, against which they protested. And
for those Ages in which the Errors prevailed: what if Histories have not
recorded, what if Historians that wrote then, did not so much as know those who
were free from such Errors? which is very possible, when Eliah knew not of any
in his time, and yet there were 7000: what then becomes of their Faith, that
make this their chief plea against Protestants?

But if by Professors in all Ages they mean such as dissented and complained of
the prevailing Errors, though it be impossible there should be such in all Ages
simply, because those errors were not at all for many Ages, yet such are found
(as we said) in all Ages after the Error appeared; and how many more suppose we
to have been, which are not recorded; or to have written against arising Errors
in that Church, whose Writings are not come down to us?

The Church of England, when it pleased God more openly to discover the Errors,
and to touch the spirits and consciences of Men, did accordingly cast them off?
only the Church of Rome would neither acknowledge them to be such, nor amend
any thing: but having for many Ages challenged Universal Jurisdiction over all
other Churches, and prided her self, as the only Catholic Church, and
Infallible Guide, she did withal render her self altogether incorrigible,
without hope of reformation and amendment.

CHAP. III. How they and we are said to differ in Essentials.
SOme Exceptions they make against this, that has been said. 1. From the
expression used by some Protestants, that we and the Church of Rome differ in
Essentials; thence I have heard some of them make this fallacious argument. If
differ in Essentials, then have the Protestants made a new Church essentially
differing from that which was. Answ. The fallacy is in the word Essentials,
which is taken either properly, for Doctrines of Faith belonging to the
constitution of the Essence or being of a Church, or improperly for such as
endanger it, working to the dissolution of it, tending to the corruption, and
destruction of the Essence and being of a Church: In this latter sense the
Doctrines of Error and Superstition, wherein they differ from us, are termed
Essentials, being no light matters, (as those of Rites and Ceremony) but such
as concern the Essence or being of a Church: not constitutive indeed, and in
the affirmative (i. e.) not such as are to be held and asserted by every
Church, but destructive rather, and in the negative, that is, such as are to be
denied and avoided by every Church, as it tenders its own being and
preservation. Even as a man, that is in company with infected persons, is
concerned, as he tenders his life, to avoid the contagion, or to free himself
from it, if tainted; So still the difference of this Church from what it was
under the Papacy, is as of the same body once infected, now sound, once
diseased, now recovered.

The Church of the Galatians was far gone in the way of the Mosaical Law to
the endangering of the Gospel, insomuch that Saint Paul says in a manner they
were removed to another Gospel, Gal. 1.6. and that he was afraid of them, cap.
4.11. The Churches of Pergamus and Thyati^a were so far corrupted, that Satan
is said to have his seat there, Rev. 2.13. and those that taught the doctrine
of Balaam, and those that held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, v. 14, 15. And
Jezabel was suffered to teach in Thyatira, and to seduce the servants of God,
ver. 20. Now when these Churches were reformed, the seducing Teachers and false
doctrines cast out, were they New Churches set up? or could those that still
adhered to the Law, or new Gospel in Galatia, or to the false doctrines in
Pergamus and Thyatira, challenge the reformed party of Novelty? so was it with
this Church before and after the Reformation, having parted with nothing, that
belonged to the being of a Church, or to the Faith once delivered, but only
cast out those false doctrines that had so generally prevailed in it, while it
was in communion with the Roman Church.

2. They object, We cast not off Errors or Superstitions, but the true
Catholic Faith. Answ. Indeed it concerns them to make the World believe (if
they can) that their New Faith was always Catholic, and that we for denying
it are Heretics. But the clearing of this belongs to the examination of the
particular doctrines.

CHAP. IV. Particular Churches may reform; Especially when a General Council
cannot be expected.
3. THey ask what Authority we had to reform the Church, and tell us, we should
have expected the determination of a General Council, and not been Judges in
our own Cause. Ans. We took not upon us to reform the Church, but had a
necessity and duty upon us to reform our selves. Neither did we undertake to
impose upon other Churches, but purge our own. And as we were a party in the
cause, so was the Pope and his faction; and as we would not have been Judges in
this cause, could we had a competent Judge, so was not he with his faction fit
to be a Judge in the cause. Indeed a lawful and free General Council of the
whole Church, setting scripture before them as their Rule, had been the only
and competent Judge; but seeing such a Council was not to be had, or expected,
(not a General one, because of the division of the Eastern Church from the
West, nor a lawful and free one, because of the exorbitant power of the Pope
and his Dependants) it remained we should use the means left us, and do it by
Provincial and National Synods, keeping the same Rule, the Word of God, Which
Gerson with other wise learned men allows, and calls it reformari per parte^;
when the Church reforms it self by parts; and to this, provincial Councels do
suffice, Gers: de Council: Vnius obed:

And so we read, the Emperor with other Kings and Princes, who called for a
General Council to compose differences in Religion, thought it reasonable upon
the tergiversation of the Pope, to do it by Provincial Synods in their several
Dominions, and so they threatened the Pope they would do, if he would not
consent to a Council. A Council, and the rame of Reformation were always
formidable to the Court of Rome, and between the dread of a General Council,
and the fear of such Provincial Synods, Pope after Pope hung tormented for
diverse years, using all the artifices as might be, to satisfy the Princes,
and yet to keep off both General and Provincial Synods; till Pope Paul the
third arose, a man of Spirit, and cunning, who turned the fear of a Council
into the hope and expectation of advantage by it; And so indeed he and his
dependants ordered the business at Trent, that nothing could there be
determined without his privity and direction; that in the end both Princes and
People, instead of relief, they expected by a Free Council, found themselves
more hampered and enslaved by the pretended General Courcel of Trent. Where
diverse points, which before were more free to opine in, or have freedom of
opinion in, were defined Articles of Faith, and all hope excluded of gaining
what diverse Princes made no question to carry at the beginning, viz: Communion
in both kinds, Priests marriage, Service in a known tongue, and some other.

The Princes and the People were very ill satisfied with this dealing; the
French did not of many years receive that Council, yet did not proceed to make
use of a national Synod (happily because of the troubles in that Kingdom) but
the English Nation would not be so fooled; for seeing aforehand what could be
expected from the Court of Rome, they made use of that Power, which God has
left in every Church of judging for it self according to his word: especially
when the Catholic Church stands so divided and oppressed with faction, that
the chief remedy of all, a Free General Council, cannot be had.

What God spoke to his people by the Prophet Hos. 4.15. Though Israel
transgress, yet let not Judab sin, tells us, a particular Church may and ought
to reform, though others will not; and the examples of many Provincial Councels
in this point of declaring, and casting out errors, creeping upon them, warrant
what we have done. For if Saint Augustine and the other Bishops in a Provincial
Synod declared against, and rejected the usurped claim of the Pope in point of
Appeal, why might not the English Church under Henry the VIIIth. cast out his
usurped power here? And if the Provincial Synod of Laodicea declared against,
and condemned the worshipping of Angels then on foot, why might not we also
declare against worship of Saints and Images prevailing here?

If it be said, it was not done here by a just Provincial Synod, but the most
of the former Bishops were against the Reformation, and displaced. Answ. We
need not tell them how the business was carried at Trent, how some were sent
away, some kept back, others, and they but Titular Bishops, sent in; and all to
make up a major part; which the Histories of that Council witness. And
Dudithius an Hungarian Bishop, and one of the Orators for that King, complained
of it, as it is to be seen in his advices and Letters from thence. But we say,
that in that Reformation under Henry the VIIIth. and Queen Elizabeth is more
largely pursued in my Is It Part, Chap: 2. there was no displacing of Bishops,
but all passed with a general consent. And upon that Reformation or Ejection of
the Popes usurped power, arose the first division of the English and Romish
Church. In that which followed under Queen Elizabeth, the business of the
Synod was regularly carried by the Major part; the displacing of the Bishops,
that were put out, being before, and that upon the denial of the Oath of
Supremacy, and their conspiring together to refuse to Crown the Queen. I will
conclude this point of our Reforming with the saying of Saint Cyprian, lib. 2.
Ep: 3. Si quis de Antecessorib: etc. If any of those that went before us did
through ignorance, or simplicity not observe and hold this, which the Lord by
his example and doctrine has taught, it may be pardoned them through the
Indulgence of God; Nobis non poterit ignosci, etc. but to us it cannot be
pardoned, who are now admonished and instructed of the Lord. So say we, If any
went before us in the Communion and Errors of the Roman Church, through
simplicity of heart, we deny him not mercy with God; but we could not expect
it, if being better instructed of God we had not amended our known errors.

CHAP. V. We not guilty of Schism. The guilt of the breach lies on the
Romanists.
THus far of our Reforming, Now of that which followed upon it, breach of
Communion. And here they charge us with Schism. When I say breach of Communion
followed upon our Reforming, I do not take the charge and guilt of it upon us,
or imply that it followed as the proper effect does upon the immediate cause;
but followed accidentally, occasionally, and is to be imputed to some cause
else; not our reforming, but their default. They gave us cause by Errors and
Superstitions thrust upon us, to reform; They, when We and all Nations called
for Reformation, remained incorrigible; We did our duty, they would not do
theirs; Division of Communion necessarily follows (by reason those Errors
were not only in belief, but in practice and worship too) not upon our leaving
the Errors, but upon their not leaving them; not upon our going forward, but
because they would not come on: As when communicating of Infants, was believed
as necessary, and accordingly practiced through the Catholic Church, we must
understand it, as generally believed and practiced, or more generally, than was
any Romish Error before the Reformation for many ages, that National Church,
which first reformed it self in that belief and practice, did it justly without
expecting a General Council, and as to that belief and practice stood divided
from other National Churches or parts of the Catholic, till they should reform
too; indeed there followed no breach or division upon it, because they all
reformed.

That saying of S. Augustine so much in the Mouths of Papists, Nulla
necessitas, etc. there is no necessity of dividing from the Church, was true
many ways, but no way against us.

1. True in regard of the occasion upon which it was spoken, viz: the ill lives
of many in the Church; no necessity of dividing or leaving Communion for that.

2. In regard of the Persons against whom it was spoken, viz: the Donatists;
they had no necessity, or just cause of leaving the Church.

3. In regard of the Catholic Church; there is no necessity of dividing from
that, for they that divide from the Catholic Church, do break with it either
upon the point of Faith or Charity, i. e. they either depart from that one
Faith held in the Catholic Church; or holding that Faith, do break with it
for some cause or matter external to that one Faith, and for it uncharitably
condemn all others, as not belonging to the Catholic Church. So did the
Donatists. We did neither. For our ceasing to communicate with the Roman Church
(which yet is but a particular, not the Catholic Church) was upon the
preserving and keeping entire that Catholic Faith once delivered, which being
the chief bond of Uniay of the Catholic Church, and being by us preserved
together with the bond of Charity in not condemning them, as no part of the
Catholic Church, we cannot be therefore said to divide from the Communion of
the Catholic Church; or to be cause of that Division, which followed upon our
endeavoring to preserve that Faith entire; but they are the cause of it, that
would not, and yet would condemn us.

Our defense then in general stands thus. We had just cause to reform, and so
had they; We in Reforming did what we ought: if they had done what they ought,
and had cause to do, no breach or division had followed. And further, We in
doing what we ought, preserved the Faith entire, together with Charity. They
would neither cast off their Errors, which clogged and corrupted the Faith, nor
retain Charity; but cut us off (as much as in them) from the Catholic Church.
It is clear then to whom the Cause of this Division must be imputed.

CHAP. VI. How necessity of dividing Communion arises.
BUt that it may more particularly be understood, what we did, and what cause
or necessity we had of so doing: We must consider, that the necessity of
abstaining from the Communion of this or that Church, does not presently arise
upon Errors or Superstitions suffered or taught in that Church, and held or
practiced by many in it: No, though they be gross Errors, and may be damnable
to them, that carelessly suffer themselves to be seduced into them. Such were
the seducing doctrines suffered and taught in the Churches of Galatia,
Pergamus, and Thyatira (Chap. 3. as abovesaid) yet was not any therefore
necessitated to divide from their Communion.

But then the necessity arises, 1. When the Error is directly Fundamental, as
in the Arian heresy; for which all true Catholics held themselves obliged to
abstain from their Communion. We do not charge the Roman Church upon that
score, in the cause of this division.

2. When the Error and Superstition is in the practice, that concerns the
administration of the Sacraments, the public service, the Form and Worship (in
all which stands the exercise of the external Communion) so that men, truly
informed and convinced of those Errors and Superstitions, cannot communicate
with good conscience, there arises a necessity of abstaining from such
practice, and consequently from Communion with that Church, so far as to such
practices, yet so as holding it a part of the Catholic Church. This, I say, is
a dividing from such a Church in the external Communion, by ceasing to practice
and hold some things, which it does, but a joining with it in the Catholic, of
which we hold it still a part, as we also are. And this may give sense to that
distinction, of forsaking the Errors, but not the Church, i.e. not forsaking,
or casting off that which makes a true Member of the Church, or not breaking
with the Church upon the point of true Faith or Charity.

3. When such Superstitious practices, together with Errors in belief (in
themselves gross and palpable, and to the careless or wilful, damnable) are
not only taught and permitted in a Church, but imposed also, and required, as
a condition of Communion (so that they which shall not so profess, or
practice, are sentenced as Heretics, and excommunicated) there is just cause
and necessity of dividing from the Communion of such a Church.

Now in both these respects we charge the Church of Rome with the cause of our
Division, and that we were thereupon necessitated to abstain from her
Communion, yet so as holding her then, and still a Church; and being then, and
still ready to hold Communion with her: Saving the duty of true Members of the
Catholic Church, in case she would provide for the security thereof by a
tolerable Reformation.

So our defense stands upon these two Assertions. That such a cause is just and
necessary: and that the Church of Rome gave it, and we had it; which two make
up the two Propositions of this Argument. It is lawful to abstain from the
Communion of that Church, which requires unlawful and sinful conditions of
her Communion; but the Church of Rome requires such. Or thus. All men ought
upon true conviction to forsake their known Errors and sins; but we knew them,
and were truly convinced of them, therefore in forsaking them we did what we
ought.

The first proposition in both these forms stands as undeniable, or else it
must be granted, that we may be bound to continue under a necessity of sinning,
and that knowingly. So the whole business rests upon the second proposition,
that such was our Case, and such the Cause that the Church of Rome gave; which
must appear by examination of the particular doctrines of Belief and Practice,
enjoined all the members of that Church.

Now that they contain such Errors and Superstitions, as before mentioned, we
are ready to demonstrate both by Scripture and the best Antiquity. But it is
our purpose and work in present, to discover and take away the general
pretenses and plausible allegations they make for themselves, or against us in
this Cause.

CHAP. VII. Sectaries cannot make the Plea that we do.
AGainst our Defense so stated, they usually reply; If Protestants upon
Apprehension, or conviction of Errors and Superstitions in the Church of Rome
had just cause to forsake her Communion, then may Sectaries justly forsake the
Communion of the Protestants Church. For they also say, and are many times
persuaded and convinced, that that Church imposes on them such Errors.

Answer. Set the Terms aright, and the fallacy, or ambiguity of this captious
reasoning will appear. If by our apprehension or conviction of Errors in the
Church of Rome, they mean only our saying, pretending or thinking to be so:
then the consequence is good (for Sectaries do pretend they are convinced, and
many times verily think so) but the assumption then is false; for we did not
upon such bare apprehension or deceiving persuasion forsake the Communion of
that Church; but upon a true and evident conviction of known Errors and Sins
(which we were bound to commit in that Communion) demonstrable by Scripture and
Antiquity. Which conviction Sectaries have not; nor do they at all pretend to
confirm, what they say, by the practice of Antiquity. Make the Case like, and
it will follow alike in both; If we had given them the like cause, as the
Church of Rome gave us, they might also forsake our Communion: If they had the
like conviction as we had, they might as justly do the like. But seeing the
case is unlike, both in regard of our giving them cause, and of their
apprehension or conviction, it will not follow they can have just cause of
Division or Revolt. See of this more below, Chap. 13.

It is not then their saying or thinking, that we imposed sinful conditions of
Communion, and that they are convinced of it, which will justify them, or
prejudice us. For some men's mistaking of Error for Truth, must not make other
men give over to stand to truth, and plead it against Error; or persuade them,
they are also mistaken, and cannot know the Truth when they do know it
evidently.

Heretics of old (as Vide cap. 23. prope finem.
appears by Saint Iren. Tertul. and August.) sheltered themselves against
Scripture by plea of Traditions: Now does the Church of Rome think it
unreasonable to defend it self by unwritten Traditions, because Heretics
pretended them? And yet I hope its more possible for us to make appear the
truth of what we say, by that which is written in Scripture and Fathers, than
for the Church of Rome to make the truth of what she says to appear by
unwritten Traditions: the truth of which Traditions it is not possible for her
to make appear.

It is not therefore saying or thinking, that must carry it on any side, but
the evidencing and proving of what is said. That we undertake to do from point
to point: as the clear demonstration, that we had just cause, and were truly
convinced of it, and had rebelled against Light, and grievously sinned, had we
still continued in known Error, and wilful Sin: the inseparable condition of
Roman Communion, to them that have means to know the Error and Sin.

But they object also, That the way of our Reforming, and Dividing from the
Church of Rome, and the plea we make for it, leaves men to their own reason and
judgment to make use of it against the Church, and so opens a gap to Heresy
and Schism.

Answer. It is not any thing we have done, or yet hold, that gives them just
cause to object this to us; but the challenging of Infallibility to their
Church, necessitates them to lay such a charg upon all that will not blindly
resign up reason, judgment and faith to the dictates of their Church. We will
first speak of the use of Reason and Judgment permitted to them that can use
it; then of the using it against, or dissenting from the Church.

CHAP. VIII. Of the use of Reason and Judgment in private men.
REason and Understanding is that Light, which he, that lightens every man that
comes into the World, Ioh. 1.9. puts into the mind of man to see, and judge
thereby, what to believe, and what to do. Now though we leave not men wholly
to their own Reason, yet must we leave them the use of it, so far as is
necessary to the assent, which Faith requires; and we leave it them, not in
opposition to the public Judgment of the Church, but to the blind obedience
of an implicit Faith, that sees no other ground or motive of believing and
practicing, than because the Church so commands. If the Church of Rome impose
the hard condition on them that come over to her (as Nahash the Ammonite on
them of Iabesh Gilead, that would come out to him, 1 Sa. 11.2.) to thrust out
their right Eye, the Eye of their spiritual understanding (by which they
discern and judge of Spiritual things revealed of God, 1 Cor. 2.13.15.) and
only leave them the eye of common sense to discern what it is the Church does
practice, or what it defines, without further enquiring about the will of God,
how consonant that practice or definition, that worship or belief is to it. If,
I say, she can impose this hard condition, we cannot; but must say:

1. That no man can believe any thing truly with such a free and full assent as
faith requires, nor do any thing in worship or practice of life, with that
faith or due persuasion of the lawfulness of it, which the Apostle requires
Romans 14. ult. unless he be convinced of it in his judgment, as in the same
chap. v. 5. Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind: concluding by the
due use of his reason, that its Gods revealed will he should so do and
believe. For the Apostle speaking that of persuasion in and about things
indifferent shows it is much more necessary in matters of Faith and Worship.
Nor can this be eluded by saying, It is sufficient for such a persuasion, that
a man knows the Church says so, and thereupon concludes that God says so; for
there is more in the Apostles saying, The Spiritual man judges all things, 1
Cor. 2.15. For that judging is not a receiving of things propounded by the
Church, without examination, but implies a discerning of them to be the things
of God, before he receives them for such by true faith; and the last resolution
or stay of Faith is not upon the Churches saying so.

2. Gods people are not left to themselves to seek out that revealed Will of
God; but he has appointed Guides and Pastors in his Church, in every National
Church to propound and demonstrate that Will of God out of his Word. To this
end were Pastors and Teachers given, Ephesians. 4. that we should not be carried away
with every wind of doctrine, ver. 14.

These have public judgment to determine and judge for others, for they must
give account for others; but private Christians have their private judgment,
or, judgment of Discretion for themselves only, which is in the discerning
and receiving to themselves, as the will of God, what is delivered, and
propounded to them for they must answer also for themselves, and live by their
own faith; which cannot be without allowing them due use of their reason and
judgment, to see the evidence of that to which they must assent. Therefore we
say also, the Guides and Pastors of the Church do guide and teach not
Infallibly, but Morally, by way of doctrine and persuasion, by manifestation of
the Truth, commending themselves to every man's conscience, as Paul says, 2
Cor. 4.2.

3. When that is done, They do not leave men to themselves, but as Governors
of the Church do by power of the Keys judge and bind the Gainsayers, and cast
the Refractory out of their Communion. So then the Guides of the Church have
the power of Public Judgment, to judge and define for others in matters of
faith and worship; and power of Jurisdiction, to judge, censure, and cast out
the disobedient; and to private men is lest only the Judgment of discretion,
without which they cannot come to believe, or serve God, as they ought, with
reasonable service, Romans 12.1.

CHAP. IX. Of dissenting from the public Judgment.
NOw for the using their reason and judgment against the Church, or their
dissenting from the definitions and practice of it, we give no encouragement to
that.

We 1. teach all Inferiors, whether People or Priests, when they find cause
of doubt or question against such definitions or practice, to mistrust their
own reason, and rather rely upon the public Judgment than their own in every
doubtful case.

2. That they which doubt still seek refolution and satisfaction from their
Superiors, modestly propounding their doubts and reasons, and conscionably
using all means to rectify their judgment, and satisfy their Conscience.

3. If they cannot find satisfaction so, as inwardly to acquiesce, yet to yield
external obedience, and peaceable subjection, according as the condition of the
matter questioned will bear. In a word, we require all that submission of
judgment and outward compliance that may be due to an Authority, not
infallible, yet guiding others by an infallible Rule, and most highly concerned
to guide them accordingly, as being answerable for their Souls.

4. We tell them the danger of gainsaying, that they are to answer it to God
and his Church; That if they cannot approve the reason of their dissenting, to
the judgment of the Church, they must expect to undergo the Censures of it.
For the Church standing so obliged to answer for Souls, and to preserve Peace
and Unity, and having therefore the advantage of Authority and public
judgment above all private persons, it is also most reasonable it should have
the advantage, in the contestation with private persons, and in the issue of
such a business, to proceed according to its own judgment, and use the power
it has, against those that stand out; And then is there a further answering it
to God.

Thus it stands between every Particular Church, and the Members of it,
between Superiors and Inferiors in it: and in some proportion between every
particular or National Church and the Catholic Church, in receiving and
holding the Definitions of General Councils, and the General Practice of the
Church. Tough here a National Church has the advantage above private persons,
in the point of Judgment and dissenting. Yet where it does dissent from other
Churches generally erring, it arises first from the use of reason and judgment
in private persons, discovering the errors (for some in all Reformations must
speak first) and propounding them; which being approved by the Judgment of
that Church, the Reformation follows as an Act of public Judgment, or as an
Act of a National Church, which though inferior to the Catholic, yet has it
judgment within it self for the receiving and holding the Definitions and
Practices of the Church-Generall, and may have possibly just cause of
dissenting and reforming; and can do it regularly, according to the way of the
Church by Provincial Synods, which private persons dissenting from her cannot
do. And this is considerable in the English Reformation, which as it was upon
public Judgment of a National Church in Provincial Synods, so will it not
prove a dissenting from the Catholic Church, or definit ons of true General
Councils; but of that more below, when we come to trial by Antiquity: And of
this respect or submission due from every Particular Church to the General, as
it concerns the Act of this National Church in the Reformation, more largely
in the first Chapter of my later Book. For the present we are to speak of the
possibility of dissent of Inferiors from Superiors, and the use of reason and
judgment necessary to it.

CHAP. X. Possibility of just dissenting.
THe submission and obedience spoken of as due to Superiors, and their
Judgment, ought to take place in all cases, where there is not something
clearly against them, that confessedly excels the Authority and Judgment of
the present Governors: as evidence of Scripture, demonstration of reason, and
a conformable consent of Primitive Times, the pure Ages of the Church.

Now that such a case, or such a cause of using private judgment even to a
dissenting from the public, may happen, Reason and Experience tells us.
Because it is possible, that such as have chief place in the public Judgment
(National or General) may neglect their duty (at least the greater number of
them to the overbearing of the less) and through prejudice of Faction, or
other wordly respects, may fail in determining and propounding the Truth. (For
the promise of guiding them is conditional upon performing duty, and that is
not always certain in the greater part) to the imposing of false Belief, and
false Worship; So that it comes to be Error manifestus, appearing so to be,
both by the Word of God, and the conformable belief and practice of the
firster Ages of the Church. Here is place for Reason and Judgment of
Inferiors to dissent upon such Evidence, after modest proposal, and
demonstration of the Error. And to this in part accords the concession of
Bell. lib. 2. de Council. Inferiors may not judge, whether their Superiors
have lawfully proceeded, nisi manifestissime constet intolerabilem errorem
committi.

Now when I speak of private Judgment dissenting from the public Judgment,
or general practices of the Church, and of the preservation of Truth, and the
Faith thereby, I do not speak of the Reason or Judgment of the People or
Laity divided from all their Guides and Pastors, but I include these; who (of
what rank soever) dissenting from the public, either definition or practice,
are as men of private judgment in such a case. These, I say, I always include
in such a just dissenting or falling off from any erroneous belief or practice
prevailing in the Church. For it cannot be imagined that God, who promised to
be with them, and guide them, should take away his Truth from all the Guides
and Pastors of his Church, and preserve it by the Judgment and Conscience of
Lay people; but that still, however they which have chief place in the Church
prove corrupt, some Guides and Pastors (though of less number and place) shall
be they that shall detect the prevailing Errors, and preserve the Truth: and
this by due use of Reason and private Judgment. Experience also tells us, what
they have proved that have been in chief place; that have sat in Moses Chair,
and in St. Peter's; how many Heretics at several times among the Popes; how a
whole succession of Monsters through the tenth Age; of which Bellarmine
complains, and Baronius cries out, Quae facies Romans Ecclesiae! when infamous
Strumpets disposed of Bishoprics, yea thrust their Paramours (Amasios suos)
into Peter's Chair! What Cardinals then made? what Bishops then ordained by
such Monsters? and stertentibus omnibus, all in a manner being asleep, -- So
he. Experience also tells us how gross Errors have prevailed over the Church:
as for example: The Millenary belief so generally, that Iustine Martyr (contra
Tryph.) says, All that were in all points, or thoroughly Orthodox Christians
held it. So also the giving of the Communion to Infants after Baptism, as
necessary to their salvation, generally held and practiced in the whole Church
for many Ages. I mean more generally than the Romish errors have been.

Now if there were not place for dissenting by the use of private judgment (for
some one person must speak first in the discovering such Errors) there would
be a necessity of the Churches continuing in Error. But both those Errors
were reformed; and he that spoke first in discovering the untruth of them, did
it upon the use of his private judgment, examining the belief and practice of
the Church, and showing the error of it.

It may be they will say, those two Doctrines were not defined by the Church,
i. e. by any General Council. So indeed they often excuse their own Doctors,
when they set their private judgment against the general stream of
Antiquity: and by the like equity they might receive our plea; That the belief
and practices we forsook were not Doctrines defined by the Church, i. e. by
any lawful General Council.

But what if those two had been defined? then no man (will they say) ought to
have questioned them, or used his private judgment against them. But then must
we say, if any thing be defined amiss, the Church must continue in error, and
an after General Council cannot amend it. But if things before defined may be
corrected or reversed by the like Authority, how can it come about but by the
discovering of the former error, and that upon the use of private Judgment,
examing the definitions, and showing the error to the Church? And that which
Bellarmine grants (as I said a little before) Nisi manifestissime constet
errorem intolerabilem committi, supposes such error may be committed and
discovered. But how can this later come about, but upon the use of private
Judgment in Inferiors? and while the Council of Trent was not received in
France, was it not upon the use of their Judgment against that Council, which
with the Romanists passes for General? or how can Moderate Papists think the
reception of the Catholic Church to be the best confirmation of the Decrees of
a Council, if not allow private Judgment in the examining and receiving them?
And seeing a General Council has its power from the diffusive Catholic
Church, of which it is the representation, however the Definitions of it may
have more form of Law, yet not more weight to press the judgment or
conscience, than what is generally believed and practiced through the whole
Church, as that of Infant Communion was.

We therefore leave men no otherwise to their reason and judgment, than reason
and necessity enforces, no otherwise than Christ and his Apostles left them.
Reason enforces it (as we heard) both in regard of the Church, which cannot
else be reformed from prevailing errors; and in regard of every particular
Man, who is to give account of himself, is to be saved by his own Faith, and
perishes upon his own score. They were not excused if seduced by their Prophets
and Teachers, as Isa 9.14, 15, 16. The Leaders of this people cause them to
err, and they that are led are destroyed -- Also, Head and Tail, rush, and
branch, both cut off, and Ezekiel. 33.6, and 8 Those that perish through the
Prophets default, their blood notwithstanding is on their own head. Answerably,
Mat. 15.14. They are not excused that blindly follow their Leaders, both fall
into the ditch. The Romanists reject this, as not applicable to the Guides of
their Church, answering in effect as the Pharisees (who also had chief place in
the Church) are we also blind? Joh. 9. and we may reply, as our Savior did;
You say, We see, therefore your sin remains; therefore your blindness is
more incureable.

Again, our Savior and his Apostles left men the use of their reason and
judgment in discerning what is taught them in and by the Church: For they
enjoin the use of it as a duty; as when our Savior bids, Search the
Scriptures. Joh. 5.39. And take heed how you hear, Luke 8.18. Beware of false
Prophets, and by their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7.15. And beware of the
Leaven of the Pharisees, Mat. 16. v. 11. that is, their Doctrine, ver. 12. Now
set against this last place, that which our Savior says, Mat. 23.2. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, all therefore that they bid you
observe, that observe and do: How can these be reconciled (observe whatsoever
they teach, and yet beware of the Leaven of their Doctrine) without allowing
the Judgment of discretion in the hearer? So the Apostle, Gal. 1. forbids the
receiving of any other Gospel, though preached from Heaven by an Angel. How
should the Galatians know a difference 'twixt the Gospel and Faith once
delivered, and any other new one, but by using Reason and Judgment? To the
same purpose he bids, Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These.
5.21. Try the Spirit, 1 John 4.1. The Romanists answer, that these Precepts of
Proving and Trying, are spoken to the Guides of the People. We say, that is
true, to them chiefly spoken, and yet to the People too: to the Guides and
Pastors in order to reforming and casting out Errors prevailing, (in which
respect we plead for use of Reason and Judgment to be allowed, not to the
people so much, but to their guides) also in order to the keeping out Errors,
which false Teachers would bring in, to the seducing of the people; for their
Guides are to judge for them. But still that Proving and Trying, that taking
heed belongs also to the People, and implies their use of Reason and Judgment,
not in order to Resorming or Judging for others, but in order to their own
believing, or receiving what is taught and propounded to them. The Apostle
calls to them, Judge what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. And judge in your selves, 1 Cor.
11. And the spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. He speaks of things
taught in the Church, and of the Spiritual man's judging them, in order to his
own believing; to which purpose, Saint Ioh. 1. Ep. 2.27. The Anointing shall
teach you all things, viz. so as to understand all things necessary to their
Salvation.

CHAP. XI. How far the Romanists leave men the use of their Reason and
Judgment.
SEE we now what use of Reason and Judgment the Romanists allow to Men. They
speak to the Reason and Judgment of Men, whom they would bring in unto them,
use Motives and Arguments to persuade their Religion, and the Authority of the
Church of Rome. But if they suffer themselves to be persuaded to embrace that
Authority upon such Reasons and Motives, they must then resign up their Reason
and Judgment wholly. Thus have they leave to use their sight in finding out
that Church, but when they have found it, then they must follow it blindfold,
or look but one way, that way only that that she directs, and take all upon
trust of her Infallible guidance. They will say they commend the Definitions of
the Church to the judgment and consciences of the people, alleging Reasons,
and Testimonies from the Scriptures and Fathers; and this in order to better
persuasion; so far it is well. But then their Reason and Judgment is
absolutely bound to look that way only, and to see nothing against the
definition of the Church: No, though she defines it is not against Chirsts
institution to allow the people the Sacrament but in one kind: or that it is
lawful to adore Images, as she has done in her Council of Trent. A man had as
good spare his labor in using his Reason and Judgment to examine their
proofs, as having done all, to be absolutely concluded and bound up. Which no
question goes very hard with many of their more learned Men, who see more
reason and evidence against, than for what they are bound by the Church to
believe and practice; and so are ground between the Definition of their Church,
and the Judgment of their Conscience, as between the upper and nether
Millstone. Hence that conscionable cunning of the Belgic Inquisitours, who in
their Index Expurgatorius, 1571. confess, when they meet with the Ancients
speaking otherwise than their Church, quovis commente -- they use any shift to
remedy it.

We read how it fared with some Divines in the Council of Trent. Who (while
their Articles were under deliberation undefined) honestly proposing their
doubts and arguments against the common sense of the prevailing party, were
cried out on as Lutherans; and some of them not suffered to speak more, were
sent away: so free was that Council! What shall we think now after the
definitions are made, but that men's Consciences, judgments, tongues are bound
up, not to doubt, think, or modestly propound any thing against them without
the note of Heresy, and danger of the Inquisition?

But see we what follows upon their Concessions: To find out the Church they
allow (as we heard) the use of Reason and Judgment. Now that must be by
examining her marks; and seeing a chief mark of the Church is Sanctitas
doctrinae (as Bellar. and others do truly acknowledge) it implies a judging of
all her Doctrines, before a Man can truly know by the purity of them, that this
is the Church.

Again, when the Church is found out, yet still the question remains, whether
it be Infallible? there also must the use of Reason and Judgment be allowed;
for no reason it should be taken upon her own word, that she is the only
Infallible guide. Therefore Bellarmine was enforced to say (though untruly)
that the Infallibility of the Romish Church, Councils and Popes, stands upon
apertas promissiones, Of this at large below; Chap. 27.
naming Act. 15. Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis, and Luke 22. Rogavi pro
te ut non deficiat fides, lib. 3. de verbo Dei, cap. 14. Now if these places,
and all other they bring to that purpose, be acknowledged so plain, that it is
easy for any man, using his Reason and Judgment to see this privilege of the
Roman Church in them (when as indeed no reasonable consequence can draw it out
of them) who cannot but justly say, the places of Scripture we bring against
their Errors are more open and plain to him that will duly use his Reason and
Judgment?

CHAP. XII. Of knowing the Church by the marks of Eminency, Perpetuity, etc.
CArdinal Perron, in his first book, cap. 5. and 6. against the Kings Letter,
seems to cut the business shorter, and to leave men the use of Reason and
Judgment in knowing the Church, not by examining her Doctrines, but by
considering her external, and more sensible marks, such as are easy and
proportionable to every man's capacity, viz. Eminency, Amplitude, Perpetuity,
or Succession, and the like. And when the Church is known by these, then a man
is to know by her the sense of places of Scripture, which need interpretation.
But what he says for this easy discovery of the out of Scripture, A City on
an Hill cannot be hid, Mat. 5. was spoken by our Savior of the Apostles, and
their preaching of the Gospel; and if applied to the Church, it does not prove
she can always be known by these marks. Nor does St. Austin's application of
that Scripture, to the knowing of the Church in his time, imply the Church
shall always be so. Not so now, when it stands divided by East and West, the
Eastern Church challenging these marks as well as the Western; Unless it come
short of the Romish Church in Eminency of outward splendour, when as it is more
Christian -- like to continue under pressures so many years; the Romish Church
may be eminent for pomp, and have more of the world in it, but the Greek Church
is eminent for sufferings, and has had more of the Cross. Now seeing the Greek
Church, which has these marks, is in the Roman account heretical, and the Roman
Church likewise condemned by the Greek, how shall a man know which of these to
join to, but by examining their Doctrine, and judging of it?

The Cardinals similitude of a Testator (^ordaining one to be the Interpreter
of his Testament, that has a name common to others, and therefore assigning
marks to know him by, so clear that they need no Interpreter) cleares not the
business. For did ever any hear of an Executor, or Interpreter of a Testament
marked out by his gray head or antiquity, by tallnesse of stature, amplitude, or
eminency of person or estate, when his proper name and habitation would
readily and sufficiently distinguish him from all others? So had God marked out
unto us in his Testament, that Church, which should in all Ages be the
infallible Interpreter of his Will, by the name Roman, and place of habitation,
and in stead of a City built on a Hill (the Scripture so often repeated by the
Cardinal) said, a City built on seven Hills, there needed no more to do, but
submit Reason and Judgment to all which that Church commanded.

But seeing he has not done it, no not when occasion of mentioning such a
privilege, had any such belonged to that Church, (I mean when St. Paul wrote
to the Romans:) it is plain he has left us to know his Church by her Doctrine
agreeable to his Word; for so must we hear the voice of the Sheepherd,
especially when Churches of several Communions may challenge the former marks,
the Greek as well as the Roman.

Now what has been said against knowing the Church by these marks, is not
spoken, to deny the Roman (which challenges them) to be a Church, but that they
mark her out for such a Church as the Cardinal would have us take her for; such
a Church as Saint Augustine speaks of, viz. the Catholic Church, the Church,
in which only the Pastors voice is to be heard, for what she pretends to by
these marks alone, she must allow to the Greek Church also. It is not these
barely without consideration of doctrine, that could mark her out for a true
Church, but that she still together with these holds the foundation. And in
regard of that we acknowledge the Pastors voice was still heard in her, yet so
that the voice of false Shepherds have often out-cryed him, yea, cried him
down in many points of high concernment to his sheep. Yet by Gods providence
his voice was still heard, and his Word or Scripture still preserved, whereby
the voice of false Shepherds might be discerned from the true one, the Errors
and Superstitions prevailing known from the Truth and faith once delivered.

When the voice of the great Pastor ( except ye eat the flesh, etc. Joh. 6.)
was generally mistaken in the Church, and misapplyed to the communicating of
Infants, there was enough of his voice and word still heard in the Church to
discover the Error, and restore the Truth. When Image Worship was cried up by
the second Nicene Council, and advanced in the West by the Romish Bishops, yet
was there enough in the word and voice of the Shepherd (known in the Church)
to condemn it in the Council of Frankford, and elsewhere. When Pope John 22.
defined the place of faithful Souls to be out of Heaven till the Resurrection,
and enjoined it to be professed by those that took degrees in the Universities:
yet was there enough still in that Church to condemn it in the Council of
Florence. When the voice of the Shepherd in those places, Feed my sheep, Joh.
21.16. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock -- Mat. 16.18. I have prayed for thee
-- Luke 22.32. was mistaken, and mis-applyed for some Ages, to advance the
Popes Infallibility, and power over all, there was enough seen by the Council
of Basil and Constance to define the contrary, and conclude a Council to be
above him. And however the noise again is greater in the Church of Rome, for
the Pope than a Council, yet is there enough still heard in that Church by the
French generally, and all moderate Romanists, to know the untruth of it. So we
say, whatever becomes of the Cardinals marks, Eminency, Antiquity, etc. (by
which he would have her marked out for the only Church, in which the Pastors
voice is to be heard) the Romish Church has failed in her doctrine, cried up
Errors and Superstitions, yet so, that the Pastors voice has been heard, and
his word so preserved there, that enough to discover them.

And now to some applying of what hdth been said touching use of Reason and
Judgment, to our Case of Reforming. We examined the Church of Rome by the
Marks, Eminency, Antiquity, Succession; We see they agree not to that alone,
nor that in Saint Augustines purpose, as he applied the like Marks to the
Catholic Church: Nor do they imply that Church, where barely found, to be a
Church designed by God, to remain incorrupt, much less to be the Infallible
Interpreter of his Testament.

Also we examined that Church by that maine mark of Sanctity of Doctrine (using
our Reason and Judgment (which they allow in this point) and that the
judgment of a National Church) and found her so far from being Infallible,
that she was grossly corrupted in her Belief and Worship: Of which we had
apparent conviction from the evidence abovesaid, to wit, Scripture and
Primitive practice, either of which excels the judgment and authority of the
present Church of Rome.

CHAP. XIII. Our way opens not a gap to Sectaries.
NOw to the last part of the Objection, The opening hereby of a Gap to all
Heresy and Schism.

Answ. Due use of Reason and Judgment does it not; Sectaries that are gone out
from us, cannot, 1. Pretend to such a way of Reforming the Church, or to such a
Judgment as our Reformation was brought about by; they wanting the Authority
which is needful to it in every National Church. They as Members of this
Church owed obedience and subjection to the Government and Governors thereof,
by divine precept; and could do nothing as to a Reformation more than private
men; whereas the Church of England (if under the Patriarchate of Rome,
according to Ecclesiastical Canon; which would not have been contended about;
yet) stood not bound to the usurped power thereof; but being a National Church,
might justly eject that Usurpation, and make Reformation within it self of all
Errors, maintained by that pretended Power and Authority.

2. As for that, wherein they dissent from this Church, they cannot pretend to
such Evidence we spoke of; they do not at all pretend to the practice and
consent of the first Ages, nor have they plain and evident Scripture, but
places unlearnedly wrested. The Evidence required in dissenting from Authority,
is such as by express words, or direct consequence is apparent to all that can
use their Reason without prejudice of self-interest or faction. But we must
note a different evidence in regard of things propounded by the Church, as
matters of Faith and Worship -- and things enjoined, as circumstantials of
Worship, or pertaining to Order, Discipline. In the first sort the Church
indeed stands bound to show them evidently out of Gods Word, to be such, before
they can be received by faith and full assent for such; because it is the
office of the Church, or Governors thereof, not to make such, but to declare
and propound them: But they that will charge the Church in those Proposals with
Heresy, Superstition, or Idolatry, must have the full and apparent evidence
aforesaid. In the second sort, Things Circumstantial, and of Order, and
propounded only for such by the Church, they that dissent and refuse to yield
obedience, must have most clear evidence that such things are unlawful and
forbidden by Gods Word, because that Word of God most evidently gives power to
the Church, to make, constitute, and ordain such things, and expressly commands
obedience to Superiors. Now for the things which the Church of Rome propounded
and imposed as matters of Faith and Worship; as she had not evidence for them
out of Gods Word, which was enough for our refusing them as matters of Faith
and Worship, so we had sufficient evidence of Scripture and Antiquity against
them. Whereas all that this Church of England propounds as matter of Faith and
Worship, is most clear by Scripture, and consent of Antiquity: So that it is
most unreasonable for our Sectaries to deny it, and impossible for them to have
evidence against it. Much less is it possible for them to be convinced out of
Gods Word of the unlawfulness of circumstantials and matters enjoined, as of
Order, and to have as apparent evidence for that conviction, as Gods Word gives
them for obedience to their lawful Governors.

3. Their pretending to be convinced in their judgment, hinders not the Church
of which they were members, to use her own judgment, and accordingly to
proceed by censure and excommunication, as i^ said above, cap. 9. And hereby
was this Church held together in Unity, no Sect or Heresy breaking forth which
was not presently crushed, till force of Arms bore down the free use of
Ecclesiastic Authority, and emboldened men to contemn it If therefore
Sectaries shall say to us, you allow us to use our Reason and Judgment in what
you teach us. True, say we, for your own satisfaction, but not to abuse it
against the Church. But we do not, say they, abuse it, but have consulted our
Guides, and used all means we can for satisfaction. We tell them, you must
bring evident Scripture and Demonstration against public Authority of the
Church, and having modestly propounded it, attend the judgment thereof, to
which if you cannot assent inwardly, yet yield an ex^erhal peaceable
subjection, so far as the matter questioned is capable of it, (which I add
because the matter questioned may be not so much in belief and opinion, as in
worship and external practice:) For that must necessarily discover it self: and
if it be such in any Church, that a man cannot in conscience comply with, and
therefore cannot yield external subjection so far as to do or perform the same
worship or practice; yet ought he still to yield a peaceable subjection, in not
resisting or reviling, but quietly suffering (if need be) for the same under
Authority. But you that dissent from the Church of England have no such cause
for any thing belonging to the substance of Worship: And as for Circumstantials
and matters of Order, ye ought to show as direct Scripture against the
particulars, as that which commands you to obey them which are over you. And if
your misinformed conscience bade you forbear to submit to the doing of things
enjoined, yet should you have had so much conscience of the express precept
commanding obedience to Superiors, as to forbear resistance and force, and to
have rather quietly and peaceably suffered under the censures of the Church,
and power of Authority set over you; and you cannot but think it reasonable,
that the Church, which is entrusted with others as well as you, and has the
advantage of Authority and public judgment, should upon the not-appearing of
your pretended evidence, maintain her Judgment and Authority, and proceed
against you, as the preservation of Peace and Unity requires. And think not
because you are allowed to use your Reason and Understanding in order to your
believing and reasonable serving of God, you are therefore allowed to use force
in order to the maintaining of your dissent from, and disobedience to
Authority: For that God whose Truth and Service ye so much pretend, is the God
of Order and Peace (1 Cor. 14.33.) not the Author of Confusion; such as your
violence has wrought in this Church and Land.

No other means or remedy has the Church to preserve Unity, than by
demonstrating the Truth to every man's conscience, and censuring or casting out
the Refractory. Nor other fear can she cast upon her children to keep them in
obedience, than the loss of her Communion, and their Answering it to God. Nor
was there any other Remedy in the Ancient Church, while destitute of help from
the Secular power, I mean no other Remedy proper to the society of the Church,
to keep men in her Communion.

CHAP. XIV. Their vain pretense of Infallibility.
HEre the Romanists lay hold on a seeming advantage by pretense of an
Infallible guidance in their Church, telling their Proselytes, that the
Protestants acknowledge their Church fallible in her Proposals, and therefore
must leave men to their own reason and judgment, but our Church is infallible
in her Definitions. How we Protestants leave men the use of their Reason and
Judgment, rather than leave them to their Reason and Judgment, has been shown
already; and to the Romish pretense of Infallible guidance, we say still, could
it be made good, there would be no more to do, but every man upon
understanding the terms and sense of her Definitions, to submit his Reason and
Judgment without farther enquiry, how consonant they are to Gods revealed
will, and what warrant he has from thence to assent and believe them. But
here is the weakness and vanity of that pretense: This Infallibility which is
pretended as the ground of all their belief, has no ground it self to be
believed ( See below Chap. 27. etc.
as we show by many most evident arguments) and that which is alleged to take
away men's Reason and Judgment, must allow every man his Reason and Judgment in
the examining of what is brought to prove it, as was shown above, Chap. 11.
etc. Whereupon it will be harder to make men believe that pretense of
Infallibility, than to believe the proposals of Truth, from Guides that pretend
not to it, but only to the demonstration of that Truth by an Infallible Rule.

Hence it is easy to see, which is more reasonable and likely to keep men in
obedience to the Church; Open and plain dealing with them in the business of
their salvation, or false pretenses? The demonstration of Truth to every man's
conscience, or the Imperious dominion over other men's faith and consciences,
under pretense of Infallibility?

We say to men, If you will be with us, you shall see what you do: we require
your obedience to what we demonstrate to be Gods will, for you to believe and
do, yet know your salvation is concerned in such obedience, and be it at your
utmost peril to gainsay.

The Church of Rome says to men, If you will come to me, you must put out your
Eyes, resign up your Reason and Understanding, and with implicit Faith give
absolute submission and obedience to my Definitions.

CHAP. XV. Dividing from the Roman Church is not a dividing from the Catholic.
ANother of their maine Objections upon our division from them, is, That,
whatever the Doctrine or Faith be which we retained, we divided from the whole
Catholic Church, holding Communion with no part of it. To the same purpose is
that which Cardinal Perron (in his Letter to M. Casaubon, and in his first book
against the Kings Letter) alleges, That to be Catholic, and avoid the note
of Schism, is not sufficient to hold the same Faith with the Catholic Church
(for so did the Donatists) but to hold Communion also with it; which the
Donatists not doing, were Schismatics: And in like manner he would conclude us
to be.

Our Answer in general is briefly this, That we did not divide from the
Catholic Church, and that to a Communion with it is not required a full
agreement in belief and practice with other parts of it: No nor an actual
Communion with them always, and simply necessary: and that our Case and the
Donatists is different, as St. Cyprian's and their case was.

Now to clear these more fully. We say first: It was neither our intent (when
we reformed) to divide from the Catholic Church, or any part of it, neither
did we. We only sought to reform our selves, leaving them to themselves. We
had indeed to do only with the Roman Church, which being a particular Church,
as it may utterly fail, without failing of the Catholic Church, so may it
surely be in such a measure corrupted, that it deserves to be divided from. Yet
our aim and intent was only to leave the Errors and Superstitions we
practiced with her, and so to leave her no farther than her Communion was mixed
with those Superstitious practices, i.e to leave her no farther than she had
left her self (as we can prove) or receded from what she was for belief and
practice in the more ancient and purer Times.

Now here is the usual mistake, and upon the Romanists part the common prejudice
against us; that they still take the Roman Church and her Communion for the
Catholic, and what they meet with in the Fathers touching the Catholic Church
to this or like purpose (that Communion with it is necessary, that there is no
salvation out of it) they apply to the Roman, or touching Communion with the
Roman Church or Bishop, to the proving any man Catholic thereby: They
appropriate it to that Church as a special prerogative, when as the Fathers did
also prove the like by communion with other Churches and Bishops, confessedly
Catholic, although not so frequently, because Roman Church and Bishop of it
was then of all other most eminent. Upon this double misapplication, those many
Testimonies which Cardinal Perron (in his Epistle and Answer) has heaped up out
of St. Augustine, and others, come to no purpose: For to be Extra Ecelesiam
Romanam, is not presently to be Extra Catholicam. For though it was a good
argument of old, when that Church was eminently and confessedly sound, to
conclude affirmatively, as the Fathers often did) such were good Catholics,
because in Communinion with that Church; yet now since Rome is notoriously
corrupt and unsound, the argument will not hold, to conclude Affirmatively.
Much less will it hold Negatively, to argue, such are no Catholics, because
not in Communion with Rome. Nay when Rome of old was sound in Belief and
Doctrine, it did not always conclude the Negative (as will appear by the
Instances below of the Asian and Afriean Churches out of Communion with the
Roman) much less can it conclude Negatively now.

CHAP. XVI. The Greek Church, a Church, and part of the Catholic.
FUrthermore, besides the Roman we acknowledge other Christian Churches parts
of the Catholic, and we say we are not out of Communion with them, as the
Church of Rome is by an actual declaring of Non-communion to each other: For
though we agree not with those Churches, in all doctrines and practices (which
is not De facto, necessary to the holding of Communion 'twixt parts of the
Catholic) yet we holding them still parts of the Catholic Church, and they
us, and not pronouncing Noncommunion to each other, we both remain in the Unity
or Matrice (as Cyprian phrases it) of the Catholic Church.

Now as to our opinion of the Greek Church, we conceive, their denying the
procession of the Holy Ghost to be from the Son, but yielding it to be by the
Son, to be only a difference in form of speech, not of any Heretical meaning,
as they are acquitted by some learned Romanists.

And for their opinion and judgment of us, we say, that Censure of Jeremias
one of their Patriarchs, (which the Romanists object against us as condemning
the Protestant Doctrine in many points) is not found to be warranted by any
Authority of the Greek Church: and to it we may oppose the judgment of Cyril
their late Patriarch, who approves our Church and doctrine.

But they ask, seeing we left the Roman, why did we not join to the Greek, or
some other Church, or part of the Catholic?

Resp. We were joined with them in the Catholic Church, (as said before) but
if by joining our selves to some other Church, they mean holding and
practicing as that Church does, we say again (as above) such agreement between
the parts of the Catholic, is not necessary to Catholic Communion. 2. We say,
it was not necessary for us. First, because we were a National Church, and
therefore not bound to join so, as to put our selves under any particular
Church of one denomination. Private persons indeed are bound so to be joined to
one Church or other which are parts of the Catholic. Secondly, because our
work was Reformation, and casting off the Romish Errors, and we saw no
particular Church, but needed Reformation very much; and therefore we could not
join to any so as to agree with them in all doctrines and practices.

These considerations show, the many Testimonies brought out of the Fathers by
the Romanists, for necessity of Communion, come not home to our case. For as
they are abused when applied to the Communion of the Roman Church (as above
noted) so are they not altogether applicable to the Catholic Church now, as it
stands in a condition far different from what it was in St. Augustines time. At
the time of the Reformation, it was found divided in two parts, accusing each
other of Error and Schism: It was our part then to consider, what Errors we
had received by communion with the Romish Church, and finding them to be many
and great, it was not for us to make any other part of the Catholic Church a
rule or pattern of Reformation, but to look to Gods Word, and the Primitive
practice, when the Catholic Church was in such an entire estate, that the
above mentioned Testimonies were truly appliable to her. Which Church is by
both sides confessed and acknowledged to have been so right and sound, that
none could have cause to leave the Communion of any part of her; Which Church
also must be acknowledged to be of more Authority than the present Romish or
Greek Church. From that Word of God was our Rule, from that Primitive Church
was our pattern, and by holding to that rule, and pattern, as near as we
could, if we cease to believe and practice many things as the Church of Rome
does, or not agree in all doctrines and practices with other parts of the
Catholic Church, we cannot be said for that to have no Communion with the
Catholic Church.

CHAP. XVII. Of agreement and external Communion twixt the parts of the
Catholic Church.
BUt further to clear this point of actual communion and agreement between
the parts of the Catholic Church by some Instances. In the points of keeping
Easter, and Rebaptization, it is evident,

First, that the Asian and Roman in the one, and the African and Roman in the
other, did not agree for doctrine and practice.

Secondly, that they could not communicate one with the other, not only in the
keeping Easter, or in the very practice of Rebaptization; but those that held
Rebaptization necessary, could not at all communicate with any of those members
of the Catholic Church, which had been received from heresy, without being
baptized again.

Thirdly, that upon the heat of the Romish Bishops ( Victor and Stephen) in
these two businesses, it came to an actual denying of Communion with the Asian
and African Churches.

What Cardinal Perron concludes upon those Churches so standing out, as to the
point of Schism, he has not expressly declared, notwithstanding he treates of
both their oppositions against the Bishops of Rome then being. lib. 3. cap. 2.
and 3.) He seems indeed to leave the Asians under Schism: but that is to
take the Crown of Martyrdom from many of those godly Asian Bishops. And we
read, that as Irenaeus and others reproved Victors Excommunicating of them, so
they held them not cut off from the Catholic Church, and professed they would
not deny to communicate with them, as Eusebius witnesses Lib. 5. Hist. Eccles.
After-ages also have excused them: And the like charity (if the Romanists had
it for us) might excuse us; or rather commend what we have done.

CHAP. XVIII. The want of that does not always make guilty of Schism.
YEt hence appears, that which the Cardinal often presses, that all the
Members of the Catholic Church must communicate one with another) is only
true of duty, so they ought to do and keep themselves; not of fact, or under
necessity of being guilty of Schism, or cut off from the Communion of the
Catholic Church. For we see, that neither want of agreement in all doctrines
and practices does it; nor yet all want of actual or external Communion does
it; as when Communion is forborne, or denied by one Church to another, without
uncharitable denying of one the other to be parts of the Catholic. And the
Testimonies of Fathers speaking of Communion, upon occasion of the case between
the Donatists and the Catholic Church, are not to be extended to all actual
Noncommunion, which often happened between eminent persons denying it to each
other, and between several Churches doing the like, yet both remaining in the
Catholic.

To these two Instances out of History, let me add two other upon supposall.
The error in the belief and practice of Communicating Infants prevailed in
the Catholic Church generally, and for many Ages, and was reformed without a
General Council. It must be supposed some one National Church did reform it
self, in that belief and practice; and it must be acknowledged justly done; for
the whole Catholic Church did accordingly reform. Now suppose it had not, but
still persisted in that belief and practice; that National Church which first
reformed, must either have returned to the error it had justly left, or stood
divided in Communion to the rest of the Catholic Church, at least from those
parts of the Catholic Church, that held Infant communion necessary, upon the
like place of Scripture, Joh. 6.53. answerable, as they thought, to that other,
Joh. 3 3 concerning Baptism, which persisting in the belief, that one Sacrament
was necessary to children as well as the other, could not have admitted those,
that reformed, as good Christians, no more than those that should have de^yed
Baptism to their children. Now there did not follow a division, because the
rest of the Church followed in the Reformation: But suppose they had not, I
would then learn of the Cardinal, whether he would have accounted that
National Church guilty of Schism, o^ of the division of Commuon, which had
followed upon their doing that which they did justly, and through the default
of other Churches in not doing that, which they saw good cause to do.

He that will apply this to the Reformation of this National Church, and the
default of the Roman Church in not doing the like, will see that want of
external Communion does not always cut off from the Catholic Church, and will
see cause also of excusing us.

My second Instance upon supposall, is from that which was intended in France.
The League had divided the Roman Catholics there; but that being broken, the
King and his party endeavored reconciliation with the Pope; and finding him
averse, and ill to be dealt with, it was determined to set up in France a
Patriarch, and to have no more to do with the Court of Rome; and the Person
was designed for it, as the History of those Times assures us. I would now
learn of the Cardinal (who was at length the Kings Proxy in his reconcilement
to Rome; and its like was privy to his design) had this been executed, with
what part of the Catholic Church had they communicated? or had they been
guilty of Schism? If it be said, it was not done, yet it was resolved on, and
so near to the execution, that a Cardinal told the Pope, As Clement the seveth
had lost England, so Clement the eighth would lose France. And as it was
resolved on, so it was thought reasonable and just, by the more considerable
part of Roman Catholics in France (viz. those that adhered to the King) and to
be maintained, if done. So here is the difference, they in France had approved
it, we in England did it.

CHAP. XIX. Our case and that of the Donatists not alike.
ANd now, that which was objected above by the Cardinal, that it is not enough
for Catholics to hold the same faith with the Catholic Church, but must hold
Communion with it too: we grant most true; but then is that rule broken, when
men hold not the Communion, or forsake it, as the Donatists did: who as they
had no cause in regard of the faith (by reason of any dangerous doctrines or
practices imposed on them) to cease from communicating with any part of the
Catholic Church, so they divided from the whole through the breach of charity,
condemning it for no Church, and drawing the communion wholly to themselves.
And in some of those sentences the Cardinal alleges out of Saint Augustine,
the breach or want of charity is expressed as the reason of condem^ing the
Donatists. Now as for us, we had just cause in regard of the faith once
delivered, to free it and our selves from errors and superstitions, not
confining the Church within our Communion, or condemning other Churches as no
parts of the Catholic. Therefore the case of the Donatists cannot concern us,
who offended not, either by breach of the Faith, or of Charity. But the cause
of Division, or breach of Communion must rest upon the Roman Church, which had
neither will to reform as she ought, nor yet charity to bear with them that
did; and the case of the Donatists does most fit that Church, which
uncharitably condemns all other, and confines the Communion to her self. For,
as to the Cardinals making the case of the Donatists and ours the same, I would
learn of him: Whether, if the Donatists had only used their liberty and
judgment in that practice of rebaptizing Heretics, leaving other Churches to
their liberty, and (though thinking them in error for admitting Heretics
without baptizing them, yet) willing to have Communion with them, as parts of
the Catholic Church (saving the practices wherein they differed) whether then
had they been guilty of Schism? If he say, Yea: then must he condemn Saint
Cyprian, and all the African Bishops: For they went so far, yea farther, to an
undervaluing of Pope Stephens heat against them; who had sent out the sentence
of Excommunication against the Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia (who
were in the same cause with Saint Cyprian) and forbade Communion with Saint
Cyprian, and the Africans, and all that held rebaptization.

What ever the Cardinal judges of them as to the point of Schism, (for though
in his third Book, third Chapter, he treats of the oppositions of Saint Cyprian
against Pope Stephen, and speaks of the Popes condemning him, yet says
nothing directly, as to the judging of him in Schism, or out of the Communion
of the Church) Saint Augustine did not judge them so, no not when often pressed
by the Donatists with St. Cyprians example, he might with a ready answer have
turned off the weight of Authority by leaving the person under guilt of
Schism, as one out of Communion of the Church: but this he did not always
speaking honorably of him, as of a worthy Martyr, and only disproving his
reasons for Rebaptization Nor did after-Ages judge him and the African Bishops,
though out of Communion with Rome, to be therefore guilty of Schism,
condemning notwithstanding the Donatists, as notorious Schismatics, because in
the one there was a bare want of external Communion with Rome, without an
uncharitable breaking with, or condemning of either the Roman or the rest of
the Churches, tha^^id not rebaptize; but ^n the other ( viz. the Donatists)
there was a will(...) bre^king with, and uncharitable condemning of the Church.

By all which may appear: our case is different from the Donatists, is like
that of St. Cyprian and his African Bishops, wanting communion with the Roman,
but not therefore out of communion with the Catholic.

And we have so much more advantage in the case, that the occasion of their non
Communion was the maintaining of an Error, though tolerable; the occasion of
ours, the casting off intolerable Errors.

CHAP. XX. Of Hell-Gates not prevailing against the Church.
ANother general Objection they make against our dividing from them. If, say
they, it was for such damnable Errors and Superstitions, as the Protestants
charge the Roman Church with, then had the Gates of Hell, contrary to our
Saviors promise, prevailed against the Church.

We answer, by denying the consequence. For from the charging of the Church of
Rome, (which is but a part of the Catholic Church) with such errors, it does
not follow that Hell-gates have prevailed contrary to our Saviors promise; for
they might have totally prevailed against the Roman Church to an utter
subversion of it (as of other particular Churches) and yet our Saviors promise
stood firm. How far they have prevailed against that Church, the examination of
her doctrines for belief and practice makes appear. We acknowledge indeed,
that Hel-Gates did not prevail against the Church of Rome to a subversion of
the Faith in it, or to a total infection of the members of it, with all the
errors and superstitions that prevailed in it, and were advanced from time to
time, chiefly by those that had chief place in that Church.

But as to the Catholic Church we acknowledge that the Gates of Hell shall
never prevail to a subversion, either of all the parts of it, or of saving
Faith in it: There shall always be a Church, and that a Church wherein saving
Faith shall be preserved, and may be had. And so Saint Augustine de Symb. ad
Catech. l. 1. c. 5. seems to render the sense of that promise, when he repeats
it thus; The Gates of Hell shall not overthrow or conquer it. And the Council
of Trent seems plainly to acknowledge what Faith it is, against which the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail: Not the now Roman Faith (for by that the Gates of
hell have far prevailed upon the Church of Rome) but the ancient Apostolic
Faith once delivered, in all Ages professed, and by us Protestants retained.
For being met at Trent to establish their new Faith, they begin their meeting
(as the Ancient Councils did) with the confession of the Christian faith,
repeating only that Ancient Apostolic Faith or Creed; and then adding, This
is the firm and only Foundation against which the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail. Sess. secund. Council. Trid.

Unto this passage I had in private this Reply, or cavil rather, returned; If
the words of the Council import so much, then may the Church of Christ cast off
Baptism, and return to Circumcision, and yet hold the foundation, because
professing that Faith. But this cavil, or infere^ce, is,

First, inconsequent, as to the particular Instances, Baptism and Circumcision:
For the one, the Nicene Creed tells us what a necessary conjunction it has with
the belief of Remission of sins in rendering the Articles, thus, I believe one
Baptism for the Remission of sins; and for the other, the Apostle tells us,
how inconsistent it is with the Faith of Christ, Gal. 5.2.3.

Secondly, it is impertinent, as to my application of that Confession at Trent:
for I alleged it not to ground any such Inferences upon it against the whole
Catholic Church, as if the Gates of Hell could prevail against it wholly, in
all sorts of Errors, saving the Verities and profession of those Articles of
the Creed; but seeing they made that Creed the confession of their Faith at
Trent, according to the manner of Ancient Councils; and acknowledged it in
plain words to be the only foundation, etc.

I infer first, That a Church holding that Foundation, may grossly err in
other things not so immediate to it, and yet be a Church. And indeed the Romish
Church for these many Ages has had no tolerable Plea to the title and being of
a Church, but so far forth as has held that foundation, however clogged with
many Errors.

Secondly, that according to this their confession, their New and additional
Faith of Trent is not that Catholic Faith against which, as pretended, the
Gates of Hell cannot prevail.

And lastly, it shows, the intolerable boldness of the Romish Church or Court,
which after the Tridentine meeting feared not to add their new Articles to
that former Creed, (which they had confessed to be the only foundation) as
making up one entire Catholic Faith, and to subjoyn Athanasius his Clause to
it all, Haec est fides Catholica, extra quam, etc. This is the Catholic Faith,
without which no salvation -- as appears by Pius quartus his Bull, and the Oath
which every Bishop in that Church takes.

But that the Catholic Church has a promise in that large sense Cardinal
Perron speaks it (lib. 1. cap. 18.) to continue perpetually pure and
uncorrupted in her doctrine, we cannot say. We cannot say it in the Cardinal's
sense, for if we speak of pure and uncorrupted doctrine, he means it of such a
privilege and freedom from Error as the Church of Rome challenges, which is
not necessary to the preservation of the Catholic Church and Faith; or if we
speak of the Catholic Church, he takes it as most visibly appearing in the
chief Pastors, and their adherents, binding that privilege and freedom to that
succession or those that are chief in it: Whereas we grant the Catholic Church
wholly according to all the Pastors and Members of it, shall not be infected
with any destructive or dangerous Errors, but that purity of saving Doctrine
shall be preserved in it: Yet not bound as a Privilege to any one Church (as
to the Roman) or to those that are for Number most, and for Place chief in the
Church; but that in some part or other of the Catholic Church, and by some
Pastors it shall be preserved and propagated: They that dream of a Church
always so gloriously visible, and so apparently holding out Purity of Doctrine
and Saving Truth (as the Romanists do) to the end all men may readily find
out the true Church, and easily come to the knowledge of that Truth, do not
consider, that God does sometimes for the sins of Christians, turning his grace
into wantonness, make his Word precious (as 1 Samuel 3.) and his saving Truth
not to be found without difficulty, and diligent search after it. We see the
Fathers interpreted that promise (the Gates of Hell shall not --) of the not
failing of the Church, never of the not erring of it; and we see by experience
the contrary. As for example, the Millenary belief, and the excommunicating of
Infants (both which the Church of Rome acknowledge errors) did as generally
prevail in the Catholic Church, as any error of their New Faith can be said
(which they boast often) to be the general belief and doctrine of the whole
Church.

We say then, The Gates of Hell cannot prevail to the overthrowing of the
Fundamental saving Faith, or to the corrupting and extinguishing of the Purity
of saving Doctrine absolutely through the Catholic Church: but may prevail
very far and generally over the visible face of the Church Catholic; viz. as
it shows it self in the parts of it, all particular Churches holding the
Foundation: For these, considered, as above, according to their more visible,
and conspicuous appearance in those that are chiefest in them for place, and
most for number (...) lose the purity of Saving Do(...) though holding the
Foundation, admit of the Superstructions of hay, stubble, and worse: Errors in
belief and practice: And though Hell-Gates may prevail very far and
generally by Superstructures, yet are they such (at least in some particular
Churches) as the foundation may bear: Such as may still be convinced by the
Doctrine of Saving Truth preserved still in the Church. For the Pastors voice
(as was said above, cap. 12.) will be so heard always in the Church, that the
strange voice of false Teachers and false Doctrines may be discerned, and will
by them that have ears to hear, and their senses exercised to put a difference
between good and evil, true and false.

Now the Romish Church (with which we had to do) had not preserved the Faith
entire without mixture of many Errors and Superstitions; had not kept the
foundation clear from such burdensome and dangerous Superstructures: yet has
the fundamental Faith in express terms been delivered down in that Church,
and such saving knowledge, as was sufficient to discern the Foundation from the
Superstructures; the true and ancient Faith, from the new erroneous Belief; the
true Pastors voice, from the strange Doctrines of unwritten Traditions. To
follow that voice, to cast off those Superstructures, to contend for the Faith
once delivered, and clear it from adventitiall errors, that was our duty, and
the work of our Reformation.

And thus far against their general plausible Pretenses. Now to some Trial of
their particular Doctrines of Belief and Practice, which we have cast off, as
erroneous and superstitious. For the way of Trial, The Affirmative in those
Doctrines being theirs, it lies upon them to prove the Doctrines (affirmed by
them) to be true and Catholic, by such Rules as are allowable.

The Rules admitted by both sides, though not in equal rank, are Scripture, and
consent of Antiquity, gathered by the Writings of the Fathers, and the Acts of
ancient Councils. We say, they cannot by these make good what they affirm, but
show that both make against them.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Trial of Doctrines by Scripture.
FIrst for Scripture. Whatsoever is revealed in that Scripture, which both
sides admit as Canonical, is likewise admitted by both sides, as of divine
Authority. But such Scripture is not acknowledged by them as a sufficient Rule
for the trial and judging of the controverted points; therefore they are
necessitated to fly to Tradition; not that which delivers down to us the sense
of any Scripture, by the consent of all Ages of the Church, but to unwritten
Traditions, which deliver Doctrines of Belief and Practice that have not
footing in Scriptures. This I note, because they are ready to abuse the unwary,
by urging sometimes the former sort, to make them swallow unwritten Traditions
upon the same pretense. For the former sort we grant, as appears by the points
of Christianity not controverted between us, because these points as they are
grounded on Scripture, so are they brought down to us by the profession and
tradition of all Ages, as the confessed sense of those Scriptures on which they
are grounded, and this not derogatory to the sufficiency of Scripture. But to
their other sort of Traditions, viz. unwritten (on which they generally ground
their Doctrines rejected by us) we cannot admit as any ground of Faith or
Worship: such Traditions being uncertain, not possibly to be proved
Apostolical, but received upon the Testimony of their present Church, and
indeed generally inconsistent with Scripture. Yet are we to note, that in all
the controverted points they pretend Scripture, and allege several places in
every point; yea in those points which they themselves confess (as most of the
controverted points are by the most ingenuous Romanists confessed) to have no
ground or footing in Scripture. To let pass the want of candor and plain
dealing in this, we must observe,

First, that their laboring to pretend Scripture for every Doctrine, is a
tacit acknowledgement that doctrines of Faith and Religion should have their
ground there. For instance; Invocation of Saints they acknowledge not used in
the Old Testament, yea and give us reason for it, because the souls of the
Patriarchs were not then in heaven, and so not to be Invocated, yet do they
allege very many places for it out of the Old Testament to make a show of
Scripture. So for the New Testament. They acknowledge Invocation of Saints
departed was not commanded or taught by the Apostles, or in their time; yea and
give us reasons why it was not published at first; because (say Eckius, Copus,
Salmeron.) It had been unseasonable and dangerous for Jew and Gentile at first
to have heard it, lest they might think the Christians set forth and worshipped
many Gods: or that the Apostles were ambitious of having such honor done them
after their death.

It is then acknowledged not to have been so much as taught in that first Age,
and yet will they again (when they come to maintain it) make the world believe
it was also written then, and bring many places of the New Testament for a
seeming proof of it. So of Image Worship, Purgatory, Indulgences, and most of
their Sacraments, the more ingenuous among them acknowledge (as our Authors
have gathered their Testimonies) they have not ground in Scripture: and indeed
if they truly had, why should the Romanist so earnestly contend for unwritten
Traditions to hold them by? yet must Scripture be alleged for them all by
every Controversie-writer. Which consequently (as was observed) does
acknowledge that Doctrines of Faith and Religion should be grounded there.

Secondly, that the necessity they have of resting upon unwritten Traditions
equalized in Authority to the written Word of God, is a plain confession, they
cannot stand by the undoubted Word of God, nor have any certain ground of
their New faith which rests upon pretended unwritten Traditions, and these you
must take upon the word of their own Church.

Thirdly, that the same necessity of resting upon unwritten Traditions, forces
them to lay upon Scripture Imputations of Imperfection and Insufficiency, of
darkness and obscurity, very unbeseeming the Testament of God; written by the
dictate of Gods Spirit, and left us as a signification of his will, and a Rule
for the direction of his Church.

Let us then take leave a little more largely to speak to these two points: of
the sufficient perfection of this written Rule, then of the sufficient
perspicuity of it. The one casts off the necessity of their unwritten
Tradition; the other, the pretense of their Infallible Judge or Interpreter.
And upon these indeed rests the whole frame of the New Roman faith: and
therefore worthy, of all other points, to be a little insisted on.

CHAP. XXII. Sufficient perfection of the Scripture, as a Rule.
FIrst then, of the sufficient perfection of Scripture, which we say contains
all things of themselves necessary to be believed, or done to salvation. All
such things we say, it contains; not expressly, and in so many words, but either
so, or as deducible thence by evident and sufficient consequence. The Romanists
are forced to grant that the Scripture contains plainly the prima credibilia
(as some of them express it) the first and chief points of belief; or those
that are simpliciter necessaria, and omnia omnibus necessaria (as Bell.
expresses it, lib. 4. cap. 1.) but they also say, that there are many other
things necessary in belief and practice to salvation, not there contained, or
thence deduced; therefore they add Traditions to make a supply.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Traditions which we allow.
FOr Tradition, We allow,

1. That Universal Tradition which brings down Scripture unto us, through the
consent of all Ages, for that Tradition is supposed in the reception of the
Scripture. But we say, the Scripture contains all material objects of Faith
necessary to Salvation, i.e. all things that had been necessary for Christians
to believe and do for Salvation, though there had been no Scripture.

Secondly, we allow that kind of Tradition which brings down the sense of
Scripture to us through all Ages of the Church. So the Creed may be called a
Tradition, and other Catholic Declarations of the Church bringing down the
sense of Scripture in any point of Faith. Now as the Scripture does suppose the
former Tradition, so this kind supposes the Scriptures for its ground,
delivering nothing but what is contained in them, and neither of these sorts
derogatory to the sufficiency of them.

Thirdly, we allow some Traditions that bring down matters of practice touching
Order, Ceremony, Usages in the Church, as of Fasts, or Festivals, or Rites
about Sacraments, and the like: But such if they be not contained in the
Scripture, so neither are they within the limits of the question; which
concerns necessaries to salvation: such we deny those to be; and such things as
are necessary to believe to salvation, we deny to come down to us by unwritten
Tradition: and what Traditions the Romanists pretend for the controverted
points, we deny that they contain such things necessary, or to have been
delivered down in all Ages; and therefore can be no ground for necessary faith,
whether we consider the matter of them, or the uncertainty of them. Our
Arguments briefly are,

I. Such as show the Scriptures sufficient for Salvation; as Joh. 5. ver. 39.
for in them ye think ye have salvation. Where our Savior supposes, they
thought true in it, or else his reason had not been good -- for because they
might have Salvation by them, i. e. know all things necessary to it, therefore
he bids them search the Scriptures, and they should find, they testified of him
-- So 2 Timothy 3.15. expressly, they are able to make wise unto salvation, etc.
They have two shifts here;

1. That Scripture is profitable to that end; for that word (Profitable) (the
Romanists lay hold on) because the Apostle says there, All Scripture is
profitable for doctrine, etc. and so (say they) is every book profitable to
that end, though not sufficient, and so they will have the whole Scripture but
partially profitable.

But we answer, Sufficiency belongs to the whole Scripture, though in
proportion also to every Book. And the other expressions of the Apostle there,
show this to be only a shift. For he said before, that Scriptures are able to
make wise to salvation; can that be said to be able to make a man wise to such
a purpose, and only to do it in part, and imperfectly, teaching him only
some knowledges to that purpose? Also he says after, ver. 17. by the
Scripture, The man of God is thoroughly furnished, or perfected to every good
work, i.e. to Doctrine, Instruction, etc. such as he spoke of before; which
must needs imply a sufficiency to that end.

2. Their other shift is, That the Scripture is said to do this, because it
contains many things plainly in it self, and shows from whence we may have the
rest, i.e. from their Church. We answer, Had it shown us that (which it does
not) yet could not this shift be reasonable here: For so the Law might have
been said to make us perfect, because it shows us Christ, and was a
Schoolmaster to him, Gal. 3. and John Baptist might have been said to have
perfected his Disciples, by showing them Christ.

II. Such Arguments as forbid and exclude all Additions to the Scripture, and
so imply the perfection and sufficiency of it, and condemn their super-added
Traditions, as, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and cap 12.32. against adding to his precepts. And
Rev. 22.18. a Woe pronounced to him that adds. And Gal. 1.6. an Anathema to
them that bring in another Gospel beside what they had received. And Gal. 3.15.
to a man's Testament none adds, much less to Gods. And Mat. 15. our Savior
expressly condemns the Pharisees that taught for Doctrines of Worship, the
Traditions and Commandments of men.

Now see, what shift they make with these places. One is, that the prohibition
of adding concerns the whole Word of God written and unwritten, no man may
add to that. We answer, that the places of Deuteronomy. and of Rev. are expressly of
the written Word. Also that of Gal. 1. and Gal. 3. must be meant of the
written: for that which is written bears the name of the Gespel, and of the
Testament of God, and can we think it bears it partially? Saint Aug. lib. 3.
contra Lit. Petil. and elsewhere expressly applies that of Gal. 1. to the
Scripture, thereby excluding all doctrines of Faith not received from
Scripture. And Saint Hier. upon 1. of Hag. relating to that place, says,
Percutit Dei gladius -- that sword of God, or Anathema, strikes through all
those doctrines, which absque authoritate and testimonio scripturae quasi
traditione Apostolica confingunt; without the authority and testimony of
Scripture they hold forth under pretense of Apostolical Tradition. And for that
other of Gods Testament, The Romanists must suppose that God Almighty has done,
as it fares with many men, who intending to write their Will, and having begun,
and prefixed the Title (This is my Will and Testament) and proceeded far in it,
being prevented by hastening death, leave the rest by word of mouth: so will
they have God to make a Will partly Written, partly Nuncupatory. Now how
derogatory this is to the providence of God, who sees not?

Another shift, That those Traditions are only forbid, which are contrary to
what is written, and so no man may add. We answer, The Apostle says, Gal. 1.
praeter, beside that which ye have received, and Bell. expressly interprets that
praeter by contra; but in the judgment of Saint Aug. and St. Hier. in the
places above cited it is enough to incur the Anathema, if they teach any
thing of faith, which is besides that which is received from Scripture says
St. Aug. and absque authoritate and testimonio Scripturae, the authority and
testimony of the Scripture, says St. Hier. to which add Tertul. against
Hermogenes, Non est scriptum, timeat vae illud ad^icientibus, It is not
written, Let him fear that curse which is denounced against them that add. It
was then enough to bring a man under the woe pronounced against them that
added, if the thing they added was not written; and not only because it was
contrary to what was written. But our Saviors speech, Mat. 15. taken from Is.
29.13. Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men; shows that all
Traditions, though not contrary to what is written, yet if they teach for
Worship or Faith necessary to salvation, that which is not commanded or
written, they are to be condemned. For though the Pharisees Corban was directly
against the written command, yet their superstitious washing was not. And upon
that occasion our Savior condemns them as to this point. To this very purpose
is one of St. Basil's Ethick Rules, Quicquid extra Scripturam est, cum non sit
ex side peccatum est. He says not contra, against; but extra, besides, or
without Scripture; and being so, it cannot be of Faith, and therefore sinful,
if so propounded and imposed: And this excludes the Romish Traditions from
being rules of Faith or Worship; besides that they are to be challenged of
contrariety and repugnancy to Scripture for the most part.

CHAP. XXIV. Their Arguments against Scriptures sufficiency, and for
Traditions.
THeir Arguments for their Traditions and against the sufficiency of Scripture,
are so many aspersions cast upon the undoubted Word of God, not without
derogation to the Providence and Wisdom of God, nor (for the most part)
without some contradiction to themselves.

Their first concerns the purpose of God in it, That he did not purpose it to
contain a perfect Rule, because the Penmen of holy Scripture had no command to
write, but did it upon occasion, or as Bell. (necessitate quadam coacti) upon
occasions ministered, and urging them to write.

We answer,

1. If the necessity of the Churches called for Scripture, and urged them to
write, it shows of what concernment it is to the Church.

But 2. though the necessity of the Church ministered the outward occasion to
some books, it supposes the purpose and special providence of God in applying
them to the work. Hear Bell. himself acknowledging, lib. 4. c. 3. Deo volente
and inspirante Aposelos scripsisse quae scripserunt, That the Apostles wrote
what they did write, by the will and inspiration of God. This is well, but this
amounts not to a command, faith he: Being then pressed with St Aug. saying,
Quicquid ille (Christus) de suis dictis and factis nos legere voluit, hoc
scribendum illis tanquam manibus imperavit, Whatsoever Christ would have us
read of his sayings and deeds, that he commanded them to write. lib. 1. de
consens. evang. c. ult. He is forced to confess they had mandatum internum, an
internal command to write -- And now what needs more? for if they had had all
of them as express outward command as Saint John had to write his Revelations,
or as Moses had to write what he had from God, it would not have made it more
the purpose of God, than did the inward command: Nor would it have made
Bellarmine any whit more granted the Scripture of the Apostles to be written
for such a Rule; for he does not grant it of Moses Writings, though he had such
a command, and therefore we may leave it as a vain reasoning.

But see what he says of Scripture as written for a Rule, That it is a Rule,
and Regula fidei Catholicae the Rule of Catholic Faith; and Regula credendi
certissima, and tutissima, The Rule of Belief, and that most certain most safe.
Bell. affirms l. 1. c. 2. and this is well toward a perfect Rule; and there he
inferres upon it, seeing it is so, sun^^ profecto non erit, qui ea neglecta
spiritus interni, semper incerti, saepe fallacis, judiciose commiserit, He is
not well advised, who neglecting Scripture, rests upon the judgment of a
private spirit, which is always uncertain, often deceiving. How well might the
inference been made so against unwritten Traditions, seeing the scripture is
Regula fidei Catholicae, and regula credendi certissima, tutissima, sanus
profecto non erit, etc. He is ill advised, who neglecting Scripture commits
himself to unwritten Traditions, which are often deceitful, always
uncertain. But in his fourth Book cap 12. Scripture is with him but a partial
Rule, unwritten Tradition is the other part: Nay, he denies in the same
Chapter, that it was the proper and chief end of Scripture to be a Rule, but to
be utile quoddam commonitorium ad conservaudam doctrinam ex praedicatione
acceptam; A profitable means to admonish and remember them of the doctrine they
had heard preached: That profit indeed the Scripture did afford, but the end of
that remembrance, and conserving of the Doctrine preached was, that the
Scripture should be as a standing Rule, or Guide to them, and so to us, that
did not hear what the Apostles preached: To us it is not properly a
Remembrancer, but a Guide and Rule; and that must be the chief end wherefore it
was written.

But this to note, how this engagement for unwritten Tradition in h^s fourth.
Book, would not let him be constant to what he had fairly spoken of Scripture
in his first. So it fares with most of them, Truth forces much from them, till
they come to be confronted with an adversary in defense of some point of their
New Faith.

Their second sort of Reasoning against the sufficiency of Scripture, is by
enumeration of some things necessary to be believed, which are not contained
(say they) in Scripture. As first, That Scripture is the Word of God, is
necessary to be believed, but not contained, or shown by Scripture: This is in
every of their mouths. Among the rest, Bell. thus, lib. 4. Scripture cannot
show it self to be the Word of God, for the Alcoran affirms also of it self the
same, that it is the Word of God.

We answer,

First to the Impertinency of this Cavil, That (as it was said above in the
stating of the Question) to believe Scripture to be the Word of God, is not of
those material objects of Faith which we say are contained in Scripture, and
are such as had been necessary for Christians to believe, though there had been
no Scripture; also that the Scripture being received upon Universal Tradition
(as we said) does not derogate from the sufficiency of Scripture, for that is a
Tradition which Scripture supposes, does not exclude in this question. For had
the Scripture been never so full and sufficient according to the Papists mind,
i. e. had it plainly confirmed (if we may suppose such a thing) all that they
say is necessary to be learnt by unwritten Tradition, yet would it not have
contained this (that it is the Word of God) otherwise then it does, but must
suppose that universal Tradition still to bring it down to us. But we also
say; that although Scripture is so brought down to us, yet being received upon
such Tradition, it discovers it self to be divine by it own light, or those
internal arguments (as they are called) which appear in it to those that are
versed in it.

And now see what Bellarmine does here acknowledge, lib. 1. cap. ^. he makes
the title of the Chapter, Libri^ can^ni^is verbum Dei contineri, among other
arg^ments, he proves it excellently well by some reasons drawn from Scripture
it self, as by the conspiration of the parts, the event of Prophecies, and the
like, and there says, Sacris-Scripturis nihil notius, nihil certius: Now, when
he comes to contend for unwritten Tradition against Scripture: Scripture cannot
show it self to be the Word of God more than the Alcoran It had been well if
Bell. had sat down with his own dishonor in contradicting himself, and not
used this odious instance of the Alcoran to Gods dishonor.

But as I noted at the beginning, their Necessity of resting upon unwritten
Traditions, forces them to cast many aspersions upon the undoubted Word of
Almighty God. Hear what others say upon the same score, the Jesuit Bailius in
his Catechism, Without the Testimony of the Church, I would believe the
Scripture no more than my Livy; no more than Aesops Fables, says another. And
how can it prove it self to be no Fable (says another Romanist) more than any
other writing that is mixed with Fables? To this purpose are those other
reproaches, that sall from them The Scripture, a mute letter, as if no sense in
it, but as the Church gives it, a nose of wax, as if applyable of it self any
way.

This the language their Disciples must learn, to speak reproachfully of that
Word which was written by the Holy spirit of God, given them to salvation, and
must judge them at the last day.

Another of their Instances of things necessary, but not contained in
Scripture, is Baptism of Infants. This generally objected by them all: And
amongst them I single out Bell. to answer himself, or (as I may say)
contradict himself in it. For lib. 1. de baptis. c. 8. he proves it by places
of Scripture, and says, the argument is strong and effectual, and cannot be
avoided, and that the thing is evident in Scripture. Now when he contends for
Tradition against Scripture, This thing of Childrens Baptism must be one of
them that is necessary, and not contained in Scripture. This is not ingenuous
nor conscionable, but enough to answer the objection.

We say further, that Baptism of Children, as to the practice of it, is not
contained expressly in Scripture, i. e. it is no where commanded to be done, or
said, that they did do it: But the grounds and necessity of it are
sufficiently delivered in Scripture, and that is enough for the doing of it; and
that the Arguments from Scripture by Bell. and others alleged do sufficiently
show. And these are their chief Instances.

Their third and last sort of reasoning is from places of Scripture expressly
naming Traditions, as 1 Cor. 11.2. 2 These. 2.15.

Answ. The whole Gospel was Tradition till it was written: Now if they will
have these places make for them, they must show those Traditions mentioned, did
contain things necessary to salvation, and no where written. It is plain they
did not. The first concerns Rites and Orders in their Assemblies; and the
other, if unwritten, concerned the coming of Antichrist, the falling away
before it (the things spoken of in that Chapter, and not of necessity to know
unto salvation) and that Tradition, if any more then was written touching those
points, being lost, it appears how well the Church of Rome is to be trusted in
this business of unwritten Tradition, that cannot show those which were, nor
prove those she has, to be delivered by the Apostles.

Also from places of Scripture, which they will have to imply Tradition, as
Ioh. 16 1^. I have yet many things to say to you, etc. 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak
wisdom among the perfect: and that to Timothy, Custodi depositum -- That good
thing committed to thee keep -- 2 Timothy 1.14.

Answ. These prove no more than the former place, unless they can also prove
and demonstrate to us, that they concerned things not written, and yet
necessary to salvation.

2. We must tell them that Heretics of old did usually pretend these very
places for their unwritten doctrines, and made the like Inferences as the
Papists do St. Aug. upon John shows they would say, their doctrines were of the
multa which Christ had to say, and Tert. de praescript. c. 5. tells us,
Heretics alleged, the Apostles delivered some things openly to all, some
things secretly to a few (the very thing the Papists say) and they proved it
(suth he) by St. Paul's saying to Timothy, Custodi depositum. St. Iraen l 3. c.
2. shows Heretics alleged the scriptures were obscure, not to be understood
by those that know not Tradition; alleging for it, that of St. Paul 1 Cor. 2.
we speak wisdom, etc. Terp. in his Book de resur. tells us, Heretics cannot
stand if you bind them, de solis Scripturis quaestiones suas sistere, to be
judged by the Scriptures alone: and in the same book calls all Heretics,
Lucifugas scripturarum, such as fly the light of the scripture.

And now we must say in the last place, their usual objection of Heretics
always alleging Scriptures and shunning Tradition, is most vain, as appears
by the former Testimonies. As for their alleging scripture, it made for the
dignity and sufficiency of scripture; Heretics well knowing the Authority
Scripture had in the Church, and therefore that it was in vain to use other
proofs without it, and so the Romanists are necessitated (as was said above,
Chap. 21.) to pretend it for the proving of those points which they know, and
sometimes confess are not grounded on scripture. As for Heretics shunning
Tradition, it is most true, they carefully shunned that Tradition which
delivered down the sense of scripture in the points of Faith through all Ages
of the Church: for to shun that, was to shun the evidence and light of
scripture. But as for unwritten Traditions (such as we and the Romanists
contend about) they shelter themselves under the darkness of them, made great
advantage (as we saw) by pretense of them, alleging the very same reasons and
places of scripture for them, as the Romanists do, and so we leave them both
well agreed in this point.

CHAP. XXV. The evidence of Antiquity in the point.
NOw for the evidence of Antiquity. Though we are to speak more generally to
that trial by the Fathers afterward, yet here in brief to this particular
point. There is scarce one Father, but we bring him expressly witnessing (as we
affirm) the fullness and sufficiency of scripture in all things necessary.
Bell. in l. 4. c. 11. sets down very many of them, and admits them for the
sayings of those Fathers, how then does he decline them?

1. One of his General answers (and it is what others answer to) that the
Fathers speak of omnia omnibus necessaria to be contained in scripture. This
the express testimonies of those Fathers have extorted from him, which is no
little prejudice to their cause (who equal tradition to the written Word, and
plead the necessity of what is conveyed to us thereby) for if all things
necessary for all be contained in Scripture, then surely the doctrines and
faith delivered in unwritten Traditions are not necessary for all. They indeed
that have given up their belief to all the dictates of that Church, are
consequently necessitated to believe them, but we may be good Christians and
yet not believe them, because not written, and not necessary it seems to all.
That which they can pretend to say here, is, that such unwritten Traditions
become necessary to be believed upon the proposal of the Church, and to be by
all believed, to whom they are sufficiently propounded or made known. Indeed,
of Scripture, we grant, All things there revealed become upon sufficient
proposal of them necessary to be believed as true; yet not all to be believed,
as necessary in themselves to salvation. But of unwritten Traditions, we cannot
say, Men are bound to believe them as true, upon the proposal of their Church,
unless they can demonstrate the testimony of their Church to be Infallible, or
that she propounds them upon full Catholic, or Universal Tradition, and
consent of all Ages; which they cannot do: Much less can we say, Men are
bound upon the proposal of their Church to believe them, as containing things
necessary in themselves to salvation, unless they can prove the contents of
those Traditions to be so, which is impossible; or that their Church can make
new Articles of Faith, or those things necessary to be believed to salvation,
which were not so in themselves before. This the sober and moderate Romanist
must and will deny.

2. He shifteth off their Testimonies, by restraining them to the particular
thing there spoken of, as if they only meant, the scripture was full to that
point only. When as indeed upon occasion of some particular point, which they
were proving, they speak in general of the sufficiency of Scripture, saying, it
contains all things necessary. Therefore to take away these, and all such
shifts which they bring to restrain what the Fathers spoke generally, We show
they spoke so generally of the sufficiency of Scripture, that they left no room
for unwritten Traditions to come into the rule of Faith. This we show
unanswerably, by the Fathers (alleged above, chap. 23.) arguing negatively (as
Tertul. sometimes) Non est scri^tum, therefore not to be received: and speaking
exclusively to all things not written, as, that we must not say or teach any
thing of faith, praeterquam quod scriptum est, says Saint Augustine lib. 3.
contra Lit Petil. Sine his Testibus, says St. Chrysostom. and citra Scipturam,
in Psalm. 95. and absque authoritate and testimonio Scripturae, says St. Hier.
in 1. cap. Hag. and, Quicquid extra Scripturam est, cum non sit ex fide,
peccatum est, Basil. in Regulis Eth. Such exclusive words (praeterquam, sine,
citra, absque, extra) they use against admitting of unwritten Tradition for a
Rule of Faith; which words and speeches are not any way to be eluded.

That they bring many sayings out of the Fathers for Tradition, it is true, and
Bellarmine boasts in the number; but to what purpose? when they do but beat the
air, strike us not. For they either mean the Scripture it self, or
Evangelical Doctrine contained in, and delivered to the Church by the written
Word, to which the name of Tradition is often given by the more ancient
Fathers, Iraen. Tertul. Cyprian; or else they mean the form of Doctrine and
Belief delivered down in the Church, which though they often call Tradition,
yet is it written and contained in Scripture, and is but the explication of it,
or the Traditive sense, nothing to the unwritten Traditions we speak of; or
else by unwritten Tradition (as they often mention that too) they imply things
of Practice, and Rites, and Festivals, or Fasts and the like, not matters of
Faith necessary to Salvation. And among these some Fathers avouch such for
Apostolical Traditions which the Romanists will not allow, as standing at
Prayer between Easter and Whitsontide, and every Lords day, and the Trine
immersion in Baptism. In a word, where the Fathers say, the Apostles left some
things to us unwritten, let the Romanists show us, if they can, among all the
particulars the Fathers speak of, as so left us, any point of Faith necessary
to salvation. Indeed some of the more ancient Fathers mention one, which (with
some consent) they held a point of Faith, and received by Tradition, viz. the
Millenary belief: but that was not a mere unwritten Tradition, but rather a
Traditive sense of Scripture (Rev. 20.) and that a mistaken one, and by the
Romanists rejected; who know the Fathers were deceived in that Tradition by
Papias, and we know the Romanists are deceived, or may very well in theirs. But
let them show, as I said, in all the Testimonies of the Fathers one of their
necessary points of Faith among those particulars, which the Fathers have
mentioned (with any consent) as delivered by unwritten Tradition: which seeing
they cannot do, all their boasting of Antiquity in this point is vain, they
meet only with the Name of unwritten Tradition, not the Thing.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Perspicuity and Interpretation of Scripture.
THus much of the Sufficiency of Scripture. Now of the Perspicuity and
Interpretation of it. Scripture being the Rule of Faith, must in all reason, be
both sufficiently perfect, as we have heard, and also sufficiently clear and
perspicuous (as we shall see.) Their pretense of obscurity and difficulty in
Scripture (such as they fasten on it) serves them to two purposes. To keep
people from Reading it, and to set up an Infallible Interpreter of the sense of
it, or visible Judge of all controversies arising.

Bellar. handles this business in lib. 3. de verbo dei, and proposes two
questions, neither of them stated aright. His first, Sintne Scripturae sacrae
per se facillimae and apertissimae, an vero interpretatione indigeant? cap. 1.
His second, An ab uno visibili communi judice Scripturae interpretatio petenda
sit, an uniuscujusque Arbitrio relinquenda? Whereas we neither say, the
Scripture needs no Interpretation, nor do we leave it to every man's pleasure,
or judgment. But we acknowledge, there are many hard places, and obscure
passages, which need Interpretation; yet is there not such a general obscurity
in Scripture, but that private persons may read it with profit: which both
Scripture it self and all the Fathers exhort the people to: because what is
necessary to life and faith, is for the most part plainly set down; therefore
it is called A light to our feet and paths, Psalm. 119. and to make wise the
simple, Psalm. 19.7. and Saint Peter bids Christians attend to the word of
Prophecy as a light shining in a dark place, 2 Epist. 1.19. Bell. answers to
such places, that the Scripture is a light when it is understood: And this is
as much as if he had said, a light is a light, if it be seen: For a light, if
it be not put in a dark Lanthorn, or under a Bushel (as the Church of Rome
serves the Scripture to hide it from the people) will show it self: so will the
Scripture, being a light, and a light shining, as S. Peter said. Certainly it
was the intent and duty of all the Apostles so to speak, and so to write as to
be understood. And St. Peter notes but some places in Saint Paul's Epistles hard
to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest -- 2 Epist. c. 3. Sure
then those that are not so, but come with minds and endeavors answerable, may
read with profit, seeing his Epistles are for the most part, not hard to be
understood.

That which they reply here comes to this, that those Churches to which the
Apostle wrote, were instructed aforehand by word of mouth, and so might more
easily understand what was written after: We grant, they were praeinstructed,
and that it made them more fit to understand what was written: but as they had
it, so Christian people want it not now; and albeit their praeinstruction might
prepare them to a more easy understanding of passages relating to some
particulars concerning things not necessary to salvation, as was that of
Antichrist, 2 These. 2. Of which we may be ignorant, and of which the Church of
Rome is ignorant notwithstanding all her Traditions: yet f^r things necessary
delivered in the Apostles writings (of which the question proceeds) our people
have as fitting and sufficient means to understand as they had: For seeing
their praeinstruction was the first preaching of the Gospel to them, the laying
of the foundation, the delivering chiefly of things necessary for them to know
unto salvation: I hope we are not destitute of such fore-instruction to fit us
for profitable reading of the scriptures, we are taught the principles of
Christian Religion, the Catholic Faith into which we and all Christians are
baptized: besides, we have the help of the Gospels and all other writings of
Gods Word; and therefore why may not our Christian people so premstructed
understand Saint Paul's Epistles (in all necessary points) as well and
profitably as the people to whom they were written?

Again, take the Scripture as a Rule of direction, it argues that it must be
clear and plain in what it is to direct us in. All men give such Rules, as
near as they can, evident and clear; and shall we deny it to the best of
Rules, the Rule of Gods making and giving, the Rule of greatest concernment to
us? Bell. could say (when he meant to give Scripture its due, lib. 1. cap. 2.)
that it was Regula credendi tutissima, certissima: And again, because it was a
Rule, therefore it must be nota and certa, which indeed is very good reason,
both for the knowing of it to be our Rule, and for the evidence of it in those
things it is to direct us in. In regard of which things, it was necessary a
Christian should have sufficient evidence: as in the harder places of Scripture
he has his exercise, to set an edge upon his endeavors, and keep him humble.
And these very reasons we find given by the Fathers for the obscurity we meet
with in Scripture; that it is not such, as to deter any from reading (for the
Fathers frequently exhort all unto it) but to stir up the more diligence in
searching the Scriptures, and to keep down Pride and selfeconceit, that people
should not trust too much to their own understanding: but have cause to repair
upon all occasions to their Guides and Pastors, whose mouths preserve
knowledge now, as the Priests did under the Law.

As therefore we said, Scripture was a sufficiently perfect rule of all things
necessary to salvation, containing them expressly, or deducibly, so we say it is
a sufficiently clear Rule, not only in regard of what it delivers expressly,
but in regard of all necessary truths deducible; because they may sufficiently
by evident and clear consequence be deduced thence.

This clearness then which (we attribute to Scripture) does not exclude
Interpretation, or the skill and industry of the Guides of the Church for the
deducing of many necessary divine Truths. All things necessary, we say, are
there contained expressly, or thence deducible; and deducible, not all by every
one that reads; but it is enough, if done by the Pastors and Guides, which God
appointed in his Church, to that purpose, using the means that are needful to
that purpose: such as is Attention and Diligence in search of the Scripture,
collation of places, and observing the connexions: also sincerity and
impartiality in the collection or deduction they make: also prayer and devotion
for assistance in the Work.

Now Bellarmine propounded the question very carelessly, or enviously, as if we
denying their visible Infallible Judge or Interpreter, left the Scripture to be
interpreted according to every man's pleasure. There was enough said above
concerning the use of Reason and Judgment, which we leave to private men, in
order to their own assent or believing; a private Judgment of discerning what
is propounded to them, and manifested out of Gods Word. Which Judgment of
theirs, as it supposes the help of, so it stands subordinate to the public
Judgment of the Guides and Pastors, God has set in his Church to judge for
others, deducing out of Scripture, and manifesting the truth to every man's
conscience, as 2 Cor. 4.2.

CHAP. XXVII. Of a visible Infallible Judge or Interpreter.
NOw the question is, Whether besides the forementioned Guides and Pastors,
there be One visible Judge or Interpreter for all the Church, to whose sentence
all men's Judgments must subscribe, and every man's conscience must acquiesce
without further enquiry? i. e. a Judge or Interpreter Infallible.

Indeed such a Judge or Umpire of Christendom would (if to be had) be a ready
means to compose all differences, and restore truth and peace. But seeing it
is only a pretense and not a reality, we have no such remedy left us: Nay,
seeing it is pretended to by a Church which may err as well as other
particular Churches, and has erred as grossly, or more than any other, it is the
greatest hinderance now of restoring truth and peace among Christians: For that
Church which pretends to the Infallibility cannot amend any Error, and must
uncharitably condemn all others which do not acknowledge her for such, as she
pretends to be. So that which the Romanists would make the stay of Christianity
(the Infallibility and unerring privilege of that Church) is the very bane of
Christendom.

But to come to the examination and decision of this Controversy. We say the
Catholic Church of Christ is, and will be Infallible in Fundamentals and
saving Truth necessary to the being and continuing of a Church of Christ; and
that is no more than to say, The Church shall not fail in being, or in saving
Truth, but that in one part or other that saving Truth or Faith will be
preserved and professed: But that there is, or shall be a Church of one
denomination (as the Roman) Infallible in all her definitions, which she
proposes de fide, is that we deny, and they cannot prove.

We are next to observe, that although the Romanists would usually shroud
themselves in this point of Infallibility, under the name of the Church
Catholic, yet when brought to the trial, they must, and do fasten the
Infallibility upon the Roman Church; endeavoring to show by general marks
that the Catholic Church is not to be found but in the Roman Communion (which
was observed above, chap. 12. to be the drift of Cardinal Perron) and here they
would willingly stay, and hold forth their Infallibility under the name and
privilege of the Church, being loath to be put upon the Contestation 'twixt
the Pope and a General Council. But seeing their Church cannot speak, or do
the office of a Judge or Interpreter, but by a Council or the Pope, therefore
their Infallibility must rest upon the one or other.

And here we must observe how they stand d vided, and disagree about the very
foundation of their Faith, where to state that Infallibility, upon which they
profess to believe all they do believe; and for want of which they usually
reproach us Protestants, that we cannot have any certainty of belief, or means
of agreement: when as they that pretend to such unity and certainty in their
belief, differ in the groundwork of it, one side destroying and confuting the
reasons and motives of the other.

Now to say, as they usually reply, that they are certain of the Definitions
of their Church, being from Councils confirmed by the Pope, and so they have
both agreeing. This does not salve the business. For it is not certain, they
shall always agree, nor have they always agreed. Where then must the
Infallibility rest? What certainty of such definitions as the Council makes
without the Pope (so did the Councils of Basil and Constance) or that the Pope
makes without a Council? The Romanists stand divided about the Definitions of
those two Councils. Again, if they do agree, what certainty is there of an
Infallibility? For still that must accrue to the definitions, either upon the
unerring judgment of the Council, making them, or of the Pope confirming them;
and so it returns to the former difference, and thereupon to the former
uncertainty, one side destroying the reasons of the other. The Sorbonists and
moderate Papists on the one part asserting, a Council is above the Pope, may
judge and depose him; on the other part, the Jesuits and more rigid Papists
maintaining the contrary. And this opinion of stating the Infallibility upon
the Pope, is the more general among them.

But that we may come to a nearer trial of this Infallibility of Judgment in
the Church of Rome, and see what the certainty of their belief (which by reason
of that pretended Infallibility, they boast of, and deny to us) will come to:
Suppose then, they are all agreed that in their Church there is such a
privilege of Infall bility, or not erring: Let us consider what is brought
against it, what pretended for it.

Their part being the Affirmative, ours the Negative, we challenge them, that
they cannot prove it either by Scripture, or any convincing demonstrative
reason: Notwithstanding they are bound to show us it (according to their own
concessions) expressly contained in Scripture: For, they grant all things
necessary for all to believe (and such they hold this point of Infallibility)
are so contained in Scripture, it being one of their prima credibilia, and
necessary for all to be believe. vid. c. 22. We, as Negatives, are proved, show
it is not imaginable, that a belief of that consequence (the groundwork of
all Faith, the stay of the Church, as they will have it) should be so ill
provided for. That,

First, the four Evangelists writing the Gospel of Christ for the use of the
Church, and all Believers, should, if they knew it, be so silent of it, and yet
record many things of far smaller importance.

Secondly, that Saint Paul, when he had occasion to speak it, as when he wrote
to the Romans, should not give the least hint of this privilege, no not when
he told them the privilege of the Jews, cap. 3. that to them were committed
the Oracles of God: How convenient had it been to have spoken this privilege
of the Romans, that to them were entrusted the Oracles of Christ, and the
interpretation of them? Again, when writing to the Corinthians, he had occasion
to tell them of some, saying, I am of Paul, I of Cephas, I of Apollo, in stead
of telling them, All must hold of Cephas (as the Roman Church has defined it of
necessity to salvation to be subject to the Roman Bishop the successor of
Cephas) he chides them for such faction and division. Or when he and Saint
Peter agreed upon a distribution of their Ministry, that one should apply
himself to the Jews, the other to the Gentiles, nothing should be acknowledged
of Saint Peter's Universal Jurisdiction, Gal. 2. Or when he reckoned up the
several Orders as God had set them in his Church, Ephesians 4.11. it should not
been said, First Peter, then the Apostles, but First Apostles, Secondarily
Prophets, and after for ordering Ministers of the Church, it should be added,
some Pastors and Teachers, without any insinuation, that the Lord had given the
Bishop of Rome to be supreme Pastor, and Doctor of the Church.

Thirdly, that St. Peter himself giving all diligence (as he says Epist. 2.
cap. 1.) to mind them of what was needful before his departure, should not
tell them whom they were to follow after he was gone.

Fourthly, that we should have so often warning of false Teachers (both in the
Gospels and Epistles) and nothing of this Remedy: So much of Antichrists, and
nothing of the Vicar of Christ.

Fifthly, that the Asian Bishops in their opposition against Pope Victor, or
that Cyprian and the African Bishops in their opposition to Pope Stephen,
should not know this privilege of the Church of Rome, or not acknowledge it.
If it be said, Both Victor and Stephen judged right: Be it so, and let Cardinal
Perron cry, Oh Providence, that after-Councils judged the same! (as he lib. 3.
against the Kings Letter) yet does it not follow that they were infallible, or
had Univerfall Jurisdiction to judge for the whole Church; Nor yet did they
judge altogether right; for Victor did not judge aright, when he concluded
excommunication against so many famous Bishops and Churches, upon a different
time of observing Easter; For albeit Irenaeus and other famous Bishops and
after-Councils acknowledged the truth of the thing it self, viz. The observing
of the Time of Easter, yet did they not approve his judgment in proceeding to
an Excommunication of, or rather a pronouncing of Non-communion with those
Churches: And if Stephen did generally without exception, as it seems he did,
conclude all Heretics to be received without rebaptization; after-Councils did
not judge the same, but concluded the contrary upon some Heretics; for some
there were, that did not observe, but destroyed, what was essential to the Form
of Baptism, and could not therefore be received without being baptized at their
admission. Furthermore, that Saint Augustine, and the Council of Carthage
should be so ill instructed in their Faith, as not to know or acknowledge this,
but to hold so long a contestation with the Bishop of Rome in the business of
Appeals; or that the then Romish Bishops, and their Proctors in that Cause,
should be so ignorant of this point, that in the former business they should
neither allege Infallibility of judgment belonging to the Pope of Church of
Rome, nor produce any Scripture for what they pleaded for, but only pretend a
Canon of the Council of Nice, which upon strict examination could not appear:
for the true Canon of that Council, which concerned the Pope, did not come
home to the business. But the wits of later ages, especially of this last which
has produced Jesuties, have found out Scripture and reason for this Pretended
Visible Universal Infallible Judge. We shall examine them, but I must tell
them (which I hinted above) that they are bound to show us it expressly in
Scripture.

For in the former controversy, of the sufficiency of Scripture, they grant
(and must needs do it) that the Prima Credibilia, or the Omnibus Necessaria,
are contained expressly there. Now this of the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome being the first thing to be believed by them, the ground and formal
reason, upon which they believe all things else, they are bound to show it
expressly set down in Scripture. And doubtless had there been such a thing
intended by our Savior, he would have left it distinctly set down, that all
might be directed to that Infallible Guide or Judge.

Bellar. to show the certainty of their belief above the Protestants, delivers,
the Proposition of Faith (as he calls it, l. 3. c. 10. de verbo Dei) in such a
syllogism. That which is revealed in Scripture is true, But this is revealed
in Scripture, -- The first proposition is granted on both sides: of the second
(that this or that is revealed in Scripture) We, says he, are certain. Why?
because of the testimony of the Church, Council, or Pope, of which we have
apertas promissiones, plain, and clear promises in Scripture, that they cannot
err. But the Protestants know this or that to be revealed in Scripture by
conjectures only, or the judgment of a private Spirit. So he.

This proposition of Faith we shall speak to bleow, chap. 28. Here I mention
it, that to show according to the Argument above, they hold themselves bound to
produce clear Scripture for this groundwork of their Faith; therefore he is
forced to call them apert as promissiones. He names two in that place; the
First is from Acts 15.28. Visu est Spiritui sancto and nobis.

Answer. This if it concerns any thing, belongs to a Council, (therefore
Bellar. put them all in together, Church, Council, or Pope, for, as I noted
above, they are not agreed where to fix) but what promise is here to Church or
Council? It is but a relation of what the Apostles said, and might say it in
their privilege of Infallibility: and I hope none of the after-Councils
presumed to say it, as they said it. Bellarmine was ill advised to give us this
for a clear promise, which is neither promise, nor yet clear: for how does it
appear by any thing in the Text, how after-Councils might speak so? Nay it is
clear they could not speak it upon a privilege of infallibility. For Councels
(as Bell. ackdowledges, l. 2 de Council.) nec habent, nec scribunt revelationes,
sed ex verbo Dei per ratiocinationem deducunt conclusiones. Neither have, nor
propound revelations, but draw their Conclusions out of the word of God by
discourse. Now no men ever undertook to deliver Truth infallibly, which they
beat out by reasoning, and concluding upon discursise means: Indeed if
Bellarmine instead or this (Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis) had givien us
that of Mat. 28. I am with you to the end, or that of John 16. The spirit of
truth will gvide you into all truth; he had given us a promise, but not clear:
a promise of guiding into all truth infallibly; so to them that received it
then: but not clear for infallibility to after Councels or Guides of the
Church: a promise indeed of assistance to them, for all necessary Truth, but
yet conditional, upon their doing their duty in using the means; which that
all or the major part in every Council will do, is not certain.

His other clear promise is our Saviors praying for Peter, Luke 22. ver. 32.
Rogavi pro te ne deficiat fides tua; This may seem to concern the Pope or
Church of Rome; yet is there nothing in it of a clear promise to them, whether
we consider the thing prayed for, or the person; The thing prayed for is the
persevering or not failing of the saving faith by which Peter was rooted, and
built upon CHRIST: which cannot agree to all the Bishops of Rome, for they may
want that Faith, or fail in it, as they acknowledge. Bellarmine grants this
perseverance was personal as to Peter; but says he, there is another thing
promised which belongs to his Successors, viz. That none in his Chair should
teach against the Faith. So lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 3. or that the Bishop of
Rome, docens e cathedra, cannot err. So lib. 3. de verbo Dei cap. 5. But how
is this a clear promise now? or how can this be wrested out of that our Savior
prayed for to Peter, by any force of reason? For thus the one must follow on
the other. Peter had assurance to persevere in Faith, therefore all his
Successors (Bishops of Rome) have assurance infallibly to teach nothing
against the Catholic Faith, which is most incohaerent. For if that which was
directly prayed for ( Peter's perseverance) does not descend to his Successors,
how shall the consequent of it? Nay how shall that which is altogether
inconsequent to it, therefore descend unto them? For were it granted that they
should persevere in saving-faith (the thing assured to Peter) yet would it by
no means follow they could not err: No more than it is true of every
regenerate man perservering, that he is infallible; but now it is granted they
have no assurance of such perseverance in the faith, yet must it follow they
have assurance of teaching nothing against it. Thus far then it is so clear a
promise, that nothing seems more unreasonable.

Again, if they would make it any way agree to the Bishops of Rome, it must be
thus, Our Savior prayed for Peter, that his Faith should not fail, though he
denied him thrice, therefore Peter's successors, though they deny the Faith in
mouth, yet it shall not fail in heart (as they say it was with Pope Liberius,
when he subscribed to the Arrians.) But then this is clean contrary to what
they would have out of it, which is an outward Professing or declaring of the
Faith by definitive sentence, whatever the persuasion of the heart be: this
they contend not for; yet this is that which was promised to Peter, this he
had; the other ( viz. outward profession) he failed in. So clear yet is this
promise. But now look at the person, were there any thing here prayed for
which might fit the Infallibility which the Bishops of Rome would have, yet
what clear consequence can make that belong to them which St. Peter had? can
they give us one place of Scripture to assure us infallibly that Peter was at
Rome, and governed that Church as the Bishop of it, and dyed in that Sea? Is it
not admirable that this groundwork of all their faith should no where appear
in all Scripture? The Ecclesiastical Writers indeed took him to be as Bishop in
that Sea, and so the Fathers generally speak of him. But this amounts only to
a humane Testimony; and besides they ascribe the foundation and Government of
that Church to Saint Paul, together with Peter; and Saint Paul we find in
Scripture to have written to the Church of Rome, to preach to them, and dwell
among them, yet must the pretensions made from S. Peter be clear
notwithstanding. Well, were this clear by Divine Testimony, that the Bishops
of Rome are S. Peter's peculiar successors; yet still there is no ground for
their belief of Infallibility, unless they can show it clearly, that what
belonged to Saint Peter (as to this point) is derived to all his successors;
and that the successors of other Apostles in the Churches they founded and
governed, must not enjoy what belonged to those Apostles.

So much of these two clear promises of Bell. had he had clearer, we should
doubtless have heard of them. One place there is, which is often in their
mouths, and serves for all purposes: for the Headship and universal
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, for the Infallibility of Pope, Councils,
and Church of Rome: and that is, Mat. 16. Thou art Peter and upon this Rock --
here the Church must be built upon Saint Peter, that is it they contend for.
Cardinal Perron is much upon it ( lib. 4. cap. 3.) and though that which he
would there work out of it, is not expressly Infallibility, but universal
Jurisdiction or Headship, yet because they both have the like foundation upon
this place, it will be worthy to observe how he raises his work upon it, by a
witty indeed, but mistaken fancy. Thus it is, The Fathers at first did for
the most part speak of the Church here as built upon Saint Peter, afterward
they did generally interpret it of the Confession of Peter, that the Church was
built on that. Now the Cardinal will have these interpretations not to
exclude, but infer one the other, thus. The Church was built causally on the
Confession of Peter, formally on Peter himself, or the Ministry of his
person, i. e. Peter's Confession was the cause why our Savior chose him to lay
the Foundation of the Ministry of his Church upon him. Now judge of the
mistake, in running upon Peter's confessing, instead of Peter's confession, i.e.
the Faith which Peter confessed and uttered. For Peter's confession (as the
Card. takes it in the notion of a meritorious cause) was a single and transient
act of that Faith which was in Peter, a Grace or Virtue; it was a confessing;
but Peter's Confession, as the Fathers take it, when they say the Church was
built on it, is understood materially, for the thing or truth confessed by
Peter, viz. Christ the Son of God; the Confession, or Faith required of the
Eunuch at his Baptism, Act. 9. That he thus mistakes, it appears also by his
illustrating of it by the saying of St. Hierome, that Peter walked not upon the
waters, but Faith; which (says the Cardinal) is not to deny that Peter did
formally in person walk, but to show the cause of his walking, viz. Faith,
which he gave to the word of Christ; where plainly Faith is taken for a Grace,
Virtue, or Act of Peter's. Now if we say the Church is built upon Peter's Faith,
will he say that Faith there is an Act or Virtue in Peter, or not rather taken
for that Catholic truth believed and confessed by Peter? Peter's confession of
that Faith was no question the cause that our Savior bestowed something on him
at that time: but that on which Christ says there, He will build his Church,
was Peter's Confession, i. e. the Faith or Truth confessed by him; and so its
plain the Fathers took it, for they opposed this Faith or Confession (as the
Cardinal acknowledges) against the Arrians, That Christ was the Son of the
living God.

Bell. applies the promise following ( I will give thee the Keys, etc.) to this
business of the One visible Interpreter or Judge, and will have (whatsoever thou
loosest) to signify not only the relaxation of sins, and their censures, but
nodos omnes legum -- and dogmatum -- the dispensing with the ties of Laws, and
the explicating all the doubts and difficulties of Doctrine and Controversy,
lib. 3. de verbo Dei cap. 5. And this is barely said by him without further
proof. Now when this promise of the Keys is applied to judgment about sins
and offenses, we know what binding is as well as loosing; but when it is thus
stretched to universal judgment in the interpretation of Scripture, defining
points of faith, dispensing with Laws we cannot tell, unless we thus infer,
that as loosing her with Bell. is to explicate Scripture, so binding must be
the obscuring or involving the sense of it; if loosing be again the power of
dispensing with Laws, which bind men (as in point of marriage or the like)
then of binding must be the forbidding of what God has made lawful, as for
Clergy to marry, or what he has commanded, as people to receive the Sacrament
in both kinds. And the Pope it seems by virtue of this promise or power of
Keys may thus loose, and bind, and not err: yet these are their chief
places of Scripture. Now let us come to their Reasons.

First is from Gods providence, who was not ignorant how many difficulties, and
controversies would arise about the faith, and therefore would no doubt appoint
such a Judge. Answ. This is to measure the wisdom of God by the model of our
Reason: but the same reason may also tell us, it would have been more
convenient for the Church to have had such an Infallible Judge or Interpreter
in every Nation, than one for the whole Church, which was to be spread over all
the Earth; yea reason may further tell us, it had been suitable to his
providence, expressly to have told us, who that Infallible Judge was, and where
we should find him. And it cannot be imagined in reason, but he would have
done it, had he appointed any such; for he was not ignorant, that many and the
greatest controversies would be about this Judge.

He tells us plainly, There must be Heresies: and the end wherefore; that they
which are approved may be manifest, 1 Cor. 11. but not appointing withal this
remedy of an Infallible Judge; we must think it is, that approved faith may be
of more price, and worth; gained with more earnest inquiry, and diligence in
searching the Scripture, and using the like means: so also kept and held with
greater care and watchfulness; all which would have fallen and grown remiss in
the hearts of men, if to trust all their belief upon an Infallible Guide,
without any further enquitie.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of certainty of belief, and whether they or we have better means
for it.
THe Second reason is from certainty of belief, which they say the Protestants
cannot have for want of such Infallibility: but we are certain (says Bell: in
his Proposition of Faith abovementioned. 27.) that this or that is revealed in
Scripture, because of the Testimony of the Church, Council, or Pope, which
cannot err:

Now would I ask, first, whether they believe, that Christ is the Son of God,
Savior of the world, that He suffered, and now sits at the right hand of God,
or the like; because the Church testifies it to be revealed in Scripture, or
because they see it evidently there themselves. If they say, because the Church
testifies it; then it seems they cannot (which is false) or may not (which is
worse) believe God immediately, when he speaks as plain as the Church can. If
they say, because they see it evidently there, then have they two formal
reasons of their belief, One, the immediate evidence of Scripture: The other,
the Testimony of the Church. And if they can believe upon that immediate
evidence or light of Scripture, then so may we also. And so we do, not
excluding the light which the Church gives to the Scripture, where it needs;
which light is not to us the reason of believing what we believe, but a means
and help to see that which is contained in Scripture, and make it more evident
to us.

Again, I would ask, how they believe it to be revealed in Scripture, that the
Church is Infallible? because of the Testimony of the Church? No, that they
cannot say here, but must allege for it plain Scripture (apert as
promissiones, clear promises, as Bellar: called them) and must allow men the
use of their reason and judgment, upon the evidence of them. Well, if they may
believe that great point, of the Infallibility of their Church, upon immediate
evidence of Scripture, why may not we believe other points so too? or why do
they condemn the Protestants for believing every point of Religion upon the
same ground, on which they themselves lay all their faith at once? for they
believe the Churches Infallibility revealed in Scripture, because they see it,
as they say plainly promised there. Now if they believing the Infallibility of
their Church upon immediate evidence of Scripture can have certainty of belief:
why cannot we have like certainty upon the like evidence? if they cannot have
certainty in that particular, then can they not have any certainty in any thing
else, which they believe, upon that belief of an Infallibility in their Church.
Only this they get by it, and must answer for it one day, that believing all
things else upon the supposed Infallibility of their Church, they are made to
believe many things to be revealed in Scripture, and to be the will of God,
which are not; yea, to believe contrary to that which is revealed, as the half
communion for the people.

Again, they that understood and believed what the Apostles preached, and wrote
to them, did it without the external means of an Infallible Interpreter, upon
the evidence of what was spoken or written: and therefore so may we. Now to
say, They that spoke and wrote were Infallible, and the other knew it to be so,
is no more than what we say, Scripture is Infallible, that speaks to us the
same which they spoke and wrote, and therefore we way as well understand and
believe it upon the same evidence.

We do not here (as I insinuated before) exclude the exterior helps and means
which God has appointed for interpreting and clearing the Scriptures, such as
definitions of Councels, the judgment and practice of Primitive Ages, the skill
and labor of the present Guides of the Church, which make for the clearing and
evidencing of that which is contained in Scripture; but upon the evidence of
that, or manifestation of the truth, out of that, is the stay or last
resolution of our Faith. Waldensis, a learned writer in the Church of Rome many
years ago, with diverse others, do well apply that of the Samaritans to the
Wowan ( Now we believe, for we have heard him our selves, Joh. 4.42.) unto this
last resolution of Faith beginning in the Testimony of the Church, as the first
motive, but ending and staying upon Scripture; As they were first moved and
brought to Christ upon the Woman's saying, but believed indeed when they heard
him themselves: So the saying and judgment of the Church at our first coming
and after is a great motive, and light to us; but then indeed we believe when
we hear him our selves; when we hear him speak thus and thus to us in Scripture.

Now he that upon careful and impartial using the means God has appointed,
does search for the Truth, shall find what he seeks, or not err inpardonably:
whereas the Romanist, receiving all upon a supposed infallible Testimony, seeks
no further comes not to (audivimus ipsi, we have heard him our selves) blindly
casts his faith upon a false ground, and so is led to believe (as I said) many
things as revealed of God, which are not, and sometimes the contrary to what is
revealed.

Their third Reason is from pretense of Unity; which they say is preserved
amongst them by this means, but lost among the Protestants for want of it; and
they instance in the breaches, and confusions of these our Times. Answ. We had
the same means for Unity which the Ancient Church had (as was said above, chapter
13.) and so long as we could freely use them (having the secular power to
friend) heresy and schism was prevented, and Unity preserved: but when the
sword of violence prevailed, no marvail if Licentiousness grew bold, and cast
off the cords of obedience Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil. And we see this
pretended Infallibility could not keep Burbon and his Army in order, but that
they sacked Rome, made the Pope their prisoner, and forced him to unworthy
conditions. And we read that Heretics of old (as Arrians, and others) when
they had the Emperors favor, bore down all before them: so that this means of
Infallibility either could not keep them from breaking out, and prevailing, or
else (which indeed is the truth) there was no such belief of an Infallibility
in the Church of Rome in those better Ages: nor was it ever made use of, or
alleged against Heretics to repress them. The judgment indeed of the Bishops
of Rome was often alleged, as was also the judgment of other Churches and
famous Bishops, but this without implying an Infallibity in judging.

Nay this pretense of Infallibility is so far from being cause of Unity in
the Catholic Church, that it has been the chief cause of division, and of
losing more than they retain by it. The Greek Church stands dis-joyned from the
Roman, because of her challenging Universal subjection and Infallibility; and
therefore no more to be dealt with. And this has lost all those that in these
later Ages have been divided from the Communion of the Roman Church, because
the pretense of Infallibility made her incorrigible, and cut off all hopes of
her amending the errors they complained of, and desired to have reformed. So
that let them cast up what they have lost, and they will have no cause to boast
of what they hold by it.

Nay did the Romanists truly confess what belief they have of this Infallible
Judge, it would in all probability be found, that not the faith of such
Infallibility, but the fear of Inquisition, fire and faggot, keeps those they
have in obedience, at least external.

But some of them have said, This Rule or way, if followed, does produce Unity:
but the Protestants Rule of belief is not apt to do it, but rather begets
division. Answ. It is true that their Infallibility (though not Real but
pretended) where it is followed, i. e. indeed believed, will produce, according
to the strength of erroncous persuasions, an answerable effect in those that
are drawn to believe it: for such must needs submit to all things else. But
being only pretended, not real, it cannot be apt to produce the effect, or
hold men to them, but as we said, has lost many. Our Rule of believing upon
evidence of Scripture, (gained by due use of the means appointed thereunto, (as
above mentioned, in this Chap.) if conscionably followed, will produce the
effect of Unity and peaceable submission, and is more apt to do it. For
therefore was Scripture given, that there might be one Faith: and certainly not
given with such obscurity, as to make men quarrel, but with such evidence, as
men not wanting to themselves, may thereby come to know that one faith, without
such a visible Infallible Judge. And when any will deceive themselves and prove
obstinate, the Church proceeds to restrain them by Ecclesiastical censure, even
to excommunication, for preserving Unity in the rest. And other means the
Ancient Church had not, nor can the Roman go farther in the way of the Church:
for as for fire and faggot, it was the way of the Adversaries of the Churcith.

The Testimonies they cite out of Fathers are all not concluding; They are such
as send Heretics to the Church in general, as S. Augustine does the Donatists
often: but this does not argue, that we shall find any where in the Church a
Visible Infallible Guide. Otherwise we say, in every Church there are Guides
and Pastors of publik judgment, to whom inferiors must submit, and the consent
of the Catholic Church is above that. Or else they are such Testimonies, as
report the judgment of the Bishop of Rome given in such or such causes, and
required by other Bishops or Churches. But this comes not home neither. For we
find the judgment of other Bishops, and learned Fathers alleged, and
required, and that by Popes themselves. So was Atha^asius his judgment, desired
by Liberius, and Hieromes often by Pope Damasus; and that in matter of
doctrinal points, and with a great deal of submission to their judgment, as to
be guided by it; (as appears in Pope Liberius Letter to Athanasius, and Damasus
to Hierome.)

One place of Irenaeus is much cited by them, Ad quam propter potentiorem
principalitatem, etc. lib. 3. cap. 2. which ^ndeed makes against them: For this
^mplies neither Universal jurisdiction, nor Infallibility in the Romish Church:
Neither did Irenaeus mean so much as the words by reason of the ill Latin
Translation, may seem to imply. For the Greek had it, (as I have met with it,
and as the whole Context avouches it) (...), and is ill translated potentiorem
principalitatem, but rather sounds propter convenientiorem institutionem, seu
principium; That Church being from Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and therefore
the most convenient example to show the succession of Pastors and Doctrine. For
from thence he fetches his argument to confute those Heretics, that being
pressed with Scripture did accuse it (as he says) of obscurity, as not to be
understood of them who were ignorant of Tradition; therefore he confutes them
by the undeniable succession of the Churches, and because Longum est (says he)
omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, therefore he singles out the Roman,
as that which was maxima, omnibus cognita and a gloriosissimis Apostolis Petro
and Paulo fundata and instituta, (there is the (...), a more convenient
beginning of succession in that, than in other less famous Churches) and by
the doctrine received from the Apostles, and delivered down in that Church, he
confounds the Heretics. Now (says he) with this Church (because of such a
beginning and succession) every Church ought to agree: and so they did then,
and therefore it was needless for him to instance in any other Church.

Thus are we also willing to deal with the Romanists at this day. They being
pressed with Scripture, accuse it of obscurity, and say, (as those Heretics
that Irenaeus had to deal with) It is not to be understood by them that are
ignorant of Tradition; We therefore tell them of the Doctrine of Faith
delivered down in all Churches, and bring them to the Ancient Roman Church,
which was glorious then for its foundation and preservation of true doctrine,
and tell them, because of such an (...), they ought to agree with it now: which
they do not in the main points between us and them controverted (as abovesaid)
and in this particular of an Infallible Universal Judge for the whole Church.

Thus far we have proceeded upon the first and chief Rule of Trial,
Scripture; the Sufficiency and Evidence of it, Now to the other.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Consent of Antiquity.
OUr second Rule of Trial, is, Consent of Antiquity. We say, the Romanists
cannot prove their Doctrines by that, as they ought to do, if they will have
them pass for Catholic; for then according to Vincentius his Rule, semper and
ubique, they must be always and generally held in the Church. Yet is there a
pretense made to it, and great confidence and boasting among them of the
Fathers: not that they know, they have indeed advantage by them, as to the due
proving of their cause, but because the Protestants have freely and ingenuously
spoken their Judgment of the Fathers and their authority. Therefore the
Romanists make advantage of it with their own Proselytes, as if the Protestants
declined all Trial that way. Now should we speak with that liberty of the
Fathers writings, as they do of the Scripture, loading it with imputations of
obscurity, imperfection, corruptions, etc. it might I hope be so much more
justifiable in us, as the divine authority of Scripture surpasses all humane
writings,

But this we profess, however they are obliged to disparage the written Word
of God (and a miserable cause it must be which obliges men to such a plea) yet
are not we obliged to detract any thing from the due worth of the Ancient
Fathers: for, take their Writings as they are, we aver that the Popish faith
cannot prove it self to be Catholic by them.

Yet if we say, the Fathers were men, and subject to error, which the Scripture
is not, we do but say, what they ost acknowledge themselves. If we say, they
have erred in several Ages, and that many of them together with a general
consent (as in the Millenary belief, the Infant communion, and the place of
faithful Souls out of Heaven till the Day of Judgment) we do but say, what
the Romanist cannot deny, who do acknowledge the Fathers erred in these.

If therefore we say, they are no Rule of Faith to us, we do but say, what
they of the Ages following thought, that they were not bound to follow them in
these errors, after they were once detected, and what the Romanists must
acknowledge, for they also have forsaken them in these.

If again we say, the Writings of the Fathers have come through ill hands unto
us, which have corrupted or maimed the true, and patched false and
supposititious writings to them, the Romanists cannot but acknowledge, we have
great cause to think there was more providence of God in the preserving of
Scripture entire, than the Writings of the Fathers. Only here is the mischief
again, they are obliged to speak any casualty that happens to Scripture, and to
make a noise of corruptions, obscurity, etc. because they find it too plain
against them, and are afraid the people should see it too; but of the Fathers
writings more rarely do they acknowledge any such thing, not because they have
cause to joy of them, as plain and full for the Romish faith; but because their
advantage is by their forged writings, and the corruptions of the true ones;
also because those writings came through their hands for several Ages, and so
the false dealing, that has been used, becomes chargeable upon the professors
of their cause: False dealing I say, what by the cunning of Monks that had
those Writings in Manuscript, what by their several editions of the Fathers,
what by their expurgatory Indexes. In all which it is easy to see what
laboring there has been, to make the Ancients speak the Language of their
present Church. Hence have they advantage, not truly, by the Writings of the
Ancients, but such as serves to their purpose, especially when to deal with
those that are less learned; whom they can turn to this or that place in such
or such a Father, knowing they are not able to judge whether the writing be
supposititious, or the place corrupted, or whether the same Father elsewhere
expresses himself otherwise, or be contradicted by other Fathers, and there
speaks only his private opinion.

This caution Vincentius gives us in his Rules for Catholic doctrine, cap. 39.
Whatever any, quamvis sanctus, doctus, Episcopus, Martyr, praeter -- vel contra
-- though holy, learned, though a Bishop or Martyr, holds beside or against the
rest of the Fathers: id inter proprias and privatas opiniunculas -- it must be
severed from the Public doctrine, and placed among private opinions.

Well, though all this makes for the disadvantage of the Protestants, that they
have not the Fathers writings, as they came from their own hands and pens, but
as through the hands of many Adversaries: yet take them as they are, with all
the difficulties of finding what is truly theirs, and what is the sense of it,
the Protestants never doubted to enter this kind of trial by Antiquity; not
standing or falling by every thing we meet with in one or more Fathers, (for the
Romanists will not so) but maintaining:

1. That the Romanist cannot prove his Affirmative by a full and sufficient
consent or Testimony of Antiquity.

2. That we have enough in the writings of Antiquity to discover the novelty of
the Romish doctrines, which may generally appear upon this evidence.

CHAP. XXX. Application of the Rule to their Doctrine in several points.
FIrst, the great silence in the writings of the firster Ages, touching the
points of Romish faith; which cannot be imagined would have been, if such had
been the doctrine of the Church, or the faith that all Christians were to learn
and hold; they call to us, to name Professors of the Protestant doctrine in all
Ages, but that is unreasonable we should be bound to it (our part being the
Negative of what they erroneously affirm) yea, and impossible too, because the
errors we deny, were not affirmed or thought of in many Ages; and how then
should any expressly appear against them? But it is most reasonable and just, to
exact of the^, who affirm Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
half Communion, Image Worship, etc. for Catholic doctrines, to show and prove
them professed in all Ages: at least so profound a Silence as we find in the
first Ages, is sufficient argument against them, yea and Silence when there was
occasion to vouch and defend them, had they been the doctrines of the Christian
Church.

As when we see so many Apologies written and declaring the faith and practice
of the Church; so many Books purposely written on that subject, Epiphanius
wrote two, his Ancoratus de fide Christiana, and his Compendium fidei
Catholicae Ecclesiae, S. Augustine wrote three, one De vera Religione, where he
says at the beginning, haec est nostris temporibus Christiana Religio, Another
De doctrina Christiana, and his Enchiridion to Lanrentius, of which he says,
ibi diligenter mihi videor complexus quo modo colendus sit Deus; in which only
he has one thing sounding to the Popish doctrine, and that is about helping the
dead by Alms, or Sacrifice, and that was but his private opinion grounded upon
a false supposal, not of Purgatory, but of common receptacles of all men's souls
out of Heaven till the Day of Judgment, in the 109 Chapter of that Book. For
that which he says in the 70 Chap. Per Eleemosynas de peccatis praeteritis
propitiandus est Deus, he qualifies himself in the same place, and excellently
speaks of the free reward of Good works in the 107 Chap. Now can it be Imagined
that in such Books purposely written, there should be such silence and
pretermission of the Romish doctrines of Faith, had they been the Doctrine of
the Church?

Again, in the first 300 years, when there was such occasion to urge and hold
up their public Penance and Satisfaction by it, also so much written and
spoken about it; had they believed a Romish Purgatory after this life, can we
think but they would often have mentioned it also, and told the people of the
pains they should undergo there, if not careful to perform due Penance and
Satisfaction here?

Also when occasion was given by Adversaries to aslert such doctrines, had the
Church known and professed them: can it be imagined those Fathers that answered
those Adversaries should be silent in the Cause? As for example, In the point
of Transubstantiation, when Marcion affirmed CHRIST had a body fantastic or
in appearance only, how obvious had it been for him (had Transubstantiation
been the doctrine of the Church) to have objected, that the sign of his Body
in the Eucharist, was but a body in appearance, the show of bread only, and
his body there under any shape, figure, etc. how necessary had it been for the
Church to have maintained that point against him? it could not have escaped the
disputation, had it been any doctrine of faith in the Church. Whereas on the
contrary, Tertullian takes it for granted, that the bread (which was the figure
of his body) was a true body, and thence infers that Christ's body (of which
bread was the figure) was also true and real, l. 4. contra Marc. c. 40. So when
the Eutichians affirmed the conversion of the Humane nature into the Divine,
and drew some phrases of the Doctors of the Church (which seemed to imply a
conversion of the bread after consecration) to the proving or illustrating of
it: had the doctrine of the Church been so, could they have declined the
express maintenance of Transubstantiation against that argument? whereas on
the contrary we see the Eutychians confuted by Theodoret, Gelasius and others,
by denying plainly a substantial conversion of the bread, and so taking away
the ground of the argument, and all belief of Transubstantiation.

So in the point of Invocation and Worship of Saints, when it was objected to
Origer by Celsus in defense of the Heathen Invocating their Demons and Heroes
(whom they held to be Internuncios and intermedios, betwixt the supreme God and
themselves) that the Christians also allowed the ministry of Angels, and that
their Saints departed were Amici Dei. Had the Church then held Invocation of
Angels or Saints departed, Origin had been bound to assert and maintain it, and
not to answer as he does, that Christians invocated God only by their high
Priest JESUS CHRIST, and they that do so, want not the Ministry or help of
Angels, in his 8 Book against Celsus, and elsewhere. The very like does S.
August: speak of the Heathen Demons and Heroes in his 8, and 9 books de Civ:
Dei. Showing, the Christians did not so to the Martyrs. And when it was
objected to him by Faustus the Manichaean, that instead of the heathen Idols
they had set up the Martyrs, because they resorted to their Monuments, and
there offered up prayers and sacrifice: Had the Church then held the Romish
belief and practice of Saint-Worship and Invocation, could he have declined the
maintenance of it? whereas he there and elsewhere disclaims it in express
terms, and shows Faustus his mistake, in the end and purpose of the Christians
resorting to Martyrs Tombs, which was to offer up the Sacrifice, and worship
and prayers to God only, lib. 20. contra Faust.

Lastly, when the Invocating of Christ was used by the Church as an argument
for his Godhead against the Arrians, would it have been good, if Invocating of
Saints also had been the doctrine and practice of the Church? and if that shift
of the Romanists had then been allowable, that they do not invocate Saints as
God, or with invocation which is due to God, but as friends of God and
excellent instruments of his glory, had not the Arrians had a pat answer to the
former argument, viz: That Christ was to be invocated, yet not as God, but as
the Son of God, after a more excellent way than any other creature is? But they
that used the former argument feared no such answer, because Invocation and
worship of Saints was then no doctrine of the Church.

Thus much for the silence of the Fathers when occasion was given them to
defend those points, had they been doctrines of the Church.

Secondly, we have Evidence against the Roman faith, by that which we meet with
in the Fathers appliable to some points of it.

1. Sometimes we meet with the Name indeed which the Romish point bears, but
not the Thing; as for example, in some few Fathers, there is mention of a
purging fire after this life; but neither do they agree upon the same thing
among themselves, nor any of their conceits with that thing the Romanists call
Purgatory. So we meet with the name of Oblation and Sacrifice in the Eucharist
but in senses we admit of, not the Roman thing of a proper Sacrifice. So we
meet with prayers for the dead, which indeed was the doctrine and practice of
the firster Ages, but it was not for relief of any Souls in a supposed
purgatory, to which the Romish doctrine and practice of praying for the dead is
bound. So for private confession, we allow it in the sense and way the Ancient
Church did persuade and sometimes practice it, not as imposed and practiced by
the Roman.

2. Sometimes we meet with phrases in the Fathers favoring some Romish
doctrine, but then we show by argument and reason from the same Fathers, that
those phrases do not speak indeed the Romish sense. As for Transubstantiation,
many hyperbolicall expressions, many speeches founding the change and
Transelementation of the Bread; but we show they could not mean a substantial
change, because we find them use like phrases of the change of a Man in
regeneration, of Water in Baptism, of Oil in the Chrism after consecration; in
all which no substantial change or conversion. Also because many of the Fathers
in plain terms acknowledge, This is my Body, to be a figurative speech; and
because it is clearly evinced out of them, that indeed they held the Bread
remained in substance after consecration. One instance whereof we had above, in
this Chap: in their answer to the Eutychians. Another we may have from their
saying, our bodies to be nourished by the Body of Christ, and to receive
increase by it. Bellarmine here acknowledges an hyperbolical improper speech,
and that they meant our bodies ex contactu corporis Christi did receive a
disposition to immortality; a figurative speech indeed, taking the body of
Christ sacramentally, and speaking of it what the sacramental element does
indeed: for our bodies are indeed nourished and receive increase by the
Elements, and this implies necessarily the substantial remaining of them. But
for Bellarmine his explication, it is too impertinent; as if receiving a
disposition to immortality, could satisfy their saying, that our bodies are
nourished and receive increase, which we find to be real upon the receiving
the Elements as well as any other Bread or Wine; and to say they receive that
disposition ex contactu corporis Christi, is to say Christ's body is touched by
ours, when as this manner of the Romish real presence enforces them to say,
Christ's body in the Sacrament is impalpable, and cannot be touched or felt.

Let me add here how Cardinal Perron in his Letter to Master Casaubon, waving
as it were Transubstantiation, lays the whole Importance of the Sacrament on
the real presence, viz: our Communion or substantial Union to the Body of
Christ; citing S. Cyrill, who calls it the Knot of our Union with God. Observe
first, that Transubstantiation it seems is not necessary to this importance of
the Sacrament, our Union with Christ: see we if their real presence (which
divided from Transubstantiation must needs fall in with the Lutheran
Consubstantiation) will be necessary to it. It is true that the importance of
the Sacrament is our Union with Christ, and for that Union we acknowledge there
must be a real presence of Christ's body to those it is united to in the
Sacrament; and so a real presence or Communication of the Body of Christ, we
hold, and a real Union: but as this Union is spiritual, so is the Presence too:
yet real, yea most real, as when our Savior said, My flesh is meat indeed,
(...), John 6. it was really so, did really nourish, yet spiritually.

Now secondly, would I know, how such a real presence as they contend for (
viz: a corporal, carnal, or contradistinct to spiritual) can be necessary to
the importance of the Sacrament: for that real presence being the bodily
communication of Christ's body, as it is not the thing of the Sacrament, or the
importance of it, viz: our Union with Christ, (for all unworthy receivers have
that bodily communication of his body into their mouths and stomachs) so
cannot it be any help to, or pledge and assurance of our substantial and true
Union with Christ: for their real presence communicates his body to our bodies,
without any sense and feeling nay against sense, and so cannot be any pledge or
sacramental confirmation to us of receiving him spiritually: also it conveyes
his body through the mouth without any real eating, and so cannot be any
representation or assurance of our spiritual eating: Lastly, it makes his body
stay a while in the stomach, without any union or incorporation, and so cannot
make any way to the working or assuring our real Union with Christ, our
nourishing by his body and blood. Of such importance is their real presence or
bodily communication, that it makes for nothing but to destroy the Sacrament,
and to take away the real eating of the Sacramental bread, the real
incorporation of it into our bodies, the real nourishment received by it: all
which are necessary in the Sacrament, to testify and help our spiritual eating
of Christ's body, our nourishing by it, our Union with him, which is the
importance of the Sacrament. And this of our spiritual eating and union is well
set out by the Fathers, that have written upon John 6. especially by S.
Augustine, yea and well expressed by the Council of Florence; Hujus Sacramenti
effectus (or as the Cardinal, the importance of this Sacrament) quem in anima
operatur digne sumentis, est adunatio hominis ad Christum, The effect of this
Sacrament which it works upon the soul of the worthy Receiver, is the uniting
of a man to Christ, (and this I hope is a spiritual communication) and then
further, Omnem effectum, quem materialis cibus and potus quoad vitam agunt
corporalem, hoc Idem quoad vitam spiritualem and hoc Sacramentum operatur,
Every effect, which material meat and drink has, as to the bodily life, the
same does this Sacrament work as to the spiritual life. What Protestant could
have spoken better, to set out the spiritual communication of Christ's body and
blood, our incorporation into him, union with him, signified and wrought by the
sacramental communication, incorporation and nourishment of the Elements?

Again, we oppose in some points the deeds of the Fathers against their
phrases. Phrases may be carelessly (at first) or figuratively spoken, and may in
time be altered and corrupted, but deeds remain in History, and deeds upon
controversy speak the judgment indeed of the persons interessed: such we
allege. As for example, against those many Eulogies and high expressions which
the Fathers used to the magnifying of the Church of Rome and S. Peter's Chair
(abused now to prove that this Infallibility, Universal Jurisdiction, and
exorbitant power, challenged by the Bishop of Rome, was acknowledged by
Antiquity) we bring deeds, and those upon contestation: as the standing out of
Polycrates and all the Asian Bishops against the sentence of Pope Victor: also
in the contestation between S. Cyprian and Pope Stephen, it is easily seen that
Cyprian by all those speeches he had used to the magnifying of the Roman See
(and many they allege out of him) meant nothing less, than to ascribe to that
See, what of late Ages they have challenged. So in the contestation between the
Roman See and the African Bishops (among whom S. Augustine was one, and one
that used to speak sometimes very high of the Roman Church) in the business of
Appeals, we see their judgment by their deeds.

We see also by this, how that which is spoken by the Fathers, may prove but
uncertainly and unwarily spoken, when it comes to the Trial, and far short of
that the Church of Rome would have us believe they meant. For it cannot be
denied, but the Fathers often speak with a Latitude, and apply things to the
present advantage. As when they had to do with Heresies newly sprung up, they
usually opposed the eminency of the Church of Rome (as then indeed it was
eminent both for succession and doctrine) setting it out with glorious Titles:
or when the Fastern Bishops needed relief, (for the West enjoyed peace for the
most part of the four first Centuries, when the East was much troubled) and
applied themselves to Rome for help (as Athanasius, Chrysostom, and others)
that their cause might be judged in the West by the Pope and his Council, when
they could have no justice in the East: no mervail if by such applications, the
Church and Bishop of Rome gained many high Titles and acknowledgments from such
distressed persons, and their Wel-wishers. But when it came to a contestation
with Rome it self (as in the cases abovementioned, wherein Cyprian, Augustine,
and others, were engaged at several times) it is plainly seen that those
Testimonies which Cyprian, Augustine, and others had given in so high a strain,
meant not what they seemed at first sight to attest, or what the Cardinal and
other Romish writers bring them for.

Now they must acknowledge this used sometimes by the Fathers, to apply their
speech to the present advantage, (not indeed contradicting what they meant, but
moderating what before they spoke more unwarily) for the Cardinal observes the
like of them, l. 4. c. 3. That before the Arrians arose, the Interpretation of
that place of the Rock, Mat. 16. run upon the person of Peter: but afterward
the Fathers finding the advantage of the place against the Arrians, interpreted
it of the Confession which Peter made, that Christ was the Son of the living
God: to this purpose he there. And it comes all to this. The Fathers before
spoke unwarily, but afterward spoke as they saw they had reason. Yet thus it
fared in this great point of Romes greatness, for which they pretend the
Fathers.

Therefore to conclude the second point: the Romanists have the shadow, the
shell, the name, the phrase many times, but we carry the substance, show the
thing, the sense, the judgment, the deeds of Antiquity.

3. Sometimes we meet with beginnings of opinions and practices in the compass
of the first four Ages, which the Church of Rome did after form into a fixed
belief and practice; but it was not so then. Then indeed the seeds were
scattered, out of the which by degrees sprang some of this forbidden fruit,
which the Roman Church now holds forth. As for Example, The opinion of a
purging fire was then but in the wandering conceits of some few (as above
insinuated in this Chap.) and which is to be further noted, those few into
whose conceits it first entered, were of the Greek Fathers; yet so little did it
prevail in that Church, that to this day it is not improved into a doctrine or
belief of the Church among the Greeks. Which shows it rested but in the conceit
of some particular men.

So for the point of Invocation, we find beginning given to that practice in
the fourth Century, by Rhetorical Apostrophe's used in their Orations for the
Dead, by the excess of devotion and honor that some were carried with toward
the blessed Martyrs, breaking out sometimes into compellations of them, and
uttering their desires to them, as if they had been present.

Here we have a private practice begun by some few, not grounded upon any
doctrine of the Church. And long time after it was, ere it crept into the
Letanies or public offices of the Church. So in the point of the
half-Communion, we meet with some private practice, some receiving the bread
only in a case of necessity, but publicly it was ever administered in both
kinds, and also privately, where and when it could. And many express
declarations we meet with against receiving it in one kind; and when it was
received so, it was held an imperfect, and not full Communion; This is most
plain in Antiquity for above 1000 years.

And now whoever will examine well the flourish of Card: Perroun in his first
book, cap. 18. (where running through all the points of Romish faith and
practice, he affirms the ancient Church to have held and practiced so) will no
question find, that, what is there alleged, falls short of proving the
doctrine or practice of the ancient Church, and that the Card. often gives us
the Name without the Thing, or the Phrase without the Romish sense, or some
private opinion for the doctrine of the Church; or some beginning practice for
an established one; or a private practice for the practice of the Church.
Besides, there is no consent of Fathers given in that Chapter upon any point.

CHAP. XXXI. Card: Perrons two Rules for knowing who and what is Catholic
according to Antiquity.
ANd here it will not be amiss to take a view of two of his Rules or
Observations, which in his Letter to Mr. Casaubon he gives us, to show what is
required to make a man or Church Catholic now, according to the doctrines and
practices of the ancient Church. By which I cannot see how himself or his
Church can stand, or challenge the name of Cathelick He there says (in his
second observation) That any should pass for Catholic, it is needful they be
conformable to the integrity of the belief of the Fathers, i.e. to believe all
things they believed, according to that degree they believed them in, viz: to
believe as necessary to salvation the things they believed to be so, and as
profitable to salvation, the things they believed to be so, and as not
repugnant to salvation, what they held so. This is one of his Rules.

Here are strict conditions; yet let us see how they or we stand bound to them.
For the first, Things believed necessary to salvation. The Romanists cannot
challenge us Protestants for not believing what they of the ancient Church did
so believe, with a due and full consent. And for the points controverted (which
they challenge us for not believing) let them, if they can, give us so general
a consent of Fathers for them, as we find in those former Ages agreeing in the
Millenary belief, in the place of faithful Souls (out of Heaven) till the Day
of Judgment, in the Communion given to Infants, as necessary for their
salvation, and some other: and yet neither the Cardinal nor any Romanist holds
himself bound to believe in these things (put them in what rank they will, as
necessary or profitable) as they more generally did of old for some Ages. If
they say the Millenary b^lief was rejected within the compass of the four
first Ages, For that is the compass of Time the Cardinal is pleased to allow
in this trial; True. But then it tells us, the succeeding Ages did not hold
themselves bound to believe all things as they before them did, nor do the
Romanists hold themselves bound to believe either that error, or the two other
of the place of Souls, or Infant Communion, which continued after, even to the
end of the Ages fixed by the Cardinal. And will they have us Protestants bound
to believe either what the Fathers did believe erroneously, or what the
Romanists please to say the Fathers did believe, when we know they did not, or
generally did not?

And as for the other two points of believing things profitable to salvation,
and things not repugnant, How will the Cardinal possibly give us a consent of
Fathers in those points? or if he had the confidence to have undertook it,
seeing so many things of opinion, of Rites, and of Ceremonies fall under those
conditions of profitable or not repugnant to salvation, shall any Church be
therefore not Catholic, because it does not hold or practice in every such
thing, as the Church in those Ages did? as for example, Trine immersion in
Baptism, standing in public prayer betwixt Easter and Pentecost, and some
other, not only held and used by the Church of those Ages, but affirmed by
some Fathers of those Ages to be of Apostolical Tradition, yet are they not
held or practiced by the Romish Church.

The Cardinal his other Rule is in his fourth Observation in the same Letter,
Let that be held (says he) as truly ancient, and to have the mark of the
primitive Church, which is found to be believed and practiced Universally by
the Fathers of the Times of the four first Councels; and when it appears, that
the things testified by them, were not held for doctrines and observances
sprung up in their time, but as perpetually practiced in the Church from the
Age of the Apostles; and that there is not found in the former Authors
testimony against them, but in all places (where there is occasion to mention
them) agreeable and favorable. So he. This indeed is reasonable fair, as to
the trial between them and us: yet not this of it self to give a sufficient
ground for belief; for how will it hold in the forementioned instances of
Infant-Communion, and the places of men's Souls till the resurrection, in which
both they and we reject what was generally believed and practiced in those
Ages? where still by Generally, is meant, more generally believed or practiced,
and so the Cardinals word Universally, in his Rule is to be understood. But as
to the points controverted: How can the Church of Rome hold to this, or stand
by it, when she is never able to show her doctrines so attested, believed,
practiced? nay when as we are able to show the beginning of many of them but
springing up in, or after those Ages, as Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
Image Worship, Transubstantiation, half-Communion? Nay when their own Authors
give us reasons why the Apostles, and those of the first Age did not teach (as
Chap. 21. was noted above) Invocation of Saints and Image Worship, to the first
Christians; yet must these pass for Catholic doctrines, universally believed
and practiced from the Age of the Apostles. A cause this, that needed the great
wit of that Cardinal, to make Antiquity appear for it in so fair a show, and
then to persuade men so far out of their wits, as to believe it did so indeed;
Whereas these general Hints, that have been given from the beginning of the 30
Chap: may suffice to let any man, that has reason, know, it can be no good
appearance, which is made of Antiquity, but a cunning disguise: and that the
Trent Articles can be no Catholic or perpetual doctrine of the Church, but
Novel-points of Romish persuasion, creeping at first, (some in one Age, some in
another) into Opinion or practice, and so by degrees gathering strength, till
they were asserted by the most and chiefest in that Communion, and defended for
the doctrine of that Church, and at length coined into Articles of. Faith, as
the Catholic doctrine of all Ages, and of the whole Church.

The End.
The Contents.
OF the Division of the English and Romish Church, upon the Reformation. 1
Chap. I. We set not up a new Church, but were the same Christian Church before
and after the Reformation. 4 Chap. II. The demand of Professors in all Ages. We
can show it better than they. 9 Chap. III. How they and we are said to differ
in Essentials. 12 Chap. IV. Particular Churckes may reform; Especially when a
General Council cannot be expected. 15 Chap. V. We not guilty of Schism. The
guilt of the breach lies on the Romanists. 20 Chap. VI. How necessity of
dividing Communion arises. 24 Chap. VII. Sectaries cannot make the Plea that we
do. 28 Chap. VIII. Of the use of Reason and Judgment in priva^e men. 31 Chap.
IX. Of dissenting from the public Judgment. 35 Chap. X. Possibility of just
dissenting. 39 Chap XI. How far the Romanists leave men the use of their
Reason and Judgment. 47 Chap. XII. Of knowing the Church by the marks of
Eminency, Perpetuity, etc. 51 Chap. XIII. Our way opens not a gap to
Sectaries. 57 Chap. XIV. The Romanists vain pretense of Infallibility. 63 Chap.
XV. Dividing from the Roman Church is not a dividing from the Catholic. 66
Chap. XVI. The Greek Church, a Church, and part of the Catholic. 69 Chap.
XVII. Of agreement and external Communion betwixt the parts of the Catholic
Church. 73 Chap. XVIII. The want of that does not always make guilty of
Schism. 75 Chap. XIX. Our case and that of the Donatists not alike. 78 Chap.
XX. Of Hell-Gates not prevailing against the Church. 82 Chap. XXI. Of the Trial
of Doctrines by Scripture. 91 Chap. XXII. Sufficient perfection of the
Scripture, as a Rule. 95 Chap. XXIII. Of Tradition, which we allow. 96 Chap.
XXIV. Their arguments against Scriptures sufficiency, and for Traditions. 103
Chap. XXV. The evidence of Antiquity in the point. 114 Chap. XXVI. Of the
Perspicuity and Interpretation of Scripture. 119 Chap. XXVII. Of a visible
Infallible Judge or Interpreter. 125 Chap. XXVIII. Of certainty of belief, and
whether they or we have better means for it. 146 Chap. XXIX. Of the other Rule
of Trial, by Consent of Antiquity, and the Romanists vain boasting of the
Fathers. 157 Chap. XXX. Application of the Rule to their Doctrine in several
p^ints. 161 CHAP. XXXI. Card: Perrons two Rules for knowing who and what is
Catholic according to Antiquity. 179
The end of the Table.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in
Ivie-lane,

By H. Fern, D. D. Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, in 4o.

A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight, before his Majesty, in 4o.

Now in the Press,

A Compendious Discourse upon the Case, as it stands between the Church of
England and of Rome on the one side; and again between the same Church of
England, and those Congregations, which (of what persuasion soever) have
divided from it, on the other side. Part I. in 12o.


