A BRIEF REFUTATION OF THE ERRORS OF Tolleration, Erastianism, Independency AND
Separation. Delivered in some SERMONS From 1 John 4. 1. Preached in the Year
1652. To which are Added Four Sermons Preached on several Occasions.

By Mr: James Fergusson, Late Minister of the Gospel at Kilwinning.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Close, Anno Domini MDCXCII.

TO THE HONORABLE Mr. Francis Montgomery OF GIFFINE.
HONORED SIR,
SO soon as I resolved upon the Publication of the following Papers, I fixed on
You as the only Person to whom they should be Addressed: And indeed, whether I
look on the Author, or on my Self, I conceive I was many ways Obliged so to do.

For as to the Author: You are a Worthy Branch of the Noble and Ancient FAMILY
of EGLINTOUN, whereof God had given Him the peculiar Charge and Oversight in
the Ordinary Course of his Ministry: A Family which (as Himself somewhere
testifies) were his great Encouragers in going about all the parts of his
Function, with Joy and not with Grief; and for which he had sent up many
Fervent Prayers to the Throne of Grace, of the Effects whereof You your Self me
(Blessed be God) yet a living Instance. It was to that Noble Patriot and
Zealous Instrument of Our late Reformation, Your Grandfather, and to the Noble
Earl Your Father (then Lord Montgomery) and to Your most Examplarly Pious and
Religious Mother, That the Author did Dedicate his Exposition of the Epistles
to the Galatians and Ephesians; And as all who have the Honor to know You, are
glad to see You so Naturally trace the Religious Example of Your Honorable
Predecessors, in Your firm Adhering to Your Principles, and Purity of Religion,
Your Encouraging of Piety and Persons Pious, Your Straight, Sincere and Upright
Deportment toward All (a Quality as Eminent in that Noble Earl Your
Grandfather, as rare in this Generation) so I nothing doubt, but that if it had
pleased God to have spared the Author, to Publish any other of his Works, He
would have looked upon Your self, as the most Proper person, to whom he should
Present them.

As for my self: Your Respect to the Author's Memory with your undeserved
kindness to all his Relations, and to my Self in particular, Do strongly oblige
me to take all Occasions for testifying my Thankful Acknowledgements. And I
presume I can scarce give You a more Acceptable Testimony of my Gratitude, than
the presenting You with the ensuing Papers, which tho the Publication be
posthumous, yet I hope a serious perusal of them, will be sufficient to
supersede any further Commendation: And indeed my near Relation to the Author,
will not allow me to speak either of Him or his Works, what perhaps others
might: And therefore without giving You any further trouble, but Commending You
and Your Virtuous Lady to the Protection of the Almighty; And Wishing, That as
God has blessed You with an Hopeful offspring, who are as so many Living
Images of your selves, in whom you see your own Lives renewed, and who by Their
Good Enclinations, do already give us cause to expect the best of Them; So You
and They may live together till You see Them prove a Comfort unto You; And that
after You are gone, They may be no less Useful in Their Generation, than now
You are; I shall humbly crave leave to subscribe my self in all duty,

Honored Sir, Your most obliged, and most humble Servant JAMES FERGVSSON.

TO THE READER.
THere are diverse years past, since the Reverend, Learned, and Pious Author of
the following Discourses, fell a sleep in the Lord, and is gone to receive the
fruit of his Labors, from the chief Shepherd of the Sheep: Yet we have in his
Memory a lasting proof of the Truth of that Word, Pro. 10. 7. The memory of the
Just is Blessed And that of Psalm 112 6 -- The Righteous shall be in
everlasting Remembrance: Their memory is Precious and Honorable: For I can
truly say, though I have heard many, of high and low Degree speak of Master
Fergusson, I never heard any make mention of him but with Honor and Respect,
As a Man of great Piety and Learning, and Eminent for Prudence and Moderation.
And I am confident, there will be no need of Epistles of Recommendation, for
any of his Works, to any who either knew Himself, or have perused his Judicious
and Pious Treatises, published already, on the Epistles to the Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians and Thes^alonians. Nor am I so presumptuous,
as to imagine my Testimony could raise the Esteem of any thing done by so
Famous and Worthy a Man: But being his Mediate Successor to the Parish of
Kilwinning, where he did for many years Labor in the Work of the Gospel; and
being desired by his Son of the same Name, I could not deny to express the
esteem I have for his Memory, Though I had not the Advantage of knowing him
while he lived.

I am informed the following Discourses, were the subject of Diverse Sermons,
delivered to that People, in a time when there was much need of Warning; It was
after that through a Boundless Tolleration, a deludge of Errors had broken in
upon England, and the Sectarian Army having Subdued Scotland, and dispersed
themselves in all the Parts of it, Corrupt Men and Seducers among Them, did
endeavor to pervert the People from the Truth: Then it was ( anno 1652.) When
this worthy Author, as a Faithful Watchman, gave to his Flock Warning of the
Danger; And that they might be rooted and grounded in the Truth, did represent
to them the necessity of a sound and well-informed Judgment, in order to
Holiness and Salvation; and for that end did excite and direct them to Try the
Spirits; and afterw^rd* for their further Instruction and establishment in the
Truth, took notice of some particular Errors, by which they seemed to be in
greatest hazard at that time; and did in a plain and convincing way, Refute the
Errors, and Confirm the Truth, making always some Practical Improvement of
what he had delivered.

Although the Reverend Author was known to be a great Master of
School-learning, and was invited to be Professor of Divinity in the Famous
University of Glasgow (which yet he humbly refused) yet he did not calculate
these Discourses for the School or Court; But being to speak to a Country
Congregation, wherein were many Common People (for whom they seem to have been
entirely designed, since the Author could never be induced to Publish them in
his own time) He had such a sense of the holy Apostles example 1 Cor. 14. 18,
19. that he choosed to speak to the edification of the meanest; and he had a
peculiar faculty of making things intricate, plain and easy to be understood.
And I am confident that those who are not for pleasing their fancy with fine
notions, or their ear with jingling-words, but desire to have their judgment
informed, and their conscience satisfied, will find here that which will be
very edifying: For his endeavor is, That Controversies be clearly stated; And
with great perspicuity and solidity does he confirm the Truth by Scripture and
Reason, and confute the contrary Error; and all this without bitterness or
wrath, but with such calmness and moderation of Spirit, wherein he did excel;
So that (as I am informed) diverse of the English Army, though of a contrary
Judgment, did resort to hear him; I know not what effects his Teaching of
these Truths had on Them, but by the Blessing of God, these of his own Flock
were so established in the Truth, that not one of them was seduced from it. And
I cannot but record it to the praise of God and commendation of that
Congregation, and for the encouragement of any who may be invited to be their
Pastor, when I, to their and my grief, am to be separated from them, to a more
difficult Post; I say, I cannot but record it, that as that Congregation of
Kilwinning, has since the Reformation, been blessed with eminent learned and
pious Men, Mr Glasford. Mr Bailie, Mr Fergusson and Mr Rogirs; So they have by
the Blessing of God on their labors, been kept not only Sound in the Faith,
but United among themselves, when others have been woefully Divided: And they
have always showed a great love to the Gospel, and all the Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, and the Ministers thereof: And I pray That their fruit may abound
more and more.

If some Expressions Concerning the Opinion of Independents, or Congregational
Men, seem severe; It would be remembered, that the Author does not speak against
Persons, but against Things; And in a time when many Errors followed that
Division about Church Government; and the Debate was hot about it, and fear
that it should have taken place in Scotland: But considering the Zeal these of
New England have discovered against Error, and their United way of acting in
Association and Synods, when they think there is need, and the love that has
been in time of Common Trial, and the Late Essay which has been made for an
Accommodation, betwixt Presbyterians and Them in England; I suppose if our
Reverend Author had lived until this time, he would have concluded, the
Difference may be so lessened, that it need not hinder their walking together,
in that wherein they are agreed, nor their Endeavors to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace.

I do not know of any particular design of publishing these Discourses now,
when they have been kept hid for forty years, but that the Author's Son having
long delayed and declined to Publish them, though frequently and seriously
advised to do it by many, he was advertised that some would publish the
Imperfect Notes received from His mouth, in the time of Hearing, which being
incorrect, might not only prejudge the Authors name, but the Truth, and others
Edification. If these (as is hoped they will) be acceptable and useful, what
yet remains unprinted of these Discourses, may see the Light in due time.

There are here subjoyned Four Sermons of the Reverend Author, which the
Publisher and others hope may be found of good use, and may make way for the
communicating more of his Pious and Judicious Sermons, which are longed for by
them who knew Him, or his other Works.

It had surely been of great advantage to the Church, had it pleased God to
have spared this judicious and pious Author till now, and that he had published
more of his Works in his own time: But seeing our infinitely wise and good God
has disposed otherwise, it becomes us to submit: But if by this, or any other
of his Works, God get Glory, and the Church be edified; The Publisher will
rejoice and bless God, as having attained his end. And if the Reader peruse his
Works with the same Spirit wherewith they seem to be spoken and written, I am
confident he will not fail of profit.

Now that the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, would lead Thee and all His people,
into all Truth, and help them to edify one another in love, and that He would
bless His Churches with Truth and Peace, and send out many Faithful Laborers
into His Harvest with a double measure of the Spirit that was in Mr. Fergusson
and other eminently holy Men who then lived, shall be the Prayer of,

Christian Reader, Thy Souls cordial Well-wisher. George Meldrum.
Edinburgh, June 1692.
The Contents.
SECT. I.
OF Doctrine in general, and the Trial thereof: Being some Doctrines raised
from the Text, Introductorie to the main purpose. Page 1: ad 26. Doctr. I.
Error is to be Eschewed. page 3. Doctr. II. Orthodoxy, or a Right opinion in
the matters of Truth, is as much to be stu^^ed as Holiness of Life. page 5.
Doctr. III. As at all times, so chiefly when there is danger of spreading of
Error, there is most need that Love should be intertain'd betwixt Pastor and
People: Where are some directions for a Ministers carriage, in order to the
keeping of the affections of his People, while he is Refuting their Errors.
page 12. Doctr. IV. The Spirit of Error began very early to trouble the Church.
Where are some Reasons for which the Lord suffers Errors to spread, page 16.
Doctr. V. The foulest Errors go out oftentimes under fairest Names, and are
backed with most specious Pretenses. page 19. Doctr. VI. When foul Error is
holden out under fair names, and backed with fair pretenses, there is a danger
lest People drink them in and believe them. Where are 5 things that speak this
hazard. page 23. Doctr. VII. Ministers the Servants of God are not to clap
Peoples heads, or to indulge them in this inclination of Theirs to Error, but
on all hazards they are to testify against it: Where are 3 Reasons for which
People ought to reverence much what warnings of this kind are given by
Ministers. page 28. Doct. VIII. It is not Gods Way That People, because there
are differences about Religion, should therefore believe no Religion: Where are
5 Directions for the unlearned to walk by, in order to difference of opinions
among the Learned page 31. Doctr. IX. How fair soever the pretense is that a
Doctrine is colloured with, It should not be taken upon Trust, but must be
brought to a Trial. Where are some Directions how to walk betwixt Popish
Tyranny, and Sectarian Confusion. page 34. Doctr. X. The right Trial to be
taken of Doctrines preached, or any otherwise vented is, To try whether they be
of God or not. Where is shown what is requisite to a Doctrines that it may be
said to be Of God. page 38. Doct. XI. There are many Doctrines pretending to
the Spirit, which yet being brought to the Touchstone will be found Not to be
of God. p. 44
SECT. II.
The Doctrine of Toleration Tried, and foundnot to be Of God. Wherein, as in
all the Errors following, First, The Question is stated. 2. Arguments are
brought for Confirming the Truth, and vindicated from the Opposites Exceptions.
3. The Opposites Objections are Answered, and Refuted from Scripture and
Reason. 4. The Truth being vindicated, is applied to a Practical Use. page 47.
SECT. III.
The Doctrine of Errastianism Tried, and found not to be Of God. page 86. Head
l. There is a Church Government (...) forth in Scripture. ibid. Head II. The
power of Church Government belongs not to the Civil Magistrate. page 103
SECT. IV.
The Doctrine of Independency Tried, and found not to be Of God. page 123. Head
I. The power of Church Government is in the Church Officers, and not in the
Body of Church Members. ibid. Head. II. The highest power of Church Government
is not in Church Sessions, or Congregational Elderships. page 150. Paragr. I.
There is a Plate-form of the Government of many Congregations, by One Common
Presbytry holden out in Scripture, page 152. Paragr. II. There is a Plate-form
of Government by Synods over many particular Presbytries held forth in
Scripture. page 167. Paragr. III. Infertor Church Judicatories are subject
Superior. page 173*
SECT. V.
The Doctrine of Separation Tried, and sound Not to be of God. page 191 Head I.
Showing what is required for making one a Member of the Visible Church. ibid
Head II. No Separation from a true Church, or Gods Worship in the Church,
because of the Sins of Fellow-worshipers. page 214 A Sermon Preached before the
Synod at Glasgow, April 5. 1653. From 1 Cor: 1. 10. page 235. Sermon Second
Preached at Irving, foom Psalm 51: 6. Immediately before the Giving of the
Communion, Being a Preparation Sermon in order thereto. page 287 Sermon Third
Preached at Kilwinning 11 May 1663 From Luke 7. 23. Upon the Monday, Immediately
after the Giving of the Communion. page 313. Sermon Fourth, Preached at
Kilwinning, From Acts 11: 23. Upon the Monday Immediately after the Giving of
the Communion. page 340.
A BRIEF REFUTATION OF THE ERRORS OF Tolleration, etc.
SECT. I.
Of Doctrine in General, and the Trial thereof.
1 John chapter 4. ver. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits
whether they are of God.
THE Body of this Epistle, as we showed when first we entered upon the handling
of it, runs upon three Heads: The first is upon Marks whereby to discern real
Grace, to wit, who had it, and who not. The second runs upon Exhortations to
several Duties of Sanctification; chiefly, Love to the Brethren, that
Christians would Love them that Love God, Love Grace wherever they saw it. The
third Head whereon it runs is, Exhortations to Constancy, in avowing Truth
against Error.

In this fourth Chapter there are two of these Heads, according to which we may
take up the Chapter in two parts. In the First, There is an Exhortation to
stand by Truth, and to beware of those who would seduce People from it: And
that to ver. 7. In the second part, There is a renewing of the former
Exhortations, To Love the Brethren: And a Confirmation of it, by a number of
new Arguments, to the end: Both which have been handled already, and yet the
Apostle returns again to them, because Exhortations against Error cannot be
enough inculcate, and therefore he reiterats them again and again.

In the first part of this Chapter, There is, 1. An Exhortation. 2. There are
Arguments to enforce the Exhortation. The Exhortation is set down in the former
part of the first verse, Believe not every Spirit, that is, lend not an Ear to
every point of Doctrine covered over with a fair Name, but bring every Doctrine
to the Touchstone. There are two Things considerable in this Exhortation:
First, There is the compellation he gives them, a warm and kindly Style,
Beloved; And then Secondly, There is the Exhortation it self: And in it there
are two Things. 1. What they should not do. And 2. What they should do. For the
First, What they should not do. Believe not every Spirit. Some take the Spirit
here for Preacher, Believe not every Preacher. And some for Doctrine, Believe
not every Doctrine: But both may well be joined together thus, Believe not
every Preacher who pretends the Spirit for his Doctrine. For the second, What
they should do; It is to Try the Spirits whether they are of God. He bids them
not cast at all Doctrines, because there are some Errors vented for Truths, as
the natural Heart is ready to do: But, he Exhorts, that they would bring every
Spirit to the right Touch stone. Thus much for opening up the words.

We intend (if the Lord give us liberty) to speak somewhat largely on this
Verse of those Doctrines or Errors which are most like to trouble our Church;
therefore we shall raise some Doctrines before hand, which may make way for
what we intend.

Doct. I. The First is, from the Apostles dehorting Believers from false
Doctrine, by many Arguments. Hence observe, That Christians would by all means
eschew any thing that may tend to seduce them from the pure Truths of Jesus
Christ: Particularly, that they would beware of Error, Heresy, and any thing of
that sort: Hence there are so many Exhortations in Scripture, to stand by the
Truth, to be rooted in the Faith, and to eschew contrary Error: So it is a Duty
lying on Christians, to be guarding and watching against Error, or what is
contrary to Truth.

Reas: The Reason is, because Error is a Sin, and a very dangerous one. We
shall show the danger of it in three Things: I. It is dangerous, because of the
desert of it; It is Damnable. 2 Peter 2. 1. False Prophets are spoken of there
as those who bring in damnable Heresies, that is highly, condemnable: We shall
afterwads show in what respect Heresies are Damnable. 2. Errors are dangerous
Sins, because they steal subtily in upon People, and people do too readily
relish them: So there are many whose nature abhorres gross Sins against the
second Table, as Fornication and such like; and yet the Devil gets them hooked,
by this sin of Error: Nature is born with a cry against gross Sins committed
against the second Table, and so naturally there is some kind of loathing in
People at them; but it is not so in the sins of Error: Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of Light, and plead Conscience, whereas he intends to
bear down Truth: So the sins of Error are dangerous, because subtle. 3. They
are dangerous in this respect, that as they creep easily in; So when once they
are in, it is hard to get them shut to the door again: And that because deluded
Conscience pleads for them. People tainted with Error think themselves right,
and therefore whatever is brought against them, Conscience casts at all as
wrong. Now in other Sins, to wit, such as are against the Second Table, although
Affection plead for them, yet usually Peoples Light does witness against them:
And so in this respect, it is more hard to get a sin of Error thrust out, where
it is once rooted, than the sin of Prophanity it self.

Use. This Doctrine may serve to fit you for receiving the following Doctrines
(which if the Lord will, we are to speak of) tending to the Refutation of
diverse Errors. Error in Doctrine is a subtle temtation, the temtation of the
time, a dangerous temptation; because it has now many advantages to plead for
it. Now if the Lord shall bless the following Discourses, they may prove an
Antidote against it: And what we have now said, shows how great need ye have
to guard against it: It is a dangerous Sin, and so ye had need to be armed
against it.

Doct. II. Again, a general Doctrine arriseth from the connection of this
Chapter with the preceding; In the preceding, the Apostle has been all
alongs stirring up Christians to Sanctification of Life, to eschew Prophanity,
here he subjoyns an Exhortation to cleave to the Truth. Which gives us this
Obeservation, That an Orthodox Judgment, or a right Opinion in the matters of
Truth is as much to be studied as Sanctification of Life, and the contrary of
them both is equally to be eschewed: That is to say, a Child of God is bound to
guard himself, and to watch as much against Heresy and Error, in the matter of
Opinion, as against Prophanity and gross Sins in the matter of Practice. We had
need to clear this, because there is a conceit in People, whereby they are
ready to think, that for the matter of Opinion, it makes not much what men be,
many that have Error may have Grace, Grace and Error, say they, are consistent:
And so if men live well it matters not much what be their Opinion. We grant
indeed every Error does not destroy Grace, and Grace is consistent with some
Errors, yet every Error does in so much weaken the work of Grace within a man.
And secondly, Error is consistent with Grace as other dam-Sins are; as David's
Adultery was consistent with Grace. And that is the point to be proven, That
Error in the matter of Doctrine is as much to be abhorred by the Child of God,
as gross Sins in the matter of their Practice.

Reas. We shall bring several things to clear this Truth to you, and the first
is this; Scripture does equally discharge both: It is as much in guarding
against Error as Prophanity. So in Hebr. 13, 9. Be not carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines: For it is a good thing that the Heart be
established with Grace: and in Coloss. 2. 8. Bewar lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy -- We need not insist to multiply Scriptures to this
purpose; any that are acquaint with Scripture (especially the Epistles of the
new Testament) will find Exhortations against Error to be as pressing as
against any sin else.

Secondly, as Scripture discharges both alike, so it aggravates the sin of
Error as much as the sin of Prophanity. There is nothing almost that Scripture
brings to aggravate gross sins against the second Table, but it uses the same
to aggravate Error: In the Epistle to the Gallat. 5. 19. Adultery, Fornication
Lasciviousness, etc* are called the works of the Flesh: An odious name: But in
ver. 20. Heresy gets the same name also, and is rekoned up amongst the works of
the Flesh. So in the Epistle to the Coloss. 2, 18. a superstitious mind is
called, a fleshly mind. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility. And worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has
not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. And both get one name. Thus in 1
Peter. 2, 11. If fleshly lusts be aggravated from this that they fight against
the Soul, they are soul destroying sins: So Heresy and Error are branded with a
worse name in the 2 Peter 2. 1 -- who privily bring in damnable Heresies.
Heresy is damnable a soul destroying sin, not for this respect only that they
deserve Damnation; For the meanest sin of Infirmity is damnable that way, in it
self it merits damnation: therefore this Scripture must mean somewhat more when
it calls Heresy damnable, than to rank it amongst our ordinary infirmities:
Neither are they called damnable in that sense as if the Soul guilty of Heresy
could not be saved; For many Heretics have repented unto Salvation: But they
are called damnable sins, as other gross sins are called damnable; that is to
say justly and highly Condemnable. They are damnable because they mar the work
of Grace, they mar the thriving of Grace, the lively acts of Grace; even as
David's Adultery, (so long as he lay under it) did.

Reas: 3 There is a third Reason to prove this point and it is this; Stability
of the heart in Grace, and stability of the mind in Truth, stand and fall
together: So that upon the mind's wavering in the matters of Truth, the heart
will begin to waver in the matter of Grace also: Prophanity follows upon
Error, Error received and embraced oftentimes ends in Prophanity at the last:
And therefore it should equally be watched against with Prophanity it self. Now
to make what we have said appear viz. That Error in the matter of Truth, and
Prophanity against Holiness of Life, usually go along together: Ye would first
look to Experience, Experience makes this good, that Error for the most part
ends in a profane Godless Life; Scripture experience clears it, So the Apostle
Jude descrives these Heretics he speaks of to be vile Livers: And later than
Scripture Experience makes this good also, That Error and Prophanity, for the
most part, follow hard upon the heels one of another: It Is true Satan ensnares
People at the first to Error, by a pretense of leading them to a more strick
way than others: But the thing he is aiming at is still more looseness. Ye need
not seek a more clear proof than what ye see before your Eyes: Did ever ye see
a more Godless company of men than diverse of those Heretics amongst us, who
were first drawn on to Error, by a pretense of walking after a more strict way
of Holiness than others? They could not join in worship with the Presbyterians
(many in their Churches were so profane as they pretended) but would gather
Churches of their own, and would Join with none but those that had evident
signs of Grace; and so came of it. They would be stricter than God would have
them, and therefore many of them have turned so abominably loose And so
Experience abundantly clears that Error and Prophanity do follow hard one upon
another; But we shall clear it also from Scripture: And our first proof is from
those Scriptures holding forth That Error in the matter of Doctrine has
usually its rise from some unmortifyed Lust within which makes way for such an
Error So Rom: 16, 17. 18. -- I beseech yo^, Brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned; and
avoid them. Now from whence come these divisions contrary to the right
Doctrine? v. 18 For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own Belly: and by good words and fair Speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple. Unmortified corruptions within blows wind in their sails, so the root
of Korah Dathan and Abiram's Error whereby they labored to bear down
Magistracy and Ministry was an unmortified root of pride within them; They had
a fair pretext for it, a pretext of Liberty; Are not all the Lords People Holy?
And may they not rule as well as ye? A fair pretext indeed! but the root was
pride: They could not endure to be ruled over, and so they will rule
themselves: Thus when Jeroboam makes separation from the Church of Jerusalem he
has a fair pretext for this 1 King. 12, 28 -- It is too much (says he) for
you to go up to Jerusalem. There is the pretext; but the root of the matter was
a lust within, stirring him up to secure to himself the enjoyment of that which
was not his own; and this Ambition breeds fear, that if they go up to
Jerusalem, to worship, his power would quickly turn to nothing. So ver. 27. If
this People go up to do Sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then
shall the heart of this People turn again unto to their Lord, even unto
Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me. There is the matter, a desire
of Reigning was the cause of his Idolatry and Schism, an unmortified lust
within was the root and rise of his Error. And secondly Scripture holds out,
That as Error is the Daughter of Prophanity, so it is the Mother of prophanity;
as it rises from Prophanity, so it tends to more Prophanity, Christ's words
import this John 8. 31. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him; if
ye continue in my word then are ye my Disciples indeed, If ye adhere and keep
closs to the Truth, then shall ye attain to walk as my Disciples. And it
imports on the other hand, That if ye drink in Error, ye shall not be my
Disciples indeed. And so, as Prophanity is the Mother of Error; So it is also
the Daughter of Error, This serves to clear the point. That a Child of God
should as much watch and guard against Error, as he should do against other
gross Sins or prophanity of Life.

For Use, This Doctrine serves for reproof first to those who would have
Tolleration of all Opinions in the Matter of Religion, and no coercive mean to
curb Error: And that because, say they, it may curb Piety. Which follows no
more than that the suppressing of Fornication will curb Piety, the one is as
dangerous as the other, and God's People may fall in the one as well as the
other; and therefore the one should be as well curbed as the other* Nay I may
say that that which is called Liberty of Conscience is the most capital Sin in
a Kingdom: It is all one as if a King would proclaim liberty, to Drink, to
Swear, to Whore, and to Steal; for both are alike evil, and where the one is,
commonly the other is also: and therefore to proclaim liberty to the one is to
proclaim liberty to the other. We think there is no heart zealous of Gods
Glory, but should abhor such a thought as this.

Use 2. Secondly, the Doctrine reproves those who think Opinions are free; Many
reason thus, If ye lead an Holy Life it matters not what be your Opinion,
whether for Presbytery, Independency, Arminianism, Prelacy, or Popery, your
Soul is in no hazard, if ye be kept from gross Out breakings; but this Doctrine
shows, this sort of Reasoning to be a gross mistake: For, besides that Error
speaks an unmortified root in the Heart. Heresy and Error in themselves are
damnable, and are reckoned up among those Sins which debar from the Kingdom of
Heaven, Galat. 5. verse 21. Heretics as well as Murderers are excluded, and
therefore Folks would not jest and play with matters of Religion, so as not to
care what side they be on.

Thirdly, this Doctrine gives another use, as ye would eschew Prophanity of
Life; so beware of Errors against the Truth: For the one of those, ends in the
other. Grant the Error pretend to much of strictness, the upshot or Issue of it
is still to Prophanity; and therefore ye would advise well when tentations to
Error are presented, before ye drink in any thing contrary to Truths received,
if ye would not have it read in the looseness of your Life afterward. Many
whose Lives were very strict, when they began first to change their Way, were
in a short time led by their new Light to a Profane Godless Life.

Use 4. Fourthly, Seeing Errors have their rise from some unmortified root
within; therefore as ye would be kept free from Error, subdue Corruptions
within. We are ready to think that Godless Men, will stand out best against
Error; But it will prove otherwise; unmortified Lusts, of any other thing, will
prove the greatest Friends to Error, such as a Lust of Pride to be Eminent; of
Covetousness, to get your Arms full of the World run as it will, a Lust of
Laziness in Duties that will make you drink in that Error that casts at all
Duties as needless: So, for an Antidote against the works of the Flesh,
(whereof Heresy is one, Galat. 5. verse 21.) The Crucifying of the Lusts of
the Flesh is brought as one.

Doct. III. We come to the words themselves, and and therein is to be
considered, first, the Style, Beloved, A warm and kindly compellation. The
point we are to raise is, from comparing the Style with the Matter which the
Apostle is about: He is to warn them to beware of Error, and yet he gives them
a loving Style, Beloved believe, etc. And it gives us this Doctrine, That as at
all times, so chiefly when there is danger of spreading of Error, there is most
need that Love should be entertained betwixt Pastor and People. So we find Paul
labors to bear in himself on Peoples Affections, especially in Galat. 4. ver
10. and 11. Ye observe Days and Months, etc. I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed on you Labor in vain. There he reproves them for their Error, And in
the 12 verse he bears in on their Affection, Brethren, I beseech you be as I
am, for I am as ye are, ye have not injured me at all. And so in the 2 Corinthians.
12. v. 16. Through the whole Epistle he has been speaking against their Error,
and all along he bears in on their Affection, especially in the place cited.
And I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more abundantly
I loved you, the less I be loved, etc. Abundance of places show his practice to
have been this way.

The Reason is, First, because when People begin to differ, they are ready to
cast at these who differ from them, chiefly, those who would curb them: For
there is still a Spirit of Pride with Error, it cannot endure to be
contradicted, or, the least thing to be spoken to its own prejudice if not all
the more warily, it will foam and rage, and if it cannot bear down the contrary
Truth, yet it will labor to bear down him that speaks it. So Heretics are
called Murmurers, Complainers, Jude verse 16. So a Minister in reproving Error.
would guard against this danger, lest he do more hurt than profit, and all the
Issue of his pains be to work a prejudice against himself.

And Secondly, This Argument will be the more strong, considering the evil that
comes by prejudice. There is nothing that makes people run faster headlong into
Error, than prejudice against Faithful Pastors. Therefore this has been the
Devil's Method, First, To bear down the Ministry, by making the people first
cast at one, then at another, and so at all; that their Ears being once stoped
with prejudice at what Ministers say, their Ear may be boared to let in any
Error that the Devil or his Instruments pleases to vent: Therefore a Minister
would make it his Study so to behave himself, that there be no ground of
prejudice given by him, but that all his Carriage may savor of a Resolution to
entertain Love.

Now because our fear is that Error may spread, and that (if the Lord give us
leave) we intend from this Verse to speak to the most infecting Errors: We
shall solve this Question, What a Minister is to do for entertaining Love: For
clearing of this, we shall first show what he is not to do, He is not to be
silent at Error, for fear of Irritating and losing Affection; That were not
Love, considering what is said of the nature of Error: It is all one as if we
would not reprove a loose Liver for fear of angring him. Secondly, Neither is
he to speak against them in a Cold-rife manner, as if it were a thing
indifferent, whether they return to a right Judgment or not: No, He must (as
he would be faithful to God) aggravate the evil of Error to the utmost, declare
its hazard, denounce what Scripture pronounces against it, whether it anger
them or not; Better anger and loose them, than anger God.

What then must he do? Answer, As in other sins he must first reprove them,
Levit. 19. ver. 17. And secondly so reprove, as it may argue Love to the person
reproved, Jude ver. 23. Only there would be this difference betwixt reproving
of Error and other sins, Other sins may be inveighed against without pains to
convince the person reproved that such are sins, Nature is born with a cry
against such; But Error has an erring Conscience to stand up in its behalf;
therefore the most of a Ministers work would be in convincing from the Word,
that the thing he holds is Error: Otherwise, to inveigh against what he
holds, without this, will harden him more, he will look on it as the Man's
passion, and that he has nothing to say from Scripture or Reason against what
he holds.

2. In dealing with erring persons, there would be a difference put betwixt
Seducers, and those who are seduced: Those who are rooted in Error, and those
who are only Doubters, so Jude verse 23.

For Use, Ye may see from this what a great Task Ministers have, and how great
need of help there is from people to Ministers in Erring times. In some respect
it is harder to deal with one Man tainted with Error, than with twice so many
Profane Livers: A profane Man's Conscience must readily say the same that we
say, and so, keep us at Reverence: But an erring Man's Conscience speaks against
us, takes us to Err, and so readily cannot endure us, and yet we must speak,
venturing in Gods strength: But there is need so to speak, least in speaking we
loose more then we gain.

The next thing that follows is, the Exhortation, Believe not every Spirit:
That is, do not credit every Doctrine that has a fair pretense, Or every
Preacher that pretends the Name of the Spirit: From this we learn, That the
Spirit of Error began very early to trouble the Church, in the primitive times
when the Apostles were yet living, there were even then some who contradicted
them to their very face; so the averrers of Circumcision, Justification by
works, denyers of the resurrection. etc.

Reas: 1. The Reason is first, because the Spirit of Error is shameless, it
will affront the most convincing evidences; for it is natures Brood, and credit
is so engaged in it, that it trampleth upon all that would bear it under, if an
Apostle were speaking a Sectarian Spirit would out-dare him: It is an affronted
and malapert Spirit.

Secondly, The Lord saw it fitting, that in the latter ages of the Church his
People should be tried by erring Spirits, and therefore, he would have the
primitive times troubled with them also, that we might be the less troubled;
seeing that even the Apostles themselves were not fre'd from such like
perplexity, as to have to do with Spirits of Error. But there is an other
Reason why the Lord suffers his Church, both in former times, and in latter
times, to be troubled with the Spirit of Error, set down in the 1 Corinthians: 11.
verse 19. For there must be also Heresies amongst you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among you. There must be Heresies, there is a
must be put upon it: Now this is not an absolute necessity, but a necessity or
a must be upon the supposition of Gods most wise decree, to permit wise decree,
to permit and suffer those things for most wise ends; and the end for which he
permitts them to be, is First, for the trial of Persons, and secondly, for the
trial of Truth. First, for the trial of Persons, this End is set down in the
verse cited Heresies and Heretics must be, that they which are aproved may be
made manifest among you. The Spirit of Heresy let loose, has a discovering
efficacy with it, it discovers who are of a humble frame of Spirit, and who are
Proud, Lofty, Conceity, and of a Selfish spirit: It discovers who are light,
weak, and easily carried away with any thing, unstable minds, as the Apostle
speaks; and who are more solid, and Balanced with the Spirit of Sobriety, and
solid Wisdom, that is from above. It discovers these who have put a price on
Truth, that they will buy it, but will on no terms sell it, and also discovers
those who have put no price upon it, or that will suffer little for it. That is
the first end why Heretics must be, to discover Persons and try them. And
secondly, Heretics, in the Lords wise Providence, tend to the trial of Truths,
and the making of them brighter and clearer, they scour Truths, (so to speak)
so that the disputs of Heretics, and venting of Error, make Truth the
brighter. The more debating there is betwixt these two, Error grows the
blacker, and Truth the clearer. When the Lord has a mind to have a Truth
cleared and rooted in his Peoples Spirits, He does in his Infinite Wisdom take
this way, a strange way indeed and yet making much for the purpose: He will let
some Error arise to oppose the Truth, through occasion whereof more light
breaks out to the clearing of the Truth. These are Reasons why Heretics must
be.

Use. The use is, seeing the Spirit of Error began so early to trouble the
Church in the Apostles time, that were guided with an infallible Spirit, then
ye are not to wonder that Error should trouble the Church now when there are
not such infallible lights as these: The Spirit of Error is a bold darring
Spirit it will dare to contradict God Himself, and find out some shift, to cast
at that which God Himself says: As may be seen Gen: 3. The Lord said The day
thou eatest thereof thou shall die: And Satan contradicts it, thou shall not
surely die. And so no wonder there be such impudence seen in the Spirit of
Error now, as to cast at any thing which Gods Servants say, seeing Satan still
Acts the Instruments of Error.

Use. 2 But secondly, from this Doctrine learn not to quarrel with Gods most
Holy and wise Providence, in that he suffers so many Errors to be. We are ready
to think that if God had that care of his Church, Covenant and Cause, as men
would think he had, he would not suffer such Effronted Spirits, and such
Blasphemous Heretics to prevail, and to outdare his Truth: But that is to
quarrel the Lords providence and without a ground: He whose furnace is in Zion
can make all the trials of the time that arise from Error to contribute much
for the clearing of Truth; by this means he will rouse up his People to study
Truth, to understand it better, to search out grounds for it, and that is one
advantage; only ye would know also, that these times will be discovering times,
they will discover many a corrupt heart, many unstable hearts and light heads,
many proud Spirits, and many that have Lusts lurking within them: So that many
will choose that Religion that will gratify their Lusts most; For, there is not
an Error that Satan hatches, but there is one Lust or other within People that
speaks for it; and there is nothing more ready to make People take in Error,
than their harboring of unmortified Lusts. So in. 2 Timoth: Cap: 3. The
Apostle speaking of those who should be carried away with false Teachers says in
the 6. v. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women laden with sins led away with diverse Lusts: Unmortified Lusts are
as fuel to make the fire of Zeal for Error to burn very hot in Peoples bosom,
and so Error will try People this way.

Doct: V. Next observe he says Believe not every Spirit, that is, believe not
every Doctrine that has the name of the Spirit, and fair pretenses put upon
it, as if they were the Doctrines of the Spirit of God, believe them not. From
this we learn. That the foulest Errors go out oftentimes under fairest names,
and are backed with most specious pretenses, what Fouler Errors than these
spoken of here, The denying of the Son of God: And yet what fairer Names than
the Spirit? What fairer pretenses than that they are Doctrines taught by the
Spirit of God? We will find this of all Errors spoken of in Scripture, for the
most part, Cora^, Dathan, and Abiram's Error whereby they rose up against the
Magistracy of Moses, and Preist-hood of Aaron, has a fair pretense for it. Ye
take too much upon you Moses and Aaron, are not all the Lords People Holy. And
Jeroboams Error, his Idolatry in setting up the Calf at Dan and Bethel, has a
fair pretense 1 Kings 12. It is too fair for you etc. The Peoples ease, and the
public good is the thing he pretends though his design was far otherwise: And
so these that urged Justification by works, and opposed the way of free Grace,
and being justified by Faith, they had their fair pretenses: O! say they, to
cast off Works from Justification, will make People secure we may sin that
Grace may abound; very taking pretenses all of them, and as taking as any that
Error is now covered over with. The Reason of the Doctrine is from the cause
for which the Tempter presents Error under fair colors, and specious
pretenses, which is this; That he may make the Error the more taking: For these
are the baits he puts on the hook that he may deceive and catch the simple.

Therefore for use of this Doctrine, ye would not be deceived with fair
pretenses, or ravishinglike expressions, that Error may be fairded over with:
See what the Apostle Paul says to this purpose 2 Thessalonians: cap. 2, v. 2. Where
speaking against an Error, he beseeches them by the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, That they be not soon shaken in mind, or troubled, neither by Spirit,
nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. It
supposes that the spreaders of that Error had all these three pretenses. First^
they pretended the Spirit, that it was a Doctrine taught them by the Spirit of
God, accompanied by his presence in their Spirits with more than ordinary
flashes, and raptures, and In-bearings of the Spirit of Light. And Secondly,
that they had the word or Scripture to allege for it. And Thirdly, they picked
somewhat out of Paul's Letters for them, so would they say: In speaking against
us he contradicts himself: These are fair pretenses; and yet, says Paul, be
not shaken in mind with them. So, say I, ye would guard your self against the
fair pretenses which Error may have, and look not only to the out side, but to
the inside of them, and then ye will find most bitter Serpents Lurking under
fairest flowers.

As for example, The Mother of all Error Tolleration has a fair pretense for
it, viz. that good men may Err, and so in suppressing Error ye may suppress
Piety: A fair pretense, but it has afoul end. For by this means Blasphemers,
Denyers of God and Jesus Christ, must have Liberty to vent their damnable
Errors, if so be that they can but pretend Conscience, and so stable room must
be given in Christ's Church, to every unclean beast that ever was hatched in
Hell. The Antinomian Errors again have a fair pretense, O say they, Christ has
become sin for us, and therefore it is taken off from us, so we are not bound
to repent for it, for to say that we are to repent were to take the burden off
from Christ's Back, and to put it on our own: These are specious words without
solidity, but they contradict Scripture Truths where they are narrowly looked
to: Peter was a justified Person, and yet when Christ looked on him He weeped
bitterly: David's sin was pardoned, and Christ had taken the burden of it, and
yet David was to Repent of it, and to be corrected for it, and so the Lord
tells him that the sword should not depart from his house because he had made
the Enemies of the Lord to Blasphem; and yet sin was not laid upon David to
satisfy divine Justice for it: Only he must get on the fingers to make him more
warry, and to scar all Justified Persons in time coming from doing the like. We
might so run through all the Errors of the time, as that of Independency,
whereby power is denied to Presbytries, O, say they, to put power in
Presbytries and make them receive Appeals from Congregations, it is to
Tyrannize over particular Flocks; and therefore say they, nothing is better
than that every Congregation have complete power within themselves, and be left
to their own guiding, not being countable to any Judicatory above them, but
only to Christ: This seems a specious Bait for such as would have liberty, but
when it is duly pondered, it will be found most contrary to Truth: For by this
means, if a particular Flock should Err, and if one should suf^er wrong at the
hands of a particular Session, there is no remedy to repair the oppressed man,
and to bring the Erring Congregation to a right mind: and how far this is
derogatory to Jes^s Christ who was perfect in all his house, any man may judge:
We might run through more of them, But because we have a mind to refute these
Errors by themselves, we shall insist no further here, having said enough to
clear the point, that the most dangerous Errors may be born in under the
fairest pretenses; and therefore ye would not take all to be Gold that
glisters, take not all for Truth that is decked up with a bundle of brave,
high, ravishing expressions.

Doct. 6 We proceed, Believe not every Spirit, says he; He speaks not this in
vain. It supposes he saw an inclination in them to believe: The point of
Doctrine that arises from it is, That when foul Error is holden out under fair
Names, and backed with fair pretenses, There is a danger lest people drink them
in and believe them; for John saw that hazard, and therefore gives them a
Watchword: So in the 16 of the Romans ver. 18. For they that are such serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good words and fair Speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple: Their baits hooked the simple, before they
were aware. We need no further proof of this, than the Example of our neighbor
Church in England; Errors which could not have been named, but People would
have loathed at them: such as the Arminian Error against free Grace; etc. Yet
being decked with the name of new light they are greedily drunk in by too too
many,

We shall give some Reasons to make you sensible of this hazard: How great
danger there is, when Error is in spreading, that People be taken off their
feet with it: We shall point at four or five things that speaks this hazard:
And the first is, the proneness of our nature to Drink in Untruths: We see this
in Eva, for Error is natures brood: And, as we said, Error is the copy of some
Lust, and therefore it soon infects: Truth again, it has nothing in us, no
party for it in our hearts, and therefore it is harder to make us take with it;
there must be word upon word, and precept upon precept; we drink in Truth
slowly and after much pains taken upon us, we are hut to begin to learn it; but
the Spirit of a man is quick to take up Error: Ye will find men more able in a
short time to debate for Error, than in a long time to debate for Truth, I
would seek no greater presumption that such a tenent is an Error than this,
that as soon as it is set on fire, it runs through great numbers, and sets
their Spirits on edge for it, we are not so hot for Truth, it is not our nature
to be so taken with it.

Reason. 2 Then there is a Second thing that speaks this hazard, and it is, the
shallowness of Peoples apprehension, together with their foolish have before
they try; From the shallowness of many it is, that they cannot put a difference
betwixt a fair pretense, and a foul Error that is hid under it, and from the
have of Peoples Spirit it is that they engage suddenly with any thing having
the color of Truth; and being once engaged they are still the more and more
involved: These two laid together are another thing to point out this hazard.

Reason 3. We may add a Third, and this is desire of Novelty in People spoken
of in 2 Timoth: Chap: 4, v. 3 -- after their own Lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears. And they shall turn away, etc. Where
by the way observe, that Lust within is the cause of drinking in Error from
without: But the thing we mark, is, That they have an itching ear lusting after
new things, and this comes from their little practicing of old Truths.

Reas: 4 There is a Fourth Reason, and it is the diversity of baits and
pretenses that is put upon several Errors, according to Peoples several humors:
So subtle is Satan that he puts a bait on for every appetit; there are some
that are Piously strict and are inclined so to be, both toward themselves and
others, and he has a bait to catch those, to wit, a pretense of strickness
which the Error of Separation is covered with, for this Error allows Church
fellowship with none but these that have a real evidence of Grace in them: It
is a way think they to shame natural Men. Again there be some whose humor is
for looseness, he puts on a bait to gratify this humor also, let them believe
in Christ and let them live as they like, says the Antinomian, and so
according to Peoples several humors, there is a bait put on by the Devil upon
Error: Now when these baits and Peoples humors agree, it is like powder and
fire, presently they kindle.

Reas. 5 There is a fifth thing which speaks this hazard, and it is this; The
Lord, that Error may be a trial, in his holy Justice lets out more than
ordinary parts and abilities, on spreaders of Error, and on the Spirits of
People when they are taken with it: The Lord for a Judgment to themselves, and
for a trial unto others, gives them as we speak, a cast of their craft, he
elevates them above their ordinary Sphere, or what is their ordinary way: And
this we speak not without Scripture, It is said of false Antichristian Teachers
they shall come with l^ing signs and wonders; And there is a Spirit of Error
which he foretells shall accompany Error, Be not soon shaken in mind neither by
Spirit nor by word, etc. In that place that we already cited 2 Thessalonians: 2, 2.
When we look on all these things we hope we have made out the point: viz. that
foulest Errors even when they are colloured with fairest pretenses, there is a
danger, lest People drink them in.

The use of the point is, If there be this hazard then ye would be afraid of
your selves, it is said, The Righteous fear always. I would seek no clearer
mark of any person that is like to be taken in the snare, than that they think
themselves so stout and steadfast that no Error will gain upon them: and I would
think it an evidence very good, when people are afraid of themselves, and do
humble themselves, in the sense of their own weakness, and are employing Christ
daily to bear them through, For Blessed is he that fears always.

Only remember that this fear would be of the right Stamp: And for clearing
this, we shall point at three or four things, wherein this holy fear does
consist, specially with Reference to Error. First where ^his fear is, There
will be a laboring to root Truth in the heart: Ye know, when People are
afraid of losing any thing, that they will labor by all means to be sure of
it: A man that has this Holy fear over himself, lest he be ensnared with Error
will study to get Truth rooted in the heart. Prove: 2. 16. The Spirit of God
speaks of hiding of understanding, putting it in the secret place of the
heart. A second thing accompanying this fear, is a forecasting what Truth may
cost you; there would be a fore-casting of this, and a taking an Essay of the
Cross before hand, and this for fear lest that to eschew suffering ye quite the
Truth, if the trial come on you unexpectedly; Paul while he is exhorting the
Disciples to stedfastness, informs them That through much tribulation we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14. 22. Then there is a third thing
accompanying this Holy fear, and that is, a fear to venture on Temptations to
Error, except there be a Providence putting to it, of necessity; and this fear
rises from the Sense of our own weakness to engage with, or stand the shock
against Temptations, this is employed in that direction which the Apostle Paul
gives 2 Timoth: 3, 5. At the end of the verse -- From such turn away v, 6. For
of this sort are they which creep into houses --: When a man is sensible of his
own weakness, the fear of his being ensnared will keep him from walking among
snares. A fourth thing accompanying this Holy fear is, that tho ye find these
Truths ye have had once sealed to your Spirits begin to be questioned, and that
ye are not able to answer what is brought against them, and so perchance your
Judgment may incline to think, that what ye thought once to be Truth is now
Error; Yet where this Holy fear is, ye will rather suspect your own want of
knowledge to discern, than any way suspect the Truth to be untruth; and it will
make you at least abstain from venturing even on that which your light points
out for the time.

Now by these ye may know what is the Fearlessness that makes People to be in
danger, and it is this, when it makes thee so inconcerned that thou never
Labors to get Truth brought lower than thy head: when thou never casts an
account what Truth may stand thee; when thou art so confident of thy own wit
and knowledge, that thou will venture uncalled to dispute with Sectarian
Spirits; or when any thing is born in as Truth contrary to what thou have
maintained, as a Truth before, and contrary to thy Covenant engagment, thou
grippes presently to it without once suspecting that thy own shallow
understanding may be deceived. This, I say^ speaks a fearlesness that borders
neigh unto Error,

Doct: VII. The Doctrine that follows next from these words Believe not every
Spirit, is, that Ministers the Servants of God are not to clap Peoples heads,
or indulge them in this inclination of theirs to Error, they are not to humor
them in it; but on all hazards they are to testify against it: Therefore, says
John, Believe not every Spirit, So also the Apostle Paul does very sharply
inveigh against People, when they are beginning to tamper with Error: And lest
People should say Paul and John were Apostles, and knew what was Error and what
was Truth, being guided by an infallible Spirit, and that therefore they might
stoutly testify against Error; but for other ordinary Ministers, they may err
as well as other People, and so it is ill reasoned from what the Apostles did
to what Ministers may now do: Therefore to clear this we shall give a place
where Paul binds it as Duty on every ordinary Minister to to testify against
Error. In the Acts ch: 20. v. 28. Therefore take heed unto your selves, and to
all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost, has made you overseers, etc. And
in the 29. Verse he gives an instance wherein they were to take heed to the
flock, For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the Flock. verse 30. Also of your own selves shall men
arise, etc. So it is a duty lying on all ordinary Preachers, to watch over
their People, lest they be seduced with Error, and that because First of that
which we spoke of before, that Error in the point of Truth should be as much
eschewed by People as other particular sins; and therefore Ministers are bound
to guard People against it. And secondly, Truth is a precious Jewel and
therefore in a special manner, they ought to contend for it. And Thirdly the
Souls of People ought to be precious to Ministers, and therefore Ministers
ought to watch over them, they ought to guard them against Error; because, as
other sins, so Error is a damnable Soul-destroying sin. And therefore as
Ministers love Truth and Souls committed to them, so they must watch over the
People, and guard them against Error.

Use I. This show's the great task lying upon Ministers at every time, but
chiefly in an Erring time: we spoke somewhat of this before how difficult it is
for a man to meddle with reproving of Error, more difficile than to reprove
Prophanity; because a profane Man's Conscience is convinced of the evil of his
way; and therefore however he may be displeased with free Preaching against his
sin, yet his Conscience clears the Minister; and thus he keeps him, at least,
at some reverence: But it is not so in a Soul taken with Error, the misinformed
Conscience speaks for it, and therefore whatever is spoken against him, he
casts at it as Error and untruth; and readily the man that speaks it may lose
respect for his pains, and yet we see the Word of God binds it on Ministers to
speak against it.

Use 2. But Secondly, If it be so that Ministers be bound to reprove Error and
testify against it; then the People are bound to take the word of reproof from
them: we mean not that they should be so bound as what Ministers say should be
the Bible, but this much we say, That People should presume as much on them as
another, to ask Council from them as much as from another; and to respect them
as much as any other: And that for these Reasons, First, because the public
Minister has a promise which private men have not, at least not such an ample
grant, as it is Matthew: 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, etc --
and lo, I am with you always* even unto the end of the World. It does not exeem
them indeed from Erring themselves; but the promise, is there more largly given
to them than to others. And Secondly Ministers as called watch men have the
charge of Peoples Souls: God has charged them with them, which he has not
charged others with: there is not a charge of Peoples Souls, laid on private
men by way of office; every one is bound indeed by way of Charity, to take a
care of the Souls of others, contrair to that of Cain, am I my brothers keeper.
But beside this tie of Charity lying on sent Ministers, there is a tie by
virtue of a particular charge; So that place Act: 20. Take heed to the flock
over which the Holy Ghost, has made you overseers. He has given them a
special Charge, and so they are charged in a special way with Peoples Souls.
Then there is a Third Reason, it is Sathan's Method to bring in Error on People
by casting in prejudices betwixt them and sent Ministers, which we have cleared
sometimes from Scripture, and so it should be watched against, lest Satan's
subtility prevail so far as to bring People to dis-respect their Ministers, for
if that be once gained he has prevailed very much.

Doct: VIII. Now further, he says, Believe no^ every Spirit. But bring them to
the trial. Do not cast at all but try the Spirits, Hence take this Doctrine:
It is not Gods way, that People because, there are differences about Religion,
should therefore believe no Religion, that is not Gods way. So Matthew: 16. we
see the Apostles practice, Christ says unto them, whom say they that I am? Say
they, some say tha^ thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, others Jeremiah, or
one of the Prophets. But whom say ye that I am? They do not Answer, we know not
what to say, there are so many different sayings about thee, but say they, Thou
art Christ the son of the living God.

Reas: So People are not to cast at all Religion because there are differences
about it; and that because, First, that were to give way to the Devils plot;
His design in raising up Error about Religion is, to make People Atheists, so
as not to care for any Religion; and so when the use which thou make of
different Opinions, is that thou will believe none, Thou fulfillest the Devils
design. Secondly, thou makes use of Gods Providence to thy destruction. The
Lords Providence in raising up Error is, to make men seek more after the
knowledge of the Truth: And when thou make that use of it, to cast at all
Religion, thou mockest the Holy Counsel of God to thy own ruin.

The Use then of the Doctrine is, to reprove those of this stamp; to wit,
Profane Atheistical men that make no differences about Religion but this: Let
Churchmen once agree among themselves what is right, and what is wrong; until
then, the back of our hand to altogether; that is a woeful way.

Indeed there may be a doubt proposed here viz. What else shall poor ignorant
People do about differences in Religion, but to lay aside the care of all, when
they see every party have their own Reasons stronger than these poor People can
Answer; I Answer, there are some directions grounded on Scripture, which if we
walk by, may bring us to a safe shore, amidst these rocks of contrary Opinions;
And the first is this, that for Differences that concern not Peoples practice,
I would not have People trouble themselves much with them; as for example, Our
late unhappy Differences about the public Resolutions; the Lord has taken the
occasion of them away; so I would not have any troubling themselves much about
them: Whatever Differences in matters of practice fall in, it seems to be a
safe rule, that when the occasion of such Practices are removed, all Contention
about them should be laid aside. Secondly, As to the Differences wherein
Peoples practice is concerned, take these Rules: First, For these that are
uncontraverted Truths make Conscience of the practice of them, which will help
to the knowledge of other things; this rule Christ prescrives, John 7. 17.
says he, If any man do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be
of God, etc. There is something that thy Conscience is clear of to be Duty, and
although the Differences of Opinion might be some excuse to make thee keep off
from these things about which there is difference, yet how art thou excused for
neglect of these things which thou art convinced to be Duty, as Prayer, Reading
the Word, etc. Secondly, We would know, whatever be the contrary Opinions about
matters of Religion, yet there is but one true way; and the knowledge of this
one way may be attained to, by those who seek humbly after it: At least, if
thou be judging thy self, and as a damned Bankrupt or D^vour by Nature, be
closing with Christ, and drawing Grace from him to make thee Holy* Thou will
attain to the knowledge of as much of these things debated, as will take thee
home to Heaven. A Third Direction is, That ye should beware of calling in
question any of these Truths that once have been Sealed into your Spirits by
the Spirit from the Word of God, 2 John ver 8. Look to your selves that we lose
not those things which we have wrought, The point of Truth that People have got
thus Sealed to their Conscience, should not readily be called in question. A
Fourth Direction is this, That in seeking out Truth under Differences, we
should beware of Loftyness of Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 32 it is said The Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, How much more ought the Spirits of
private persons to be subject to the voice of Christ's Ambassadors speaking in
his Courts. This is not as if we would make Ministers Sayings the Peoples Rule
to walk by: But this much will follow that in a constitute Church where
Discipline is Exercised, there should be that Humility in People, that when
doubts arise concerning any point of received Truth within the Church, they
should offer their Judgment, and the Reason of it to the Prophets and Christ's
Courts to be tried, before they lay down any new Opinion as a solid Truth: That
much is contained under this, The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, if it mean any thing at all.

Doct: IX. Now we proceed. The next thing that we come to, is, what People
should do, Try the Spirits, and the Rule of Trial is, whether they are of God.
The first point we learn is, that how fair soever the pretense be, that our
Doctrine is colloured with, it should not be taken upon Trust: but the Spirits
must be Tried. Such we see was the practice of the B^reans, and they are
commended for it, they would not take the Apostles Doctrine on trust. Act: 17.
11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind and searched the Scriptures daily whither those
things were so. They would not take the Apostles Doctrine on trust: and this is
a command given by Paul writing to the These: 1 Epistle ch: 5. v. 21. Prove all
things after he had said, despise not Prophecyings, So that Doctrines should be
brought to a Trial, whatever be their fair pretenses.

Reas: The Reasons are first: because foulest Errors may be colored over with
fairest pretenses. And Secondly the Scripture says, all men are Liars; that is
to say, all men may Err, and therefore words cannot be the Ground of Divine
Faith; for Faith must have an infallible ground as Ephesians: 2. 20. And are built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. i. e. the word Preached
by them, and dictated by the Spirit of God.

Use. This Doctrine reproves first, the Papists that will have nothing Tried,
that comes from the Church; but all taken upon trust, hence is it that many
swallow such Monsters of Absurdities, as the Errors of Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Merit, Mals, and such like, for which they have no other ground,
but because their Church says so; But this Doctrine holds out another duty
that who ever hears any Doctrine proponed by one or other, they are bound to
pass their Judgment on it, Try the Spirits.

Now that we may walk betwixt extremes, the Papists on the one hand, who set up
Tyranny, and these Sectaries on the other hand, who set up Confusion; we would
know there is a twofold Judgment to be passed on Doctrine: Public Judgment,
and Private Judgment: Public Judgment again, is either, peremptorily
absolute, or limited. A public peremptory Judgment is, That which binds the
Conscience to obey simply that which is spoken, and none have this Judgment,
but God himself. Secondly, There is a public Judgment which is limited, and
this is a public declaring and holding out that which is found to be God's
mind in his word, which does not bind absolutely, but in so far as it agrees
with the Word; and this Judgment belongs to public Church Judicatories met
together in Christ's Name: They are like the Lyon-Herauld set forth to proclaim
the Royal Acts, if he proclaim that which is contained in the principal Acts,
it binds; but if he add any thing of his own, it binds not. Next, there is a
private Judgment of Discretion, and this belongs to every Christian: every man
in relation to his own practice, is bound to pass Sentence on what is held out
to him by others, that if it be right, he may embrace it, but if wrong, he may
reject it; but his private Judgment is not binding to others. Now this private
Judgment, or this Judgment of Discretion is necessary, because all men may
Err; Councils may Err, Synods, etc. And Secondly, Their Error will not excuse
private Christians to follow them in their Error: says Christ, When the Blind
leads the Blind both falls into the Ditch. And therefore there must be a
Judgment of Discretion in private persons to try what they hear.

And this much for guarding against the Popish Tyranny; but least this Doctrine
be abused to cast at all public Church Judicatories, we shall next speak
somewhat to guard against Sectarian Confusion: First, Although public Church
Judicatories have not Power to bind Consciences; yet when men are in a doubt
concerning a point of Truth, their Judgment ought to have more weight than the
Judgment of private Men: And that not only because there are more Gifts
exercised together, but mainly because there is a promise annexed to the
Commission given by Christ to public Church Judicatories, Matthew. 18. 20. Where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.
And Secondly, From this it follows, that there would be a kind of loathness to
differ from public Church Judicatories; a man's grounds would be well
examined, l^st if differing from these Judicatories, they also differ from
Truth. And Thirdly, when they differ they are to bear them at Reverence,
although in such a point they should Err, yet for their Authority, they are to
be Reverenced: This much is granted by us to Church Judicatories, but no
further, They are not to be made the Rule of our Faith.

Use 2. It reproves those who are Lazy, and cannot endure the trouble of
trying what they hear, but take things on trust, and have no more but such a
man's Authority, he is of that Way and Opinion, and therefore they are Fire and
Flint, Tooth and Nail for it, as much as if they had the Word of God for it: We
have seen much of this in the unhappy Differences that have fallen out in our
time, which I have no pleasure to speak much of, and therefore we proceed to
another Doctrine.

Doct. X. The next thing then that we observe is from what he says, Try, etc.
whether they be of God; that is the Trial: The Doctrine is this, That the right
trial of Doctrine is, To try whether they be of God or not, and this point puts
us to give Marks whereby it shall be known what Doctrine is of God, and what
Doctrine is not of God; and here we shall speak to two things. First, We shall
show what are the marks that necessarly infer a Doctrine to be of God. And
secondly we shall speak of other things that do not infer necessarly a Doctrine
to be of God, but for the most part follow upon such a Doctrine.

For the First, That which makes Doctrine necessarily to be of God, is, if it
be according to the rule of the Word. So when the Bereans are commended Acts
17. The rule they went by in the trial of Paul's Doctrine, is the Scripture:
And this is Isa^a's rule, chap. 8. ver. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony,
etc. He would have all Doctrines tried by the Word of God: So the Word is the
rule, and that Doctrine which has the Word for it, is of God; and whatever
Doctrine has not the Word for it, is not of God: All Spirits, even the Spirit
of God himself, must be tried that way: And that because the Word is a perfect
rule: I give only two places of Scripture to clear the perfection of this rule.
First, The heavy Plagues pronounced against those who add to this rule: The
Word is so perfect, that if an Angel should come and pretend a purer Rule, Let
him be (says Paul) Anathema, Gal. 1. 8. There is another place which proves
the perfection of this rule according to this point in hand, 2 Timoth. 3. 16,
17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for Instruction in righteousness. That
the Man of God may be perfect, etc. So there is as much in the word of God, as
may make the man of God perfect: And this in relation to Doctrine and
Instruction, It is profitable for Doctrine and Instruction, It will make a man
perfect in that, as well as in reproof.

Use, This reproves, First the Papists, they cast by the rule of the Word, and
will have their Traditions, and their Po^es Decrees to be the rule. But of this
enough already in the preceding Doctrine. In the second place, it reproves the
Sectaries, some whereof reprove the Word, they will have a higher trial and
rule to examine by; and it is the inbearing of Gods Spirit, say they, He is the
Spirit of Truth, and can he bear in a Lie: But, say we, how know they the
Spirit of the Devil by the Spirit of God, except they bring it to the Word. So
the Word is the Rule, yea and the last Rule.

But here is a doubt which we shall speak to. This is a very hard task, may
some say, for poor ignorant People to try Doctrines by the Word; the Word it
self is obscure, and every one pretends the Word, all Parties will say that
they have the Word, and so it is hard for us to know what is of God, and what
not, if we have no other rule but the Word: I answer it is very true, there are
very few Sectaries who will not pretend the Word: And yet it does not follow
that ye may cast by the Word. But Secondly, we say, although the Word be in
some places obscure, and although Men of Opinions as contrary to the Word as
Light is to Darkness, may every one of them wrest the Word, yet there is as
much of the Word clear, if it be rightly studied, as will make a man know what
is right, and what is wrong. Hence that Epithet given to the Word, The word of
the Lora is a Lamp to direct thy Paths. The Word of the Lord is not unfitly
compared to a Sea, wherein Elephants, i. e. men of greatest parts and Learning
may swime, and readily lose their fect, how great soever their parts be, if
they rely upon them. And yet it may be compared to a shallow calm running
Stream, wherein Lambs, that is, men of mean Gifts, may wade, and find out Gods
mind in it, if they be humble and take Gods way for searching of it.

But say ye, what is that way of God wherein people may hope, so as not to
miscarry in the searching out of Gods mind in his Word. In answer to this, we
shall give several Directions. First, A man that would not mistake Gods mind in
his Word, should be a diligent Reader of it, Acts 17. 11. -- and searched the
Scriptures daily, etc. it was their daily task. And Secondly, Reading of the
Word should have Prayer going alongs with it, Prove: 2. 3. Yea if thou cryest
after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, ver. 4. If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures: Then, etc.
this crying and seeking is certainly in Prayer, as well as in other means. When
people join Prayer with the Reading of the Word, they will more readily attain
to the knowledge of Gods mind, Than a man that takes no more with him but his
own natural parts. Thirdly, The word should be read with Meditation, Psalm: 1.
2. -- in his Law does he meditate day and night. And Fourthly, with
Self-denial. Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not
to thine own understanding. We should go to the Word with a deep sense on us of
our own Ignorance to seek Light from it.

There are several other directions how People may be led to get the meaning of
the word; we shall speak of some. First, Obscure places being compared with
these that are more clear, will be clear also: There are some places obscure,
but the Lord has been so Graciously condescending in contriving the Scriptures
that there are other places to make them clear: So there is an obscure place:
we are not under the Law but under Grace which at first seems to sound as if
People needed not to take heed to the Law; But there is another place, that
clearly shows how we are not under the Law There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ. They are freed from the condemning power of the Law, but
not from the directions of it. Secondly, in obscure and dark places of
Scripture on which men according to their several Conceptions, would Father
several senses, the meaning that agrees most with the ^nalogy of Faith should
be taken: this is that which Paul calls the form of wholesome words. So there is
a place controverted he laid on him the iniquit^ of us all, Says the
Antinomians all our sins were laid on Christ, and so do what we will, we are
not bound to seek pardon or mourn for t^em; for our sins are laid on him, and
so we have none: Now this gloss is contrary to the whole current of Scripture,
which holds out that believers have sin in them, a body of Death. 1 John 1, 8.
If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves and the Truth is not in us. It
holds out believers at their best condition as Mourning for sin, and praying
for the pardon of sin Romans 7. Psalm 25. 11. So that this Antinomian sense
cannot be right, because it is contrar to the whole current of Scripture; and
therefore the laying of our iniquities on him, must be the guilt and punishment
of our iniquity, and not the being of sin it self, which was bound upon Christ:
So another place the promoters of Tolleration pleads from, is that in Phil. 3,
15. that Counsel that Paul gives Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded, And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded God shall reveal even
this unto you: say they, there is Tolleration whatever be Peoples differences,
let them walk according to their Light; we say again, that what Paul says of
mutual forbearance must not be extended to all Errors; but it must only be
applied to these that were Errors of infirmity; As Rom: 15. 1. we then that
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves. And that the opposite meaning cannot be right, because it is contrair
to the current of many other Scriptures, which command Heretics to be
Excommunicat. An Heretic after the first and second admonition reject. and not
so much as bid them God speed: So this is another way to know the meaning of
the Scripture. And this much now for directions to help you in the study of
Gods word, that you may attain to know Gods mind in it; and so to know whether
a Doctrine be of God or not.

We thought to have spoken of these other marks which do not infer necessarly a
Doctrine to be of God, but for the most part do follow on such a Doctrine; but
the time being now ended, I shall only name them: First, That Doctrine which is
of God will have Holiness following upon it: And so that Doctrine of the
Antinomians that tends to prophanity of life cannot be of God. Secondly, that
Doctrine that is of God tends to exalt Christ. John 16. 15. Speaking of the
Spirit of Truth, he says, -- he shall take of mine and shall show it unto
you. And so that Doctrine of the Papists, I mean their Doctrine of Merit, is
not of God. Thirdly, That Doctrine which is of God humbles men, as Error does
fill men with pride: Thus those Sectaries that are spoken of in Jude are called
Lofty; and so the Doctrine of Separation is not of God, because whatever be the
pretense of strickness that it caries along with it, there is an over-weaning
conceit of the Man's self and undervaluing of others, that cleaves to this
Error And Secondly, it makes People orderly in standing for it: So is it said
of Christ His voice is not heard in the streets. Now these marks as we have
said do but usually follow, for because of the corruptions of men even the
Doctrines that are of God may want these properties, and the Doctrines that are
not of God may have a show of them; and therefore the first mark to wit, the
word, is the adequate Rule, So that all Doctrines ought to be brought to it.
Whatever be the show any Doctrine has, whether of Holiness, exalting Christ
and free Grace, whatever show it have of Humility and orderly carriage, in
those who profess it in their avowing of it: Yet if it be not according to this
Rule, ( viz. the word of God) it is not of God.

Doct: XI. We come now to our main design, to wit the Refutation of some of the
most dangerous Errors of the Times. The ground of what we are to speak to this
purpose is taken from the following Doctrine, which is evidently imported in
the words; to wit, That there are many Doctrines pretending to the Spirit,
which yet being brought to the Touchstone will be found not to be of God. For
while he bids us try the Spirits whither they be of God, He evidently
insinuates that there are some Spirits which being brought to the trial will be
sound faulty, and not to be of God. I shall, God willing, give instances of
this, and accordingly make it out upon the most taking, dangerous, and most
Erroneous Doctrines of the Times, particularly upon those following: First, the
Doctrine of Tolleration. Secondly, the Doctrine of Erastianism. Thirdly the
Doctrine of Independency. Fourthly, the Doctrine of Separation. Fifthly, the
Doctrine of the ordinary Preaching by unsent men. Sixthly, the Doctrine of
Antinomianism. And Lastly the Doctrine of Anabaptism: In all which we shall
with the Lords assistance make it appear here, that however they pretend to be
Doctrines warranted by the Spirit of God in his word, yet they are not so
warranted, in a word we shall show they are not of God.

SECT: II.
A BRIEF REFUTATION OF THE ERROR OF Tolleration.
WE shall begin with the Error of Tolleration; of all Opinions in the matter of
Religion, a Doctrine that is much cried up among Sectaries, and a Doctrine that
is very taking; what (thinks People) if they get leave to serve God according
to their own Conscience, they need not trouble themselves what others do. Our
purpose is to show that this Doctrine, though it pretend to the Spirit, is not
of God: and for this end we have read these places of Scripture whereupon we
are to ground the most of what is to be said against this Error. The Author did
in the beginning of his Sermon read several Texts of Scripture.


I begin to refute this Error of Tolleration First, because it is the Sectaries
main refuge, it is their Holy of Holys wherein they shelter themselves in their
grossest Errors: what, say they, it is our Conscience and who dare meddle with
Conscience but the God of Conscience. Secondly, we think it needful to begin
with it; First, because of all other Errors it is the most dangerous and
damnable, in so far as other Errors do only evert these particular Truths of
Scripture to which they are contrary; but by this one Error (this Monster of
Tolleration) way is made to evert all the Truths contained in Scripture, and to
the setting up all Errors contrary to every Jote of Truth: and in the mean time
there shall be no power on earth to hinder it, or take order with it,

In prosecuting of this, we shall follow this Method First, we shall clear the
state of the question Secondly, we shall bring our Arguments for confirming the
Truth, and vindicate them from the Adversaries exceptions. Thirdly, We shall
bring forth their Arguments, and shall refute them from Scripture and Reason.
And Fourthly, We shall apply the whole to some practical use.

First, For the state of the question, what a thing this Tolleration is that we
Labor to refute: There is a twofold Tolleration of Error: There is a Church
Tolleration and a State Tolleration. A Church Tolleration is, That whereby it
is pleaded that Error and Heresy should have liberty to be vented and go free
even from Church Censure; such as suspension from the Sacraments or
Excommunication. There are but few Sectaries of any note that plead for
Tolleration in this Latitude, and that because the Scripture is so plain
against it. Paul says, An Heretic after the first and second Admonition
reject. Therefore they are content that Church Censures such as Excommunication
be inflicted on Heretics, providing, First, that they be free from Civil
censure. Secondly, That Excommunication be inflicted for no Error, but for
these that are contrary to fundamental points of Truth, or as some say contrary
to the very light of Nature: Upon these and no other will they have
Excommunication to strike.

Though this be not the main question which we are to insist upon: Yet we shall
lay down some assertions contrary to their Doctrine, even in this point. And
First, we do not see what reason can be brought to exeem Heretics from civil
Censure; but the same may be brought to exeem them from Church Censures also;
If Conscience, as they say, be free from the one, what reason but it should be
free from the other also? And if fear of civil Censure against those who Err do
as they say enforce the Conscience, and make People Hypocrites; we see not but
the fear of Church Censures may do the same: Or if, notwithstanding of Church
Censures, the Conscience is not forced, the Service not constrained, which they
grant, then notwithstanding of Civil Censure it is not forced, or the Service
constrained either: And so from their own grounds this vast Tolleration of
Error falls to the ground. Secondly, We cannot assent to that which they
affirm, that Excommunication is not to be inflicted for any Error; but these
which are contrary to fundamental points of Religion; and that because Christ
gives us a rule upon what faults Excommunication should strick; to wit, on
every scandalous Fault done against a Brother, or the Church wherein the
Offender persists obstinate, and will not be reclaimed: So Matthew. 18. 17. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Pubican. That is,
Excommunicate him. Now, for what faults he is to be Excommunicate, they are set
down v. 15. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee etc. So it is
a scandalous Trespass wherein the offender does persist and remain obstinate,
on which according to Christ's Rule, Excommunication should strick: Now sure it
is, there are many Errors not contrary to fundamental Truths: such as many
points of Arminianism, Antinomianism etc. which yet persisted in are Scandalous
both to particular Christians and the Church; and therefore according to
Christ's Rule, Excommunication should strick upon other Errors than those
contrary to the fundamental Points of Religion, which is contrary to their
assertion. Thirdly, Neither can we assent that Excommunication should strick on
no other Errors but those contrary to the light of Nature, and that not only
because of what is presently said, that Excommunication should strick against
every scandalous Sin done against a Brother, or the Church wherein the offender
does persist and remain obstinate; but also according to that Rule whereby they
maintain that Excommunication should strick on no other Error, but these that
are contrary to the very Light of Nature; it would follow that the publisher of
these Errors following (or the like against fundamental Truths) should not be
censured: to wit, That the Scriptures are not the word of God. That Jesus
Christ was an Impostor, a Deceiver: That we are not justified by free Grace;
say according to that rule, such Heretics should not be censured, no not
Ecclesiastically; because these Errors are not against Natures Light, but
Scripture Light only; for Natures Light teaches not the Truths which are
contrary to these Errors. This much for Church Tolleration, but, as said is,
concerning this is not the present Contraversy.

The main question then is, concerning State Tolleration. Concerning which some
do affirm. That whatever the Church may do in Inflicting Church Censures on
Heretics, Maintainers of Heterodox Opinions: Yet, say they, no civil
Punishment, such as Death, Imprisonment, Mulcts, or Fines, should be inflicted
on any Error or Blasphem whatsoever; providing the Maintainers of them carry
themselves peaceably, do not trouble the State, or do evil against the
Commonwealth in civil Things: We again on the contrary do hold, That it is the
Duty of the Civil Magistrate to suppress Error, Heresy, and every sin against
the First Table, as well as it is his Duty to suppress Adultery, Fornication,
Sedition, and other sins against the second Table: And that he is not only
bound to suppress Errors and Blasphemies, that are contrary to fundamental
Truths, or the Light of Nature; but all Error contrary to other points of Truth.

Now for clearing the State of this Question, and freeing it from some odious
Imputations that may be cast upon it: Before we come to Arguments we shall lay
down these Assertions: First, We do not say that the Magistrate is bound to
punish Heretics at the first step; Pains should first be taken to inform them,
the Judgment of the Church is Antecedent, and their Labor is to convince
Gainsayers: So this must go before the Magistrates Duty, they must be found
Obstinate before the Magistrate meddle with them, or punish them Civilly;
Especially if their Errors be not horrid Blasphemies against God and Natures
Light, in such the Magistrate is not bound to give so much Forbearance.
Secondly, We do not say that all Errors and Heresies are to get alike
punishment; but according to the degrees of the guilt that is in them, even as
it is in sins committed against the Second Table: Murder is a more heinous
Fault than Fornication, and therefore the Magistrate is bound to punish it more
highly. Even so is it in Sins done against the First Table; Blasphemies done
against God, or a denying of the true God, is a higher Sin than Worshipping of
the true God after a false manner; and therefore the Magistrate is bound to
punish it more severely. Thirdly, As we do not say, that every Error and
Heresy is to receive the like punishment; so neither do we say that every one
that maintains the same Error is to be alike punished, for there are some that
are Seducers, or Drawers on of others to Error, Disturbers of the Peace of the
Church, Ringleaders; there are others again that are only seduced and drawn
away to Error; and these last, although they should not be Tolerate, yet the
power of the Magistrate is to be exercised more sparingly toward them. So
Secondly, There are some rooted in Error, confirmed in it, who will not hear
Instruction: There are others that are but weak, and are seeking Light, whose
way evidenceth them to be Conscientious, only for the time they are Ignorant,
and in Humility seeking after Light; and these last, the Magistrate, as all
other Christians, is to bear much with, according to Romans 15. 1. We then that
are strong, ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, etc.

Now this being said to clear the question, we come to Arguments to make out
this Truth, to wit, That the Magistrate is bound to suppress and punish Error,
Heresy, and other sins against the First Table, as well as he is bound to
punish Adultery, Theft, and other sins against the Second Table.

The First Argument we bring is, from the approven practice of Kings and
Magistrates under the Old Testament, from which we form an Argument thus: If it
was the approven practice of Kings and and Magistrates under the Old Testament
to suppress Error, Heresy and Blasphemy, then Magistrates under the New
Testament are bound to do the like: But, so it is that it was the approven
practice of Kings and Magistrates under the Old Testament to suppress Error,
Heresy and Blasphemy and other sins against the first Table: Therefore,
Magistrates under the New Testament are bound to do the like: For confirming of
this Argument there are two things to be made out: First, That it was the
practice of the Magistrate under the Old Testament to suppress Error and
Heresy. Secondly, As it was their practice, so their practice herein is
approven of God, otherwise it were not binding unto others; for Kings and
Magistrates did several things wherein they were not approven, and so not
binding unto us now: The first thing then we are to clear is, that this was the
practice of Magistrates under the Old Testament: And we shall begin First with
Abraham's practice, Genes. 18. 19. For I know him, that he will command his
Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, etc. Secondly, with Jacob who was a Magistrate in
his own Family: And we shall see him employing his Power to suppress false
Religion. In the 35 of Genesis verse. 2. Then Jacob said unto his Household, and to
all that were with him, put away the strange Gods that are among you, and be
clean, and change your Garments. And in the 4 verse, And they gave unto Jacob
all the strange Gods which were in their Hands, and all their Earrings which
were in their Ears, and Jacob hid them under the Oak which was by Scechem. The
Third practice which we shall observe, is that of Asa in the 2 Chronicles. 14. verse.
2. And Asa did that which was good and Right in the Eyes of the Lord his God.
verse 3. For he took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high places,
and broke down the Images, and cut down the Groves. Verse 4. And commanded
Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and the
Commandment. And in the 5 Verse Also he took away out of the Cities of Judah,
the High Places and the Images, etc. And we shall find it in chap. 15. verse.
12, 13. And they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God, etc. That
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death,
whether small or great, whether man or woman. And in the 16. v. he employes his
power in this point against his own Mother Maachah. And also concerning Maachah
the Mother of Asa the King, he removed her from being Queen, because she had
made an Idol, in a Grove: and Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt
it at the brook Kidron. The Fourth practice shall be of King Manasseth. 2 Chronicles: 33, 15. (ye would mark such places for ye may have need of them) And he
took away the strange Gods, and the Idol out of the house of the Lord, and all
the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the Lord, and in
Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City. v. 16 -- And commanded Judah to serve
the Lord God of Israel. The last practice that we shall name is, that of Josiah
2 Chronicles: 34. v. 31, 32, 33. And the King stood in his place, and made a
Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord. etc. And he caused all that
were present in Jerusalem and Benjamen, to stand to it. etc. And Josiah took
away all the Abominations out of all the countries, that pertained to the
Children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to
serve the Lord their God; Let this suffice to make out the first point, That
such were the practices of Kings and Magistrates under the Old Testament.

The Second thing to be cleared is, That as these were their practices; so they
were approven practices: And this is clear; First from Gods approbation given
to them in that place before cited, 2 Chronicles. 14. 23. Asa gets a Testimony, That
He did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God. And
wherefore? For he took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high
Places, and broke down the Images, etc. And Secondly, We find that Jehu,
although he was Hypocritical, was rewarded of God, for suppressing of False
Worship: In 2 Kings 10. 30. And the Lord said unto Jehu, because thou have done
well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the
House of Ahab, according to all that was in mine heart, thy Children of the
fourth Generation, shall sit on the throne of Israel. We might bring several
other evidences, that these their practices were approven of God, but what is
already said may suffice.

The patrons of Tolleration bring several exceptions to weaken the strengh of
this Argument, which we shall propone in as full strength as they come to our
hand; and take them off: And the First exception is this, say they, The
practice of Judah and Israel under the Old Testament cannot be binding to
Magistrates under the New, because they were Typical Kings, and the actions they
did were Typical of somewhat to be done by Christ, and so not binding to us. To
this we reply. First, That however this our hold concerning the practices of
the Kings of Judah and Israel after they entered Canaan who were Typical Kings
(as they say) of this Typical Land, that they could not be binding to
Magistrates now; yet we find it was the practice of Jacob before the the Kingdom
of Israel was erected, and so what he did was not done by him as a Type of
Christ, but a moral duty; and he was approven in it; we find also when heathen
Kings came to the Knowledge of God, they employed their power this way and were
approven in so doing; and surely they will not call Heathen Kings Types of
Christ: We shall give one instance of this in the seventh chap: of Ezra v. 26.
There a decree comes out from Atraxerxes a heathen King. Whosoever will not do
the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let Judgment be executed speedily
upon him, whither it be unto Death, or to Banishment or to confiscation of
Goods, etc. Now lest it should be said this was a rash Act, and so not binding:
therefore there is something in the Text equivalent to God's Approbation of it;
to wit, Ezra's Blessing the Lord that he had made such an Act Verse 27. But we
give a Second Answer, to the Objection: Although it were granted that all the
King's of Israel were Types of Christ, as we do not grant it in all, especially
in those who were wicked and Godless men, it does not follow that what they did
in punishing false Doctrine, they Acted therein as Types of Christ: And if so,
then it does not follow, that it is not binding now; except they will say that
whatever was done by any who were Types of Christ in no ways binding unto
others; and if so they may as well argue, that what Magistrates under the Old
Testament did in punishing sins against the second Table, such as Adultery,
Murder, were done by them as they were Types of Christ; and so not binding to
Magistrates now: Yea, upon the same ground they may infer that David's Prayers
and Tears for sin were no copy for us to follow; why these were Acts of one who
was a Type of Christ. Yea by the same Reason, they may reject the whole
Scripture of the Old Testament, as not binding unto us, because forsooth, it
was written by the Prophets, and such as were Types of Christ, and so not
binding to us. Thus we see what absurdity the giving way to such an exception
will draw unto, and therefore it is to be rejected.

But their Second Exception seems more plausible and it is this, say they, The
practice of the Kings of Israel does not argue up fully to that which we do
hold, because their practice did not strike on every Error against Truth, but
only Idolatry; and not all Idolaters, but those that made Apostasy and served
false Gods; and not all of those, but these only that seduced and drew away
others to serve the false God. Now it does not follow from their punishing of
Idolaters, who worshipped a false God; that therefore Magistrates are bound to
punish Heretics worshipping the true God though in a false way, This is the
strength of their exception; to which we reply. First, That though it were true
which they say that the practice of the Kings of Israel did extend but to
Idolaters, and those that seduced and drew away others to serve false Gods, yet
it does not follow but it may be binding to Magistrates now to punish Heretics
worshipping a true God in a false way, and that because of this rule necessarly
to be admitted in expounding of Scripture, that when the command of God does
strick against any one sin most usual in the time, by rule of proportion, it
stricks against all sins of that kind, As in the second Command there is
nothing expressly forbidden but the Worshipping of God by graven Images; and
that because the worshipping of God by Images was the sin most in use at that
time; yet under graven is forbidden all ways of worshipping of God invented by
men; and so although it were true that the practice of Godly Kings did strick
but against Idolatry, yet by rule of proportion all sins of that kind should be
suppressed: To which add, that when the high degree of any sins by divine Law
is to be punished by death, common equity will infer, that lesser degrees of
sin are to be punished by a lesser punishment at least. Secondly, to what they
say, that the Magistrate did only punish Idolatry under the Old Testament. We
Answer that it is false, they did punish other Errors also, and such as would
be thought light of now; and this we shall instance in several particulars.
First, They punished will worship in serving the true God, and this we see by
comparing two places of Scripture: The first is the 2 Kings 23, 8, 9. Speaking
of Josiah, And he brought all the Priests out of the Cities of Judah, and
defiled the high places, where the Priests had burnt incense: So he employes
his Power against the high places, for the removal of their way of worship. The
other place of Scripture to be compared with, is the 2 Chrov: 33. 17. (Which
tells us the nature of their high places) Nevertheless, the People did
sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the Lord their God only. So that
this worshipping on the high places, was not that kind of Idolatry whereby a
false God was worshipped; but a way of their own, whereby they worshipped the
true God, and yet Josiah suppresseth even this kind of false worship. Secondly,
we find that Magistrates did employ their power for suppressing of the breakers
of the Sabbath day, and and punishing those that Married strange wives, which
yet were not Idolaters and Apostats from the true God; a noble example whereof
is in Nehemiah 13. from verse 15, to 21. There is a large History what pains he
took to reform the People to keep the Sabbath day, therefore in the 21. v. Then
I testified against them, and said unto them, why lodged ye about the wall? If
ye do so again I will lay hands on you. He threatens to employ the Civil power
for suppressing of that Error, and this is not Idolatry. And Secondly, we find
that the Magistrates employed their power generally, for suppressing any Error
that was contrary to any Article of the Covenant: So where we read in the 2 Chronicles: 34. 31, 32. And the King stood in his place, and made a covenant before
the Lord -- etc. And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin
to stand to it. And the heads of the Covenant are not only against those who
were Seducers, but also against those that were seduced: So we find it in
Exodus 32, v. 20. In that Idolatry of worshipping the Golden Calf, when Moses
came down from the mount in his zeal to the Glory of God, he not only punished
Aaron, but also the People: and more than this, he Arms the Levits, as the
avengers of God's Justice, and proclaims that every man should avenge the Lord
upon his very Brother: Thus we have made out in the first Argument taken from
the practice of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and have vindicated it by
Scripture from their exceptions brought against it.

The Second Argument shall yet be grounded on the Old Testament, and it is
taken from the many commands and precepts, that are given in Scripture to Godly
Kings and Magistrates and others to punish Blasphemers, False Prophets and
Idolaters, Heretics, Sabbath Breakers, and Seducers, from whence we form this
Argument: That whatever was commanded to be done by Magistrates under the Old
Testament as a part of their duty, this Magistrates under the New Testament are
oblidged to as a part of their duty also: But Magistrates were commanded under
the Old Testament to suppress Idolatry, Blasphemy, and Heresy and that they
were to do as a part of their duty as Magistrates: And therefore it is a duty
lying on Magistrates under the New. The thing we have to prove is, that this
was a command given to Magistrates under the Old Testament and that as a part
of their duty as Magistrates. And for this look over these places of Scripture
Exodus 22. 20. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed. There is a command given to the Magistrates. And so
in Levit. 24, 15. And thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel, saying,
Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sin. v. 16. And he that Blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death. So in the 13. of Deuteronomy:
1. If there arise among you a Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or a wonder. etc. Through the whole Chapter there are Commands given to
the Magistrate to punish false worship. We shall only add another, and that is
taken from the fourth Command, where a charge is laid on the Magistrate as well
as the Master of a Family to make use of his power for keeping of the Sabbath,
and to see to the keeping of it by others also. Thou shall do no manner of
work, thou, nor they son, nor they daughter -- This Command is given to the
Magistrate as well as to the Master of the Family, as appears from those
things. First, By virtue of this Command Nehemiah the Magistrate of God's
People, did make use of his power to punish Sabbath Breakers in that place we
cited in Nehemiah 13. 21. Secondly, It appears from this that the Gates spoken
of their, Nor any thing that is within thy Gates, is a term which aggreeth not
to a single Family, but a whole City, even to the circuit of a whole Kingdom:
of the word [ Gates] is taken in Scripture Gene^: 22. 17 -- and thy seed shall
possess the Gate of his enemies: It follows as in that respect, therefore he
speaks to the Magistrate, no Master of a Family having such large power. And
Thirdly, The power there spoken of, is to be extended to Strangers: now the
chief care of Stangers did belong to the Magistrate, and not to the Master of a
Family, therefore Nehemiah the Magistrate extends this power of his to the
Strangers that came to buy and sell on the Sabbath day, Nehem: 13, 20

The Adversary brings several exceptions against this Argument which we shall
propone and take off. The First Exception is, say they, Those were Judicial
Laws, and so now are expired with their Commonwealth: Answer, This is a common
refuge to Sectaries where any practice is brought from the Old Testament
against them, presently they cast at it upon this account as not binding to us
under the New: Therefore we shall speak so much the more unto this point: By a
judicial Law is meaned a Civil Law, so the force of their Argument is this: The
Civil Law of one Kingdom is not binding to another, but these were Civil Laws
belonging to that Kingdom; Therefore, they are not binding to us. To this we
Answer, First, That they cannot say this of all the Laws instanced,
particularly of that Law of the fourth Command: It is a Moral Law binding to
all, Secondly, we Answer, the rest of these Laws are Moral and binding to all
Magistrates, yea and that for these Reasons: Because First, Abraham, and Jacob,
and other Magistrates that were among the Jews did practice these Laws even
before the Judicial Law was given out by Moses; and so they behooved to be
Moral. Yea Heathen Kings that were not under the Judicial Law of Moses, as not
being Members of their Commonwealth, when they came to the knowledge of God,
they made use of their Power to suppress Idolatry, which certainly was through
virtue of the Moral Law, commanding them so to do: Not the Judicial Law, that
they were not under. A Third Answer we give, that though what is said were
true. viz. That these Laws were Judicial: Yet it does not follow that they are
not now binding to Magistrates. To understand this, there were two things in
their Judicial Laws, as in our Civil Laws. Yet, there was somewhat that
concerned the Kingdom in particular as that Law, that Servants should be freed
from their service at the seven years end. And the Law of inheritance to be
keept within the Tribe, and this part of the Law did fall with their
Commonwealth. But their was another thing in their Judicial Laws, and that is
somewhat of Common Equity belonging unto all, such as Laws for punishing sins
done against the Moral Law; and in this far the Judicial Law is binding to us:
because there is not a syllable in the New Testament for abrogating of it, and
so must bind, being given by God. And Jesus Christ and his Apostles Reason from
this Judicial Law; as in 1 Corinthians: 9. 9. It is written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that tread thout the corn: And in
several other places: so is it in the Civil Laws in other Kingdoms: as for
example, That Witches should be punished by death, and burnt to Ashes, is a
Civil Law in Scotland: Now there is somewhat there of Common Equity, to wit,
that they should be punished by death; but the particular way of putting them
to death, to wit, whither by strangling drowning etc. or the burning of their
Bodies to Ashes, is not of Common Equity: Other Kingdoms may use another way of
Execution, as pleases them best.

There is a Second Exception they bring against this Argument, say they: If
their Laws were binding to us, then they would be binding according to all
their circumstances: and if so, then all persons, whole Cities, yea beasts
behoved to be stoned to death: For so is the Command Deutro: 13. Now say they,
what Massacring would this be. To take off this exception, we Answer: There are
two things in a Law, there is first, The substance of the Law, Secondly, The
Circumstances of it: Now a Law may hold according to the main substance, and
yet not according to these circumstances: We shall clear it in an Example, The
Law of Hospitality binds all nations as to the substance of the things
commanded by it, but there were some circumstances joined with this Law,
according to the nature of the people to whom it was given; such as the washing
of feet, and kisses of Charity; and according to these it is not binding; And
so that command, That false worship should be punished, is substantial and
binding unto all; but that it should so be punished as to put Children, Women,
Beasts, young and old to death, was suited according unto the temper of that
People unto whom it was given, being so naturally prone to Idolatry, and
therefore were by more fearful punishments to be scarred from it, and so in
that respect is not binding unto others. We may add where this Law is repeated,
as Exodus: 22. 18. Deutr: 17. 2. 5. and Cap: 18. 20. It is only repeated in the
substance of it, and the way and manner is not mentioned. Secondly, we find
that Jacob and other Magistrates who were before the Law did not Execute it
according to their Circumstances; Yea and the Jewish Magistrates as Moses and
Josiah Ezod: 31. and 2 King 23, Did not tie themselves precisely to Execute the
Law according to all these Circumstances; And so it remains that though these
Circumstances do not bind the Magistrate yet the Law according to its substance
is yet binding.

There is a Third Exception they bring, say they, the Magistrate under the Old
Testament had an infallible Rule whereby he might know what was Heresy and what
not, to wit his consulting the Lord by Vrim and Thummim. But the Magistrates
under the New Testament have not this infallible Rule, and so it does not
follow from the duty of Magistrates under the Old Testament, that the same
should be done by the Magistrates under the New. To which we Answer, This
exception suppones First, That Magistrates under the New Testament may punish
those whom they know certainly to be Heretics, and surely there are sundry
Heretics of this kind, which he may know as well as if he had consulted with
Vrim and Thummim. Secondly, this exception of theirs does suppone, that the
Magistrate under the New Testament has no way left him how to come to know
infallibly what is Heresy, what not, which is false; he has the word of God,
his Spirit speaking by it, which is more infallible than that of the Priests
getting their Answer from Vrim and Tummim: For it might be doubted whither the
Priest had taken up the Answer right or not; or if he was Faithful in giving
it, according as he had received it. Yea Peter says the word is more sure than
any voice from Heaven, 2 Peter 1. Thirdly, This exception does suppone that the
Magistrate under the Old Testament took this course of consulting with Vrim and
Thummim, for knowing who was Heretics, Idolaters, and who not: But this is
false* it was only the written Word which they consulted with, for knowing what
was Heresy, what not Is^: 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, etc. And for
the application of the rule to persons, that they might know who were the
Heretics, we never read that they consulted Vrim and Thummim, but used a
judicial Process against the person challenged, and proved the Fact by
Witnesses: So Deuteronomy. 17. 4. There must be a scandal of Idolatry upon the man
challenged, And if it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired
diligently, etc. And it must be proved on him by Witnesses, verse 6. As the
mouth of two Witnesses, or three Witnesses, shall he that is worthy of Death,
he put to death.

They except Fourthly, That in the Infancy and Nonage of the Church God Typed
out things Spiritual by things Earthly, and so those Punishments were Types of
Spiritual Censures, Excommunication and Hell, and therefore are not now to be
put in practice: We answer First, Excommunication and Damnation were things
present to the Jewish Church, and so they had no Types of them. Secondly, This
is to turn Scripture to Allegories, and by this same reason we may cast at
punishments of Sins against the Second Table, as being Types of Spiritual
Censures, Hell and Damnation, and there is as much ground for affirming the one
as the other. This much for Arguments from the Old Testament.

We shall next hint at some Arguments from the New Testament. First, If so be
that it were unusual for Magistrates to meddle with men in matters of Religion,
then certainly Jesus Christ and his Apostles should have used this legal
Defense, when the Magistrate called them before him to answer about their
Doctrine, They would have said, ye have no place to challenge us for our
profession, for matters of Opinion are free; but we do not hear that they
declined the Judge, or used any such Defense, for sure Christ and his Apostles
would have left no lawful mean unessayed.

There is a second Argument taken from Romans 13. 4. Where speaking of the Civil
Magistrate the Apostle says, For he is the Minister of God to thee far good,
but if thou do that which is evil be afraid, There is set down the object of
the Magistrates Power and the extent of it, and it is set down indefinitly,
upon him that does evil. And therefore if Heretics, Maintainers of fall
Worship, be doers of evil, they fall under the Magistrates Power. Now that
spreaders of Heresy are doers of evil, we did prove in the second Doctrine
raised from this Verse, where we show that Heresy and Error was as much to be
eschewed, as Adultery and other Sins against the Second Table; and the
Magistrate as Magistrate should put forth his zeal against them as much; and
all the places commanding zeal against Error (which are not few) in the New
Testament proves this, for they bind every one according to his place; the
Minister according to his place, and the Magistrate according to his.

There is one Exception they make much of against this Argument, and it is
this; say they, By doers of evil, cannot be meaned these that are taken with
Error and Heresy, and other Sins against the First Table: And that because the
evil that is here spoken of, is the evil that is mentioned in the beginning of
the Verse, But if thou do that which is evil be afraid, It is an evil, say
they, that any that were guilty of it had need to be afraid of the Magistrate
because of it, and so it is not meaned the evil of Error and Heresy against
Christian Truths: For the Magistrate here spoken of, is the Roman Emperor and
Senate, who themselves were Enemies to Christian Religion, and so none needed
to be afraid of them for spreading Errors, but rather for mantaining Truths;
and therefore the doers of evil here meaned, must be the controveeners of the
Emperors Civil Laws, and not Heretics and such like. For Answer, This
exception is grounded on a wrong supposition; for by the Magistrate is here
meaned, not only the Roman Magistrate, but all Magistrates in general doing
their Duty as they ought. Paul indeed takes occasion from the Roman Magistrate
to speak here what is the Duty of all Magistrates; and it is clear from several
Circumstances of the Text: We shall mark one of them from the first words of
the Text, For he is the Minister of God to thee, Now sure it is, this must be
meaned of Magistrates in general, and not astricted only to the Roman
Magistrate; he not being the Minister of God unto every one who was to make use
of this Scripture. There is another Circumstance of the Text, proving this in
the 3 V^rse, For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works. Now sure this must be
expounded of the Office of Magistracy in general, and of that which Magistrates
should be, and not of the Roman Magistrate, who then was well known to be a
Terror unto many good Works, not only unto Christian, but also unto Moral
Virtues.

We shall give you only another Argument shortly taken from that Prophecy,
Revel: 17. 16. A Prophecy that the Civil Magistrate shall bring down the
Antichrist, and that Error of the Roman Religion, as a most acceptable work to
God: And so the Magistrates Hand is not bound up from punishing Error and
Heresy against the First Table, no more than from punishing other Sins done
against the Second Table. And this much for our Arguments brought in defense of
the Truth.

In the Third place, we promised to bring forth some of their Arguments and
solve them; Herein we need not spend much time for this being Truth, there can
be nothing said against it, which is Truth: Yet there being some nimble Spirits
to propone Arguments which every one cannot answer; we shall stay a little on
this Third point also.

The First thing they object is this: If so be that it were the Magistrates
Duty to punish Error and Heresy then Jesus Christ would have reproved the Jews
for Tollerating the Pharisees and Saduces: But so it is he never reproves the
Jews for so doing: Nothing of that kind is recorded by any of the Evangelists.

To this we Answer, First, That it does not follow that Christ did not reprove
the Jews, because it is not written: For John says Chap. 20. 30. He did speak
many things which are not written; so it follows not. But Secondly, we say,
although it be granted that Christ did not reprove them, yet it follows not
that their neglect was not a Sin. For First, by that reason we might say that
the Mgistrate should not punish Theft, because Christ speaks nothing of the
punishment of it in the New Testament: Neither, Secondly, reproves he the
Church for not Censuring them, and yet it follows not but that they ought to
be Censured that way. And Thirdly, God had revealed his Will before. And
Fourthly, It would have been for no purpose to have stired up the Magistrate to
this Duty then, for the Sectarie^ themselves had the Power that was of it. And
Lastly, the Jews at this time had not the Power of Civil Punishment in their
Hands, but the Romans, and so it was not in their Power to punish.

There is a Second Objection which they bring from the Apostle Paul's words in
the Epistle to the Philipp: 3. 15. where speaking of Differences among
Christians, he says, Let us therefore as many as be perfect, ^e thus minded:
and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. Say they, we see what was Paul's Judgment, That notwithstanding of
Differences, there should be Heart Waling or Uniting; and therefore the
Magistrate should not be stired up to Censure those who Err. To this we Answer,
Paul speaks nothing there of State Toll^ration; for then the Civil Powers were
not for Christ, but of Church Toll^ration in respect of that meekness and
tenderness which Christ's Servants should have in inflicting of Church Censures,
for fear of breaking Love: Secondly, He commands not all Errors to be thus
Tolerated; for so he should contradict himself in another place, where he
says, An Heretic after the first and second admonition reject. And Thirdly,
Paul limits that Tolleration that he would have here; and that in two things.
First, As to the time, how long, God shall reveal even this unto you. And
Secondly, He supposes the persons differing from them should walk with them in
things wherein they differ not, according to the same rule, and so make no
separation. Now it does not follow that those who remained Obstinate in their
Error should be still Tolerated, and that the Censure of the Church should not
strick on them at all; chiefly if it be such an Error as causes Rents and
Schisms, for he says, Take heed to those that cause Divisions and Offenses,
and avoid them, Romans 16. 17.

Their Third Objection is, That this is contrary to the way the Apostles took
with those that Erred, their way was to watch against them that Erred, Acts 20.
29. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the Flock. Verse 31. Therefore watch -- That which the
Apostle commands is, to watch against them. And in Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech
you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses -- and avoid them.
And in the 2 Timoth: 2. 24. it is said, And the Servant of the Lord must not
strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient. Now, say they, this
is a far other way than to stir up the Civil Magistrate against those who
differ from us, This Savors not of the meek Spirit of Christ. I answer, It is
the Duty of Ministers to watch against Error, and that is one mean for
suppressing of Error and Heresy; but one mean destroys not another: it does
not follow that this which is in controversy is not another mean also, neither
is it contrary to that meekness commanded to wait on them, more than to deliver
to Satan, or to Curse, and Excommunicate Apostates, with that great Curse
called, Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. They may as well say, It is contrary
to Christ's meek Spirit to establish the Sword in the Hands of the Christian
Magistrate, according to Rom: 13. 4. For punishing Sins against the Second
Table, and so under this pretense, Adulteters, Murderers, Seducers, Thieves,
and all should go free unpunished. But they do far mistake the Meekness of
Jesus Christ, Christ's Meekness is not to let people live in their Sin, to let
vile Heretics trample on Truth, destroying Souls: And in the mean time binding
up the Hand of the Magistrate, that he dare not hinder it; this were a
disrespect to Truth, and cruelty to poor Souls in danger to be carried away;
which our Lord was very tender of.

There is a Fourth Objection from Matthew. 13. 24. Taken from the Parable of the
Tares; where the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a man that sowed Wheat, and
the wicked one comes and sowes his Tares among it, and both is bidden let grow
till the Harvest. Now, say they, by these Tares is meaned Heretics; therefore
they should not be plucked up by the Sword of the Civil Magistrate. We Answer,
If they astrict the Word Tares to Heretics, in this sense, That the Sword of
the Civil Magistrate should not be used against them; by the same reason they
may say, that they should not be disputed against, for that is a plucking up of
them also. Secondly, We answer, That by the Tares that are commanded here to be
suffered let grow up to the Harvest, is no more meaned Heretics than other
Scandalous Livers: And this we shall make out from Christ's exponding the
Parable, Verse 41 -- And they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend* Now Heretics are not all things that offend, other scandalous Livers
offend also. Thirdly, By the Tares is meaned, Them that do Iniquity, verse. 41.
Now others besides Heretics are such. And Fourthly, If by the Tares were here
meaned Heretics, then by the [ Wheat] are meaned only the Orthodox, and so
every man that is Orthodox should -- Shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
Heaven, verse. 43 But there are many who are Orthodox* who yet are evil Livers,
and so will never go to Heaven. And therefore by the [ Wheat] must only be
meaned the truly Regenerate; and so by the [ Tares*] must not only be meaned
Heretics, but all other Evildoers.

And further, By this it would follow that Heretics should not be
Excommunicate, for that is a rooting out. But what can be meaned by the Tares
then: for whatever be meaned by them, it will follow that by this Parable Verse
30* they should be tolerated; and to say that all vile scandalous Persons
should be tolerated, is more absurd than that only Heretics should be
tolerated. Answer, If we narrowly observe Christ's exposition of the Parable,
we will find that part where he bids, Let both grow together until the Harvest,
is not exponed, although he expone the rest, which doubtless he would not have
omitted, if it had been his mind that we should have built any Doctrine of this
kind on it; therefore we say this is not Christ's meaning, that he would have
all men (how Godless and Scandalous soever) let alone; for that were contrary
to other places of Scripture: But that Christ is to show that when all pains
are taken by Christ's Officers for purging the Church, yet there will be always
some Hypocrites in it, and it is Christ's mind, though he has given order to
Censure scandalous Offenders, yet that his Servants should not press after such
a separation of the precious from the vile, as to have all the Weeds and wicked
in heart to be cast out; lest when they gather out the Graceless Tares, they
should root out also the Gracious [ Wheat] with them.

Object. 5. There is a Fifth Objection from Luk: 9. 54: Where Christ reproves
James and John for seeking fire to come down from Heaven to consume the
Samaritans; and from this they argue: That when People refuse Christ in his
Person, much less when they oppose him in his Doctrine, it is not his mind that
they should be punished, but admonished and waited on: But before we Answer
they must prove the Quarrel was for Religion. Now this cannot be made out for
the Reason why James would have ^ire coming down from Heaven, was, because of
an Act of Inhumanity in denying lodging to Christ; and that because of the
great envy and hatred betwixt these two people the Jews and Samaritans. The
Second Answer we give is, although the Quarrel had been for Religion, yet it
makes not against this Doctrine; because they were wholly Idolaters, utterly
ignorant of the Gospel; and our Doctrine is not that when a Nation is lying in
Idolatry, that the first thing that should be done is the Magistrates sword to
slay them, or to seek fire from Heaven to consume them: We say it is utterly
unlawful to go with fire and sword to force the Indians to embrace the
Christian Faith; only they should be taught, instructed and restrained from
spreading Blasphemies, reproaching the Son of God etc. Our Question is whether
or not a People that are Members of the visible Church, that have bound
themselves by Covenant to adhere to the Christian Truths, whether or not when
they fall away from Truth to damnable Error, the Magistrate may make them stand
to their Covenant, as Josiah did 2 Chronicles: 34. 31. And he caused all that were
present, to stand to it.

Object. 6. The Sixth Objection is this; say they, If Magistrates may punish
Error and Heresy, then he may force the Conscience; for what they hold, is as
they profess, according to the light of their Conscience: Now to force the
Conscience is a fearful sin, who dare meddle with Conscience but the God of
Conscience. Answer: This Argument seems plausible; but for Answer to it we say,
Conscience cannot be forced properly, Only we say that the Magistrate may
punish for, or restrain sin in such outward motions as come from an evil
informed Conscience, and if this be a sinful forcing of the Conscience then it
were a sin to punish those who from Conscience killed the Apostles John 16, 2.
-- the time comes, that whosoever Kills you, will think that he does God
Service. Yet we hope none will say the punishment of such would be a sinful
forcing of the Conscience; so it were a sinful thing to punish those who made
their Children to pass through the fire unto Molech, under the name of
Conscience^ These and many other absurdities would follow on this Tenet of
theirs, that none ought to be punished for any thing they do following the
indytments of a deluded Conscience. What have there not been, and yet are,
Heretics who pretend Conscience for the vilest villainies of the World? The
Jesuits pretend Conscience for stobbing Kings and Magistrates. The G^ost^cks to
have Wives common. And ancient Heretics has made it a point of Conscience to
practice Adultery, and some present Heretics to Marry their Sisters, so that
the ^igher in Blood the Persons Married are, the Marriage is to them the more
spiritual, and a number of such like villainies. Now will any think it a sinful
forcing of Conscience to punish such, whatever they tatle of Conscience. But
Secondly, To what they say, for the Magistrate to punish men for Error, is a
persecuting of men for Conscience. To this we Answer: Then it should follow
that God commanded sin to the Godly Magistrates under the Old Testament, for it
is clear they had a command to punish men for Idolatry. Thirdly, if this be a
persecuting of Conscience then it is a persecuting of Conscience to Preach
against Error, to refute it by good Reason. To make this Consequence clear,
know as there is a Persecution with the hand, so with the Tongue, and it is the
bitterest Persecution that is, called job 5. 21* The scourge of the Tongue. And
the mocking of Christ was one of the fearfullest Persecutions he met with he
trusted in God etc. And so according to this Doctrine it were unlawful to
Preach against them etc. Why? For it is a sin to persecute them for Concience.
But Fourthly, our Answer is; It is not the hurt inferred that makes sinful
Persecution, but it is the cause for which the punishment is inflicted.

There is a Seventh Objection they bring against this Truth, and it is this,
say they, If Magistrates were bound to punish Error and Heresy, it would lay a
tie on Magistrate; to know what is Truth, and what is Error; Now, say they,
there are many intricate Questions about the nature of Error and Truth, which
the Generality of Magistrates are ignorant of, and therefore say they according
to this Doctrine, we put power in the hand of the Magistrate whereby he may
punish those that profess the Truth, if the Magistrate mistake, and take Truth
for Error. A dangerous Doctrine, If Magistrates turn ignorant or corrupt. This
seems plausible: But we shall Answer to it. If this Argument hold strong then
it would follow that the Civil Magistrate has no power to punish sins against
the second Table; for there are a number of difficult Questions even about
these, as in some cases of Murder, Incest, matters of false Witness: And the
Lord says Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
Judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke
and stroke, etc. Which suppones there are many doubtful questions even about
things Civil which the generality are ignorant of: and so it may fall out they
may punish the honest man for the knave; and yet this does not evert the
ordinance of Magistracy, neither does it follow that he has no power to punish
for Civil crimes* Secondly, they may argue as well against what is commanded to
Masters of Families, That he receive not an Heretic within his house 2 John v.
10. and 2 Timoth: 3, 6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, etc.
Rom: 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions --
and avoid them. etc. By all which he supposes certainly they have some
knowledge to judge who are Heretics and who not; else how could they elchew
them; and so they may argue as well against these commands, as against this
Doctrine: For may they say, this is to put it on Masters of Families to know
who are Heretics, who not, to know what is Truth and what not, and this the
generality of Masters of Families are ignorant of; and so a power put on them
to bar the door on honest men, in stead of an Heretic: Now when they free
these Commands from these consequences we shall free this Doctrine from them
also. Thirdly, Neither the word nor this Doctrine puts a power on
Magistrates to punish Truth, their power is only to punish Error: They may
indeed so abuse their power, but it follows not that therefore they have no
power to punish Error: no more than because that a Godless Magistrate as Nero
was, may abuse his power to oppress, Murder honest Citizens, and do other Acts
of Injustice against the second Table; that therefore the Magistrate has no
power to punish Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, because either through mistake or
wickedness, he may abuse it to punish innocent Men; whatever remedy is left for
the Magistrates abusing of his power under the one, the same is left under the
other, as insome cases suffering, in others resisting.

There is an Eighth Objection they have against this Truth, say they, we make
the mean unproportionate to the end, no outward force can convert a man and
br^ng him to Christ, it makes men but Hypocrites, the blast of the Kings horn
or outlawry can make no man a member of Christ's body, that must be done
willingly, not by compulsion, and this were to cudgel People out of their
opinions. To this we Answer, That our Doctrine does not hold forth that the
power of the Magistrate is any mean to convert Souls: Only this it does hold
forth that the power of the Magistrate is a mean to restrain men from doing
sinful Acts against Christ; as Asa made use of his Civil Power to keep down
Idolatry, it puts People indeed on the profession of outward Obedience, and to
this it is very proportioned. And therefore Secondly, Though the blast of the
Kings horn cannot make a Member of Christ's invisible Body, by working Grace;
Yet it may be a mean in its own kind for making a Member of the Church visible,
by withholding from sinful Acts, and putting them on Acts of outward
Obedience. A Third Answer we give, That the power of the Magistrate does not
make men Hypocrites of it self, but through the corruption of Man's heart, who
makes himself an Hypocrite. The end of this ordinance, what it is in it self is
set down in Deuteronomy: 13. 11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no
more any such wickedness as this is, among you. That is the end, that they
being moved by their Example, should abstain from such like work: but that
they do this Hypocritically, is from their corrupt nature, who fears him more
who can kill the Body, than him who after he has killed the Body can cast both
Soul and Body into Hell. We Answer lastly if this were a good Argument why a
Magistrate should not make use of his power to punish for false Doctrine
because throw occasion thereof many turn Hypocrites: then say we, It should
follow that the Magistrate should not make use of his power to punish Incests,
Adulteries, Murders, Thefts etc. because it is the occasion of many Hypocrites,
who abstain more from such, for the fear of punishment, than for the fear of
God; yea according to this Doctrine it should follow, That the Preaching of the
word should be unlawful, because through the occasion of it many turn
Hypocrites under it.

There is a Ninth Objection they have against this Truth, and it is this, say
they, By this power we give to the Magistrate to punish Error and Heresy, we
give him the Power of Church Judicatories, to judge of Doctrines, Error and
Heresy. In Answer to this we shall speak more fully in the (...) Doctrine, only
for the present this giving Power to the Magistrate to punish Error and Heresy,
gives him not a public Judgment to discern, what is Error, and what not, as a
Judge in Church matters; but only a Judgment of Discretion in relation to his
own Act: As for Example, when the Lord gives Power to Masters of Families, not
to let Heretics come into their House, it is not a putting the Power of Church
Judicatories in their Hands.

IV. The last thing we promised to speak to you of, was to give you some use of
this: And the First is, to reprove those who think Opinions are free, and that
none ought to be punished for such, We grant as we said that there would be a
difference amongst Errors, some more damnable, some less; and so to be less
punished: and there is a difference to be put amongst persons, some are
seduced, some whose Conscience is Seared, some venting their Darkness, some
seeking Light: In such there should be a difference observed. Again the
Magistrate is to deal one way with a Community, another way with some persons,
before it come to such an hight. And Lastly, He is to deal otherwise with
Errors that cannot be mantained without troubling the Peace of the Church and
State, and those that break not Love, nor strike not at any material point of
Truth; the last happily may be Tolerate, if the Maintaine^s of them do not
evidence contempt: But not so the first. These and such like Distinctions may
be to qualify this Power; but to deny it altogether, is the most damnable
Doctrine that ever was vented, the Devil cannot take a shorter course to undo
Religion, and there can be no heart zealous for God but he must loath it; and
therefore look so on it: Think not, what is that to you what others do, if ye
get leave to serve God your self: Is that all your zeal for God, that if ye get
leave to serve him, ye care not that all beside you Spit on his Face, and serve
the Devil.

Use 2. Hence see what an Account those Magistrates have to make, who make no
use of their Power this way for God, if they get their own Houses built, cares
not for his, if Rebellion against themselves be curbed, cares not for the
curbing of Rebellion against God. This was the Sin of the Parliament of
England, though they entered into a Covenant with the most high God, That they
would suppress Error and Heresy, they never employed their Power that way; and
that because they durst not for angring of their Army, and therefore God has
suffered their Army to overturn them, and set themselves and whom they please
in their place; And now they by their practice give Tollerat^on to all; and
this is the way to strengthen them. I say in the Name of the Lord, if they
repent not, it shall be the way to ruin them, A people Swearing in their low
condition to root out Heresy, etc. And God blessing them from that day; and
within a few years carrying themselves as if they had Sworn to do the contrary,
to suffer all, encourage all, invite all the Devils in Hell to vent what
Blasphemies they please; and for their encouragement to give them Surety that
no Power in Britain shall hinder them, Was there ever such an affront done to
God? Think ye that he will sit with it? No, if he should make the one half
avengers of a broken Covenant against the other, He will not. It is noted of
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 5. Gods way, to keep Magistrates sure, and their Kingdoms
quiet, is to be zealous against false Worship: No, but (say they the way is not
to anger Heretics, they are the surest Pillars of our Commonwealth, but woe
to, and will be to, that Commonwealth that is builded on such Pillars. And if
Scotland, or any party in it, join with them on these terms, our woe is but
coming. He is a jealous God chiefly in the matter of his Service, as is clear
from the Second Command.

The Third use is, If this be an Ordinance of God to put Power in the
Magistrates hand to punish Error, it should make you scar at Error and labor
to be grounded in the Truth: For we see Error is a sin that God hates, and it
is a sin that God will have the Magistrate to punish, and so a sin that he
himself will punish if the Magistrate do neglect it. It is natural to men to
think, If they can live a good Life, it is the less matter what be their
Opinion; but the Lord Judges not so; for as he will have other sins punished by
the Magistrate, so he will have these punished also. And such as he usually
punishes himself, by fearful Plagues, when the Magistrate neglects his Duty,
in punishing other sins, so does he in those. We might speak much from History
of fearful Judgments sent immediately by God upon Heretics, but we shall here
close.

SECT: III. A BRIEF REFUTATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF Erastianism.
Head I. That there is a Church Government held forth in Scripture.
HAving thus show'n that the Doctrine of Tolleration is not of God, I proceed
to Demonstrate this also in some other of the most Dangerous Errors of the
Times; We shall begin first with these Errors which are about the Government of
the Church; and that because the Government of the Church is the hedge of the
Doctrine; for if once the Government be brangled or shaken the wild Boar of the
Wilderness comes in easily and corrupts the Doctrine: therefore it is that
the Devils main design has been against the Government of the Church to blast
and storm this Wall on all Hands.

The sum of what we have to say in this is, to make out these four points:
First, That there is a Government appointed by Christ in his Church distinct
from the Civil Government. Secondly, We shall show that this Government is not
in the hands of the Civil Magistrate, but in the hands of Christ's own officers,
which he has appointed for Governing his house, By inflicting of Church
Censures, enacting of Church canons, so as they are not to act by derived power
from the Magistrate, and Appeals are not to be made from them to the
Magistrate. Thirdly, we shall endeavor to prove, That this power of Church
Government is not in the hands of private Christians, or the community of the
Faithful: but in the hand of Christ's own Officers, Ministers and Elders. And
Lastly, We shall endeavor to prove that this Authority and Government is not
in the hand of particular Congregations or particular Elderships, Independently
from other Judicatories above them: but that this power is given to them, so as
they must be subject to Superior Judicatories. In which propositions we will
meet with these Errors that are most dangerously opposite to Church Government
at this time. The First two propositions are contrary to the Doctrine of
Erastians, and the last two are contrary to the Doctrine of Independents (as
they are commonly designed) First, we shall engage with Erastianism and our
Scope in this shall be as in the former, to show that however it pretend to the
Spirit, yet when it is brought to the trial it will be found not to be of God.

This Doctrine or Error has its name from the prime Author of it called
Erastus, a Doctor of Medicine who upon some discontent did first vent it: to
wit, That Ministers should only meddle with Preaching; but should have no power
to meet in Church Judicatories, Sessions, Presbyteries, or such like, nor
should they punish Scandalous sins with Church Censures, Such as Suspension or
Excommunication; But that all power whatsoever in a Nation, both in Church and
State, should be in the hand of the Civil Magistrate. This Doctrine so soon as
it was vented, did get, and does yet get many followers, chiefly among state
Divines, and Christians that know more of wordly policy than Christian
simplicity, so that in a short time if God prevent it not, it is like to
swallow up all other Controversies about Church Government, so plausible and
pleasing it is to the powers of the World, who cannot well endure to have
Christ Reigning besides them. Psalm: 2. 3. Let us break their bands assunder,
and cast away their cords from us. Both Sectaries and Malignants do aggree in
this Error, to take the power of Discipline out of the Churches hand's. The
spiritual power of Church Censures in the hands of Christ's officers, is an eye
sore to both of them.

But to come nearer to the point, There are two heads of this Erastian Doctrine
which we shall labor to refute. The First, is most gross, whereby they affirm,
That there is no particular Church Government set down in Scripture; In a word,
that there is no Government in the Church by divine right; but that this
Government is left in the hands of the Civil Magistrate, whether to erect any
Government at all in the Church, or not: or if he please to erect one, That he
may establish That Government which suits best the well-being of the Civil
state: So that according to this Doctrine the Civil Magistrate may establish
Episcopacy this year, the next year he may establish Presbytry, and the third
year he may cast both and establish Independency; And if he like, He may find
out a Government different from any of these, and establish it. The Second
Erastian Error is this, whereby they affirm whatever Government be in the
Church (whether grounded in Scripture or not) that according to Scripture it is
in the hands of the Civil Magistrate and that he is the chief fountain of
Church Government.

In opposition to the first Error we lay down this Conclusion, which (God
willing) we shall make good, That Jesus Christ the King and head of his Church
has established a particular form of Church Government in his word, which to
alter is not in the power of any State whatsoever. He has set down a way for
punishing Scandals, for inflicting Church Censures, Enacting Church canons; And
has not left this in the Arbitriment of Kings or Parliaments to set down any
Government they please. In prosecuting which point we shall follow that Method
we kept in refuting the Doctrine of Tolleration. We shall First clear the
State of the Question. Secondly, We shall bring Arguments to confirm the Truth.
Thirdly, We shall Answer these Arguments the Adversary brings against the
Truth: And so we shall apply all to Use.

I. And First, for clearing the State of the Question, take their two
assertions: First, we do not affirm that all the Circumstantials of Church
Government is set down expressly in the word; But only first, That all the
substantial parts of Church Government have a warrant in the word and are
therein so fixed and established, as they are unalterable by any State
whatsoever. And Secondly, As to the Circumstantials that relate to this
Government; we say, they are set down under general Rules, sufficient for the
ordering of them: such as, let all things be done in order and to edification.
Our Second Assertion is, we are not to enter here to show, what is the
particular kind of Government that is appointed in the word, and what things
falls under the power of Church Governors, and in what relation they are to
handle them, what are the nature of these Censures, and how in all these things
they differ from the Civil power: It would take long time to clear these. The
thing we aim at is only, this general: That Jesus Christ the King of his Church
and Lord of his House has set down in his word a particular way for Governing
of his house distinct from the Civil, which is not in the power of any State to
alter. We proceed now to Arguments for comfirming this Truth.

II. The first Argument is this, If so be that under the Old Testament, there
was a particular form of Church Government different from the Civil, set down
in the word; then there must be also the like set down under the New; but* so
it is that there was a particular way set down under the Old Testament for
Governing the Church: Therefore, there must be the like set down under the new.
For making out this Argument, there are two things we have to clear. The First
is, That there was such a Government as this under the Old Testament warranted
by the word. The Second thing to be cleared, is, that therefore and upon the
same Reason there must be also the like under the New. For proving of the
First, that there was a particular Government of the Church different from the
Gvernment of the state under the Old Testament, We shall clear two things.
First, That they had Church Judicatories different from the Civil Judicatories;
And to prove this we shall cite two places of Scripture: The First is, in 2 Chronicles: 19. 8, 9, 10. Ye may read the place at leisure; but there are these
things in it proving that there was a Church Judicatory distinct from the
Civil. First, We see that there is a Judicatory made up of the Churchmen of
the Levits and Priests, in verse 8. Secondly, We see that the things they
judged of were spiritual matters distinguished from Civil things by calling the
the first sort, The matters of the Lord, And the Second, Matters of the King,
v. 11. Thirdly, We see that in this Judicatory a Churchman was Moderator, in
the 11 verse And behold Amariah the chief Priest is over you. And Fourthly, We
see that the sentence of the Court was Execute by Churchmen in the end of the
11 verse -- Also the Levits shall be officers before you. All which being laid
together, makes out clearly that under the Old Testament ^^^re was a Church
Judicatory different from the Civil. The Second place is in Jeremiah. 26. 8. 9.
10 Where we have these things to make out the present point. First, We see that
there were two Judicatories in the 8 v. There is a Judicatory of the Priests
and Prophets condemning Jeremiah as a false Prophet: again in the 10. and 1^.
v. We see there is a Civil Judicatory made up of Statesmen When the Princes of
Judah hard these things, then they came up from the Kings house -- etc. So it
is plain they had a Church Judicatory for Church matters, as well as a Civil
Judicatory for Civil matters.

The Second thing that we are to speak to in order to the proving of the first
point, to wit, That there was a Government of the Church different from that of
the State among the Jews, is this, that as they had Church Judicatories
different from the Civil, so they had also Church Censures different from Civil
punishments, as we have amongst us. And First, public confession of Scandalous
sins was in use among them, we shall clear it from one place of Scripture Ezra
10. 10. 11. And Ezra the Priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed -- Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your
Fathers, etc. There is confession of sin appointed for a fault that was
Scandalous to wit, their Marrying with strange Wives. Now this confession was
not only private to God, nor on a Fast day, but a personal public
acknowledgment, after particular Examination of all one by one. And we gather
this from the 13. v. where it is said -- Neither is this a work of one day or
two -- etc. And in the 16. v. Three months was spent on the business, so that
this was a personal acknowledgment given by every one of them, after the
Examination of their guilt, as we do in our Church Judicatories. Secondly,
Besides this public Confession they had the Censure of suspending Scandalous
men from the Ordinances, as we do suspend from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; we will find this in David his appointing of the offices of the
Priests. Among the rest it is recorded of Jehoiadah 2 Chronicles. 23. v, 19. And he
set the porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none which was
unclean in any thing should enter in. They were suspended from the Ordinances
because of their uncleaness, And for the neglect of this the Priest's are
reproved in Ezekiel. 22 v, 26. Her Priests have violated my Law, and have
profaned my Holy things: they have put no difference between the unclean and
clean neither between the Holy and profane. They let all come rushing together
to the Ordinances: And for this they are reproved. Thirdly, They had among them
the sentence of Excommunication, which is set down under the name of Cutting
off from among the People. And in the new Testament it is expressed by the name
of casting out of the Synagogue, which certainly was Excommunication. It is a
Ridiculous alledgence that they say, by cutting off, was meaned the inflicting
of Temporal death by the sword of the Magistrate; for the uncircumcised
Man-child, he that had touched a dead Body and did not wash after it, were to
be cut off; now who would think that such were to be put to death.

The Second thing to be made out is, That therefore there must be a Church
Government under the New Testament, seeing it was so under the Old; and the
Reason is, because no necessity can be alleged for a church Government then,
but the same necessity is now. Is not the Church a mixed multitude now, as well
as then? is there not as great need to separate betwixt the precious and the
vile now, as then? Is not the Church now a field of Wheat and Tares as well as
then? Is there not need to keep the Ordinances pure now, as then, by the fence
of Government? Is there not need now to suppress sin as well as then? Is not
Christ perfect in all his House as well as Moses? Yea, in a word there can
nothing be alleged for a necessity to have a Church Government under the Old
Testament, but the same may be brought to prove the necessity of it under the
New.

The Second Argument we bring to prove this point is taken from the native end
of Church Government which is spiritual, to wit -- For the edifying of the Body
of Christ: Ephesians: 4. 12. To gain the Soul of our offended Brother to Repentence
Matthew: 18. 15. It is -- that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. 1 Corinthians. 5, 5. So the end of the Church Government is a spiritual end,
and therefore it must have a Divine Original: Church Government whose end is
spiritual can be no humane Ordinance, for such produces no supernatural
effects; therefore it must have a higher warrant for it than that of the
Magistrate.

Our Third Argument is taken from this, that all the substantials of Church
Government are set down expressly in Scripture, from which we make this
Argument: That Government whose substantial parts are all set down expressly in
Scripture, the Magistrate has no power to alter it, or put an other in its
place; but so it is that all the substantial parts of Church Government are set
down expressly in Scripture: Therefore, the Magistrate has no power to alter
it. The thing we have to make out in this Argument is this, That all the
substantials of Church Government are set down in Scripture; And to clear this
we shall reckon up five things. First That Church officers have their warrant
from Scripture These: 5 12. 1 Timothy: 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be
counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and
Doctrine. There is a Ruler, or an officer with power to rule, established in
Gods house. What they say, That by Ruling there is meaned Preaching, because
Ministers guide People by Preaching, is a frivolous Exception: and that because
of what is in the end of the Verse -- especially they who labor in the word
and Doctrine. So laboring, in the word and Doctrine, is one thing, and Ruling
is another thing, and not one and the same, as their Exception affirms. But
we shall find a more clear place for it in Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the
Rule over you, and submit your selves There are Officers established with power
to Rule, and the People are commanded to submit and give Obedience to them, and
so there are Rulers, Officers established in Gods Church. Secondly, The Courts
and Judicatories of the Church have a warrant in Gods word; and for this see
Matthew: 18. 17, 18. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church -- Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven -- The Adversaries are so shamless that they say, by the Church
is here meaned, the Civil Magistrate, and that the complaint should be made to
them: But it is sure the Civil Magistrate is not here meaned. And to prove it,
The Judicatory here meaned is that whereof the Apostles should be Members, and
therefore in v, 16. It is said whatever ye [to wit the Apostles] shall bind on
earth -- etc. Now sure it is Jesus Christ gives no power to his Ministers to
sit in Civil Courts, and to judge of Civil business. The third substantial of
Church Government that has warrant in the word is, the subordination of lesser
Judicatories to greater; and this is warranted in Act: 15, 2. Where Paul and
Barnabas come up from Antioch, to a General Council at Jerusalem (because the
controversy in hand could not be ended at Antioch) where there is a Court with
power, They determine the Question, Censure the Schismatics, giving them the
name of Liars v. 24. The Fourth substantial of this Government set down in
Scripture is, the order of proceeding in relation to Censure. 1. By private
Admonition, Then more pub^ick Matthew: 18. 15. The fifth thing is, The nature and
kind of their Censures, which are not bodily, as taking^ way the life; but
spiritual, to wit, Admonitions, reproofs, Casting out of the Church, Matthew: 18
17 -- Let him he unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican. Now from all this, It
evidently appears that Christ has set down all the Substantials of Church
Government in his word: And seeing he has done so, what man dare alter it,
taking any prudential way for the good of the Church at his pleasure: Yea there
is a charge given to preserve all these inviolable till Christ's coming; 1 Timothy:
5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another,
doing nothing by partiality. So that which Christ has set down concerning the
Government of his house is unalterable by any person whatsomever, till the
coming of Jesus Christ. So much for the third Argument.

There is a Fourth and it shall be our last, which is this, If so be that
Christ has left his House without any particular Government, only referring it
to the Civil State, to appoint what Government they please* it would reflect
much on the wisdom of Jesus Christ; For the Church visible is his Kingdom, his
House, his Vinyard* his Garden; And shall we say that he has appointed no Laws
to Govern no Courts to guide this Kingdom, but left it to the Civil Magistrate,
to appoint by whom and how it pleases him best: A King of Clay would not do so
with his Kingdom, much less he who is the King of Glory. This for the Arguments
to confirm the Truth, we shall in the next place Answer their Objections.

III. The First is (say they) from 2 Timothy: 3, 16. The word of God is able to
make a man perfect; and therefore there is no need of Government. We Answer,
This same Argument may as well strick against Magistracy. But Secondly, We say
(which we made already appear) That the Government of the Church is grounded on
the Word; Hence their Argument proves not, because the Government of the
Church is a part of the Word, and is commanded by it; and so it is not an
adding to it: But if they say the bare Preaching of the word is enough; We
Answer, Not to detract any thing from the word Preached, which is the mean
appointed by God to save Souls, yet the Exercise of Dicipline is necessary
also. It is necessary (we say) for Three Reasons. 1. To keep the Ordinances of
God from being polluted by the rushing foreward of Dogs, and Scandalous
Persons. All the Preaching that can be, to bid Scandalous men keep back, will
not do. Then 2. It is necessary for keeping the Church from being infected by
the contagion of Scandalous men. Hence says the Apostle Paul, a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump: Therefore put the incestous man from among you. 3. It
is necessary for the good of the Soul that is censured: So in the 2 Thessalonians: 3.
14 -- note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. And
1 Cor: 5. 5. Excommunication serves for the Destruction of the Flesh, that is,
To tame and mortify its Lusts: And so although the word be only the necessary
mean for the converting of Souls, yet it does not follow that the Government of
the Church should not be exercised, to wit, that the word may work the better.

The Second Objection is this, That all the Arguments we have to establish a
Church Government by Divine right are taken from the Churches practice in the
Apostles time, and commands given them; but it does not follow that what was
then, should be a rule now; and they give this as the Reason of the difference;
because the Magistrate was then a Pagan, and so would not meddle with these
things; but the case is now otherwise when the Magistrate is turned Christian.
We Answer First, By this it is granted, that Church Government was an
institution of Christ, at least in the primitive times, Now sure it is that
every thing instituted by Christ lays on a perpetual obligation, except
Christ in his word has set a period, that it should be only so long: So if
this Argument of theirs have any force, they must show from Scripture that
Christ has appointed this period for Church Government, so as it should be
only in force under an Idolatrous Pagan Magistrate: And that the Power of it
should cease under the Christian Magistrate: But no place of Gods word can be
given for the proof of t^is; But on the contrary a Command is given, That which
Christ delivered to the Apostles, 1 Timoth. 6. 14 Should be kept to his
second coming, And therefore it remains a perpetual Ordinance. Secondly, We
Answer, That if this were true, then the Case of the Church should be worse
under the Christian than the Pagan Magistrate; If so be that under the one,
they have an Intrinsecal Power to purge and keep his Church free from Scandals,
but not under the other, would not this be hard. Thirdly, We Answer, That the
reasons for which the Church did exercise Government, in the primitive times,
were taken from common Equity, and so are binding to the Church at all times.
We find this 1 Cor. 5. 5. Where a command is given to exercise Discipline by
Excommunicating of the Incestuous person: The reasons given are, First, The
good of the Man's Soul verse 5. Secondly, The good of the Church to be kept
from Infection, verse. 6. Now the Church is bound to see to these at all times.

We come to the Fourth thing, which is a word of Use: And it serves 1. To
reprove those who think debates about the Government of the Church useless and
of no value: To what purpose is it (say they) what be the Government, and who
governs, if sin be punished, and the Word Preached. I answer' it is of much
moment: For, from what is said it appears that Church Government is an
Ordinance of God, a part of his word, and they who evert it, or gives way to
the everting of it, give way to evert a part of the Word of God; yea to the
bringing down of the Government of Christ's own House. It is a point of Truth
that concerns no less than the Royal Diadem of Christ, and all who have got
good of Truth are bound to stand for it; yea it is more than an ordinary Truth:
The question is concerning Ch^ists Kingdom, if he have a Kingdom of his own
distinct from the Kingdoms of the World; If he shall have ^is own Laws,
Office-bearers, Courts, Censures, according to his will in his Word; or if all
he has left to that purpose be to scra^ched out, and the Civil Magistrate to
appoint what Laws, Rules, Courts, he pleases in Christ's House: So it is a
point relating to his Kingdom, a Doctrine to be avowed, and a point of Truth
worth the Sustering for, and which some have suffered for and boasted in it,
yea it is a point of Truth that has this advantage beyond other Truths, That
Christ has suffered for it himself in his own person, for it is clear that this
was the only point he was accused on by P^late, and he avowed it Luke 23. 3.
That he had a Kingdom, though not of the World, yet in the World. We shall
find, that this point was chiefly laid to Christ's charge in John 18. 33. 34,
35, 36, 37. And this was the p^int that was driven home by the Jews (...)
Christ, John. 19. It was his (...) on the Cross, Jesus Christ of Nazareth King
of the Jews. And this was the point that straightened Pilate most, and put him to
it to make Christ suffer, Joh. 19. So this point has this advantage, that in a
special manner Christ s^ffered as a Martyr for it: Should any then think it a
little thing to suffer for? God forbid. Yea we may think it an Honor.

The Second Use, If so be that Church Government is an Ordinance of God, then
those entrusted with it, such as Ministers and Elders, would discharge it as
Service to God, so as to be countable to him; t^ere should be an other frame of
Spirit, when Men are in Church Judicatories, than when they are in Civil
Judicatories: These are Ordinances of Men, their of God, and require more than a
common frame of Spirit. Alas (we may say) for the Unministerial like Carriage
of Ministers and Elders, may justly provoke God to through us out altog^ther.

A Third Use of this point is, That seeing Church Government is an Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, then ye that are people should obey and submit to those that are
over you in the Lord, otherwise if it be not t^us looked on it may provoke the
Lord to remove the Hedge from us; and if this were, God knows what we would
be: we are evil now, but if people got leave to do every thing that seems
good in their own eyes, we could not but be much worse: Ye see what ye are with
it but know not what ye will be without it. And so much for the first Head of
Erastian Doctrine.

Head II. The Power of Church Government belongs not to the Civil Magistrate.
THe Second Head of Erastian Doctrine, which we are to prove not to be of God,
is, That whereby they affirm, That all the Power of Church Government is in the
Hands of the Civil Magistrate. And here there are some differences among
themselves: some giving him all Power to dispense all Church Ordinances, and
this as a Magistrate, without a Call from the Church; and so to Preach and to
Administrate the Sacraments: Others again content themselves to ascribe to him
only a Power of Jurisdiction to make Church Laws, to inflict Church Censures.
And herein they also differ, some putting this Power wholly in the Hand of the
Magistrate: Others conjunctly with the Ministers; a third places it in him as
the fountain, and in Churchmen but as his Deputes; so that they are to act by
virtue of a Commission from him, and meddle only with these things that he
gives them Warrant for, and so to meddle with them as to be liable to an Appeal
to him as the supreme Judge in all Church matters. We contrary to all these
shall make out this following Assertion: To wit, That the Civil Magistrate as a
Magistrate has no Power either to Preach, or Administrate the Sacraments, nor
yet to make Church Laws, or inflict Church Censures, either by himself or
others as his Deputes; but all this power does belong wholly to Church
Officers, Ministers, and Elders: Which power they are to execute without
Dependency on the Civil Magistrate; so that they are not liable to Appeals to
his Court* neither has he Power to rescind the Sentence pronounced by them.

In following out of this point, we shall go on as in the former, we shall
First clear the state of the question. Secondly, We shall bring Arguments for
the Truth, Thirdly, We shall bring their Arguments against the Truth, and
refute them. Fourthly, We shall apply the whole to some use.

1. First, For clearing the State of the Question take this assertion; that
however we do not give the Civil Magistrate Power of Church Discipline, or the
power of governing the Church, yet we give him much Power about Church matters.
Our Divines following the word of God, give the Christian Magistrate a
threefold Power about Church matters. 1. A defensive protecting Power. 2, A
ruling Power. And 3. a Punishing Power.

First, They give him a Defending Power, and that is grounded on that Promise
made to the Church in Isa. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, etc.
By this Power the Christian Magistrate is to do three things. 1. By his Power
he is to encourage, countenance, and advance by his Authority and example the
public exercise of all Gods Ordinances; and so defend the Church in her
Liberties that are given to her by Christ: This was the practice of those Godly
Kings under the Old Testament: So did Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. to verse ^8. and
Jehoshaphat. 2 Chronicles. 1. 8, 9. 10, 11. And other Godly Kings. They encouraged
others in the Service of God; they countenanced them, and by their Authority
and example allured others to the practice of Godliness; which I ower Christian
Magistrates have yet. 2. By this Power they are to provide the Church with all
external Necessaries; as public convenient P^aces of meeting for Gods Worship,
and public Mantainance for the Church Officers, etc This we see was Hezekiah's
practice 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. Moreover, he commanded the People that dwelt in
Jerusalem, to give the portion of the Priests, and the Levites, that they might
be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. And it was Jo^^ah's practice 2 Chronicles. 34.
He repaired the House of the Lord, The public place of Gods Worship. 3. By
this defending Power of the Christian Magistrate, he is to remove all outward
Impediments lying in the way of God's Worship, such as Prophanity, Idolatry,
Heresy, and Blaspemy, as we did prove at length in the former Controversy.

Secondly, We give to the Christian Magistrate a Ruling Power about Church
matters: By this Power 1. He may convocate Church Judicatories, command them to
meet, and to enact Canons, and to make rules for Governing the Church; although
he cannot make Church Laws himself: So pious Magistrates under the Old
Testament did call Synods, as David 1 Chronicles. 23 2. And he gathered together all
the Princes of Israel, with the Priests and Levites. 2. By this Power the
Christian Magistrate is to confirm the acts of the Church Judicatories, and to
give the force of a Civil Law: Only herein we differ from the Papists, They say
the Magistrate should do this blindly, he is only (say they) the Churches Echo
to ^ay Amen to what they conclude: But we say the Magistrate is not to do this
blindly, we allow to him a judgment of Discretion to try whether what they
conclude be right or not, and accordingly he is to add his Authority or not;
and yet this makes him not a Judge in Church matters, but only a Judge of his
own Actions. 3. By this Power the Magistrate is to take Inspection of the
Carriage of Church Judicatories, so that all things be rightly managed by them;
so as if they should conclude a point of Injustice, though he may not rescind
their Act himself; yet he may command them to resume the the matter, take it to
their second Thoughts, give Reasons to the contrair, exhort them to their
Duties from time to time, until the matter be rightly concluded: Only it is
still the Church Judicatory that must rescind their own Act. By this ruling
Power the Magistrate may do much: When the Church is corrupt he may reform it:
That is, when Church Judicatories are all wrong, that they will do nothing for
his upstirring, In this case the Magistrate may lay the Church Judicatory
aside, and do that himself which they should do: His Power in this case is
extraordinary, he may reform by his own Power, as Godly Josiah did 2 King 23.
And as Asa and Jehoshaphat. At such a time Magistrates may do much this way:
But extraordinary Cases are not to be made ordinary Rules.

Thirdly, We give to the Magistrate a Coactive punishing power about
Church Matters, and by this power we affirm that all the persons of Churchmen,
and their goods are liable to the Civil Magistrate in things Civil: According
to that, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers (contrary to what the
Papists teach) so that if a Churchman should commit a Civil crime, the
Magistrate by his own power may punish him; as Solomon did Abiathar. 2. By this
coactive punishing power he may see to the Observation of Divine and Church
Laws, and punish those that are contemners of them by Civil punishments. There
are several examples of this; as that of Josiah He made all the People stand to
the Covenant. Now, by all that is said ye may easily perceive, that We give to
Caesar that which is Caesar's; although we give him not what is Gods: We give
him much power about the Church, but not the power of Governing the Church. We
shall clear this by a simile, how the Magistrate may have much power about
Church Matters; although not power of Governing the Church: Ye know the Civil
Magistrate, or Church Sessions, have much power about matters belonging to
husband and wife, Parents and Children, so as to censure and punish them for
their unnatural carriage toward each other, and to see every one do duty to
another; and yet neither the Civil Magistrate nor Church Session has Marital
or Husbandly power over the Wife, or Parental power over the Children so as
they might challenge the same duties from them, to be done to themselves, which
the Wife owes to her Husband, or the Children to the Parents; the Husband and
Parents only have that power: So it is here, The Magistrate has much power
about Church matters, but he has no Church Power properly so called; that
belongs only to Christ's own officers. Secondly, For clearing of the question
take this Assertion, what we deny to the Christian Magistrate in the power of
Governing the Church, we deny it to him only as a Magistrate; for so we laid it
down in the conclusion to be proved, A Magistrate as a Magistrate has no power
in Governing the Church, otherwise if a Christian Magistrate be chosen an
Elder, he has power of Church Government, being joined with the rest: Only we
say as a Magistrate he has no power to Govern the Church.

II. We come to the Second thing which is our Arguments to confirm the Truth,
And the first Argument is this That Jesus Christ has given no warrant to the
Civil Magistrate for the Government of his Church, and therefore he has no
right to it. 1, We say, that Christ in his word has given no warrant to the
Magistrate for Governing his Church: And this will appear from all these places
where mention is made of any warrant given to any, of Church Government; There
is no word of the Christian Magistrate in any of them, only mention is made of
Apostles, Ministers and Elders: so in Matthew: 16. 19. The power of Governing the
Church to bind and loose is given to Peter in the name of the rest of the
Apostles, but no word of the Civil Magistrate. And Matthew: 18. 17. the power of
Excommunication is given to the Church and if he shall neglect to hear them
(...) be -- etc. The Church of Ministers and Elders has the power, but no word
of the Civil Magistrate And so in Timoth: and Titus the scope of which Epistles
is to instruct Ministers concerning the right way of Governing the Church, what
is spoken there, is spoken to them and to Ministers succeeding to them, but
there is no mention of the Civil Magistrate. And therefore we may conclude he
has no right from Jesus Christ for Governing the Church: And what he would
challenge of that kind is but an usurpation and intruding unto that, to which
he has no right.

Our second Argument is, If the power of the Church Government belong to a
Magistrate as a Magistrate, then it belongs to every Magistrate but this were
absurd. We say, if the power of Governing the Church did belong to a Magistrate
as a Magistrate* then it should belong to every Magistrate, for whatever
belongs to one as such, belongs to all such. Now this has many absurdities
following on it; For by this Rule Heathen Magistrates might have power of
Church Government, and be Church Governors, which were absurd; For they are
not Church Members. Then Secondly, Women might be Church Governors, for they
may be Magistrates in some cases, and yet they may not speak in the Church. Yea
Thirdly, By this it should follow that Children not come to age might have the
power of Church Government, for they may be Magistrates, when Magistracy goes
by succession; Now Children cannot have the power of Church Government for that
power is not to be Exercised by deputies, but by the persons themselves who are
entrusted with it.

A Third Argument to confirm the Truth is this, That Magistrates as Magistrates
are not Church Officers; And therefore they have no power to Govern the Church.
The consequence is clear, for if Magistrates have power to Govern the Church,
then they must be Church Officers, if any thing make a man a Church Officer,
then power to Govern the Church will do it, for State Government and State
Officers are Relata, and have a mutual Relation one to another, and so must
Church Government and Church Officers have a mutual Relation one to another:
But in the next place it is evident, That a Magistrate as a Magistrate is no
Church Officer, and that because among all that roll, set down in the word of
God, wherein Christ reckons up his Officers, there is no mention made of the
Civil Magistrate. Ephesians: 4. There is a roll verse 11. And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists and some Pastors, and
teachers. But no word of the Civil Magistrate: and in Rom: 12, 6, 7. There is
an other roll of Church officers, but no word of of the Civil Magistrate --
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith: Or
Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering: or he that teaches, on teaching:
etc. But neither in this place or any other is there any mention of the Civil
Magistrate: Only some of our Adversaries mutter somewhat of 1 Cor: 12. 28. That
by Governments there mentioned is meaned the Christian Magistrate, but it is
easily refuted, for the text speaks evidently of such Governors, as the
Church had at that time; And God has set some in the Church -- etc. Now the
Church at that time had no Christian Magistrate, nor for above 200 years after.
So by Governments cannot be meaned the Christian Magistrate but the Ruling
Elder, who is often spoken of in other places.

Our Fourth Argument to prove this point is, That the Church did enjoy full
power of Government within her self, and accordingly did exercise it, near 300
years, before any Magistrate was a Christian, and so the Church has this power
within her self yet. For the first part of the Argument, it is evident if we
consider: First, That which is not controverted, to wit, that in the space of
300 years after Christ, there was not a Magistrate a Christian: If we consider,
Secondly, That all this time the Church had full power of Church Government
within her self; and therefore Paul says to Timothy 1 Timothy: 4. 14. Neglect not
the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery. So they had power of Ordination, Power also to
dispense Censures, as Excommunication. 1 Cor: 5. 4, 5 -- When ye are gathered
together -- To deliver such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh,
etc. And they had power to relax from Excommunication: So 2 Cor: 2, 6. Where
Paul commands to relax the Excommunicate man from that Sentence, Sufficient to
such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many. v. 7. So that
contrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him, etc. Fourthly, They had Synods
meeting together, making binding Canons to guide the Church. Act: 15. The Synod
of Apostles, Elders, and Brethren meet together, determine a controversy, and
Censure those who had troubled the Church. Thus the first part of the Argument
is made out, to wit, That the Church did enjoy full power of Discipline within
her self long before any Magistrate became Christian, And therefore it follows
that this power is yet in the Churches hand, and not in the Magistrates. And
that because if the Church at that time had right to dispense this power, as
undoubtedly she had, then they must make it appear how Christ took this right
from her and transferred it to the Civil Magistrate, which they cannot do.

Our fifth Argument is to obviate that which they say, That Ministers are but
the Magistrates deputes: From which we argue thus: If Church Officers in
inflicting Censures be the Magistrates deputs, then whatever the Church
Judicatory does the Magistrate may do it also, for none can delegate more right
to there than what he has himself: And so by this it should follow that the
Magistrate might ordain Misters himself by imposition of hands, he might
Excommunicate; And if he may do this, by consequence he might also Preach,
Administrate the Sacraments etc. For what right can be pretended to the one,
which may not be extended to the other; and so there should be no need of
Pastors and Teachers, but the Magistrate might do all.

Our last Argument is taken from the distinction which the Scripture holds
out betwixt Ecclesiastic and Civil power, Scripture condemns Church-mens
usurping the Civil power, and Statesmens usurping the Church power: Church men
are forbidden to judge or meddle with Civil things by Christ himself Luk: 12.
13, 14. 22 25. And so the Civil Magistrate may not meddle with Church power
either: There are two Kings we read of to be heavily punished for their
Transgression in this kind; Saul, for offering a Burnt-offering 1 Samuel: 13. 13.
And Vzziah, for burning Incense 2 Chorn. 26. 19. He would go in and burn
Incense; And therefore the Lord smites him with leprosy. And surely Reason
would say, if it be a sin for Church Officers to Exercise the Civil Government,
then it is a sin for the Civil Magistrate to take to himself the only supreme
power of Church Government, and ingross it wholly to himself.

III. We come to the Third thing we promised to speak to, And that was the
answering of the Opposites Arguments. The first Argument they bring against
this Truth is, That Godly Magistrates under the Old Testament had the power of
Church Government: And therefore so should Christian Magistrates have it under
the New. We Answer, That their Argument proves nothing, except they also
prove, that what power of Church Government Magistrates had then, they had it
as Magistrates: For we grant indeed what did belong to Magistrates as
Magistrates under the Old Testament, does belong to Magistrates under the New;
But it may not be granted, that that which belonged to Magistrates then under
other respects, does belong to Magistrates yet. For clearing of this, It is to
be observed that there were many Magistrates extraordinary men under the Old
Testament. So Moses gives out Laws and Ordinances for ordering the Church; But
we find in Deuteronomy: 18. 15. Moses was a great Prophet and a Type of Christ. The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
Brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. So David appointed the
office of the Levites that divided their courses; But David was a Prophet 2.
Chron: 8, 14. And he appointed according to the order of David his father, the
courses of the Priests to their service: Thus in another place it is shown how
David did this at the direction of other Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29. 25. And he set
the Levites in the House of the Lord with Cymbals, with Psalters, and with
Harps, according to the Commandment of David, and of Gad the Kings seer, and
Nathan the Prophet: For so was the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. And
so from these and such like practices they can no more infer the Power of the
Magistrate now in Church matters, than we may infer the Power of Churchmen in
Civil-matters from the example of Churchmen under the Old Testament: For
Churchmen did meddle with Civil-Matters in extraordinary Cases: As Eli the
Priest, He governed the State: And Samuel, in cutting Agag in pieces. Elisha in
Anointing Jehu to be King: And Jeho^ada the Priest, in causing kill Attaliah
the Usurper, and making Joash King. All which we grant were extraordinary Acts,
and so cannot be an ordinary rule for Churchmen to have such Power in Civil
things now: And so must they grant concerning these extraordinary practices of
Civil Judges, in meddling sometimes with Church matters.

The Second Argument they use is this, If so be that Magistrates were set over
Church Officers to receive Appeals from them, it would make them afraid to go
beyond their Duty: But if they have none above them, there is danger of their
Ambition and abusing of Discipline. To which we answer, First, Ministers are
Men indeed, and as other men, are ready to abuse their Power; But if the danger
of abusing Power be a good Argument to take Power from them, then there should
be no Power in the Hands of any: For what kind of Men are there to be found,
who are not in danger to abuse their Power, and so all must be left in
Confusion. We give a second answer, That the same Argument may be used against
the abuse of Preaching the Word, and administrating the Sacraments, For the
danger is as great; and yet the Erasitans (the most part of them at least) will
not say that the Magistrate, for preventing of this abuse, may step into the
Pulpit himself and Preach better, and Administer the Sacraments better, There
is another way to curb that abuse; and so is it in the matter of Governing the
Church, there is danger indeed of abusing that Power: but we say in like
manner, that for that the Magistrate may not sit down and take the Power of
Church Government himself: There are other means left to prevent this danger:
Which shall be our Third Answer, Wherein we shall show some of these means
appointed by God for preventing the abuse of Power in the hands of the
Church Officers: First, There are some Remedies in the Church Power it self, to
wit, The Subordination of Judicatories: So that although a Congregational
Eldership should wrest Justice; yet there are above them Presbyteries, and
above them Synods, and above them General Assemblies. Now it may be conceived
that an Act of Injustice will hardly get through all those, before it be
branded with some deserved mark: But Secondly, Though all Church Officers
should connive one at another, and so the Faults of Ministers go through
unpunished, yet there is some remedy left even in the Civil Power: For
although, for the reasons foresaid, he may not take upon him the Power of the
Church Judicatory under pretense of Righting their Abuses, no more than he may
take upon him to Preach, for preventing their abuse of Preaching: Yet he may do
several things. 1. If Church Officers commit a civil Crime, he may curb them by
his own Authority. 2. If Church Judicatories meddle to judge in Civil things
which concern a man's Life or Estate, the Magistrate may make null what they
conclude and punish them for abuse of Power; for therein they meddled with what
belonged not unto them. 3. Grant the matter be merely Ecclesiastic wherein
they abuse their Power, yet the Magistrate may do somewhat here also: He may
command them to resume the matter, he may compear in person and reason the
matter, and bid them see to it in the Name of the Lord, and stir them up to
judge it better, and he may go from one Judicatory to another till he get this
done: As for example, If it be a censure wrongously inflicted; But yet it is
still the Church Judicatory that must ranverse their own Censure.

The Third Argument they use against this Truth is, If the Power were put in
the Hands of the Civil Magistrate, it would be a mean to decide all the whole
Controversies about Church Government, which are managed with so much Animosity
on all hands: Prelates plead that They should have the Power of it:
Independents That particular Congregations: Presbyterians, That Sessions,
Presbyteries, Synods, General Assemblies, should have the Power of it, the
former being Subordinate to the latter, Sessions to Presbyteries, etc. Hence
arises all our Debates: Now were not this good to take it from all, and give
it to the Magistrate. We answer. It is a way to end the Difference, such as
Solomon did to the two Women striving about the living Child, It shall be none
of yours, A way that relished not with the kindly Mother of the Child, 1 Kings
3. 25. Secondly, We answer, This Argument may take with natural Hearts who
would buy Peace at any rate; but not with those who are taught of God To buy
the Truth and not to sell it; For it holds out a way to end Controversies,
which is not God's: His way is to establish what is right, and to quite what is
wrong: But this way tends to suppress both right and wrong, such Peacemakers
will not be Blessed.

Thirdly, The Presbyterians may borrow this Argument against Prelates,
Independents, Erastians, and have better right to it, and so it will run thus:
If Church Government were put in the hands of the Presbytery, It would
establish and settle all Differences in the matter of Church Government betwixt
Prelates, Independents, and Erastians: Now if this Arment be good when they use
it for them, it must be also good when it is used for us: But I doubt if they
will admit of such like reasoning, and so neither can we.

There is a Fourth Argument they use, say they, Jeremiah appealed to the Civil
Magistrate Jerem: 26. and so Paul Act: 25. He appeals to Caesar. We answer, let
that place of Jeremiah cap. 26. be read, and nothing will be found to prove
that Jeremiah makes any appeal to the Civil Judicatories: But Secondly, Though
he had appealed, yet it does not prove that it is Lawful to appeal to the
Magistrate in a Church business; for the Sentence which the Priests had past on
Jeremiah was Civil, Thou shall surely die, v. 8. Now it was the Princes Duty to
see to it. That Innocent Jeremiah should not be put to Death, especially by
those who had no Powet to inflict such a punishment. As for that instance Acts
25. 10, 11. about Paul's appealing to Caesar, it makes nothing to these
purposes; He appeals only from Festus, an Inferior Civil Magistrate to the
Superior; And this we are not against. But Secondly; Though Paul had appealed
from a Church Judicatory, yet this makes nothing to confirm their Doctrine: For
the cause here whereabout Paul was to be judged, was a Civil cause, to wit,
Treason against Caesar, And a thing worthy of Death. Now we do Teach, that a
Churchman may appeal to a Civil Magistrate, when he is questioned about his
Life* and for a Civil crime; But hence it follows not, That we may appeal
from a Church Judicatory, when the cause is Ecclesiastic and no ways civil.

Their last Objection is taken from 1 King. 2. 27. Whereof they make much, The
words are, So Solomon thrust out Abiathar, from being Priest unto the Lord:
From which they argue thus: Here is a civil Magistrate inflicting a Church
Censure, to wit, Deposition of a Churchman, to wit, of Abiathar the Priest,
Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord: Therefore,
Christian Magistrates have Power to Dispense Church Censures: Yet we answer,
Solomon did nothing here but what we yield to any Magistrate, for a civil
Magistrate may inflict a civil Punishment on any person whatsomever for a civil
Crime; and so was the present case: Abiathar's Fault was Treason, in assisting
Adonijah to the Crown against Solomon, appointed by God to it. Secondly, The
Censure inflicted by Solomon was not a Church Censure, but civil, to wit,
Banishment to Anathoth, as appears from verse 26. And therefore what is
mentioned in verse 27. He thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord,
Is not the Censure directly intended by Solomon, but that which followed upon
his Banishment from Jerusalem, ipso facto; because the Office of the Priests
could not be exercised but at Jerusalem.

IV. In the last place it follows, That we give a word of use from all we have
said. The First use, If so be that Jesus Christ has appointed a Government in
his House, as is proven, to be exercised by his own Officers, Then know that
those Magistrates that would ingross this Power to themselves, so as to have
his Courts and Censures depending on them, or rather taken away, and others put
in their place, do highly incroach on the Regal Power of our King Jesus Christ.
And this seems to be the great sin of the Times, Atheists, profane Men,
plead for it; as looking for more forbearance to their Lusts from civil Powers,
than from Christ's own Courts. Civil Powers plead for it; They are not content
that Christ let Them reign, and that they let Christ reign besides them; But
they must have him thrust out of his Throne, and made to plead at their bar;
And so no wonder Christ overturn Kingdoms and Governments: It was the
Parliament of England's fault, They feared lest Christ's Courts should have
wronged their Privileges; Hence they would not allow him his Privileges: They
set up indeed a Government in Christ's House, but it was a Lame one; They durst
not give Christ's Courts their full Power, but so as to be their Deputes: And
therefore they have dashed themselves against that cornerstone Christ Jesus,
until they are struck in pieces, Their Fear is come upon them. What they feared
from Christ's Courts, they have met with at the Hands of their own Servants: Our
Kings have still been afraid of this, and Malignants also going under the Name
of Royalists; They thought they could not get Their Throne secure if so be
Christ got leave to reign besides them; And this among many others has made
their Throne shake. O that Kings would be wise and kiss the Son, It would be
their Wisdom to be faithful in what is committed unto them; But for the
Government of his House it is not in their Charter, and so a thing that will
not thrive in their hands, their prudential Laws and Rules will do no good.

Secondly, Ye would ground your self in this Truth; It may cost you much, and
though it should stand you never so much, it is worth the avowing. Christ
himself suffered on this account (as we have already shown) and others of his
servants have thought it their Glory to be called unto suffering for it. Who am
I (says Master Welsh) That he has not only called me to be a Preacher of glad
things, but also to be a sufferer for his cause and Kingdom; To wittness that
good confession, That Jesus Christ is the King of Saints, and that his Church
is a most free Kingdom; Yea as free as any Kingdom under Heaven: That she is
free in her Government from all other Jurisdiction on Earth except only
Christ's: We are waiting (says he) with joyfulness to leave the last Testimony
of our blood for the confirmation of this Truth; If it would please our God to
be so favorable, as to honor us with that dignity. Thus He. And who knows
how soon he may honor some of us with that dignity: A dignity indeed to suffer
for the Royal Crown and Diadem of Our Lord Jesus.

SECT: IV. A BRIEF REFUTATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF Independency.
Head I. The Power of Church Government is in the Church Officers, and not in
the Body of Church Members.
THE days bypast we spoke against the Doctrine of Erastianism, And show you,
that however it had many fair pretenses, yet it is to be reckoned among those
Doctrines which are not of God. We are now, with the Lords assistance, to speak
against the Doctrine of Independency, Ye Remember when we entered on these
controversies about Church Government, We show you there were Four points of
Truth which we should Labor to make good: The first was, That Jesus Christ the
head of his Church, had appointed in his word a way for the Governing and
Ruling of his Church, and that he had not left it to the power of the Civil
Magistrate, King or Parliament, To establish what way of Government they
please. The second point was, That this Government of the Church which Christ
established in his word was not in the hands of the Civil Magistrate, to be
Executed by him. Their two points we have made good in our former Disputs
against Erastianism. The third point of Truth is this; That Jesus Christ the
head of the Church has not committed the power of Governing his Church unto
the Body of Believers, To the community of Church Members: but has established
it in the hands of his own officers, Ministers, and Elders. The Fourth point of
Truth which we promised to prove was this, That Jesus Christ the head of the
Church has not given particular Elderships and Church Sessions, the Supreme
power of Church Government in their hands, so as that there should be none
above them to call them to an account; But that they are subject in the Lord to
Superior Church Judicatories; such as Presbytries, Synods, and General
Assemblies. These two last points we are to make out in Refuting this Doctrine
of Independency.

This Error of Independency above all other we may call a fountain Error: It is
the Sluice, whereby an entrance is made to all other Errors of what sort soever.
This is the Error whereby the most part of those that has fallen from the way
of Truth these years by past, have been first hooked; They first turned
Independents, yet rested not long there, but proceeded from evil to worse. Our
scope shall be in this as in the former points to show, That however it has
many fair pretenses, yet when it is brought to the Trial, it will be found not
to be of God.

There are two main heads of this Error of Independency opposite to the two last
points of Truth, which we promised to make out. The first is, That whereby they
affirm, That Jesus Christ has given the power of Governing the Church unto all
those that are Members of the Church, Although they be not Ministers or Elders:
To the community of believers as they call it. The second Head of their Error
is this, They do affirm that Jesus Christ has entrusted particular
Congregations, Elderships, or Church Sessions with the highest power of Church
Government on earth; so that there is no Judicatory above them to call them to
an account. As for the first Head of their Error which we are to speak against
at this time. Therein they have different Opinions among themselves; some
affirming that the power of Governing the Church is given to the Body of Church
Members, the community of Believers, without the Minister and Elders; yea a
power over them to ordain them, Censure, depose them, and inflict all other
Church Censures: Others give them this power conjunctly with the Church
Officers, Ministers, and Elders. Secondly, Some give only the power and
Authority to Govern, to the Church Members; But for the Exercise of that power,
they allow it to the Elders: Yet so as to the Peoples deputs, to whom they must
give an account: Others give the People not only the power and Authority, but
also the Exercise of this Government; So that the People may sit down in Church
Judicatories themselves, enact Church Canons, inflict Church Censures etc.
Thirdly, Some give them the Exercise of this power only in some things; as the
Exercise of the power of Jurisdiction, to make Church Canons, and inflict
Church Censures; But not to Preach. Others give them a full Exercise of
Authority to do all.

We in opposition to all these, lay down this conclusion, which we shall Labor
to make good from the word of God, and solid Reason; to wit, That Jesus Christ
has not given to the Body of Church Members, or to private Christians either
the power or Exercise of Church Government, neither in whole nor in part, but
has entrusted it wholly to his own Officers, Ministers, and Elders. I
prosecuting this point we shall follow forth the former Method. First, We shall
clear the State of the Question. Secondly, Bring Arguments for the Truth. And
Thirdly, We shall propone and answer their Arguments brought against the Truth.
And Fourthly, We shall shall apply the whole to some use.

I. For clearing the state of the Question, Th^a it may be known what we do
grant to private Christians, and what we deny, several distinctions would be
given. First, There is difference betwixt Church power or Authority, and
Christian privileges: We do grant several Christian privileges to private
Christians, but these do not infer any Church power, or Authority of Governing
the Church. As for Example, We do grant to the People a Power of Electing their
own Officers, Ministers, or Elders, we grant to them a power to try the Spirits
whether they be of God. i: e: They are not to believe blindly what Ministers
say, but have a power to Try what they say in Relation to their practice, To
pass a Judgment of discretion upon it, whether it be according to the word or
not. We grant these privileges to the People but none of them does infer any
Church power, which we clear in both. First, The Peoples power in Electing
their Minister, does not infer any power of Church Government in them, and that
because it is not the Peoples Election or their choice that makes the Minister
to be a Minister, or gives him Authority to Exercise the Ministerial calling;
but it is the Act of Ordination, by imposition of the hands of those who are
Church Officers, that makes the man the Minister, and gives him Authority. We
shall find this, Acts 6, 3. where the Peoples Election and Ordination by Church
Officers is clearly distinguished. Wherefore Brethren, (say the Apostles) look
ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom
(there is the Peoples Election) whom we may appoint over this business, There is
the Church Officers part: Though the People look them out and choice them, that
gives them not the power of their calling until the Church Officers appoint
and ordain them. Secondly, The power of trying the Spirits does not infer any
such power or Authority of Government in the People, otherwise it should follow
that the People of Berea, who did try Paul's Doctrine, Act. 17. 11. And compared
it with the word whetber those things were so, had Authority over Paul, which
none will affirm.

A Second distinction to clear the state of the Question is this, There is a
great difference betwixt those to whom the Authority of Governing the Church is
given, and those for whom, or for whose good it is given: although we deny that
the power of Governing the Church is given to private Believers, yet we grant
it is given for them. So all Ordinances are given for the good of Believers: As
it is Ephesians: 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangilists, and some Pastors, and Teachers: For the perfecting of the Saints,
etc. and in this respect 1 Cor: 3. 21, 22. all is said to be theirs -- For all
things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or
Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, i. e. given for
their good: But hence it will not follow, that because Church Discipline is
given for them, that therefore they have the power of it; for in this respect
Paul is given to every particular believing Woman, and yet it does not follow
that Women have Paul's Authority. And so the Body of the particular Church has
not this power in their hands although the power be given for their good.

A Third thing for understanding the State of the Question; We do willingly
grant to private Christians power to admonish, exhort in the Lord, out of
Charity: and this they may extend even to Ministers, say to Archippus take heed
to thy Ministry. But this Liberty to admonish by way of Charity, does not
import any Church power in them over those whom they rebuke, no more than Paul's
rebuking of Peter Gal: 2. 14. does infer a power in Paul above Peter. So ye see
what we do grant to private Christians; and what we deny: The sum whereof is
this. That Jesus Christ has not given them any power of Church Government, or
the Exercise of it, either in whole or in part, but has entrusted it wholly to
his own Officers, Ministers, and Elders. This for clearing the state of the
Question.

II. We come now to Arguments for clearing the Truth, And the First is this,
That Jesus Christ has given no warrant to private Christians for Governing his
House, or for the Exercise of this Government; and therefore they have no right
to it. The consequence must be clear: For none has right to play the part of a
Governor in Christ's Church, except those who have a warrant in his word for
it. Now that private Christians have no warrant in his word for Governing the
Church, either expressly, or by good consequence, either by precept or promise,
or any thing else, it is clear from this that in several places of the Word
this power is denied unto them: So Rom: 10. they must not exercise the Power of
Preaching for how shall they Preach except they ^e sent. v. 15. Now the whole
communi^y of Believers cannot be sent, besides they have no ability to
discharge this Office, there is but one of a Thousand that can convince
gainsayers: Is apt to teach, that is; able to cut and divide the word aright;
and so they have no power to Preach. And Secondly, From this it will follow
that they have no power to Administrate the Sacraments, for Christ Jesus has
joined both these powers in one Commission, He gives no power to any to
Aministrate the Sacraments, but those to whom he gives power also to Preach
Matthew 28, 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations Baptizing them-etc. Power
of Preaching, and Administrating the Sacraments go together. And so seeing the
one power is denied to them, the other must be denied also. Thirdly, They have
no power to ordain Ministers, or to execute any other act of Church
Jurisdiction, for they have no ability to try Ministers gifts, there is no
precept commanding them to do it, there is no practice in the New Testament
proving that ever they did it, as shall be more fully cleared in answering the
Arguments they bring for it; And so they have no right to Govern the Church.

The Second Argument for the Truth is this, That this Doctrine of theirs,
whereby they give the power of Governing the Church to private Christians, does
overturn the order established by Jesus Christ in his House; And therefore they
have no right to it: The consequence none may doubt of; For nothing appointed
by God does evert the order established by himself. Now that this Doctrine of
theirs, whereby they put the power of Governing the Church in the hands of the
People, does evert the order appointed by Christ is clear; Because his order
is, That some be watchmen, some watched over, some Rulers, some to submit: some
Governors, some to be Governed: some Sheepherds, some the flock: But if so be
that all the Members of the Church had the power of Governing in their hand,
then all should be overseers, watchmen, Rulers, Governors; and none more than
another, If so be that power to Govern should flow from this, That they are
Church Members; For all are so alike.

The Third Argument we bring for the Truth is this, That to whomsoever Christ
Jesus has given warrant for Governing the Church, to those he gives promises
of suitable abilities for discharging of that great Trust; But so it is, that
Jesus Christ has not gifted, neither promise to gift every Christian, nor yet
requires He answerable gifts for Government from them: And therefore he has
given them no warrant for Governing the Church. For the first part of the
Argument, that those to whom he gives the power of Church Government he does
also promise them sufficient abilities for their Trust, is clear, For how could
it stand with the wisdom of God to commit the great affairs of his House to
those whom he has not qualified to that purpose; Besides no instance can be
given that ever he trusted any with those things, but he promised them
furniture, and in some measure enabled them accordingly: So when he sends
forth Moses, Jeremiah, Isay, etc. he gives them furniture; and when he sends
out the Apostles he furnishes them for that End; So John 20. 21, Then said
Jesus to them again peace be unto you as my Father sent me, even so send I you.
There is the commission given them: and upon the back of this in v. 22. And
when he had said this, he breathed on them; etc. There is the Furniture: And so
does he to Ministers whom he entrusts with this power, He promises them
Furniture, Matthew; 28, 20 -- and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the World. There a promise made to the Apostles, and in them to the Ministers,
as appears from these following words even unto the end of the World. And so
these promises could not be fully verified in the Apostles, who were to die
within a little, but in Ministers their successors, to the Worlds end. Now it
is very evident he has neither made such promises to every particular
believer, for Governing the Church; neither does he perform them unto them
What? Is every believer furnished with that measure of knowledge, prudence, and
wisdom, that is required for the right managing of the affairs of Church
Government? Yea, God does not require it of them: And so certainly it stands
not with his wisdom to have committed the power of Church Government to all and
every one of believers. This for ou^ third Argument.

Our Fourth Argument for the Truth is, If so be that the power of Governing the
Church belongs to Church Members, Then it belongs to them either as they
are gifted for it, and chosen out for that purpose: And if so, then we have our
intent; For then all are not Church Governors, but only those who are gifted
and chosen, And so, Church Officers: Or it belongs to them as believers, or
Church Members, and if so, then it Belongs to all, for every one is a Church
Member as well as another, and every one that has Faith, is a believer as well
as another, and whatever privilege flows from Faith, belongs to every
believer, the meanest as well as the greatest. So if the right of Church
Government be grounded on Faith and Grace, then every believer, and none but
believers, should have the right of it, from whence shall follow many
absurdities; as that Children as well as Parents, the simple as well as the
wise; Women as well as Men, may Preach, Administrate the Sacraments, lay on
hands in Ordaining the Ministers, sit in Sessions, inflict Censures,
Excommunicate, and what not. Secondly, Then none but believers should have
right to Church Government. So none has power to Baptize, Censure etc. But
they that have Grace. And upon this People should have Reason to doubt whether
they be rightly Baptized or not, because they know not if the Minister who
Baptized them had Grace or not; and if he wanted Grace, he had no power of
Church Government by this Doctrine; And so no power to Baptize.

We bring a Fifth Argument for the Truth, and it is this, private Christians
are in no place of Scripture acknowledged to be Church Governors, There are no
names nor titles given to them, importing this power to be in them, as is given
to Church Officers 1 Timothy: 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor And 1 Corinthians. 12. 28. And God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. But no title
of that kind is given to private Christians; Yea they are set down plainly
under names in opposition to Governors: As the flock to Overseers. Acts 20.
28. Take heed tberefore unto your selves and to all the flock over the which
the Holy Ghost has made you overseers. etc. Yea and are commanded to honor,
obey, submit to their Governors set over them, and distinct from them, Hebr:
13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves. etc. Now
it is strange to imagine, That Christ should have entrusted them with highest
power of Government; And yet in all the styles he gives them, there is nothing
imported of that power, but much of their Subjection; Surely he has not done
so with Officers, as we have shown; And let any discover the Reason of the
difference.

A Sixth Argument for the Truth is this, If so be that the power of Governing
the Church be given but only to some, then it does not belong to all; but, so
it is that the power of Governing the Church is only given to some; therefore,
not to all Church Members. The first part of the Argument cannot be denied; For
the second, That it is only given to some, see those proofs that limit this
power only to some as Ephesians: 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles and some
Prophets, etc. Some and therefore not all 1 Cor: 12. 28. (which we cited
before) and God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly,
Prophets, thirdly teachers, There are but some that he has set for Governing
his house and therefore not all and Heb: 13, 17. Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves etc. Tim: 5. 17. (as is likewise before cited)
There are some then that rule, to whom the rest ought to submit; And so all are
not Rulers.

There is a Seventh Argument for clearing the Truth. And it is this, That power
which Jesus Christ has not set down rules and limits to order it by in his
word, is not of God; but he has set down no Rules how to direct the managing
of Church Power in the hand of Church Members; therefore it is not of God. The
first part of our Argument, That whatever Power is appointed of God, he has
set down Rules how to order it, is very clear; As we may prove by the
Enumeration of lawful Powers: He has set down Rules how to Regulate the Power
of a King, that he play not the Tyrant; He has set down Rules to Regulate the
Power of Masters, Parents by: So the Power in the Hand of the Church Officers
is regulated, that they Rule with Diligence, Romans 12. 8. And so through the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus: But so it is that he has set down no Rules to
order Church Government by, in the Hands particular Believers. For in no place
of the word will such Rules be found, Ye that are the flock govern the Pastors
and feed them, watch over the People of God, lay hands suddenly on no man. I
say there are no such directions given to private Christians; and therefore
this pretended Power is not of God.

Our last Argument for the Truth is, If so be the Power of governing the Church
does belong to every Churchmember; then every Churchmember is bound in
Conscience to attend all Church Judicatories, to wait on the deciding of all
Ecclesiastical questions: But what inevitable confusion would follow on this?
How long time would it take to inform People about the Circumstances of things?
How tedious would it be to hear every man's judgment to the point? And what
distractions would it be to Peoples Callings? This certainly would bring great
confusion; And so such a Power as this cannot be from God, who is the God of
Order. These are now the Arguments for the Truth.

III. In the next place we shall answer their Arguments brought against the
Truth. The first they use is grounded on Coloss. 4. 17. A command There is
given to the Body of Believers in reference to the Minister, Say to Archippus,
Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord. From this they
infer, That People have Power to Censure their Minister; And so have Church
Authority. We answer, They make much of this Argument, and yet it is little
worth: For they build their Power to Censure upon this that they have Power (to
Say) A poor reason. So Matthew. 18. 17. Say to the Church, or tell the Church: It
is the same word that is here used; But to infer from this that one man had
Authority over the Church, were very ridiculous. Surely if he had commanded a
judicial act of Authority, he would have said Command and Charge Archippus with
all Authority, as in the like case he speaks to Timothy; But as we show in the
state of the question, private Christians have Power to exhort and admonish one
another, yea their Pastors; But this does not import any Power of
Church Government over others, else women who are not permitted to speak in the
Church, should have Power of Church Government, to make Church Canons, Censure
and Ordain their Ministers; For they are bound to exhort and admonish as
occasion offers.

Obj. 2. A second Argument they bring from Act. 11. 1. When Peter comes up to
Jerusalem, verse 3. the people Challenge him saying, Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them, and verse 4, He begins to clear himself
to them, and rehearsed the matter from the beginning, etc. And from this they
reason thus: That the Church has Power to call Peter to an account; And
therefore they have Power to Censure for Scandals. Its answered first. Besides
the People, there were Apostles and Brethren There verse 1. Secondly, We
answer, It does not follow because Peter purges himself of a Scandal unjustly
laid upon him, That therefore they had Power to Censure him; For every
Christian is bound to clear himself to another Christian of that which he is
stumbled within his carriage; yet one private Christian has not Church Power
over another to Censure: So Peter was bound to clear himself before any one of
them, and if he had done wrong, to take with it, but that That one could not be
a Church Judicatory having Power to inflict Censure on Peter, our Opposits
themselves will grant.

Obj. 3. A Third Argument they bring against the Truth, is from Revel. 2. 14. I
have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold the
Doctrine of Balaam. The Spirit of God here is wri^ing to the Church of
Pergamus, And after he has commended them for their Doctrine, he reproves them
for not exercising Discipline against these Heretics, to wit, Balaam, Iesabel
and the Nicolattans. Now from this they argue, The whole Church is reproved
here for not executing Discipline against these Heretics; and therefore they
had power to do it, Otherwise they would not have been reproved for the neglect
of it: But that all were reproved, they prove from verse. 13. and its connection
with the 14. say they, these who are commended in the 13. are rebuked in the 14
verse, I know thy Works, and where thou dwell, even where Sathan's seat is,
etc. But so it is, that not only the Ministers and Elders, but all the People,
dwelt where Sathan's Seat was: Therefore they all are reproved Answer, It
follows well that they are all reproved for one fault: But not that they were
accessory to it after one and the same way. It was the Rulers part judicially
to cast out these vile Heretics: It was the Peoples part to have stirred up
the Rulers to it: Now because these were neglected on both hands, both have
their own guilt; and so both reproved for their respective guilt: The People
are reproved for not Mourning to God for the tollerating such like
abominations; and their not stirring up the Rulers to take course with them:
But it will not follow that they were reproved for not sitting down in the
Judicatory and inflicting Censures themselves, That was the Rulers fault: And
therefore we deny that they are all rebuked for their accession to that guilt
in the same way; And we clear it thus, Doubtless the Teachers did not teach
against these vile Heretics; Now there were Women there, and yet surely they
are not rebuked for not Preaching against them, for They ought to be silent in
the Church: So their fault, as of all other Church Members, was of another
kind, to wit, Their not Mourning nor stirring up the Officers: And so it
follows that it was their Duty to Mourn, stir others up to their Duty, which
we grant. But not to exercise the Power themselves, for that is not the thing
they are reproved for.

Obj. 4. The Fourth Objection is grounded on Mat: 18, 17, If he shall neglect
to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican. Whence (say they) the
power of Church Censure is in the hand of the Church; but so it is Church
Officers are never called the Church; Neither can they be so called without the
Body of the People: Therefore the power of the Church Censures is in the hand
of the Body of the People. We Answer, This Argument will make more against
them than us, and that because they grant that neither Women nor Children have
hand in Church Government, but only professing Men: Now they shall get no place
in Scripture wherein the name of the Church is given to the Body of the Men
Assembled without Women and Children. Secondly, We grant that the name of the
Church is very sparingly given to Officers without the People: Yet we say. 1.
it is given them in some places; As for Example Acts 18. 22. It is said of Paul.
When he had landed at Caesarea, and gone up, and saluted the Church, etc. Now
by the Church here certainly cannot be meaned the body of profess^rs which did
amount to many thousands of People as shall appear from Acts 21. 20. In its own
time: So by the Church must be meaned the Chief men and Rulers of the Church.
For Paul having so short time to stay, he seeing them but at the by, could not
have saluted every one, man by man; and therefore certainly, it must be the
prime men of the Church. But Secondly, The name of the Church is very usualy
given to Rulers and Judges whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, without the People
in the Old Testament, So Psalm 82, 1. God stands in the congation of the
mighty: The same word rendered there Congregation is rendered the Church
elsewhere; And by the Congregation there, is meaned the Judges, and not the
People: so we find it taken for the Rulers by comparing Exodus: 20. 18. 19. with
Deuteronomy: 5. 23. 2 Chronicles: 1. 3. Where Solomon takes up the whole Congregation with
him: And yet that Congregation is exponed v. 2. to have been Chief-men and
Rulers, so that usualy in the Old Testament, the word (Church) is taken from
Rulers. And Thirdly, it must be so taken in this place also, for in the verse
following he tells what a Church he meaned by, v, 18, Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven: etc. Speaking to
the Apostles: So it must be the Church of Rulers who are so called, because
they represent the Church, doing her business wherein she is concerned.

Objection Fifth, This were (say they) to establish a yoke of Tyranny over
Church Members, if power be put in the hands of Officers to make Acts binding
to them, and they to have no hand in making these Acts themselves. We Answer it
is no yoke of Tyranny to instruct Officers with power to be over the People in
the Lord: To Rule them according to his will; to make use of their power not
for destruction but for edification. And this is all we do teach. Its true,
Church Officers may abuse their power, but there is no power were it never so
good but coming in man's hand may be wrongly used. But secondly, There is as
great danger of Tyranny in the Independent way, and more also, than in this;
For if the major part of the Congregation should enact what is wrong, and press
it on the fewer and better part; would not that be Tyranny? And surely there is
as great liklyhood of this, as of what they say, that the Eldership may press
unjust Acts upon the Congregation: And as it is as likly, so it is more
remeedless, for though a Congregation or any in it be wronged by the
Elerdership, they have a Superior Judicatory to complean to, according to our
Doctrine: But if the lesser part of the Congregation be wronged and Tyrannized
over by the greater, according to their Doctrine, there is no power under
Heaven to right the wrong, to call the oppressing party to an account: So of
all Governments under Heaven Independency is the most Tyrannical.

Obj. VI. The Sixth Objection they bring against the Truth is from Matthew: 16.
19. Where Christ says I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven: and whatsoever shall be bound on earth -- etc. It is agreed on by both
sides, that by the Keys there is meaned, the power of Governing the Church. Now
from this place they would infer that the Keys are given to the Body of the
People: we shall propone and Answer Three of their Objections, whereby they
labor to prove this consequence: The first is this, The Keys are given to the
Church built on the Rock whereof Christ spoke in the preceding 18, v. But sure
it is, all that are believers are built on this Rock; Therefore the power of
the Keys are given unto them. We Answer, What they say that the power of the
Keys are given to the Church built on the Rock, Is said without a ground; For
he does not say Unto this Church built on a rock do I give the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; But I give it to thee Peter: Sure none needs to learn our
Lord to speak; and this change of Person is not without a Reason, in the
preceding verse, he says -- upon this rock I will build my Church. Now if
Christ had meaned to have established the Government in the hands of the body
of the Church, he might have as easily said unto this Church will I give the
keys etc. But he says not so, but changes the person, unto thee to wit, Peter
will I give the keys Besides this also every believing woman is a part of this
Church built on the rock; And yet according to their own grant, the power of
the Keys is not given unto them. The Second Argument they bring from this place
is this: The power of the Keys is given to those whom Peter did represent: But,
Peter did represent all believers, the body of the Church: therefore, the power
of the Keys is given unto them. For answer to this, we deny what is affirmed,
that Peter in this place does represent all believers, he does but represent
the rest of the Apostles, and those who were to succeed to the Apostes in
Preaching the word and Administrating the Sacraments: And this we shall make
good from other places of Scripture wherein the grant of this power is renewed
and confirmed: The first place is John 20. 21. Then said Jesus to them again,
Peace be unto you: as my father has sent me, even so send I you, and v, 23;
Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, etc. Where it is clear
the above mentioned grant is renewed, and renewed to the Apostles. Secondly, He
did not only represent the Apostles, but all Ministers who succeed to the
Apostles in Preaching the word and Administrating the Sacraments; As in plain
also from Matthew: 28. 19, 20. Where ye will find these things clear. 1. That
there is a grant of power by Jesus Christ unto the Apostles. 2 That this grant
is made there not only to the Apostles but to these who should succeed to them
in Preaching and Baptizing to the end of the World: For it is said -- lo I am
with you always; even unto the end of the World. And so from this we retort the
Argument on themselves, That the power of the Keys is given to these whom Peter
did represent: But, so it is, Peter did represent the Apostles, and Ministers
who were to succeed to them in Preaching the word etc. And therefore, the power
of the Keys is given unto them. They argue Thirdly from this place that the
grant of the Keys is of as large extent as Peter's confession v. 16, Thou art
Christ the son of the living God. Now this Confession belongs to all believers,
and so also must the power of the Keys, We Answer, 1. That the grant of the
power of the Keys does belong to all who hold out Peter's Confession, has no
ground but their own Assertion. And 2. We say it is false, For this Confession
belongs to all faithful Women and Children as well as men, who yet by our
Opposits own concession have not the Power of the Keys.

Their last Objection is taken from 1 Cor: 5. 5. Where the Apostle commands the
Church of Corinth to Excommunicate the Incestous Person To deliver such a one
unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus. Now, say they, this command is given unto all the
Church, because there is no exception, and therefore not to Elders only; As
also the command is as large as the reproof in v. 2. And ye are puffed up, and
have not rather mourned, etc. Now sure it is there were more reproved than the
Church Officers; And therefore the command belongs to others than these. In
Answering this Argument, we shall first retort it on themselves, For if so be
the Argument hold good it would follow that Women and Children had power of
Excommunication; for if the command be to all without exception, then they are
not excepted; and if the command be given to all to whom the reproof is given,
then it is to them, for doubtless Women and Children mourned no more than the
men: And so they should have power to Excommunicate also: Now this were absurd
and against themselves; And so the two main pillars whereon they build their
Argument, fall to the ground; to wit, That the command is given to all without
exception; And that it is of a like latitude with the reproof. But Secondly, We
Answer to the point, That all who are acquaint with Scripture know that God
uses to give commands indefinitly to the whole Church, which he will not have
applied to every one in the Church but only to those persons to whom, according
to their respective callings, interest, or relations, the command does belong:
We shall make this clear from 1 Cor: 14. 31. Where Paul speaks generally to
the Saints at Corinth: ye may all Prophecy one by one, etc. The command is
given indefinitly to all, and yet sure it is not the Apostles mind that all to
whom he writs should do this, but only they who had abilities and a Call to it;
and therefore he says in the preceding 12, chap. 29. Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? are all Teachers? etc. So in 1 Thessalonians: 5. 13. And to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake, etc. Now if this be a duty lying on
all to whom the Epistle is directed, then the Ministers had been to esteem
highly to themselves for their own works sake; For the Epistle is written to
them among the rest; now this were absurd and so it must be intended for the
People. So is it here the command is given indefinitly to all, yet the matter
is not to be done by all, but only by some, to wit, the Church officers, and
this appears evidently from 2 Cor. 2. 6. He was speaking to them concerning
the same case in hand, to wit, the relaxing of the incestous man from
Excommunication, and says he, Sufficient to such a man is this punishment
which was inflicted of many. Now he does not say Inflicted of all (as they
would make the words bear) but inflicted of many: Yea (as the learned observe)
the word ( many) signifies, The chief ones; It is the same word that is Matthew:
12. 41 -- a greater than Jonas. So Paul explaines himself, That it was not all
but the chief Ones, to wit, the Rulers, by whom the Censure was to be
inflicted. And this now for Answering their Objections.

IV. In the nixt place we shall come, and apply the whole purpose to a
threefold Use. And the first is: Seeing this Error, as we have now made
evident, it is not of God: I would have you suspecting fair pretenses that a
Doctrine may be colored over with; There is no Error that has a fairer
pretense than This has: it is the liberty of the Saints, say they, should not
they judge others; A fair pretense; And yet it is but the same that Korah
Dathan, and Abiram had, and so we need to stumble the less at it -- Ye take too
much upon you (said they) seeing all the Congregation are Holy every one of
them, etc. Numb-16. 3.

The Second Use is to private Christians, that ye would do your duty: And
Secondly, Content your selves with your duty. And first do your duty, whereof
many come short. Doubtless many at the hearing of this Doctrine will cast off
all care, seeing the care of the Church is laid on the Officers thereof
Ministers and Elders; Nay but as we show in the clearing of the State of the
Question, although power of Governing the Church be not in the hands of all
believers, yet there is a duty lying on them to admonish and exhort, even their
Ministers, say to Archippus take heed to thy Ministry. Yea it is a duty lying
on private Christians, that when your private Admonition does not the business,
ye are bound to delate it to the Church: We see this Matthew: 16. Where Christ's
institutes this order v, 16. 1. To tell thy Brother privately, and if that will
not do, bring two or three more Witnesses with thee: then if that do it not,
tell it to the Church: so it is a duty lying on every Church member to admonish
and rebuke, even their Ministers and Elders; to stir them up when slack, and
when that will not do, to tell it to others. And we would charge you to make
more conscience of this duty than usually ye do. A second part of your duty we
told you was to try the spirits in reference to your practice, ye are not bound
to take a Doctrine on trust from Ministers, tho Apostles, Nay not from Angels
-- Though we, or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that which we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed. Galat. 1. 8. And
private Christians come short of this part of their duty also; many seeking no
other Reason of their Faith than what Ministers Preach, it is a loose ground;
For ye are commanded to Try the Spirits. But Secondly, As ye would make
Conscience of your duty, so ye would content your selves with your duty, ye
would look on Church Officers and reverence them; ye are not to say, what is
more in them than in our selves, may we not be as fit as they, they may err as
well as we: Grant it be so, yet they are Gods Ordinance, appointed by the God
of order, and he who reproacheth them, reproacheth his ordinance, and breaks
down the hedge appointed by God.

The Third Use is directed to Church Officers, Those whom the Lord has
instructed with this power, Ye would make use of it for Edification and not for
destruction, ye should so carry your selves in your places as not to tempt the
People of God to despise your Office. When the Lords People hear of an Elder to
be a Tipler, or a Swearer, it is a temptation to them to despise both that
Elder and his Office: Many surely in this are stumbling blocks to People, As
Eli's Sons made the People abhor the offering of the Lord. The Truth is, it is
no great wonder that the Government of the Church be losing weight in the minds
of many, if it were but for this one Reason, that they who are entrusted with
it do not Labor to beautify it; It is looked on by many as a place of respect
and not of Office; If a man be Richer than his neighbor, he thinks he is not
respected if he be not an Elder; and having gotten the name he cares for no
more: Now, is that the way either to make People respect thy Person or thy
Office. Let me obtest and charge all of you who have taken on this Heavenly
Calling, as ye will Answer on your hazard to Jesus Christ the chief sheepherd
that ye would study by all means so to walk in it, as to beautify it, and that
so much the more, as the Devil is Laboring to disgrace it. And this now for
the First Head of Independency.

Head II. The highest Power of Church Government is not in Church-Sessions, or
Congregational Elderships.
WE come now to the Second Head, And it is, That, for which mainly they are
called Independents: The point they affirm is this, That every particular
Church Session or Congregational Eldership is instructed with the highest power
of Church Government on Earth, so that there is no power in the Church above
them to call them to an account, when they go wrong, to rescind any Act once
concluded, though it were never so unjust: They grant that a Synod of Ministers
and Elders may meet to consult about matters, but withal affirm, that they
have no Ecclesiastical power to command in the Lord any Congregation
whatsoever: So that if a man be wronged by a Session: As for instance, if he be
unjustly censured (as it may very readily fall out) he must sit with his wrong,
there is no power to right it till Christ come in the Clouds: Or if a
particular Congregation divide, turn Heretics, run wrong (as many of the
Independent Congregations do) there is no Church power to heal the breach,
unless it be by giving an advice, which they may either follow, or not follow,
as likes them best. We again grant, That particular Elderships have a power
from Jesus Christ to Exercise Discipline in these things which concern the
Congregation in particular; But as for other things of more public
concernment, that is to say, Things that concern other Congregations as well as
them, these ought to be handled by a Superior Judicatory; And that even in
those things of particular concernment, They are liable to Appeals, and the
inspection of the Superior Judicatory; So that wherein they shall be found
wrong, partial, or Erroneous, They may be called to an account.

For showing the fashood of this Error* as also for the vindicating of the
Government of the Church of Scotland, that is now so much spoken against, we
shall labor to make out, with the Lords assistance these Three Truths from the
word of God. The first it this: That, besides the power of Church Government
that Christ has given to particular Elderships, There is also holden forth in
his word, A platform or a Copy of the Government of many Congregations by one
Presbytry over them all in common. The Second Truth that we shall make out is
this: That besides the Church Government that Christ has established by
Presbytries, there is also holden out in the word greater Church Judicatories,
to wit, Synods made up of Commissioners from several Presbytries instructed
with power of Church Government from Christ also. And Thirdly, We shall labor
to make out this Truth, That the inferior Judicatories are to be Subject to the
Superior; as Sessions to Presbytries, Presbytries to Synods, Synods to General
Assemblies: So that the Superior judicatories have power over the Inferior in
the Lord, to receive Appeals from them, and complaints (...) them, to Censure
them for Miscarying in the matter of Discipline, and to enact Church Canons or
conclusions binding to them, which Inferior Judicatories are bound to obey in
the Lord.

I. There is a Platform of the Government of many Congregations, by one common
Presbytery holden out in Scripture.
COncerning the State of this Question I only premit this, That however we have
the very name of this Presbytry whereabout we dispute holden out in 1 Timothy: 4.
14. Whereby I might easily show is meaned the Presbytry we plead for* yet we
shall not dispute about names; Though the Name were not, yet it is sufficient
that the Thing be in it, And this we shall make good, to wit, That in Scripture
is holden out a pattern of the Government of many Congregations by one common
Presbytry. The proof of this point we might instance almost in all the Churches
that were planted in the Apostles time: As in the Church of Jerusalem, The
Church of Antioch, Ephesus, Thessalonica, Corinth, and of Rome: We might easily
make it appear that those Churches were not single Congregations, but
Presbyterial Churches, under one common Government: But in stead of spending of
time in pointing out this in all these Churches, we shall instance it only in
the Church of Jerusalem; That by this One ye may know what to judge of the
rest. And first concerning the Church of Jerusalem planted by the Apostles, we
shall labor to make out their two things. 1. That in that one Church there were
many particular Congregations. And 2. That all these particular Congregations
made up but one Church, and was guided by one common Presbytry, and Judicatory,
set over them all in common. Which two being made out, the point we intend will
appear evidently, to wit, That there was here a Government set over many
Congregations in one common Judicatory; such as our Presbytry is over all the
particular Church-Sessions in the bounds.

The first thing we shall make out is this, That there were more Congregations
in the Church of Jerusalem than one, and this from four grounds. First, From
the multitude of Church Members that were in Jerusalem. Secondly, From the
multitude of Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, that were there, more than could get
work in one single Congregation. Thirdly, From the diversities of Languages
that were among the People of that Church. And Fourthly, From the way of their
meeting and the place they resorted to for Gods service.

And first, For the multitude of Church Members that was at Jerusalem, If we
compare place with place, we will find that they amounted to many thousands,
and so behooved to be more than one single Congregation. Take a view of some of
these places Acts 1. 15. they are numbered to be about ane hundred and twenty.
And Act. 2. 41. there are added unto them about three thousand Souls: and then
in v. 47. There is daily Addition of more and more -- the Lord added unto the
Church daily such as should be saved. Act. 4. 4. We see yet a greater increase;
There are about five thousand -- and the number of the men was about five
thousand, concerning which five thousand it is necessarly to be understood that
they were added presently, excluding the rest of the numbers before spoken of,
For the last part of the verse must be exponed according to the first part:
Howbeit, many of them which heard the word believed, Now certainly that is
meaned of others besides those that were before added; and so this five
thousand must be a new number, Fifthly, In Acts 5. 14. Besides all these it is
said And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and
Women. And Sixthly, In Act. 6. 7. And the word of the Lord increased, and the
number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of
the Priests were obedient to the Faith. They multiplied, and multiplied
greatly; And these were not only the common People, but the leaders and Priests
also, who doubtless would bring multitudes with them by their example: Now all
these being considered, any understanding man may easily conceive, that so many
thousands, as these would amount to, behooved to be cast in more Congregations
than one, and could not be one single Congregation.

Before we proceed to the Second ground of our proof, we shall show you first
what they say against this: There are three things mainly they object: And the
first is, That the most part of those who were converted by the Apostles were
strangers, who had not their dwelling at Jerusalem; and so did not remain
Members of that Church: And for this they cite Act: 2. 8, 9. Where it is
reckoned that among the number of the hearers, there were Parthians, and Medes,
and Elamits, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, etc. To this we Answer that
though those men came out of those far Countries being Godly men, who come in
Expectation of the Messiah his coming, who was then expected; yet they were
dwellers in Jerusalem for that time, and for this see Act: 2. 5. And there were
dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under Heaven. So
they had taken up house and were dwelling there: And in v, 14. Where Peter
began his Preaching he says -- Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, etc. Secondly, We answer, dwell where they
please, They were Members of this Church at Jerusalem; And this appears from
several things that are ascribed to them by the Holy Ghost, which cannot be
spoken of any but Members of that Church: So in verse 47. it is said -- And the
Lord added them unto the Church daily. Secondly, In verse 46. They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house,
etc. Thirdly, In verse 45. They sold their possessions, and gave their Goods
into the Church Treasury, for the help of the poor. And Fourthly, We find in
Act. 6. 5. That they all joined in choosing the Deacons and Officers of the
Church. Now sure these are Actions that belong to none but Church Members. This
for their First Objection.

Their second Objection is this, say they, The Holy Ghost says expressly, that
they did meet all at one place, as if it were on purpose to evince our
Argument, and that the whole multitude did come together, As for instance Act.
2. 1. it is said, They were all with one accord in one place, and in the same
Chapter verse 46. They continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, etc. And
it is also said, Act. 6. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the
Disciples unto them, etc. And verse 5. And the saying pleased the whole
multitude. Now to take off this exception which seems to be the most plausible
of their Objections: First, Consider what we spoke from the Scripture of their
number, and what thousands were in this Church: And let any reasonable man
conceive how it could be possible that all those should meet in one place; And
therefore that meeting in one place must be taken in another sense: It Is
observed by the Learned, That the word here turned, meeting together in one
place, (...) does not always signify a meeting together in one room, but the
agreeing of the Affection and Judgment in one thing: And for the clearing of
this they cite, Act. 4. 25, 26 -- Why did the Heathen rage, and the People
imagine vain things? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were
gathered together against the Lord, etc. Now it is the same word that is there
turned (in one place) which is here turned (gathered together) and certainly no
place of Scripture will prove that Herod, Pontius Pilate, Jew and Gentile did
all meet in one place to consult about the Death of Christ: But only they
agreed in one Judgment, and hearty Affection about it: And so the meaning may
well be taken thus, in t^is other place. But yet to speak to these places
further: For Act. 2. 1. That they were all with one accord in one place, It
makes nothing against our Argument: For the number was not then so great, as we
show it grew afterward, and so they might well meet in one place. The same
answer we give to that in verse 46. They continuing daily with one accord in
the Temple. They were not then come to the full number that afterward they came
to: So that although they might all have continued in the Temple at that time,
yet afterward they could not. And Secondly, We answer; It does not prove the
point they bring it for, It is only mentioned They came to the Temple to hear
the Word, but not that they were all of one Congregation, partaking of all
Ordinances in one place; For it is said afterward, They brake Bread from House
to House, meaning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which they did partake of
from House to House in their particular Congregations: So that place makes more
against our Opposits than against us: For the other place in Act. 6. 5. When
the Apostles and Believers were come to a greater extent, yet the Apostles call
the whole multitude to them, and it is said, The saying pleased the whole
multitude. To this we answer, by the whole multitude cannot be meaned all
before spoken of: And therefore we say, by the whole Multitude, is meaned a
great Multitude: as in that of Luke 8. 37. Where it is said, That the whole
multitude of the Country of the Gadarens round about, etc. It is not to be
imagined that Man and Mother-Son, or every Individual Person came out to meet
Christ, but only a great Multitude; or otherwise the whole multitude may be
taken, for the whole multitude of those that were present, as Luke 1. 10. And
the whole multitude of the people were praying without, when Zacharias was
offering Incense. Now this must not be understood that all the multitude of the
People of Jerusalem was there, but only of the whole multitude that was
present. This for their second Objection.

Their third Objection is this: Though it be granted that the number of
Believers was such before the persecution that fell out, Act. 8, 1. Yet when
that Persecution came, there were no more left than might meet in a single
Congregation, for the Text faith, They were all scattered abroad throughout the
region of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles, To this we answer, That if it
be granted that there were more Congregations before this Persecution; then it
makes out the point we are to prove. But Secondly, Neither do we yield that
which they affirm, That by the persecution mentioned Act. 8. 1. The multitude
was brought to such a few number, as they could make up but one Congregation;
It is said indeed, They were all scattered except the Apostles: But by this
(all) is not meaned all the Professors, but all the Preachers, and there are
several reasons to prove it; For it is said, Saul made havoc of the Church,
verse 3. Now if he had meaned that all the Professors were scattered, where
should Saul have gotten Men and Women to hail to Prison; and that this was done
in Jerusalem, Paul himself acknowledges, Act. 26. 10. A second thing to prove
that this ( all) that was scattered, was the ( all) of the Preachers and not of
the Professors, is that in verse 4. where it is said, They were scatered
abroad, every where Preaching the Word, So that it astricts the scattering
mainly to those who were Preachers: For certainly the whole multitude could not
have gone to Preach the Word. And Thirdly, The Apostles remain still at
Jerusalem, as appears from the first verse, Now to what end and purpose should
the Apostles have stayed there behind the rest, except there had been several
Flocks there, with whom they stayed with the hazard of their Lives to confort
them against the Persecution, which had driven their Preachers from them. But a
second answer is, That however they had been so scattered in the beginning of
the Persecution, that there was no more of them than made up a single
Congregation; yet in process of time they so multiplied, that they behooved to
make up many Congregations: And for this ye may find out several places, as
Act. 9. 31. They were multiplied, and Act. 12. 24. speaking of Jerusalem, The
word of God grew and multiplied. But we shall take one place for all, In Act.
21. 20. where the Elders relate to Paul the exception that the People had taken
at him for his going to the Gentiles -- Thou see, Brother, how many thousands
of Jews there are which believe, etc. Now the word rendered thousands in the
Greek is (...) which signifies Ten Thousands; so there were not only Thousands,
but Ten Thousands; yea, and many ten thousands there; And so more than could be
Edified in one single Congregation. And that these were of Jerusalem, is clear
from verse 21. They are informed of thee, etc. And from verse 22. -- the
multitude must needs come together, etc. Now this is from the first ground of
our Proof.

2. The second ground from whence we are to prove, That there were more
Congregations in the Church of Jerusalem than one, is taken from the multitude
of Christ's Officers; That there were so many that it had been a shame for them
all to wait upon one flock: We find the Apostles were there, as in Act. 6. 15.
about the choosing of the Deacons: We find they were also there in Acts 15. v.
6. Now besides the Apostles we find there were other Church Officers in
Jerusalem, as in Acts 11. verse last. There were Elders there, where he is
speaking of Jerusalem, as it appears in verse 27. Besides there were Prophets
in it, as in verse 27. of the same Chapter, And in these aayes came Prophets
from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And it is the Judgment of several Interpreters,
that the seventy Disciples whom Christ sent out to Preach, were still at
Jerusalem; And that they were of the number of these hundred and twenty
mentioned Act. 1. 15. Now let any man consider if it was likely, especially
when the Harvest was so great, That so many of the Apostles should be ordinary
Hearers of the Word, and only one but to speak; especially when we consider,
That when Christ sent out the twelve Disciples only, he sent them not out all
together, but two by two; and so certainly a wise man may well conclude, That
there behooved to be more Congregations there than one, yea many Congregations.
This is for the second ground of our proof.

The third ground is taken from the multitude of Languages that were in
Jerusalem, Act. 2. 5, 8, 9. 10. 11. and Act. 6. Which diversity did necessitate
them to enjoy the Ordinances in diverse distinct Congregations in their own
Language; And that it might be so, the Spirit furnished the Apostles with
diversity of Languages.

The fourth ground to prove this point is taken from the way of their Meeting,
which was not in void capacious Rooms built for the purpose, as we now have;
for they had not then the Civil Magistrate for them, to allow places of meeting
for the purpose; but only in private Houses, upper Chambers, Houses allowed to
them by private Christians; as Act: 2. 46. And surely it cannot be conceived
that their Houses could contain so many thousands; and therefore of necessity
they could not meet all in one Congregation.

Thus we have made out the first point, That there were more Congregations than
one in Jerusalem. We might prove the like in the other Churches of Ephesus,
Antioch, Corinth, Rome, Thessalonica, that there were more Congregations than
one there also: And that from the multitude of Believers the Scripture speaks
of, the multitude of Preachers, diversities of Languages; But for brevities
cause we pass to the other point, which is the second thing we have to make
out, and it is this.

II. That all these Congregations in Jerusalem were under one Government, there
was one common Judicatory that Ruled them all in common, As our Presbytry is
over all the Congregations within its bounds: And for clearing of this we lay
down three things. The First is that although there were many particular
Congregations at Jerusalem, yet they are called but one Church: so in several
places they are called the Church, Act: 8. 1. 15. 4. etc. And by the way this
refutes one of the Independent tenets, whereby they affirm: That the name of
Church is never given under the New Testament, but to those who meet ordinarily
in one place, for the discharging of all parts of Gods Worship. But to the
Argument, For what reason could they be called one Church? Not because they met
together in one place for the Ministration of the word, Sacraments and Prayer;
For those were dispensed to them in their singular Congregations severally, and
so certainly they are called one Church; because they were under one
Government, one Eldership above them to Govern them: As the Church of Scotland
is called one Church, because all her Congregations are Governed by one General
Assembly.

Secondly, We add to the former, In this one Church, made up of many Churches
we find there are Ruling Elders; so we find in Act: 15. 4. and Act: 21. 15, 18.
And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of
the Apostles and Elders, etc. Now they are not called the Elders of a
particular flock at Jerusalem; but the Elders of the Church; and therefore did
meet in one Common Judicatory. The force of this Argument cannot be spoken
against by our Opposits, who prove their particular Elderships from the same
ground as in Act: 20. 28. mentioning of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus;
From whence they Reason thus: Ephesus was a particular Congregation, we read
there were Elders in this Church, therefore there was an Eldership who met
together for Governing that Church in common. They must give us liberty to
Reason that same way thus, We find at Jerusalem was a Church made up of many
particular Churches, we find Elders in this Church; Therefore there was an
Eldership who met together for Governing of this Church or these Churches in
common.

But Thirdly, to make this Argument yet stronger, not only there are Elders in
this Church, but we find they meet together for Acts of Jurisdiction, belonging
to the whole Church in Common. For proof of this see Act: 11, 30. The
contribution that is gathered for supply of the Saints is sent to the Elders:
Now what the Elders should do with it, may be gathered from a place like it
Act: 4. 35. 37. where it is said: They sold their possessions and laid down the
price at the Apostles feet. And distribution was made unto every man, according
as he had need. So doubtless the contribution was given to the Elders, for this
end that they might have distributed the same to the poor in the whole Church;
And so it was an Act of Government tending to the good of the Church. Further
we find this more clear Act: 21. 18. They meet together, and Judicially set
down a way to Paul for removing of a Church Scandal, by satisfying the
offended, and purifying himself after the manner of the Jews, In v, 23. Do
therefore this, etc. So we see their Elderships meeting together for removing a
Scandal. We find a Third place to confirm this; Act. 15. 2. 4, We shall
afterward make use of the whole Chapter to prove the power of Synods; only this
much at present to the purpose in hand. We find the Elders met, and make
binding Acts to the Churches under them. So we have made out the first point,
That there is a Government of many Congregations under one Presbytry holden out
in the Word.

The main thing our Opposits flee to at the last is this; That granting it to
be true, That there were many Congregations in Jerusalem before the Persecution
in Act: 8. And that they had one Government above them; yet that does not infer
a Government by Presbytry; For they were Governed by the Apostles; We read not
of any Elders in that Church before the Dispersion, at which time they were
brought to so few a number, that they might all meet in one place: So that
though there was one common Government then, by Elders; It inferrs not a
Presbytry but a Congregational Eldership only. This is the sum of all that is
said to this. For Answer, They grant to us, That after the Persecution there
was a common Eldership over the Church of Jerusalem. And Secondly, We have
proved that there were more Congregations than One there, even after the
Dispersion: And we have also proved that they had Elders over them in common;
so that whatever was before the Dispersion, yet even from their own concession
it follows, That there was a Presbyterial Government in Jerusalem after the
Dispersion. Secondly we answer, They can hardly prove that there were no Elders
in Jerusalem before the Dispersion: Its true we read not of Elders until Act.
11. But when they were first instituted, we read not. Thirdly, We answer, That
though there were not Elders to govern them in common, yet it is enough for us
that the Apostles did govern them in common; for they were also Elders: So they
call themselves, 2 John ver. 1. 1 Peter 5. 1. But Secondly, As they were
Elders, so what they did in these Acts of Government, they did it as Elders:
For what they did as Apostles is not imitable now, but what they did in
Governing the Church is imitable, such as Ordaining of Officers, Distributing
of Alms. Again, What they did as Apostles, one of them might do it alone; But
here they do it in Collegio, Act. 6. And reserve the Peoples part of Election
to them. Now they never met together to write Scripture; nor sought the Peoples
concurrence for any Act merely Apostolic; so it is clear the Church was
governed by them as Elders; And so the Churches even then were under one common
Eldership. And this now for the first thing we promised to make out, to wit,
That the Scripture holds out a pattern of the Government of many
Congregations by one common Presbytery.

II. There is a Platform of Government by Synods over many particular
Presbyteries holden forth in Scripture.
THe Second thing we promised to make out is this, That as the Scripture
holds forth the Power of Presbyteries, so also the Power of a Synod; by which
we mean Church Judicatories above Presbyteries, as they are above Sessions, or
Congregational Elderships.

I. For understanding the Question, These Synods or greater Meetings of Church
Officers, are of three sorts: Some made up of several Presbyteries, and these
are Provincial Synods, (such as commonly we have twice a year) Or they are made
up of several Synods within a Nation; and these are General Assemblies. Or
Thirdly, They are made up of several Churches of several Nations, or
Commissioners from them; and these are called Universal Councils, or General
Synods of the Christian World. Now all these differ from Presbyteries, not only
in this. That they are more ample; but also in this, That the Government by
Presbyteries is the common ordinary way of Government held out in Scripture:
But Synods for the most part are more rare, and upon particular emergent; as
Act. 15. That Synod was called upon an occasion of Division in the Church of
Antioch, which troubled other Churches about.

Secondly, All these kinds of greater Synods, The Provincial Synod, and the
Synod of a Nation, and the Universal Councils, do not differ in Nature and
kind, but only in less and more; Wherefore it is not needful that we hold out
every one of them from Scripture, It is sufficient that we hold out the Power
of Synods in the general, which is to be applied to every kind in particular:
For so we find it in Scripture in other things. Particulars are infinite; and
therefore in things of one and the same kind General Rules are sufficient; Or a
Rule for one particular, which keeping the just proportion, is to be applied to
other particulars of the same kind, As Matthew: 18. Christ sets down the way of
walking in private Scandals, speaking nothing of public Scandals: Not as if
Jesus Christ did mean that public Scandals should be passed over, but that the
same Rule may serve for these, keeping the just proportion: Even so is it here;
If the nature of Synods be held out in the Word, that is enough, though it
speak nothing of the bounds to which they should extend, whether of One
Province, or of All the Provinces of a Nation; no more than it is particularly
set down in Scripture, what should be the number and bounds of a particular
Congregation.

There is a Third thing for clearing of this Question: The Independents and we
agree in this, That the word gives ground for meeting of Synods; only we differ
about their Power: They grant that in case of Division or Scandal, Synods may
meet and give their Advice in Matters doubtful; only they say, that Synods have
no Power of Jurisdiction to command others in the Lord to embrace their
determinations, We on the other hand maintain that they have this Power, and
that the Scripture holds out such a Power belonging to them.

II. We might instance this in Act: 1, In the choice of Matthias, which was
done by no particular Church; For here were the Apostles, whose Paroch-Church
was the whole world: Here were the Brethren of Christ from Galilie v, 14. Some
from Jerusalem v. 15. This meeting did a Church business of common concernment
to the whole Christian World, and so behooved to be done by those who did
represent them, And therefore this behooved to be a General Council.

But to clear the point more fully, we shall take Act: 15. Where this Synod we
plead for is held forth clearly: The History is plain: A difference arises in
Antioch about Circumcision, This cannot be composed in Antioch it self; so they
send up Commissioners to Jerusalem to determine this matter, where there is a
Synod of Apostles and Elders, and they determine the Question. Now that it may
appear the Synod we plead for is here; consider first, That there was a Church
meeting or Judicatory here; None may doubt of this, as is clear v, 6. Secondly,
Consider, That this Judicatory is made up of Commissioners from the several
Presbyteries, we see that Commissioners from the Presbytry of Jerusalem was
there v, 6. And Commissioners from the Presbytry of Antioch Act: 15. 2 Paul and
Barnabas and others. Now that these were Commissioners, and had voice appears
from Act: 16. 4. where the decree that was then made was ascrived to all the
Elders who were present. It is very likely that there were other Commissioners
there also from Syria and Cilicia; For they are joined with Antioch in the
Letter v. 23. For what other Reason cannot be imagined, except that as they
were alike troubled with the Heresy as Antioch was, so they had their
Commissioners there as Antioch had, And therefore these Acts are binding to
them in a special manner, However it is clear that there were Commissioners
from the Presbytry of Jerusalem and of Antioch, so the meeting was made up of
two Presbytries; And by the same rule it may be made up of more.

Thirdly, We would consider that this meeting made up of Commissioners from
several Presbytries makes binding Acts unto other absent Churches, who were
present only in their Commissioners; And there are several things to clear
this: First, They determine the Question in v, 19. 20 Secondly, They impose
Their determination on the Churches to be kept by them: So in the Letters
They wrote to the Church of Syria and Cilicia v, 28. The word that is turned
there a Burden, signifies a Law or a Decree, and so we find it in Act: 16. 4.
There their Conclusions are called Decrees which were ordained of the Apostles
and El^ers at Jerusalem, And which were to be kept: From all which it is
clear They did make Acts binding other Congregations. Thirdly, We find they put
forth an Act of Censure on the false Prophets v, 24. They called them Liars, A
brand of Infamy. It Is true They Censured them not with Excommunication, For it
was time enough to do That, when they knew they were become incorrigibly
obstinate, according to the common Rule, An Heretic after the first and second
Admonition reject. By this I hope, ye perceive clearly a pattern for greater
Synods, a Judicatory made up of Commissioners from several Presbytries; and
these making binding Laws to other Churches, who were absent in their Persons,
and only present in their Commissioners

III. Their main Objection against this is, That the Apostles were here, who
were guided with an infallible Spirit to determine; and so this can be no Rule
for our Synods, made up of men wanting that assistance. To this we Answer, that
this if it prove any thing will make against our Opposits themselves as well as
against us; For they hold that here is a pattern of a Synod for advice, so if
their Argument hold against Us in the One, It must hold also against Them in
the Other. Secondly, We show before that the Apostles were also Elders, and
sometimes Acted as Elders; Now if it can be proven that they Acted as Elders
here, it breaks the strength of their Objection. But this is clear, First, Paul
and Barnabas are sent by the Church of Antioch, They willingly submit Act: 15.
4 Now in their Apostolic Office they were not directed by me^, And so surely
here they acted not as Apostles. Secondly, The Apostles all along go not on
that way, as when guided by an infallible Apostolic Spirit; For they state the
Question, and debate it in v, 7. Now when they write Scripture, they do not use
advice, nor do they debate what they shall conclude, but speak all as
immediately inspired; But here they debate. And ^aving found Truth, By force of
Reason they conclude, as any other Assembly, upon like assurance of Scripture
warrant, may do, It seems good unto Us being Assembled with one accord, etc.
In v, 25. Thirdly, When the Apostles did determine any thing as Apostles, and
were guided by the immediately inspiring Spirit of God, then they did determine
the Question fully that nothing needed to be added: But so it was not here, For
Peter v, 6th gives his Judgment, That Believers were freed from the Ceremonial
Law: What he says is true indeed; Yet it speaks not fully to the point,
until James adds somewhat, to wit, That however the Gentiles were freed from
the Ceremonial Law, yet to eschew the Scandal of the weak Jews, They were to
abstain from things strangled etc* v, 20. And therefore, They Acted not as
Apostles, except we would say, that Peter as an Apostle intending to determine
a Controversy, yet did not speak fully to the point, which were an injury to
that immediately inspiring Spirit, by which they were acted in penning
Scripture, Fourthly, Because the decrees of the Synod are put forth in the name
and by the Authority not only of the Apostles, but Elders also, Act: 15. 22.
23. Act. 16. 4. Act. 21. 25. Now surely ordinary Elders did never concur with
the Apostles in Acts of their Apostolic office; As penning Scripture, etc.
From all that is said, it is most clear, that the Apostles here acted as
Elders, leaving a Pattern for such like Judicatories upon the like occasions,
to the end of the World: Which is the Second Point.

III. Inferior Church Judicatories are Subject to Superior.
THE Third point we have to make out is this: That Inferior Church Judicatories
are subordinate to the Superior, as Sessions or Congregational Elderships to
Presbytries, Presbytries to Synods, etc. So that the greater have power of
Government over the lesser: For receiving Appeals from them, Complaints of
them, Enacting of Church Canons; unto which the Inferior ought to be subject in
the Lord. The point in short is, That particular Elderships are not
Independent, so as to do what they please, without being accountable to any
Judicatory above them; But Presbyteries are over them in the Lord. We shall
follow the former Order: First, To clear the Question. Secondly, To bring
Arguments for the Truth. Thirdly, To answer Arguments against the Truth.
Fourthly, To apply it to Use.

I. For the First, We allow unto particular Congregations an Eldership and
Power of Discipline within themselves, to judge of these things that are of
their particular concernment: But as for things wherein other Congregations are
concerned with them, We hold that such do belong to Superior Judicatories
according to the Rule, What belongs unto all should be handled by all.
Secondly, We do not give Power to any one single Congregation above another: We
say, That all Congregations (the least as well as the greatest is equal in
Power; This way was the Bishops Tyranny, that made all the Congregations of the
Diocese subject to the Cathedral Church, the Parish where the Bishop lived: So
that all others were to subject themselves to it, and the great Lord Bishops
Laws which he gave out in it. We do only say, That all particular Congregations
should be subject to a Presbytery, made up of Elders taken from among
themselves, wherein no Congregation can challenge Power more than another: The
meanest has as great Power in them as the greatest. Thirdly, We do not say
that the Power of Presbyteries or Synods are absolute, so that whatever they
conclude should stand for a Law; or that they ought to be obeyed in every
thing. We affirm Their Power is a limited and Ministerial Power, It is a Power
in the Lord; So that put the case, If a Presbytery or Synod should conclude a
thing that is wrong, They are not to be followed blindly. We allow to every
particular Christian a Judgment of Discretion, whereby they should compare the
Acts of Church Judicatories, with the Rule of the Word, and accordingly either
to choice or refuse: Only herein we say, First, That particular Christians
should have a kind of loathness to differ from the Judicatories of the Church,
arising from a secret kind of diffidence and distrust of their own Light and
understanding; so that although they are not to follow others blindly, yet they
are to suspect themselves rather than them; we mean when the matter is dubious.
Secondly, We say, That when the case comes that it is evidently seen that
Superior Judicatories have gone wrong, private Christians are to differ from
them indeed, yet so as to give great Reverence and Respect to the Judicatory,
even when they are necessitate to dissent from their Acts, least by their
furious zeal they cast all loose and into confusion.

But to come to the point, The Question is, Whether all the Power of Church
Government be in the Hands of particular Elderships; And so if particular
Elderships be Independent: Or if Jesus Christ has warranted Presbyteries to be
above them in the Lord. We maintain the last: And we clear our part the
Controversy from several Arguments.

II. The First Argument is taken from the many defects that are in this way of
Independency, where the whole Power is put in one Congregation; so as to be
countable to none: We shall reckon four or five of these Defects; and indeed
very great Defects. First, According to this way of Theirs, there is no
Authoritative way in Christ's Church to right a man that is wronged by a
particular Congregation; As put the Case that an Eldership should wrong a man
by Censuring him unjustly: According to Their way, He must sit with the wrong,
there is no remedy to him till Christ come in the Clouds. There is a second
defect according to this Independent way of Theirs: There is no Authority in
the Church to heal Breaches in a Congregation: Put the case that a People
should divide from the Elders, or the Elders among themselves, or that one
Congregation may have a contest with another: Now in these cases, suppose both
these Parties to be wilful, as too usually it falls out, so as They will not
yield to any Advice, without Authority to back it: Now what remedy is left in
such Cases without the assistance of a Presbytery, that has Power over both
Parties, to command them in the Lord to do what is right: And can we think that
Christ has left no remedy in his House for such evils, as may so frequently
fall out. Thirdly, The Independent way leaves no Authoritative mean for
holding down Pluralities of Religion; For if so, then let a particular
Congregation set up what Religion they please; suppose it be Popery: There is
no Authoritative mean to hinder it: But in the Way of Presbytery it is
otherwise: Presbytery is Christ's Weeding-hook to weed out Heresies; so we
observe wherever it is set up it bears Heresy down; And no wonder; For
Judicatories are so subordinate, one to another, that what is overseen in the
one, is taken notice of in the other. Fourthly; By this way of theirs, there is
no Authoritative mean for unity and uniformity in the public service of God
among Congregations; But every one being left to themselves, will take a way of
Their Own; This Congregation one way, and that Congregation another way; which
doubtless would prove a great stumbling block to the weak, not knowing unto
what Congregation to join, because of the great diversity among all. Put the
case (to clear it in some things whereby ye may guess at others) that in one
Congregation they would both read and expound, In another, they would only
Read: In others the line were not read for singing; And in another, it were
read: In some Congregations Children were not Baptized but in time of Sermon,
In others, That Baptism were Administrate at other times also: In some
Congregations Two Prayers before a Sermon, In another but one: In another the
Conclusion Sung, In another not. Now though the Strong would not stumble at
these things, knowing that such in their own nature are, for the most part at
least, indifferent; Yet to the weak Christian they might prove a ground of
stumbling; For usually such presently stamp Conscience on that part of the
difference which they like best, and hence arise contests, Janglings, and
matter of renting the Church. Now there is no way in Independency left for
preventing of this. Fifthly, The way of Independency leaves no remedy to a
Congregation wanting a Minister, for Trial of the next that comes* Whose trial
is left wholly to the People by this way of Theirs: How slight that trial would
be, any may judge; How few Parishes can try a Minister in his Abilities, If he
be apt to Preach, convince gainsayers, watch against ravening wolves etc. Now
this is remeeded in the way of Presbytery, according to Paul's Rule 1 Timothy: 4.
14. That Ministers be ordained -- with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. This for the first Argument, from Five great defects in the
Independent way; Other defects also might be instanced, but these may suffice.

Our Second Argument is taken from Matthew. 18. 16. 17. 18. where Jesus Christ
lays down a way for the removing of private Scandals, or dealing with an
offending brother; From whence we argue thus, If Christ has laid down a way
for gaining an offending brother, how much more for gaining an offending
Church: Its above all doubt that a Church may offend, walk inoderly, wrest
Justice. Now surely Gods care must be no less of the whole Church than of One
Member: So that our consequence holds: but we assume, There is no way to heal
the Scandal of an offending Congregation or particular Church, but by
compleaning to a Presbyterial Church above them: This is evident, For 1. our
Opposites themselves will not censure them-themselves: They cannot be both
judge and party. 2. It appears from the rule of proportion, For by that same
rule that private Christians are to be compleaned of to that Eldership whereof
they are parts; so the Eldership is to be compleaned of to that Presbytry
whereof it is a part: and if the Christian liberty of the private Christian be
not taken away by the one, so neither is the just power of the Eldership taken
away by the other.

Our Third Argument is from that which we handled before, That in Scripture is
holden forth Government by Presbytries over single Congregations, and by Synods
over Presbytries, From whence we argue thus, That the way of Governing the
Church in the Apostles times was by Presbyteries and Synods; And therefore the
Church should still be so Governed. For the first part of our Argument That the
way Then of Governing the Church was by Presbytries and Synods, it was proved
before: So we have only to speak to the Second part of our Argument, that
therefore the Church should be Governed so now: And to clear this consequence,
consider these things. 1. That whatever is recorded of the practice of the
Churches in the matter of Government in the Apostles times, can be for no other
end but to be a Pattern for imitation to the Churches in after times, For
whatsoever things were written before times was for our learning and instruction
Rom: 15. 4. 2. Those primitive Churches were planted by the Apostles; Now who
can imagine but what the Apostles did of that kind, was according to the
directions given them by Christ; A promise of whose presence they had with them
in their Ministry, and if so, then their practice must be a Rule to Generations
following 1 Cor: 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, etc. 3. We make the practice of
the Apostles then, to be a Rule for us in other things; As from their practice
in giving the People liberty in choising their own Deacons Act. 7. We argue,
That the People may choice their own officers yet: And from their practice in
having Ruling Elders in the Church 1 Timothy: 5. 15. We argue, That we should have
Ruling Elders yet: So from their practice in having the office of Deacons we
argue, That we should have them yet: And from their practice in Celebrating the
Lords Supper on the Lord's day Act: 27. We argue, Therefore we should celebrate
it on that day yet. Now if so be that Their practice should be a Rule to us in
other things, why not also in Church Government by Presbytries and Synods;
especially seeing that we have made out, that Their practice is as clear in
this as in other matters. A Fourth consideration to strengthen this Argument is
this, That the Churches now have these same Reasons to move them to submit to
that Government, which the Church in the Apostles times had; and a Law or
Practice is still binding, so long as the Reason of the Law remains: Now the
Reasons that moved the Church in the Apostles time to submit to Presbyterial
Government, was first, Because there were many things of common concernment to
all the Congregations in Jerusalem, and therefore they were Governed by one
Presbytry as said is: so there are many businesses of common concernment to
many particular Congregations now, and therefore it should be so yet. Secondly,
In Act: 15. There arises a controversy in Antioch, and because the
controversy cannot be composed in the Presbyterial Church of Antioch,
therefore it is referred unto a Synod made up of many Presbytries, all
concerned in it: So there are businesses of common concernment to many
Presbytries yet, and some that cannot be ended in one Presbytry, and therefore
there should be Synods for composing of these things yet. And seeing the
Apostles extraordinarly assisted, (one whereof might have composed the
Controversy) would nevertheless have a Synodical Convention for ending
Controversies; Much more ought we to do it whose Gifts are far Inferior to
Theirs. By all which it remains clear that the practice of the Church then in
that point, is binding to us now.

Argument Fourth, There is no Pattern of such an Independent Congregation, by
precept or Practice in the whole Scripture, where one particular Congregation,
with one Pastor, and Their Eldership, did Exercise or may Exercise all Church
Government, in all its Acts, and that Independently: therefore etc. The
Antecedent is true. First, An instance cannot be given of Ordination of
Ministers by One Congregation. Secondly, By precept and Practice Ordination is
to be by more Pastors than one; as Act: 1. 13. Act. 6. 2. Act: 13. 13. 1 Timothy: 4.
14. So it is clear, That it is by Pastors, and many Pastors, and so cannot be
by a single Congregation, where there is required, and should be (say they) but
one Pastor. As to what they say of the Church of Corinths Excommunicating the
Incestous man. We Answer, Corinth was a Presbyterial Church. And Secondly, It
proves not that they might Excommunicate Independently, For if a Controversy
had arisen about it, which they could not have ended among themselves, they
were to have their recourse to a Synod, By the same Reason for which the Church
of Antioch had, Acts 15.

Argument Fifth, If so be that Congregations be Independent, And no benefit of
Appeals allowed to the party grieved, Then the state of the Christian Churches
were in greater Slavery than the Jewish; But this is absurd; For Christians are
in an estate of greater liberty; As appears from Galat. 4. 1. Therefore etc.
For clearing the first proposition* We lay down these things; First, There was
a Subordination of Judicatories in the Jewish Church; As might be made out from
several places, We take one 2 Chronicles: 19. 8. where there is a Supreme
Ecclesiastical Judicatory v, 10. The matters they handle come to them from
other Judicatories: And Deuteronomy: 17. 8. Shows the matters to be handled by the
supreme Judicatory are such as had been before the Inferior Court, but found
too hard to be judged there; So that here was a Refuge for the party wronged by
the Inferior Court: Now if there be no such Refuge left to Christians, we may
certainly say, The state of Christiansis most hard, being left under the
Tyrannical sentence of the unjust Eldership, And no power to right them; When
the oppressed Jew might appeal to the Superior Judicatory.

We might further argue from this, Whatever was in the Jewish Government that
was neither Ceremonial, nor Judicial; but Moral; That is binding to us; For the
Moral Law binds all alike, and is not abrogate: But this, That there was
subordination of Judicatories for the relief of the grieved party among the
Jews, was Moral, not Ceremonial, nor Judicial. It is true that all things were
determined by an high Priest, among the Jews, who was typical of Christ, and of
his supremacy in Judgment: So the Papists argue ill from the high Priest to the
Pope: But it is as true, That the Subordination of Judicatories for things of
harder knowledge, and relief of the oppressed party, was Typical of nothing;
But Moral and of the Law of Nature, which forbids party to be judge; which will
naturally follow if there be not Subordination of Courts. Yea further we shall
not find that this Law is given to Moses in the pattern upon the mount, but was
taught by the light of nature to Jethro, and by him given to Moses Exodus 18.
22. It shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, etc:

III. We come now to Answer Their Objections many whereof we have taken off in
the first two Heads* As for the rest we shall not trouble you with those that
are frivolous, as indeed the most part are, we shall only pitch on these that
^eem to carry some show of Reason, and whereof they boast most.

Their first Objection is from Matthew: 18. 17. This Church, say they, is a
Parochial Church, and Christ's mind is that the business should be here ended,
without any Appeal from it. Answer Christ means not only a particular singular
Congregation, but also, if not mainly, A Presbyterial Church: For first, The
particular Church cannot sometimes heal the distemper, as when it is divided,
or when the Church it self is Scandalous, as often may fall out by giving a wrong
sentence; So that if Christ had meaned only a particular Church should be
compleaned to, and in no case a Judicatory above them, then his Remedy should
have come short in curing the desease for which he intends it, which to say
were no small imputation to Jesus Christ. Secondly, Christ here alludes to the
Government of the Jewish Church, as appears from the Censure of the Obstinate
to be reputed as an Heathen, the same which was among the Jews: And from the
plainness of the speech, Tell the Church; Which could not be otherwise
understood, if he had not alluded to the Jewish Judicatory, besides which, They
knew no Judicatory, for such offenses as Christ spoke of to them, There being
as yet no particular Church which had given its name to Christ. Now (as we
cleared before) the Judicatories among the Jews which were to be complained to
for Scandals, were not only these who were in their single Synagogues or
Congregations; But also Superior Courts, to which it was Lawful to Appeal from
the lesser Courts. Thirdly, Christ means here of such a Church, as were the
Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, etc. But these (as we have already cleared)
were Presbyterial Churches or Judicatories, having the oversight of many
Congregations: Now sure these being the first Churches instituted by the
Apostles, must not be excluded from the power of Government given by Christ to
his Church in that place.

Their Second Objection is this, That the Dependency of Churches upon
Presbytries lays on a yoke of Tyranny and Subjection upon particular
Congregations, equal to the Tyranny of Bishops: And if the Church must be in
bondage, it is better to be subject to one Lord Bishop, than under a number of
Ministers and Elders in Presbytry or Synod. For Answer, We make no other
Subjection here than what the Independents themselves make; For they make Ten
in a Congregation subject to Five hundred, and the Laws of the Five hundred to
be binding to the Ten: So make we many Churches to be subject in the Lord to
all their own Pastors and Elders, conveened in a Presbytry; What more
Subjection is there in the one than in the other? Secondly, It is an unjust
comparison to compare Bishops Tyranny with Presbytries. For 1. The Government
by Bishops was Humane, This is Divine. 2. The Bishop being but One Man did by
himself alone Govern, and that ad Arbitratum, Nor had he Any to Answer to; But
here more Pastors and Elders are joined together, who are by mutual advice to
Rule Gods People, according to the Word of God. 3. The Government by the Bishop
was altogether extrinsecal to, or without the Particular Churches: For the
Bishop was none of their Members, nor yet chosen by them; But Presbyteries and
Synods are not so, They are wholly made up of Members and Commissioners from
those same very Churches, where They govern, and so it is wholly intrinsecal.
4. We say Government by Presbyteries is so far from being in its own nature
Tyrannical, as that it is the greatest remedy against Church Tyranny; because
it is a City of Refuge, for all these who are oppressed in their particular
Congregations; For if in the Independent Government one be wronged, he must sit
with it, till Christ come and right him: Neighbor Churches may advise and
request, but the Cong^egation advised, is not bound to follow it; But h^^e when
the Eldership does wrong, there is a refuge to a Presbytery, and above them to
a Synod, etc.

Object: 3. Government by Presbytery lays upon Ministers and Elders the
Charge of other Flocks than these of whom the Lord made them Overse^rs, to wit,
The Charge of all the Churches in the bounds of the Presbytery: They are Elders
to all these Churches; because they govern them. Answer, It follows not that
they have the Charge of all these Congregations in particular, and in every
thing that concerns the Duty of an Elder; so that they are bound particularly
to Catechize, to Visit, etc. Only They are Elders to them in things common to
all, And as they are joined in the Court with others: And this is not absurd,
for in our Parliament, Commissioners from Shires are Judges to the whole
Kingdom: But how? It is as they are joined in Parliament, not by themselves
alone; It is in matters common to the Shire, not in other petty particular
Affairs; And so it is here, They are Elders to all the Congregations indeed, as
they are joined together in the Presbytery; But not by themselves alone: In
things of common concernment to the whole particular Congregation, not in these
Duties belonging to every Congregation in particular.

Object: 4. If this Subordination, and Judicatory above Judicatory were of
Divine Institution, Its like Scripture would have spoken more plainly of it;
not leaving it to be drawn out by so many far fetched Consequences. Answer, We
have already given sufficient Warrant for this Government by clear Consequences
from Scripture; And Consequences from Scripture are Scripture, else we must
cast at many points of Divine Truth which have no other ground but Scripture
Consequence: As the Trinity; and Change of the Sabbath; yea we see Christ
himself grounding a material point, to wit, The Resurrection, upon Scripture
Consequence, Mark 12. 26. 2. We must not teach God how to set down his mind in
Scripture; We perchance think, It had been a plainer way to have cast matters
of Religion to so many Heads; By which means many Controversies should have
been shunned, But He has thought otherwise: The Lord in Wisdom has scattered
the parcels of every Truth through his Book, intermixing it with other
Subjects, as the Gold is in the Mine, and this to exercise his people in
searching out his mind from Scripture.

IV. In the last place, We come to make some Use of what is said. And the first
Use is this, If it be so that this Government by Presbytery is grounded on the
word of God, Then ye would know it is not a thing of naught we are contesting
for, It Is a part of that Truth once delivered to the Saints, and a Truth of no
small concernment: What would become (think ye) of Particular Congregations, If
they had none above them to call them to an account? What Divisions, Strifes,
Heresies, Schisms would ensue; if people were informed of these Contests that
have fallen out among our Opposits themselves, where this way of Independency
was followed; The one half renting from the other, Excommunicating one another?
It might make moderate Men scar at it: But we need se^k no other evidence of
this, than by looking on Scotland and England these years by past. In the
Church of England, Presbytery could not be set up, Independency was pleaded
for, and practiced; And what is become of it, Satan has vomited out a flood
of Errors, that there were never more, nor more gross in any time of the
Christian World; Yea all the rotten Graves of old Heresy are dug up, and
now avowed: Socinianism, In denying Christ's Righteousness in the matter of
Justification: Anabaptism, In denying the Baptizing of Infants: Arianism, In
denying the Trinity: And many other such like. Yea there are some Errors there
that were never before heard of: Some affirming, There is no Church they can
join with: And therefore, They turn Seekers. Some are above all Preaching,
Prayer and all Ordinances: And all these are the Fruits of Independency. Again,
look on the Fruits of the Presbyterial Government in Scotland where it has
been in Vigor, God has made it an Hammer for battering down the beginnings of
Error: So that these twelve years bypast not any one Error has come to any
Strength: And this all under God from Presbyterial Government, being His
Institution: Our Judicatories were indeed terrible, as an Army with Banners,
though indeed we are now like to turn contemptible. God himself heal our
Breaches.

Secondly, Guard against the Errors that would draw you from this Truth; If ye
cannot carry the grounds we have been speaking of with you, yet ye may remember
ye once heard this Truth confirmed from Scripture and Reason; That so when ye
meet with temptations to quite it, ye may advise well before ye yield.

I would press this* so much the more, As that this Doctrine of Presbyterial
Government is the Butt of Sathan's Envy, the thing he would have most gladly
overthrown, As that which stands most in his way; For so long as it stood in
its integrity, We might in the Lords strength have defied the Devil to have
brought Error into Scotland. And indeed it is the thing he sets himself to
brangle, To get the hedge once plukt up, that so the wild Boar of the
wilderness may come in. And (believe me) there is nothing makes me more
afraid, than that through Gods permission, the Devil shall get a deludge of
Error brought in on Scotland; Because those who have been entrusted with this
Government have weakened the power of it, by Divisions among our selves; A copy
is casten How that Erroneous Spirits need not stand much on the Authority of
Assemblies, when they would cross their Designs: We are afraid, yea we may be
past ^ear and conclude. That Presbyteries, Synods, etc. have lost much of the
weight They had lately in men's consciences. Only let me entreat you in the
bowels of Christ, That ye would put a difference betwixt the Government it
self, and the Persons who are entrusted with it; Do not charge the faults of
the one upon the other: The best things that are may be abused; And it is
Peoples Trial to put difference between the good of a thing, and the Abuse of
it. The Government is good, and of God; and the abuse of it is evil and of men:
What is of God, cleave to it, and stick fast by it; what is from men's
corruptions, mourn for it: Pray themselves may get a sight of it: And thus ye
shall walk in an eaven way. Ye had need to deal with God to ground you in the
knowledge of these things; For we know not how soon we may be put to it, to
quite them: Only remember They are Truths ye have sworn to maintain with your
hands lifted up on high.

SECT: V. A SHORT REFUTATION OF THE ERROR OF Separation.
Head I. Showing what is required for making one a Member of the Visible Church.
WE have gone through these Controversies, which are about the Government of
the Church: We are now to refute some dangerous Errors of Doctrine. And first,
We shall begin with the Error of Separation.

The Errors of Separatists are many, but we shall only engage with two Heads of
them, which are the main. The first is That which they teach concerning the
Constitution of the Visible Church; Or who it is that should be received
Members of Christ's visible Body. The second is That which they hold to be the
duty of every sincere Christian, viz. That when they spy any corruption in a
Church wherein they are Members, as if Persons Scandalous be admitted to the
Lords Supper (seeing they ought all to be Gracious who come there) Then (say
they) It is their duty to keep back from the Communion; and not only so, but to
quite That Church, and set up a new Church of Their own. We shall begin first
with that Doctrine that concerns the Constitution of Visible Churches. And
therein we shall follow our usual Order: First, Clear the Question. Secondly,
Bring Arguments for the Truth. Thirdly, Answer those they bring against the
Truth. And Fourthly, Apply the whole to some Use.

I. First, For clearing of the Question, ye would know what Church it is
concerning which the Controversy is. First, It is not that place where Gods
people meet to go about Gods public Worship, (such as this House we now are
in, which is called the Church by a Figure, improperly) But it is the People
gathered together in it; which People are really and properly the Church;
although the House be so called, because it contains them, by an usual Figure.
The Church that we are to dispute of, is made up of Men and Women: And not that
which is built of Timber and Stone. Secondly, The Controversy betwixt Us and
Them is not concerning the Invisible Church, that is called the Church of the
Firstborn, Those who by virtue of their Effectual Calling are united to Jesus
Christ the Head, are living Members of His Mystical Body, and draw Spiritual
Influence from him. Concerning the Church taken in this Sense, There is no
Controversy betwixt Us and the Separatists, but that the Members of this Church
are only made up of Believers, are all gracious, because this Church is Christ's
Mystical Body, a Royal Priesthood, the Lambs Wife, all fair, undefiled* etc.
Thirdly, The Question Then is concerning the Church Visible, which is, a
Company of Men and Women, who have according to the Tenor of Gods Covenant with
the Visible Church an Outward Ecclesiastical (which is in its kind a real)
Right to enjoy the Outward Privileges of the Children of God.

This being the Church about which the Controversy betwixt Us and the
Separatists is, We shall speak a little to clear what is meaned by it; And
First, The Church is called Visible, not because the Members of it may be seen:
For in that respect the Church Invisible, the Church of Believers, may be
called Visible; For the Members of it being believing Men and Women, may be
seen also: But the difference betwixt the Churches in those two Senses, is
taken from that which makes one to be a Member of the one Church, as it differs
from that which makes one a Member of the other. That which makes One man a
Member of the Invisible Church, is True Grace, sincere Faith, inward Marks
thereof: Now Grace is a thing that cannot be seen by another certainly: Its
true there are outward effects of it; but they are such, that a Hypocrite may
have the counterfeit of them, so as the one cannot be discerned from the other
by a Beholder. The nature of Grace is only known Infallibly and certainly to
God; And therefore This Church is called Invisible. Again that which makes a
Man or Woman a Member of the Visible Church is something that may be seen*
something that may be judged of, by those who have Power to receive Members
into the Church, and cast them out from it. Secondly, We said that this Visible
Church is a Company or Society of Men and Women, that have an Ecclesiastical
Right to enjoy the Outward Privileges of the Sons of God. For understanding
what is meaned by enjoying of Outward Privileges, we shall show you That there
are Outward Privileges, and Inward Privileges of those who are the Sons of
God. Inward Privileges are Jesus Christ himself; a Right to him, a saving
Right to the Covenant of Grace, and Life Eternal; These are the Inward
Privileges of the Sons of God: And only Believers have right to those: Painted
Hypocrites have no right to them. But Secondly, There are Outward Privileges
of the Sons of God; such as these, To be ordinary Hearers of the Word Preached:
To be taken a care of by Jesus Christ his Servants: To have liberty to come to
the Sacraments: These are Outward Privileges, And these are Privileges that a
Member of the Visible Church has a right to. We said they had an
Ecclesiastical Right or a Church Right to them: That is, such a Right as gives
Warrant to the Church for receiving them to enjoy these Privileges, and yet
possibly they have not a Right to them before God: As for Example, when there
is a painted Hypocrite in a Congregation, who makes Conscience seemingly to use
the Means: That man has an Ecclesiastical Right to come to a Communion; such a
Right as may Warrant the Minister for admitting of him, although he have not a
Right to come before God; God will challenge the Hypocrite for coming, and not
the Minister for suffering him to come. Yet we are still to consider that though
this Ecclesiestical Right be not Saving, yet it is Real in its kind, being
founded upon Gods Covenant with the Visible Church, and his Ordinance of
admitting such therein. Now ye may know somewhat by this, what we mean by an
Ecclesiastical Right, it is That which gives warrant to Church Officers to admit
a man to enjoy these Outward Privileges: And so ye may know what we mean by
the Visible Church whereof we Dispute.

There are several differences betwixt Us and the Separatists, Concerning the
Visible Church. First, They affirm That there is no Visible Church on Earth;
But a single Congregation; As many as may meet in one place. This we refuted in
the former Controversy; by showing That in the Church of Jerusalem there were
far more than could meet in one single Congregation; yea many particular
Congregations; And yet are called but One Church. Secondly, They differ much
from us, as also from the Truth, concerning the power They give to this Visible
Church, They give them the full power of Church Government, and that
Independently from any Chuch power on earth: This difference also we spoke of
in the preceding Debate; And so we shall stand now no longer upon it. Thirdly,
We differ concerning That which gives a Being to the Church Visible; They say,
To make a Society of People a Visible Church, so as to have right to partake of
the Privileges there of, It is requisite that all the Members of that Society
Swear a Covenant one to another, wherein they bind themselves to submit one to
another in the Lord, to walk in all the Ordinances of God, and not to leave
that Society till liberty be given them by the rest: So that tho a man should
be never so truly Godly and Gracious, yet if he take not such a Covenant, and
if he Swear not such an Oath, He is without the Visible Church, He is in the
state of a ^agan, to live and to die without any Church Ordinance.

The Judgment of our Church, and that of Truth herein is this, That wherever a
man comes out of one Particular Congregation (which we call a Paroch) to
another, By his so doing he comes under a duty and Obligation, which he is
bound to before God, and the Congregation also, to discharge himself in; Namely
all the Duties pertaining to a Member of that Particular Congregation or Paroch
to which he comes, Although he Swear not such an Oath. We say, Secondly, he may
also Swear to do these Duties. But Thirdly, To bind this on all the Consciences
of the Members of the Church, to take such an Oath, so as if they take it not
They are not Church Members; We say, It is Will Worship not commanded by God,
either by Practice or Precept, in Old or New Testament. We might easily prove
that Jesus Christ never took This way to gather a Visible Church.

But the main difference is the Fourth, and that is Concerning those who are to
be kept or received Members of the Church Visible; Or who they are that have
right to these Outward Privileges we spoke of: That which they hold in this
Point is, That they would have all Visible Churches disolved, and then Churches
gathered out of these, wherein none are to be received or admitted to partake
of Church Privileges, so as to be under the care of Ministers, Admitted to the
Sacraments etc. but those who have evident positive signs of Grace, and these
not only evident to the Minister and a few more, but to all the Members of the
Congregation, so that every one in the Congregation must be convinced, so far
as men can attain unto, that he has Grace, or else he is no Member of the
Visible Church; by which Rule they model Congregations; But there was never a
Congregation since Christ was on the earth so constitute, except Their Own; For
according to this Rule they will cast out the Two Part, and of some
Congregations, leave Ten Parts and take but the Eleventh, leaving all the rest
as Pagans, without Baptising their Children, or admitting themselves to any
Church Privilege: This is what They hold. As for the Judgment of our Church,
and that which is according to the Word, take those Assertions.

First, We hold that every man indeed that is a Member of the Visible Church
ought to have Grace; so that he sins against God and his own Soul if he have it
not; And all the privileges he enjoyes will do him no good without it. We say
in this respect, all the Members of the Church ought to have Grace; But to say,
That they so ought to have Grace, that none of them must be admitted to be a
Member of the Church Visible without it, This we deny: It is ill reasoning from
unanswerableness to an obligation to a forfaulture of Privileges: For every
man that is a Magistrate ought to have Grace; so as he sins against God if he
have it not; yet a man may be a lawful Magistrate, and have the Privileges of
a Magistrate, although he have not Grace. Secondly, We do willingly grant that
in the Constitution of our Church, and admitting of People to the Lords Table:
Our Practice comes far short of the Rule; There is not that care taken to purge
out scandalous persons as should be, Our practice is indeed short of the Rule;
But Our Rule which we shall hold out (as we shall prove) is Good. To know then
what is the Rule according to which we should admit men to be Members of the
Church. First, There are some who are admitted to some Privileges only, and
not to all; as to Baptism: And these are Members of the Church Incompleatly,
They are Members, but not so fully; And those are, Infants that are born within
the Church Visible; They are Members, although not to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. Now betwixt Us and the Separatists herein, to wit, whether Infants
should be Baptized, there is no difference. Secondly, There are some who are
admitted to all Privileges of the Visible Church; And those are Members
Completely and fully: And concerning those the dispute is: Who are those that
ought to be admitted to all the common Privileges of the Visible Church? They
mantain (as we heard) that none should be admitted but those that can give
evident Signs of Grace to the satisfaction of the Consciences of all within the
Church. We hold First, that if it be known that Men be Baptized. And Secondly,
If they be free of Scandal. And Thirdly, If they submit themselves to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and have some competent knowledge of the Grounds of the
Christian Religion, If these things I say be in a man, We hold that he is to be
received, although he cannot give evident signs of the reality of the Grace of
God in him to All. And this is the Controversy.

II. Now we come to prove that which we hold by Arguments. The first is John
the Baptist did not follow this Rule of Theirs in receiving Members to the
Church, and therefore it is not the right Rule: That John the Baptist did not
follow this Rule will appear, if we consider Luke 3. Wherein consider, Who it
was whom John Baptized v, 21. Now when all the People were Baptized, etc. It
was all the People. Consider Secondly, What he requires of this People before
he Baptize them, We shall find in the preceding words that he seeks no more
than that they would be convinced that they were wrong before. And Secondly,
Profess an earnest desire to amend. So we find in v, 10. And the People asked
him, saying, what shall we do? And the publicans in the 12. v, do the same, who
yet were but Course Men. And in the 14 v, The soldiers likewise demanded of
him, saying, what shall we do? Now these Questions import this much, That they
were convinced they were wrong, and professed at least a desire to become
better; And accordingly John instructs them, thus and thus ye shall do; And
without more ado in v, 21. He Baptizes them. Now it is not possible that John
could have got positive signs from every one of them to convince him that they
had real Grace; Far less That every one of the multitude could have been
persuaded in Conscience of the reality of Grace in each other; And therefore
the Rule of admiting men to be Members of the Visible Church cannot be this,
That every one to be admitted should have evident signs of Grace, satisfactory
to the Consciences of all: John sought not this of those whom he received, It Is
true he falls very sharply on the Scribes Matthew. 3, v, 7 -- O generations of
vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come. But it is as true,
when he has rebuked them, as ill as they were before, seeing now they professed
a desire to amend, he Baptizes them in v, 11. I indeed Baptize you with water
etc The same ( You) whom he spoke to in v. 7. As is clear from the Connection of
every Verse. If it be Objected that they were not received to be Members of the
Church, although they were Baptized. We shall once for all clear that Baptism
seals up a man's right of Membership in the Church Visible. We find this from
the Apostles Practice Act: 2. 41. Where the Way is how they received men to be
Church Members, it is said They were Baptized etc. And those who were Baptized
are said to be added to them and added to the Church v, last, So in Act. 8, 38.
The Eunuch was received by Baptism to be a Member of the Visible Church. So
Saul Act: 9. 18. And Lydia Act. 16, 15. Secondly, Circumcision was a seal of
the Jews right of Membership in the Visible Church under the Old Testament, And
therefore Baptism is a seal of our right to be Members of the Visible Church
under the New; For Baptism in the New Testament is come in the same place with
Circumcision in the Old Testament. This is for our first Argument.

The second Argument is taken from the practice of the Apostles, And it is
this, The Apostles went not by that method of our Opposits in admitting Members
of the Visible Church, This was not the Rule They followed: Therefore it is not
the right one. We clear this was not the Rule which they followed from Act. 2.
41. Where in one day there are three thousand added to the Church. Now surely
none can imagine that it was possible that every one of these Three thousand
could be persuaded in conscience of the regeneration of one another. It is true
Peter binds on them to Repent; But it is as true that on their desire to be
admitted to be Members of the Visible Church, and some evidence of their
conviction, he receives them; Although there were many of them did not even
this much in sincerity. For Anamas and Saphira were but Hypocrites; So no more
is required of Simon Magus Act. 8. 13. And so of Demas, who afterward forsook
Paul. Yea if we look to the Rule which Christ walked by, He sought no more but
a profession to follow him, and He sought no more of Judas, to make him not
only a Member of His Society, but an Apostle and Minister; Christ knew him well
enough to be a Hypocrite: And yet upon his professed desire to follow him,
admits him to his Company, yea makes him a Minister: So that this Rule which
Separatists so much cry up, was neither followed by Jesus Christ nor his
Apostles.

The Third Argument we bring is this, There was never a Church before or since
Christ's days whose Members, All of them, could give evident signs of Grace to
each other; And therefore it cannot be a Rule of Gods appointing, That the
Church Visible must be made up of only such. We prove the Antecedent; Sure the
Church of Israel in Moses time was not such, every Member was not such a
Visible Saint, so as he was known to be Gracious; For says Moses Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, etc. and oftimes they are
upbraided as stiff-necked. Secondly, We must suppose the purest Churches
coming nearest the Rule, to have been in the Apostles days, and yet the
Members of those Churches were not of this kind. So the Church of Corinth was a
Church that the Apostles themselves planted and Preached to, and yet we shall
find many in this Church who were so far from giving evident signs of Grace
one to another, That there were many there Scismaticks 1 Cor: 6. Many there
Fornicators that Paul writes against: There were many there Drunkards, yea and
drunk about the time of the Lords Supper. And those he reproves 1 Cor: 11. Yea
there were some there who denied some of the fundamental Points of the
Christian Religion as the Resurrection: As appears from Chap: 15. So this
Church of Corinth, was not such. Secondly, The seven Churches of Asia spoken of
Revel: 2. 3. were Churches that had the Candlestick among them, Churches that
were in Christ's hand, that he took a care of, and yet they were not such, as
every Member of those Churches had real signs of Grace, otherwise the Spirit
of God would not have said so often, If any man have ears to hear etc. If he
had not supposed that there had been in them blind, obdurate, carnal hearers.
Thirdly, The same may be said of the Churches of Rome, Galatia, Thessalonica,
and of all the Churches that ever we hear or read of since Christ's days, never
one of them was such: And therefore we may safely conclude that this Rule of
Theirs cannot be Right, seeing neither Christ nor his Apostles nor the Church in
any Age did follow it.

We bring a Fourth Argument and it is this: That cannot be a right Rule of
gathering Churches, that would hold out a number of Gracious Souls from being
Members: But, this Rule of Theirs would do so: Therefore, it cannot be the
right Rule. For the first part of our Argument none will doubt of it. And
Secondly, That this Rule of Theirs would hold out many truly Gracious, we prove
it: For first there are many that have Grace, that for want of parts they
cannot express the thing they have, they are so far from giving evidences of
Grace to others, that they cannot satisfy themselves; Some so Proud, some so
Passionate, so Worldly, so Talkative, so Imprudent, that it will be hard for
any to satisfy themselves that there is Grace in them. Thirdly, The way of some
is so hid, or rather Gods way in them so hid, that for any thing People can see
in them, they are nothing different from Natural Civilians, and yet many of
such will make clear and satisfying discoverys of Gods Grace in them at their
death: The work of Grace then appearing that was long under ground. And now
according to this Rule of Theirs, these are all to be holden out of the Visible
Church, and put in the place of Pagans; And so That cannot be Christ's Rule.

Our fifth Argument to prove the point is this, That cannot be a Rule of
admitting Members to the Church Visible, which puts the Church in perpetual
danger of Renting: But, this Rule of Theirs puts the Church in a perpetual
danger of being Rent: Therefore, it cannot be the right Rule. We shall clear
that this Rule of Theirs puts the Church in a perpetual hazard of being Rent:
For there are some more easy to be satisfied of the signs of Grace than
others, so That which will be a lawful Church to one, will not be so to others.
Secondly, There are some that in progress of time will grow more strick in
searching: Hence that which was a true Church to him the last year, will be no
Church to him this: And so this Rule of Theirs keeps the Church in a continual
hazard of being Rent, of Separating after Separating, while they cast off all.
This has made the most part of all Their Churches rent, and one part to
Excommunicate another. Yea hence many of that Way cast off all Churches at
last, and turn Seekers; Cast off all Serving God with others, all use of
public means, only serving God apart and by themselves alone; Because they
cannot be sure enough that any others have Grace but only themselves.

There is a Sixth Argument taken from the similitudes and comparisons under
which the Church Visible is holden forth in Scripture; which similitudes do
show there is not That strictness required in admitting Members to the Visible
Church as the Separatists judge; It Is compared to a Draught net cast into the
Sea, that gathers fishes good and bad Matthew: 13. Secondly, To a Field wherein
is Wheat and Tares, ibid. Thirdly, It is compared Matthew: 22. to a Table of
Guests, where there are some with, and some without a Wedding Garment.
Fourthly, It is compared to a House wherein are Vessels of Honor and
Dishonor; and to a Fold of Sheep, and Goats; And in every Church there are
many Called but few Chosen: Now how shall Tares, chaff, Goats, etc. give
convincing signs of that which they have not: Certainly these Similitudes seem
to speak, That there needs not so much Waling or Picking out, in admitting
Members to the Visible Church, providing they be free of Scandals; Once take
them in, and and then let the Word work on them; This great Waleing and
Separation will be when the Net comes to the shore, when the great Harvest
comes, when the Sheep and Goats are severed. This much for Arguments for the
Truth.

III. We shall in the next answer Their Objections, whereby they labor to
prove, that the Church Visible should only be made up of such Church members as
can give satisfactory Signs of Grace to each other.

Obj. 1. Their first Objection (which is the most specious) is taken from these
Glorious s^^ies given to the Church in Scripture. They are called Saints; a
chaste ^^rgine spoused to Christ; Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty; and
Christ's mystical Body, whose Members are all Gracious: Now, say they, seeing the
Church has these Styles in Scripture, Should any be joined to the Church, but
such, who to the uttermost of our discerning have Grace? For answer, If this
Argument conclude any thing, it will conclude that none should be Members of
the Visible Church, but those who have Real Grace; for none is a partaker of
Christs^ Mystical Body, the Lambs Wife etc. But such only Now this, our
Opposites themselves will not affirm, They grant there may be painted
Hypocrites in the Church, and the Scripture says the same; for Ananias and
Saphira, Judas, and Simon Magus, were such; and so these places of Scripture,
if they prove any thing, will prove more than They will grant. But to answer
directly, ye would know that in the Church Visible there is a Company of Good
and Bad, sincere Christians, and painted Hypocrites: Now the Scripture speaks
of them sometimes according to the Better Part, and sometimes according to the
Worse Part; where it speaks of them according to the Better Part, it speaks so
of them as if there were not One Evil Man among them all, hence are these
Styles, The Lambs Wise, Sons and Daughters of the Almighty, Called to be
Saints, etc. They are so according to the Better Part. Again when it speaks of
the Visible Church according to the Worse Part, it gives such names as if there
were not One Good Man among them all; it calls them Stif-necked, a Rebelious
house, Children that are Corrupters; Now, As it were ill Argued, to conclude
from these places where such styles are given to the Church, that every one
within the Church were Corrupters, Stif-necked, etc. and not one seeking God:
For there he gives them those Styles from the Evil Part among them: So it is
also ill argued from these places where the Scripture calls them the Lambs
Wife, Sons and Daughters of the Almighty, etc. That they were All of them so;
And we shall clear it more fully from the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor, 6, 18. They
get many Glorious styles, They are called The Sons and Daughters of the
Almighty, they are called A chaste Virgin, etc. 2 Cor, 11, 2. Now there were
many Schismatics among them, some denying the Resurrection, some Vilifying
Paul's Doctrine, Many who were Contentious, Drunkards, Fornicators; so that
these Styles cannot be Verified of the Members of the whole Church, but only of
the Better Part that was among them: even as men speaking of an Heap of Chaff
and Corn, will call it An Heap of Corn; Not that there is nothing but Corn in
it, but because the Corn is the Best Part: And so the Church Visible (wherein
is a mixed Company) is denominated from the Better Part sometimes in Scripture,
and called Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty; and sometimes from the
Worse Part, and called Stiff-necked, etc.

Obj. II Their second Objection is taken from Act, 2. 47. Where it is said --
And the Lord added unto the Church daily such as should be saved. Say they, God
added no other to the Church but such as would be saved, therefore we should
add no others. For Answer, If any thing follow from this, it would follow that
none should be added to the Church but these who are Believers really, for no
other will be saved: But this is against themselves: And therefore our second
Answer is this, That the meaning of the words must be, That He had a chief care
of adding those to the Church who were to be Saved: But it is not said that He
added no other; for the same Chapter says, He added more; v, 41, whole three
Thousand were added, and yet all those were not to be saved; For there were
Ananias and Saphira, and doubtless many other Hypocrites among them.

Obj. III. The third Objection is taken from Matthew, 22. 12. In the Parable
concerning the Kings Banquet, where he bids his Servants go and invite to the
Marriage, and finding One wanting the Wedding Garment (says he) -- Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a Wedding Garment? Now (say They) this is a
reproof to those who admitted him to this Privilege. We Answer, This is quite
contrair to the scope of the Parable, if we look to the command v, 9, Go ye
therefore into the highways, etc. They are commanded to invite all, and to
hold out none for want of the Wedding Garment; For that being Inward is only
discernable by God. Indeed this Parable will show this much, That Ministers may
admit People to Communions, and yet Christ will come with an after search, and
find many there whom he will cast, that Ministers have admitted: Ye ought not
to think that every man that comes through a Ministers Trial is in a good
state; The place says, That Christ found One wanting the Wedding Garment; But
it says not That Ministers should let none come but those that had the Wedding
Garment; And to show that this is the scope of the Parable, see v, 14. There it
is said, For many are called, but few are chosen.

Ob. IV: Their fourth Objection is taken from Rev. 2. 4, 5. The Lord speaking
there to the Church of Ephesus, says, Nevertheless, I have somewhat against
thee, because thou have left thy first love Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and and do the first works, or else I will come unto
thee quickly, and will remove thy Candelstick out of his place, etc. From
whence They argue thus: None are to be admitted to the Church who will ruin the
Church But, all those who cannot convincingly prove their Regeneration, will
ruin the Church: Therefore they ought not to be admitted. We Answer, That the
last part of their Argument is false: For there are many Gracious Persons
keeping their first love, who yet can neither satisfy themselves nor others in
the Truth of their Regeneration, and that will not ruin the Church. Secondly,
We Answer, To the first part of their Argument, where they say that every one
who has not real Grace will ruin the Church: It is not universally true, for
then there should be no Hypocrites in the Church at all, neither known nor
unknown, for Hypocrites can do no other thing but that which is tending to the
ruin of the Church; Now themselves will not say That all Hypocrites are
debarred; For they admit some such; and Scripture says the contrair in the
admission of Annanias and Saphira: And so some must be admitted, who, If God
look not more to his own mercy than to their me^^t, and more to the respect he
has to others than to them, can do nothing but ruin the Church.

Obj. V. Their last Objection is taken from 2 Timothy: 3. 5. Having a form of
Go^liness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. Therefore none
are to be admitted but those who can give satisfactory signs of their
Regeneration. For Answer: It is a gross mistake; For if we look to the place,
Those who have only a form of Godliness, he tells what they are, High-minded
etc. v, 4. And in the 6 v, Subtle Heretics who lead away the simple. Now we
say none such ought to be admitted, for those are Scandalous: But what they say
does not follow; For many cannot give satisfactory Signs of their
Regeneration, who yet are not Gross Livers, nor Scandalous, nor seduceing
Heretics; And so not of the number of those from whom Paul bids Turn away. And
thus we have Answered the strongest of their Objections.

IV. Use. I. This Doctrine being thus cleared, ye ought not to look on what our
Opposites hold in this Point as a matter of small moment, neither ought ye to
suffer your selves to be deceived with the pretense of strictness with which
they cover it. It is a Doctrine that has fearful Consequences: For by this,
the third part of the best Churches that ever were, shall be put in no better
case than Pagans themselves, to live without all ordinances, their Children
without Baptism: And this will hold off many who have true Grace; for how many
are there (even of those) who cannot give convincing signs of Grace, either to
themselves or others. By this Rule men's Consciences shall still be held in an
Uncertainty, whether they may stay members of such a Church or not; because
they can hardly be satisfied, whether all in it have convincing signs of Grace
or not. Now the Judgment of our Opposits is, that if the Rule be not kept
Conscientiously, Christians ought to Separate. By this Rule an insupportable
Burden is put on Christians, not only to examine themselves, but also the
inward state of others: By this Rule, all the Churches that ever were in the
days of the Prophets, Christ's, Apostles, or in the Primitive Times, have been
in the mist; all living and dying without the Visible Church, and so without
Baptism, and so as Pagans. As also this show of strictness beyond whatever God
has commanded, does ever end in looseness, as appears by the Separatists
present practice; for, what ever they speak against the looseness of other
Churches, that we are but a mixture of Drunkards and loose profane Livers; yet
there is as great looseness in their own Churches as in any other, for they
make no scruple to admit Heretics, Covetous Vain, Proud Boasters, almost of
all sorts, if so be they agree with them in Principles against Presbyterians.
This Rule puts men in an overweening conceit of themselves; others are nothing
to them, all are unclean or at best but civil, natural, moral Men; but they are
the Godly, Saints, and what not? Now that Doctrine which in its natural
Consequence puts People to overvalue themseves and undervalue others, is
certainly not of God. This rule of theirs makes way for infinite Janglings, and
carrying on of self interests, under pretense of Holiness; for when the Rule
is, That which every particular man thinks Signs of Grace, Such is the
Corruption of the best, that it will not be applied to all alike; To some they
will be too strict, to others more lax, as affection caries; Until at last
they think all good enough, who are for Their Way; And all others, but Natural,
Worldly, and Carnal, who are not so. I may say that this has been one of the
most unhappy Doctrines that ever the Devil hatched; For it is that whereby
Satan has carried on his design mainly these years by past; Many such
Deceivers crying up strictness, whereby they have made themselves to be
respected by some, and terrible to others, while under this pretense, they have
born down Christ, Truth, and Holiness. I speak not this to countenance
Looseness nor to give a dash to holy Strictness; It is our sin (and we are
plagued for it) that we have not walked according to our Rule? Yet I love no
further Strictness than what Christ Commands, Let us stretch out our Arms to
invite sinners, to give Outward Obedience; and then when they are in, let us
Hew them with the Word and Discipline* This was Christ's way, And his Apostles
way, as we have proved: So when Separatists say to you, That there are such
sinful mixtures in your Churches, that an honest man is polluted to come among
them; And so it is better to stay in your Chambers with a few of a gracious
temper, and let the rest run to the Devil; Tell them, Christ and his Apostles
made no such separation; And ye desire to be no stricter than They were: Only
this is not to plead for our coming short of Christ's Rule in our practice; That
Scandals are too easily past; That so many Ignorants are admitted to the Lords
Table, is our sin, and so not to be pleaded for. This for the first Head of
Separation.

Head II. No Separation from a True Church, or Gods worship in the Church,
because of the sins of Fellow-worshipers.
WE are now to speak of the Second Head, Concerning Separation from true
Churches, and the true worship of God in them, because of the sins of
Fellow-worshipers.

I. That which our Adversaries hold concerning this, is, That the presence of
wicked men at Ordinances do defile the Ordinances to the Godly: Therefore, say
they, where ever there is any corruption in a Church, or where profane or
wicked men are suffered to be in it, The Godly are bound to abstain from the
Lords Table, and not to communicate with the mixed multitude; And because they
hold it is not Lawful for any to live in any Church, where they cannot enjoy
the whole Ordinances of God: Therefore they maintain that the Godly are bound
to Separate from That Church, and to make up a Church of their Own, by
gathering out so many of the Godly that are in it, as they can get, and make a
little Congregation of their own, choosing any of them to be a Minister, and
some one or two to be Elders, And so they set up a Church against a Church, a
Church in the Bosom of a Church.

This is not a new Error, It troubled the Church of Christ long since, in the
Fourth Century or something more than Three hundred years after Christ: The
Donatists, a kind of Heretics arose and troubled the Church for a long time,
and did teach the same very thing; Against whom the Godly Fathers of the Church
in that time did write: Yet because this Error was carried on with a show of
Holiness and Strictness more than ordinary, It took such deep rooting in the
minds of some well minding People (some of them at least) that it could not be
driven out by force of Argument, till the Lord did leave the mantainers of this
Error to fall into other vile abominations, for all their pretense of
Strictness; Which made all others to loath them: And before it could be gotten
rooted out of the minds of men, It troubled the Church almost 100. years
together. The same is the Error which we have now to Refute.

That ye may know what is the Doctrine of Our Church, that we are sworn to, And
which is grounded on the Word, in this particular, Take it up thus; First, We
hold that the Church should be reformed from all corruptions, And that wicked
Scandalous men should be casten out of the Church, at least debarred from the
Lords Table: This we hold, and herein there is no difference betwixt Us and the
Separatists: But the Question is, When the Church Officers do not their duty
(as often it falls out) what through negligence, and what through other
corruptions, and what through a base want of courage; so that sometimes the
Rule is not put in practice; By which means all wicked men are not kept back
from the Ordinance of the Lords Table; And some corruptions are tolerated: The
Question (I say) is, what the Godly should do in that Case? And concerning this
we hold, First, That in such a Case, it is lawful for a Godly Person to remove
his dwelling, and go dwell in another Congregation, where he may have the
Ordinances more purely Administrated; There is no tie laid on him, for binding
him to remain constantly where he is, if he may conveniently remove. Secondly,
We hold that if he cannot conveniently remove from that Congregation; he may
remain a Member of it without sin, although he know there be several things
which God is angry with in it, providing he keep his own hands clean of these.
Thirdly, We hold that as long as the Godly man stays in that Congregation
where there are abuses of that kind tolerated, he is bound according to his
place to endeavor the remedy of them, he is bound, according to Christ's Rule
to admonish these who are Wicked and Scandalous; and if his admonition do no
good, he is bound to delate them to the Eldership that they may be Censured: If
they be Censured, It is well, he has gained his point: But if they be not
Censured, Or not so fully as he would, he is to regrate the matter to God and
mourn for it. But Fourthly, We hold, that so long as he stays in that
Congregation, he is not bound to keep back from Gods Worship, As from the Lords
Table, or from any part of service in it self lawful, because there are wicked
men joining with him in it: Far less is he to make a Rent in the Congregation
or to draw away a number with him, to set up a little Church for themselves.
And this is now the Question we are to debate about. The Separatists say, He is
bound to keep back from the Communion; If any be admitted to it who is profane
or wicked; And that lest he be defiled with them. We say, if the Worship and
service be lawful and pure in it self, He sins in keeping back from it,
notwithstanding that others join with him in it, whom the Church Officers
should keep back. We grant indeed, when the service is not pure and lawful in
its self; As for example, when Communion cannot be had except the People Kneel,
And so worship the Bread: In that case, every man is bound to keep back, that
would keep himself free of sin; Not because there are wicked men going to the
Table; But because the Ordinance is gone about in a sinful way. But our
Question is Concerning Worship in it self lawful; That is to say, when a
Communion is Administrated by a Minister Lawfully Called; When that Table
Gesture, which Christ himself used, is kept at it; When in all other things
done according to his command; What Godly Persons should do in that case, when
Scandalous Persons one or more are suffered to come to the Table: We hold, That
notwithstanding of their being there, he is bound to come foreward; And the
wicked man's being there defiles only the Worship to himself, and not to those,
who come in honesty. This much for the state of the Question.

II. Having cleared the Question, we come to Our Arguments for the Truth; viz.
That the presence of wicked men does not defile the Worship of those that are
Godly: And that the Godly should not keep back from lawful Commanded Duties,
because wicked men have their hands at them.

Arg I. Our First, Argument is taken from the Church of the Jews in Christ's
time; Any who know the History of the Gospel, know that it was a very corrupt
Church, in Christ time, in Doctrine and manners; Their Preachers the Scribes
and Pharisees were debauched Persons; They perverted the Law, the blind led the
blind: And when the Preachers were such, ye may judge what the People were; And
yet we find that Christ and his Apostles did join with them in the lawful
Worship, For First, Christ himself came yearly up to the Feast at Jerusalem.
Secondly, He is so far from commanding his Apostles, and those who believed in
him, to keep back from the Ordinary Worship, because of wicked men among them,
That upon the contrair he forbids them to stumble at any thing of that kind;
And commands them to come to the lawful Worship: as Matthew: 23. 1. 2. Then spoke
Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, Saying, The scribes etc. Which is
as if he had said do not keep back from the lawful Worship, because they are
but Godless men that go about it; What they Preach according to the word, do
that, and for Their wicked life follow them not in it.

Arg: II. Our Second Argument is taken from the Church in the Old Testament: We
find, for the most part, many Corrupters and Graceless men that were Members of
that Church; Both of the Preachers, and People; And yet we never find that the
Godly did loath the Lawful Worship or keep back from it because of that: Yea we
find, The Lord commands them to join in the lawful Worship; And when they would
Separate, He reproves them for it. We shall make this appear from Three or Four
Times of the Church of the Old Testament. The First is, Moses Time; There was a
great mixture of profane men in the Church at that Time; As ye will find Deuteronomy:
32. (only remember this all along that the Point we are speaking to, is not to
plead for keeping profane men in the Church; We show those should be removed;
But the Question is, when they are kept in, what the Godly should do in that
Case; If they should turn back and leave that Church) I say we find, Deuteronomy: 32.
the Church at that time, for the most part, was not very sound, They corrupted
themselves, Their spots were not the spots of Children; yet we never read that
Moses and the Godly did withdraw from the Commanded Worship, because such were
at it; yea, on the contrair, we find them joining with them, Deuteronomy: 29. Moses
enters into a Covenant with them, Preaches to them, Prays for them: Yea Deuteronomy:
1^. 6. 7. 8. The Lord commands the People to come up to the Public Worship, in
the place where he should choose to place his name, and go about the lawful
Commanded Duties: Tho (doubtless) there would be many wicked men among them. The
Second Time of the Church in the Old Testament, which we take to prove the
Point is, in Joshua's time; there were then great mixtures of wicked men among
them; As appears from Joshua 24. 14. 23. He bids them put away the Strange
Gods, So there were numbers of them corrupt in the way of Worship, and yet we
find in the same Chapter v, 23. That Joshua conveens them altogether to a
Solemn piece of Worship, and enters into a Covenant with God, and Preaches to
them on that Subject: Now surely Joshua would not have done this, if so be the
presence of wicked men did defile the Worship to the Godly: And if it had been
a sin in the Godly to stay with the wicked when about Worship. The Third Time
is in Elijah's time, 1 Kings 18. We find at that time there were some Godly,
Seven Thousand that had not bowed their Knee to Baal; We find also an
Atheistical Multitude in verse 29. The Body of the People Halting betwixt God
and Baal; They would neither say that God was their God, nor that Baal was
their God; and yet Elijah called All together to a solemn Worship, a solemn
Sacrifice; That is gone about verse 36. And there was Preaching and Praying to
that purpose. Now surely, If so be the presence of that Godless Multitude,
which Elijah could not get reformed in a have, had profaned the Worship to the
seven thousand Godly, Elijah would never have been accessory to that sin: A
Fourth Time is from Solomon's time to Hezekiah's: There was great Corruption
tolerated in the Church then; As Worshipping God in the High Places, as is
clear through the whole Tract of the History of that time; And there was much
Prophanity of Life in that time; which also appears from the frequent Sermons
of the Prophets to that purpose; And yet we never read that the Prophets did
separate from the lawful Worship, because of that mixture in the Church: Yea on
the contrary we read they did join with them in every Lawful Duty, 2 Chronicles. 15.
Asa gathers all together, and enters into a Covenant with them: Isaias,
Jeremiah, and the rest Preaches to them, Prays with them. Now if the presence
of Wicked Men had polluted the Service to them, then Isaias his Preaching and
Praying, and joining with the People in Worship should have been defiled to
Him. A Fifth Instance is taken from 1 Samuel 2. 16. Eli's Sons the Priests were
Profane men: whereupon the Godly began to abhor the Worship; And so it is said
in verse 17. Wherefore the sin of the young Men was very great before the Lord,
for Men abhorred the Offering of the Lord. And to speak the Truth, It was
little wonder they did so: For in verse 22. We find the Priests were so Godless
that they did ly with Women that Assembled at the doors of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation: Little wonder then that the Godly did loath and withdraw: But
does the Lord approve of Their withdrawing, notwithstanding of that reason? No,
We see in verse 24. Where Eli the Prophet speaks to his Sons, says he, Nay my
Sons: For it is no good report that I hear; ye make the Lords People to
transgress: Their abhoring the offering of the Lord because of wicked men that
had their hands at it, is called (a transgressing) ye make the Lords people to
transgress. From all which it is clear. That the presence of wicked men does
not defile the Worship to the Godly, providing they come honestly themselves:
And that therefore the wickeds presence should not keep them away.

There is an Exception which our Opposits have against this Argument: And it is
taken from the State of the Church in the Old Testament; They say, That to
separate from the Church in the Old Testament was impossible, there being no
other Church to join with; The Service was then annexed to the Temple; And so
the Case of the Church under the Old Testament, was far different from the Case
under the New. We might answer several things unto this: As First, If so be
that the presence of wicked men does defile the Worship to the Godly, then the
Godly had been bound to withdraw from the Church, even under the Old Testament,
although there had been no other Church to join with: Better to be out of the
Church Visible than to be in it, if we must sin by abiding in it. But to answer
more briefly, we shall find Instances in the New Testament that make Separation
unlawful, as well as in the Old, which Instances shall make up our Third
Argument.

Arg, III. Our Third Argument. In the Church of Corinth there was a Profane
Multitude, 1 Cor, 3, 4. We find there were Schismatics in it. Chap, v. v, 1.
We find Incests were Tolerated, Chap. 6 v, 1. We find there were men of
Contentious Spirits, going to Law before Infidels. Yea in that Chapter, We find
there were some pleading the Lawfulness of Fornication; And Chap, 11. We find
there were Drunkards among them; And such Drunkenness as was most abominable;
For some came Drunk to the Lords Table, v, 21. And Chap, 15. We find there were
some infected with a dangerous Heresy The denying of the Resurrection. And so a
number of very offensive things were among them, But after all, the Apostle.
Tho he reproves them very sharply yet he no where says, Ye that are Godly stay
away from joining in Worship, because of such men's joining; But on the contrair
he approves their coming together to go about the Ordinances, Only reproving
the wrong way they came in. So Chap, 11. v, 18. First of all when ye come
together in the Church I hear there be divisions among you. And v, 20. When you
come together therefore unto one place, etc. He does not reprove their coming
together, but suppones it as a thing Lawful, only he reproves them for their
Divisions. So in the Church of Galatia, There was much corruption among them,
they were Bewitched with Heretical Doctrine O Foolish Galatians who has
Bewitched you, etc. Cap, 3. v, 1, They had begun in the Spirit but were like to
end in the Flesh, v, 3. In the Church of Ephesus were many who had fallen away
from their first Love, Revel, 2, 1. The Church of Sardis, Revel: 3, 1. Did
Tolerate profane persons such as defiled their Garments; And yet we never
read the Spirit of God commanding to Separat from worship because of them:
Indeed he reproves them sharply for their Corruption; For their falling away
from their first love, For Their Tollerating Profane wicked men; But he says
not All ye that are Godly turn your backs upon that Church; Make up a new
Church of your Own; But directly approves their joining together in what was
right. So it is clear that Separation from the Ordinances is no more to be
Tolerated under the New Testament than it was under the Old.

Arg: IV. Our Fourth Argument to prove the point is this: The Sins of wicked
Men only defile the Worship to themselves: Therefore, not to others. We shall
find for this two places of Scripture: Matthew. 22. In the Parable of the Guests
coming into the Kings Supper, there is one that wants a Wedding Garmant verse
12. The Master of the Feast finds him out, and says, Friend, How come Thou
hither, And he was found Speechless. The Master of the Feast says not All ye
Guests are defiled because this man sits with you; As should have been said If
his presence had defiled the Worship to them: But only he reproves the Man
himself; The sin is thine, and thou shall bear the blame of it. The Second
place is, 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself: He says not, He eats and drinks Damnation
to all, but to himself. It would necessarily follow according to this Doctrine,
that he did eat Judgment to all, If so be the presence of the wicked Man did
defile the Ordinance, or make it sinful to the rest that Communicate with him:
And therefore in the preceeeding words it is said, Let a man examine himself,
etc. He says not when ye are coming to the Table, Let everyone of you examine
your Neighbor, Which would necessarily follow, If the presence of the Wicked
Man did defile the Ordinance to the rest, but all he says is, Let every one
examine himself, etc. It Is true the permitting of a wicked person to come to
the Communion is the sin of the Church Guides, but it is not the sin of Fellow
Communicants, seeing he is admitted to Communicate with them: For He only
defiles the Worship to Himself.

Arg. V. Our last Argument to prove this Point is, That from this Doctrine of
our Opposits, it would follow; That the Dignity and Worth of Ordinances did
depend on Instruments, or upon those that are partakers of the Ordinance, If so
be that the sins of the Instruments, or of Fellow-Worshipers did defile the
Worship: Now this is most absurd; The Dignity of Ordinances depends on him
whose they are: The Word of God, however Preached, Is His Word; Its true we are
ready to cast at the Word because of Instruments: But whoever he be that
Preaches, The Word is the Word of God, and worthy to be received: And so the
Sacraments, Whoever they be that join with Me in them, lose not their worth and
efficacy to Me, who am seeking Christ in them, though worthless men have their
hand at them: And the reason is, I do not Communicate with them in what they do
wrong, Let God and Them reckon for that; The root of my Communion is Christ; In
so far as They lay hold on Christ, I Communicate with them; In so far as they
do otherwise, I do not. The wicked man professes Communion with Christ, and
Seals up an Outward Fellowship with the Visible Church: I Communicate with him
in That: But in so far as he does this Hypocritically, I do in as far separate
from him. And this much for the Arguments Confirming the Truth. That the
presence of Wicked men does desile the Ordinances to none but to Themselves.

III. In the next place we come to bring to the touchstone the Arguments they
use against the Truth, we shall shortly propound the most plausible of them and
take them off.

Obj: 1: The First Objection is grounded on the 2 Cor. 6 17. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate etc. This is the stongest of their
Arguments: The Lord commands the Corinthians to come from among them and
Separate; And therefore (say they) when there are wicked men coming together
with the Godly, the Godly ought to separate from them. But to show you the
vanity of the Argument we shall Answer it by reading out the rest of the verse;
For it is clear what the Apostle aims at -- Be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing etc. He bids them only Separate from Sinful
Actions, and not from Lawful Duties. That ye may see yet further the vanity of
this Reason, Know, It was the custom in the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 10. When
Idolaters would invite some of their Christian neighbors, they would go with
them, and eat with them at their Idol Feasts, and they thought they might
lawfully do it, because they knew their Idols were not true Gods, and so by
their eating they intended no worship to the Idol, as these Idolaters did who
did eat with them, but did it only to satisfy their hunger and keep up common
Friendship: Now Paul discharges them from this kind of Communion, and this is
it he points at here, Be separate, Do not meddle with their Idol Feasts because
it was indeed Communion with them in their Idolatry: And so it does not follow,
because Paul bids the Corinthians be separate from Heathens, in doing a thing
sinful, That therefore he forbids Christians to join in a lawful Worship with
the Church of Christ.

Obj. II. Their Second Objection is taken from Rev: 18, 4. And I heard another
voice from heaven, saying, come out of her, my People, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. But this place is
pitifully misapplyed to the purpose; For its evident that the Apostle John is
there speaking of whoorish Rome, and is commanding all Gods People to Separate
from the Antichristian Church; Now let any judge if that be not loose
Reasoning, We are commanded to Separate from Rome, who has overturned the
foundation of Religion, Worships the Creature instead of the Creator, therefore
we are to Separate from Christ's true and Purest Churches and Gods Worship in
them, If so be profane men be kept in them: It is a senseless Consequence.

Obj. III. Their Third Objection against the Truth is taken from 1 Cor: ^. 11.
But now I have written unto you not to keep company etc. Say they, We are
forbidden to eat our ordinary meat with wicked men, and far more we are
forbidden to eat at the Lords Table with them. To this we Answer, That indeed
it is the shame of Christian Churches, and our sin, that Scandalous and
Ignorant Persons are admitted to the Lords Table; But when they are admitted
partly through the neglect of Ministers, and partly through abounding
corruptions, It does not follow that every private Christian is to cast himself
out of the Church, because wicked men are admitted. As to this place here
spoken of, Its true every tender Christian is forbidden to use Familiar Society
with Fornicators, But it is not simply forbidden, as if it were unlawful at all
times to eat with them; For even Paul himself eats with Heathens Act: 27. 35.
So the thing here forbidden is, That the Lords People should not use intimat
Society with wicked men; yet so as when they cannot get it eschewed, It is
lawful both to eat and drink with them; As put the case we could not get it
otherwise, it were lawfu^ for us to eat with them following Paul's practice And
so it follows in the matter of the Lords Table, If it be in Ministers power to
hold them back, if they do it, it is well; If not, it does not follow, that
private Christians who have no power to debarr them, and so cannot get eating
with them eschewed, without neglecting of a duty, are bound to Separate.

Obj. IV. Their Fourth Objection is from 1 Cor: 5. 6 -- Know ye not that a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Scandalous men infect the Church; And
the Church being infected, infects the Worship; and so if I come to the Worship
it is infected to me, and I do sin. Now this is a Consequence far from Paul's
words, a little leaven, says he, leaveneth etc. Therefore cast out the
Incestous man. But he does not say, If he be not put out; cast out your selves.
As for that they say that profane men infect the Worship, It is without
ground: Its true profane men oftimes infect these among whom they live; But
they do not infect the worship: For the way that profane men infect these
among whom they live, is not Physical, As the Pest infects every thing it
touches; but they infect by their evil example: And so a profane man may
infect another man, but by his evil example cannot infect the Worship, because
the Worship is not carried away with evil example, as a man is: And so if I can
keep my self from following their example, the worship is pure and clean to me.

Obj. V. Their last Objection is (say they My coming to the Table with them is
a countenancing of them in their profanation of the holy things: So I partake
with them in their sins, and say Amen to what they do: And therefore better for
me to withdraw. We Answer, this is a plausible Argument to deter People that
are tender, but when tried, it will be found weak; For if so be this Argument
do hold for Separating from the Lords Table, it will conclude also that we
should not hear Preaching with them for our hearing Preaching with them is a
countenancing of them, as well as our coming to the Sacrament with them; And
the wicked man profaneth the holy things in the one, as well as in the other?
And by this it should follow that Jesus Christ should have been polluted; which
were Blasphemy to speak, by His Preaching to Profane multitudes; For in That
He countenanced them. Therefore Secondly, For a more full Answer we say,
Worshipping with them is not a consenting to their sin, except it were in our
power to hold them out, but not otherwise; Thou do say Amen to what they do
profess, that They are serving God, doing the commanded Duty; But not to Their
Hypocritical Way in doing of It: Did Christ say Amen to the Pharisees way of
Hearing although He Preached to Them: So neither do thou: But as is already
said Thou approves of Them in so far as They do the Commanded Duty; But that it
is done Impenitently, Thou by Thy joining in the Worship approves it not. This
for their Objections.

IV. For Use, Our first is this: To regrate that there is so much occasion
given to this Error in the Churches of Christ, We may regrate that there are so
many of the Members of the Church Profane and Wicked; And that People walk not
like Their Holy Calling; We may regrate that the Officers of the Church,
Ministers, and Elders, do not Purge out Scandalous Persons, Do not Labor to
find Them and Censure Them, and debarr Them from Communions; But most of all it
is to be regrated, That many of those, who should Purge out others, Their Life
is such that They deserve to be Purged out as Scandalous Themselves: For this
cause it is that the Lord threatens to Rent the Church; And if He should let
men arise among our selves, under pretense of Pious strictness, to cast at Our
Worship, We behoved to say, Just is the Lord: Although on the other hand it is
no excuse, but a fearful sin to Them, who by Their carriage Rent and undo the
Church, because of some Corruptions that are in it.

Use II. The Second Use is, That ye would, not think all alike Guilty that may
incline to this Error of Separating from Lawful Worship, because of wicked
Men's being admitted to it. It Is true there may be some Piously strict, that
upon the one hand, loath at that which is Good, when they cannot get it but in
wicked Men's company, And upon the other hand, because they cannot live without
the Ordinances, therefore They incline to make up a Little Church of Good Men of
Their Own choice: By which means the Devil takes advantage of Their zeal to
make them dishonor God by running to the other extreme: Now although the Humor
of such should not be given way to, yet those who incline this way from a
desire of strictness are much to be Pitied. But on the other hand, we are not
to think so of the Ringleaders of this Error; It has been found by experience
that such have been more carried on by a conceit of their Own Holiness, than
any true Love to Holiness it self; It has been usually found in Heady men who
had a mind to make a Rupture in the Church, that this has been the Method they
used to walk in, To cry up Holiness in themselves, and to cry down all who
differed from them, as untender: That so they might carry all with them at
last; At least to Rent and divide the Church: To such we will say nothing, but
Christ's Curse, and the Churches for Renting her bowels, will fall on Them.

But unto the other we will speak something, that is, To those who are piously
Strict and really loath at the good Service of God, because such Persons are at
it who should not be there. To those I shall say; First, Know what it your
Duty. And Secondly, What is not your Duty in reference to Profane Men;
Ofttimes we mistake our Duty and leap over it, to what is not our Duty: Now
your Duty in reference to profane Men, Is not to take your hands from the
Ordinance, because Their hands are at it; To turn your backs on your Duty
because Profane Men join with you in it; It will be but a small excuse to
pretend when God reckons with you, when the Lord will say, What made you
neglect such a Duty? to say. Lord I grant it was my Duty, but I could not,
because such Men were at it: Therefore ye should know your Duty in reference to
those, and it is this, In the place where ye live, when ye see a fault
committed, ye should tell the guilty persons of it; If the Fault be open, and a
Fault ye can get proven, ye ought to delate it to those who have power to
Censure them, If so be they may be gained by this mean; Or if not, ye have done
your Duty: Or if the Church do their Duty in casting out the Obstinate, then ye
have your intent: But if so be that notwithstanding ye have done your Duty, yet
the Church do not Theirs, in purging the House of God: In this case, ye are to
regrate the matter to God, to mourn for it, ye are to testify that ye do not
approve their way, and in so doing ye have done your Duty, and may have peace:
For the presence of the wicked Man makes not the work sinful in it self to you,
He eats and drinks Damnation to himself, And not to you; His presence does not
make the Worship sinful to thee; And so it looses thee not from they obligation
to join in the Worship: For if that were true, That the presence of wicked Men
did defile the Worship to Thee, then Christians would be in a very hard
condition: For there was never a Church so pure, but there were some admitted
to it, whom a Man truly tender would think should not be there; There was never
a Church so pure but a tender Man zealously strict would find some to
challenge; And so according to that Doctrine there should be no Church that a
tender Christian could join with; And so he should be forced to serve God apart
and by himself alone: And this has been the Separatists way, They have
Separated from one Church to another, till at last they could get none to join
with; And so turned Seekers, that is, A Sect who think there are None they can
join with; And therefore, they cast off all Public Duties, and serve God by
themselves alone; Because they can see none so Holy as themselves. And
therefore ye would suspect Zeal when joined with Error; And fear Error most
when it is covered over with Zeal: For Error is never so dangerous, as when it
gets on the mask of Zeal, It being then most cruel and most impudent: People
then have no will to meddle with it, lest they should seem to be Enemies to True
Piety; And therefore because it is suffered and born with, it turns impudent
until it undo all.

I only give One word to guard this, and so I shall end. There is not one Error
that we refute, but if not guarded, Profane Men may abuse it, and so may they
This, to cast at those who are piously strict, though in an orderly way: And
therefore, We say it is every Christians Duty to walk tenderly, and to be so
strict toward others, as God requires of him. The thing we have Refuted as an
Error is only this, That because a Man cannot get all Duties gone about by All,
so strictly as God commands; That therefore he will Separate from altogether:
But withal we did show, That not only a Man should be strict on himself (where
right strictness will always begin) but also do what in him lies, according to
his Duty and Calling, That the Ordinances of God may be kept pure by others.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached before the SYNOD AT GLASGOW. APRIL, 5th. 1653.
The first SERMON.
1 Corinthians. 1. 10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among
you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment.
THIS Text begins a new Purpose, so it is not necessary to speak much for
clearing of the Dependence and Cohesion: Only ye would know somewhat of the
State of this Church at the time when this Epistle was written, which will help
us not a little to take up the Occasion and Scope of the Words read. Paul
having planted a Church at Corinth, was after driven from thence by the sury of
the Jews, as appears from Acts 18. 12. In whose absence, partly through the
malice of Satan, partly through the subtilty of false Apostles, the Church was
rent in Factions; some taking part with one Pastor and some with another,
according to the diverse estimation they held them in, for their Humane
Eloquence, great Knowledge, and other parts. The Church being thus rent, the
Apostle addresseth himself timously to the Cure of this so Great an Evil: But
because he was almost out of request with the most part of that People; tho as
he himself, Chap. 4. v. 15. declares, he had begotten them in Christ Jesus
through the Gospel; Therefore as a skilled Physician being to administer a
bitter Potion, he suggereth the brim of the Cup, by showing, That whatever was
Their respect to him, yet his Affection did remain the same toward them; And
this he insisteth on from the beginning to the tenth Verse, wherein he falls
upon the Sore he intends to Cure, to wit, Their Factions and Schism's,
Obtesting them gravly in the Name of Jesus Christ, That they would set about
the Healing of these woeful Rents, before they should turn to worse.

In the Words there are two things, 1, A Duty to which they are exhorted. 2.
Some Arguments moving them to set about this Duty. The Duty is last in order of
the Words, and propounded in three Sentences: 1. That ye all speak the same
thing. 2. That there be no Divisions among you. 3. That ye be perfectly joined
together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. The Duty pressed in all
these may be taken up in two. 1. An Evil they were to Eschew. 2. A Good which
they were to Follow. The Evil to be Eschewed is in the second Sentence, to wit,
That there be no Divisions or (as it is in the Original) Schism's among you. I
shall not enter to speak of the nature of Schism, or how it differs from
Heresy; It is sufficient for the opening up of the Text, to know what Divisions
or Schisms the Apostle means by here: And that is known from the following
Verse, to wit, Their Factious sidings in extolling One Minister, and debasing
Another, with many fruitless Janglings and other bad consequences following
thereupon, whereof doubtless this was One, The engaging of the Ministers
themselves in Parties for upholding their Dependants, So Verse 12. -- Every one
of you says I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas -- One says Paul
is best, let us follow him: Another says, Nay, but Apollos is best, we'll
follow him: A third says, Cephas is better than them both, I Will follow none of
them: Now away with these fruitless Contests says he.

In the next place. There is the Good to be Followed, and that is threefold, in
opposition to three sorts of Evils which usually accompany Schism in a Church.

The first Evil accompanying Schism, is, Flat Contradiction, first among
Ministers, and next among People; when not only their Opinions do differ, but
they are so hot upon the Business, that at all occasions they proclaim their
Differences* In opposition to this, he exhorts them To speak the same thing,
that is, They would beware of Contradictions in a matter of so small
importance; Wherein they agreed, they would speak to that; Wherein they
differed, they would forbear others, spending their time and parts upon more
edifying purpose.

The second Evil accompanying Schism in a Church, is, Renting of Affections,
When the Members of one Body turn cold-rife one toward another and their
Affection dies: In opoosition to this Evil he exhorts them to be Joined
together in the same Mind, or the same Affection. It Is true, the Word here
rendered Mind, is used indifferently for the whole Faculties of the Soul, as the
Understanding, Will, and Affections; But the Understanding being spoken to
under the Word Judgment, which follows; We think with some of the best
Interpreters, That by the Mind here is meaned the Affections: So the thing he
presses in the second Place, is, That not only they would forbear others in
the matter of their Public Expressions, but also would labor to blow at the
Coal of their almost dying Affections

The third Evil accompanying a Schism, is, Difference of Judgment; And in
opposition to this, he exhorts them to be Perfectly joined in the same
Judgment. The meaning is, They would labor to remove the Root of the
Difference by coming to One Judgment: Not as if the Apostle had been careless
what Judgment they had been of, providing they had been One; No, the one part
of every Contradiction is Truth, and there is no Truth which the Apostle would
have denied for Peace.

This for the Duty pressed: Next there are some Arguments persuading to this
Duty. As 1. There is the Apostles Insinuation, partly in his Affectionate
Exhortation, I beseech you, partly in his lovely Compellation, Brethren. 2.
There is his Grave Obtestation -- By the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ -- That
is to say, as the Name of Christ is dear to you, which ye profess so much
respect unto, so set about the Cure of these Factions and Fractious Sidings and
Schisms, by which His Name suffers so much. There is a third Argument to
enforce this Duty, in the words perfectly joined, whereby the Apostle hints at
the great Evil the Church was under by the present Schism, and the great good
they should attain to by the removal of it. The word in the Original is
borrowed from the Office of Surgeons, and that part of it which consists in
the mending of broken Bones, and setting in joint of Dislocated Members: So it
imports 1. That through occasion of the Schism they were put all out of joint:
All the Members of the Church were Dislocated, and therefore unfit, so long as
they remained in that case, for doing of any good Office to the Body. 2. It
imports, that their following of his Advice for removing of the Schism, would
set every Member of the Body in it is own place, and so enable the Body for
going about actions profitable unto it self, which now (the whole Members being
out of joint) it could not do. This

This much for opening up the meaning of the Words. Diverse points of Truth,
arising from the several branches of the Text, might here be handled; but I
intend to insist upon One arising from the scope which will comprehended the
most part of the rest; It is this, Unity in the Church, is a thing much to be
labored for and sought after; and Division and Schism in a Church, is much to
be eschewed.

In prosecuting this Doctrine I shall first distinguish Union, That we may know
what Union is meaned. 2. I shall confirm the point. 1. By Scripture. 2. By
Reason, 3. I shall apply the Doctrine for our Use.

First then, To know what Union the Text and Doctrine speaks of: It Is fit you
know, That there are several sorts of Union. 1. There is an Union of the Church
Invisible, the tie and bond whereof is Inward Graces: All the Members of the
Church Invisible are United to Christ the Head by Faith, and one to another by
Love. This is not the Union here meaned, The Text speaks of a Visible Union of
the Church Visible, In Opposition to a Visible Rent and Schism.

Secondly, There is an Union of the Church Visible, and of it is Members among
themselves. This again is twofold; The first is That Union, which is necessary
to the Being of a Church, and the Being of a Member: So that a Church cannot be
a Church, nor a Man a Member of the Visible Church without it: Wherein this
Union consists, is Controverted betwixt Us and the Independants. But the
Doctrine means not of This Union either; So we insist not on it. The Union
pressed in the Text, is such, that the Church at Corinth for the time did want,
and yet remained a Church. The Union therefore here meaned is, A second sort of
Union belonging to the Visible Church: To wit, That which is necessary to the
Well-being of a Church; without the which tho a Church remain a Church, yet she
losseth much of her outward Beauty, her Authority is much weakened, her great
work, which is the edification of her self in Love ( Ephesians. 4. 13.) is much
retarded: She remains a Church, but not such a Church as is described, Cant. 6.
10. Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners? A divided Church is not such a
Church.

But for further understanding of the Union here pressed, ye would know that
this Union which is necessary to the Well-being of a Church is Threefold. 1.
There is an Union in Judgment, when there is no considerable Difference among
the Members of the Church, in the matter of Opinion; When all Think the same
thing. And this is here pressed, Be prefectly joined in one Judgment. 2. There
is an Union in Heart and Affections spoken of Act. 4. 32. The multitude of them
that believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul. And this Union is also here
pressed, -- Be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, or in Love and
Affection, as we showed in the opening up of the Words. 3. There is an Union in
Practice, and that is, when whatever Difference there is in Judgment, yet it is
not openly proclaimed: Public Contradictions and Eristick Debates are
eschewed, and an unanimous joint practice in these things, wherein there is
Agreement, is followed. And this Union is also pressed in the Text, I beseech
you -- that ye all speak the same thing. So it is clear the Text means all these
three sorts of Union, the Doctrine intends them All, and as might be made
evident, other Scriptures press them All. Only this, we would know, the Order
wherein they are pressed, to wit, So as every Breach in the Former, is not to
make a Breach in the Latter; Every Difference in Judgment, is not to make a
Rent in Heart or Affection; Nor, tho a Rent be in both, does it infer
necessarly a Divided Practice, at least in these things wherein there is
Agreement: And for that, the Scripture is clear, especially Philipp. 3. 15, 16
where v. 15 the Apostle supposes difference of Judgment among the
Philippians, as to the point he is there speaking of* and subjoineth for matter
of Practice, v. 16. Nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained, let us
walk by the same Rule, That is to say, Tho we cannot agree in all things, yet
let us eschew the prolaiming of Our Differences, by Our contrary Practices.

This much for the first thing, to wit, What Union the Doctrine presses. It is
an Union necessary to the Well-being of the Visible Church, particularly, an
Union in Judgment, an Union in Affection, an Union in Practice: An Union all
these ways is to be sought for and labored after, yet so as, if we cannot
attain to Union in the Former, we are yet still to endeavor it in the Latter.

For Confirmation of this Truth we might cite several Scriptures. 1. These
wherein this Union is promised to the Church, and that as a rich Covenant
Blessing, such as Jer. 32. 39. -- I will give them one Heart, and one way that
they may fear Me for ever -- The like is in Ezekiel. 37. 22. 2. These Scriptures
wherein this Union is highly commended: Especially Ps. 133. 1. Behold how good
and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity -- and so
through the whole. 3. These Scriptures which hold out the Mediator's Prayer to
the Father for this Union, Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as Thou
Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us -- and so v.
23. 4. Those Scriptures where this Union is expressly enjoined and pressed
whereof there are many; Such as Philipp. 2. 1, 2, 3. If there be -- any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any Bowels and Mercies; Fulfill ye My Joy, that ye be like minded, having the
same Love, being of one accord, of one mind. And 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally
Brethren, farewell -- be of one mind, live in peace --. And lastly, these
Scriptures where Division contrary to Unity is condemned, as Romans 16. 17. -- I
beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, and avoid
them.

But for further Confirmation of this Truth, we shall in the next place, bring
foreward some Reasons, concluding the equity and necessity, of seeking after,
and entertaining of Unity in the Church, which shall also serve as motives to
the Duty.

Reason 1. Union furthers Edification: So Ephesians. 4. 3. Union is pressed; And One
Fruit among many to be reaped hereby, is (v. 12.) the edifying of the Body of
Christ. And as Unity furthers Edification, so Division marreth it; Divisions in
a Church, tho about small things, yet if stiffly mantain'd, prove a great
stumbling Block to the Weak; they are put to doubt all Truths, because Men
gracious and learned doubt of some: So Division not only marreth progress in
the building, but strikes at the very foundation of what is already built.

Reas. 2. Divisions in a Church make the Ministers contemptible: Of all Men
Ministers suffer most this way, because usually they are most active in
beginning and upholding the Division; and usually even these who have Truth for
them, suffer much (if not most) this way: Paul, tho an Apostle, and a Man for
Truth, yet he lost much of the former esteem he had amongst the Corinthians,
though once they would have plucked out their Eyes for him, yet through the
Division, their Distemper grew to such an hight, that he was looked on as
Contemptible -- rude in speech -- yea A Fool, and what not? as appears from 2
Cor: 10. 10. Chapter 11. 6, 16.

Reas. 3. The Essential Unity of the Church, and the many things wherein a
Church agrees that way, should enforce this Union. The Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.
draws a strong Argument for Unity and Peace in the Church, from this Ground.
The Duty is propounded v. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace. And v. 4, 5, 6. it is pressed by this Argument, There is on
Body, and one Spirit, -- One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; One God and Father
of all* -- Here are many Ones together in two or three lines, as if he had
said, What a shame is it for you who are so many ways One, to rent in pieces
for a thing of so small moment.

Reas. 4. Divisions in a Church turn away every Man's Eye from his main Task; I
mean from the joint opposing of Satan's main Design, to be wrangling one with
another: It Is Satan's Policy when he intends to bear down Truth in a Church, to
set those who should oppose him most, by the Ears about smaller things, that so
he may carry his point with less difficulty; herein making use of Matchiavils
(or rather his own) Principle divide and impera, Divide and Carry. It Is often
seen that the nearer those who differ come to one another, they drive on their
point against others with the greater Animosity and Eagerness; the Jews and
Samaritans were at greater variance than Jews and Heathens: And the Reason is
this, The less the Difference is, they have the more hopes to bring others to
their mind, hence their mutual On-setts are more furious, and their
Disappointments the more bitter, the higher they were in their hopes; and in
the mean time while they mind nothing so much as to bear down one another,
Satan comes good speed in bearing down of Truth and Them and All.

Reas. 5. Union when once lost in a Church, is hardly ever again attained: We
read Act. 15. 39. that Paul and Barnabas parted, but we hear nothing of their
meeting again. And Church History shows us, That Schisms in a Church for
almost just nothing have continued incureable for some Generations, until not
only the Authors and Ringleaders of the Schism, but also their Disciples were
removed by Death. Osiand. Gent. 4.

Reas. 6. When a Rent is made in a Church, as it is hardly curable, so it still
grows wider: It is easier to know whereabout a Rent begins, than whereat it
will end. The greatest of Church Divisions (some of them at least) have been
observed to have had but small Beginnings, hence is that commonly received
Maxim Omne Schisma desinit in haresin. The Faction of the Donatists at first
made but a Schism separating from the Communion of the Church, upon pretense of
some faulty Officers and mixed Communions, but it was not long until they fell
into several Heresies.

The Doctrine being thus Explained and Confirmed, from Scripture* and Reason, I
shall now apply it to Use. Our first Use is for Refutation. The Doctrine
refutes, at least lays a just odium upon; the Doctrine of Separation, and
that Way which is called Independent or Congregational, in so far as it is made
up of such Principles, as lay a Foundation for the perpetual Renting of the
Church: Of which Principles I shall reckon Four.

The First is, That Principle, whereby They maintain the Lawfulness of
gathering Churches, out of Churches, acknowledged by themselves to be True
Churches. A most dividing Principle, in so far as it gives way for every Man to
Separate from his Own, and to join himself with another Church supposed Purer,
with contempt of the former Congregation. To gather Churches out of Churches,
is the way to destroy, but not to heal diseased Churches; It is to destroy many
Churches for making up of One, as if one going about the Cure of a Natural Body
should cut off and take out all the sound Members, and leave the rotten and
diseased Members, either to Cure one another or to perish. A strange and
desperate way of Cure.

A Second Dividing Principle in that Way, is, The Rule according to which they
will have Ecclesiastic Judgment passed upon their Church Members, to wit,
Conviction of their Inward good Estate, which Rule being variable and
uncertain, some will judge one way, some another, according as they are more or
less inclined to Charity; yea the same Man at several times, will have a
various Judgment of the Inward State of another, according as the Presumptions
and Probabilities, (by which only he is led to judge of what is within,) are
more fully or sparingly represented: Hence there is a Seed of Breach upon
Breach: But God has not left his Church in the matter of Authoritative judging
to walk by such uncertain Rules.

A Third Dividing Principle in the Independent Way is this, That all Church
Power is solely in a Particular Congregation. Hence if a Particular
Congregation go wrong, tho but made up of seven Persons (which is a competent
number with them) there is no Authoritative Mean in all the Churches of the
World to reclaim them. This must needs open a Door to as many Divisions as
there are Churches.

A Fourth Dividing Principle is, That there is not a Catholic Visible Church,
yea no Church Visible, but a Particular Congregation; and another Principle
they hold which follows upon this, to wit, That a Minister can exerce no Acts
as a Minister, to any but those of his own Flock. Hence 1. There can be no
Communion of Churches as Churches, there remaine^h only a Communion of Members:
There can be no Church Act from one Church, or many toward another. The
Results and Determinations of the most Famous Synods, made up of never so many
Churches, are to be looked upon but as the Actings of so many private
Christians. Yea, 2. Hence it will follow that there can be no Communion amongst
Members of several Congregations, in public Church Ordinances, as in hearing
the Word jointly from a sent Minister, in Receiving the Seals together; For
according to this Principle a Minister cannot Authoritatively Preach, nor in
any respect Administer Baptism or the Lords Supper unto any, though never so
Gracious, except to those of his own Flock; no not tho they be occasionally
present when he is dispensing these Ordinances unto his Own: Which Consequence
is expressly granted by some of the chief of that Persuasion. So it is a
Principle which destroys all Communion of Churches and Members; and therefore
inconsistent with Union.

Several such like Principles in That Way might be reckoned out, Concerning
which the Doctrine warrandeth us to say this much; If Unity be so necessary,
and so much to be sought after, then such Dividing Principles cannot be of God.

Our Second Use is for Direction: If Unity be so necessary, and so much to be
labored for, then we are to bewail that we our selves are so far, and every
day a step further from it: Our Divisions grow I fear all the three ways, and
in all ranks; Our Heads are divided, our Tongues divided, yea and our Hearts
divided, Synods are divided, Presbyteries are divided, Congregations divided:
Ministers divided, People divided; yea, and in some places Families divided:
Husband and Wife, Father and Son, Mother and Daughter, Master and Servant, yea
and all divided. We are as Madmen, every one eating the flesh of his own Arm.
Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim Manasseh: And they together against Judah -- An
Evil never enough lamented, and the more to be lamented that there is no
appearance how it shall be helped. There are many things may make us look upon
the present Division as our saddest Affliction and greatest Weight: I shall
reckon Six things.

1. The many particular Evils which upon an exact search, it will be found Our
Divisions have brought upon Peoples own Spirits. How much of our precious time
is spent in vain jangling, by which our Heart cannot but ^e made worse? Many, I
fear too too many so taken up with their Heads that they forget their Hearts;
the sweetness and profit of mutual converse and fellowship is much marred; Our
mutual freedom and benefit that way much impaired: Our Peace with God by our
hot Debates* untender Expressions, and bitter and unnecessary Reflections of
times brangled and shaken.

A Second Thing that may make Us look on our Present Divisions as our great
Weight, is, The name of Praise which this Church has had for Unity in times
bypast amongst the Reformed Churches. In the Harmony of Confessions, the
Preface to the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, makes mention of
this as a rare Privilege of This Church beyond many, and that which makes Her
very Name Famous among Churches abroad, That for the space almost of Sixty
Years She had keep'd Unity with Purity without either Schism or Heresy. Now if
Unity has been formerly this Church's Praise, how sad and weighty is it, and
how woeful men are we, that this Breach should be under our Hand?

A Third Thing to make our present Division weighty is, That it is the greatest
Weight which Gods People up and down the Land lies under, it is a Weight beyond
all other Weights and Sufferings: And if it be their Weight, it ought for many
Reasons to be much more ours.

Fourthly, Our Divisions, and Courses taken for carrying them on, has given a
deeper Inward Wound, to the Government of Christ's House than all the Outward
Power of the World could have done The leading of us by pairs to a Stake for
our adhering to the Government and Constitution of our Mother Church, our
Imprisonment, Banishment, the laying of Congregations desolate for that Cause,
could not have shaken the minds of many, in relation to these Truths, so much
as our own Divisions and Practices following thereupon have done. An Inward
Disease is more dangerous, and weakeneth more than Outward Blows.

Fifthly, Our Division may and ought to be the more weighty, the more of
Judgment is in it: And certainly there is much of Wrath and Judgment in it.
It is a judicial stroke; For all see it is Evil, the most part are weary of it,
and yet cannot fall upon the right way for putting an end to it: Yea, no course
hitherto essayed for Union, but it has proved an hightning of our Division;
And so it will until it come to that hight which God in His just Judgment will
have it at; However it is clear that Wrath is in it, much of Judgment is in it,
and that should make it weighty: We side one against another, and God is siding
against us both.

Sixthly, This should make our Division have a particular Weight with us in
this Synod, That we drink most of its bitter Fruits: We are the Stage whereon
this cruel Dividing Spirit acts its Game most: None in time past so United as
We, but none now so Divided; And even this may give Us sad thoughts of our
Accession to the beginning and Fomenting of this woeful Rent.

Our Third Use is of Direction also following upon the former, If Union be such
a good; if Division such an evil; And if our Divisions be so much to be
bewailed; Then we ought to have some thoughts toward the making up of our
breach* there ought to be some guardings against these evils which may follow
upon it, until it be made up.

The Prosecuting of this Use, as it is the most part of our Work, so it is the
most difficult; and I fear also, considering our present Distempers, and deep
Engagements lying on every one almost to his Own Way, that for the time it
shall be but Fruitless: Yet being led to it by the word of Truth, and not
knowing when the Lord may make it have it is own Fruits, whether now or
afterward, I shall with the Lords help adventure on it. And therefore in
pressing this Use, I shall speak to three things. 1. I shall show what things I
conceive as necessary to be eyed by us while we aim at Union, if so we would
have Our aim's effectual. 2. Because a Complete Union is not soon to be
expected, I shall give some Directions for the Management of Our Differences,
so as the Church of Christ may have the less hurt by them at least. Lastly, I
shall propound some Considerations to People, for preventing of stumbling, and
making Shipwreck upon our Divisions.

As to the First, I shall mention Six things we should carry alongs with us
while we aim at Union. Unto all which I premit One General, as tending to give
Life to all the rest, without which all our Endeavors for Union, though
otherwise never so regular, though guided with never so much Prudence, though
prosecuted with never so much zeal, will prove ineffectual; and it is this: That
both Ministers and People should be more in seeking after God's Face: So long
as we remain at a distance from him, no wonder we grope as Blind-men in the
dark, and cannot come nigh one to another: It Is granted by all, That Jesus
Christ has much withdrawn from the Spirits of his People: There is not so much
of Life conveyed by Preaching, not such access granted in Prayer; no such
delight in Means; no such joy in his presence; This is granted by all and in a
manner regrated by all, but lamented by few; And fewer yet make it their work
to have the Lord returning and showing himself as sometimes he has done: And
until this be, we can look for the less success of any attempts made for the
removal of this our sore stroke: But if God would return, It were then easy
work: One glimpse of him, filling the House with his Glory, would scatter the
Clouds of mutual Jealousies, make us, as men ashamed, steal from all our
Dividing Principles; would put to silence all our turbulent Distempers; and
make us blush at our proud and selfish Animosities: O! for more of God, then
would all be well. But I come to the particulars to be eyed by us while we aim
at Union.

First, It is not to be expected that Our Union will begin at our Uniting in
Judgment, In that Question about which our unhappy Differences began. It was
the Judgment of some from the beginning, that the standing at a distance in
other things, until we should be united in That, should put Us at a further
distance, even in That. Our Union in Practice first, will be the shortest cut
to bring us unto Union of Judgment about that Question, if ever we shall come
to it at all. Hence public Debatings before the People, and such as tend to
make others odious who are not of our Way, is not the way for Union. Such work
irritateth, but convinces not. It Is true no Truth may be quit for Union, No,
not the least, Quisquil^a veritat^^ praetiosissima, The very refuse of Truth is
most precious: Yet that the positive asserting of some Truths may be forborne
for Peace's sake, I believe is granted by All, and there is good reason for it:
Only there is one exception here necessary, to wit, when Truth is impugned,
then there is a necessity to speak for it, at least till there be such a
Testimony given to that Opposed Truth, as may ^e rested upon. And in this Case
some may be made unwillingly to speak, as the Apostle Paul was once in defense
of his own Estimation, 2 Cor. 12. 11. I am become a fool in glorying, ye have
compelled me: for I ought to have been commended of you: -- As if he should
say, God knows, I have no more delight to speak of this subject, than ye have
to hear me, but your Indiscretion forces me to it.

A Second thing to be carried along with us, while we aim at Union, is, no
union of this kind of which the Doctrine speaks, can be expected in the Church,
except there be an Union in one Supreme Representative; land that such an one
whose Authority we may stand under for the present. As it is in the Civil
State, so is it in the Church as to this purpose, No Union can be there, as of
one actually incorporate Body, except it be under one and the same Supreme
Rulers: So is it in the Church, So long as there is no agreement about One and
the same Supreme Representative, under whose Authority we may stand for the
present, But one part stands for it is Authority, another is contrary unto it,
or setting up another against it, In this case the matter is clear, there is no
complete Union but a fixed Schism, or at the best a strong tendency unto it.

A Third thing to be eyed is, If so Our Union must be under one Supreme
Representative, then such ways of Union will do no good as carry not alongs the
Body: An Union if not with the Body, instead of healing, does widen the Rent. A
resolution or desire to unite with a few not caring for the rest, will not
produce an union, I mean of the Church, although it may be of a stronger Party in
the Church. These few would possibly as gladly unite as others would have them,
if it were not evidently a strengthening of the Breach.

Fourthly, Yet a Part ought to labor with the Body for condescending, as low
as warrantably can be, for Peace's sake: Only a Caveat must be here, They are
so to deal with the Body to condescend for Union, as to beware of making a new
Rupture in the Body upon their not granting: For that were in a desperate way
to make a new Rent, because others will not take Our way for removing of the
Old.

Fifthly, If we desire an hearty cordial Union, it would be endeavored without
rubbing upon the Credit. 1. Of Persons. 2. Of Parties. 3. Of Ordinances. If the
Credit of all can be held up, it is well. He is no friend to Union that would
endeavor the contrair: But if some must suffer, Love to the Public and Zeal
for God, will teach That the former is to yield to the latter, viz. Persons to
Parties, and the Credit both of Persons and Parties, yea, and of both Parties
themselves, if need be, are to stoop for upholding the Authority of Divine
Ordinances. A little of this Self-denial would do much good: But how little of it
is there to be found?

Sixthly, Dividing Principles and such as tend of their own nature to obstruct
Union, should be abandoned: There is One Principle often spoken of by some, and
now made more public, which if maintained, in Our judgment will close the door
upon Union in have, to wit, That it is unlawful to sit in an Assembly with
those, who have enacted persecution against the Godly. And this in the sense of
the Propounders, and as it is expressly, tho injuriously, applied by them, is as
much as to say, It is unlawful to join in any Assembly made up for the most
part of those who acted in and approved of Our late Controverted Assemblies:
Now if it be unlawful to join in an Assembly made up for the most part of such,
why not also unlawful to join in a Synod or in a Presbytry likewise made up of
such, yea and to join at a Communion Table where the most part are such. And
indeed some (of the People chiefly) draw out their Principle to this full
length. A Principle which (to say no worse of it) strikes at the very throat
of Peace; and, if stood to, makes it desperate; and so I hope is, and will be
disowned by all who cordially pretend to Peace and Union in the Church.

These I conceive and many more should be eyed by Us in Our aiming at Union, if
we would have Our endeavors effectual: But because a Complete Union in an
ordinary way is not to be so soon expected, I shall in the next place give Two
Directions for managing our Differences; So as the Church of Christ may have
less hurt by them at least.

The first Direction is, That we ought to guard against these Tentations, which
Our Standing Division may readily make way for, Whereof I shall mention Three.

The First Tentation is this, An oversight of every other fault almost, whether
in Ministers or Professors, providing they be true to the Party. A Party is a
dangerous thing, and in nothing more dangerous than in this, That it drives
men, if not all the more tender, to take fidelity unto the Party to be the
prime, if not the only (...) and badge of honesty, and enclines them to look on
all other things, whether Corrupt Principles, or loose Practices, as excusable
Infirmities. A woeful Tentation! and destructive both to Truth and Piety; And
therefore ought so much the more to be guarded against on both hands,

A Second Tentation is, The secret wishing after, and rejoicing in the Slips
one of another. An Evil so woeful that David complains to God of it even in his
avowed Enemies, Ps. 38. 16. -- When my Foot slippeth, they magnify themselves
against me. And Jeremiah complains of it in his false Friends, Chapter 20. v. 10.
They -- watched for my halting. And yet an Evil that even Good men, if once
engaged in Parties, will have a Battle with,

A Third Tentation upon Our standing Divided, and which is also to be guarded
against, is, A bending of Our selves to the outmost of Light, and possibly
beyond it, for strengthening of our selves, to the doing of these things, in
relation to these who now Rule, which not long since we would have abhorred
both in our selves and others. It is very possible that as Gifts blind the Eyes
of the Wise, Exodus 23. So the seeming advantage unto that which we conceive
Truth, may draw out somewhat like an Approbation to such like Work, from those
of our own Judgment, and if these do approve, it is the less matter (think we)
that others do disapprove: But we ought to remember there are others to sift
our Actions: Foreign Churches abroad, our own Conscience, being sober and
settled, and above all God the Judge of All.

A Second Direction for managing our Differences, is, That we ought not to be
so taken up with others as to take our Eye off from guarding against that which
is Satan's main design against the Church of Christ at this time. Satan does as
a subtle Warrior labor to raise a Mutiny among the Forces which should
oppose him, that while they are wrangling one with another, he may carry his
Point, without stroke of Sword.

Being to insist a little on this Direction, I shall first speak to what I
conceive to be Satan's main design against the Church at this time. 2, I shall
give some Directions to manage our Differences, So, as not to further this his
main design, nor yet to be short-coming in our Duty against it.

And First, For taking up what is Satan's great Design, we shall in a word or
two lay before you a wonderful Contexture, as it were of God's Wisdom and
Satan's Malice, since the first beginnings of the Christian Church even until
now. There is no Truth almost but Satan's Malice has set it self in some one
Age of the Church or other, to bear it down; And God's Wisdom has still
overshot Satan, making use of his Malice in opposing Truth, for the further
clearing of that Truth, which he intends most to obscure and darken. Satan's
first design in the first Ages of the Christian Church was to beat down that
great Fundamental Truth of Christ's Divinity: But after long debate this Truth
was fully cleared by the means of several Worthies, whose Spirits the Lord
stirred up in these Ages to mantain That so much opposed Truth: Satan therefore
being beat off this strong Fort of Christianity retired a little, and labored
next to bear down the Truth of Christ's Humanity: But the Truth hereof, the more
it was opposed, growing the brighter, The Lord making Light break up
convincingly in the midst of Hot Debates; Satan retired a little further yet,
and bent his whole force in the following Ages against the Unity of Christ's
Person: And next against the Distinction of his Natures.

But Satan not prevailing this Way either, he set himself to undermine Christ
Jesus in all His Offices. 1. By setting up the Infallibility of Popes and
Councils against His Prophetical Office. 2. The Doctrine of Merit in the matter
of Justification against His Priestly Office. 3. The Doctrine of Free Will and
power of it in Man's Conversion to God, against the Inward part of His Kingly
Office. And for the Outward part of it, he set himself to wrest the Scepter of
Christ's Government from His own Office-bearers, and put it in the Hands of
Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops. But after long Contest, Truth is
now abundantly cleared and confirmed in all these. Thus, as One says, the
Lord Jesus has been content to dispute His Ground by Inches with the Devil,
until almost He has beat him out of all; only Satan has no will to quit it
so, it seems to us he is now giving his last and sorest Onset; on which in a
desperate way he is to venture all; wherein his design is evident, to cast all
in a Confusion. First, By trampling under foot the Outward Court of God's
House, I mean the Constitution of His Church Visible, by the Doctrine of
Renting and Separation; And next to deprive the Catholic Church Visible, and
all Her considerable Members, of all Government, by the Doctrine of
Independancy, which confineth the whole Power of the Keys within the narrow
circuit of a Particular Congregation; whereby all the Particular Churches are
left as so many small Boats in a storm, to dash one against another, having no
Intrinsical authoritative Mean to make them steer an even Course without
rushing one upon another. Thus Satan aims to cast all in confusion, that he
may undo all. What in former Ages he could not do in destroying Gospel Truths
by Piecemeal and one by one, he intends now to do it by whole sale, and all at
once; For if once the bottom of the Ship be split, and the Rudder broken, the
precious Ware contained in it, can hardly be preserved. Now that Satan's main
design is to deface these Truths which are about the Constitution and
Government of the Visible Church, that thereby all may be covered with
Confusion, appears, In that not only the method God has hitherto kept,
does point at it; There being few other Points of Truth to clear, but also the
thing speaks for it self, the main speat of the Errors of the time running
directly contrary to these; So that certainly, as God intends to clear Truth in
these, so it is not the least part of Satan's main design against the Church of
Christ at this time to obscure Truth in these.

This then being Satan's design, I shall in the next place give some Directions
how to manage our Differences so, as not to further this main design, nor yet
be short coming in our Duty against it; Of which Directions I shall reckon
Three.

First, We ought to examine Opinions and Practices, even tho by us conceived
just and lawful, How far they may contribute for furtherance of that Design;
and in that respect should be more circumspect and sparing at least in meddling
with them. Thus the Apostle Paul Gal. 2. 3. would not Circumcise Titus, tho
Circumcision at that time was a thing Lawful, as appears from his Circumcising
of Timothy, Act. 16. 3. much about the same time, and yet he would not
Circumcise Titus: The reason is v. 4. There were False Brethren present; who
would have taken advantage of That his Practice, to confirm themselves in their
opposition to that Truth, which Satan intended most to bear down at that time;
to wit, The freedom of the Christian Church from the yoke of Mosaical
Ceremonies: therefore he thinks himself bound to abstain from that practice,
tho in it self Lawful, and which in some other cases would have been necessary:
And that lest by That his Practice he should have been advantageous to Satan's
main design against the Church of Christ at that time.

It Is true Truth remains still Truth, however Satan abuse it, yet seeing all
grant that the venting of some Truths at sometimes is unseasonable, and so for
that time may be forborne; And seeing it would seem that nothing makes a Truth
more unseasonable, than when it is known that Satan will make bad use of it,
for bearing down that Truth which God intends mainly to clear; It will follow
that the venting of such a Truth ought to be at least with great modesty, and
much holy Circumspection, if not altogether forborne for that time.

For Application of this Direction, I will not say much: Only I shall propose
it to your serious thoughts, Whether or not the late Proceedings in opposition
to the Supreme Judicatories of the Church, together with the Tenets whereupon
they are grounded (which for Peace's cause, and from unwillingness to give the
least occasion of Irritation, I forbear to name) whether or not, I say, These
(even supposing the Lawfulness of the Practices, and Truth of the Opinions)
seem not to have been unseasonable for the time; as being apt to be abused for
leading People upon the Errors of the time: Such as the Contempt of
Ecclesiastical Judicatories; Quarrelling the Constitution, and Separating from
the Fellowship of our Church. I fear much it will be hard for People (not
acquainted with subtle Distinctions) to conceive, that any Corruption amongst
those with whom we converse, can make Civil Fellowship with them Unlawful, but
it must make Church Fellowship, especially Communion Table Fellowship, with the
same Persons, to be as much, if not much more, Unlawful. But I forbear, not
being without hopes but that Brethren Gracious and Wise will ponder what they
hold, and what they practice, when they see bad use made of it, beyond their
own Intention and Purpose.

There is one thing further I shall say for application chiefly upon the other
hand, and it is this, Such Practices ought to be eschewed, as may prove unjust,
and unnecessary Irritations unto People, to cast themselves headlong upon the
Errors of the time. I do not love that any thing should be done of purpose, to
make People (as we say) kyth or appear in their colors, I mean, to bring out
these Practices, the Seed whereof thou conceives to be already within; which at
the best is to cast a stumbling Block before the Blind. I might reckon several
Practices which are not only Irritating, but also in themselves Sinful; such
as, Promiscuous admissions of Clean and Unclean to the Lord's Table; Little
pains taking by Ministers to Instruct People with Knowledge; Showing much of
Passion, but little of Reason, against Errors. There be many whose Zeal is
honestly fervent against Error and Confusion, who yet by these, and such as
these, are not a little indirectly instrumental to the furtherance of it.

Our Second Direction how to manage our Differences so as not to further
Satan's main design, is, That all, especially Ministers, would beware of such
things as of their own Nature do prove, and by constant observation have
proven, Forerunners of Error and Confusion: Of which I shall reckon Three.

The First thing to be eschewed, is, Unscriptural Expressions while speaking of
things Religious, as, Cases of Conscience, Exercises of Mind, and Scripture
Truths: An affected way of bringing forth old Truths in new and uncouth
Phrases, high soaring Notions, serving more to astonish than inform the
Hearers, Paul 2 Timothy 1. 13. bids, Hold fast the form of sound words, and not
only of sound Doctrine: It was Calvin's Observation in his time, and severalls
since, that those who coin new Words and strange Expressions, tending only to
amuse the Hearers, are in hazard to be carried away themselves, and to carry
others with them, unto some New and Dangerous Opinions.

2. Ye must beware lest a disgust of old Truths spread amongst the People,
together with an itching after new Things, new Opinions, new Cases, new
Fellowships, new Teachers. Ye'll find 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. That itching Ears in
People go before the turning the Ear from the Truth. For preventing whereof
Ministers should be much in the inculcating of old Soul-saving and
Soul-humbling Truths; And for keeping these still fresh and savory, much of the
need of Christ should be pressed; to a Soul-hungring for Christ, every bitter
thing is sweet, but a Soul full of Conceit loatheth the Honeycomb.

A Third Thing predisposing to Error, and so to be guarded against, is, The
undervaluing of the Ministry. It has been Satan's method in drawing on People
toward Error at all times, and in no time more than these of late. First, To
make them despise their Faithful Ministers; that once getting the Ear stopped
by prejudice against these he might get the more ready access for his
Emissaries to infect them with Damnable Errors. It is the Observation of a
Reverend Writer of late, speaking to the same purpose, That the Galatians were
easily seduced, so soon as they were made to disgust Paul their Faithful
Teacher.

This much for the Second Direction for managing of our Differences so, as not
to come short in defense of these Truths, which Satan is laboring most to
deface.

Our Third Direction, is, To be watchful over the first Buddings of Error That
way: There are some lesser Errors whereby Satan scoureth the Field, and makes
way for these great Ones which he mainly intends: Whereof as to the present
case I shall mention some. Concerning which, whatever we might speak from our
own knowledge of the propensity of severals toward some of them; yet I shall
rather choice to speak of them in the abstract, as such, That if People should
be taken with them, will make way for that Confusion which Satan mainly aims
at.

Error 1. The first whereof is, That no Man truly Godly, ought to be Censured
for Opinion or Practice, which we conceive he owneth or practices from grounds
of Conscience, tho his Opinion or Practice tend never so evidently to the
Renting of the Church.

Error 2. Secondly, That the presence of Scandalous Persons at the Lords Table,
defiles the Ordinance unto all who Communicate, knowing such to be there.

Error 3. Thirdly, That a Minister Scandalous, tho not Judicially proved such,
cease to be a Minister, so that it is unlawful to receive either Word or
Sacrament at his hand, or to join in Discipline with him.

Error 4. Fourthly, That there is no special tie upon People to countenance the
Ordinance, in that Congregation whereof they are Members: But a liberty left to
go constantly where they may be most edified, tho with the discouragement of
those whose hands they are bound to strengthen.

I have only mentioned these Tenets without Refutation, being confident that
none of Christ's Ministers, to whom herein I mainly speak, will own them: Only I
shall point at three things Ministers should make conscience of as their Duty,
in relation to these or such like.

First, As it is our Duty to watch against prophanity and Scandal upon the one
hand, so to be learning where any thing of this kind vents it self either in
Practice or Contentious Reasoning.

Secondly, We should not think lightly of such, when they do appear; and that
Because, 1. They do evidently make way for Satan's great design in these times,
which is to cover the Church of Christ with Confusion. 2. Because that however
possibly such do not reflect so much upon our own Ministry as upon others, who
we may conceive have justly procured their own grief, yet a year or two may lay
them down at the door of him who thinks himself for the time at greatest
distance from them, and that with so much the more weight, as that he did not
resent these evils sooner. 3. Such would not be thought of lightly, Because
Experience shows, That the simple overseeing of such, is not the way to root
them out, but rather to make them take strength.

And therefore the Third thing that Ministers should make Conscience of in
relation to such, is, To set about the Curing of them, wherein ye are to eye
two Caveats. 1. As ye would thrive so set about the Cure of One evil as not to
neglect Another; They are not to be approven, if any such be, who in their
Reproofs bend themselves wholly against Error, but little against Prophanity
and Vice; neither are they to be approven, if there be any such, who pass over
the reproof of Error wholly, because the Person to be reproved will hardly take
with it; or that profane men will take occasion to mock at Piety because of
it: These things require indeed that the Duty be wisely and tenderly done, but
not that it be left altogether undone. A second Caveat to be eyed is, your Cure
should be more in Convincing Arguments, than in Bitter Reproofs: Else it will
be taken but for the venting of Passion, and that ye have nothing to say in
Reason; which will make the Disease worse.

This much for the second branch of our last Use. The Third shall be some
Considerations to the People, especially, for preventing their stumbling and
making Shipwreck upon the present Divisions.

The First Consideration is this: The Church in all Ages has been afflicted
with Divisions from the Apostles time even till now: yea, in the very time when
the Apostles were alive themselves, We read Act. 15. 39. That two great
Apostles Paul and Barnabas were so divided, that they parted one from another:
The Word made use of in the Original, to express their Contention, signifies,
The high fit of a Fever ( a Paroxism) It is the very word; The Spirit of the
Lord thereby insinuating, That their Contention cast them, as it were, in the
rage of a Fever; and yet the matter whereabout the contest fell out was not
very great: Much like That, which was the Fountain of our woeful Rent, to wit,
whether Mark who had before deserted the Work, should be again employed in it,
The one would have him, the other would not; hence they part Company. And what
Divisions fell out amongst the primitive Churches almost presently after they
were planted by the Apostles, The Epistles of Paul to the Romans, Corinthians,
Galatians, etc. make it very clear. And for the times following the History of
the Church does abundantly testify, That from the Apostles Death to this very
Age, the Church has still been shaken with Rents and Schisms, in some one
place or other; and these sometimes even amongst the most Gracious Men of those
times, as Augustine, Hierom, Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin, Together with
several others, whose Names, if it were pertinent I might recite. So that ye
are not to stumble at the present Divisions: There is no new or strange thing
befallen Us: The Church of Christ in all Ages has been tried with the like.

A Second Consideration to prevent stumbling at our present Divisions is, That
God has foretold Church Divisions should be, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be also
Heresies among you -- And he has not only foretold that simply they must be,
but so a^ he should have an holy hand in them, Matthew. 10. 35. I am come to set
a man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother -- So
that he has an Holy hand in Church Divisions, he permits them to be, and for
wise Reasons, whereof I shall reckon Three. 1. He permits Divisions to be, That
Men's Spirits may be thereby tried. So 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies
among you, And wherefore? -- That they which are approved may be made manifest.
There is a great deal of evil lurking in Peoples Spirits, Unsound Principles in
some, Seeds of loose practices in others, Pride, Conceit, and other unmortified
Distempers, in a third sort; and Divisions in a Church decipher those. 2.
Divisions are sent for the clearing of Truths: This, as we showed before, has
been Gods method from the beginning, when he had a point of Truth to clear, he
has suffered men to contradict it, and the more it has been contradicted, it
has still grown the brighter. 3. He permits Divisions to be, that in his Holy
Justice they may be a stumbling block to the wicked; If thou think there are so
many Opinions, and so many Religions, that thou'l care for no Religion, until
wiser People than thou agree among themselves; Then Church Divisions and
difference of Opinions in Gods just judgment are thy Destruction.

A third Consideration to prevent stumbling at our present Divisions is, That
some good use may be made of them in the mean time; I shall first speak to some
Bad Uses of them which ye are to eschew: And then to speak to some Good Uses of
them which ye are to seek after.

1. The First bad Use of the present Divisions is, From them to take occasion
of Rejoicing, that Ministers are set together by the Ears: A woeful Use! Thou
rejoycest in that which is the Gospels shame, the Godly's weight, and God's
dishonor; and God shall rejoice in thy shame and ruin another day for it.

2. Another bad Use is, Because of them to wish That the work of Reformation
had never been begun; as having such ills following upon it: An use which the
carnal Israelites did often make of their present strait, Would God (say they)
we had never come out of Egypt. An Use which speaks, That for all thy professed
adherence to the work of God and Covenant, yet thou have never thought upon it
as His work; else a blast of Affliction could not have put thee so soon out of
love with it.

3. The giving over of your selves to a Spirit of Looseness, it being a lawless
time: Some Ministers may possibly make this Use of the present Division, but it
is a woeful Use, and such as will deceive: God may of purpose have sent such a
time that thou may without fear fill up thy Cup, and so be taken course with
afterward for all together.

4. It is a bad Use of them, to observe only which of the ways do afford most
advantage, where the Sun of Prosperity is most like to shine, that ye may
strike in there, but with a resolution, if the Wind change ye will change also:
A bad Use and unworthy of a Man, much more of a Christian Man, whose Profession
is to be ruled by Conscience, Scripture and Reason; and not by self-interest
and advantage.

5. The last bad Use of the present Division is, To blow at the Coal; making it
your work what ye can search out and scrape together, from the carriage of
these who differ, that ye may vent it, and make them odious by it. A base
uncharitable and unchristian Use. A thing so woeful that David complains of it
in his very Enemies. Ps. 56. 5, 6. Every day they wrest my words; all their
thoughts are against me for evil. They gather themselves together, they hide
themselves, they mark my steps when they wait for my Soul. This is a thing I
may say, which has had it is own hand in the hightning and continuance of our
Differences, if that which Solomon says, Prove. 26. 20. be true, as it is most
true, -- Where there is no talebearer the strife cease.

These now are bad Uses which ye are to eschew, but out of the Eater comes
meat, there is some good Use may be made of our present Divisions, and that ye
should seek after.

The first good Use is, That from these separating stirs ye would labor to be
convinced of abused Union. Our Division speaks that Union has not been
improven aright, neither amongst Ministers nor Professors, there has been much
of carnal Joy, triffling over of time, but little and too too little of God in
our Fellowship: And therefore in His just Judgment He has given us some other
thing to set our Teeth on edge with, ye should be convinced of this, and be
humbled for it.

A Second good use of our present Division is, Ye should press so much the more
after Peace with God, If strife with men be so wasting and wearisome, what will
Gods feud be? If peace with men be so hard to get, seek the more of peace with
God: Seek the more of his smileings, the more thou meets with of men's
frownings: seek the more warmness in him, the more of Coldness thou meets with
from men; seek the more of Counsel and Direction from God, the more
Reservedness thou finds in others from whom thou was wont to get sweet Counsel.
This were a sweet use of our present Divisions; An Exposition of Sampsons
Riddle indeed; For thus Out of the eater should come meat, and out of the
bitter should come sweet.

Thirdly, By these Divisions ye may discover much evil in your spirit that was
before undiscovered, what a deal of Pride, not enduring to be opposed? What
Carnal Emulation at the good of others? What rejoying at their slips? What
eagerness of spirit in the pursuit of things of little worth, when more
excellent are neglected? What violent Eruptions of unmortified nature, bending
after courses unwarrantable for making of our Point good, except Grace did bear
them down? Ye find such a discovery of some things, such as may make you abase
your selves before God.

Fourthly, Our present Divisions may confirm us in the Main, and settle us more
than ever in the belief of those so much opposed Truths concerning the
Government of Christ's House, and Constitution of Visible Churches: and that
because those who are divivided and oppose one another much, yet for the most
part do agree in these. If a man's house stand after the shaking of many strong
winds, he concluds the foundation is good, This is a strong Argument for Truth,
that our Divisions Factions and oppositions, one against another, do not shake
our minds in relation to it.

Fifthly, Our present Divisions may be a spur to more diligence in dealing with
God for helping foreward of his so much retarded Work. He is an unhappy man
who, when the Ship of the Church is at the point of shipwrak, will not use
violence against his own Laziness, and improve his interest with God, that he
would help his tossed Church at a dead lift. Oh! that there were more of this
Use; The Generation of those that seek God are fallen asleep: many are the
means that God has used to rouse us up; We have had the Calm Voice of the
Word; and that has not done it; We have had the Thunderclaps of Sad
sufferings from without, and that has not done it: And now the Earthquakes of
heart Divisions within, have shaken All: And, if God prevent not, will overturn
All. And if this awake us not, Oh! Lord what will thou do next!

I shall now shut up all with the words of my Text, Now I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment. I know, as matters
now stand, This, and all we have spoken from it, may prove but threshing on the
water, as to the thing by us intended: Yea, and very like it may be made use of
for the hightning of prejudices, and further increase of Our strife; and if so
be, I am at a point what to Answer: That even this will confirm unto me the
Truth of what I have said, to wit, That Our Divisions are an Evil much to be
lamented; It is a Judicial stroke, in so far as nothing can be said for the
removal of it, but thereby one way or other it takes strength; It is a strong
fire, that when water is poured upon it, blazeth up the higher; It is a
dangerous Disease in the natural body, which is so prev^lent, as to turn the
very medicine applied, unto the nature of that vicious Humor, whereby the
disease is further fed and nourished. And yet tho all this should be (which God
avert) I have another thing to say, and it is the ground of my comfort as to
Our present sad stroke; That Jesus Christ who has found out the way to make
God and man One, when they were at variance, has ways enough to reconcile us
one to another, tho Our Divisions were at a greater hight than yet they are come
to: And if he has pleasure in us he will make us One, tho it should be on our
own Expenses: He may possibly do it by sending us to one Common Goal, or some
such like thing; For our adhering to the Cause of God, Covenant and precious
Liberties of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, That precious Trust
committed unto us by him, and transmitted unto us by our Zealous and Faithful
Predecessors, who in the obtaining and preservation of them, loved not their
lives unto the death. If He have pleasure in us he will make us unite, and if
no other thing will do it, he will make such like work as this do it: And it is
very like such like work may be ere long: For shall we look on our mother
Church oppressed and bereaved of these Privileges which are left unto her by
her Lord and husband, in his Latter Will and Testament, and shall we not so
much as in ways competent for us, upon all hazards resent it? Shall stronger
Powers usurp upon the Church's Right and in the mean time, shall we by our
mutual janglings, encourage them to go on in this woeful Work? Or shall we
resent these wrongs the less, or secretly approve of them, becasue possibly
that which is our own design for weakening one another is thereby promoved? God
forbid. Now the God of Peace establish our Peace with himself, and give us
Peace one with another in himself.

A SERMON PREACHED AT KILWINNING, Immediately before the giving of the
COMMUNION. Being a Preparation Sermon in order thereunto.
The second SERMON.
PSALM 51. 6. Behold, thou desire Truth in the inward Parts: And in the
hidden part thou shall make me to know Wisdom.
THIS Psalm is one of David's Penitential Psalms, wherein his Conscience being
first awakned, and made sensible of his Sin, He pleads hard for God's Mercy
and Grace, and especially for the Pardon of his Sin; which Petition He insists
upon most, and does again and again inculcate it.

The Words read in the First Part of this Verse, hold out somewhat which God
mainly called for, and David aimed at, as a necessary Ingredient in his
Penitential Address unto God; Without which nothing he could do in any Duty of
God's Service, or particularly in This which He is presently about, would have
been acceptable to God, and which being obtained and in exercise, all He did
was the more savoury; and therefore He makes mention of it in the midst of His
Prayer and present Exercise, that thereby He may both mind His Heart, of the
great necessity there was to have it, and also may cheer up his weighted Spirit
somewhat, in confidence that He would be accepted of God in His present
Address, seeing He had something of that necessary Ingredient, which God does so
much require, desire, and accept of.

The thing it self is expressed by the Word (Truth) Behold thou desire Truth
in the inward parts, etc. Whereby is not meaned Truth in the Judgment, opposed
to Error; nor Truth in People's Words, opposed to the Sin of Lying, and
speaking Untruth; But it is Truth in the Heart and Affections, called here
Truth in the inward parts; In a word, it is the Grace of Sincerity and
Singleness of Heart; For so is this Grace often expressed in Scripture, Isai.
38. 3. I have walked before thee in Truth, says Hezekiah) and with a perfect,
upright, or sincere Heart. And Ephesians. 6. 14 Having their loins girt about with
Truth, etc. That is, with Sincerity and Single-heartedness. This then is That
Truth which God requires as a necessary seasoning Ingredient in all Duties, and
especially in all Religious Performances; And which David here holds out with a
Behold, as the thing which above any other thing he had aimed at, and yet would
aim more at, in his Penitential Address unto God.

We have then in the Words, 1. A Note of Attention ( Behold) which David
prefixeth to that which he is to say; I call it a Note of Attention, for that
is the use it serves for in this place, as I shall clear afterward. 2. There
is That which he subjoineth to this ( Behold) The Lords Complacency and Delight
in the Grace of Sincerity, and the Exercise of it, as that without which his
Present Address could not be savory or acceptable to God: Thou desire Truth
in the inward parts.

I shall observe Two things in General before I come to the Particulars of the
Text. 1. From this, David holds out the Rule he had walked by and was to walk
by for making his Present Address to God, In confessing of Sin, and pleading
hard for Pardon, acceptable. Hence take this Doctrine. That it is not enough
that we do somewhat of Commanded Duties, but we must labor to do what we do in
some measure acceptably: David not only confesses Sin, and pleads for Pardon,
but he aims to do it in Truth, that so he may do it Acceptably; For while he
says, God did desire Truth in the inward parts, it is evidently employed that
He aimed to have it: There is reason for this; Because, If the thing we do be
not done Acceptably and in the Right Manner, though the thing done be never so
good in it self, the doing of it is but lost labor unto us: Thus though it was
a piece of Commanded Duty under the Old Testament to offer up Sacrifices to
God; yet when People made not Conscience to discharge this Duty in the Right
Manner, all they did was to as little purpose, as if they had done nothing at
all; Hence Isai. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices
unto me? says the Lord: etc. Yea, the more excellent any Duty is in it self,
and the greater good is to be had by going about any Duty in a Right and
Acceptable Manner, the greater is the Hurt and Damnage which we incurr by it,
when we advert not how we do it; And when, without taking heed to our Feet, we
rush foreward to it, and carry our selves but carelessly in the mean time that
we are employed about it: What more excellent, comfortable, and Soul edifying
Ordinance is there than this of a Communion, which through God's Mercy ye have
yet the liberty of approaching unto? Is it not a Feast of Fat things? of Wine
on the Lees well refined, wherein we Feast with Christ and upon Christ, His
broken Body is Meat indeed, the most excellent that Heaven or Earth can afford:
And yet (says Paul) If ye come not to this Ordinance in the Right Manner, if
ye set not your selves so to go about it as that ye may be accepted in your
work, if ye eat or drink unworthily without previous Examination of your
selves, Ye shall eat and drink Damnation and Judgment to your selves; Not only
shall your Table prove a snare, but your meat be turned into poison; And
therefore consider this in the entry, and labor to have it imprinted on your
Hearts, That it is not enough to come rushing foreward to your Work not
considering how ye come; Your coming ought to be according to the Direction
given, Eccles. 5. 1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, etc. As
at all time, so especially when ye approach unto such a dreadful Ordinance a
this is, whereof the advantage is so great, if ye come Right, and the hurt and
hazard so unspeakably great, if ye come Wrong.

But Secondly observe yet in General, That in going about Commanded Duties in
some measure Acceptably, ye ought now and then to reflect upon the Manner and
Way of your discharge of Duty, even in the mean time when ye are about it: For
so does David Here, He casts an eye upon the Right Manner how He should have
prayed, to wit, In Sincerity and Truth, even in the very midst of his prayer,
while he says unto God, Behold, thou desire Truth in the inward parts, And
thus Christ in Luke 8. 18. says unto His Disciples, in the very mean time they
were Hearing. Take heed therefore how ye hear: And surely our Hearts do often
turn formal, vain, wandering and lumpish, or heavy, in the Service of God,
because we do not seriously mind how sinful, shameful, and unseemly it is that
it should be so: A check of this kind in time, and seasonably, to a vain,
straying and wandering Heart, would do much through God's Blessing to make it
halt: David does this often, especially Psalm. 43. 5. where he turns his speech
from God, and gives himself a rebuke and check for the present unsuitable frame
of Heart wherein he then was, Why art thoucast down, O my Soul? (says he) And
why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God, etc. So that this reflecting
upon the Manner and Way how ye discharge Duty, even in the mean time when ye
are about it, is useful: When ye find your Heart out of frame, a serious timous
check given unto it, will prove an effectual mean to reclaim it: Besides, if
upon your reflecting thus, ye find matters tollerably Right, and your Heart in
such a frame for the Main, as the Lord requires, it will furnish you with
matter of boldness, courage, and confidence: as here it does David, who having
found somewhat of this Truth and this upright and sincere frame of Heart, in
his own Inward parts, He takes ground of Confidence from That, to expect that
God who had given him This, could also give him more, In the hidden part (says
he) thou shall make me to know Wisdom.

For Use, This does shortly speak two things. 1. The Service of God is a Work
not of the Outward Man only, but also and mainly, of the Inward Man: The Heart
and Mind of a Man must be exercised in it, if so be go rightly about it; And
that many ways: And this is One way, The Heart must be exercised by reflecting
now and then upon it self, and observing its own present frame and disposition,
how it comes up to the Rule prescrived by God, for making what we do in the
Service of God Acceptable. And next it speaks the great guilt of many in God's
Service, A piece of the Iniquity of our Holy Things, for which we ought to be
humbled; That many times when our Tongue is busy our Heart is idle, when our
Outward Man is present, the Inward Man is away, and gets liberty to depart from
God without check or challenge. This is it that God complains of, Isai. 29. 13.
-- This People draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have removed their heart far from me.

But now I come to the words in particular 1. David prefixeth a (Behold) while
he is to speak to that which was necessarly required for making his Adress
acceptable to God: Behold is sometimes a note of Admiration prefixed to such
things as are wonderful, as Isai. 7, 14. Behold a virgin shall conceive^ and
bear a Son etc. And so it may be taken here, it is indeed a thing wonderful
that God should desire or delight in Truth in the inward parts, or that any
thing which is in us, or proceeding from us should be lovely to him; There is
such a mixture of unlovely sinful dross in every thing of that sort. But we
think it does rather serve here (as often elsewhere) For a note of Attention;
Only taking it so, ye must consider that David's design and aim hereby is not
so much to stir up God as his own Heart, and the Hearts of others in whose
hands this Piece of Scripture should come, to take heed to the following
Purposes.

We shall from this shortly mark Two things 1. The Hearts even of the best have
need of being stirred up to take heed unto what is the Lords mind concerning
the Right and Acceptable Manner in going about comman^ed Duty; For therefore
does David see it needful to pluck his own ear (as it were) for making himself
more attentive to this Subject, by prefixing a Behold a note of Attention unto
it, Behold thou desire Truth in the inward Parts. The Truth is, if we get the
substance of Duties gone about, we are ordinarily too apt to think that it is
but needless scrupulosity, to be anxious about the manner how to do it; So are
we in Prayer, So are we in Hearing, and so are we also in coming to Communions;
when ever occasion is offered, and an outward Call or invitation given us to
come, there is none almost but his Conscience will challenge him if he stay
aback; But as to the qualifications of the Call, and what is required of you
for coming Acceptably, It is a wonder to see with what a careless ear the most
part do hear any thing of that sort; as if the Communion were a Charm to work
upon People whether they be fitted to Receive it or not; So that Sermons for
Preparation do serve (as to many) for no other use, but for a Customary
Ceremony, and to fill up so much time. These necessary Directions which are
given you to come in the right manner and the warnings you get, telling you how
dreadful a thing it is to come Wrong, are minded no longer by the most part,
than the mean time they hear them, and by some scarcely so long: Hence
certainly it is that the Lord is not so Familiar with the Hearts of People at
his Own Feast as sometimes he has been; It is no wonder, Because we come not
as Prepared Guests with a Wedding Garment to meet with him; Yea doubtless hence
it is that the Lord does threaten so hard to draw his Table, and to suffer men
to impose upon us a Dead lifeless formal way of Worship, that therein we may
see the Copy of our own Hearts, who if they get the outward form gone about,
they care little for the inward Life, Power, and Substance; and surely if ever
it come to this, (as God knows how soon it may) that all our Religion shall
consist in threed-bare Imposed Forms, and that more pains be taken by Ministers
to press upon People the observance of these Forms, than the very Life and
substance of Religious Performances, we must justify the Lord in it, for that
is the very Copy of our formal Hearts. Our Love to and resting on Formality may
provoke the Lord to wreath the yoke of a Dead, Lifeless and Formal Service on
our necks, that we shall not be able to shake it off, though we would. The Lord
oftimes shapes out Cross Dispensations in the public, according to these
sinful Distempers which are common and prevalent in the Hearts of People, that
therein they may see the unlovely Representation and Idea of their Own Heart
Jer: 5. 31. He Will suffer even The Prophets to Prophesy falsely, and the Priests
to bear Rule by Their means, If his People love to have it so.

But Secondly, The consideration of this your Dullness and Aversness to hear
what is the Lords mind, concerning the Right and Acceptable Manner of going
about Commanded Duties, should make you so much the more to stir up your
selves, to give diligent heed unto any thing that is spoken to that purpose;
For therefore in order to his own upstirring does David prefix a Note of
Attention ( Behold) to the purpose in hand. 1. Directions of that kind are
needful to be given; For (as ye heard) though ye do all that is Commanded, as
to the Substance and Matter, yet if ye do it not in the Right Manner, all ye do
is to no purpose, as I cleared from Isaiah 1. 11. 2 If it be needful that such
Directions be given, then it is needful that ye diligently hear them, else ye
cannot obey them, ye'l but leave them where ye find them, as oft-times ye do;
In which case your Hearing them does but aggravate your guilt in the neglect of
them. 3. Our backwardness and aversness to hear and lay to Heart what is spoken
to that purpose; though it be great, yet is not such, but if it be wrestled
against and manfully opposed it may be overcome; It is only Our giving way to
it without resistance, which makes it strong, importunate and shameless, when
our setting our selves seriously and in earnest to wrestle against it, would
make it to cede, according to that word, Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he
will flee from you.

I shall not insist on this, only This serves in place of a Preface for stiring
you up to hear and lay to Heart what I am to say on the rest of the Text, which
holds out the Lords mind (as to one thing at least) concerning the Right and
Acceptable Manner of going about Commanded Duties, and especially This Duty
which now ye are called to, of approaching to the Lords Table: The Lord
desires Truth in the Inward Parts. It Is true, not only what ye heard from the
former Note, but your own experience at such times does show your Hearts are
woefully backward to Hear and lay to Heart any thing that is spoken to this
purpose; But seeing the thing is needful, and so needful as that all your other
pains, without coming up to what ye hear to this purpose, will be to no good
purpose: Therefore ye ought to bestir your selves, striving in earnest against
your own Backwardness: And if ye seriously set your selves to strive against
it, I doubt not but ye will get it overcome, at least in part.

This much for the Note of Attention ( Behold) I come next to that which is
subjoined, to. This (Behold) viz. The Lords complacency and delight in the
Grace of Sincerity, and the exercise of it, As that without which David's
present Address could not be Savory or Acceptable to God: Thou desire Truth
in the inward Parts.

We Will find Three things in the Words, For clearing what it is which makes our
Performances accepted of God. 1. In general, It is somewhat which God desires,
approves, or loves, Thou desire, etc. 2. It is somewhat in the Inward Parts,
not so much That which is External, and seen by Men, as what is Internal, and
known only to God, and the Man's own self. 3. One main particular hereof is
condescended on, to wit, Truth, the Grace of Sincerity and the Exercise of that
Grace, Thou de^irest Truth in the Inward Parts, Of all which I shall endeavor
so to speak, as that therein ye may see both your bypast failings for your
Humiliation, and also may see a Rule to which ye ought to Conform your selves
for time to come; As in the practice of all Duties, so especially in your
Address to God at this time. First then observe, The Rule of going about
Commanded Duties Acceptably and in the Right manner is God's approbation: For
David does not propose unto himself to follow That which would please his Own
Humor, or the Humor of others, but that which God Desires, Loves and Approves
of; Behold (says he) thou desire Truth, etc. As if he had said, The t^ing O
Lord which I aim at, is, That which thou Desires and Approves: Thus the Lord
says to Abraham Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect, He ^ have His
Approbation (hinted at in the words Before me) the Rule of his walking
acceptably: This was the Rule which Christ himself when he came unto the World
did walk by, Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8, Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire --
Then said l: Lo, I come --. I delight to do thy will, O my God: And there is
reason for it, If we consider 1. That God is our main Party to whom we must
give an account for all we do; We must give an Account to others also, but he will
reckon with us when all others have done with us. 2. He has tied us to this
Rule and will reckon with us according to it, Deuteronomy. 5. 32. Ye shall observe to
do therefore as the Lord your God has commanded you: You shall not turn aside
to the Right hand, or to the Left. And therefore 3. Ye must look mainly to what
He approves or disapproves, else all ye do will be to no good purpose, Matthew.
6. 2. They do their Alms, that they may have Glory of Men, verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. This ought to make you search what is the Rule ye
walk by, and to which ye labor to conform your selves most, in your walk: And
for your more easy search, I shall point at some who walk not by this Rule.

1. Those walk not by this Rule, who set themselves to come up in their way not
to what God desires, but to what the time, and any Party who bears ^way in the
time, desire: This is the Rule which the Pharisees would have had all in their
time to walk by John. 7. 48. Have any of the Rulers (say they) or of the
Pharisees believed on him? And it is the Rule that many walk by in all times;
they know no other Religion than That of the Times, and which pleases Them
best who bear the greatest sway; So that if Such should change their way every
year once, They will not scruple much to change it as often. This is the Rule
which these did follow whom God does threaten, Hos. 7. 3. They make the King
glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their Lies. They cared not
what they did if so they might please their King and Rulers by it: Such are
Time-servers, Men-pleasers, and so cannot be God-pleasers; For (says Paul) If
I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

2. Those walk not by this Rule of God's Approbation and Desire, whose highest
design in the point of Duty is, To follow the Example of others; And whose
great enquiry is, not so much to know what God Desires, as what others do; and
rest upon that as sufficient that they may do the like: This is the Rule which
God forbids to follow, Exodus 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, etc. And Broad is the way which leads to destruction, and many there be
that go therein: And yet it is a Rule which many follow, both as the matter
what, and the manner how they do it: How many are there, that though they want
not their own Convictions and Challenges for several things they themselves are
conscious of, yet if there be many who are under the Power of the same Evils
with themselves, they force themselves to take Peace and hold on, because there
are many guilty of the same fault: Alas, That is but a very poor ground of
Comfort, To go to Hell with Company, and speaks but very little zeal for God's
Honor, else the more thou see it trampled on by others, thou would be the
more tender of it; and consequently the more Common any sin is, thou should
hate it the more, because God gets the more Dishonor by it: This was David's
way, Rivers of Tears (says he) run down mine Eyes because of the wicked who
transgress thy Law.

3. Those walk not by this Rule, who walk only by that which their own Carnal
Wit and Natural Reason approves; How many are they, who though they cannot but
know that God in His Word requires more exactness in their Walk, yet they rest
on that which they think their own Carnal Wit thinks may suffice; They Will do
what they can in Religious Duties, which indeed is but to do what they please;
But for further, God must forgive them: Thus they will meddle with what is easy,
pleasant, and profitable, in Religion; But for what is hurtful, burden some,
or may bring loss, they will never own that; Because their Carnal Reason suggests
unto them, that less than that may serve the turn, Religion is good, but People
ought not to impoverish or destroy themselves for it: Thus many do easily
dispense with themselves for the neglect of all painful Hazards and expensive
Duties; such as To deal their Bread to the Hungry, To choose Affliction rather
than to sin; Not to recompense evil with evil, but evil with good, To cleave
unto Christ and Truth when the wind of Trial and Persecution blow hard in their
face. These and such like Duties are not much stood on by the Man that walks by
this Rule of Carnal Reason. As also the Duty of Mortifying your Predominant,
Cutting off of the Right Hand, plucking out of the Right Eye, and that painful
Duty of Heart-searching, and Self-judging, as at all times, so chiefly when ye
are coming to a Communion, Carnal Wit will suggest to you that such precise
strictness is not needful. Now this Rule is flatly contrary to that which is
here prescribed, The Rule of Gods Approbation: For the Carnal Mind is Enmity to
God, and Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Those walk not by this Rule whose great endeavor is to conform themselves,
not so much to what God Desires, as to what they themselves find Peace in, and
who if they get not troublesome challenges from Conscience for their way, do
take it for granted that their way is good enough, and do never set themselves
to enquire further about it: Now this is an unsure Rule: For 1. Many may have
Peace in that which is just opposite to what God Requires and Desires. Ye'l see
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. How the Profane Ruffian cries, Peace, he shall have Peace,
though he add Drunkenness to Thirst: As it were in despite of God. But, 2. Though
thy Conscience be not thus feared, yet it may be sleeping, because thou takes
no pains to get it awakened; And if thou would but rouse it up, and make it
pass impartial Sentence upon thy Way, There are many things thy Conscience
would give thee little rest in, for which now thou finds no check or challenge.
3. It would be considered, whether Conscience now and then do not give you some
gentle Checks for many things, tho it wound not sore, because ye do quickly
command it to silence, so that it does not speak to purpose, being overaw'd so
that it dare not speak. In either of which Cases, Peace of Mind is not a safe
Rule to walk by; For ye may have Peace in that which God approves not.

I come now to the second thing here expressed, for clearing what That is, that
makes our Performances accepted of by God: It is somewhat in the Inward Parts,
not so much that which is External and obvious to the Eyes of Man, as Internal
and only known to God, even the hidden man of the Heart. It Is true the man who
would walk acceptably, must also look to that which is External, to wit, that
which God has Commanded, according to Philip. 4. 8. Finally, Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. So he is not to over look all things External, or look
on them as things indifferent, if they be Honest, Pure, of a good Report, and
any virtue in them, he must set about them: Only the great Work of such a man
should ly most about his Heart and Inward Parts; how to get it brought up to
Duty and kept at Duty: For John 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship
him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. The Heart is the thing which God
does mainly seek. My Son (says Solomon) Prove: 23. 26. Give me thy Heart. And
He does so seek it, that if he get it not, he cares not for all the rest, Isai.
29. 13. This People draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do
Honor Me, but have removed their Heart far from me, etc.

I might here run out in a sad complaint That the Religion of the times is
almost all Out-side-work (at least in very many) who the longer they live make
the less ado about the Heart: And is it not so, If when ye neglect the external
part of Duty ye get a Challenge, but if that be discharged ye have Peace,
though there be no more care about the Heart than if ye had none? But as to
your accquitting your selves in this particular of making your great work ly
about the Heart and Inward parts, Try your selves but by these Three things. 1.
What is your care to restrain and mortify Heart Sins, which the Apostle calls
the Filthiness of the Spirit, As High conceit of your selves, and your envying
of the good of others, because it overshadows you; The Sin of Fretting and
repining under cross dispensations; of not reverencing God in, and being
contented with your Lot. Try I say what your Cares and Endeavors are to
mortify these and such like Heart sins; 2. Try what Conscience ye make to
Discharge Inward and spiritual Duties, which require only the Inward man to be
acted in them; As the Duty of meditating on God, keeping intercourse and
fellowship betwixt your Hearts and Him, The Duty of self judging, and calling
your self to an account every night of the days work, the Duty of stooping to
God under Cross Dispensations, and constructing aright of every thing that God
does. Try I say what Conscience ye make, to discharge those and such like
spiritual Duties. 3. Try in what way your greatest Care does run in these
Duties which require both the Outward and Inward man; Is your great Care to act
from right motives, and for right ends? or rather do ye not on the contrair
take but little care what be the frame of your Heart within, if ye but get the
outward work done, and a fair outside which none can challenge? Is your desire
not only to exercise your Tongue in Praying, Your voice and art in Singing
Praises, but also and mainly, to exercise your spiritual Graces, your Faith,
your Humility, your Love, your Repentence for Sin, and your joy in God? I fear
if ye try by these marks, many of us shall find, that though the Inward parts
be that which God Desires most, yet it is that whereof we do give him least,
which makes a great part of our Duties to be but shadows of Duty; They have the
external draughts and lineaments, shape and proportion of Duty but no more;
they are painted Duties, like a painted man without life, a painted fire
without heat, Let the trial of your self in these, and judging of your selves
for them, be a part of your Preparation: And take this for a further part of it
from the same Ground, if ye would have what ye do about your Preparation,
accepted of by God, let your great work ly about your Heart, how to get it
brought to Duty, and wrought up to some good Frame; for the Lord desires
mainly the Inward parts; and where your backward, dead, and lumpish Hearts will
not move or drive for you, beseech the Lord to draw them, and make them willing
in the day of his Power.

But now lastly, I come to the particular here condescended on as a necessary
Ingredient, for making our performances Acceptable and savoury viz. The Grace
of Truth and sincerity, Behold thou desire Truth in the Inward parts. And it
gives us this Doctrine That the Grace of sincerity and the exercise of it, Is
abosolutely necessary for making our Duties acceptable to God; It Is so
necessary that the Lord will accept even very little where it is, when he I
reject much where it is wanting: we will see both these if we look to the
Scripture verdict of two Kings of Judah, The first is, Asa, He was guilty in
many things, there were very visible defects in him as sufficient that they may
do the like: This is the Rule which God forbids to follow, Exodus 23. 2. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, etc. And Broad is the way which
leads to destruction, and many there be that go therein: And yet it is a Rule
which many follow, both as the matter what, and the manner how they do it: How
many are there, that though they want not their own Convictions and Challenges
for several things they themselves are conscious of, yet if there be many who
are under the Power of the same Evils with themselves, they force themselves to
take Peace and hold on, because there are many guilty of the same fault: Alas,
That is but a very poor ground of Comfort, To go to Hell with Company, and
speaks but very little zeal for God's Honor, else the more thou see it
trampled on by others, thou would be the more tender of it; and consequently
the more Common any sin is, thou should hate it the more, because God gets the
more Dishonor by it: This was David's way, Rivers of Tears (says he) run down
mine Eyes because of the wicked who transgress thy Law.

3. Those walk not by this Rule, who walk only by that which their own Carnal
Wit and Natural Reason approves; How many are they, who though they cannot but
know that God in His Word requires more exactness in their Walk, yet they rest
on that which they think their own Carnal Wit thinks may suffice; They Will do
what they can in Religious Duties, which indeed is but to do what they please;
But for further, God must forgive them: Thus they will meddle with what is easy,
pleasant, and profitable, in Religion; But for what is hurtful, burden some,
or may bring loss, they will never own that; Because their Carnal Reason suggests
unto them, that less than that may serve the turn, Religion is good, but People
ought not to impoverish or destroy themselves for it: Thus many do easily
dispense with themselves for the neglect of all painful Hazards and expensive
Duties; such as To deal their Bread to the Hungry, To choose Affliction rather
than to sin; Not to recompense evil with evil, but evil with good, To cleave
unto Christ and Truth when the wind of Trial and Persecution blow hard in their
face. These and such like Duties are not much stood on by the Man that walks by
this Rule of Carnal Reason. As also the Duty of Mortifying your Predominant,
Cutting off of the Right Hand, plucking out of the Right Eye, and that painful
Duty of Heart-searching, and Self-judging, as at all times, so chiefly when ye
are coming to a Communion, Carnal Wit will suggest to you that such precise
strictness is not needful. Now this Rule is flatly contrary to that which is
here prescribed, The Rule of Gods Approbation: For the Carnal Mind is Enmity to
God, and Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Those walk not by this Rule whose great endeavor is to conform themselves,
not so much to what God Desires, as to what they themselves find Peace in, and
who if they get not troublesome challenges from Conscience for their way, do
take it for granted that their way is good enough, and do never set themselves
to enquire further about it: Now this is an unsure Rule: For 1. Many may have
Peace in that which is just opposite to what God Requires and Desires. Ye'l see
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. How the Profane Ruffian cries, Peace, he shall have Peace,
though he add Drunkenness to Thirst: As it were in despite of God. But, 2. Though
thy Conscience be not thus feared, yet it may be sleeping, because thou takes
no pains to get it awakened; And if thou would but rouse it up, and make it
pass impartial Sentence upon thy Way, There are many things thy Conscience
would give thee little rest in, for which now thou finds no check or challenge.
3. It would be considered, whether Conscience now and then do not give you some
gentle Checks for many things, tho it wound not sore, because ye do quickly
command it to silence, so that it does not speak to purpose, being overaw'd so
that it dare not speak. In either of which Cases, Peace of Mind is not a safe
Rule to walk by; For ye may have Peace in that which God approves not.

I come now to the second thing here expressed, for clearing what That is, that
makes our Performances accepted of by God: It is somewhat in the Inward Parts,
not so much that which is External and obvious to the Eyes of Man, as Internal
and only known to God, even the hidden man of the Heart. It Is true the man who
would walk acceptably, must also look to that which is External, to wit, that
which God has Commanded, according to Philip. 4. 8. Finally, Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. So he is not to over look all things External, or look
on them as things indifferent, if they be Honest, Pure, of a good Report, and
any virtue in them, he must set about them: Only the great Work of such a man
should ly most about his Heart and Inward Parts; how to get it brought up to
Duty and kept at Duty: For John 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship
him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. The Heart is the thing which God
does mainly seek. My Son (says Solomon) Prove: 23. 26. Give me thy Heart. And
He does so seek it, that if he get it not, he cares not for all the rest, Isai.
29. 13. This People draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do
Honor Me, but have removed their Heart far from me, etc.

I might here run out in a sad complaint That the Religion of the times is
almost all Out-side-work (at least in very many) who the longer they live make
the less ado about the Heart: And is it not so, If when ye neglect the external
part of Duty ye get a Challenge, but if that be discharged ye have Peace,
though there be no more care about the Heart than if ye had none? But as to
your accquitting your selves in this particular of making your great work ly
about the Heart and Inward parts, Try your selves but by these Three things. 1.
What is your care to restrain and mortify Heart Sins, which the Apostle calls
the Filthiness of the Spirit, As High conceit of your selves, and your envying
of the good of others, because it overshadows you; The Sin of Fretting and
repining under cross dispensations; of not reverencing God in, and being
contented with your Lot. Try I say what your Cares and Endeavors are to
mortify these and such like Heart sins; 2. Try what Conscience ye make to
Discharge Inward and spiritual Duties, which require only the Inward man to be
acted in them; As the Duty of meditating on God, keeping intercourse and
fellowship betwixt your Hearts and Him, The Duty of self judging, and calling
your self to an account every night of the days work, the Duty of stooping to
God under Cross Dispensations, and constructing aright of every thing that God
does. Try I say what Conscience ye make, to discharge those and such like
spiritual Duties. 3. Try in what way your greatest Care does run in these
Duties which require both the Outward and Inward man; Is your great Care to act
from right motives, and for right ends? or rather do ye not on the contrair
take but little care what be the frame of your Heart within, if ye but get the
outward work done, and a fair outside which none can challenge? Is your desire
not only to exercise your Tongue in Praying, Your voice and art in Singing
Praises, but also and mainly, to exercise your spiritual Graces, your Faith,
your Humility, your Love, your Repentance for Sin, and your joy in God? I fear
if ye try by these marks, many of us shall find, that though the Inward parts
b^ that which God Desires most, yet it is that whereof we do give him least,
which makes a great part of our Duties to be but shadows of Duty; They have the
external draughts and lineaments, shape and proportion of Duty but no more;
they are painted Duties, like a painted man without life, a painted fire
without heat, Let the trial of your self in these, and judging of your selves
for them, be a part of your Preparation: And take this for a further part of it
from the same Ground, if ye would have what ye do about your Preparation,
accepted of by God, let your great work ly about your Heart, how to get it
brought to Duty, and wrought up to some good Frame; for the Lord desires
mainly the Inward parts; and where your backward, dead, and lumpish Hearts will
not move or drive for you, beseech the Lord to draw them, and make them willing
in the day of his Power.

But now lastly, I come to the particular here condescended on as a necessary
Ingredient, for making our performances Acceptable and savoury viz. The Grace
of Truth and sincerity, Behold thou desire Truth in the Inward parts. And it
gives us this Doctrine That the Grace of sincerity and the exercise of it, Is
absolutely necessary for making our Duties acceptable to God; It Is so necessary
that the Lord will accept even very little where it is, when he^l reject much
where it is wanting: we will see both these if we look to the Scripture verdict of
two Kings of Judah, The first is, Asa, He was guilty in many things, there were
very visible defects in him trary to that which the Law of God required: as
particularly, he caused imprison the Prophet who reproved him 2 Chronicles: 16 10.
He did not remove the superstitious High places, and yet see what the Spirit of
God says of him 1 King 15, 14. The High places were not removed: nevertheless
Asa his Heart was perfect with the Lord all his days. Implying that because he
was a sincere upright hearted man, the Lord overlooked his many other failings.
So much is also employed in Hezekiah's Prayer, and the Answer it gets from God 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19. The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his Heart to
seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the Purification of the Sanctuary, And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah and healed
the People. The other is King Amaziah 2 Chronicles: 25, 2. He did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect Heart. Implying that
though he did many things which in themselves were Right and Good, yet because
his Heart was not single, sincere, and straight, in what he did, the Lord does
not regard it; which clears the thing I said before, That the Grace of
Sincerity and exercise of it is so necessary, that the Lord will accept even
very little where it is, and will reject much where it is wanting.

Now for opening up this Grace of Truth and sincerity a little, in order to the
application of the Point: Know 1, Sincerity is a Grace which looks mainly to
the Inside, therefore it is here called Truth in the Inward parts: If thou be a
Sincere man, an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile, Though a fair
outside, may please Onlookers, because they see no further, yet it will not
please thee, because thou knows it will not please God, He desires Truth in
the Inward parts. But of this already. 2. Sincerity and Truth of Heart makes a
man's Tongue and Heart to go together in all his deportment, whether to God or
man; The sincere hearted Man is not a double Man, he labors to be that in
effect which he gives himself out to be. Thus 1. John 3. 18* Truth is opposed
to ^air words which are no more but Words; My little Children (says he) let us
not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. Implying where
Word and Deed go not together, there is no singleness, sincerity, or Truth
there. 3. Sincerity aims at the right end, and works from right, approven and
spiritual motives. The Apostle Paul Philip: 1. 15, 16. Puts this difference
betwixt the sincere and unsincere man, The Sincere Man works out of love and
good will to Christ and Truth, the Unsincere man again works the same Work, and
as much of it, but he works out of envy and strife, For some base and by ends.
This Grace of Sincerity and Truth makes a man look not only to the Substance of
his Actions, that they be Right and Commanded, but also to the Manner of them,
and chiefly that they be from spiritual motives and for a right end, that is,
for God's Glory, Thy own Salvation, Thy neighbors good and Edification.

Now for Use, Ye would try if there be not much want and inlake of this Truth
and Sincerity among Us; It Is true every inlake and failing in the exercise of
Sincerity will not prove a Man to be Unsincere; As every act of Hypocrisy will
not make a Man an Hypocrite if so he do not countenance himself in it; If so he
do bewail it and flee to Jesus Christ to get pardon for it, and strength to
subdue it: It is not for this end I would have you to search and try your
Inlakes in the exercise of Sincerity, that ye may give your selves over for
Rotten-hearted Hypocrites: But that you may bewail it, take with it, judge your
selves for it, flee to Christ to get it pardoned, and to get Grace to amend it;
And your making this use of your foul Failings, as to this point, shall be a
clear evidence, that though there has been much unsincerity, and shameless
Hypocrisy in you, yet ye are no real Hypocrites*

But the main Use of the Point is, That as ye desire to come to the Lords Table
Acceptably, and in the Right Manner, so deal with God sincerely and in Truth,
that is, Let your great Work ly about your Heart and Inward Parts to get some
right frame and disposition put on them, whereof I spoke before; Only an
humble, hungring frame, thirsting after Communion and Fellowship with him, is a
good frame at such a time. Again let your coming flow from Spiritual Motives,
and level at Right and Approven Ends; But especially deal Sincerely and in
Tr^th with God, by laboring to be That indeed, which by your Act of coming to
the Communion ye give your selves out for. Now ye give your selves out for many
things. 1. Your Coming says, That ye have need of Christ, and must be at him;
And therefore deal sincerely and in Truth with Christ, in searching out and
being affected with the need ye have of Him. 2. Your Coming to the Lords Table
speaks that ye are weary of your old Masters, and have a real mind to change
them; Now I beseech you deal sincerely and in Truth with God, and see it be so
that ye are really weary of your old Lusts which formerly enslaved you; And
that ye have a mind indeed to quite them. 3. Ye do hereby give out that you
have a mind to take God for your Master, to enrol your self in the List of His
Soldiers to fight against the Devil, the World, your own Flesh, and every thing
which is an Enemy with Him; Deal in Truth and dissemble not with God in this:
See ye come not to give God a Day, with a secret purpose to give the Devil an
Year. 4. Ye do hereby give out, that you mind to close with Christ on His own
Terms; See ye deal sincerely with Him in this also; And for this end, Ponder
well and think on the Terms before hand, for if ye close a Bargain with Him on
his own terms, and so deal sincerely and in Truth with him; Ye must first take
him Freely, For Come and buy (says he) without money and without price. Isai
55. 1. And therefore ye must not keep back from Him, or come heartlesly to Him,
because ye find no worth in your selves for which ye should be beloved by Him:
If ye do so, ye deal not Sincerely and in Truth with Him. 2. If ye take Him on
his own Terms, and so deal Sincerely with Him, ye must take him wholly, not
only as a Priest to save you, but as a King to Rule in you: If ye mind to make
no other use of Christ but to get your bypast Sins pardoned by Him, that ye
may take on a new Score in time to come, ye deal not Sincerely and in Truth
with Him; ye pretend to take Him on His own Terms, and that is to take Him
wholly; And yet ye will not take Him as a King to Rule over you. 3. Ye must
take him with all the hazard that may follow upon your taking of Him, ye must
take him with a resolution to ^leave to him, through Well and through Woe,
as well when the World frowns upon him, as when it smiles, otherwise ye deal not
Sincerely with him: For these are his own terms whereon ye pretend to close
with him; If any man (says he) will be my Disciple, les him deny himself, take
up his Cross and follow me. And lastly, Ye must take him Irrevocably, for it is
an everlasting Covenant: So that if the next day when the sensible Fruits of a
Communion do not answer your expectation, ye loose your grip and quite the
Bargain, ye do not deal Sincerely and in Truth with Him.

I shall shut up all I have said, by giving some motives for making you deal
thus Sincerely and in Truth with him. Know 1. He is dealing Sincerely and in
Truth with you; He minds indeed to close a a most blessed Bargain with you, and
with all of you who mind to take him at his Word, and to give him Credit; And
if ye will but credit him, ye shall find from experience ere long that he has
been sincere, real, and in earnest with you: And to the end ye may trust him,
He gives the most speaking evidences of His Real sincerity toward you which
can be given: Before ye take a trial of him, ye have His Word for it, His Writ
for it, His Oath for it, and ye shall have His Seal and Pledge of it* Even,
that He shall be all that to you which He gives himself out for: so that I may
well say, The Lord is dealing Sincerely and in Truth with You, and therefore do
ye so with Him. 2. Your dealing thus Sincerely and in Truth with Him, (as I
showed before) will make him overlook your many other Failings, which otherwise
he will take notice of, and reckon on your Account. 3. If ye deal not Sincerely
and in Truth with Him now, it is a venture when, or if ever again ye get such
another occasion to do that which ye now leave undone. Many of us have often at
such times dealt deceitfully with God, our Hearts have not been straight before
Him: And yet for all this, he gives us a New Offer, That notwithstanding all
that is come or gone, He shall be our God, and we his People; And if ye close
with this Offer in Truth, and on his Own Terms, ye shall find him to be
forthcoming according to his Offer; But if ye shall slight him, and deal
deceitfully with him, seeming to close a Bargain with him when really ye do it
not, It is a venture (I say it over again) if ever ye get such another Offer.
The shaddows of the Evening, in respect of the bright Sunshine of Pure
Ordinances we have hitherto enjoyed, seem to be stretched out upon the Land,
and our Sun drawing toward a declining; But though that should not be, yet who
is there among you can infallibly promise, That he shall ever see another
Communion? yea or hear any number of Sermons after this. And therefore while it
is to day hear his Voice* and harden not your Hearts: Behold Now, this very
present ( Now) is the Acceptable time and the day of Salvation; And therefore
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and Call upon him while he is near.

A SERMON PREACHED AT KILWINNING, MAY 11th. 1663. Upon the Monday immediately
after the Giving of the COMMUNION.
The Third SERMON.
LUKE 7. 23. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in Me.
Beloved in the Lord,
THAT place 1 Cor. 1. 23. -- We Preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a
stumbling block, -- has had its accomplishment in all Ages, and in no Age more
than in this; Jesus Christ and His way of working, both with Churches and
Particular Souls, has been a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to many;
yea more and more are stumbling still, what through one occasion or other; many
who once did seem to run well in the way to Heaven, in the way of Truth, and in
the way of Piety, have either already taken up, or are in hazard to take up,
such an halt, as Christ may be conceived to say, to those very few who seem
resolved to follow him through Better and Worse, as once he said Joh. 6. 67.
Unto the twelve (when many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with
him) will ye also go away? I have therefore chosen this Text to speak from, now
immediately after having engaged your selves to walk in Christ's Way, that
thereby ye may guard against that woeful common evil of Being offended in
Christ, or of stumbling and taking up an halt in his Way of Truth and Piety,
notwithstanding all the stumbling blocks and rocks of offense ye may meet with:
For Blessed is he (says Christ) whosoever shall not be offended in me. The
Words are a Part of Christ's Answer to that Question propounded to Him by Two of
John's Disciples at John's desire, verse 20. -- Art thou he that should come,
or look we for another? Ye may wonder that John who knew Christ so well, should
have moved such a Question: But the Answer is, First, Tho Souls know Christ
never so well, they will desire and have need to know him better, and to get what
knowledge they have of him confirmed to them, especially in the day of Trial;
For John was now in Prison* And 2dly. They Will desire that others may know him
also; For it appears from what goes before, that John propounds this
Question for his Disciples satisfaction, and to satisfy their Doubts more than
his own.

Christ's Answer has two Parts* 1. He bids them show John what they saw him
doing, Verse 22. -- Tell John (says he) what things ye have seen and heard,
how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,
the dead are raised, to the poor the Gospel is preached. If ye ask what makes
this to the Answer of the Question; I answer, It makes much, for it shows he
was doing that which Scripture foretold the Messiah would do, Isai. 35. 5, 6.
And therefore he behoved to be the Messiah. 2. In their words he answers a
main Objection against this Truth taken from Christ's own low condition and the
practice of his Followers, which made many bear off him: For they expected a
Glorious Messiah, a Great earthly Monarch; And because Christ was but obscure
and mean, therefore they stumbled and were offended in him: To this Christ
answers, -- Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended (or scandalized) in
me. The word rendered here ( offended or scandalized) seems to be a Metaphor
taken from Travelers, who having dashed their Foot or Leg at some stone or
block in the way, do stumble or take up an halt so as they can go no further,
at least advance not so quickly in the way as they did. And Secondly, while he
says Offended in me, take this first Actively; And so the meaning is, They
should not take occasion of stumbling from any thing in Christ or in His Way.
2. It may be taken Passively, so as to point out the Way that we should not
stumble nor take up an halt in; For there are some ways, to wit, Every sinful
course and way, that it were good for People to stumble in, and turn their
backs upon: But this Way wherein we should not stumble, is Christ Himself, and
the Way of Truth and Piety prescribed by him, Blessed is he says Christ) who
shall not be offended in me. As if he had said, Happy is that Man who takes
not occasion from Me, or any thing in My Way, to stumble or turn his back upon
Me, and that course of Truth and Piety wherein I have commanded him to walk.

The Words are but One entire Proposition and Sentence, I need not therefore
spend time in dividing them; But shall come to the Doctrines.

First, The Lord applies the general Prophesies Concerning the Messiah in the
Old Testament to Himself in particular; showing they were verified in Him; For
the Words ( in me) have in them a direct Answer to the Question propounded by
John's Disciples, and shows the Messiah was come; and that He is That Messiah.
Whence we might mark, That JESUS CHRIST the Son of Mary, who was Born in
Bethlehem, brought up in Nazareth, and Crucified in Jerusalem, is that very
same Messiah, who was to Come and promised to the Fathers. We might observe
2ly, That before He gave this Answer that He was the promised Messiah whom they
were to follow, and not to stumble at, He does first prove by Scripture that it
was so, while he hids John's Disciples tell their Master, he was doing such
miraculous Works as the Scriptures did foreshew none but Christ should do.
Whence we might learn, That all Questions and Debates about Religion should be
determined from Scripture, and according to the Rule set down in Scripture: For
here when a Question arises among John's Disciples, If JESUS the Son of Mary
was the promised Messiah? neither John the Baptist (than whom there was not a
Greater Prophet among these that are Born of Women) yea nor Christ himself who
was Greater than he, do take it upon them to determine in it: But John sends
them to Christ, and Christ sends them to the Scripture for a Solution. Thus, To
the law and to the testimony (says the Lord, Isai. 8. 20.) if they do not
speak according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. The
neglect of this Rule has been the Inlet to Humane Traditions, without, and
contrary to Scripture, both in Worship and Government in the Antichristian
Church: And if this Rule once be laid aside, there can be no end of Humane
Ceremonies, until all that trash which is in the Roman Church be brought in
upon the Church of God: For if the Authority of a Man can make way for One, it
may also make way for all the rest.

But passing those, The two following Doctrines are these that I intend most to
insist upon, And both of them are employed. 1. That there are many stumbling
Blocks in Christ's way, whereat People are apt to Offend, take up an Halt and
stumble. And yet, Secondly, There is nothing of that kind which ought to make
us stumble: For if there were not some stumbling Blocks, Christ needed not so
much guard against them; and by his guarding against them, he shows we should
not stumble at them.

I shall prosecute both these Poins jointly. 1. By condiscending upon some of
these Rocks of Offense from which the Jews at first, and many since, have taken
occasion to stumble at Christ, to take up an Halt in his Way, and to turn their
backs upon it. And 2. By making it evident that there is no ground or reason
why ye should stumble at any of them.

First, The Jews stumbled at the Meanness of Christ's Person. They could never
take him, whom they looked on as a Carpenters Son, accompanied with a Train of
poor Fishermen, to be their long looked-for Glorious Messiah. And there is a
Rock like to this which many yet do break their neck upon and stumble at, to
wit, the Meanness of a Ministry; Their Spirits cannot digest to be reproved,
contradicted, and (as they think) trampled upon, by silly Bodies: And
therefore, they must have Ministers; some of them at least, advanced to the
highest pitch of wordly Honor; As thinking it will be less disgrace to be
controlled, reproved, and made to stand in awe by such; which is in effect to
stumble at the Way which God thinks meetest for saving Souls; even that his
Servants may have but little of outward Worldly Dignity, whereby the Efficacy
of their work on Souls may not be imputed to them but to Him, and usually Gods
own Way comes best speed, 2 Cor. 17. Paul, speaking of the mean and afflicted
Condition of Christ's Ministers, says -- We have this Treasure in Earthen
Vessels, that the excellency of the Power may be of God and not of us.

2. The Jews stumbled at Christ's Doctrine: The Doctrine of Justification by
Faith laying hold on Christ's Righteousness, Rom: 10. 3. They could not submit
themselves unto the Righteousness of God. And his condemning of the very first
Motions of the Heart to Sin; as appears by Christ's vindicating the Law from the
corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 5. 18. etc. Thus the
Doctrine of Christ, especially the strictness of it, and that acuracy of
Holiness enjoined by it, is a stumbling Block unto many yet: How many are they
who would willingly embrace Christ's Doctrine, so as to profess themselves
Christians; But to be so strick laced in your practice as that ye must dye to
the World, deny your selves, pluck out the Right Eye, cut off the Right Hand,
and so as ye dare not lie, no not for gain, nor Drink to Excess with your
Commerads; nor Curse and Damn your selves, no not when ye are in ^assion; no,
nor avenge your selves with your own hand when ye have gotten a wrong; This
they think sounds harsh, and must either have Liberty in things of that kind,
otherwise they will altogether quite It.

3. The Jews did stumble at the simplicity of the Gospel and Gospel Ordinances:
They could not endure the laying aside of the Levitical Ceremonies, which made
the Worship of God somewhat glorious to the Carnal Eye, and therefore was that
way of Religion called, Gal: 4. 2. 3. The Rudiments of the World, and Pedagogy
of the Law fitted for the Church while she was in her Infancy; as Rudiments and
Pedagogues are for Babes and Children; Now that the Jew's did stumble at the
Way of Christ because of it is simplicity, and because of the laying aside that
outward dress of Mosaical Ceremonies. Is clear from the many Disputes which
Paul has throughout his Epistles to that purpose. And this has been
frequently a ground of Offense and stumbling to many since, who could not, or
cannot think but God is better pleased with his Worship, when its decked up
with a number of Humane Ceremonies, that may breed (as they think) Humility and
Devotion in the Worshipers, than when its gone about in that plain simple way
wherein Our Lord Jesus Christ has enjoined it. But this were to make People
wiser than God; For if he had thought such things needful, or that they would
prove acceptable to him, could he not easily have commanded them; But now he
has not only not commanded, but also forbidden any thing of that kind, Col: 2,
20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World^ why,
as though living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances. Touch not, Taste
not, Handle not; which all are to perish with the using after the Commandments
and Doctrines of Men? Evidently teaching that the Lord did not abrogate His own
Ceremonies under the Old Testament, that men might appoint Theirs under the
New. And as to that which is suggested, That Humane Ceremonies added to Worship
are a means to quicken Devotion, as the Papists affirm of their Images and
Relicts; The Apostle tells us in the following 23 verse, Which things have
indeed a show of Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility -- They seem to be such,
but really are not: It Is but A show of Wisdom, Devotion and Humility which is
wrought by any Mean of man's Invention.

4. Men are ready to stumble at Christ and his Way, because of the sinful
Infirmities of Instruments and Ministers: Let them, say they, mend their own
Faults, and we will mend ours; but as long as Ministers, the best among them,
have their own Faults, some Pride, some Avarice, some Worse, Let them reprove
our Faults as they please, we will hold on and be doing; For if Sin were as ill
as they say it is, would not they themselves be more afraid of it: But herein
ye must know that ye stumble at the Wisdom of God: For as ye heard from 2 Cor:
4. 7. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the
Power may be of God, and not of us. He might have Preached to you by sinless
Angels; But this makes more for the Glory of God, when he makes use of Men
puzzled with a Body of Death like your selves, as an Hammer in his Hand to beat
down the Body of Death in others; For we must say in this Case, no Thanks to
the Preacher, but unto God.

5. Men are ready to stumble at the Scandalous Out-breakings of others:
Especially of those whom Christ has employed as Instruments for promoting his
Kingdom in Peoples Hearts; No doubt this made many stumble at Christ and his
way, That Judas one of his Own Company for Covetousness did sell his Master,
and hanged himself afterward. And indeed such Scandalous slips in those do
prove dreadful Stumbling Blocks, First, To Profane men, who have no Love to
Religion, but lie at a catch to lay hold on any thing whereby they may throw
dirt upon it, and here they get the very thing they wish: Hence (says Christ)
Woe to the World because of Offenses, They think themselves Happy because of
Offenses, For they have got that which makes Religion hateful: But our Lord
says, Woe be to them because of Offenses, For they prove stumbling blocks and
break-necks to them. Again they prove dreadful stumbling blocks to Godly weak
ones, whose face is thereby covered with shame, so as they have not the courage
to go on in Christ's Way, and set their Face against the storm of reproach, and
disgrace, which is raised up with such like work: But notwithstanding, know
there is no reason to stumble at Christ or his Way for any thing of that kind:
Because 1. He approves no such Scandalous outbreakings; His Word condemns them
in all, and in none more than in his Followers: Because David by his fall made
the Enemies of God to transgress, therefore the sword never departed from his
House. 2. He permits such Offenses to be, for holy wise and just Reasons, or
that wicked men may thereby get occasion, to vent that inward Spite they still
carried against Religion and Godliness; and so in Gods holy justice be
permitted to break their necks upon them. And 3. That all (even the best) may
see therein their own weakness before a tentation, and what unspeakable
obligations they are under to God, That they are not made examples of humane
frailty unto others, as others are to them. And 4ly That all may learn not to
have the Persons of men in admiration, to love Truth and cleave unto it, not
for the Piety of men who own it, but from that worth that is in Truth it self:
So as that tho the very Ministers themselves who Preach it should run away from
it, or by their Scandalous outbreakings through dirt upon it, Yet ye may still
adhere to it: In which case, that whereon others stumble and break their neck,
should make you advance the faster in your way, and God should bring you meat
out of the eater.

A 6th thing that proves a stumbling block unto many is, Diversity of Opinions:
There are so many Religions, and Opinions about Religion, they know not which
to follow, let all men once agree among themselves and then thy, I Will choose,
but till then they will forbear; and so in effect do mock at all Religion. But
neither should this be: For in the deep wisdom of God There must be Heresies --
that they which are approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor: 11. 19. Besides It
lies not in the Devils power so to confound matters but that humble seekers of
God will find out the right way, He that guids the blind in a way they know
not, will lead such: There are proud conceity People, even tho otherwise good,
and there are also Careless profane People, that is, Such as look upon all
Religion as Policy; who are most like among such uncertainties, to lose their
way.

7. People are ready to stumble at Christ and his way, Because of the Quality
of his followers; It Is the Poor receive the Gospel: John 7. 48. Have any of the
Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? And as Christ's Followers are of the
poorest sort; So usually the Cross is their Livery Through many tribulations
(says Paul) they must enter the Kingdom of Heaven. And who is Poor, sickly,
tender, despised, mocked at, afflicted in body and mind, if Christ's Followers
be not? But there is no Reason for stumbling at Christ and his Way for this;
And if thou stumble at it, thou stumbles at the wisdom of God, who 1 Cor: 1. 27
-- Has chosen the foolish things of the World, to confound the wise; and --
the weak things of the World to confound the things which are mighty; And base
things of the World, and things which are despised, has God chosen -- And as
to the Cross they get noe more of it than what is needful for them 1. Peter 1,
6 -- Though for a season (if need be) ye are in heaveness -- It is needful, and
they find it needful; so as many times they will be made to say, they could not
want one dram of it; besides that the bitter Cross makes Christ the sweeter to
them, and so sweet, as to furnish them with more contentment in their Crossed
condition, than a King has, who swayeth a scepter; Psalm 4. 6. The light of
Gods countenance made David Glad etc. To this add, Their Heaven is not here;
and the Lord of purpose makes earth bitter to his followers, that Heaven may
be the sweeter when it comes.

8. Not only common Calamities from God, but bitter persecutions from men,
attend the way of Godliness; and these make many stumble and take up an halt.
Christ our Lord Matthew. 13. 21. Speaks of a sort of men, who -- when tribulation
or persecution arises because of the word, by and by they are offended. And
the experience of all times shows that many formerly forward do then faint:
Neither want they their pretended Reasons, for they are made to suffer as evil
doers, often as disloyal or seditious persons, which to some, makes sufferings
more terrible than any other thing. Again, they will but faint and shame the Truth
when they are put to it, and therefore think it better to quite it in time; And
how can they be answerable to God, to run the hazard of losing all they have in
the World, and to make themselves and posterity Beggars; To this add, what if
sufferings should run higher than goods, even to their life? They are not ready
to dye, and so they may lose their Souls; besides they yield but in a little,
but quit not all; and therefore it is not wisdom (think they) to be too
peremptor, These and such like Reasons make many stumble at Persecution and a
suffering Lot, when it attends God's way and those that walk in it; But there
is as little cause to stumble at Christ and His Way, at this, as for the rest;
For seeing Christ our Lord and Master went to Heaven through a sea of many sad
sufferings, why should it be looked upon as a matter unbeseeming, or a ground
of stumbling, that it is with the Servants as it was with their Lord, and with
the Disciples as it was with their Master: Christ strives to prevent his
Disciples stumbling by the same Reason, John 15, 15. Again, a Suffering Lot
has still, when it followed Christ's Fellowers, made Christ's Way, the Way of
Truth and Piety, a gainer: It has ever proven so, as might be made appear both
from Scripture and Ecclesiastic History: As it was with the Apostle Paul
Phi^p. 1. 12. So has it been, and so it will be, with all Christ's suffering
Followers -- I would (says he) Ye should understand -- that the things which
happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel: This
ever has, is, and will be, God's nonesuch Way, wherein none can follow him,
to make his Truth, his Work, his Church, his Interests, thrive best when they
are born down most: As the Children of Israel Exodus: 1. 12. Who -- the more they
were afflicted, the more they multiplied and grew and therefore to stumble at
Christ's way because of Persecution, and a suffering Lot which usually does
attend it, is nothing else but to break our neck upon the deep and infinite
wisdom of God; because he takes his own Way, the surest and speediest way, to
make his Church to grow; and will not take Ours. Besides all these pretexts and
excuses of stumbling on this account may be easily answered: For tho it has
been the lot of Gods Servants, even when they have suffered for Righteousness,
to be suffering in the eye of the World as evil Doers; yet, in that case men
must think it enough that they approve themselves unto God; and that there is a
day coming when their integrity shall be brought forth as the Light. 1, Cor: 4
3 -- with me (says the Apostle) it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's Judgment -- he that judges me is the Lord. Again
none ever suffered that for him which he did suffer for them; He takes nothing
from men but what he has first given unto them, neither puts he them to more
than what he does fit and strengthen them for: It holds constantly, In the
mount the Lord will be seen. And 1 Pet: 4. 14. If ye be reproached for the name
of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests on you --
And when People are put to the outmost of what can be expected, even to lay
down their Lives; what is it but a paying of their debt a little sooner? For
once die they must: And tho they should shift the matter at that time, how
quickly may God take their life from them another way; possibly in a long
lingering and pineing sickness, with greater torment, and a gnawing worm of
Conscience besides: and for any loss of goods, Lands, and inheritance, that
either People themselves, or others of their Relations may sustain, by cleaving
to Christ's Way in a suffering time; It is not to be valued to the loss of
God's favor and countenance, which cannot but follow, if men do otherwise;
God's peace and Favor, the light of his countenance listed up, is that Hundred
fold, more than houses, brethren, sisters, Children, and Lands, which a man who
suffers the loss of all these things for Christ's sake and the Gospels, shall
receive even now in this life: As our Savior teaches Mark. 10. 29, 30. So
besides that God has a thousand ways to make up to men any loss of that kind:
at least so far, as no man who sets his face toward Heaven, shall want a
competency for carrying him there, and when a man's once there, he needs no
more: Matthew: 6. 33 -- Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you. And many things may fall out that
may impoverish you, in which ye will neither have that honor nor
satistisfaction which attends the Christians loss for Christ's sake. And tho
ceding for a little might put a storm of trouble by; yet he that is not
faithful in the little, will never be faithful in that which is more; and it is
Satan's Policy at all times to draw out the cause of sufferings to small
things; As Moses's Hoof, Mordecart's Beck, and Daniel's opening of his window:
In which case, to wit, the case of Confession, even small things become great.
From all which It Is abundantly clear there is no real Reason why any should
stumble at Christ and his Way, because of Peresecution, or a suffering lot
which usually does attend it.

But a Ninth and Last thing which makes People, ready to stumble at Christ and
his Way, and not only at one piece of his way, but the whole bulk of Godliness,
and turn perfect Atheists, is, The temporizing temper of Ministers* When, Alas
so much the more is our shame! it is usually observed the generality of
Ministers (almost of all Countries*) are of that Religion and Way which is most
in Credit, and which the sway of the Court runs most for: Thus among Papists,
almost all are Papists; In Sweden and Denmark, almost all are Lutherans: And
here with Us, and in France and Holland, almost all are Calvinists: And that
which increases the Scandal and Rock of Offense is, When it is observed they
easily turn their Tongues to speak the language of all times, forewardly crying
up such a Way the one year, when the Ruling Power is for it, and not only
crying it up, but engaging their Credit and Conscience by the most solemn Ties
which can be imagined amongst Men to promote it, and pressing, with all the
most serious vehemence that Men can use, upon the Lords People to do the like.
And yet when times change, and that they perceive the promoting of such a Way
does not make for their Worldly interest, they will cry it as much down again:
As if there were no respect to be had, either to God, Conscience, or Credit;
but only to Peoples Interest and Standing. Thus in the days of Constantine the
Great a Godly Prince, all the Ministers almost were Orthodox: Again, in his Son
Constantius his days, almost all of them (even the same Men who had been at
the Council of Nice and condemned the Arian Heresy) turned Arians: Hence it was
then said, Vnus Athanasius contra totum mundum. And as it was in that Age, so
has it been almost ever since, The sway of the Court and Ruling Power of the
Times, has carried with it the generality of Ministers too great a length, to
say and unsay, as they did enjoin them. This I grant is indeed a Rock, which of
any other has in it most of Offense, a Rock whereon many a Soul has made
Shipwreck: And if the mighty Power of God did not preserve his own Elect, It
were a Worlds wonder, if it did not banish all sense of Religion out of the
World, making all Flesh turn Irreligious Atheists: But notwithstanding the Word
of the Lord does furnish us with something to say of this Rock also; that there
is no reason why any should stumble at Christ's Way for it. And 1. Because both
Scripture and Humane Histories do show, That though it has been so almost in
all times; yet the Lord has guided the matter so, that he has still keep'd a
Church to Himself. I have showed so much already from Church History in
Constantine's time: And for Scripture History, Ye know in Elijah's time, 1
Kings 19. 14. The torrent of Defection was so prevalent, that for any thing
could appear to such a sagacious Man as Elijah, He, and he only, was left
alone. And Rev. 3. 4. There were but a few Names left in Sardis which had not
defiled their Garments with the Iniquity of the Times. 2. This may also
contribute to remove stumbling, That the Lord, amongst all the most general
Defections of Ministers, has ever kept some straight: So as the Way of Truth
and Piety is not left without a Witness, and some encouragement to those that
walk in it. In Achab's time there was one Elias, yea several others, tho Elias
knew not of them: And in Sardis there were a few names at least, who had not
defiled their Garments. When the Arians so far prevailed, that it was said, the
whole World groaned and wondered at it self that it became Arian, yet there was
One Athanasius. And when Antichrist was to prevail, it is shown Rev. 11. 3.
That notwithstanding all the Tyranny of Antichrist, and the torrent of
Corruption in these times, God should have His Two, that is, tho not many, yet
some few Witnesses.

3. The Lord in His deep Wisdom does measure out such a Dispensation for
heightning His Churches Trial, And that these who keep their Garments clean may
come forth as Gold. It is but an inconsiderable Trial, and calls for little
Resolution to stand it out, When all the Lord's Ministers speak one thing,
lifting up their Voice as a Trumpet, and denouncing the dreadful Judgments of
God on all who turn their back on Truth and Piety; But when the generality of
Ministers at any time do blow the Trumpet of Defection from the Lord, That
speaks Loyalty indeed, If then, notwithstanding such Defection, People stand to
the Lords Banner, and in nothing be moved from it: And that because the Trumpet
gives an uncertain sound, speaking one thing one day and another thing the
next: So that to stumble at Christ's Way because of this when it falls out,
is to stumble at the Wisdom of God.

4. Therefore should no Man stumble at Christ nor His Way for this, because the
Lord in all times has made it, and no doubt will yet make it, tend to the
advantage of His Way in the close; So as afterward, times growing more
favorable, the Church of God has thereby been freed from a Fleece of
Time-servers, who would never otherwise have discovered themselves: Besides
that others who through weakness, had turned aside in some degre^^ with the
torrent of the time, somewhat against their Heart, have been made to
acknowledge their weakness to God's Glory: And so make up by their Repentance,
the breach they had made on God's Way by their Fall. And consequently for any
to stumble at Christ's Way because of This, is to break their neck on that,
which in God's method does make His Way most lovely in the Close.

There are other Two Points yet which might be handled jointly as the former;
The one Expressed, The other Employed, and both of them serve to confirm the
last, to wit, That whatever we meet with in Christ's Way, we should not love
Christ nor His Way the less: None of these things should make us take up an
halt in His Way, much less turn our back upon it. For 1. It is an happy thing
not to stumble at Christ or His Way: This is expressed in the Text. 2. The Man
who is offended in Christ, who turns his back upon Him because of
Stumbling Blocks or Rocks of Offense in the Way, That Man is an unhappy Man and
cursed. I might prosecute both these Points, but for the time I shall forbear,
and only say something in Answer to a needful Question: I think one may readily
ask what I call Christ's Way whereat we should not stumble; For there are Men
and Parties of several ways, There are Papists and Protestants, Sectaries,
Socinians, Formalists, Anabaptists, Prelatists or Episcop^l-men, Presbyterians,
Independents, and Quakers, every one whereof, have their Own Way about
Religion; And no doubt all of them will call their Own Way Christ's Way: And
therefore it is needful to know which of these ways are Christ's Way indeed,
that so we may not turn our backs upon it. In Answer to which Question, It
cannot be expected (if it were but for the time) I can enter in a Debate
concerning what is Right or Wrong, what is Christ's, what is not Christ's in All
those Ways; I shall therefore only give you some general Directions for
finding out what is Christ's Way amidst the tide and torrent of so many
contrary Opinions: And these such, that upon the one hand I think there is no
Man having his right Wits about him, with the least Grain of Piety, but he must
give his Assent unto them; And yet such as through God's Blessing, being
rightly improven, shall not leave you without a Guide what to choose as God's
Way, and what not.

First then, I doubt not it will be taken for granted by All. That the Way of
Christ whereat we should not stumble, are the Essentialls of Piety and
Christianity; I mean Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Life, Holiness and
tenderness of Walk in eschewing all known Sin, and coming up to the Practice of
all known Duty: This is it I intended mainly all alongs, to wit, That
notwithstanding all the forementioned Rocks of Offense, ye would not turn
Profligate, Profane, Debauched, and Irreligious Atheists; but hold on in the
Way of substantial Piety notwithstanding of all, and over the belly of all.

2. But this is not all: It Is but a loose way of Religion, and very near to no
Religion at all, for a Man to pretend to no more but adhere to the Practice of
substantial Duties, and the Faith of Fundamental Truths, while in other things
he says and unsays, and rolls about with the times: For hereby they may suffer
the Devil to do with the most part of Scripture what he pleases: For Truths
absolutely necessary to Salvation are but few, the Lord in Mercy having so
provided, that the meanest capacity may explicitly comprehend them and all of
them, seeing they cannot be saved without them: But tho there be some few Truths
only of absolute necessity for Salvation; yet there are others in their own
kind also necessary, to wit, for Gods Glory and your own Comfort, and the Lord
will have you sticking closs by these Truths once knowing them to be Truths, as
well as by others; and that because a great part of Christ's Way lies in a
Man's adherence even to these Truths, to wit, God's Glory and the Man's own
Comfort: And a Profane loose and indifferent Spirit as to these, does both in
the nature of the thing and in God's just Judgment, beget in progress of time,
Profane Indifferency and Atheism as to other more great and substantial Truths:
So does the Apostle Paul inform the Galatians, Chapter 5. 9. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump.

Thus then the great Question is to know which is Christ's Way in Truths of
that sort, that so we may not stumble at it: For which in the first place take
Paul's Rule, Philipp. 3. 16. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same Rule. And 2 John 8. Look to your selves that we lose not
these things that we have wrought -- In a word, whatever a Man is persuaded on
good ground to be Christ's Way, let him stick closly by That as his way, and
whatever he meet with, beware of doing any thing wherein his own Heart will
condemn him. I say this, because there are some Truths of an inferior Nature,
which are as clearly revealed in Scriptures as other more substantial Truths:
And consequently a Man may as much be persuaded of the one as the other: And
tho another Man may think, or say he is persuaded of the contrary Error that it
is Truth, and be deceived: Yet it follows not that the Man who is persuaded of
Truth to be Truth is deceived likewise; There is a Man who in his Dream thinks
certainly he is awake and speaking, that Man certainly is deceived: But it were
a strange thing to conclude from that, that the Man who is really awake cannot
know if he is so, but must always suspect he may be deceived and in a Dream.

This much then for things out of Doubt, and wherein a Man upon good grounds
has attained to a full persuasion of the Truth that is in them. But the
greatest Question of all is, concerning Points of the Truth whereof we are not
absolutely persuaded without some scruple and ground of Doubt to the contrary,
how we may know what is God's Way in those. And for this I shall give you some
Marks. 1st. The Light of Nature will teach us in things Doubtful to incline to
the surest and safest side, and that against which least can be said: As for
Example, in that Controversy concerning the adding of Sacred significant
Ceremonies invented by Man to God's Worship: As; Bowing to Altars, Kneeling at
the Communion, Signing with the Cross at Baptism, etc. Those who plead such
Additions to be superstitious and unlawful, do bring Deutr. 12. 32. What things
soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor
diminish from it, And such like Scriptures for a Proof. The Patrons of
Ceremonies answer* That God forbids such Additions only which are contrary
to the Word, but not such as are besides the Word neither forbidden nor
commanded by it. Now that is the very Answer which Papists give to Our
Protestant Divines, while we use the same Scripture for an Argument against all
their superstitious Ceremonies invented by Men: And indeed if that Door be once
opened, a Door is opened not only for one or two, but all the Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, for on that ground only do they plead for them: When we ask
what Warrant have they from Scripture for their frequent Crossings, their use
of Salt, Spitle, Exorcisms in Baptism, their use of Holy Water, Baptising of
Bells, Pilgrimages, and Pennances? They Answer it is enough of Warrant for the
Church to Command them, that they are not expressly condemned in Scripture. Now
seeing the way that is pleaded for such Ceremonies casts up so wide a gap; It Is
sure, that to abstain from them altogether, is the safest.

2. That Way in things Doubtful is most like to be Christ's, the Chief
Promoters whereof are not carried on with by-ends, self designs to acquire
Worldly Honors or Riches, or Fa^ Benifices to themselves, but on the contrary,
the very thing they plead for, and that part of the Contradiction which they
mantain, is, That nothing of that kind, further than honest Compitency, and
Ministerial respect, should be bestowed on Christ's Ministers. And upon the
other hand, it is a shrewd Presumption at least that such a Way is not
Christ's, wherein the Chief Promoters do palpably seek themselves and their own
Worldly Interests: The Apostle Paul uses to lay great weight on this Mark,
especially Romans 16. 18. -- Such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly -- So that if they seek their own Bellies they serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ. And Philipp. 3. 18, 19 -- Many walk -- that are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ -- whose God is their belly -- who mind earthly things. If it
be evidently seen they mind earthly things, They are but Enemies to the Cross
of Christ.

3. When People doubt about several Ways which of them is Christ's Way, they
are to stick by that unto which they are most engaged, and by more solemn ties
obliged, until (at least) they be clearly convinced it is wrong, for very
common understanding will judge That to be the surest.

4. That way which by the grant of its Adversaries has ground in Scripture for
it; tho they also say men may change it, must certainly look more like Christ's
Way than the contrary which is confessed by its prime Maintainers to have no
ground in Scripture, but that the great Warrant which is given for it, doth^ly
in the Authority of men. Even an heathen King Artaxerxes did know so much, that
every thing in the House of God behooved to be done according to the revealed
will of God; whence he issues forth a Decree Ezra; 7, 23. Whatsoever is
commaded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done, for the house of the
the God of heaven: for why should their be wrath against the realm of the King
and his Sons?

Lastly, That which tends most to the promoting of Piety, and is attended most
with the Fruits of a Godly life, and tender conversation in it is most eminent
mantainers and followers, and this not for a little short flash only at it is
first beginning and when it is as it were upon it is Trials, but at all times
when ever there was any Controversy about it, That Way I say looks most like
to Christ's Way: For all His Way and every Piece of it tends unto That to make
People lead a Godly and Holy life Titus 2. 11 -- The Grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all men: Teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and Godly, in this present
World. And upon the contrary, That way, whereof the most zealous mantainers and
and followers, as to their generality have been still plagued with prophanity
and looseness; That way I say looks not like the way of Christ. We Will find
Christ himself does lean no small weight on this Mark Matthew. 7. 15, 16 Where he
gives a general rule whereby to try false Prophets and teachers, to wit, The
Fruits and Effects which their Doctrine has upon their own Lives and
Conversations Ye shall know them (says he) by their fruits: Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. And verse 20. Wherefore by their fruits
ye shall know them. Now all these things are such undoubted Truths as none will
get them denied in the general, and yet such as through Gods Blessing being
rightly improven, may give People light in the former Question, To know which
is Christ's Way, among the many waye^ on foot in the Church of God; so as we
need not any further application, but exhort you with the Apostle Paul 2 Timothy:
2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

A SERMON PREACHED AT KILWINNING, Upon the Monday immediately after the giving
of the Communion.
The Fourth SERMON.
ACTS 11. 23. Who when he came, and had seen the Grace of God, was glad, and
exhorted them all that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.
THE Scope of my Sermon yesterday from Jeremiah 3. 22. was to bring you to God:
The Text in hand holds out a main Duty ye should make conscience of when ye are
brought to him, and have closed with him, as all of you by your approaching to
the Lord's Table profess ye have done. Your Duty now is with purpose of heart
to cleave unto the Lord. I shall not run far back for finding out the Connection
of this Purpose with that which goes before: Only ye may observe that Luke the
Penman of the Holy Ghost in this History of the Acts, does show (from Verse 19
of this same Chapter) how that through occasion of that Persecution which the
Church at Jerusalem met with after Steven's Death* mentioned Chap. 8) the
Gospel being preached by those who were forced to fly for their lives did
wonderfully spread as far as Phan^ce, and Cyprus, and Antioch; And many in
these Regions and Kingdoms were taken with it, for Verse 21, The hand of the
Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.
Whereupon as is shown v. 22. when these tidings came to the Church at
Jerusalem, They sent forth Barnabas* A Man of extraordinary Parts and Calling
(for he was an Apostle, as is clear from Acts 14. 14.) I say the Church sends
him as far as Antioch, for helping foreward the Work. And in this Verse we have
Barnabas his coming to them, and what he does when he comes: Who when he came,
and had seen the Grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with
purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.

In which Words we have these things consideraable. 1. Barnabas his coming to
Antioch. 2. We have what he saw when he came, He saw the Grace of God, to wit,
The wonderful effects of God's Grace, in bringing so many to embrace the
Doctrine of the Gospel. 3. We have what this sight did work upon him. 1. It
made him Glad. 2. It brought a pithy needful exhortation from him to these New
Converts, the sum whereof is here set down -- That with purpose of heart, they
would cleave unto the Lord. What Explication is needful, I shall insist on as I
go through the Particulars.

First, It is mentioned he came to Antioch. But we hear nothing of any great
train he carried along with him, Or any great solemnity at his Reception, tho
he was an Apostle the highest Office-bearer in the Church: But only that he
came, doubtless in a sober way as became a Minister of Christ: It was a thing
then unknown in the World for Churchmen to go accompanied with Trains like
Princes, and that whole Country sides and greatest Personages in them,
behooved to wait upon their Grandeurs. It never was well with the Church of God
since Churchmen began to overtop Peers and Nobles. But the thing I mark from
this is, That Barnabas tho an extraordinary Office-bearer in the Church and an
Apostle, does nevertheless obey the Orders of the Church at Jerusalem: For it is
mentioned v. 22. That the Church at Jerusalem sent him forth, and here, That he
did come accordingly: Now what this Church at Jerusalem was, to whose
Directions he subjected himself, is clear from Act. 21. 18. It was the Church
of Elders or Presbyters, even a Presbytry as has been made out convincingly
these years bypast against the Independants. To the direction of which Elders,
the Apostle Paul did submit himself there, as Barnabas does here. From which it
is clear, that even the Apostles and extraordinary Office-bearers of the Church
were very respective and tender of that Authority which Jesus Christ has given
to His Church and the Judicatories thereof. This appears chiefly in Two things.

First. When there were Churches constitute and Church Judicatories erected to
manage the Discipline of the Church, the Apostles did not exercise power of
Jurisdiction over these Churches by themselves alone, neither in the Ordination
of Ministers, nor in the Censuring or Excommunicating of Scandalous Offenders,
but tho they were without doubt universal Pastors of the whole Church, yet they
did remit the same to Ordinary Church Judicatories: Thus Paul does not Ordain
Timothy to be a Minister alone, but admits the Ordinary Presbytery to do it. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophesy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And 1 Cor. 5. he
clearly speaks of the power of Excommunication as residing in the Church
Judicatory at Corinth, and reproves them for their not making use of that Power
in Excommunicating the Incestuous Person, and stirrs them up to their Duty. V.
4, 5. That In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered together,
and my Spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 5. To deliver such an
one unto Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus.

A Second thing wherein the Apostles did show their respect to Church
Judicatories was this which is here mentioned in the Text, That in many things
they were ordered by, and subject to their directions: Thus in the place cited
Acts 21. 20. The Church of Elders or Presbyters at Jerusalem give their
Injunctions to Paul that for removal of an offense that many thousands of Jews
had taken against him he should publictly practice some of the Jewish
Ceremonies in purifying himself and shaving his head, which were at that time
things indifferent: And accordingly it is mentioned v. 26. That Paul did follow
their direction: All which shows that the Authority of Church Judicatories was
very much tendered even by the Apostles themselves. The Bishops do indeed boast
themselves to be the Apostles Successors, and their only Successors, I shall
not stand upon this, It being made very clear by Protestant writers against the
Papists, In the controversy about the Pope, That the Apostles had no
Successors, as to what was extraordinary in their Office; and as to that which
was Ordinary in it, as to Preach the Word, Dispense the Sacraments, and
exercise Church Discipline over particular Churches, That they have in these
all Ministers for their Successors: But passing that, What I am now on is, That
the Bishops of these latter times have encroached more upon the Power and
privilege left by Christ unto his Church and Church Judicatories, than ever
the Apostles themthemselves (whose Successors they give themselves out for)
did. For as I have cleared from the present Doctrine, The Apostles did leave
the matters of Ordinary Jurisdiction to be managed by Ordinary Church
Judicatories; but so do not they, The whole Body of Christ's Ministers within a
Church (though they were all gathered together) may neither Ordain a Minister,
nor Excommunicate a Scandalous Offender, but this must be done only by the
Bishop, and such as ^e does Substitute under him for it. Again the Apostles
were in some things at least subject and ordered by the Directions of Church
Judicatories, but so are not They, such a Condiscendance could not stand with
their Honors and Dignities.

Secondly, We have in the Text what Barnabas saw among them when he came, and
this is called, The Grace of God. The meaning whereof is not as if all of them
had been converted and endued with saving Grace, neither does Grace here
signify Gods Grace inherent in them, but Gods Grace and free Favor which he
saw in the effects of it, in that it wrought so Powerfully in bringing a great
many to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel among whom there (doubtless) were
many sincere and real Converts, though all of them were not so. However the
thing he saw was, The mighty progress and success of the Gospel; and this
occasioned by a strong and cruel Persecution (mentioned verse 19) the Ministers
are forced to flee from their Flocks; wherever they go they Preach, Gods Grace
and mighty Hand accompanies their Labor to the Conversion of many thousand
Souls, this is the Grace which Barnabas saw.

Hence take this Doctrine, That sadest Persecutions for Truth do frequently
prove an occasion of the Gospels spreading: Thus it was Act: 8. 3. Saul -- made
havoc of the Church, entering into every House, and haling Men and Women,
committed them to Prison. v. 4. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went
every where Preaching the Word, Even as far as Ph^nice, Cyprus and Antioch, as
it is ver. 19 of this Chapter The making havoc of the Church occasioned the
enlargement of the Church, which has frequently fallen out since, which gave
ground to that true and ancient saying, The Blood of Martyrs is the seed of the
Church.

The Reasons why the Work and Grace of God thrives best at such times may be
many. As 1. Peoples Ears are then bored and readiest to drink in the Word with
greediness, because then they have little other comfort left them: Affliction
and Persecution is a Tasty Sauce to make the Word Relish, Psalm. 141. v. 6. When
their Judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words for they
are sweet. 2. At such times the Servants of Christ are more diligent in their
Work, as they can have access to it, and more fervent in dealing with God by
Prayer for a Blessing to their Work, because the thriving of their Work is all
the reward which they can then expect. And 3. The Lord does then, usually
countenance the Labors of his Servants most, because they are most despised,
few do then care for them, or takes any notice of them. And therefore the Lord
takes this way, both to hearten them and to put respect upon them. And 4. The
Courageous, Constant and Cheerful enduring of Hardships and Sufferings for
Truth, does commend that Truth for which they suffer, unto others, even to
indifferent Spectators; and makes them enquire after it, and desirous to know
what so much worth there can be in it.

I shall not insist for Application, hasting forward to the latter part of the
Text, Only if it be so, Then People are not to lookupon Persecution and a
suffering time for Truth, whenever it comes, as so sad, so dismal, and dreadful
a thing, For this at least may be expected to be lovely in it; The same Truth
which men labor to bear down, shall spread the faster and the further. And
that this is so, the following Doctrine will show.

Another Doctrine arises from the first effect this sight did work on
Barnabas, It made him Glad, for so says the Text, Who when he came and had
seen the Grace of God was glad. The Doctrine is this, That the Gospel and Truth
do spread, and gain ground among People, is matter of Joy and gladness to a
Godly heart, though the times were otherwise never so sad: For there were many
things to make Barnabas sad at this time, If we consider 1. How they had stoned
the first Martyr Stephen to death, a man full of the Holy Ghost, and used him
so as if he had been the most notorious Malefactor that ever the Earth carried.
And 2. The prosperous state of the Churches Enemies, the Scribes, Pharisees,
Highpriests, a company of degenerate corrupt Churchmen, who at that time did
sit at Jerusalem, guiding all things at their pleasure, That if any did but
mutter against their State and Dignity, though in the furthest part of all the
Realm, their hand could easily reach them; They needed no more but hound out a
Saul with a Commission if it were to Damasc^s to take them, and bring them
bound to Jerusalem. As is clear from Acts 9. 1, 2. And 3. if ye consider his
own poor condition, and that of others the Servants of Christ at that time, who
were hunted from corner to corner, yea from Kingdom to Kingdom. These, and many
such things as these, were at that time to make Barnabas sad, and yet this
makes him take all in the better part, and in a manner digest all, That when he
came he saw the Grace of God had accompanied the Labors of his despised
Servants, and a rich Income of Souls to the knowledge of Christ and the Gospel.
And when he saw this, he was glad; He is in some sort so transported with it,
That in a manner he forgets Stephen's death, he envyeth not the prosperous
state of the Churches Enemies, no^ does much resent his Own hard lot, or that
of others, who were Christ's Faithful Saints and Servants. All which clears
the Doctrine, That the spreading of Truth will make a Godly Heart Glad* though
the times otherwise were never so sad. Thus was it with the Apostle Paul,
Philip, 1. 12. The things which happened unto me. (says he meaning his Bonds,
Imprisonment and other harsh usage) have fallen out rather unto the furtherance
of the Gospel. Whereupon v. 18. he breaks out, What then? notwithstanding every
way, whether in pretense or in Truth, Christ is Preached; and I therein do
rejoice; yea, and will rejoice.

For Use 1. Try your selves by this, What it is that makes you Glad, Is it the
thriving of Gods work in Souls? The down-bearing of Sin? The growth of Piety?
If so, It speaks thee to be a man of Barnabas temper: and upon the other hand,
If things of that kind do rather make the sad; and if the back-going of Gods
Work, The destroying what he has built, The plucking up of what he has
planted, The thriving of sin and Wickedness* The general Looseness of the times;
If (I say) these things make thee Glad; It speaks thee to be a man of a woeful
temper, a very Godless Heart. But 2. If this be a thing that will make a Godly
Heart Gla^, in the saddest of times, then Pray to God for it; that it may be
so, That the Work of God may thrive in Hearts, That those woeful Spiritual
Plagues of Security, Deadness and Hardness of Heart may be removed, and the
Gospel may take many by the Heart who never hitherto knew the Power of it. It Is
easy for God to bless his Truth in the Mouth of his despised and persecuted
Servants, and to make a gracious Change, tho Wickedness were at the greatest
hight: And if he do it, whatever may be the other sadness of the Times, thou
who art a Godly Heart shall have reason to be Glad, yea and thou shall be Glad,
tho thou were lying bound in a Prison with Paul, thou shall in a manner forget
thy Sorrow, and in that thou will rejoice.

But I come now to the 2d. Effect which this sight did work in Barnabas; It
brought a pithy needful Exhortation from him to these new Converts: For says
the Text, -- When he had seen the Grace of God he was glad and exhorted them
all, etc. I observe first in general that this was the Eirand the Church of
Jerusalem had sent him on, at least the Chief part of it, and that which he
minded most, therefore his discharging this part of his Commission is only
mentioned, even his Exhorting of them and Confirming them, by Preaching to
them. Hence this is clear, That Preaching and Exhortation is one part at least
of the Ministerial Office, yea and a great part of it: It is such a piece of
the Ministers Duty, that both the Converted and Unconverted have need of it,
and such need, That in an ordinary way they cannot be saved without it. It Is
needful to the Unconverted, For Romans 10. 17. -- Faith comes by hearing -- And
1 Cor. 1. 21. -- It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them
that believe. It Is needful also to the Converted, as is clear both from this
Text (for after he had seen the Grace of God among them, He sees it needful to
exhort them) and from Acts 14* 21, 22. The Apostle Paul did Confirm the
Disciples, and exhorted them to continue in the Faith, Exhortation and
Preaching even to those that are already Converted, is God's mean to Confirm
them. In a word, it will neither be good for the Converted nor Unconverted
among us if ever it come to this (as the Lord knows how soon it may come)
that Preaching shall be looked on as no part, or a very Inconsiderable part of
the Ministers Duty, or a thing Indifferent whether he Preach or not, providing
ye Read, Sing, or Say a Set Service, which within a little cannot but wear
threed-bare to people by frequent Hearing: Alas! how little Food is there in
such like work for hungry exercised Souls? How little stuff to rouse up or work
upon the dead drouzie secure Conscience? We read in Scripture that Apostles,
Evangelists and Ministers, were sent out to preach and to mind that as a great
part of their Work, yea and to mind it more than the Administration of the
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 1. 17. -- Christ sent me not to Baptize but to preach the
Gospel. -- That is, not so much to Baptize as to Preach; But we never find they
were sent out to read, say, or sing a Set Service, and much less, that they did
place the stress of Religion on such a Service, Caring the less, if that were
done, whether there had been Preaching or not: Alas! Beloved, when we consider
how much plain and powerful Preaching, fervent and Soul-piercing Exhortation
has been in Britain, and how little use, the Generality have made of it, and
how much they have undervalued it: It were little wonder though liberty to
Preach were taken from Ministers, or Preaching Ministers removed from People,
and such set over them as can do no more than what any School Boy may do, even
to read an Homily or old printed Preaching, and to chant over a Service Book.

But I come to the Exhortation it self, or rather the sum of what Barnabas
preached to them: For we may not think he spoke neither more or less than these
very words: Doubtless he ran out and enlarged excellently on these Heads; but
this was the sum of what he said, He exhorted them all that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord. Here we have Two things. 1. The thing
exhorted to, or what he would have them do, which is To cleave unto the Lord.
2. The manner wherein he would have it done viz. With purpose or resolution of
heart.

As to the First, The thing exhorted to, is, to cleave to the Lord Jesus
Christ, who usually gets the Name of Lord in the New Testament: And the word
rendered [cleave unto him] signifies also continue with him. Now the Lord to
whom he exhorts them to Cleave, or to continue with, is, 1 The Lord Christ
Himself, who tho Bodily absent, yet is Spiritually present, and as to the
Merit, Virtue, and all the Fruits of His Death, is offered to us in the
Promise: And the Way how we c^eave to the Lord thus, is, By Faith, and the
continuing in the exercise of that Grace: This is it which is called Ab^^ing in
him. 1 John 2. 6. And Dwelling in him. 1. Joh. 4. 13. Take this then for the
first Piece of this large and comprehensive Duty to which ye are here exhorted,
That ye who have fled to Christ by Faith, Cleave to Christ, and Continue with
him, that is, mantain what ye have do^^ein closing with Christ, beware of
loosing these grips ye have laid hold on, but frequently renew them, that so ye
may cleave the nearer to him.

This is nece^^ary, for 1. Satan will not fail to let showers of Tentations
flee at you, to drive you from Him, and make you loose your grips; And surely
ye shall be made to loose them, unless you put on a Resolution thus to cleave
unto Him. 2. This Cleaving to Him, and Abiding in Him, is the cause of
fruitfulness, Joh. 15. 4, 5. I am the Vine (says Christ) -- he that abides in
me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: It is little wonder there
be but few Fruits after a Communion, because instead of Cleaving to the Lord,
and mantaining what ye have done in closing with him, and instead of doing it
over again, ye do on the contrary upon the least cross Dispensation begin to
question the reality of what ye have done, and to retire as Men ashamed,
because ye have Hoped.

Now that ye may thus mantain what ye have done in Closing with the Offer of
Christ held forth in the Promise, and so cleave to the Lord in the exercise of
Faith; I shall recommend to you these Three things. 1. Labor to be tender in
your Walk; For tenderness of Walking is a Fruit of Faith, and the want of it
will beget a suspicion that ye have no Faith nor ever had it, and if ye suspect
ye want Faith ye can have little heart to cleave to the Lord by exercising it:
There is nothing which more obstructs our Boldness in adhering to our Interest
in Christ, and in our Cleaving to him by Faith, than Untender Walking. 2. Dwell
much in the daily sense of your Wants, this will put you frequently to employ
Him: When People want Water within doors, they must of necessity run often to
the Well with the Bucket to draw, but when ye wear out of acquaintance with
your emptiness and Wants, and think ye have a Fountain and sufficient stock in
your selves, ye'l make but little use of Faith, and seldom use making of it
makes it to decay, that ye cannot make use of it when ye would. 3. Do not
needlessly and without a ground call in question the reality of your former
closing with him; For that, as I told you before, will make you heartless to
set to it of new; Or however ye question the reality of what ye have done
already, yet see that in no terms ye question your Right to close with him by
Faith, and believe in him for time to come: For whatever thou have done
formerly, the Gospel Offer is yet at thy door, and a Command from God unto thee
to close with it, and if thou have not done it in earnest before, thy need is
so much the greater to do it frequently and in earnest now.

But now to proceed, By ( the Lord to whom he exhorts them to Cleave, is not
only meaned The Lord Himself as he is offered in the Promise, but generally all
that he has recommended to our care, as an evidence of our respect to him,
Thus we testify our respect to absent Friends by owning their Concerns and
Interests, and if ye ask what these things are that the Lord Christ has
recommended to our care, I answer in two words, First, His Truth, and next his
Service. So that 1. ye are to Cleave unto, and Continue in his Truth against
Error; according to what the Apostle Jude commands, V. 3* -- Ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, (to wit, the Doctrine of Faith or Truth) which
was once delivered unto the Saints 2. We are to Cleave to and Continue in his
Service, whether the Duties of Immediate Worship we should cleave to these
against Superstition, voluntary neglect, Will Worship and Idolatry: Or the
Duties of our Particular Callings and Stations; All which should be gone about
as Service to him; So Servants are to do their service with good will, as to
the Lord, and not to men, Ephesians. 6. 7. Now that Cleaving to all These is meaned
by Cleaving unto the Lord, appears from Deutr. 10. 20. and 30. 20. where
Cleaving to the Lord is explained by fearing the Lord, by obeying his voice, by
serving him and swearing by his name.

Now to speak a little to each of these. 1. Ye must Cleave to and continue in
his Truth. Gaius is commended for this 3 John 3. even that he walked in the
Truth; And Prove. 23. 23. we are bidden Buy the Truth and sell it not; And ye
heared from Jude, -- Ye should contend for the Truth: For Error contrary to
Truth is of a Damning Nature, 2 Peter 2. 1. They are called Damnable Heresies;
And Error in point of Truth makes way for Prophanity and looseness of Life, a
sound Heart and an unsound Head cannot well subsist; Therefore does Peter 2
Epist. 3. 17. call Error -- The error of the wicked*

For helping you to this needful Duty of Cleaving to the Lord, by Cleaving to
His Truth, I shall recommend to you these things. 1. Beware of Skepticism, or
making all Truths debateable, or those Truths especially which may bring you in
greatest hazard to confess or cleave to: This is down right contrary to the
Cleaving to Truth here enjoined. 2. Do not undervalue any Truth, say of no
Truth as Lot said of Zoar, (is it not a little one?) and so I may skip from it.
It Is true there is a difference among Truths, some greater Truths and some
smaller; But as it is of Sins, so it is of Errors, The lesser alwise does make
way for the greater, and there is no Truth which comes not from the God of
Truth; And therefore no Truth which ye should look on as a thing Indifferent,
whether ye think so or otherwise of it: Besides in times of Defection from
Truth, it is the usual Artifice of Persecuters to extenuate those Truths they
labor to bear down, as things Indifferent, and very triffles; When in the mean
time their own practice does give the^r Profession the lie; For if they thought
them things indifferent and triffles, why would they persecute M^n for adhering
to them? Besides tho some Truths be not so absolutely necessary to Salvation,
but a Man may be saved tho he think otherwise, yet it does not follow we should
be careless of all such: Thus tho a Man's hand be not so absolutely necessary
but he may live without it, yet he were a mad Man who on that account would
wittingly and willingly cut it off: Besides an Error in some Truths, which will
not damn one, may condemn another who knows at least may easily know it to be
an Error, and yet will live and die in the Justification of it without
Repentance. 3. Ye ought chiefly to cleave to those Truths which ye are most
engaged to own, either by God's sealing them to your Spirits, or by
Catechizing and Instructing you from your very Childhood in them, so that ye
are put out of all doubt of the Truth that is in them, or by bringing you under
most sacred Ties of Solemn Vows and Oaths to maintain them; I say, ye ought to
look upon it as your Duty chiefly to Cleave unto such Truths. 2 John 8. Look to
your selves that we lose not those things that we have wrought; And Solomon
says, It is not safe after vows to make enquiry. If a Man's Conscience grow
once so wide as to let such Truths pass through either for Errors or Triffles,
he may persuade himself there is not a Truth in all the Bible, if he be hard
put to it that he will stick at, but that meeting with a pressing suitable
tentation he will let it slip through after them 4. We are to Cleave to Truth not
only by retaining the knowledge of it, and by giving assent to it in our
Judgments but also by giving a modest and faithful profession and confession
of that Truth on all hazards when we are called to it: This is commanded 1 Pet:
3. 15. Be ready alwise to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason
of the hope that is in you, with meakness and fear, and Rom: 10. 10. -- With
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. This is necessary both for the honor of God, Truth being
a piece of his Name which we are bound to confess Rev: 2. 13 -- Thou hold
fast my name and have not denied my faith -- And its necessary also in order to
our own Salvation For whosoever (says our Savior) will confess me before men,
him will I also confess before my father which is in heaven; but whosoever will
deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven.
This now as upon the one hand it does not justify unseasonable Confession
contrary to Matthew: 7. 6 -- Cast not your pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under their feet, and turn again and rent you; So upon the other hand it
reproves those who dar not or will not give a Confession of the Truth even when
they are called to it, and much more those who deny the Truth either expressly,
or Interpretativly, That is, when they do that which men are apt to take and
have reason to take for a denial of the Truth, tho they do not deny it in so
many words.

But Secondly, We must cleave unto the Lord by Cleaving to and continuing in
his Service, for that is the other thing which he has recommended to our Care,
as an evidence of our respect to him: Joshua bids the People, Take diligent
heed -- to cleave unto the Lord and serve him, Jos: 22. 5. Now this holds first
of the Ordinances he has appointed for his Service and Immediate Worship: Ye
must Cleave to these. In order to which. 1. Beware of Will Worship, or doing
that in his Worship which he has not commanded, Colos, 2 20. Wherefore if ye
be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World: Why as though living in
the World, are ye subject to Ordinances? To wit, Ordinances and Commandments of
Men in Gods Service, as he explains verse 22. And he gives some instances of
them verse 21. Touch not, taste not, handle not. It is true men may appoint the
outward Circumstances of Order and Decency for going about these parts of God's
Worship which he has commanded; such as are Time and Place, what hour of the
day ye shall meet at public Worship, and in what Place, and such like, which
are Common both to Civil and Religious Actions; but they may not under that
pretext, appoint new practices of Worship to God, or significant engaging
Ceremonies: As for example, That the Sign of the Cross be used in Baptism, As a
Token we shall not hereafter be ashamed to Confess Christ Crucified; And that
Ministers Preach with a White Shirt or Surplice above their Garments, to
signify the Holiness of their Calling; or as the Ancients did ordain those who
were Baptized to wear White Garments for the space of eight days after
Baptism, To signify their being washen from Sin: For by that same Rule, They
may command every one to taste Vinegar and Gall at the Communion, as a Sign
that they shall not be ashamed of Christ who Died so: And to put on an Helmet,
Breast Plate, and other Armor in time of Public Worship, To signify our
Resolution to Fight the Battle against Sin and Satan so long as we live; And
suck or drink in Milk publicly in time of Divine Worship, In token that by
Faith we draw in the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. Now
any may see that to command these and such like, were to appoint New Work in
Gods Service, and more than to do that Work he has appointed Orderly and
Decently. Besides many things of Lesser moment and of the same nature with
these; I mean significant Ceremonies are appointed by God in his Law, to which
there is yet added that Sanction, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. What thing soever I command you
observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. So that the
appointing any such things in the Worship of God is an adding to Gods Law which
is there prohibited.

I shall be more brief in the following Directions for Cleaving to the
Ordinances of Gods Immediate Worship: And therefore 1. Beware of Irreligious
Impiety in neglecting these Ordinances: Ye are commanded to wait upon them,
Pray without ceasing, Despise not Prophesying (or Preaching) Speak to your
selves in Psalms and Hymns, Give attendance unto Reading. Ye cannot cleave to
the Lord in these Ordinances if ye neglect to go about them; ye must
countenance public Ordinances, make Conscience of secret Duties. 2. Beware of
Formality in going about them, by resting in an outside work; But above all
things, strive to bring the Heart up to them, otherwise ye do not as ye ought,
cleave unto them, God is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth, The Lord will not rockon you to cleave unto them, tho ye be present at
them, if so your Heart be far away from them. 3dly. Beware of up-sitting or
backsliding from making Conscience of them, after ye have once begun; That it
be not said of you as the Apostle Paul said once of the Galatians, Ye have run
well, but who did hinder you that ye should not obey the Truth. Otherwise ye do
not cleave unto them.

But further, This cleaving to the Lord, by cleaving to and Continuing in his
Service does hold in the Duties of our Particular Callings and Stations. And in
order to your Cleaving to these, or to the Lord by making Conscience of these.
1. Do not neglect them; I mean those Duties which ye owe, whether as Servants,
or as Masters; as Parents, or as Children; as Husbands, or as Wives; as
Magistrates, or as Subjects: Much of the Life and Power of Religion is
manifested in the Conscientious discharge of such Duties; and a man manifests
best what he has by making Conscience of such; Rom: 12. 11. Ye are not to be
Sloathful in Business. 2. What ye do even in things of that kind, strive to do
it as Service to the Lord. For (as I have showed) so much is enjoined Servants;
Thus shall ye Cleave to the Lord, even by going about your Ordinary Calling,
when ye discharge the Duties thereof as Service to Him, that is, when ye do
them because He appoints you so to do, and that ye may adorn Religion, and take
away all occasion of Reproach, by your Conscientious Diligence in the practice
of them. 3. Let not the Duties of your particular Stations make you neglect the
Duties either of Public or Private Worship, there is time for both, ye cannot
Cleave to the Lord in the Duties of the one sort, if they shall justle out the
Duties of the other. 4 Strive to keep Communion with God even in the practice
of such Duties, by sending up secret thoughts and pithy ejaculations to God
among hands; as Nehemiah did chap. 2. By laboring to make a Spiritual use of
every thing that occurs, or which ye meet with. This much now for their
cleaving to the Lord, the thing He would have them to do.

I shall now speak a little only, to the manner wherein the Lord would have it
gone about; Its with a purpose or resolution, and a purpose of Heart. 1. It Is
with a purpose and resolution, he would have them take on a fixed resolution to
do, and that as an help to make them do: Hence take this Doctrine, That ye may
cleave to the Lord and continue constant and steadfast in his Truth and Service,
ye must take on a fixed Resolution and Purpose so to do, I suppose ye have
taken on such a Resolution as this at your coming to the Lords Table, but tho
ye have done it, yet your wisdom will be every day to renew it: David had taken
on such a purpose, Psalm. 17. 3 -- I am purposed that my Mouth shall not
transgress, yea he binds himself by an Oath to it, Psalm. 119. 106, I have
Sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments This is
that piece of the spiritual armor called Ephesians: 6. 15 -- The preparation of
the Gospel of peace. Even a prepared, ready, resolute purpose in the Lords
strength, to go on in the Way of Truth and Duty, notwithstanding of any hazard,
hardship, or difficulty, I say it must be a Purpose taken on in the Lords
strength, for without him we can do nothing; For says David Psalm: 71. 16. I
will go in the strength of the Lord God.

Now ye must labor to bring up your hearts to such a Resolute Purpose as this,
to go on in the Way of Truth and Duty, notwithstanding hazard, hardship and
difficulty: For 1. The want of such a Resolution or Purpose will not keep off
Trial and trouble, neither will the putting of it on, hasten Trials. Job 34.
33. Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou
refuse or whether thou choose. 2. Courageous Resolution and Purpose to fear no
opposition but to charge through all difficulties and hazards, is half victory
Jam: 4. 7. Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. 3. When a Resolution and
Purpose is once laid, to undergo all that ye may meet with in the Way of Truth
and Duty, it is usually attended with cheerfulness in Duty: Now God loves a
cheerful giver, when upon the contrary if an unexpected storm of Trial and
trouble come on a man before he be fully resolved to endure the worst of it, It
does at least very much damp and weaken him, if it do not wholly make him quite
the way. 4. The promise is made only to the persevering and Resolved man; He
that endures to the end shall be saved, when The backslider in heart shall be
filled with his own ways (Prove: 14. 14.) That is, he shall meet with some
plague and judgment in his way, which will make him weary of it and be grieved
of his undertaking e're all be done, tho this usually comes out of time.

The Use is for Reproof to those who are like the Israelites in Elijah's time,
halting betwixt two Opinions, and can never suffer themselves to come to an
even-down Resolution and Purpose on all hazards to cleave to the Lord, to his
Truth and his Service, whatever it may stand them; but do either think to put
the evil day far from them, by imagining they will one way or other Shift it: or
if they see no probability in this, but that once it will be at their door; yet
they keep themselves Irresolute, in an hovering suspense what to do when
trouble comes; Whence so soon as they meet with a tentation, they begin to
Capitulate with it, when they should Resolutely repel it, and after a little
Capitulating, they will find out some shift or other to beguile themselves, and so
do give up their arms and basely yield.

Lastly, This Purpose and Resolution to Cleave unto the Lord must be a Purpose
of the Heart. It Is true every Purpose is a Purpose of Heart if it be Real; But
there are some Purposes which are not Real, but naked Convictions of the
judgment, that such and such things should be done, which some are apt to take
for a Purpose of Heart, when they are only of a Heart and a Heart, or of a
double and deceitful Heart, but not of a single and sincere Heart: ye should
therefore labor to be single and sincere in your Purpose and Resolution of
cleaving unto the Lord, such a Purpose as your Heart may be engadged in it. For
which cause ye must. 1. Forecast what such a Resolution may stand you,
otherwise if ye look over that, or look not unto it, your Purpose will not be
sincere, and ye will not stick by it: and when the thing comes ye looked not
for, ye'l do the thing ye thought not: and even that which to think on now
would make you say with Hazae^ 2 Kings 8. 13. Is thy servant a dog, that he
should do this great thing? 2. Beware of a mixture of unsincere motives and
byends: If ye resolve to cleave to the Lord either for temporal advantage, or
to get a name of Constancy or to eschew the Imputation of Changeableness this
will argue Unsincerity in your Purpose, and Consequently it will not hold out
long: Let your eye therefore be single, in being acted from spiritual motives,
love to Christ, love to Truth, so shall your Purpose be a Purpose of Heart 3.
If your Purpose to cleave to the Lord be sincere and a Purpose of Heart, then
the whole man, your soul, your body, all the Faculties of the one and Members
of the other, must be ready to follow out their whole Purpose. for the heart
commands the whole man, your Purposes and Resolutions which have nothing of
action following, are not Purpose's of the Heart; as when ye Purpose to cleave
to the Lord in the mortifying of such a sin, and yet ye have not power to keep
from the occasions which lead unto it; ye Purpose to cleave to such a Truth,
and yet cannot endure to be at the pains to get your selves rooted grounded and
established in the Faith and knowledge of it. I say no more but remember the
Text, and be exhorted to cleave unto the Lord, His Truth, His Ordinances, His
Service, with Purpose of Heart.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 17. Line 1. dele Wise decree, to permit. p. 20. l: 7, for, too fair.
read, too far. p. 58. line 7. for, in: r. is. p. 64. l: 18: dele (.) add (;)
p: 101. l: 16: r: is to be. p: 113. l: 2: for, Misters r: Ministers. p: 126: l:
25: for I. r: In. p. 131: l: 22: for promise r: promised. p. 140. for Congation
r. Congregation: p: 287. In the Title r. Preached at Irving.


