A DEFENSE OF AN APOLOGY For the People called QUAKERS Being in Answer to a
Book, Entitled, Quakerism Exposed: OR, Some Papers delivered to the King and
Parliament.

By JOHN FIELD.

He that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander is a
Fool, Prove. 10 18. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.

TO THE Christian Reader.
I Here present thee with a Defense of an Apology for that abused and
misrepresented People, called Quakers, and earnestly desire thy serious
Perusal, and submit it to thy Impartial Judgment.

Not Doubting thy Acceptance, if a true Lover of him, in whom Peace and
Acceptance with God is known.

Because, whatever Prejudices there may be in some Men, one to another, there is
none in him; neither can it be entertained in any that sincerely Love and Live
in Jesus Christ, the dear Son of the Father's Love, whom God has sent a Light
into the World; and is come to destroy the Works of the Devil, and all Envy and
Malice in those that truly Receive him: And to Preserve and Deliver those that
are truly his, from the Hands of unreasonable Men, who are in Confederacy
against a People, he has gathered to be the Sheep of his Pasture.

Remember, it was the Chief Priests and Pharisees, that gathered together in
Council against our Savior, and said, What do we, if we let him alone, all Men
will believe in him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place and
Nation?

And when Satan entered into Judas, he went his way, and communed with the
Chief Priests and Captains, how he might betray him; and they were glad, and
covenanted to give him Money.

And it was Demetrius that cried out, and made no small Stir against that Way
Paul taught; being sensibly touched with an Apprehension, the Craft he got his
Gain by was in danger.

And it was proud Haman that informed the King, That there was a certain People
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the People, and their Laws were diverse
from all People; neither keep they the Kings Law's; see Esther 3.8.

But the Lord, that in every Age was mindful of his Suffering People; and in
all their Afflictions, that by wicked Instruments he suffered to come upon
them, he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them; for he knew
their Innocence, however they were Misrepresented and Reproached by his and
their Enemies: And therefore he then, as now, has supported, and been with
them, in and under all the Reproaches, Cruel Mockings, and great Sufferings,
they have hitherto met withal: Of which I have in Brief given some Account.

And it is the Lord that has been and is their Light and Salvation, whom then
shall they fear? And he has been the Strength of their Life, of whom then
shall they be afraid? Surely I may say, these have no cause of Fear, because
they are Innocent: And therefore I pray they may be preserved therein, and that
will be their Defense, as it is mine.

And then the Government, under which they Live, will have just Cause more to
Credit what their Eyes see of their Peaceable Conversations, and what they,
with Thousands, have been and are Witnesses of, than the false Suggestions and
Insinuations of those Men; whose Interest and Prejudice is against this People,
that truly Fear God, Honor the King, Love all Men, Live Honestly, Do Justly,
are Peaceable and Inoffensive to those that do not Offend God: And if those
that Offend God, are offended with them or me, I pray God forgive them; keep
me, and incline them to the Practice of that Holy Religion Christ was the
Founder of; and in that Christian Charity, which is the most Excellent Gift;
and in that Spirit, which all that are the Sons of God are led by.

In which Christian Spirit, I desire thou may be found, and therein duly
Weigh, and seriously Consider, how greatly this Despised People have Suffered
in Body, Estate, Good Name, and Christian Reputation, by Severity on their
Bodies, Havoc on their Estates, Revilings on their Holy Profession, false
Accusation and Misrepresentations of their Christian Doctrine and Principles.

All which, as they have abode in the Faith and Patience of the Lamb of God,
they have been enabled to endure, and go through, hitherto; for which they, in
Humility, give Holy Praise to him, that has supported them, and have Faith and
Confidence in him, that he will never leave nor forsake them, as they continue
in their Christian Duty, and abide in Faith, Hope, and Charity: In which, I
pray, that all who Profess that worthy Name, may be found; then will Pride be
abated, Envy rooted out, Humility spring, and Love increase. So be it, says,

Thy Sincere and Cordial Friend, J. F.

A DEFENSE OF AN APOLOGY, etc.
THE Peaceable Christians, in Days that are past, were accounted Heretics,
called Movers of Sedition, and their Holy Religion was almost every where
spoken Evil against: Nor could they expect any better Treatment from an
untoward Generation, than what their Lord and Master Jesus Christ met with; who
was rendered a Blasphemer, by those that pretended great Loyalty to, and would
own no other King but Caesar: And yet, it was not long after, but they rebelled
against him, whom they pretended great regard to, that they might get their
Revenge executed upon Jesus; in whom no Cause of Death, or any Fault was found,
as Pilate the Roman Governor, who examined him, declared.

And when the Exclaimers against, and false Accusers of Christ, had their
wicked Ends answered; they themselves were found to be Rebels to Caesar, and
the true Disciples and Followers of Christ, Peaceable Christians.

But what related to their Holy Religion, their Way and Worship of the great
God of Heaven and Earth, was then accounted as New, Strange, and as much spoken
against, as it is now; and their Testimony and Doctrine struck as much at the
High Priests, Learned Rabbis, and Great Doctors Hierarchy, in that Day, as
many esteem, the Quakers Testimony and Doctrine do at those of this Day.

Nor were the Apostles, whom Christ made Choice of, and sent forth, Men that
were brought up in Academical Learning; but were for the most part Illiterate
Persons; of whom the Pharisees contemptuously said, John 7.49. This People, who
knows not the Law, are cursed. And for that reason, among others; they were
then as much Despised, Vilified, and Ridiculed, as those now are; whom Christ
has Called, Commissionated, and Sent forth in his Work and Service, in this
Day of his Blessed and Glorious Appearance.

Against whom, some that esteem themselves Learned, have lately appeared in
Print, with a Pretended Brief Discovery, of some of the Blasphemous and
Seditious Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers; taken (as they
say) out of their most noted and approved Authors, and said to be Humbly
Offered to the King, and both Houses of Parliament. See G. W's Brief
Examination, in Answer thereunto.

Now, I having written a Brief Apology on the behalf of the said People, and an
Appeal to the Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. One Francis Bugg has
taken Occasion to carp at some Passages therein, which he has picked out, and
patched together; for after mentioning part of the Title, he takes a Sentence
out of the 9th Page, then he goes back to the 5th, then forward to the 7th, and
back again to the 1st.

And therefore I shall cite the Paragraphs as they lie in the Apology, and put
the words he has picked out in Black; that the Reader may be the better
capable to make a Judgment of his Disingenuous Dealing by me, beginning with
the last first; because it is in the 1st Page, and is as follows,

Suffer me to Expostulate with you, on behalf of these Abused People in your
Counties, that have of late been rendered Blasphemers; and to Apologize a
little for them; whom, some among you have lately often Assembled and Consulted
together, how they might (by Subtilty and Misrepresentation) Incense you (and
by you, those in Authority) against these Innocent People, and your Peaceable
Countrymen and Neighbors, that the Monster of Persecution might be again
raised, and let loose on them, to suppress them.

Reply. Now, what just Occasion has this Man to be angry with me, for terming
this People, for whom I Apologize, an Innocent People, and Peaceable
Neighbors? Have they not in their Lives and Conversations, in and under the
various Sorts of Government, wherein they have lived, so demeaned themselves? I
leave this to the Just Principle which God has placed in every Man, that has
known them, to answer. Why is this Man so angry? Had he rather they should be
Nocent than Innocent? If they were indeed a People that Fired Houses, and
Poisoned Rivers, as he mentions, and were duly convicted thereof; though they
should pretend, they followed the Light of Christ within (which Light never
leads any into such Practices) then the Law, which is made for Transgressors;
and Magistrates, which should not bear the Sword in vain, might justly punish
them for their Evil Doings: But surely, it does not therefore follow, that
those who truly Believe in Christ Jesus, and follow the True Light, that
lights every Man that comes into the World, must Suffer for their Faith in
him, and abiding in his Doctrine: For this, under what pretense so ever it may
be, would be Persecution; which surely I might as well term, the Monster of
Persecution, as F. Bugg a Badge of a False Church, for he declares in his
Postscript thus: I do profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have
often and do now again tell you, that I am against Persecution and will add,
that Persecution for Righteousness sake is a Badge of a false Church.

And yet in the latter part of King Charles the 2d's Reign, there were 1460 of
these People Prisoners; only for their Abiding in the Doctrine of Christ, and
peaceably Meeting together to Worship him, in Spirit and in Truth; and great
Spoil and Havoc were also made upon the Goods and Estates of these Innocent
People for the same. And many were Prosecuted for not going to their Parish
Churches, so called, when they were Prisoners upon other Accounts, as well as
for Meeting, viz. on Writs De Excommunicato capiendo, and as Popish Recusants,
for 20 l. per Month, and of their Estates: And by Law many of these People
might have been Burnt at the Stake, if the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo had not
been Repealed.

I do heartily wish, that no People, professing Christianity, may ever wear
this Badge more, nor raise the Monster of Persecution in this Nation again: But
that Liberty of Conscience may for ever be continued to all that Live Peaceably
under the Government: It being most agreeable to the Nature of True
Christianity, and to the whole Tenor of the Doctrine and Practice of Christ,
and his Apostles.

Apology. p. 9. And if these People must be accounted Blasphemers, if they
disown not those Books, or their Friends that writ them, without seeing the
Books, or what is in them; how can they be either Just to their Friends, or True
to Themselves? For, ought any Man to condemn another, without full Hearing, and
due Examination? Or would those Clergymen account it Just, that any should
Charge them as the highest of Criminals, and Condemn and Sentence them (but he
has put Censure) 'as such, for what some of their Brethren have Writ in Books,
which they never saw, nor read, nor knew? If not, why should the Quakers,
without seeing the Books, and examining the Contents, be obliged to condemn
their Friends, for Publishers of Blasphemy, or be esteemed Blasphemers?
Consider this I beseech you, and examine whether it agrees with Christ's
Doctrine, All things, whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye
even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets? Or whether there is any
ground to conclude, that the Chargers would ever have refused to have given the
account desired by the Quakers; if they had been well assured, that by the
express words of these Books, out of which they pretend to prove their Charge,
it would be clearly and evidently proved.

Now to the words that are in Black, F. Bugg says, they are both Charged and
Condemned, just or unjust, at the Quakers Bar; and therein the Quakers are
Gross Hypocrites and Dissemblers with God and Man.

Reply. An high Charge, but not proved, That the Quakers, just or unjust, have
Condemned and Sentenced those Clergymen, so called; without full Hearing, and
due Examination, for what some of their Brethren have writ in Books, which they
never saw, or read, or knew the Contents of. Oh Injurious Man! To suggest such
a Gross Falsehood, and then call the Quakers Gross Hypocrites and Dissemblers,
and render them such as do not, as they would be done by: But what other can we
expect from such an Vnfair Adversary?

Apology. p. 5. Out of this Paragraph, which I shall recite at large, F. Bugg
has picked a few words, which I shall distinguish again by Black Characters.

But these People, for whom I Apologize and Appeal to you, how ever they are or
may be Rendered and Represented, by Men of Evil Designs and Persecuting
Spirits, Have, Do, and by the Lord's Assistance, are Resolved to Continue Quiet
in the Land; and in their Christian Duty and Practice, of making Supplications,
Prayers (he says Pray) Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men, for
Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty: for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come
unto the Knowledge of the Truth.

This, F. Bugg says, is so false and fallacious, that I Challenge the whole
World to prove one Instance of your Praying for King William, or any King.

A Bold Challenge, but as False as Bold: For our Principle leads us, and our
Practice is as I have before affirmed, to Pray for all Men; for Kings, and
those in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all
Godliness and Honesty; and if we do not in our Prayers to Almighty God, recite
the Names of Kings, or of the King of the Nation wherein we live, he cannot
prove that such an Omission is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and the Example
of the Apostles. Besides our peaceable Lives and due Subjection unto those in
Authority, evidently manifest to them, who have impartially observed us, that
we own the Powers that are to be ordained of God.

Apology, p. 7. And although in some things they have seemed to differ from
those of other Persuasions; yet who can convict them of Error in any
Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion? Or, of their not holding that
which is truly Essential to Salvation, and agreeable to the Holy Scriptures?
Which Holy Records (however they have been Misrepresented, or falsely Accused,
as Slighters and Contemners of them) I do declare on their behalf, they have
always had, and still have a high Esteem and true Value for them, above all
other Writings or Books: And their frequent use of them, and pressing their
Children and Servants to the reading therein, may sufficiently Demonstrate to
those that know them, the Innocence of this abused People.

This, F. Bugg, says, is false with a Witness; and so you must give me leave
to whip this John Field, for his deep Hypocrisy and Deceit; and I wish it may
do him good. What, to pretend that the Quakers value the Bible above all Books;
then consequently above their own? This is such a Lie, that it stabs it self.

Reply. This I am a Witness is true, although F. Bugg says it is false with a
Witness; for which confident Assertion, he has produced no other proof, but
his own Ipse dixit, which with sober and moderate Men, is of no Moment or
Validity; seeing he has assumed to himself that Extravagant Liberty, of
writing what Malice and Envy prompt him to.

And therefore I do affirm, that the Quakers always had, and still have, an
high Esteem of, and true Value for the Holy Scriptures; as they contain the
Revealed Will of God, speaking to us either through his Holy Prophets, or
Apostles, or by Jesus Christ his only Begotten Son, our Lord and Savior: In
this Sense we do, and ever did, value them above all other Writings and Books,
etc. yet as they consist of Ink, Paper, and various Characters, they are
Corruptible, and will return to Dust, from whence they came: And if F. Bugg can
deny it, let him. And when I said, that I esteemed them ( viz. the Holy
Scriptures) above all other Writings or Books, etc. I spoke of them, with
respect to the Holy Doctrines contained therein.

Now what cause F. B. has to call me Liar and Hypocrite, etc. let the
impartial Reader judge.

And, if where G. F. or any of our Friends, speak of them in the same Sense
that I did, our Adversaries will pervert their Meaning, and wrest it to
another, quite contrary to what they intended; thereby rendering them as
Persons that undervalue their Evidence, it is their own Fault; for it is evident
from our Friends quoting them in their Writings, and bringing them as
Evidences, for Proof of their Doctrines, that they have an high Esteem and
Value for them; for who can be supposed to undervalue that, which they bring
for Evidence and Confirmation of what they deliver?

And for my own part, I can truly say, that ever since I knew the difference of
Writings, and was capable to Judge between them, I preferred the Holy
Scriptures to all other extant; and that I wrote not this to serve a Present
Turn, as F. B. falsely suggests: For I have done it many Years since in my
Friendly Advice, p. 12. wherein is a Chapter, in which I exhort Children to
avoid telling Idle Tales, and to read and learn the Holy Scriptures, according
to the Examples of Ancient Protestants, and Quoted Instances.

And therefore I may justly revert his own Words upon him, and say, This is
such a Ly, that it stabs it self; or rather him that told it, F. B. But as he
quotes G. Whitehead, who long before, on behalf of the People called Quakers,
declared to the King, We are free to Vindicate any Principle we hold according
to Scripture; So it shows, we give it the Preference to all other Books.

Again, F. B's Quotation out of Edw. Burroughs's Works, (but not mentioning the
Page) is as little to his purpose, as his Citing G. W. viz.

And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the World, that if any,
especially the Heads and Rulers, have any doubt concerning us, for that End,
let any Propound, that we with Consent of Authority [mark, E. B. had Regard to
Authority] meet, etc.

Reply. For this Proposal was made by E. B. to show how ready they were, with
Submission to Authority, to satisfy the Doubts of those Rulers and Heads in
Authority, or any else, to whom by some prejudiced Priests and otherr, this
Innocent People were then, as much Misrepresented, as they are now.

And this Proposal of E. B's was Impertinently Urged by Doctor Beckham at
West-Dereham in Norfolk, to settle the Preliminaries of that Particular
Conference, (with respect to which our Friends were then met, pursuant to the
time prefixed by those very Priests in Norfolk, that with F. Bugg had Challenged
and Charged them with many Blasphemies;) upon which our Friends perceiving
their Deceit, in pretending by that which was written above 35 Years since, to
settle the Preliminaries of that Particular Conference, said; How should that
which was written so long since, answer the End it is urged to be read for? Or
what is this to a Copy of your Charge, or to an Account of Books, Titles and
Pages, out of which ye pretend to Charge us. Give us that, and let us mutually
Agree to Time and Place, and then settle Preliminaries. But this we could not
get them to, though we proffered to pay for it; and now F. B's offended, and
says, These were no Arguments, since you pretend to write from the Lord, moved
thereto by the Holy Ghost.

Reply. If it be a Fault to write from the Mouth of the Lord, moved thereto by
the Holy Ghost, I conclude F. B. is not guilty: But if none (as is falsely
suggested) are moved by the Holy Ghost, to write from the Mouth of the Lord,
what are they moved by? Or, from whose Mouth do they write, who Scribble
against us, and Trouble the King and Parliament with their Lies and Slanders?
Let him tell in his next.

But this your Shuffle, says F. B. showed the Justices of Peace, the Gentry
and Clergy, as well as the Protestant Dissenters, that your Principles are so
destructive to Common Christianity. -- And this; yea, only this, so far as I
know, put them upon a Petition to the House of Commons.

Reply. I deny (and let him prove if he can) that this, yea, only this, showed
the Justices of Peace, Gentry, and Clergy (so called) and Protestant
Dissenters, that the Quakers Principles are so destructive to Common
Christianity; for then the Discovery is but of late Date, if this only put them
upon a Petition to the Honorable House of Commons. Pray let F. Bugg, who
asserts this as above, make it appear to the King, and both Houses of
Parliament, That this only put them upon it; and that they are, as he
confidently tells the King, and both Houses of Parliament, Unanimous herein:
For if so, there is not one of all the Sorts, but what is consenting thereto, or
has been actually concerned in a Petition to the Honorable House of Commons,
against the Quakers; for this, yea, only this, viz. the Quaker's Shuffle, as he
falsely says, at West-Dereham: When they met there, some Clergy, so called, that
with F. Bugg had Challenged the Quakers, and Charged them with Blasphemy
against God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Scriptures.

But if it be not so, as many besides my self can Testify it is not; then the
Parliament may be hereby informed, that he has not truly Represented
themselves: For they are included in his General Words, viz. the Unanimous
Consent of all Protestants, as he affirms, in his false and envious Sheet
delivered to the Parliament.

Now, what Credit is to be given to such a false Asserter as this? And let him
tell, if he can, what he means by that Common Christianity which the Quakers
Principles are so destructive to; and whether he means thereby some Common and
Base Professors of it, or the Looseness, Pride, Swearing, Cozening, Cheating,
and Debauched Practices; or the Lying, Envy, and Hatred, which such Professors
are found in, that the Quakers Principles are so destructive to; or what else
it is he intends thereby? But F. B. proceeds thus:

One John Field (whom he calls the Quakers Tool) compared some, called
Clergymen, and one or two Presbyterian Preachers, to Herod and Pilate; and
some Body else he compared to Haman and Judas; and said, Field, Do not blame
till you examine.

Reply. Passing by his Scoffing Reflection of the Quakers Tool, I grant the
Substance of this is true; and they that will peruse my Apology, p. 4, 5, and
7. and not Blame till they have Examined, may find these words therein. But I
did not say, that F. Bugg was like Judas; or that Haman and Judas's End might
be his; for I pray God it may not: But that he may come, if it be the Lord's
Will, to see his Outgoings, Repent of his Evil, and Belying of an Innocent
People, that I am persuaded never designed him any Harm, and may find Mercy
with God to his poor and never-dying Soul.

But F. Bugg says, 'This you are deeply sensible of, else you would not be so
startled and affrighted, because of the Petition, which n^^ther incites to
Persecution, nor any Alteration of the Act of Toleration of Protestant
Dissenters.

Answ. We are neither sensible of it, nor so startled and affrighted, as he
suggests; for we well know what it is to Suffer Persecution for Righteousness
sake, and have found to our great Comfort, that the Lord has been our Support,
in and under all our Sufferings, Cruel Mockings, Spoiling of Goods, Sore and
Long Imprisonments, Evil Treatments and Misrepresentations by our Adversaries;
who have done what they can to render us Frightful and Dangerous, and to
account us (as they did our blessed Lord and Savior) Blasphemous Enemies to
Caesar, Dangerous to the Commonwealth, Deceivers, Cheats, and Impostors: In
which wicked Work some few Hot and Angry Priests, that had more Passion than
Prudence; in Conjunction with some Envious Deserters and Renegades, that have
been filled more with Rage than Reason, and with Clamours than Solid Arguments,
have endeavored to Stir up the Magistrates, to be the Executioners of their
Wrath and Fury; they wanting Power, tho not will, in themselves to Execute them
upon us.

Yet so seemingly tender is Francis Bugg, as to say, the Petition neither
incites to Persecution, nor any Alteration of the Act of Toleration of
Protestant Dissenters: But only that the Quakers Principles and Practices may
be strictly examined, and Censured or Suppressed.

Reply. What then! may new Rome, as he falsely accounts the Quakers; and Popish
Emissaries, which the Petitioners suggest are among them, be tolerated and
esteemed Protestant Dissenters? What a Change is here!

But, says F. B. the Petition neither incites to Persecution, nor any
Alteration of the Act of Toleration, etc.

Reply. Here he endeavors to put a fair Gloss upon a foul Design, and to make
his Readers believe, that no Persecution was intended by the Petitioners. But
can any thing be more plain and obvious, than that Persecution, was the main
Purport of that Petition, since the Suppressing of the Principles and Practices
of the People called Quakers, is the concluding Part of their Prayer to the
Parliament? And is this possible to be effected, without exercising great
Cruelty on the Persons or Estates of the said People? And what is such Cruelty,
but Persecution? Yet,

This, says F. Bugg, is the Substance of what is desired in the Petition which
does so startle you, which is a great Sign that you are convicted of Errors in
Fundamentals.

Reply. Then it seems the Substance is, that under a Pretense they are not for
Persecution, they pray to have our Principles Examined, or Suppressed: And
because we inform the People of what their Words and Petition import, F. Bugg
suggests; that it startles us, and is a great Sign that we are convicted of
Errors in Fundamentals. But this to me is rather a Sign that his Words are
short of Proof, when he said, I can, I have convicted them of Errors in
Fundamentals. But let not F. B. or any else think, his Words are of that Credit
to be believed without Proof; which he has not yet made of what he confidently
and falsely asserts.

Again, he says (the Clergy of Norfolk, which joined with him to Challenge the
Quakers) do not go behind your Backs to try, judge, and condemn you; they met
you, and would have proved their Charge upon you.

Reply. It may be rather said, we met them: For those Priests declared, their
Measures were fixed, and we might choose whether we would meet them or not; and
no Doubt, but that would have pleased them better, than our meeting of them
did: And why did not they try, judge, and condemn us then behind our Backs? Was
it not because we Appeared to their Faces? And so they could not then prove
their Charge, tho they would, if they could: But since behind our Backs, by
Picking Sentences, Breaking them in Pieces, and Abusing us and the Authors,
they have assayed toward it: Yet how far, or fairly they have done it, viz.
proved the People called Quakers, Blasphemers, I shall leave to the impartial
Peruser to enquire and judge by the Brief Examination before referred to. Next,

He quotes Edward Burroughs's Works, page 223. being a Book printed 1657,
entitled A just and lawful Trial of the Teachers and professed Ministers of
that Age, etc. And then F. Bugg says, Now Friends, do you think, this was fair
dealing in you to condemn the Clergy of all Ranks at once? How can you have the
Face to go to the Bishops for Favor?

Reply. If F. Bugg accounts those God's Heritage, and Christ's Ministers, that
turned and kept the Bishops out of their Bishoprics; how can he have the Face
to own himself a Member of the Church of England, and Receive Money from them
and their Clergy so called? But if not, why should he blame Edward Buroughs
for writing against those, whom neither he, nor the Bishops esteemed Ministers
of Christ, nor truly called to their Office? Let him read what Edward Buroughs
writes, and refute it if he can; and consider whether this be fair Dealing in
him, and whether the Quakers may not with a better Face, go to the Bishops for
Favor, or rather Justice, than Francis Bugg for Money? Seeing they did not
esteem those, that drove and kept the Bishops and their Company out of their
Rich Bishoprics, Large Parsonages, and Vicarages, to be Ministers of Christ;
nor were they found in their Spirit and Practice; although F. B. is offended with
the Quakers for it, and would have them Retract, and calls what the Quakers
writ against them, the Quakers abominable ancient Testimony.

Now let F. B. consider whether he must not retract this, before he gets
another Letter from a Bishop in his Commendation, to carry about with him to
get Money.

As to what he carps at in Edward Burroughs's Works, p. 273. about the Quakers
Sufferings, it being brought by the Priests, and replied to in the Brief
Examination before mentioned, and answered at other Times, I refer thereunto.
Only this I may query, is a Book to be condemned, and the whole Society to
which the Author belonged, for some Difficulty in it, or seeming Inconsistency?
Seeing Bishop Kidder, in the Preface to his Second Volume against the Jews,
says, in such a Case; I hope the Jews do not think that Book [meaning the
Bible] is to be rejected, because there is some Difficulty in it, for seeming
Inconsistencies: For then they must reject the Law and the Holy Prophets,
unless they are able to account for all the difficult Places to be found in
them. Thus far the Bishop.

But to proceed, F. B. says, Indeed, if it be as Edward Buroughs said in the
recited Trial and Condemnation of the Clergy in his Works, p. 223, 227, 234.
viz. That they Agree and Concur with all the false Prophets and Deceivers in
former Ages; that they are Ministers of Antichrist, yet have 1500000 l. a Year
for their Antichristian Service, as his ancient Testimony sets forth, printed
1655. then 3 d. a Day is enough, nay, too much.

Reply. If F. Bugg will insist upon it, that those Teachers and Professed
Ministers in 1657. (for that was the Date of Edward Burroughs's Book, not
1655.) were (what he terms them) the Clergy, or Heritage of God (as that Word
signifies;) I then propose to the impartial Judgment of all Men, whether F. B.
ought not to prove; that the Teachers and professed Ministers of that Age did
Agree, were according to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages, and did
not Concur with any of the false Prophets and Deceivers, either in Call,
Maintenance, Doctrine, Conversation, or Practice? And when he goes about to
prove this, let him consider what Gratuity and Applause he will gain from his
new Lords and Masters.

Now, if he prove, that those of that Age, who entered into a Solemn League and
Covenant against Prelacy, were God's Heritage, and what they did was according
to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages, and also that those Sort of Men
of that Age, Bak. Chron. p. 588.
which declared the Kingly Office to be unnecessary and burdensome, and that
the Lord's House was dangerous and useless, and therefore to be laid aside,
were the Ministers of Christ rightly called of God, truly ordained, and in
their Call, Ministry, Maintenance, Doctrine, Conversation, and Practice,
agreeable and according to Scripture, although they positively declared against
the Clergy (to use F. B's Phrase) in these Words:

1. We will, to the uttermost of our Powers, in our several Capacities, oppose
the Interest and pretended Right of Charles Stuart, Bak. Chron. p. 671.
in and to the Government of these Nations, or any other Person or Persons,
pleading or pretending Right or Title by Virtue of his or their Descent from
the same Line with him.

2. We will not give our Consent unto, but will oppose to our utmost Power, the
setting up of any Single Person whatsoever, in the Place of, and for the chief
Magistrate of these Nations, without a Single Person or House of Lords.

Now I say, if those Men, who so did, and joined therein, were the Clergy (or
Heritage of God) the Ministers of Christ rightly Called, truly Ordained, and in
their Call, Ministry, Maintenance, Doctrine, Conversation and Practice, were
not Antichristian; nor did act any thing in Agreement with any of the false
Prophets and Deceivers in former Ages:

What then does F. B. render those that he now pretends to be one of, or that
Church of which he now declares himself to be a Member? For they have made Laws
against such Professed Ministers, that Edward Buroughs wrote against in 1657.
Enacting, about three Years after, That every Ecclesiastical Person or
Ministers, ordained by any Ecclesiastical Persons, Bak. Cron. p. 724.
before December 25. last past, being 24 Years of Age; having not renounced his
Ordination, who has been since January 1642. placed in, and in actual
Possession of any Ecclesiastical Benefice with Cure of Souls, etc. is declared
Lawful Incumbent. By which it seems plain to me, they did not esteem any Person
or Minister, that was 24 Years of Age, and was ordained from 1642. to 1660. and
had Renounced his Ordination, to be rightly Ordained, or Lawful Incombent; so
that it appears, they were not truly Ordained; and by Edward Burroughs's
Examination it also appears, they were not rightly Called. Again, if they were
Ministers of Christ, and rightly Called and Ordaindained to that Work, why were
they Silenced Preaching, Turned out of their Parsonages, Prohibited Living
within five Miles of any Corporation, and Laws made to suppress their Meetings?
And if now F. B. shall confess, they are not the True Ministers of Christ, nor
Right in their Call or Ordination, etc. and that 3d. a day is indeed too much
for them; how comes he, and all those of his Church, so called, to join in an
Unanimous Consent with them, to have the Quakers Suppressed, if what he writes
be true? Is it from any Consciousness to themselves, or Doubt that what Edward
Buroughs said of those Teachers, or Professed Ministers, might as truly be
said of some of those he is now joined with, upon due Examination, and by
Scripture Proof, both with respect to their Call, Maintenance, Doctrine,
Conversation and Practice? Which some of them have declared, by being very
severe upon some, who for Conscience sake cannot put into their Mouths, that
for 35 s. pretended Dues, have seized more than 80 l. and when they had an
easier Way to have Compelled it, viz. by Distress, have seized and sold to the
value of 87 l. 16 s. 11 d. for 6 l. 15 s. 11 d. Demanded.

And since F. Bugg ridicules our Sufferings in the Postscript of that Book to
the King and both Houses of Parliament, I shall briefly hint, that of the
People called Quakers, there suffered in the Year 1660. by Imprisonments,
Stockings, Whipings, Loss of Goods, and other Abuses 3179. and 79 lay in Prison
when King Charles the 2d came in; and 32 Died there. Now many of these suffered
by those Teachers, Ministers, etc. that F. Bugg calls the Clergy (or Heritage
of God) which were gotten into the Fat Parsonages, Rich Vicarages, and other
Profitable Places, of those that were turned out.

In the Time of King Charles the Second, many Thousands suffered by Qui Tam's,
two thirds of their Estates; and 20 l. per Month for not going to Church (as
they called it) by Sequestrations for Tithes, and by Imprisonments on Writs De
Excommunicato capiendo, and Justices Warrants, and for their Religious
Meetings, as Rioters, and Tumultuous Persons, when they were Quiet and
Peaceable.

At Horselydown there was more Blood shed than a Bloody Nose (as F. Bugg
scoffingly writes) by Troopers and Soldiers. And 1660 were left Prisoners, when
King Charles the Second died, besides the Fines, Estreats out of the Exchequer,
that were against many, which the late King James relieved them from, and for
which they were thankful to God and the King; and from hence some that caused
us to Suffer, when they could not have their Ends answered to continue our
Sufferings, would insinuate, that we were Popishly Aflected: So that when they
could not Afflict us with their Hands, they would Lash and Persecute us with
their Virulent Tongues and Pens.

Let F. Bagg in his next (seeing he scribbles Books so fast) tell how many of
those that kept the Bishops, and their Company out, turned with the Times to
save their Benifices.

It Is very like old Henry Meriton, Rector of Oxborough, in Norfolk may inform
him herein; and who it was that was Excluded or Suspended from Preaching in any
Corporation in England, and what it was for.

Again, that woeful Cry against Unjust Persecutions and Grievous Oppressions,
writ by Edward Buroughs, which F. B. quotes, as I have hinted before, was
against those that turned, and kept the Bishops, and their Company, out of
Possession; and that cried against them as Popish. Did not they call the
Common Prayer, Porrage, the Surplice, the Whores Smock? And did they not cry,
Down with the Whore of Babylon; Down, Down with Her? And did not the Trumpets
sound when they so Cried, and the Cross in Cheapside was pulled down, and the
Images defaced, and the Organs called their Bag, or Grumbling Pipes, and turned
out also? And was there not a great Cry then made against the Bishops? And the
Church Lands sold also? Yet F. Bugg will Cry and Exclaim against the Quakers,
who Cried against those that turned the Predecessors of his New Lords and
Masters, out of Possession: Is it for the Reasons beforementioned? Or because
the Quakers testified against those Teachers, and their Persecuting Spirit and
Practices? How will he then Reconcile this Persecution, which he says is, a
Badge of a false Church? And if these Men in that Age were found in it, why
then does F. Bugg call them the Clergy (or, Heritage of God?) Why does he say
they are one with the Church of England, and that there is the Unanimous
Consent of all Protestants, both Conformists and Nonconformists, to have the
Quakers Principles Examined or Suppressed; and that they, i. e. the
Nonconformists, are sorrowfully affected, that they are joined with them in the
Act of Toleration, to see Christianity suffer so deeply by their
Anti-scriptural Doctrine? And not only so, says F. Bugg, but I have a
Testimony well attested of their Abhorrence of their Blasphemous Tenets.

O how busy is this Agent, to insinuate, that all other Dissenters were sorry
they were joined with us in the Act of Toleration; and that Christianity deeply
suffered by the Quakers Blasphemous Tenets! O wicked and false Insinuations!
But this is our Comfort, that we are made Partakers of the Blessing which
Christ pronounced, when he said; Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, and
Persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil falsely (or as it is in the
Greek, lying) for my Name sake: We therefore Rejoice, and are exceeding Glad,
knowing our Reward is great in Heaven; and while we are here, we are resolved
through the Grace of God, to Love our Enemies, Bless them that Curse us, do
Good unto them that Hate us, and Pray for them who Despightfully use us, and
Persecute us, that we may be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven: For
he makes his Son to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the
Just and on the Unjust, Mat. 5.44, 45.

And therefore I tenderly propose to the Serious Consideration of all Christian
People, Whether to dwell in Love, abide in Charity, walk in Humility, fear God,
and live Peaceably with all Men, will not render us more like God and Christ,
than to dwell in Hatred and Enmity, to walk in Pride and High-mindedness, and
to be Turbulent and Quarrelsome? For, are not they the best Christians Subjects
and Neighbors, that truly Believe in God, and Jesus Christ his Son, and in the
Holy Spirit; and take the Holy Scriptures, which were given forth by Divine
Inspiration for their Creed, the Holy Spirit for their Guide, Christ for their
Example, and God for their Teacher; and are rather careful to live well, and
love all Men, than to contend about School Distinctions, and mere Speculative
Notions, as too many do? For such commonly are more Earnest for their
Interpretations, than for the Text; and Hate and Kill one another, falsely
pretending it is for God's sake: Who, while they would be counted Members of
the true Church of Christ, by their Fruits are known to be of the contrary; for
if Persecution is a Badge of a false Church, and the Protestants generally
account it so in the Papists; then ought it not diligently to be by all them
avoided, and to account it their Interest to Unite in Love and Affection, in
Charity and good Will? For what is that Man's Religion worth who wants Charity,
and his Pretense of Zeal for God, who dwells in Envy and Malice to his
Neighbor, whom he ought to Love as himself?

So desiring heartily that the Lord may Incline the Minds of all to follow Him,
and his Son Christ Jesus our alone Savior, who came not to Destroy Men's lives,
but to save them; who would not have the Tares pulled up, lest the Wheat should
be plucked up also; and told his Disciples, who desired Fire to come down from
Heaven, to consume those that would not receive him, That they knew not what
Spirit they were of, Luke 9.55.

And thus in the Sensible Feeling of the Love of God, I rest in this Hope and
Faith, That he will in his own appointed Time, persuade Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem, gather the Gentiles, who are yet afar off, unto Shiloh; and
frustrate all the Attempts of Gog and Magog, who are in Hellish Confederacy
against the Accomplishment of so Glorious, so Blessed, and so Desirable a Work.

A Brief Abstract of some Sufferings of the People called Quakers, given to
Confront F. B's diminutive Account, and not for Ostentation, nor to Reflect
upon any of the Church of England, or others, who are Principled against
Persecution.
BY printed Accounts to the King and both Houses of Parliament, there suffered
of the People of God in Scorn called Quakers, in the Days of the Commonwealth,
and of Oliver and Richard Cromwell, for bearing a Faithful Testimony to the
Truth, as it is in Jesus; as follows.

In England.
There have suffered Imprisonments, Stockings, Whippings, Loss of Goods, and
other Abuses to the Year, 1660. 3179 Persons. Remained then Prisoners, 79
Persons. There died in Prison, in the Commonwealth, in Oliver and Richard
Cromwell's Days, 32 Persons. Imprisoned in King Charles the Second's Name in
1660, after his Return and of which died, 77 Persons. Then Prisoners, 317
Persons. For 706 l. 8 s. 11 d. demanded, had taken 3000 l. 03 s. 08 d.

In 1661.
There have suffered of the said People, by Imprisonments, for refusing to
swear, and for meeting together, and refusing to go to the public Worship,
since King Charles II. came into England. 5400 Persons. Died, through hard and
cruel Usage 14

1661. In Ireland.
There suffered for not swearing, by Imprisonments, Stockings, Whippings, and
Loss of their Goods. 200. Present Prisoners being taken out of a peacable
Meeting in Cork, and one Meeting more. 14

1661. In Scotland.
For not swearing, etc. have been imprisoned, stockt, whipped, and some banished.
91 And many then in Prison there, had Necessaries denied them, and their
Friends visiting of them. Besides, there remained Prisoners in 1661, in
England, for good Conscience. 552

1661. In Foreign Plantations. New England.
BAnished on pain of Death, 26 Martyred, 4 Ears cut off, 3 Burned in the Hand
with the Letter H, 1 650 Stripes given to 31 Beat till his Body was like a
Jelly, 1 Five Appeals made to England, were denied by Boston Rulers. Taken from
them in New England, in Goods, to the Value of 1045 l.

Cyrinam.
Some imprisoned and after banished into Woods amongst wild Beasts, to be
devoured, but the Lord preserved them.

In Maryland.
Suffered by the Loss of Goods taken for worshipping God. l. s. d. 299 12 4

In Virginia.
Imprisoned for meeting to worship God 12 Persons

And fined and whipped for having Meetings, and not pulling off the Hat, and had
taken from them 2000 Pound Weight of Tobacco, and from one a 100 l. Sterling.

Besides several others, some whereof kept so close in Prison, in a close
Place, that they were not suffered to go forth to ease themselves.

Nevis,
Banished thence, 15 Persons.

And 2 of them whipped, and one had a Wife and Children that were banished.

Christophers.
Banished, 1.

Besides what is mentioned, some have been beat with Clubs, shot at with Pistols
and Guns, cut with Swords, knocked down into Pools: Armed Men came among Men,
Women, and Children, when peaceably Met together, only to Wait upon, and
Worship Almighty God, in a peaceable and innocent Manner, and have been thrown
down, and trod upon, till the very Blood gushed out of them: Yet these were,
and the said People still are, an innocent and peaceable People, clear from all
Rebellion, Plots, or Actions and Intentions of Evil: And that then desired, as
they now do, to live a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty
under the King.

Note, In this printed Account, they offered the King and Parliament, if they
would not set their Friends at Liberty, which lay in Holes and Dungeons, some
without Straw, some wanted Air, many could hardly get Meat, and several have
died through cruel Sufferings and Abuses by Goalers and others, viz.

That they, who were out of Prison, were free, as many of them, to lie in
Prison in their room, and to go into those Holes, Dungeons, stinking Vaults,
and Places, where some of their Friends had lain 2, 3, 4, and 5, Years: But it
would not be granted.

In 1685.
By a Printed Account to the Bishops and Clergy, it appears, that from the Time
aforementioned, to 1680, there died in Prison, and Prisoners for the Exercise
of their Faith and Conscience in Matters of Religion and Worship toward
Almighty God, some of whom being knocked down, beaten and bruised in their
Meetings, died of their Wounds. 243 Remained then in Prison, in the several
Goals, 276 The Number of those that had suffered Imprisonment, for Meeting,
refusing, for Conscience Sake, to Swear, some of them having had Sentence of
Praemunire, and Goods and Chattels seized. 9437 Excommunicated and imprisoned
for Nonconformity, besides many more so prosecuted. 624 Sentenced to
Banishment, for Meeting to worship God, 198

And in the same Year, There was presented to King James II. that were then
Prisoners for their Religious Worship and Meeting for that End. 1460 There died
since 1680, to 1685, Prisoners for their Faith and Worship. ^78 And the Number
of all amounting to 12316

Note, some of the present Prisoners were still continued upon the abovesaid
Account in 1680.

And farther Account of more sent to Prison, and some more died Prisoners.

Besides, many that have suffered Imprisonment, since 1680, and a great Number
distrained upon, and Havoc made by Informers (and some Informers were Priests)
for their religious peaceable Meetings, and not coming to the Parish
Church-Worship, so called, to the Ruin, of many, both in their Husbandry and
Trade, some not having a Bed left to lie upon, nor Stool to sit on, nor Cow to
give Milk for their poor Children, nor Corn for Bread, or Seed, or Drink, nor
Tools to work withal, etc. The Value of which Goods taken, is considerable, as
well as the Number of Sufferers, upon the said Accounts; and by Imprisonments
(not here inserted) as says the printed Account.

And since 1685, there have suffered of the said People, upon Account of their
tender Consciences, as for not paying Tithes, bearing Arms, Swearing, etc. to
1697. 2322 There have been imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, etc. 622 Since
1685, to 1697, they have had Goods distrained, in England, Wales, and the Isle
of Man, for not swearing, and not paying Tithes, and not bearing Arms, etc. to
the Value of l. s. d. q. 27875 10 5

Not accounting the great Havoc, Spoil, and Loss of Goods they sustained from
1661, to 1685, for their peaceable and religious meetings, which would amount
to a vast Sum.

From 1685, to 1697, there died Prisoners 17 Persons. And in Barbados, from
1658, to 1694, as appears by a printed Account, the said People have suffered
great Loss, mostly for not sending out to the Militia, to the Value of l. s. d.
11805 11 6 Of which Sum was taken contrary to Law 1817 l. 15 s. 6 d.

And a great deal more they have suffered, of which no Account has been yet
given, besides Imprisonments.

And in Maryland, Jamaica, Virginia, Nevis, Ireland, and Scotland: They have
been Sufferers by Imprisonments, and Loss of Goods, only for their Religious
Meetings, and for not Swearing, and upon other Accounts of their tender
Consciences, to the Value following, viz.

l. s. d. In Maryland, from 1638, to 1668. 552 17 6 Thus, by what I have
hinted, their Loss appears to have been above the Value of 43702 00 00

And that which has caused their Sufferings to amount so high, has been the
Excess in the Distresses, the distrainers often taking, in Barbados, much more
than would satisfy; by which, some of them, notwithstanding all their
Providence and Industry are scarcely able to subsist and maintain their
Families.

Which surely is far more than the Loss of a 1000 of Pins, o^ 2 double Bibs, as
Fra. Bugg scoffingly and slanderously writes: And yet hereby they declare, that
they believe the King's Revenue (in Barbados) is nothing increased, nor he or
the Country benefited.

In Nevis.
Several suffered on other Accounts, besides those that sufered for their
Testimonies against the Priests Worship, Doctrine, etc. for which they
underwent great Fines and Imprisonments, and Persecutions, and Three had about
17 l. sterling demanded for Fees; unto which Imprisonment no Fees belonged, by
any Law in being; and yet Friends were distrained, and had taken from them, by
Order of Court, in a Negro, and Sugar 4000 l. weight and for the Marshal's
Fees, for which only there was granted but 858 l. of Sugar So that they took
more than due by their own Law, to the worth of above after 3 Months
Imprisonment, for writing a Paper. 3142 of Sugar. 19 l. And another had 45 17
06 sterling taken for 20 00 00 imposed

For a Fine on the Meeting House; and several others fined and Distrained.

And were indicted by John Lawson, Priest, for Slanders pretended against him,
by base Libels, in terming him an Antichristian Priest, and he declared against
them, that he had sustained 100000 l. of Sugar, Damage.

And one banished to Burmudos, for writing a Warning to the Inhabitants of that
Island.

Ireland.
And since 1661, the said People have been exposed to Sufferings, for not
having their Children Baptized, and for working on Days called Holy Days, and
not going to the public Worship; and for not paying Smoak-Penny, etc. but in
that Year, an Order was granted by Maurice Eustace, Chancellor, and Orrery
Montroth, dated Dublin the 17th August 1661. Signifying, that they, commonly
called Quakers, who for a long time had endured Imprisonment, and were in
Prison in diverse Places, in that Nation, only for Conscience sake, should be
released from their hard Imprisonments.

And after this, they Suffered again in 1669. But about 1686, they enjoyed
their Liberty, and were mostly quiet in that Nation, from those Persecutions
they before had gone under, upon the Account of their tender Consciences.

Scotland.
Many times they were Dragged, Stoned, Reproached and Mocked, with cruel
Mockings, and often Imprisoned, as appears by Account of Geo. Keith from thence
in 1669.

Some were Fined, according to the Act of Nonconformists, and committed to
Prison, and continued for Fines; and Distress was made on their Goods.

Those that Preached or Prayed in these Meetings were required to pay 5000
Marks, Scotch, or to subscribe to their own Banishment, as appears by another
Letter from George Keith.

In 1677. the Prisons were so thronged, that they were in danger of their
Lives: A Doctor declared, That a Plague might be feared, if they had not more
room to Breath in.

And Application being made to the King, there being about 24 Prisoners; most
of which had been six Months.

It was referred to the King's Council, who ordered their Release, upon
Condition they would pay their Fines; which they for Conscience sake could not
do, and so were continued Prisoners.

Maryland.
In 1681. the Assembly passed an Act, that their Solemn Promise should be
taken, as if they had been Sworn in any Matter, Cause, or Thing, or before any
Court, Judge, or Magistrate, within that Province; by which means they were
somewhat eased from those Sufferings, that were occasioned for their not
Swearing, and enjoyed the Liberty of their Consciences till 1692. but since
that have remained, and still are, Sufferers on other Accounts; particularly on
that Act made there, on which the Royal Assent has not yet passed here,
Entitled, An Act for the Worship of Almighty God; which is esteemed to be
contrary to the Fundamental Laws of that Province; and the like Law was by the
King and Council here disallowed in 1695/6. but that by which they now Suffer
was made in 1696. and is strictly Executed upon them by Chargable Levies.

And being kept here, and not presented to the King and Council, is in force
there, till it is Disallowed, as that of the same Title and Tendency was by
them in 1695/6.

In the Isle of Man.
The said People have been great Sufferers several times, by Imprisonments
there, and Banished thence by direction of the Reverend Ordinary, so called;
they having refused several Charges and Publications to go to Church, and
continuing their Meeting, were therefore Censured to Prison, and Order given by
Robert Parr and John Harrison, two Priests, that if they refused to be
Committed by them, to call for the Assistance of a Soldier, and let the Sumner
put this in Execution immediately.

And by Virtue of this Order, the Quakers were taken into Custody, and
Imprisoned, without bringing before the Magistrate, or these two Priests
themselves, without any Ceremony of Excommunication.

Oh what Power did these Priests take upon them, by Order from their Reverend
Ordinary, so called, to admonish the Quakers, and without having them before
them; cause them to be Imprisoned and Banished: Is this the way of the Bishops
Courts? And when the Sufferers met the Bishop at the Earl of Darby's House,
they told him what was done, and how they and their Ancestors had had
Possessions there in that Island, for several Hundred Years, and that they had
their Wives and Families; some of which consisted of many little Children: And
yet they were Banished by the direction of the two Priests, that pretended
their Orders from the Reverend Ordinary, so called: The Bishop told them
plainly, that if he might persuade the Earl against them, they should not go to
the Isle again.

Let all that Read this observe, how unlike a Christian Bishop he appeared, and
what little Regard he had to these Men, or their Distressed Families, their
Wives, or tender Children, from whom by his Priests and Orders, they were
Banished.

And when they returned by order of the Magistrates in Cumberland, to the
Island, they were not suffered to Land, but had back to England.

In the mean while, the Magistrates of the Island sent and seized their
Estates, Real and Personal; and when one of the Sufferers, viz. William Callow
made Application to the Earl, for Relief, he was rejected.

So his Wife and others were sent to Prison, and the said William Callow being
Banished; his Children and Family, Fou^teen in Number, were left without any to
take care of them; and this was what the Bishop's Court did.

Note, It happened, that after the chief Sumner or Apparitor, viz. Robert
Chiefton, who thus Prosecuted them, being drinking in a Priest's House, that
kept Ale to sell, on a 7th day night, with John Harrison, Priest aforesaid, and
others of the Persecutors was found dead next Morning, being the 20th Day of
the 7th Month, 1670.

All, both Men and Women by the Governor Henry Nowell, had orders to prepare
to be brought by Capt. Ascough, the 3d of the 8th Month next following, to
Douglas, to be Transported to Barbados; and accordingly all the Quakers were
brought to the House of William Callow, and two of the Women that were brought
had each a young Child, one of which was six Weeks old, and the other but three.

The next Morning they were had to Douglas, several of their Neighbors and
Relations accompanying them, with many Tears and Cries, some part of the way,
and many to Douglas.

And delivered to the Custody of one Capt. Quail, and a List of their Names
taken, for to deliver to Capt. Ingram, Master of the Ship that came from
London, Bound for Barbados, who would have persuaded them to Transport
themselves; which they refused, and had a long Discourse with them.

He asked Quail, How many there were? He said six, viz. William Callow and
Wife, Edwin Christian and Wife, Jane Christian, and Mary Callow, and three
Children.

Ingram said, I Will have neither Mother nor Child.

Then Quail swore at Ascough for bringing the Children; so the Childrens Names
were put out of the List, and the List altered.

And Quail swore, none of the Children should go into Prison, and called for a
Soldier to take them to Prison. Then William Callow desired, that seeing they
had been Traveling all day with those small Children, they might refresh
themselves before they went into Prison, but were denied. And Quail said, he
would find them a House, where they should see neither Sun nor Moon: They
pressed to Refresh themselves first for their Money, but were denied, and the
Children taken from them, and Quail said, Let them lie and die, It Is no Sin to
knock them on the Head, and dash out their Brains. And added, I think I do God
good service to kill them, rather than they should live in your Foolish Fancy.
So they were all brought to Prison, and near the Door Quail said, I Will tell you
the Truth of my Heart, I could find in my Heart to Kill you both: Indeed I
could find in my Heart to Hang you both, and would be hanged my self. Some of
their Relations were then with them at the Prison-door.

Then he opened a Stable-door, and laid hold on W. C. and put him in, and the
two Women, his Wife and Jane Christian, commanding their Children to be taken
from them, and to be laid in the Street; which the Soldiers that were
commanded refusing to do, Quail took the Child of six Weeks old from W. C's
Wife, and threw it down, and pitched his Wife into the Stable; And he took the
other Child also of three Weeks old, and left it in the Street. Upon which
William Callow desired to let the Mothers have the Children that were lying in
the Street. Then he turned about, and with his Rapier in the Sheath, broke W.
C's Head; and struck him again, and broke it in another place: This was in the
Prison. So that the Blood run down his Face on both sides, which caused the
People on both sides to weep, and cried out, Shame to strike a Man in Prison,
and the Children lay crying in the Street.

The Relations, not meddling with them, being desired to let them alone, to see
what they would do with them. And the Prisoner told him, He as freely forgave
him, as he gave him those Blows; and then he suffered the Mothers to have the
Children again.

And the next Morning, being the 5th of the 8th Month, 1670. the Night having
been so Fair and Calm, one might have carried a Candle in ones Hand through the
Streets; yet that great Ship, in which they were to be carried, was broke in
the River, and the Drum beat for People to go and take the Goods out of her;
and presently after some of the Rigging was put in the same place, the said
People were Prisoners in. Then Capt. Quail sent for William Callow, and said,
Your Curse is come on the great Ship; to which he replied, We Curse not; but if
any deserved God's Curse, it was enough to overturn them.

And to the said Captain Ingram, Master of this Ship, it was told that Captain
Harwood, who before had carried William Callow off that Island, being banished
to Virginia; that he, going into Ireland, had his Ship fired; and the 8th Day
of the 8th Month, 1670, Captain Quail sent for William Callow, and told him
he, might go home, and tell Captain Ascough, to take care of them; and next Day
sent for their Children: That Day they were all at home, Praising God with Soul
and Spirit.

Note, This was the 5th Ship that was broken, besides that which was fired, and
some of the People scorched, and the foregoing was the 8th Time of their
Banishment.

This Brief Account of some of the Sufferings of this abused People, I have
given to show, although they fall greatly short of what those Christians suffered
by the Heathen in former Days. Yet they have been far greater than what F. B.
represents them, and these Sufferings have been from Christians and Ministers
of Christ, and reverend Fathers in God, so called.

And this I hope, will not, by those that are truly wise and considerate, be
esteemed wicked with a Witness, as F. B. falsely says, to record such as
Persecutors who execute the Laws: If so, let me query; was it wicked with a
Witness, to record those that executed the Law, De Heretico Comburendo, etc.
upon the Martyr's Persecutors; let this be considered in Coolness, and also how
Ill Will and Envy never speaks well; and whether F. B's being too much filled
therewith, against this People he has left, and hating that Light they profess
and believe in, as he once did, or pretended to do, is not the cause of his
thus Writing?

But, it is no new thing for evil Doers, to hate the Light, nor Men to depart
from the Faith. There was a Judas in early Days, an Alexander and a Demas in
the primitive Times, and those that Apostatized from the Christian Faith, and
that made Shipwreck thereof, and a good Conscience, and in this Day, to the
true Christians Grief, there are too many, over whom the same degenerated
Spirit, and Power of him that kept not his first Habitation, nor abode in the
Truth, has prevailed, and thereby they are become like the great Red Dragon,
that stood ready to cast forth his Flood to destroy the Man-Child, as soon as he
was born; but in vain proved all his Rage, and fruitless were his Attempts, and
so has, and will the Lord make all the Attempts, secret Contrivances, and
Combinations of such, against those who abide in the Faith and Patience of the
Lamb of God; for Behold, said the Lord, he who has, and will perform his Word,
they shall truly gather together, but not by me: Whosoever shall gather
together against thee, shall fall for thy Sake. No Weapon that is formed
against thee, shall prosper; and every Tongue that shall rise against thee in
Judgment, thou shall condemn. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord,
and their Righteousness is of me, says the Lord* Isai. 54.15, 17.

A shorter Abstract of the Sufferings before hinted.
THere have suffered of the said People called Quakers above, 14638 Persons.
Sentenced to be, and Banished 240 Died Prisoners 141 The Loss sustained by this
Suffering People, amounts to above the Value of l. s. d 43702 00 00 Besides
vast Sums not reckoned herein, which would amount to more than 27321 00 00 And
makes in all above 71023 00 00

And this is not done in any wise, to boast of their Sufferings, but rather to
show they have been more than they are falsely represented by F. Bugg; who, with
those few hot and angry Men, that joined with him, have not been wanting in
their endeavors to Incense the Government against this People, by falsely
Charging them with many Horrid Blasphemies, and their Principles to be Bloody,
Treasonable, and Destructive to Government; which is an evident Token, that
it is the same old Persecuting Spirit, which once prevailed against this People,
that now works in these Men: But as the Lord preserved them under all their
Sufferings, so he has disappointed these Men in their Evil Designs; for which
they are truly thankful to God, that he has so preserved them, and they did
and do, pray for those that despitefully use them and persecute them; and bless
Almighty God for his Mercy and Providence toward them; and gratefully
acknowledge the favor of the Government, under which they live, for their
present Liberty in the free Exercise of their tender Consciences, and peaceable
Enjoyment of their Religious Meetings therein.

Which are not for any of those ill Ends, nor of such dangerous Consequence, or
tending to Sedition, etc, as has been falsely and maliciously Suggested to the
Parliament against them.

But are held in the Name, Love, and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to no
other end, but to serve God, and one another, in Love; and to counsel each
other to keep and persevere in the Doctrine of Christ, and in the Practice of
that Religion he is the Author of: Notwithstanding the Enmity of their
Adversaries, and malicious Insinuations of such who have left them; and,
Judas-like, seek to make them Suffer; as Experience has shown.

And they hope their peaceable Demeanor, under all Governments, has been, and
shall be, a better Evidence to their Superiors for them, than the groundless
and malicious Suggestions, or false Charges of their Adversaries against them.

And as by Law they have been indulged, and no ill Consequences ensued
therefrom; and the Reasons remaining, that induced the King and Parliament
thereto, viz. The Uniting the Hearts of the King's Subjects in Interest and
Affection. It Is Humbly Hoped they will, in their Great Wisdom and Counsel,
continue it; that every one, that lives Peaceably and Honestly, may enjoy his
Undoubted Right, viz. A free Liberty of Conscence, to serve the God that made
him, in that way he is persuaded is most agreeable to his Mind and Will.

FINIS.

