PIAN PIANO. OR, INTERCOURSE BETWEEN H. FERN, Dr. in Divinity AND J.
HARRINGTON, Esquire.

Upon occasion of the Doctors Censure of the COMMONWEALTH OF OCEANA.

^entit terra Deos, mutataque syder a pondus
Quaesivere suum.
-- Petron. Sal. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1656.

EPISTLE To the READER.
Reader,
I Seldom talk with him that does not confute me, nor ever read that which did
not confirm me; wherefore if I be glad to take a man in black and white, you
will not blame me, or do not know that I have had an University about my ears,
without any possibility left unto me whereby to defend my self but this, in
which you may imagine me speaking unto the Chair.

INTERCOVRSE Between H. FERN Dr in Divinity, and JAMES HARRINGTON Esquire. upon
occasion of the Doctors censure of the Commonwealth of Oceana.
WHen I had published my Oceana, one of my sisters making good provision of
Copies, presented of them unto her friends, as well to show her respect to
them, as to know their judgments of it. Among the rest being acquainted with
Doctor Fern, she sent him one, and soon after received this answer.

Madam,
I Received a Book directed to me from your Ladyship, with intimation I should
express my sense of it: I acknowledge, Madam, the favor you have done me in
sending it; but the return you expect has its difficulties: the Book being now
past the Press, and of such an argument, had I seen it before it was public,
I should have said it was not likely to please, etc. but that is nothing to me;
your desire I suppose is to know how I like it. I conceive your Ladyship is not
so far a stranger either to the Book which you sent, or to me, whom you are
pleased thus to own, but that you take me to be of a different judgment from
the Author in this his form, whether concerning State or Church. And it may be
your Ladyship did therefore call me to speak as one that would be less
partial. Give me leave then Madam in plain English to say, that albeit the
Author has shown good sufficiency of parts, and taken much pains in order to
his design; yet I conceive, First, that he is not a little mistaken in thinking
the Israel-Common-wealth or Government under Moses so appliable unto his
purpose as he would make it. Next, that when the question 'twixt his form and
the Monarchical is disputed over and over again, reason and experience will
still plead for the latter. Nor can the balance he pretends stand so steady in
his form, as in a well tempered Monarchy, by reason the temptations of
advancing are more like to sway with many in a Common Weal, then with one, etc.
in the height of Dignity. Next, When I consider such a change by this Model
from what was ever in, etc. And that the Agrarian, with some other levelling
Orders, are the laws of it, I should think the nature of men was first to be
new modeled, before they would be capable of this. Lastly, what is said in
relation to the Church or Religion in the point of Government, Ordination,
Excommunication, had better beseemed Leviathan, and is below the parts of this
Gentleman, to retain and sit down with those little things, and poor mistakes,
which the ignorance or wilfulness of many in these days has broached in way
of quarrel against the Church of England. And lamentable it is to see so many
(especially Gentlemen of good parts) so opinionate, so boldly meddling in
matters of Religion, as if they had forgot, or did not understand their Article
of the Catholic Church.

Madam, You see I have been plain in speaking my sense, and hope you will think
me therefore more fit to do you real service when you shall have occasion to
command.

Madam, Your humble Servant.
Nov. 4th. (56.

THe Doctor's letter though it be scandalous (for to charg a writer of little
things, poor mistakes, sitting down by ignorance, or wilfulness, without
proof, is no better) was yet but private; and therefore I may be asked why I
would make it public? whereunto I answer, That what a Divine will have to be
true, is no less public then if it were printed; but more, for he will
Preach it; and Preaching communicates unto more then can read: Also his present
Doctrines are exceeding dangerous. For in government that is cast upon
Parliaments or popular elections, as ours has ever been and is, to take wise
men, and understanding, and known among their Tribes to be Rulers over them,
has ever (except where the people were not free in their elections) been, and
must ever be, the certain and infallible consequence. Now wise men, and
understanding, and known among their Tribes, must needs be (at least for the
greater part) of that rank which we now call the Aristocracy or Gentlemen.
Whence the Senate in every well ordered Commonwealth has consisted of the
Aristocracy or Gentry. And that the Senate ever had the supreme Authority, as
well in matters of Religion as State, is not only clear in all other popular
Governments, but in the Old Testament; which also is confirmed by our Savior
in the New, Mat. 23. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat, and
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, (both He and His Apostles observed
the national Religion) observe and do; for the liberty of conscience or
prophetic right in the Commonwealth of Israel, as in others was such, as by
which Christianity notwithstanding the national Religion might grow. But do not
(says he) after their works, for they say and do not. In their inquiry after
John, Joh. 1. they seem to imply or say, that if he were that Prophet, there
was nothing in the Law why he might not introduce his Baptism; and therefore
why he might not gather Churches, or instruct the people in his way.
Nevertheless when they come to doing, they kill the Prophets, and stone them.
This indeed Christ blames, being the abuse of their power. But whereas the
supreme Authority of the Senate, whether in matters of Religion or State, is
confirmed by all divine and humane prudence; and the Senate is the more
peculiar Province of the Gentry: The Doctor says that Lamentable it is to see
so many, (not only men of such parts or quality as the people in their
elections are not likely to look upon) but especially Gentlemen of good parts
(then which the people upon like occasions have no other refuge) so opinionate,
so boldly meddling in matters of Religion, as if they had forgot or did not
understand their Article of the Catholic Church. Now where ever the Clergy
have gained this point, namely, that they are the Catholic Church, or that it
is unlawful for Gentlemen, either in their private capacity to discourse, or in
their public to propose, as well in the matter of Church as State Government,
neither government nor Religion have failed to degenerate into mere
Priestcraft. This especially was the reason why I wrote unto the Doctor as
follows.

Sir,
WHereas in a Letter of yours to one of my Sisters, I find your judgment given
vehemently against me, but merely positive, I conceive that both in the matter
and manner of delivery you have given me right to desire, and laid obligation
upon your self to afford me your reasons, which may be done (if you please)
either by confuting my book, or answering the Quaeries hereunto annexed; in
either of which ways, or any other I am more then desirous to undertake you;
and that for many considerations, as your abilities, the safety (at least on
your part) in the performance, the importance of the argument, the
seasonablenesse, and (however it came in your mind to distrust it) the
welcomenesse of such discourse unto all men of ingenuity, both in power and out
of it, or whose interest is not the mere study of Parties, from which the
freest since the late troubles, that has written in this nature is

Sir, Your humble Servant.
Nov. 17. (56.

The Quaeries I shall interweave with the Doctor's Answer unto each of them
returned unto me with this Preamble.
Sir,
I Received your Paper wherein you are pleased to propound Quaeries, and say an
obligation now lies upon me to render my reasons of dissenting, or to answer
the Interrogatories. But you must give me leave to say, the obligation still
arises from my respect to my Lady and your self, not from the matter or manner
(as you seem to imply) of the delivering my former judgment. For I could not
conceive that by the favor and honor my Lady did me in sending the Book, I
had lost my freedom, and stood bound either to complye, or be challenged as an
Adversary to try out the difference. Therefore upon the score of friendship and
civility, I have forced my self in the midst of many pressing occasions, to
give you this account of my Thoughts in order to your Quaeries.


The Doctor has written heretofore upon the Politics; Then this among the
occasions or subjects of writing, there is none of greater moment. I am a
beginner in this art, and have no desire to impose upon any man; but if I
cannot teach him, to learn of him. But my Senior in it contradicts me, and
gives me no reason. Now to contradict a man and give him no reason, is to give
him an affront; and to demand reason in such a case, that is, for such an
affront to send such a challenge, as provokes unto no other contention then
that for truth, being according unto Scripture, and not against Laws, concerns
a man's honor and right; therefore it is in such a case not of courtesy, but
the devoir of him that gave the affront to answer; which the Doctor having now
done, I come into the lists or to the Quaeries, with his answers and my replies.

The first Quaery.
How much or in what the Author of Oceana is mistaken, to think the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews appliable to his purpose.

The Doctor's Answer.
I Have reason still to think and say, The Government or Commonwealth (as you
call it) of the Hebrews, was of all other less appliable to your form, which
supposes a Senate debating, proposing, and the people resolving, choosing, as
page 15. To which there was nothing like in that Government. You find indeed
princes and Heads of the Tribes, and may call them a Senate, and read of the
Assemblies of the people, but without any such power or authority, Both of them
receiving Laws by the hand of Moses without any debate or contradiction. And
it is in a manner confessed, page 18. where you say the function of that Senate
was executive only, the Laws being made by God. And if we look to the
Institution of the seventy, we find it was upon the advice of Jethro, and that
not to be as a Council to Moses, but as Vnder-Judges for his case in the
Administration of the Laws, which rather suits with the condition of inferior
Min sters of Justice under a Monarch, Gods Vicegerent on earth, as all Kings
are in a more large consideration, as Moses was more specially in that
Theocracy. Therefore I did not a little wonder at your assertions and
inferences, Page 16, and 17. Where you speak of their making God their King,
their power of rejecting and deposing him as their civil Magistrate * the
harshnesse of the phrase may be mollified, but the thing asserted I suppose
cannot be defended (viz.) any such power in the people to Godward; your
inference also seems strange and infirm, that they had power to have rejected
any of those Laws. What you assert in the 17. page of all the Laws given by
Covenant, is true in a sober sense, but the inference strange, that only which
was resolved (or chosen) by the People of Israel was their Law. This is so far
from good Logic, that it falls short of good divinity; for it must suppose God
and the People on equal terms at their entering that Convenant; whereas God
often (especially in Deuteronomy.) shows his right of commanding, and enforces their
obedience to his commands upon antecedent obligations; his being the Lord their
God, his choosing them out of all Nations to be a peculiar People, his bringing
them out of the Land of Egypt: Much more might be said to show these instances
of the People receiving laws from God (in which they were only passive) are
far from proving any power in the People as to Godward, or from concluding
generally the power in the People of resolving and choosing Laws; and therefore
this Commonwealth of Israel not appliable to your purpose.

Reply.
IN my Book I call the Government whereupon we are disputing the Commonwealth
of Israel; but though I think I did not much amiss, I am the first that ever
called it so, and you make no difficulty in your first Letter to speak after
me: But when I come to call it, as all they do that have written upon it, then
you begin to doubt, and it is the Commonwealth (as I call it) of the Hebrews,
whence you will be more then suspected, not to have read any of those Authors.
And yet how confidently is it laid to me in your first Letter, that I am not a
little mistaken in thinking the Israelitish Commonwealth or Government under
Moses to be so appliable to my purpose, as I would make it? Nevertheless when
you come in Answer unto this Quaere to give your Reasons, you bring this for
one, that Page 18. I say the function of the Senate was only executive, the
Laws being made by God; Where First the word only is not mine, but of your
imposing; Secondly, when you should show that I am mistaken in thinking the
Commonwealth of Israel so appliable to my purpose as I would make it, you show
that I make it no more appliable to my purpose than it is: Which is not fair,
especially when I gave you so clear a Reason, that albeit the Authority of
proposing laws appertain unto every Senate (as such) yet the Laws of the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews having been all made by an infallible Legislator,
even God himself, the Senate had no Laws in the beginning to propose, but came
afterward to propose, when those laws given in the beginning came to need
addition; for if you find the Kings upon such occasions as David, 1 Samuel 7. 2.
and Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. proposing, and the People resolving, was this likely
to have been introduced by them? or if the People had the result in the
Monarchy, must they not much more have had it in the Commonwealth? Wherefore
the Authority of proposing unto the people, as will better appear hereafter,
was derived by the King from the Judge, by the Judge from the Sanhedrim, by the
Sanhedrim from Moses, and by Moses from God: As (Exodus 19. 5.) where God gives
him instructions for a Proposition unto the People; Thus shall thou say unto
the House of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel, ye have seen what I did
unto the Egyptians, etc. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed, and
keep my Covenant, then you shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests: If you will
(not whether you will or no) you shall be (which relates unto the future) unto
me a Kingdom; that is, I will be your King. God having given these
instructions unto his sole Legislator, Moses came (accordingly) and called for
the Elders of the People, and laid before their faces all these words that the
Lord had commanded him. And all the People answered together (gave their
suffrage, Nemine contradicente) and said, All that the Lord has spoken we will
do: And Moses returned the words (that is, the suffrage, or result) of the
People unto the Lord. Wherefore God was King in Israel by Covenant, proposed by
Himself or his servant Moses, and resolved by the People: Now that he was
afterward rejected by the People (when they chose another King) that he should
not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7. are his own words: And if in these words he
show plainly that the People had power to reject a Law that was not only
proposed unto them, but resolved by them, then must it needs be included even
in Gods own words, that the People must have had power to have rejected any
thing that was proposed, and not confirmed by them: And yet you tell me, that
this is so far from good Logic, that it falls short of good Divinity; And why?
because it must suppose God and the People on equal terms at their entering
that Covenant. Then that a King either cannot covenant (for example) with his
Chandler to serve him with Wax, or that the Chandler was upon equal Terms, or
Hail-fellow well met with the King, at their entering that covenant, comes up
to good Divinity. Such is the Logic which you chop with me, for you are beyond
my understanding! But the honest part of Logic I understand well enough, not
to envy them that seem to have more.

For if by the Word Terms you understand the Conditions of the Covenant, it is
fair: as to these indeed, the parties covenanting are so far equal, that they
may equally will or choose; else it were a Precept or Command, not a Covenant;
but if by the Word Terms you understand the dignity or power of the parties, it
is not fair, but an equivocation; for the equality of the Parties in that sense
is nothing at all unto the equality of the Covenant; wherefore the impiety you
would fix upon me, is your own, and arises from your want of distinguishing
between the Almighty Power of God in which he is above all things, and his
infinite love whereby he boweth the Heavens, and descends unto his poor
creatures; in the former regard to talk of electing or deposing God (who is
King, be the Heathen never so unquiet) were, indeed, impious; but in the latter
it is most certain, that He rules among no other than a consenting, a
resolving, a willing People; Or tell me whether the reign of God on the neck of
the Turks be the same with that in the hearts of his elect, or wherein consists
the difference? Moreover to what I have said, and more than what I have said
for the debate that was in the Senate, and the result that was in the People of
Israel, Grotius has summed up the Talmudists in this Note upon the Tenth Verse
of Deu. 18. Notandum praeterea scita Senatus nonnull a sive legi interpretandae
sive praemuniendae fact a evanuisse, non modo si Senatus ante receptum ubique
morem sententiam mutasset, verum etiam sivel ab initio Populus ea non ferret,
vel si irent in dissuetudinem, where there is nothing plainlier to be perceived
than that debate was in this Senate, and result in this People: and you
confess what I assert in the 17th page of all their Laws given by Covenant to
be true in a sober sense; now the sense which I have showed you is that of all
sober Men. But can you show me the judgment of any sober man that because we
find Princes and heads of the Tribes, we may call them a Senate? pray' how do
you cut Twelve Princes into Seventy Elders, or where do you find them in the
Senate? but this is nothing. If we look to the institution of the Seventy, we
find it (say you) to be upon the advice of Jethro. (We) I pray you take it to
your self, or I appeal to him that shall compare Exodus 18. with Numb. 11.
whether this have been the opinion of any sober man. Moses in that of Exodus
hearkens unto the voice of his father in law, Jethro the Priest of Midian:
Making able men out of Israel, Heads over the people, Rulers of thousands,
Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tenns. And they judged the
People at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small
matter they judged themselves. These were the Jethronian praefectures, or the
courts afterward consisting of Twenty three Judges that sat in the gates of
every City. Never were they mistaken before for the Sanhedrim or Seventy
Elders, which came not to be instituted till afterward in the Eleventh of
Numbers, where Moses while he stood alone, being as weary of the recourse had
unto him from these judicatories, as he was of That, before their Institution,
Cries unto God, I am not able to bear this People alone (his Office of sole
Legislator, in which relation Lycurgus and Solon are as well and as properly
called Kings, as He, who was King indeed in Jesurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. but no
otherwise than they in their Commonwealths, that is to propose the Laws of his
form, when the Heads of the People, and the Tribes of Israel were gathered
together (...) was now almost accomplished.) Wherefore the Lord said unto
Moses, Gather unto me Seventy Elders of the men of Israel, whom thou know to
be Elders of the People, and Officers over them, and bring them unto the
Tabernacle of the congregation (in which or in the Temple was ever after the
Session-house of the Senate) that they may stand there with thee. If this be
not enough, you may have a farther sight of your great mistake, 2 Chronicles. 19.
where at the restitution of this Government in some part by Jehoshaphat, the
Jethronian Councils are set up City by City: But the Senate or Seventy Elders
with a moreover in Jerusalem; and that the Jethronian Courts are intimated in
the New Testament by the name of the Judgment, as the Sanhedrim by that of the
Council, Godwyn the Schoolmaster could have told you. But whereas nothing is
more constantly delivered by all Authors, nor express in Scripture, then that
Moses having instituted the Sanhedrim stood from that time forward no more
alone, or was thence forth but Prince of the Senate, which God appointed to
stand with him; You say, that he was a Monarch or stood alone. And whereas the
Jethronian Praefectures henceforth brought all their difficult Cases unto the
Sanhedrim, in the institution of which Sanhedrim Jethro had no hand: You say,
that the Sanhedrim or Seventy Elders were instituted by Jethro. How plain would
your English have been upon this occasion if they had given it; whereas I shall
say no more then that these are no little things nor poor mistakes.

The second Quaere.
In case the Authors Form, and the Monarchical be or be not disputed over and
over again, what the Reason or Experience may be that remains, or may be
thought to remain, for the advantage of the latter?

The Doctors Answer.
I Have not time to dispute the two forms, nor will to make it my study; but
this Reason is cogent for Monarchical, that in it there is one Chief; For Order
is the main concernment of Government, and Order is more perfected by reducing
to Unity, or having still One Chief in the Order; And this I mention the
rather, because as anciently the Romans, so you in your model, are sorced to
betake you in necessity to a Dictator, which undeniably evinces Monarchical
Government, the fittest for all exigencies. Also because God to whom you seem
to appeal (Page 15.) led his People (Psalm. 77. ult.) by the hand of Moses and
Aaron. Moses chief in the whole Government, and Aaron the chief in the
Priesthood, and after Moses Joshua, and still raised up single persons to judge
his People. Lastly, because the dust of Nature led your form of Government,
from Paternal (so it was at the beginning or Peopling of the World) unto
Monarchical, as Families increased into Nations.

Reply.
YOu in your Letter are positive that be the two Forms never so often disputed,
the advantage in reason will remain to the Monarchical; but when you come to
give your reason, have not time to dispute the business, nor will to make is
your study; you will give a man his sentence, without recourse to the law, and
his objections: Again, without taking notice of his Answers, as in the matter
of Dictatorian Power, for which you say, First, that one person is fittest, and
Secondly, that one person being fittest for this one thing, it undeniably
evinces Monarchical Government the fittest for all exigencies. Now granting the
former were true, as I have showed it to be false, and therefore chosen the
Venetian Dictator which consistth not of One man, rather than the Roman, which
did; yet if One Man be fittest to be a Pilot, how does it follow that That one
man is fittest for all Exigences? Or if Gideon were fittest to be Judge or
Dictator of Israel, that it was fittest (as the people desired of him, Judges
8. 22.) he should rule over them, both He and his Son, and his sons son also?
And whereas you say that God (unto whom I appeal) still raised up single
persons to judge his people; does it follow that these Judges or Dictators were
Monarchs, especially when Gideon answers the People, I will not rule over you,
neither shall my son rule over you, The Lord shall rule over you: Or rather
that Monarchical Government even in the time of the Judges was in this
Commonwealth, to the rejection of God? In which place (to allude unto that in
your Answer to the first quaere to which I have not yet replied,) it is plain
also that antecedent obligations do not always imply command, or enforce
obedience: for say the people unto Gideon, rule thou over us, etc. for thou
have delivered us from the hand of Midian; yet neither did this obilge the
people to choose or Gideon, to be chosen King.

That God led his People, Psalm. 77. by the hand of Moses and Aaron, is right;
but your flourish upon it, where you say Moses Chief in the whole Government,
and Aaron Chief in the Priesthood, withers; for the Place relates unto the
Times, (Exodus 7.) In which says the Lord unto Moses, See I have made thee a
God to Pharaoh, and Aarou thy Brother shall be thy Prophet (that is) thy
Chaplain or Orator (for otherwise there arose not a Prophet like Moses in
Israel,) and this was before the time that Moses made Aaron High Priest: nor
after the institution of the Sanhedrim, was the High Priest other then
subordinate unto it, whether in matter of Religion or State; Nay, if he had
given them just cause, he might be whipped by the Law, as is affirmed by the
Talmudists. This Senate was to stand, as has been showed, with Moses;
therefore Moses from the institution thereof, was no more than Prince or Archon
of it, and General of the Commonwealth; in each of which functions he was
succeeded by Joshua. And the People served the Lord all the days of Joshua,
and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, (Judges 2. 7.) But from
this time forward you hear no more of the Jethronian Praefectures, that sat in
the Gates of the Cities, nor of the Senate, as I take it, (being yet but
studying this Commonwealth, in which it were a better deed to aid, than mislead
me) till the restitution of it by Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. For after the death
of Joshua, and of the Elders of these Courts, the people of Israel mindlesse of
the excellent Orders of their Commonwealth, given by God, were so stupid, as to
let both the Senate and the inferior Courts to fall. But a Commonwealth
without the Senate must of natural necessity degenerate into Anarchy: Wherefor
the Nature of this Commonwealth throughout the Book of Judges was downright
Anarchie. You have the Tribes without any Common Council or deliberation
leaguing one with another, and making War at their Fancy, as Judge 1. 3. Judah
said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight
against the Canaanites, etc. Whence (especially when there was no Judge nether)
is that frequent Complain throughout this Book, that in those days there was
no King (as men of your rank have rendered the Word, though in this place it
rather signifies Suffes Consul, or Dictator, as some of the Laiety that is of
the folks do affirm) in Israel, but every one did that which was right in
his own eyes: In this case of a Commonwealth there is no help but by
Dictatorian power, which God in the raising up of Judges, did therefore
indulge, appointing them ordinarily but protempore, or upon some, not upon all
Exigencies; For Judges 20. the Congregation sentenceth the Tribe of Benjamin,
decrees and manageth the War against them, without a Judge or Dictator. This
Anarchy with the confusion of it, by want of the Senate, especially when the
sons of Samuel grew corrupt and imperious through the long rule of their
father, was the true cause why the people chose to have a King, and so fell
into Monarchy, under which they fared worse; for though there happened to come
with a great deal of cost, as in the War with Saul, a David to be defended, yet
by another War against his ambitious son, and after him a Solomon; in the next
generation the Tribes rent in sunder, and besides the execrable wickedness of
the most of their Kings (the like whereunto was never known,) gave not over
hewing one another, till Israel first, and then Judah fell into miserable
Captivity. And yet this is that Unity and Order which you celebrate, and the
Argument for Monarchy that must be cogent; which happens because you are
resolved not to (...) see that the Unity of Government consists in such a form,
which no man can have the Will, or having the Will can have the power to
disturb, but cast all upon the unity of a Person, that may do what he list,
running still upon your Equivocations, as if brethren could not live together
in Unity, unless reduced to the will of one brother.

The third Quaery.
Where there is or ever was a Monarchy upon a popular balance, or that
proposed by the Author, but those only of the Hebrews, and whether these were
not the most infirm of all other?

The Doctor's Answer.
I Perceive not how it concerns any thing I said, or the cause in hand, as to
any material point. Only it seems to suppose the Monarchy of the Hebrews to be
on a popular balance, which I cannot apprehend, unless because they had a kind
of Agrarian, their Land divided by lot, which notwithstanding left place for a
sufficient difference, and excess in dignity of persons, bounds of Estates,
measure of Wealth and Riches.

Reply.
IN your Letter you say, that the balance I pretend cannot stand so steady in
my Form, as in a well tempered Monarchy; and yet to the Quaere, where there is
or ever was a Monarchy upon such a balance? You Answer, that you perceive not
how it concerns any thing you said, or the cause in hand as to any material
point, as if the balance were of slight concernment to a Government. And for
the Monarchy of the Hebrews, you say, that you cannot apprehend it to have been
upon a popular balance. But the Land of Canaan as it is computed by Hecataeus
Abderites in Josephus against Appion, contained three Millions of Acres; and
they among whom it was divided, as appears Numb. 1. 46. At the Cense of them
taken by Moses in Mount Sanai, amount unto 603550. Now if you allow them but
four Acres a Man, it comes unto two Millions four hundred thousand Acres, and
upwards, by which means there could remain for Josua's lot, Calebs portion,
with the Princes of the Tribes, and the Patriarks or Princes of families, but a
matter of five hundred thousand Acres, which holds not above a sixth part in
the balance with the people, and yet you will not apprehend, that this was a
popular balance: Why then it will be in vain to show you the certain
consequence, Namely that the Monarchies of the Hebrews, being the only
governments of this kind that ever were erected upon a popular balance, were
the most infirm and troubled of all others; That the cause why the Congretion
that elected the former Kings were able to reject Rehoboam was from the power
of the people, and the power of the people from their Popular Agrarian: and
that the cause why the Kings of Israel and Judah, while they had not foreign
Wars, never gave over knocking out the Brains of the people, one against
another, was, that having no Monarchical balance, or not such an one as was
sufficient, whereupon safely to rest themselves in peace, they were
necessitated as some Kings at this day (the balance of whose Empire is broken)
to make themselves useful unto the people through their danger, that so through
the want of Order, they (...) subsist (according unto the modern Maxim) by
confusion and war; an expedient sufficiently practiced to be well known.

The fourth Quaere.
Whether the Temptations of advancing did sway more with the Many in the
Commonwealth, than with the Few under the Monarchies of the Hebrews, (that is)
under the Kings of Judah, Israel, or the High Priests, when they came to be
Princes? and whether other story be not (as to this Quaere conformable unto
that of Scripture.

The Doctor's Answer.
WHether greater Temptations in the Hebrew Government before or after they had
Kings, seems little material by comparing them to learn, and as little to your
purpose, till what you suppose be granted, (viz.) that the Government before
they had Kings, was in your sense a Commonwealth. But as for all Forms that
have been popular, or shall be, still the Temptations are the more powerful or
dangerous, as to the change of Government. This put them upon an inconvenience
by often changing their Generals of Armies, and upon often banishing them, or
any great Citizens, when their just deserts had made them honored and beloved;
and this I suppose puts you upon a necessity in one place of defending the
Ostracisme as no Punishment, and the People of Rome as not ungrateful in
banishing Camillus.

Reply.
IF to doubt whether Israel were a Commonwealth in my sense be excusable in one
that will take no notice of the Elders that stood with Moses, nor why Gideon
being Judge refused nevertheless to be King; yet the league that was made
between Judah and Benjamin in the first, and the sentence that was given by the
whole Congregation, with the War thereupon levied by the people only, without
so much as a Judge or Dictator, in the last Chapter of the book of Judges,
evinces my sense, and that of all Reasonable Men; wherefore the comparison
desired by me is plainly material: and your evasion a poor shift, below a man
of parts, or well meaning.

For albeit Israel for the far greater time of the Commonwealth before the
Kings was Anarchy, the most subject State of such a Government unto confusion;
yet abating the conspiracy of Abimelech (made King of the men of Sichem) there
was (as I remember) no disturbance from ambition, nor striving to be uppermost,
of which after the Kings, there was no end. For (to omit David's destroying of
the house of Saul, and reigning in his stead (as done with good warrant) you
have Absalom levying War against his father; Jeroboam an Arrant knave breaking
the Empire of Rehoboam a hair-brained fool in two pieces, whence the children
of Judah turning Sodomites, (a King. 14. 24.) and they of Israel Idolaters; You
have Baasha conspiring against Nadab King of Israel, murdering him, destroying
all the Posterity of Jeroboam, and reigning in his stead: Zimri (Captain of the
Chariots) serving Asa the son with the same sauce, when he was drunk (killing
all of his kindred, that pissed againg the Wall,) as Baasha the father had done
Nadab, when (may chance) he was sober: Omri hereupon made Captain by the
people, and Zimri after he had reigned seven days, burning himself; The people
of Israel when Zimri was burnt, dividing into two parts, one for Omri, and the
other for Tibni, who is slain in the dispute; whereupon Omri out-does all the
Tyrants that went before him, and when he has done, leaves Ahab his son, the
heir of his Throne and virtue: You have Jehu destroying the Family of Ahab,
giving the flesh of Jezebel unto the dogs, and receiving a pretty Present from
those of Samaria, seventy heads of his Masters sons in Baskets. To Asa and
Jehoshaphat of the Kings of Judah belongs much reverence; but the wickedness
of Athalia, who upon the death of her son Ahaziah, that she might reign,
murdered all her Grand children, but one stolen away, which was Joash, was
repaid by that one in the like coin, who also was slain by his servants; so was
his son Amastah that reigned after him: and about the same time Zachariah King
of Israel, by Shallum, who reigned in his stead, and Shallum was smitten by
Manahim, who reigned in his stead, (Battle Royal in Shoo-lane) Pekahah the son
of Manahim was smitten by Pekah one of his Captains, who reigned in his room,
Pekah by Hoshea, who having reigned Nine years in his stead, was carried by
Salmanezer King of Assyria with the Ten Tribes into Captivity. Will Judah take
a warning? Yes, Hezekiah, the next, is a very good King, but Manasseh his son,
like the rest, a shedder of innocent blood; to him succeeds Ammon, fathers
own child, who is slain by his servants: Josiah once again is a very good King;
but Jehoahaz, that died by the heels in Egypt deserved his end, nor was
Jehoiakim the brother of the former (who became Tributary unto Pharaoh) any
better; In whose Reign and his successor Zedechia's was Judah led into
Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar, (the common end of battle Royal) where I leave
any man to judge how far the unity of a person tends to the unity of
Government, and whether the temptations of advancing (to use your Phrase) were
greater in the Commonwealth or in the Monarchies of the Hebrews. It were easy
to show, if you had not enough already, that the High Priests when they came to
be Princes, were never a barrel better herring; whereas that there is no such
work in Venice Switz, or Holland, you both know, and might if you did not wink
as easily see. All Is one, It is, for it is as you have said, nay and more in
all forms that have been Popular or shall be, still the Temptations are more
powerful and dangerous as to the change of Government; this put them upon great
inconveniences by often changing their Generals of Armies. A pound of Clergy,
for which take an ounce of wisdom, in this Maxim evinced by M. Disc. B. 3. Chapter
24.
Machiavel. Prolongation of Magistracy is the ruin of popular Government. The
not often changing their Generals or Dictators was the bane of the
Commonwealths both of Rome and of Israel, as by the corruption of Samuel's
sons (Moss that grows not upon a roling stone) is apparent: And for the
banishment of Great Men, Name me one that since those Governments were settled,
has been banished from Venice, Switz or Holland. The Examples in Rome are but
two that can be objected by a rational man in Seven hundred years, and I have
answered those in my Book; For the Ostracisme, though I hold it a foolish Law,
yet where the people have not had the prudence to found their Government upon
an Agrarian, I showed you out of Reason, Aristotle and experience, that it is a
shift they will be put to, whether a punishment, or not; Though no man, that is
versed in the Greek story, can hold it to have been so esteemed.

The fifth Quaere.
Whether Men as they become richer or poorer, free, or servile, be not of a
different Genius, or become new modeld, and whether these things happen not as
the balance changes?

The Doctors Answer.
SVch sudden changes of the Genius and Nature of Men, I leave to the Pipe of
Orpheus, or Ovids Metamorphosis.

Reply.
A Pretty jeer; but there is one in that Book metamorphosed into the Bird that
cannot see by day. Now, a change that happens in the Revolution of one hundred
and forty years, is not sudden; but so long has the Government in question
been changing from Aristocratical to popular: and if the Acts of popular
Councils from that time, have still been and be to this hour more and more
popular, the Genius of the people is as clear as the day with the alteration of
it, in those opinions you in your first Letter are pleased to call the
ignorance or wilfulness of these days, that since the Aristocratical balance
of the Clergy is gone, shake the yoke of the Priest, The Butcher sought his
Knife and had it in his mouth.

The sixth Quaere.
Whether Gentlemen have been more beholding unto Divines, or Men in Orders, or
Divines more beholding unto Gentlemen, or such as have not been in Orders, for
the knowledge which we have of the Commonwealth of the Hebrews? or who of each
sort have written best upon that Subject?

The Doctor's Answer.
COmparisons being Odious, I only say, Divines have cause to give learned
Gentlemen their due, and thank for their labors, but also cause to complain
when they are too bold with holy things: not only with the Commonwealth of the
Hebrews, the Form that God then appointed, but also with the Government of the
Christian Church, the form and functions left by Christ and his Apostles,
according to which the Church acted three hundred years before the Civil power
became Christian.

Reply.
DIvines have cause to complain when Gentlemen are too bold with holy things,
as with the Commonwealth of the Hebrews; but if you ask, who of each sort have
written best upon this Subject, Comparisons aae odious; here you can be modest;
for no body has written in this kind, but Carolus Sigonius, Buxtorfius,
Cornelius Bertramus, Hugo Grotius, Seldom and Cunaeus, all which were
Gentlemen, or such as were not in Orders. Nor can it be gathered from any thing
now extant, that any Divine understood this Government. But if Divines cannot
deal with this Government and Gentlemen may not, how should it be known? or if
Divines understand not this, why do they meddle with others?

The seventh Quaere.
What and how many be those little things, and poor mistakes, which the Author
below a Gentleman of his parts has entertained?

The Doctor's Answer.
THose little things and poor mistakes I confined to the matters of the Church:
for innovating wherein these latter times make exceptions against our
Translation, delight in some Notions of Words in Scripture, vent new
interpretations, make strange inferences, in which to rest satisfied is below,
etc. Such Page 16. from Notion or Origination of Ecclesia, to infer
Democratical Government of the Church; and that inference for the right of
gathering Churches now, Page 28. So after in the model, what is said for the
Notion of (...) to the prejudice of due Ordination and the like.

Reply.
IN Judges 20. 2. the Civil Congregation of the Chief of all the Tribes of
Israel, is called Ecclesia Dei; and not only Greek writers, as particularly
Aeschines, use that word for the Assemblies of the People in the Grecian
Commonwealths, but Luke also speaking of the People of Ephesus, he says, Erat
autem Ecclesia confusa; Acts.
wherefore this Word having been of this use before the Apostles, and being
applied by them unto their Convocations or Assemblies, there must needs have
been some reason, why they made choice of this, rather then of any other. Now
if the Reason had not been that they intended the Church to be Democratical,
why would they borrow a word that is of that sense? or why should you think
that they would give names unto things not according unto their Nature; seeing
if they had intended it should have been Aristocratical, they might as well
have taken the word (...) or Senate? Wherefore says Calvin the Lawyer,
Sumpserunt Apostoli illud melius nomen ad significandum Ecclesiam, ut
ostenderent politiam Populi Dei esse quidem Democraticam, etc. I have showed
you my reasons, and given you my Testimony, and yet you that have neither, call
this a Notion. Then for the Chirotonia, or holding up of hands, it was the way
of giving suffrage in some of those Popular Assemblies, more particularly, that
of Athens, and this word the Apostles also came to borrow for the suffrage of
their Congregations, as in the Greek, Acts 14. 23. where they use the Word
((...)) the same that was used by the Athenians, signifying holding up of hands
or their manner of suffrage; but this the English Translators have left out,
and where they should have rendered the place, and when they had Ordained Elders
by the holding up of hands in every Congregation, they render it, When they had
Ordained them Elders in every Church: Now You, though you know this well
enough, never lay any blame upon the Translators, but with them that find fault
with the Translation, as if it were less impiety in Divines to corrupt the
Scriptures than in others to vindicate them from Corruption. And this is
another of those things which you have the confidence to call Notions, albeit
in so doing you must needs sin against your own conscience: but what is that to
Interest? if this place be restored, Ordination is restored unto the People;
and so Divines losing it, there is an end of Priestcraft, as by telling the
story of this invention, (though in brief) will better appear. Ordination in
the Commonwealth of Israel being primarily nothing else but Election of
Magistrates; was performed by the suffrage of the people, or (as is shown by
the Talmudists upon Numb. 11. in Eldad and Medad) by the balot. Nor was it
otherwise till the Sanhedrim got a whim of their own, without any precept of
God, to Ordain their Successors by the Chirothesia or Imposition of hands, and
the Parties being so ordained called Presbyters, became capable of being elected
into the Judicatories, whereby cheating the People of the right of electing
their Magistrates: the Sanhedrim instituted the first Presbyterian Government;
nevertheless this Form as to the Imposition of hands, was not always held so
necessary among the Jews, but if the party were absent it might be done by
letter, and sometimes though he were present it was done by verse or charm
only. But whereas the Senate, if not every Senator, by this Innovation had
right to Ordain; by Hilel High Priest and Prince of the Sanhedrim, (who lived
some three hundred years before Christ) means was found to get the whole power
into his hand, which being of such consequence, that no Magistrate could
thenceforth be made but by the High Priest, it changed this same first
Presbytery (the High Priests becoming afterward Monarchs,) as I may say, into
the first Papacy; for this track was exactly trodden over again by the
Christians; first, to the Presbytery, from thence to the Bishop, and that by
means of the same Chirothesia or Imposition of hands taken up from the Jews;
and out of this Bishop stepped up the Pope, and his Seventy Cardinals, anciently
the Presbytery, or Seventy Elders of Rome in imitation of those of Israel.
Moreover it is the judgment of good Divines, as Bullinger, Musculus, P.
Martyr, Luther and Melancton, that this Chirothesia or Imposition of hands is
not necessary, for that the Apostles took up some things from the Jews, as
community of goods, which are not necessary, you will not deny: and if this
were not of that kind, then wherefore in the place alleged, where the
Chirotonia, prayer and fasting, as all things necessary unto Ordination are
mentioned, is the Chirothesia omitted even by the Apostles themselves? Nor can
you find that it was otherwise than sparingly used by them in comparison of the
Chirotonia or suffrage of the people; and perhaps there only where the people
had not the Civil right of any such suffrage, by which where it was, they
Ordained Elders in every Church. And in this place comes that of your Answer
unto the 7th Quaere, Namely, That the Church acted three hundred years before
the Civil Power became Christian, to be very questionable. For that Tarsus a
City of Cilicia, was so free, that Paul, being a Native thereof, claims the
right of a Roman, is clear in Scripture; Nor is it more obscure in story, that
the people in the Cities of Lycia, Pamphylia, Lycaonia, or Cappadocia, in which
the Apostle ordained Ecclesiastical Elders by the Chirotonia of the Church or
Congregation, had not only the Ancient right but custom of electing their civil
Elders in the same manner: and where was the necessity, or sense that the
Astles to convert them unto the Christian Religion, should go about to depose
them, than which nothing could have caused a greater jealousy, obstruction, or
scandal upon their Doctrine? But if the Apostles used the words Ecclesia and
Chirotonia in these places according unto the right of the people, and the
known sense (in which they had been always taken) then acted not the Church
three hundred years nor half a hundred years before the Civil Power became
Christian: And if the Bishops, when the Emperors became Christian, made no
bones of receiving their Mitres from the Civil Magistrate, they must have done
ill, had they known or conceived that the Church in the purest times had waved
the Civil Magistracy. Paul arriving at Athens converts Dionysius one of the
Senators, and some others unto the Christian faith: Suppose he had converted
the whole S^^ate and the People, what sober Man can imagine, that he would have
disputed with the Congregation the sense of their former Name Ecclesia, or the
right of electing their new Elders by their old Chirotonia, or suffrage by
holding up of hands? But he converted but a few; wherefore as he had no aid, so
he had no hinderance from the Magistrate; This, then, was a gathered Church, I
think, or what was it? If the Prophets in Israel went up and down preaching
unto the people, by whom they were followed; and if some of these that were
thus followed were true, and more of them false, the people that followed them
could not be all of the same persuasion, though it is like that no man would
follow such an one as he was not persuaded was true. But the people choosing at
their own discretion whom they would follow, how could these Congregations be
less gathered than these when the people were divided into three sects,
Pharisees, Saduces, and Esscans, which could be no other? Nor does the
Sanhedrim, though they had the Government of the National Religion, sending
unto John the Baptist (John 11. 25.) to know who he was, and why he baptized,
refuse him the like Prophetic right, used by him first, and afterward by our
Savior and the Apostles, without the Authority of the Sanhedrim; Nor does Paul
blame the Congregations of Apollos and Cephas (1 Cor. 1.) in that they were
gathered, but in that they put too much upon them that gathered them: How then
does it appear that my Inference for gathered Congregations now, is a little
thing or poor mistake below a Gentleman of parts; when I say no more than that
gathered Congregations were in use both before and after Christ,
notwithstanding the National Religion that was then settled? and therefore
gathered Congregations for any thing in the Old or New Testament that I can
find to the contrary, might be now, though a National Religion were settled.
And if this be not true, the Testimony, which you bear in your present
practice, is against your self; for what else are your Congregations now, that
will use none other then the Common Prayer, but gathered?

To conclude, it should seem by you, that if the National Religion were so
settled, that the meddling with holy things by any other than a Divine, might
be resolved as boldly (and to use a fine word) opinionately done, as if it were
against an Article of our Creed; you would be pleased. But the National
Religion and the Liberty of Conscience so ordered in Oceana, that neither the
Interest of the Learned, nor the Ignorance of the unlearned can corrupt
Religion (in which case though there might, yet there is no probability, that
there would be any gathered Congregations, this being the peculiar Remedy for
that which you hold a disease) you are displeased: for thus you Conclude,

Sir,
YOu see I have used freedom again, it is like you will think too much; but I
desire you would allow me the privilege of the Old saying, suo quisque sensu
abundet, and not trouble your self with interrogating me, from whom you can
draw fo little satisfaction. I never made it my study to model or shape out
Forms of Government, but to yield Obedience to every lawful Command proceeding
from Authority, how perfect, or otherwise the form was. In a word, Sir, I
honor your parts, wish them employed as may be most for the service of God and
his Church, and do promise my self in all friendly and Christian Offices,

Nov. 26. (56.) Sir, Your humble servant. H. Fern.


To which I say that

I Have not heard a Divine quote Scripture (Quisque suo sensu abundet) as an
Old saying; but you are not contented to do so only but to use it
accordingly; for whereas (Romans 14. 15.) it is indulged by the Apostle as to
indifferent things, this was never intended to be an Argument that the Seventy
Elders were erected upon the advice of Jethro, that Moses instituted a
Monarchy, that Gideon was King of Israel, or indeed for any thing that you have
said; And therefore however you call it Interrogatory, it is civil enough in
such a case to desire better reason, but do not fear that I should trouble you
any more in this kind, nor had I at all, if whereas you confess in the close
that you have not studied these things, you had but said so much in the
beginning, for there had been an end.

This study indeed as I have showed elsewhere, is peculiar unto Gentlemen; but
if it be of your goodness that you study not to shape such work, must it ever
be the study of your Tribe to mishape it? Is it in such less impiety to have
ruined a Kingdom then in any other to show the true Principles of a
Commonwealth? Or whereas the Nature of the Politics, or such Civil Power
(witness the Sanhedrim of Israel) as comes nearest unto Gods own pattern,
regards as well Religion as Government and is receptible of Gentlemen; does it
follow that I have not laid out the best of my parts in my Vocation, to the
service of God and his Church, because you in your pretended zeal have chosen
to insinuate the contrary by a prayer? But he, unto whom you have addressed
your self knows the secrets of all hearts; To him therefore I appeal, whether
I have not sought him in a work of Universal Charity; and whether one end of
this present writing be not least you making use of your great Authority thus
to prejudice such a work, should hurt them most, whom you love best: It being
apparent unto any Man that can see and understand the balance of Government
with the irrisistible consequence of the same, that by such time as the vanity
of men's ways shall have tired them a little more, it will be found that God in
his infinite goodness and mercy, has made that only possible for us which is
best for us all, most for the good of manking, and his own glory. And so
notwithstanding the heat of our dispute, which so far as it has not resisted
nor exceeded truth, cannot have been very sinful or uncharitable, I do oblige
my self in all the devoirs of

London Jan. 3. (56. Sir, Your affectionate friend and humble servant, James
Harrington.

FINIS.

