Licensed,

October. 11. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

Festa Anglo-Romana: OR, The Feasts of the English and Roman Church, with their
Fasts and Vigils.

Being an Exact and Concise Account of their various Etymologies and
Appellations, with the Reasons and Grounds of their Celebration.

Together with a Succinct Discourse of several other Grand Days in the
Universities, Inns of Courts, and the Collar and Offering Days at White Hall;

Tending, To the Instruction of all Persons in all Capacities, and the
Dilucidation of several seeming Difficulties in the Ancient, as well as Modern
English and Roman Calendar.

By a True Son of the Church of England.

London, Printed for William Jacob, and John Place, and are to be sold at the
Black Swan, and Furnivals-Inn-Gate in Holborn. 1678.

blazon or coat of arms MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715. GEORGIV^ D.G. MAG BRVRET
H^^^^^ F.D.



To the READER.
I Design not to Preface this small Tract with a Prolix Epistle; for that were
to make the Porch larger than the Temple; but only to acquaint you, that it is
an Historical Collection of all the Feasts (with the Fasts Vigils and Octaves)
Registered both in the English, and Roman Rubric; together with their approved
Etymologies, Various Names, and the True Grounds and Reasons of their
Celebration; A Treatise which differs from all others of this Nature that are
hitherto extant, both in its Method and Compendiousness; for it begins
(according to the old Roman Computation of the year) at the 1st of January, and
ends with the last of December, giving an account of all the Festivals, as they
are placed successively in the Calendar. And withal, I must Advertise you, to
avoid Confusion, that our Festivals are Entitled in an English, and the Roman
in an Italick Letter. And thus I leave the Reader, with these few necessary
Instructions, to the perusal of the Contents of this Book, which may (I
presume) tend to his more ample and plenary satisfaction.

The TABLE.
New Years Day. Page 4 Epiphanie. Page 6 St. Paul. Page 10 January the 30th.
Page 11 Purification of the Blessed Virgin. Page 12 St. Matthias. Page 15
Sunday. Page 20 Valentines-Day. Page 23 Septuagesima, Sexagesima,
Quinquagesima, and Quadragesima. Ibid. Shrovetide. Page 27 Ash Wednesday. Page
28 St. David. Page 29 St. Patrick. Page 36 St. Joseph. Page 37 Annunciation of
the Holy Virgin. ib. Palm Sunday. Page 39 Good Friday. Page 42 Easter. Page 44
Low-Sunday. Page 51 St. George. Page 52 St. Mark. Page 53 Misericordia. Page 54
Phillip and Jacob. ib. Holy-Cross. Page 56 Rogation-Sunday. Page 58 Holy
Thursday. Page 63 King Charles Birth and Return. Page 65 Penticost, or
Whitsontide. Page 67 Trinity-Sunday. Page 68 St. Barnabas. Page 69 Corpus
Christi. Page 72 St. John Baptist. Page 74 St. Peter and St. Paul. Page 75
Visitation of Mary. Page 78 St. Swithins-Day. Page 79 Dog Days. ib. Spanish
Invasion. Page 81 St. James. Page 86 St. Ann. ib. Lammas-Day. Page 87 Gowrie's
Conspiracy. Page 91 Transfiguration. Page 94 St. Lawrence. Page 95 Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin. Page 96 St. Bartholomew. ib. Decollation of St. John
Baptist. Page 97 September the 2d. the burning of London. Page 98 Nativity of
the Blessed Virgin Mary. Page 99 Holy-rood-Day, or Holy Cross. ib. St. Matthew.
Page 100 St. Michael the Archangel. Page 102 The Apparition of St. Michael.
Page 103 St. Luke. Page 104 Ursula a British Virgin. Page 105 St. Simon and
Jude. ib. All Saints. Page 108 All Souls. ib. Gunpowder-Treason Day. Page 110
Queen Catharines Birthday. Page 119 Presentation of the Virg. Mary. Page 120
St. Clement. Page 121 St. Andrew. Page 123 Advent Sunday. Page 124 Conception
of the Virg. Mary. ib. St. Lucia. Page 125 St. Thomas. ib. Christ Mass-Day.
Page 126 St. Stephan. Page 128 St. John. Page 130 Innocents. ib.
In the Press a Printing in a Pocket-Volume, Englands Remarks, very much
enlarged; a fit Companion for all Travelers and others.

Festa Anglo-Romana.
Holy Day, in the Sacred Phrase, is the same as separate, or set apart to God;
being taken out of ordinary Days, and dedicated to the Holy Service of God, and
his Worship; tho none of them are certainly declared in the New Testament; nor
is any Christian obliged to the observance of those in the Old: But the Holy
Church has thought fit and necessary for the Confirmation of Faith, and the
Exercise of the true Christian Religion, that peculiar days should be culled
out of the common, whereon we should convene (Politic affairs being laid
aside) in the Public Assembly, to hear God's Holy Word, and to offer up the
Calves of our Lips in Prayers to, and Praises of the Almighty, with Reading and
Meditation. Now, as there is a Holy Feast, Nehemiah the 8th, and the 10th.
which our Church has dedicated to the Religious Commemoration of some eminent
Mercies and Blessings received (among which some Festivals are of a superior
degree, in regard of the greatness of the Blessing remembered, and the solemnity
of the Service appointed to that purpose) so there is an Holy Fast, Joel 2.
such as are Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, and the whole Week before Easter, which
the Church has dedicated to God's solemn Worship in Fastings and Prayer.

The Holy Days we divide into General and Particular. The General are such as
are generally celebrated by all Men, and termed Solemnities; as the
Circumcision, Epiphany, Purification, Annunciation, Resurrection, Ascension,
etc. the Particular are solemnized by some particular Church, or some Country,
called Commune; as those dedicated to the Apostles, or by some Bishop's Sea,
Parish-Town or called the proper Holy Days of the Place.

They are again divided (in respect of the days whereon they fall in the
Calendar) into Moveable, and Fixed.

The Moveable are those, which tho celebrated on the same Weekday, have no
fixed seat in the Calendar.

The Fixed are such, which fall upon diverse days of the Week, yet upon one and
the same day of the Month.

New Years Day.
The first of January, commonly called New Years Day, of the old Roman Account,
which began the year from that day; otherwise the Circumcision of our Lord,
being celebrated eight days after his Birth inclusively, as it was on the
Male-Children of the Jews, according to the Judaical Law, in memory of his
Circumcision, as the old Law commanded, Genesis the 17th, and the 12th. when he
was named Jesus, (Gr. a Savior) as the Angel had foretold, St. Luke 1.32.
Circumcision is derived from the Latin Circumcido, which signifies a cutting
round about; and in truth to speak more properly, it is the cutting away of the
Praepuce, or double foreskin, which enfoldeth the Head, or Extremity of the
Virga Virilis; and was performed with a very sharp Stone, ordered and fitted
for that use; and not with an Iron Knife steeled, as some are of Opinion, tho
mistaken. It was a Ceremony Prescribed by the Great Jehovah, to Abraham, the
Father of the Faithful, and his Posterity, who were Heirs of the Divine
Promise, and Commanded to be sacredly observed by the Hebrews, upon the severe
penalty of Death; as a sign and seal of the Covenant betwixt God and them, and
a mark of Distinction from all other Nations; which Ceremony was always
strictly observed among them; but abrogated after the Resurrection and
Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. This Fast is one of His Majesty's
Offering-Days at Court, whereon Gold, Myrrh and Frankincense is offered; and
being celebrated on the first of January; the second is termed the Octave of
St. Stephan, the third of St. John, and the fourth of the blessed Innocents.

Epiphanie.
The next we meet with in the order of the Calendar, is Epiphanie, or
Twelfth-day. Epiphanie is a Greek word, (...), and signifies an Arparition, so
called and celebrated in memory and honor of our Saviors manifestation made
to the Gentiles by a miraculous Comet, or Blazing-Star, by virtue whereof, the
three Magi, or Sages (vulgarly called the three Kings of Colen) were conducted
to him, who, upon Discovery of that Star, came out of the East to Palestine, or
Jewry, to adore him in the Manger, where (a Twelvemonth after Christ's Birth)
the first of them is (as Tradition delivers it down to us) named Melchior, an
aged Man, with a long Beard, who offered Gold to our Savior, as to a King, in
testimony of his Regality; the second Jasper, a Beardless Youth, who offered
Frankincense, as unto God, in acknowledgment of his Divinity; the third
Balthazar a Black, or Moor with a large spreading Beard, who offered Myrrh, as
to a Man, that was ready or fit for his Sepulcher, thereby signifying his
Humanity; of which this Distich is extant, Tres Reges Regi Regum tria dona
ferebant;
Myrrham Homini, Uncto Aurum, Thura dedere Deo.


Englished thus, Three Kings the King of Kings Three Gifts did bring;
Myrrh, Incense, Gold; as to God, Man and King.


And the Poet Prudentius sings sweetly on this Subject, in this following
Tetrastich. Hic pretiosa Magi sub Virginis ubere Christo
Dona ferunt Puero, Myrrhaeque and Thuris, and Auri;
Miratur Genitrix tot casti ventris honores,
Seque Deum genuisse, Hominem, Regemque supremum.
And thus Translated by Dr. Spark in his Primitive Devotion. The Wisemen here
choice Treasures do dispense
To Christ, and Mary, Myrrh, Gold Frankincense;
While thus astonished at this Glorious thing;
A Maid at once to bear God, Man, and King.


Or it is so called from the appearing of the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove,
at his Baptism, 30 years after (for this sixth of January was the day of our
Savior's Baptism, and is Celebrated as such by the Church) and therefore it is
termed by Alcas Cyriacus, an Arabic Manuscript of Astronomical Tables in the
Archbishop's Archives, in the Library of Oxford; the Feast of Epiphanie, or
Benediction of Waters. On this day also is commemorated the first Miracle
performed by our Savior at the Wedding in Cana of Galilee, where he turned
Water into Wine. The Vigil (or Eve of this Festival, so named from Vigilia in
Latin, Watohing; because then Christians were wont to Watch, Fast, and Pray in
their Churches) was called in the Primitive Times, Vigilia Luminum; and the
Ancients then were accustomed to send Lights one to the other. This day was of
old Celebrated in honor of Augustus Caesar by the Romans, for his Conquest of
Media, Egypt, and Parthia, which were after added to their Empire; but the
Holy Church willing to alter that Solemnity, and introduce a better, instituted
this Feast of the Epiphanie in lieu of it. It Is styled Twelfth-Day, because
Celebrated on the 12th day after the Nativity of the Blessed Jesus exclusively,
not taking in Christmas Day for one. This is also one of His Majesty's
Offeringdays at White Hall.

St. Paul.
January the 25th. is kept the Festival known by the Name of the Conversion of
St. Paul, that once bloody Persecutor of the People of God; tho through his
Mercy, he afterward became the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and was Martyred
at Rome for the faith of Christ; but inserted in our Rubric since His
Majesty's Restoration, Anno Dom. 1664.

January the 30th.
January the 30th. A Day -- Nigro carbone notandus; -- and not to be thought
upon without Horror and Consternation. It Is kept annually, as a solemn Fast for
the barbarous, unexampled Murder of the best of Kings, Charles the First, of
blessed Memory, and is by Act of Parliament, 12. Car. 2di. set apart to implore
the Mercy of God, that the guilt of the innocent Blood of this Royal Martyr may
not hereafter be visited upon us, and our Posterity, etc.

Purification of the blessed Virgin.
February the 2d. is Candlemas-Day, or the Purification of the Blessed Virgin.
Candlemas-Day it is called from the Saxon, Candlemaesse, the Mass or Feast of
Candles (the old Saxons term all Holy Days, Massdays, because they were obliged
to hear Mass on those days, or because High Mass was then Sung) for before Mass
is said on that day, the Roman Church blesses, deputeth, or sets apart her
Candles for sacred use; which do serve in the Church all the ensuing year, and
goes in Procession with Hallowed Candles, carried by the Romanists, in
commemoration of the Divine Light, wherewith our Savior Illuminated the
Universal Church, at his Presentation, when the Good and Aged Simeon styled him
a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel, Luke 2.32.
and both by Simeon and Anna proclaimed to be the true Messiah. It Is named also
the Purification, from Purifico, to Purify; kept in memory, both of the
Presentation of our Blessed Lord, and the Purification of the Holy Virgin in
the Temple of Jerusalem, within the space of forty days after her Happy
Delivery of the Holy Child, Jesus; in obedience to the Mosaical Law, as it is
set down, Leviticus, the 12th. and the 6th: not that the Blessed Virgin had
contracted any Impurity by her Childbirth, which stood in need of Purification
(being the Mother of Purity in the very Abstract) but partly because (as Mr.
Lightf. says in his Harmony of the four Evangelists) that Christ in nothing
might be wanting to the Law; and partly that this might be an occasion for the
first public Declaration of him by Simeon and Anna: The Dutch call this Day
Lichtmiss, the Mass, or Feast of Lights; see the Saxon Dictionary by Summers:
and was Instituted by Justinian the Emperor, Anno Christi 542. Besides, it is
one of the four Gaudy, or Grand-Days in the Inns of Court, which singly fall
out in every Term: Candlemas, or the Purification in Hilary; Ascension, or Holy
Thursday in Easter; Midsummer, or St. John Baptist's in Trinity; All Saints, or
Allhollandtide in Michaelmas Term. These four are no Days in the Courts at
Westminster: and in the Inns of Court on these Days double Commons are allowed,
and Music and Revelling on All Saints: and Candlemas-Day, as the first and
last day of Christmas.

The Etymology of the word may be taken from Judge Gaudy; who as it is affirmed
by some, was the first Instituter of these Days; or rather from the Latin
Gaudium, because they are Days of Joy, and furnish the Tables in the Inns of
Court with good Cheer.

In the Colleges at the Universities they are usually called Gaudy, in the
Inns of Court Grand-Days, and at His Majesty's Court, White Hall, Collar-Days;
for on these Days at Court, the King, Knights of the Garter, and Judges wear
their Collars of S.S. It is also one of His Majesty's Offering-days.

St. Matthias.
On February the 24th. (but in Leap-year the 25th) is Celebrated the Feast of
St. Matthias, who was one of the 70 Disciples, and elected Apostle by lot, in
the room of that Arch Traitor Judas, after the Ascension of our Blessed Lord:
He Preached the Holy Gospel in Macedonia (and after Traveled into Judaea)
where he was first cruelly stoned by the Jews, and then Beheaded according to
the Roman Custom, Anno Dom. 51. and it is also one of His Majesty's
Collar-Days, without Offering; here we may properly come in with our Discourse
concerning Bissextile, or Leap-year. It Is termed Bissextilis, because the 6th
of the Calends of March are twice reckoned, viz. on the 24th and 25th of
February; so that Leap-year has a supernumerary day more than other years;
according to that old Rhythm, Thirty Days has November,
April, June, and September;
February has Eight and twenty alone,
And all the rest have thirty and one;
But when of Leap-year comes the time,
Then Days has February Twenty and nine:


Observe also this Latin Distich; tho in old Monkish Rhythm, regardless of true
Quantity, Bissextum Sextae Martis tenuere Calendae,
Posteriore die celebrantur Festa Mathiae.


This Leap-year is observed every fourth year, and was first invented by Julius
Caesar, the Perpetual Dictator of Rome, to accommodate and even the year with
the Course of the Sun; and takes the name of Julian Account from him, who
before the Incarnation of Christ, the space of 44 years, observing the
erroneousness of the Account then in use; ordered the year to consist of 365
days and six hours which six hours, in four years time, made 24 hours, or a
Civil Day, and were added to the end of February; and upon this account every
fourth year contained. 366 days, and was called Annus Bissextilis, for the
reason premention'd, and the thing it self Intercalatio, an Interlacing or
putting any odd thing between even ones, meaning the odd day in Leapyear, in
which account for many years there was no sensible Error discovered; yet in
process of time it was found not to be so exactly agreeable with the Sun's
natural Motion; for the Julian exceeded the true Solar year by 10 Minutes, and
48 seconds, and caused the Aequinoxes and Solstices, yearly, to alter and
change their places, and recede or fly back so many Minutes and seconds; in
consideration whereof, Pope Gregory the 13th of that Name, by the advice and
assistance of Antonius Lilius, ^is Brothers, and other Eminent Mathematicians,
did, in the year of our Lord 1582. correct the Roman Calendar, appointing the
year to contain 365 days, 5 hours, 49 Minutes, and 12 seconds, and that the
Vernal Aequinox which was then on the 11th of March, might be reduced to the
21th as it was at the time of the first Council of Nicaea; he commanded, that
10 days in October should be totally omitted, viz. from the 4th, to the 14th;
so that the 4th day of the Month was counted the 14th. Hence it is, that the
New, Foreign, Gregorian, or Lilian is 10 days before the old, or our Julian
account. Here it is also observable, that every Leap-year (to prevent all
Ambiguities that may arise at Law) it is provided by the Statute de Anno
Bissextili, 21 H. 3. that the 24th and 25th of February, in Suits at Law, shall
be accounted for one day only. Britton f. 209. Dyer 17 Eliz. 345. but for
keeping of Fairs, it is ordered, that those which use to be on the 24th of
February, shall be kept on the 25th, because the Feast of St. Mathias is not
till the 25th of February in the Leap-year. It is called Leap-year from the
Dutch Loop-iare, qu. Leapyear, because it exceeds the bounds of other years by
a day.

Sunday.
As for Sunday or the Lord's Day, it is the weekly Feast of the Refurrection of
Christ; not Instituted by him, or God himself, but by his own Apostles in the
place of the rejected Sabbath of the Jews, for these ensuing Reasons:

1. That Christians should not be obliged to the observance of Judaical
Ceremonies; but testify the Abrogation of their Feasts, and the liberty
received by the coming of Christ.

2. That as the Jewish Sabbath did continually put them in mind of the former
World finished by the Creation; so the Lord's Day ought to keep us in the
constant Remembrance of a far better world begun by our Savior, who came to
restore all things, and make Heaven and Earth new; therefore for this Reason
did they Honor the Last day, we the First in every seven, annually.

3. In regard that the Lord rose from the Dead on this day, and perfected the
great and wonderful Work of Man's Redemption.

4. We cannot more congruously apprehend the Majesty of the Super-eminent and
Puissant Jesus, by any other Creature than by the most resplendent and glorious
Light of the Sun, the Ruler of this day; for it is written, Et in sole posuit
Tabernaculum suum, and exiit de Tribu Judae, cujus Signum (Leo) est Solare
Animal.

The Lord's Day (when any happens) between Candlemas, and Twelfth-Day, has no
certain Name; but is called the first, or second Sunday (on which it falls)
after Christmas; but those that succeed the Epiphanie, are denoted according to
the Numeral order, as the first Sunday after it is styled the first Sunday
after Epiphanie, the next the second, etc. whereof there are five this present
year, sometimes only four, but more or fewer, according to the greater quantity
of the Intervallum majus, tho the Sunday immediately preceding Septuagesima is
ever counted the last Sunday after Epiphanie.

Valentine's-Day.
Valentine's-Day is on the 14th of February, so called from Valentine
(Powerful, Lat.) a Roman Bishop, whose Feast is kept this day: about this time
the Birds make choice of their Mates for the ensuing year, and we among us of
our Valentines; that is, Men and Women chosen for special Loving Friends; it
signifies also Saints chosen for special Patrons for the year.

The next 4 Sundays are known by the Name of

Septuagesima, Seragesima, Quinquagesima, and Quadragesima.
The three first have their Names from the Order in which they precede the 4th
Quadragesima, and so of the rest.

Septuagesima was Instituted, as it is generally believed, for these three
Reasons.

1. For Suppletion; i.e. making up what is wanting; for because some did not
use to fast on the Friday (and therefore Sexagesima was Instituted, as you
shall understand by and by) neither upon the Saturday, in regard that our
Savior on that day rested in his Grave, to denote our future Rest (and it is
observed by St. Augustine, that the Inhabitants of Asia, and some others,
grounding their Practice on an Apostolical Tradition, would not Fast on the
Saturday) therefore the Week called Septuagesima, was added to supply the seven
days of Sexagesima.

2. For it is own Signification; in that thereby is signified unto us the Exile
and Affliction of Mankind from Adam to the last general Conflagration; and
therefore all Holy Hymns, and Sacred Anthems of Joy are intermitted by our Holy
Mother the Church, during the time of Septuagesima.

3. To represent the 70 years Captivity of the Jews in Babylon: and as at that
time the Israelites laid aside their Instrument, saying, Quomodo cantabimus
Canticum Domini, etc. so the Church leaves off her Songs of Praises during this
time. Sexagesima was instituted by Melchiades Bp. of Rome, a Martyr, who
flourished, An. Dom. 311. and ordained, that none should Fast on Friday,
because of the Lord's Supper, and his Ascension on that day; so neither on the
Sunday (which being the first day of the Week) solemnizeth our Savior's
Resurrection, to distinguish between Christians, and Gentiles; therefore the
Ancients (to redeem the Fridays in Quinquagesima) added this other Week to the
Fast, called by them Sexagesima.

The next Sunday is Quinquagesima. The Holy Church Commands a Fast to be
observed, consisting of 40 days, before Easter, styled Quadragesima, or the
Holy time of Lent, wherein there are but 36 days, besides the Lord's-Days, on
which she fasts not, for joy of the Resurrection; now to supply this Defect,
four days of the foregoing Week were added to the Quadragesimal Fast; and
afterward it was (first by Telesphorus Bishop of Rome and Martyr, who
flourished, Anno Dom. 142. and since that by Pope Gregory the Great) Decreed,
that all Priests should begin their Fast two days sooner, viz. two days before
the additional four pre-mentioned; that as they preceded the Laity in Dignity,
they might also in Sanctity and Holiness; therefore this Week Quinquagesima was
added to the Week Quadragesima.

Shrovetide.
Next we come to Shrovetide or Carneval, which is derived from the Saxon
Shrive, or Shrift; and the Belgic Tide or Tijdt, i.e. the time of shriving or
confession of Sins; for about this time the Roman Catholics use to confess
their Sins. and receive the blessed Sacrament; to the end they might more
Religiously observe the Holy time of Lent then immediately ensuing. It Is called
Carneval (being a dissolute Season, or Licentious Time) qu. valeat caro,
because then they bid adieu to eating of Flesh, and feed on Fish.

Ash Wednesday.
Ash Wednesday is the Beginning, or Head of the Fast of Lent, and was by
Gregory the Great, (Pope of Rome) Dedicated to the Consecration and sprinkling
with Ashes (and therefore called in Latin, Dies Cinerum, or Ash Wednesday, by
the Ancients Caput Jejunii, the Head of Fasting, or first beginning of Lent)
yet (as Hospinian affirms) there is extant an Homily composed by Maximus Bishop
of Tours, in France, with this Inscription, In Die Cinerum, which shows the
Institution thereof to be before his Time, because Maximus Taurinensis lived
170 years before him, viz. Anno Dom. 420. It Is called Ash Wednesday, from the
ancient Ceremony of Blessing Ashes on that Day; and therewith the Priest
signeth the People on the Forehead in the form of a Cross, affording them
withal this wholesome Admonition; Memento Homo quod Pulvis es, and in Pulverem
reverteris; Remember Man, that thou art Dust, and to Dust thou shall return; to
mind them of their Mortality, and prepare them for the Holy Fast of Lent; the
Ashes used this day in the Church of Rome, are made of the Palms consecrated
the Sunday Twelvemonth before: and formerly in the Easterin Countries, they
usually on this Day wore Sackcloth, and sprinkled Ashes on the Heads of the
People, which was done in token of sincere Humiliation, and a true and
unfeigned sorrow for Sin.

St. David.
St. David's, vulgarly and ludibriously nick-nam'd St. Taffie's Day, which is
on the first of March, is a British Holy Day, and observed by them very
solemnly, in Honor and Commemoration of St. David, their worthy Patron, who is
by their Records and Tradition, justified to be a Prelate of Eminent Holiness
and Austerity of Life, a Person of great Learning, a most Florid and Eloquent
Preacher of the Word of God, and Archbishop of Menevy, now taking from him the
Name of St. David s in Pembrokeshire. He flourished in the fifth and sixth Age
after the Incarnation of Christ, and died aged 140 years, as Dr. Pits
testifies in his Treatise Entitled, De Illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus: The
Britains on this Day constantly wear a Leek, in Memory of a Famous and Notable
Victory obtained by them over the Saxons; they, during the Battle, having Leeks
in their Hats, for their Military Colors, and Distinction of themselves, by
the persuasion of the said Prelate, St. David.

The first Sunday in Lent is called Quadragesima, the second Reminiscere, the
third Oculi, the fourth Laetare, the fifth Iudica, the fixth Dominica Magna; of
these in order.

Quadragesima, or the first Sunday in Lent; so called because it is distant 40
days from the grand Feast of Easter, containing the Lenten Fast, as it was
observed by the Primitive Christians, in imitation of our Savior's Fasting in
the Desert 40 days, and 40 nights; it is called also Invocavit, because on that
Day the Church sings Invocavit me, and ego exaudiam eum, or that taken out of
Psalm the 90th, v. 3, 4. It Is styled Lent, so called from the old Saxons, who
nominated March, Lenct Monat, i. e. Length Month, because the Days then begin
to lengthen, and exceed the Nights. Now this Month being so named by our
Ancestors, when they did first imbibe or embrace Christianity, and therewith
also the ancient and Religious Custom of Fasting; this Season is peculiarly
termed the Fast of Lent, by reason of the Lenct-Monat, or Month of March,
wherein the major part of the time of this Grand Fasting always happened. Sir
Richard Baker says in his Chronology, that it was first commanded to be
observed here among us in England, by Ercombert the 7th King of Kent, in or
about the year of our Lord 641. So that it is of Antiquity in this Nation, and
no upstart and newfangled Fast.

Then we meet with Ember-Week, so named from the Greek (...), i. e. Dies; Days,
by way of Emphasis, the Grand Days of Fasting, as some are of opinion; others
conceive, that they are called the Days of Ashes, or Ember-Days from that as
Ancient, as Religious Custom of wearing Hair-Cloth, and using Ashes in times of
Public Penance and Piety, or from the Antiquated usage of eating no other Food
on those Days, till Night, only a Cake baked under the Embers or Ashes, which
they called, Panem Subcineritium, or Ember-Bread, Turb. Cath. Yet Sir Henry
Spelman says, De Conciliis, that the true and genuine word is Imber, from the
Saxon Imbren, i. e. a Circle; because the Ember-days move round the year, as it
were in a Circle. These Ember-Weeks are four in the year; and they of old, in
every one of them fasted on Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, as you will find
it in this ancient Couplet.

Post Cineres, Pentec: post Crucem, postque Luciam.
Mercurii, Veneris, Sabathi, Jejunia fiant.
That is, the next Week after Ash Wednesday, Whitsunday, Holy-Rood, or the
Exaltation of the Cross, and St. Lucie's Day. They are of great Antiquity in
the Church, being times of Public Prayer, Fasting and Procession, and styled
Quatuor Anni Tempora, by the Ancient Fathers; for besides the first Institution
of them for quarterly Seasons of Devotion, proportioned to every part of the
year, that the entire year, and each Division thereof might be blessed thereby;
they were partly instituted for the successful Ordination of Priests in the
Roman Church, and partly to beg a Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth, and
render thanks to God for the same; nay, besides their answerableness to those
Jejunia Quatuor, or solemn Fasting-days instituted by the Jews, and mentioned
by the Prophet Zachary, ca. 8. that we Christians might not be inferior to them
in so Holy a Duty; the Church has assigned them an Excellent use, in imitation
of the Apostles, Acts 13.3. See a Book Entitled, A View of the Directory, fol.
56. Much about this time the Aequinox happens, which is an Imaginary, phancied
Line, passing just between the two Poles in the midst of Heaven, which Lines
the Sun travels to twice a year (namely about the 11th of March, which is
called the Vernal, and the 11th of September, the Autumnal Aequinox) and equals
the Day and Night for length throughout the Universe (except with the
Inhabitants directly under the Poles) and therefore termed Equinox.

The second Sunday in Lent is named Reminiscere, from the Entrance of the 5th
Verse of Psalm. 25. Reminiscere miserationum tuarum Domine, etc. Call to
Remembrance, O Lord, thy tender Mercies, etc.

The third Sunday in Lent is called Oculi, from the entrance of the 14th v. of
the 25th Psalm, Oculi mei semper ad Dominum, etc. My Eyes are ever looking unto
the Lord.

March the 17th. St. Patrick's- Day; a great Saint, Worker of Miracles, and the
much honored Patron of Ireland.

The fourth Sunday is called Laetare, from the beginning of the 10th v. of the
66th Chap. of Isaiah, Laetare cum Jerusalem, etc. Rejoice with Jerusalem, etc.
It is also termed Dominica de Rosa, from the Golden Rose which the Pope of Rome
carries in his hand when he walks before the People in the Temple; as also,
Dominica de Panibus, or Refectionis; because the Miracle of the five Loaves in
the Holy Gospel is explained on this Day in the Roman Church; but we here in
England truly style it Mid-Lent Sunday.

March the 19th. in the Roman Church is Celebrated in Commemoration of St.
Joseph Confessor, the Husband of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Annunciation of the Holy Virgin.
The 25th of this Month is the Feast of the Annunciation of the Holy Virgin,
the Conception of our Savior, vulgarly Lady Day; and this is Celebrated in
Commemoration of that most Happy Message, or rather Embassy from God, which was
pronounced by the Angel Gabriel, in which she was Declared and Proclaimed the
Blessed Mother of God, St. Luke 1st. 31, 32.

The fifth Sunday in Lent is called Judica, and Passion-Sunday; from the
entrance of the 35th Psalm, Judica me Deus, Discern Causam meam, etc. Judge me,
O Lord! Plead thou my Cause, etc. It Is termed Passion-Sunday, from the Passion
of our Lord, which is then near approaching, and was Instituted to prepare us
worthily for the Religious Celebration thereof.

On this Day the Romanists clothe all their Crucifixes in their Churches with
Mourning Colors, in remembrance of our Savior's going out of the Temple, and
absconding Himself, in order to Dispose us to a Compassion with him.

Palm Sunday.
Palm Sunday, Dominica Palmarum, or Dominica Magna, is the 6th and last Sunday
in Lent, immediately preceding Easter. It Is called Palm Sunday, or Dominica
Palmarum (which is the same in Latin) from the Branches of Palm which the Jews
strewed under his feet, at his Triumphant Entrance into Jerusalem upon an Ass,
crying Hosanna to the Son of David, St. Matthew. 21.25. and hence it is that the
Romanists do annually on this day, bless the Palm, and go solemnly in
Procession, in honor of our Savior's Triumph, all the people carrying Boughs,
or Branches of Palm in their hands. It has the Name Dominica Magna, or the
Great Lord's Day; because of the Great and many Infallible good things that
were conferred on the Faithful, the Week ensuing; namely, Death abolished,
Slander and the Tyranny of Satan removed, by the painful and ignominious Death
of our Savior.

This is called the Holy-Week, because Men gave over their worldly employ,
Courts were shut up, Prisoners freed, and many Prayers and Offices performed by
the Holy Church, in order to our Preparation for the Grand Feast of Easter, and
the Week of Fasts, because fasting was then increased, with Watching and
Prayer, for they did lie on the ground, and when they did eat on these six
days, their Food was only Bread, Salt and Water.

The next Wednesday after Palm Sunday, was the Day whereon the Scribes and
Pharisees sat in Council against the Lord of Life; the Thursday following, the
Parasceue (Greek) or Preparation of the Legal Passover, and the Institution of
the Lord's Supper, that very night, which is otherwise named Maundy Thursday,
quasi Mandati Thursday (being the last Thursday in Lent, and first before
Easter) from fulfilling the Mandate or Command of our Savior, which arose from
an ancient Ceremony frequently practiced by Prelates in Cathedral Churches and
Religious Houses, and is in imitation of Christ; who on the Evening of this
Day, after his last Supper, and before he Instituted the Blessed Sacrament,
washed his Disciples feet; acquainting them withal, that they must do so
likewise to one another; which is the Mandate whence the Day takes
Denomination. At the beginning of the said Ceremony, Christ uttered these
words, soon after he had washed their feet, Joh. 13.34. (which are sung as an
Antiphone) Mandatum novum do vobis, ut diligatis invicem, sicut dilexi vos.

Good Friday.
The next Day is styled Good Friday, because the Good Work of Man's Redemption
was then Consummated; the Cause of all our good, and true ground of all our
joy; it being the most Sacred and Memorable Day of the Bloody Passion of Christ
on the Cross; which was a sufficient Atonement or Satisfaction for the Sins of
Mankind.

And here it will not be amiss for the Reader to take notice (in order to his
understanding it, when he meets it in Authors) that in the Roman Church, the
Offices called Tenebrae, are Sung on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, of this
Holy, or Great Week, and that in Lamentation of our Savior's Passion; and
because these are still anticipated in the Rehearsal, the Evening of the
foregoing Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, has obtained the Appellation of
Tenebrae-Days from the Latin Tenebrae, or the French Tenebres, Days of
Darkness, or Dark Days, because thereby they represent the Darkness that
attended and accompanied our Lord's Crucifixion; and then also that Church
extinguisheth all her Lights; and after some silence, when the whole office is
concluded, they make a sudden great noise, to represent the rending the Veil of
the Temple, and the disorder the whole frame of Nature was in at the death of
her Maker.

Their Matins also, or Morning-Service is, on the first three days before
Easter begun with very many Lights, but ended in Darkness; representing thereby
the Nightime wherein they seized and apprehended our Savior in the Garden
Gethsemani; in which Office there are 15 Tapers lighted at the first, and
placed in a Candlestick of a Triangular form, viz. as many as there are
Canticles in the Office; and at the conclusion of every Canticle or Psalm, one
of the 15 Tapers or Lights is put out, and so gradually, till they are all
extinguished.

Easter.
The next to this great Week, that Great and High Feast of Easter, or the
Resurrection of the Holy Jesus, after his three days Interment in the Grave,
succeeds; and is styled Pasche, (Pascha) or Easter. It Is called Pascha, a
Passover (not in memory of the Angels transit in Egypt, (the Jewish Passover
being a Holy Action appointed by God in the killing and eating of a Lamb;
partly that the Church of the Jews might remember the Benefits God conferred
upon them in passing over the Houses, and not smiting them, Exodus 12.11.) but
our Feast is celebrated in Commemoration of the Resurrection of Christ; tho we
still retain the Name Pascha, not only because the Lamb that was killed by the
Jews of old in their Passover, was a true Type of the Lamb of God, Christ
Jesus, which was sacrificed for Man's Salvation; but because at that very time
he passed to his Father from this World (...) Pesach, signifies Transitio, a
passage from (...) Pasach, Transire, to pass) or because then there was made a
passage from an Old to a New Life; in Span. named Florida a florido and
vernanti anni tempore, from the flourishing and Springtime of the year in
which it falls. It Is called Easter, from Eoster, a Goddess of the ancient
Saxons, whose Feast they kept in the Month of April, Came. or as Minshew gives
it in regard that then the Sun of Righteousness did rise, as the Sun in the
East; and therefore Easter comes from the East. Now this is the Basis of all
the Lord's-Days in the year, tho it be a Moveable Feast, and falls sometimes
higher, sometimes lower, (as all the Moveable Feasts do) but the time of Easter
being known, the rest are soon discovered; and thus you may know when Easter
will fall:

Post Martis Nonas, ubi sit Nova Luna requiras,
Et cum transierit bis Septima Pascha patebit.
Or thus, Inde dies Solis tertia Pascha venit.

But take it in English more plainly thus: Easter Day is always the first
Sunday after the first full Moon, which shall happen next after the 11 day of
March, and if the full Moon fall on a Sunday, the Sunday after will be Easter
Day. Now tho this Rule be true enough as to the Gregorian, yet it is not
applicable to our Julian Account, which the Table of Moveable Feasts in the
Common Prayer Book Calculated for 40 years regards only, and must be followed
till His Majesty Commands another; and one reason is, the Precession of the
Aequinoctium Vernum, which from the first Nicene Council, to this time has
Anticipated 11 days, falling now the 10th of March; whereas it was on the 21th.
and the reason of this Anticipation is, that the Julian exceeds the Solar year
10 Minutes, and 48 Seconds, or thereabout; which causes the Aequinoxes and
Solstices yearly to change their Places, and go backward so many Minutes and
Seconds. The Lunations also, by reason of the great quantity allowed them, do
every 19 years anticipate almost an hour and a half, and in 312 years and a
half, one whole day; and therefore not exactly to be found by the Golden
Number, tho on those Lunations, Easter depends, as of it all the Moveable
Feasts, which is the other Cause of those Errors, and both together the first
occasion of the Roman Emendation, whereby that Church does always produce
Easter on the Sunday following the first full Moon next after the Vernal
Aequinox, according to the Deeree of the Nicene Council. This occasioned that
Error that all the Astrologers were guilty of, viz. 5. Weeks Mistake in 1663,
and one Week in 1664; and it is the 20th time it has so happened since 1600:
but in the Years 2437, 2461, 2491, there will be 42 days Error, and some time
afterward no less than 49 days; and after the Year 2698, (if the Old Calendar
be still retained) it will never again happen according to the Rule of the
Church, as before: Thus far Mr. G. Wharton.

Easter Day, (and the rest of the Moveable Feasts) Anno 1668, according to the
Julian Account, fell full as soon, or low in the Year, upon its nearest Limit
or Boundary, as ever it could, which has not happened from 1573, till this Year;
nor will so fall out again in 247 years, till the year 1915, which will be 239
years from this Year, before it so happen.

Here you may also Observe, That Easter always falls between the 21th of March,
and the 26th of April, these two days being excluded; for it never happens on,
but between them. Easter Day is one of his Majesty's Offering-dayes at Court,
being a Houshold-day also, when the Besant is given by the Lord Steward, or one
of the other White-Staffe-Officers. All the Holy Days in Easter week are his
Majesty's Collar, but not Offering-dayes.

Next follows the Quinquagesimal Interval of 50 days between Easter and
Whitsontide, which the Primitive Christians observed as an entire Festival, in
honor of the Resurrection and Ascension of the Holy Ghost, with great
Exultation and exceeding Joy, it contains 6 Sundays.

Low-Sunday.
The first is Low-Sunday, Dominica in Albis, or Quasimodogeniti. It Is styled
Low-Sunday, because it is a Low Festival in comparison of Easter Day, the
preceding high Festival. It is the Octave of Easter Day, named Dominica in
Albis, in regard of the Angels who appeared at the Resurrection in White
Garments; and from the Catechumeni, or Neophyts (i.e. persons lately Converted
to the Faith, newly taught the Principles of Religion, but not Baptized; or if
Baptized, not yet admitted to the Eucharist, White Garments, (the Emblems of
Innocence) which in old times they usually put on at their Baptism, and in the
Church on this day were solemnly divested of them; or for that those who had
been Baptized, received then the Bishop's Confirmation, and put on other white
Vestments, which they wore till the next Sunday. It Is called Quasimodogeniti,
from the entrance, in the 1 Peter, 2.2. Quasimodogeniti Infantes Rationabiles
sine dolor lac concupiscite.

St. George.
April the 23th. is the Day Dedicated to the Memory of St. George, the Martyr,
of Cappadocia, and is honored by the Georgians the Inhabitants of a Country
called Georgia. situated between Colchos, Caucasus, the Caspian-Sea, and
Armenia, heretofore Iberia and Albania; they do highly reverence and honor
this Saint. He also is our Patron, and the same Person that the Knights of the
Garter have formerly so much honored, they being always, on that day only,
Installed at Windsor. This is one of his Majesty's Collar-days without
Offering, at White Hall.

St. Mark.
The 25th of this Month is St. Mark's Day. A Feast in Honor of the Evangelist,
who wrote the Life, Acts, Miracles, Death and Resurrection of our Savior
Christ. He was the first Prelate of Alexandria, where he Taught the Gospel, and
also all over the adjacent Regions from the Country of Egypt to Pentapolis. He
was Martyred at Alexandria in the time of the Tyrant Trajan, which was thus
executed. They fastened a Cable-Rope about his Neck, wherewith they dragged him
from the place called Bucolus, to another termed Angels, where the raging
Idolaters burned him to ashes, (against whom he preached) Anno Domini 63. and
was Interred at Bucolus praemention'd. This is one of his Majesty's
Collar-dayes without offering.

Misericordia.
The second Sunday after Easter is termed Misericordia, from the Entrance of
the fifth Verse of the 32 Psalm, Misericordia Domini plena est Terra, etc.

Philip and Jacob.
May Day, or St. Philip, and St. James, vulgarly, but falsely called Philip and
Jacob; (Philip is a Greek word, and signifies a Lover of Horses. Jacob, Hebr. a
Supplanter, May Day it is called, because the first of May, a day of Mirth and
Jollity among the Common Herd; and Philip and James, because dedicated to the
two Apostles and Martyrs of that name. The former of the City of Bethsaida, who
preached in Phrygia, and Converted the Eunuch Candaules. It is affirmed by some
Authors, that he sent 12 Disciples into our Country of Britain, to work the
Conversion of them. In conclusion, the Pagans seized him, and put him to the
Ignominious death of his Lord and Master, at the City Hierapolis, about the
Year of our Lord, 53.

The later, viz. St. James the Lesser, (James is a Name wrested from Jacob) was
Son to Alphaeus and Penman of that Excellent Epistle which goes under his
Name; for his Wisdom and Piety surnamed the Just. He was created Bishop of
Jerusalem after the Ascension; and Governed that Church 30 years complete;
where he was most Inhumanely first stoned, and afterward being placed on the
Top of a Pinnacle of the Temple, precipitated from thence, and being half dead,
and his Thighs broken, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, he was knocked on
the head with a great Fuller's Club; this Bloody Butchery was Executed on this
Saint in the Seventh Year of the Sanguinary Emperor Nero. This is also one of
his Majesty's Collardays without Offering.

Holy Cross, or Holy-Rood-day.
May the 3d, is Inventio Crucis, i. e. the Invention of the Holy-Cross, or
Holy-Rood-day, and is in the Roman, tho not in our Rubric; of which there are
two called Holy-Rood-dayes, viz. this, being on the 3d. of May, and the
Exaltation of the Cross on the 14th of September. It Is a Feast in Commemoration
(as the Romanists believe) of the Miraculous and Wonderful Invention, or
finding out the Holy Cross, on which the Blessed Jesus suffered, by St. Helen,
the Mother of Constantine the Great, after it had been concealed and buried in
the Earth by the Painims, the space of 180 years, in place whereof they had
erected a Statue to their wanton Deity, Venus. It Is called Holy-Rood-Day, and
Holy Cross, because of the great Sanctity it received, by touching and bearing
the Oblation of the most precious Body of Christ, and Rood is an old Saxon
word, signifying a Cross, or the Image of Christ on the Cross, being composed
generally of Wood, and erected in a Loft for that purpose, just over the
passage of the Church into the Chancel. Fuller.

The third Sunday after Easter as it falls in course here, is styled Jubilate,
from the beginning of Psalm the 65. Jubilate Deo omnis Terra, etc.

The fourth Sunday Cantate, from the entrance of the 98th Psalm, Cantate Domino
Cantieum Novum, etc.

May the 14th. our most Gracious and Sovereign Princess Donna Catarina Landed
at Portsmouth, in order to the confirmation of her solemn Nuptials, with His
Majesty our Dread Sovereign, Charles the Second, whom God long preserve in
health and happiness.

Rogation-Sunday.
Next follows Rogation-Sunday, the fifth Sunday after Easter, (the Week
following is called Rogation-Week, or Vocem Jucunditatis, the Institution or
Restoration whereof, is by Historians attributed to Claudius Mamertus, or
Mamercus Bishop of Vienne in France, Anno Dom. 452. or as some say, 466. being
the fifth Sunday after Easter, from the like entrance Vocem Jucunditatis
annunciate and audiatur, etc. and Rogation Sunday, or Week, which is always the
next but one before Whitsunday, a Rogando Deum, as being once (tho we cannot
affirm that now) Consecrated above all other Weeks of the year in an
extraordinary manner, unto Prayers, Litanies, and Supplications, (and are still
enjoined by the Church to all persons among the Roman Catholics on Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday) with Abstinence from flesh, for these Reasons: First,
for a Devout Preparative to the Feast of Christ's most glorious Ascension, and
Pentecost, which is shortly after. 2. Because the fruits of the Earth are
tender, and in danger, being in the Blossom. 3. For that much about this time
of the year, Monarchs and Potentates begin to undertake their Wars; upon both
which Considerations, all Good and Pious Christians have great Reason to be
frequent with God in Rogations and Prayers, at this time, particularly; and for
this cause it is, that the Solemnization of Matrimony is prohibited by the Holy
Church from the first day in this Week, until Trinity Sunday following. The
Belgians or Dutchmen call it Cruys-Week, that is, Cross-week; and so it is also
named in some Parts of England, because the Priest on these days goes in
Procession with the Cross before him.

In the old Saxon it is named Gangdagas, i. e. Days of Walking or
Perambulation. In the North of England Gang-week, from the ganging or going in
Procession (for Gang there, as well as in the Saxon, signifies to go) from an
Ancient and Commendable Custom (tho discontinued in the time of the late
Unnatural Rebellion) to make Perambulations and Processions with the Young
Children in every Parish and Township with us, to view and understand the
Ancient Limits and Boundaries of every Parish, to prevent all manner of
Encroachments, Contentions and Suits at Law. In the Inns of Court it is known by
the name of Grass-week, because the Students Commons on some days that Week,
consist much of Salads, hard Eggs, and Green-sauce.

The Robigalia and Ambarvalia of the Ancient Romans, did, after their
Heathenish manner, in something, resemble these In^^itutions; They were called
Robigalia, from Robigus, one of their numerous Deities, to whom they ascribed
the preserving of Corn from Blasting, therefore these Feasts were sacred to him
particularly. And Ambarvalia, quod victima arva ambiret, because the Sacrifice
to be offered at that time did walk round the Fields.

May the 21th. 1662. K. Charles was Married at Portsmouth to Donna Catarina,
Infanta of Portugal, by Gilbert Bishop of London.

May the 22. is a Feast dedicated by the Romanists to one Julia, a Holy, Devout
Virgin, and is placed in their Rubric, not mentioned in our Calendar.

Holy Thursday, or Ascension-Day.
The next Feast celebrated by our Holy Mother the Church, is Holy-Thursday, or
Ascension-Day, which is the 40th day after Easter, or his Resurrection; called
Holy-Thursday, because so Holy a Work was performed on this Holy Day; and
Ascension-day, in memory of our Savior's Ascension into Heaven, in the sight
of his Apostles and Disciples then present, Acts 1.9. there to prepare a place
for all true Christians, being preceded by whole Legions of Angels, and
attended by Millions of Saints, whom he had discharged and set at large out of
their imaginary Prison of Limbo: (as the Romanists fondly conceive) In short,
and in truth, this Festival of Christ's Ascension, is the Consummation of all
he did and taught, during his Residence here upon Earth, and therefore it was
(not without great reason) termed by the Ancients, Felix Clausula totius
Itinerarii Filii Dei, the Sabbath, or Consummation of all his labor in the
Great and stupendous Work of Man's Redemption. This is one of his Majesty's
Offering-dayes.

Next comes the 6th Sunday after Easter, called Exaudi, from the beginning of
the 27th Psalm, Exaudi Domine vocemmeam, etc.

The Week after Ascension-Day is Expectation-Week; for now the Apostles were
earnestly expecting the promise of our Lord; If I go away, I will send the
Comforter to you, Jo. 16.7.

King Charles 2d. Not.
May the 29th is Celebrated upon a double account, first in Commemoration of
the Birth of our Sovereign King Charles the Second, the Princely Son of his
Royal Father Charles the First of happy Memory, and Mary the Daughter of Henry
the 4th, the French King, who was born the 29th day of May, Anno 1630. and also
by Act of Parliament 12 Car. 2. by the Passionate desires of the People, in
Memory of his most Happy Restoration to his Crown and Dignity, after 12 years
forced Exile from his undoubted Right, the Crown of England, by Barbarous
Rebels and Regicides; and on the 8th of this Month his Majesty was with
Universal Joy and great Acclamations Proclaimed in London and Westminster, and
after throughout all his Dominions; the 16th he came to the Hague; the 23th
with his two Brothers Embarked for England, and on the 25th he happily Landed
at Dover, being received by General Monk and some of the Army; From whence he
was, by several Voluntary Troops of the Nobility and Gentry, waited upon to
Canterbury, and on the 29th 1660, he made his Magnificent Entrance into that
Emporium of Europe, his Stately and Rich Metropolis, the Renowned City of
London. On this very day also Anno 1662. the King came to Hampton Court with
his Queen Catharine after his Marriage at Portsmouth, as is before mentioned.
This as it is his Birthday is one of his Collar-days without Offering.

Pentecost or Whitsunday.
After this succeeds the Grand Solemnity of Pentecost or Whitsunday. Pentecost,
from the Greek, because it is the 50th day from Easter or Christ's Resurrection;
and Whitsunday, or White-Sunday, from the Catechumeni, who were apparelled in
White Garments, and on the Eve of this Feast admitted to the Sacrament of
Baptism. But Verstegan affirms, That it was of old named by our forefathers,
Wied-Sunday, or Wihed-Sunday, because Wied or Wihed, in the Saxon Tongue,
signifies Sacred. Now this Festival was anciently celebrated among the Jews on
the 50th day after the Passover, in the memory of Promulgation of the Divine
Law of God on Mount Sinai; and our Whitsunday is kept 50 days after Easter by
all True and Good Christians; to commemorate the Mission of the Holy Ghost, on
that day, (which descended on the heads of the Apostles, in Tongues resembling
fire, Act. 2.3.) who is the only and most Infallible Interpreter of the Divine
Law. This is one of his Majesty's Offering-dayes, and a Houshold-day when the
Besant is given by the Lord Steward, or one of the other White Staff-Officers,
and all the Holy Days, in Whitsun-Week, are Collar-days without Offering.

Ember-Week follows Whitsun-day, which is one of the 4 Grand Seasons of the
Year, as is before specified at large.

Trinity-Sunday.
Trinity-Sunday falls next in course, (which is always the Lord's day
following, and the Octave of Whitsunday) so nominated in Honor of the most
Blessed Trinity; and to signify unto us, that the holy Works of our Redemption
and Sanctification, which were then Consummated, are common to all Three
Persons in the Trinity. This Festival was first Instituted by Gregory the 4th,
who then sat in the Episcopal Chair, in the year of our Lord 827. It is one of
his Majesty's Offering-days at White Hall.

St. Barnabas.
June the 11th. St. Barnabas the Apostle comes next in the Calendar; commonly
called Barnaby. The Name is Hebrew, signifying Son of the Master, of Prophecy,
or of Comfort. The proper Name given him at his Circumcision was Joses, for
Joseph, by a sweeter Termination, or Cadence: From the Apostles he received the
Surname of Barnabas; He was born in the Isle of Cyprus, an Island in the
Mediterranean, between Cilicia, Syria, and Egypt, whose Ancestors fled thither
for their greater safety, in the Tumultuous and Distracted Government of
Antiochus Epiphanes, or as some imagine, when Pompey with his Romans Conquered
Judaea. He descended of the Tribe of Levi; his Parents were Opulent, and Pious;
he was committed to the Tutelage of the Great Doctor of the Law, Gamaliel, at
whose Feet he was educated with his Fellow-Pupil St. Paul. He was an
Eyewitness of the Miracle in the Cure of the Paralytick at the Pool of
Bethesda, which soon convinced him of the Divinity of our Savior. He was one
of the 70; sold all his Lands on Earth to Purchase in Heaven; and when God gave
Saul his Fiat for an Apostle's Place, they two were Joynt-Commissioners for the
Church, Fellow-Travellers, Consorts, and Zealots for Christ, etc. Dr. Brough on
the Fest: And both Preached the Gospel in Seleucia, Salamis, Paphos, Cyprus,
Perga in Pamphilia; and here Mark the Son of Barnabas his Sister Mary, whom
they took with them, as their Minister and Attendant, weary of this
Troublesome, Itinerant Life, departed from them, (which occasioned the unhappy
Difference between these two Apostles Paul and Barnabas) afterward they
Traveled to Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, and so back to Antioch, and then they
parted with some discontent, because Barnabas would take his Cousin Mark with
him, which St. Paul denied, by reason of his weak Desertion, and he went to
Silas, but Barnabas with his Cousin Mark to his own Country Cyprus, though some
say Rome, but it is most probable Cyprus, in the last period of his Life, where
he Converted great numbers; but some Syrian Jews coming to Salamis, where he
then was furiously set upon as he was Teaching in the Synagogue, in a Corner
whereof they shut him up till night; then brought him forth, and after
unexpressible Tortures, stoned him. This Barnaby-day, or thereabout, is the
Summer Solstice or Sun-sted, when the Sun seems to stand, and begins to go
back, being the longest day in the year; about the 11th or 12th of June; it is
taken for the whole time, when the days appear not for 14 days together either
to lengthen, or shorten.

Corpus-Christi.
June the 14th is Corpus-Christi-day, that is the Festival of the Body of our
Lord, a Feast that owes its Institution to Urban the 4th Prelate of Rome, about
the year of God 1264. in honor of the Body of Christ, or Blessed Sacrament of
the Altar. On this Day in all Catholic Countries, during the Octave of this
Feast, and the Sacrament is most solemnly carried about in Procession, to be
adored by the People; the Priests and they all Expressing their Devotion in
Hymns, Songs, and Prayers, accompanied with all the Testimonies of Pious
Affections (as they term it) as Music, Lights, Flowers strewed all along the
Streets, their richest Tapestries hung out upon the Walls, etc.

The next Sunday is the first Sunday after Trinity, and the Sundays after are
called 1st, 2d, 3d, etc. according to their Numeral order, from their
succession of Trinity, till the 1st Advent-Sunday.

St. John Baptist.
The 24th of June is St. John Baptist's, or commonly Midsummer-Day, which needs
no interpretation. The Name John in Hebrew is Gracious, and Baptist is a Greek
word, signifying Washer or Dipper, by way of Eminence; because he Baptized our
Savior in the River Jordan, and was the first that Baptized. This Festival is
in Commemoration of St. John, the Son of Zachary and Elizabeth, who was one of
the Tribe of Levi, and he that showed us the Lamb of God, who takes away the
Sins of the World, yet was this Devout and Austere Saint, the Praecursor or
Forerunner of our Savior, beheaded by Herod the Blood-thirsty Tetrarch, at
the desire and request of Herodias (the Relict of his Brother Philip) Anno Dom.
30. This is one of His Majesty's Offering-Days at Whitehall, and the day
appointed for the Election of the two Sheriffs of London and Middle-sex.

St. Peter and St. Paul.
On the 29th of June is celebrated the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul. Peter
in the Greek signifies a Stone, or Rock; Paul, Hebrew, Wonderful, or worst; but
Cardinal Baronius derives it from the Latin, and makes it signify Little, or
Humble. They are both joined in one Solemnity for these Reasons; because they
were both Principal and Joint Co-operators under our Lord and Savior, in the
Conversion of the World; it falling to St. Peter's lot to Convert the Jews, and
St. Paul's, the Gentiles; for this Cause St. Paul was named the Apostle of the
Gentiles; as also in regard they were both Martyred at Rome. St. Peter, the
Chief and Head of the Apostles, Preached the Gospel in Pontus, Cappadocia,
Bithynia and Galatia, and at last at Rome, where he was disgracefully Crucified
under that Tyrant and Monster of Men, Nero, with his Head downward; for
according to Tradition, it was his own desire, and there he was also Interred.

St. Paul, whose former Name was Saul (Hebr. Lent of the Lord, or as some will
have it, Fox) before his Conversion; being a violent Persecutor; when St.
Stephan was stoned; kept the Murderers Clothes; and when cruel Commissioners
were sent to Scourge, Kill and slay all that called on the Name of Christ, he
carried the Letters. He was a Jew born, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
Learned and (his Principle pardoned) Conscientious too. The Voice of our
Savior to him out of Heaven, Acts 9.38. with a Light, struck him blind, and
down, and did both unhorse and un-Jew him. He asked, and was directed what
course to steer; goes to Ananias, and receives at once his Sight and Baptism;
and thenceforth the World becomes his Charge, and Conquest; and the Gentiles
his special care. Being thus called after Christ's Assumption, and Registered in
the Catalogue of his Apostles; he Preached the Gospel (the Professors whereof
he formerly persecuted with so great fury and heat) from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, Spain and Italy, and was beheaded by the bloody Sword of the Emperor
Nero, on a Sunday, being the third Calends of July, or the 29th of June,
according to our Julian Computation, and so was also St. Peter; now as they
both suffered, they both lie buried together. This Day the Church keeps, and we
most concerned (his Gentile-Converts) have greatest cause of all to observe to
his Memory, but to thy Glory, O Christ! Dr. Brough of the Holy Feasts and
Festivals of the Church of England. This is one of the King's Collar-days
without Offering.

Visitation of Mary.
In July, the first we meet with, is the Visitation of Mary, instituted and
observed by the Church of Rome, in Honor of the Mother of God; and in Memory of
her visiting St. Elizabeth, after she had Conceived the Son of God; at whose
presence, St. John the Baptist leaped in the Womb of his Mother, St. Luke 1.41.
This is a Festival in the Roman Rubric, not in ours.

St. Swithin's-Day.
On the 15th of this Month is St. Swithin's-Day ( Swithin Saxon comes from the
old English Switheahn, that is, very High, as Celsus with the Romans.) This
name was taken up in Honor of St. Swithin, the Holy Bishop of Winchester,
about the year of our Lord 860, and called the Weeping St. Swithin; for that
about this time Praesepe and Aselli, two Rainy Constellations in the Sign
Cancer arise Cosmically (that is together with the Sun, or in the same Degree
of the Ecliptic with him) and commonly cause Rains. Cambden.

Dog Days, Dies Caniculares, or Sirius; certain days that begin toward the
latter end of June, and end the latter end of August, so called of Canicula,
the little Dogstar, which then rises with the Sun, being Predominant, and
greatly increases his heat, during the time of its Reign.

It Is named Sirius from the Greek, (...) h^e. Siccand^, to dry up; Propterea
quod and fluvios and fontes nimio calore exiccet, because it dries up the
Rivers and Fountains by its Excessive heat; vel (...) ab evacuando, from
evacuating, quod Corpora nostra sudoribus evacuet; because it cleanses our
Bodies by sweat.

Here I presume we may appositely insert an account of the Spanish Invasion,
abstracted out of History; because they were Engaged, and Discomfitted this
Month,

In the 21th year of the Reign of Q. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1588. the Spanish Invasion
happened; Their Navy consisted of 130 Ships, in which there were 19290 Soldiers,
8050 Mariners, 2080 Gally-Slaves, 2630 Great Ordnance, and for the greater
Sanctification of the Action, 12 of their Vessels were called by the Names of
the 12 Apostles. The Commander in Chief of the Fleet, was Don Alphonso, Duke of
Medina; the next in Authority was Martin Recalde, an Able Seaman. They came out
of the Groyn in May, but were dispersed, and the Queen in the mean time made
the following Preparations; the Lord Charles Howard Lord Admiral of her whole
Navy, and Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral, were to be ready at Plymouth; the
Lord Henry Seymor (second Son to the Duke of Somerset) with 40 English and
Dutch Ships to guard the Coasts of the Netherlands, and keep the Prince of
Parma from coming forth for Land-Service. Three were placed along our Southern
Coasts 20000 Soldiers, and two Armies of Trained Men Levied, the one commanded
by the Earl of Leicester, consisting of 1000 Horse, and 22000 Foot, who pitched
his Tents at Tilbury; over the other (appointed as a Guard to Her Majesty's
Royal Person) consisting of 24000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, the Lord Hunsdon was
General.

Now all things on both sides being in a readiness, the Spanish Navy set forth
in May, as before, but were drawn back and distressed, and their first
Appearance was July the 21th. The Admiral of England, coming out of Plymouth,
sent a Pinnace, named, The Defiance, before; which, by a Great Shot, Challenged
the Spaniards to Fight, and they speedily fell to it, but the English had the
better.

The 23th of this Month they had a second Fight, where there was little hurt
done by the Spaniards; the 24th they rested on both sides, and the 25th which
was St. James his Day, they fell to it the third time, and the English got the
better; after which the Spaniards held on their Course, and turned no more upon
us.

The 27th of the Month, toward evening, the Spaniards cast Anchor near Calice,
the English then having 140 Ships; tho but 15 of them bore the brunt of the
Battle.

The 28th the Lord Admiral made eight of his worst Vessels Fireships, and sent
them in the Night to the Spanish Fleet; at the sight whereof, they made a
hideous noise, cut their Cables with great confusion and astonishment.

The Spanish Navy being now destitute of many necessary Provisions, and no hope
of the Prince of Parma's Assistance, resolved for Spain Northward, in which
they lost many Ships and Men; the English Navy still pursued closely, till they
were fain to leave them, for want of Powder.

Thus this Invincible Armada, (for so it was styled in a Spanish Bravado) that
was three whole years preparing; in the space of one Month was often beaten,
and at length put to flight; many of their men slain, above half their Ships
taken and sunk; not above 100 of the English missing at the most; not so much
as a Ship, but Cock's small Vessel; thus sailing about all Britain by Scotland,
the Orkneys and Ireland, they returned to Spain with as great dishonor, as
they set out with Ostentation; for indeed, Mendosa in France Triumphed before
the Victory in Print. Now Q. Elizabeth for this Happy Success, appointed
Prayers and Thanksgiving in all Churches throughout England; and She (as it
were in Triumph) came in Person attended with a numerous Train of her Nobility
into the City, went into the Cathedral of St. Paul's (where the Banners taken
from the Enemy were publicly exposed to the view of Spectators) and there gave
thanks to Almighty God in a most humble manner, for so great a Deliverance
from, and defeat of a Foreign Enemy.

St. James.
July the 25th, is the Feast of St. James (Hebr. the same as Jacob) the
Apostle, surnamed the Greater, Brother to St. John, the Sons of Zebedee, who
was both an Apostle, and Martyr: This is he that Taught the Gospel to the 12
dispersed Tribes; and was Murdered by the Sword; or (as some say) Beheaded in
Judaea by Herod Agrippa, Anno Dom. 45. where he was buried, and consequently
the first of the 12 Apostles that was translated to the Kingdom of Christ.

This is one of the King's Collar-Days without Offering.

St. Anne.
The next day, being the 26th, is by some People Celebrated to the Memory of
St. Anne (Hebr. Gracious) who was the Holy Mother of the Blessed Virgin. This
Day is not in our, but the Roman Rubric.

Lammas-Day.
August begins with a Feast; the first, being called Lammas-Day, the Gule, or
Yule of August, St. Peter advincula, or St. Peter's Chains. It Is named Lammas,
qu. Lamb-mass; because on that Day in the time of Popery here among us in
England, the Tenants that held Lands of the Cathedral Church in York (which is
Dedicated to St. Peter ad vincula) were obliged by their Tenure on that day, to
bring a live Lamb into the Church, whilst they were singing High-Mass, or (as
some conceive) it may take its Derivation from the Saxon, Hlarmaesse, i.e.
Loaf-Mass, or Bread-Mass so called, as a Feast of Thanksgiving to God for the
first fruits of the Corn, and it seems has been observed with Bread made of
new Wheat; and accordingly it is a Custom in some Places, for Tenants to be
bound to bring their Lord that years Wheat, on or before the first of August.
Ham. Resol. 2.6. Quaeries p. 465.

It Is called the Gule or Yule of August, which some Conjecture to be only a
Corruption of the British word Gwyl-Awst, that is, the Feast of August. Others
again conceive (and I think more truly) that Gule comes from Gula in Latin, or
Gueule in French, a Throat; and St. Peter ad vincula for this Reason following,
which you have in Durand's Rationali Divinor. l. 7. Ca. De festo Sancti Petri
ad vincula: (a Catholic Story) that one Quirinus a Tribune of Rome, had a
Daughter who was troubled with a painful Disease in her Throat; and therefore,
(I presume, other means failing) Addressed himself to his then Holiness
Alexander the 6th of that Name, from St. Peter; and desired to borrow or see
the Chains that St. Peter was chained with under Nero; which Request being
obtained; his Daughter kissing the said Chains, was as miraculously, as
Immediately cured of her Malady -- (Credat Judaeus Appella, -- Non Ego) --
whereupon Quirinus with his whole Family turned Christians, and were baptized:
Tunc dictus Alexander Papa (as Durand has it) hoc Festum in Calendis Augusti
Celebrandum Instituit, and in Honorem Beati Petri Ecclesiam in Urbe Fabricavit,
ubi Vincula ipsa reposuit, and ad vincula Nominavit, and Calendis Augusti
Dedicavit; so that this Day being before only known by the Name of the Calends
of August, was afterward upon this very occasion termed, either of the
Instrument that wrought this Miracle, the Day of St. Peter ad vincula, or of
the part of the Daughter, namely, the Throat, whereon the Miracle was wrought,
the Gule of August. This day is kept by the Papists, as they say, in Honor of
those Chains, wherewith Herod caused St. Peter at Jerusalem; to be bound, from
which he was disengaged by the Angel of God, Acts the 12th. by the sole Touch
whereof, not only the forementioned, but many other Miracles were wrought;
nay, some of that Church are so superstitiously Credulous, as to believe their
Miraculous joining together many years after into one entire Chain, with those
Iron Fetters wherewith the Holy Apostle was laden, when he was Imprisoned at
Rome.

August the 5th. in some of our ancient Calendars, is known by the name of
Gowrie's Conspiracy, and tho now omitted, (the reason thereof you shall soon
understand) yet it was kept very devoutly in the Reign of King James, as a Day
of Thanksgiving to the Almighty for his Deliverance from the Treacherous
Conspiracy of the Gowries in Scotland.

The Story runs thus, as Baker relates it in his Chronicle, p. 382. out of
which take this Abstract. The Earls Gowry, Mar, Lindsey, and others, Invited
the King to the Castle of Reuthen (in the absence of the Earl of Arran and
Lenox) and there detained him, not permitting him to walk abroad; all his
Trusty Servants they removed from him, and Compelled the King by Letters to
Queen Elizabeth to approve and allow of this his Thraldom. After his Mother
Queen Mary had sent to Queen Elizabeth, complaining of the Usage of her Son, he
himself sent Colonel William Steward, and John Colvill to the Queen of England;
and after the Death of Lenox in France, the Surprizers being lifted up in their
Conceits, thinking they had him safe enough; he, on a sudden (tho scarce 18
years of age) with some few others, conveyed himself to the Castle of St.
Andrews, to whom the Nobility Repaired, with Armed Bands, fearing some danger
might befall him; afterward with fair words he advised some of his Surprizers
to go from Court to avoid Tumult, promising them Pardon, if they would crave
it; but Gowry only asked Pardon, and submitted himself, using this Distinction,
that he had not offended in Matter, but in Form: and farther, Baker says, p.
384. that Gowry was tried by his Peers at Sterling, Anno 1600. where being
accused of many Treasons, tho he gave colorable Answers to them all; yet was
found Guilty, Condemned, and Beheaded; whose Head his Servants sewing to the
Body, committed to the Grave.

Baker farther says, p. 428. At this time, Anno 1603. the King forgot not a
Deliverance he formerly had; which tho it were in Scotland, yet he would have
notice taken of it in England, which was this his Deliverance from the
Conspiracy of the Gowries, on the 5th of August 1600. three years before, and
thereupon, Friday, being the 5th day, was by Commandment appointed to be
Holy Day; with Morning-Prayer, Sermon, and Evening-Prayer read, with Bonefires
at Night, which was then, and after, during his Life, solemnly observed.

August the 6th. is the Transfiguration; (from Transfiguro, Lat. to change
shape) a Feast Celebrated by the Papists in Memory of our Savior's
Transfiguring himself upon Mount Thabor, and showing a Glimpse of his Glory to
his Apostles, St. Peter, St. James, and St. John; And his Face (says the Text)
shone as the Sun, and his Garment became white as Snow, Matthew. 17.2. and in
them also unto us, for our encouragement to Virtue, Perseverance in Faith and
mutual Love one toward another.

St. Laurence.
The 10th of this Month, is a Day Dedicated to St. Laurence (Lat. flourishing
like a Bay Tree; the same as Daphnis in Greek) who was Deacon to Pope Xistus,
then sitting in the Chair at Rome, a very Zealous Person, according to
Tradition, for the Catholic Cause; who thereupon in the Primitive times, was
by the Cruel and Barbarous Pagans, most inhumanely Broyled on a Gridiron, for
the Faith of Christ; which Martyrdom he suffered with undaunted and matchless
Fortitude. This is in the Roman, but not in our Rubric.

The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
The 15th of this Month is, The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the
Mother of the Holy Jesus, so called from Assumo, Lat. to assume, or take up;
it is observed in Memory of her being Assumed, or taken up (as the Papists
confidently maintain) into Heaven, both Soul and Body after her Dormition, or
Dissolution, and this is a constant Tradition of their Church. This is also in
the Roman, not in our Rubric.

St. Bartholomew.
The next is the Festival of St. Bartholomew, solemnized on the 24th of August.
The Name is Chaldee, and signifies the Son of him that makes the water ascend.
He was Nephew (as some maintain) and Heir to a King of Syria; yet both an
Apostle, and Martyr. He Preached the Glad Tidings of the Gospel to the Indians,
where he, by the Command of Polemius, King of India, was sorely beaten with
Cudgels, the first day; the next Crucified and Excoriated, or flean alive,
while he was fastened on the Cross; and finally (still breathing, and alive)
Beheaded in the year of our Lord 51. For this Reason it was named Duplex
Festum, some observing the 25th. as we the 24th of August. Here was a
Complication of Punishments for no Crime at all. This is one of His Majesty's
Collar-Days without Offering.

The 29th is the Decollation of St. John Baptist. Beheaded by Herod, at the
request of Herodias; which we have praementioned in the Festival of St. John
Baptist.

September. the 2d. On this day happened that Dreadful Conflagration of the City of
London, about one of the Clock in the Morning, Anno 1666. beginning at the
House of one Mr. Farryner, a Baker in Pudding-Lane, near New Fish-Street, which
consumed in four days time the greatest part of this Flourishing Metropolis.
It Is supposed to be fired by one Robert Hubert of Roan in Normandy, with one
Peidloe, the chief, there being in all 23 Accomplices, as he confessed; for which
he was hanged at Tyburn, and dyed a Roman Catholic.

Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
The 8th of this Month is the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, (Heb.
Exalted, or from Marah, as some conceive, i. e. Bitterness) which is a Festival
observed by our Holy Mother the Church, in Commemoration of her Happy and
Glorious Birth, who brought into the World the Author of all Life and
Salvation, our Blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Holy-tood-Day, or Holy-Cross.
The 14th. is the other Holy-rood-Day; or Holy-Cross, (the Invention of the
Cross being on the 3d of May, which we have given you an account of) it is
called Holy Cross, or the Exaltation of the Cross, in Memory of the Exaltation,
or setting up the Holy Cross which was found by St. Helen. (as we have already
acquainted you) by Heraclius, the Emperor; who having regained it a second time
from the Persians, after it had been given over for lost, the space of 14
years, carried it on his shoulders to Mount Calvarie, and there Exalted it with
more than ordinary Solemnity.

Then follows the Ember-Week, according to the Rule before laid down, Post
Cineres, etc. this being the third in the year, following Holy-Cross, or
Holy-rood-Day.

St. Matthew.
On the 21th of this Month, is Celebrated the Festival of St. Matthew, (Heb.
Reward) an Apostle, and one of the four Holy Secretaries of the most Sacred
Gospel. He was by Birth a Jew, by Profession a Publican, or Toll-Customer; was
at length Converted, and became a Disciple, Apostle, Evangelist and Martyr. He
wrote the Gospel of Christ in the Hebrew Language, and delivered it to James,
the Brother of our Lord, who was at that time Bishop of Jerusalem. He Preached
in the Kingdom of Aethiopia, where he was kindly entertained by the Eunuch
(Chamberlain, or Chief Governor to Candace, Queen of Aethiopia; as it is
Recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts the 8th. 27th.) and was so
successful in his Teaching, that he prevailed and persuaded Aeglippus the King,
and his People to be Baptized; but after his Decease, there succeeded him one
Hyrtacus by name, who Detested the Apostle, and therefore Commanded him to be
run through with a Sword; which was accordingly done, Anno Dom. 71. This is one
of His Majesty's Collar-Days, without Offering.

St. Michael the Archangel.
The 29th of this Month is the Feast of St. Michael (Heb. who is like God) the
Archangel who figured Christ, or Michaelmas, that is, a Solemnity or Mass in
honor of St. Michael, Prince of the Heavenly Host, and one of the Nine Orders
of Angels, as well to Commemorate that famous Battle fought by him, and them in
Heaven, against the red Dragon (or the Devil) and his Apostate Angels, Apoc.
12. in Defense of God's Honor; as also (say the Romanists) to Commend the
whole Church of God to their Patronage and Prayers; and by them it is named the
Dedication of St. Michael; because there is a Church at Rome, dedicated on that
day to St. Michael by Pope Boniface. This is one of King Charles his
Offering-Days at His Court of Whitehall. And on this day also the Lord Mayor of
the City of London, for the year ensuing, is Elected.

There is another Feast observed by the Romanists, called the Apparition of St.
Michael, and is in Commemoration of his Wonderful Appearance on Mount Garganus,
where (as the Papists fondly flatter themselves) by his own appointment a
Temple was Dedicated to him, in the time of Pope Gelasius.

St. Luke.
October the 18th. is a Day Consecrated to the Memory of St. Luke (Heb. Taken)
the Evangelist. Syria was the Place of his Nativity; by Profession he was a
Physician of Antioch, after that an Evangelist, and the Holy Penman of the Acts
of the Apostles in their Peregrination; but especially of St. Paul's. He died
at Ephesus, in the 84th year of his Age, where he was inhum'd, Anno Christi,
74; and was (together with Andrew and Timothy) Translated to Constantinople,
many years after, in the Reign of Constantius, Son of Constantine the Great;
but Nicephorus, the Historian says, that he was Hanged on a Green Olive Tree.
This is one of His Majesty's Collar-Days, without Offering.

The 21th of this Month Dedicated to Ursula (Lat. a little She-Bear) The Name
of a Female Saint heretofore of great Honor, and still continued in the
Calendar, and this Day was kept solemnly in Commemoration of a Famous,
Religious British Virgin, who notwithstanding the Tenderness of her Sex, and
her Zeal for the true Religion, was most Inhumanly Martyred under Attila King
of the Huns; styled Flagellum Dei; a Bloody, but Valiant Scythian, who overran
Italy, and Gallia; and at the Persuasion; or rather Entreaty of Pope Leo,
retired into Hungary.

St. Simon and Jude.
The 28th is the Festival of St. Simon and Jude. Simon (Heb. Hearing, or
Obedient) surnamed Zelotes (Gr. Fervent) was born in Cana, a Town of Galilee,
the Son of Mary and Cleophas, as Eusebius. affirms, L. 3. C. 11. and taught the
Gospel in Egypt and Persia; from thence he returned, and succeeded St. James
in the Bishopric of Jerusalem; where, under the Reign of the Emperor Trajan,
he was Crucified in the 120th year of his Age, and consequently the last Martyr
of all the Apostles. St. Jude (Heb. Jude, Judah, and Jehudah; all three
signify Confession called also Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus) Preached the Holy
Gospel to the Edessaeans; a sort of People of Edessa, a City of Syria, and
throughout all Mesopotamia; he was Murdered at Berytus, a City of Phoenicia, in
the Reign of Agbarus, King of Edessa, according to the most Authentic
Tradition, where he was very Honorably Sepulchred, in the year of our Lord 21.
This is one of His Majesty's Collar-Days, without Offering.

The next day after, being the 29th, is a day whereon the Elected Mayor for
that year, accompanied with the Aldermen of London on Horseback to the River of
Thames; and the Companies of Freemen wait upon him in Barges, with Drums and
Trumpets, to Westminster, and there he walks with the Aldermen round the Hall,
and then goes up to the Exchequer, where he is Sworn, and returns to the City;
and at his Landing, he is waited upon by several Companies of Soldiers, and
several stately Pageants are erected, and carried about in a Triumphant manner.

All Saints.
November 1st. Begins with the Festival of All Saints, or Allhallows, and this
time is commonly called Allhallontide; It Is a Solemnity in Honor and Memory of
all the Saints, (as the Papists maintain) that so at least they may obtain the
Patronage and Prayers of them all; since the whole year is much too short to
afford us a Particular Feast for every Saint.

All Souls.
The next day, November. 2d. is All Souls; a Day Instituted by the Church of
Rome, in Commemoration of all the Faithful departed this Life; that by the
Prayers and Suffrages of the Living, they may be discharged of their purging
Pains, and at last obtain Life Everlasting; to this purpose the Day is kept
Holy till Noon. Hence proceeds the Custom of Soul-Mass Cakes; which are a kind
of Oat-Cakes, that some of the Richer sort of Persons in Lancashire, and
Herefordshire (among the Papists there) use still to give the Poor, on this
Day; and they in Retribution of their Charity, hold themselves obliged to say
this old Couplet, -- God have your Saul Beens and all.

Both these days were of such eminent observance with our Ancestors, that they
still continue no Court-days at Westminster Hall, but are the Lawyers and
Judges Holy Days. All Saints is one of His Majesty's Offering-Days at
Whitehall, and one of the Houshold-days, when the Besant is given by the Lord
Steward; or one of the other White-Staff-Officers.

November the 5th, commonly called Gun-Powder-Treason-Day, Anno 1605. and in
the third-year of the Reign of King James, in England, of Happy Memory, of
which take this Brief Narrative Collected out of Sir Richard Baker, in the said
King's Reign. The 19th day of March-was a second Parliament appointed to sit at
Westminster, and the said Parliament beginning, the King made a long and Loving
Speech to both Houses wherein he signified the Cause of his Calling it; but in
the time, when it should have proceeded, there was suddenly discovered a Plot
of Treason, so Damnable, and Foul, that Posterity will hardly think it true,
when they shall hear of it. The Plot was to blow up with Gunpowder both Houses
of Parliament, at a time when the King, Prince, and all the Nobility should be
sitting in the Upper House, and all the Knights and Burgesses in the Lower.

The Principal Contriver of this Plot, was Robert Catesby; a Gentleman of great
account in Northamptonshire, descended from that Catesby, who had been a
special Councellor of King Richard the 3d. to whose Family the Divine
Providence had now ordained a disastrous Period. This Catesby, not able to
perform the Work alone, draws in many to assist him; as namely, Tho. Piercy,
Tho. Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, John Wright, Francis Tresham, Guido
Fawks, and at last Sir Everard Digby, all earnest Papists, and all bound by
Oath, and by receiving the Sacrament, To be secret for effecting this Plot,
they hired a House close adjoining to the Upper House of Parliament, where they
were to dig through a Wall for the fit placing of their Powder; about Candlemas
they had wrought the Wall half through, and suddenly they heard a noise in the
next Room, which made them fear they had been discovered; but sending Guy Fawks
(who went now under the Name of John Johnson, as Mr. Piercy's Man) to see what
the matter was, he brought word, that it was a Cellar, where Sea-Coals had been
laid, and were now a Selling, and the Room offered to be Let for a yearly Rent:
this Room therefore, as most fit for their purpose, being right under the
Parliament House, Mr. Piercy presently went and hired, laying into it 20
Barrels of Powder, which were covered with Billets and Faggots, that they might
not be discovered.

Thus the 1st part of the Plot was put in good readiness, it now remained to
consider what was to be done, when the Blow should be given, intending to
surprise the Duke of York, who was absent, and the Lady Elizabeth, at the Lord
Harrington's, in Warwickshire, where she then lay, under pretense of a Match at
Hunting, near Dunchurch; but their Tenderness, lest their Friends should
Perish, overthrows them; for to prevent such Promiscuous Slaughter, a Letter
was framed, and sent to the Lord Monteagle, Son and Heir of the Lord Morley,
brought him by one of his Footmen, which he received from an unknown Man in
the Street. The Letter was as follows.

My Lord,
OUt of the Love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
Preservation; therefore I would wish you (as you tender your Life) to forbear
your Attendance at this Parliament; for God and Man have Concurred to Punish
the Wickedness of this Time; and think not slightly of this Advertisement; for
tho there be no Appearance of any stir, yet I say, they shall receive a
terrible Blow, this Parliament, and yet shall not see who hurts them. This
Counsel is not to be Contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no
harm; for the Danger is past, as soon as you have burned this Letter; and I
hope you will make good use of it.


My Lord having read this Letter, tho much perplexed, yet went presently to the
Court, (the King being then a Hunting at Royston) and delivered it to the Earl
of Salisbury, Principal Secretary of State; and the Earl having read it,
acquainted first the Lord Chamberlain with it, and then the Lord Admiral, the
Earls of Worcester, and Northampton; who, as soon as the King was returned from
Hunting, acquainted him with it; but the King apprehended some Violent Motion,
and that it must be some sudden danger by Blowing up with Powder; and diligent
search being made by the Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord Monteagle, who entering
the Cellar, found great store of Faggots and Billets, and more diligent search
being made, there were found under the Billets 36 Barrels of Powder, together
with other Instruments fit for their purpose, and apprehended Fawx there, and
found in his Pocket a piece of Touch-wood, a Tinder-box to light the
Touch-wood, and a Watch, which Mr. Piercy had bought the day before, to try the
short, or long burning of the Touch-wood, that was prepared to give fire to the
Train of Powder. Most of the Confederates met at Dunchurch, according to
Agreement; but the Plot being thus Discovered, Catesby and Piercy were both
slain, coming out of Mr. Littleton's House in Worcestershire; so were John and
Christopher Wright, the rest taken; and on the 27th of January following, a
Commission was directed to diverse Lords, and Judges of both Benches, for Trial
of the rest of the Confederates, who were all Condemned, and had Judgment to
Die; and on the Thursday following, Sir Everard Digby, Robert Winter, Grant,
and Bates, were accordingly Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered at the West End of St.
Paul's Church, London; and on Friday the other four, Tho. Winter, Keys,
Rookwood, and Fawks, were Executed in the Parliament-Yard at Westminster. This
Plot was Discovered to the Rejoicing of all People; insomuch that the King of
Spain's, and the Arch-Duke's Ambassadors made Bone-fires, and threw Money among
the People, in token of Joy.

And now King James, not to be unmindful of the Lord Mounteagle, for being the
means of Discovering this Treason, gave him in Fee-farm of Crown Lands 2000 l.
to him and his Heirs, and 500 l. a year besides, during his Life; and not to be
Unthankful to God for the Deliverance, he caused the 5th of November, being the
day of the Discovery, to be kept Holy with Prayers, and Thanksgiving to God,
which was then solemnly performed, and has been since, and is likely for ever
to be continued.

The 28th of March following, Henry Garnet, Provincial of the English Jesuits,
was Arraigned in Guild Hall, for concealing the aforesaid Treason, where he had
Judgment to be Drawn, Hanged; and Quartered; and accordingly on the 3d of May,
was Drawn from the Tower unto the West End of St. Paul's Church, and there
Executed.

At his Death he Confessed his Fault, asked Forgiveness, and Exhorted all
Papists never to Attempt any Treason against the King, or State, as a Course
which God would never prosper. By an Act 3d Jac. it is ordained, that all
Persons appear at their Parish Church, for the Observation of this Day. This is
one of his Majesty's Collar-days without Offering.

Queen Katharines Birthday.
November the 15th, is the Birthday of our most Gracious Queen Katharine (Gr.
Pure) whom God preserve, and grant her length of Days, Health and Happiness in
this world, and in the world to come.

The 19th of this Month is Celebrated in Commemoration of the Nativity of our
King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, a Royal Monarch, and Glorious
Martyr, who was born this day, at Dunfernling, in Scotland, Anno Dom. 1600 and
is placed in our English Rubric.

Presentation of the Virgin Mary. The 20th, or as ours has it the 21th of this
Month, is the Presentation of the Virgin Mary, in the Roman Rubric; a Feast in
Commemoration of her being presented in the Temple at the age of three years,
where she Vowed her self to God, both Soul, and Body.

St. Clement.
The 23th, is Dedicated to St. Clement (Lat. Merciful) who was Fellow Laborer
with St. Paul, and according to all Probability, Rome was his Native Place,
descended of a Noble Race; his Father's Name Faustinus, or as some think
Faustus; he was the Youngest of three Sons; he had the good fortune to be under
the Pupilage of St. Barnabas in Judaea, who came to Rome, and followed him to
Alexandria, Judaea and Caesarea, where he met with St. Peter who Discipled,
Baptized, and as some over-consecrated him Bishop of Rome. Now that which made
him Martyr was this: He had Converted the Noble Roman Lady Theodora, and her
Husband Sisinnius, Kinsman and Favorite to the then late Emperor Nerva; and for
this Torcutianus, a Grandee of Rome, with the Mutinous Rabble, charging him
with Magic and Sorcery, the Emperor being acquainted therewith by Mamertinus,
the Prefect, he returned this Answer, That he should either Sacrifice to the
Gods, or be Banished to a disconsolate City, beyond the Pontick Sea, and was
Transported thither to dig in the Mines, a horrid Punishment, Et mortiproxima;
here he Converted great Numbers, which incensed them so highly, that Aufidianus
the President by the Emperor's Order, Commanded he should be cast into the Sea,
that the Christians might not find his Body. There are many Miracles handed
down to us by Tradition of this Pious Man; for which, see Dr. Cave's
Apostolici; for we design but an Abridgment. He was thus destroyed on the 24th,
or as some say, the 9th of November, in the 3d year of the Emperor Trajan,
about two years after his Exile, he having been nine years, and some
controverted Months Bishop of Rome.

St. Andrew.
The 30th day of this Month, is the Festival of St. Andrew (Gr. Manly) the
Brother of Simon Peter; by Profession an Indigent Fisherman, yet an Holy
Apostle, and at length a Blessed Martyr, who Instructed the Scythians, Sacians,
Sogdians, and the Inhabitants of the middle Sebastopolis, in the Gospel of
Christ. After this he Preached in Cappadocia, Galatia, Bithynia; and all along
the Euxine Sea: Lastly, in Thrace, Macedonia, Thessaly and Achaia; where in the
Reign of the Emperor Vespasian, he was Crucified by the King of the Edessaeans,
Aegeas by Name, and Sepulchred at Patris a City of Achaia, Anno Dom. 80. or
thereabout. This is one of his Majesty's Collar-Days without Offering.

Advent-Sunday.
The next is Advent-Sunday, so called ab Adventu Domini in Carnem, and they are
four in number Instituted by the Holy Church, to the end, that from the first
of them, until the Nativity of our Blessed Lord, we might prepare our Minds for
a sober Life, and Pious Meditation of his Birth then approaching. Parate viam
Domini, rectas facite semitas Dei nostri; and this is the last of the Moveable
Feasts in the Calendar.

The 8th of December, is the Conception of the Virgin Mary, a Feast among the
Romanists, Celebrated in Memory of her Miraculous Conception, who was conceived
by her Parents St. Joachim and St. Anne in their old and infirm Age, and
Sanctified from the very first instant in her Mothers Womb.

The 13th of this Month, is in remembrance of St. Lucia (Lat. Lightsom, or
Bright) who is by Tradition reputed to be an Unspotted Virgin, and Resolute
Martyress. This is usually counted the Winter Solstice, at which time the Sun
comes to the Tropic of Capricorn.

The next Week ensuing is the 4th and last Ember-Week in the year.

St. Thomas.
The 21th is Dedicated to St. Thomas, the Apostle ( Tho. is Hebr. a Twin, or as
some will have it, Bottomless pit, he was surnamed Didymus, Gr. a Twin, because
a Twin-born, or on some such occasion) was our Savior's Holy Apostle and
Martyr, who instructed the Parthians, Medes and Persians in the Gospel; as also
the Caramanians, Hircanians, Bactrians and Magicians, and was at last wounded
to death with a Dart at Calamina, a City in India; and there honorably
Interred, Anno Christi 35. This is at White Hall one of the King's Collar-days
without Offering.

Mat. Christ.
The 25th of December, beyond all Controversy, is the Day of our Savior's
Nativity at Bethlehem, or Christmas Day (as the Saxons use to term their
Feasts, from the Mass appropriated to the day, of which you have an account
before) which is sufficiently and Learnedly proved by Modern Authors, namely,
Edward Fisher Esquire; in his Vindication of our Gospel-Festivals, and the Great
Seldom in his (...), or God made Man; and by the Ancients St. Austin and St.
Chrysostom. And of old Epiphany (which is Manifestation) was taken for
Christmas Day upon this Identity of the word, it being the time, when our
Savior was incarnated, or manifested in the flesh. In the North of England,
it is commonly called Yule, from the Latin Jubilum, which imports a Time of Joy
and Festivity. The Latin or Western Church named it Luminaria, or the Feast of
Lights; because therein were used abundance of Lights and Tapers; or rather,
(as some conceive) because Christ the Light of Lights; the true Light then came
into the World; and this is the Foundation and Basis of all the other Christian
Festivals, and to be Celebrated with greatest Solemnity and Veneration. This is
a Grand day in His Majesty's Court, and one of the Houshold-days, when the
Besant is to be given by the Lord Ste ward, or one of the White-Staff Officers.

Immediately after Christmas, follow as Attendants upon that high Festival, St.
Stephans, St John's, and St. Innocents; not that this was the very time of their
Suffering; but because none are thought fitter Attendants on Christ's Nativity,
who have laid down their Lives for him, from whose Birth they received
Spiritual Life. Dr. Spar. Rationale of these as they succeed in the Calendar.

St. Stephan.
First of St, Stephan, (Gr. a Crown) The Proto-Martyr; the Holy Writ gives us
no particular Satisfaction; of the Country, Parents, or Relations of this
Pious and Zealous Christian. He was a Jew without question, and by the Ancients
agreed to be ordained one of the 7 Proto-Deacons; Ut bona communia curaret,
eaque viduis and Pauperibus recte distribueret; which was but part of their
Office; for they were elected by our Lord to be the Apostles Coadjutors and
Fellow Laborers, not only to distribute justly the Alms of the Church,
according to their emergent Necessities; but to Baptize, Preach and Absolve too
in some Cases. He zealously and strennously confuted the Jews in their
erroneous Tenets concerning the true Messiah; maintaining that Jesus of
Nazareth was the true one foretold by the Prophets; He was for this accused of
Blasphemy, Condemned and Stoned by the Jews at Jerusalem, An. Dom. 35.

St. John.
The next in order is St. John's, ( John in the Hebr. signifies Gracious) who
was the Brother of James, an Evangelist, and the best Beloved Apostle. He
taught the Gospel to the Asiaticks, but the Tyrant Trajan Banished him into
Patmos, an Isle in the Aegean Sea, where he penned his Holy Gospel, which was
afterward published at Ephesus by his Deacon and Host. After the death of the
Emperor, he returned to Ephesus, and continued there till he lived 120 years,
and then died of an Apoplexy, in the year of our Savior's Incarnation 104.

Innocents.
The 28th. Innocents, or Childermass-Day, that is the Feast of the Children,
the Holy Innocents of Bethlehem, who were Massacred by Herod the Great most
Inhumanely in our Savior's stead, tho not for his sake; among whom, his own
Son (as Historians affirm) escaped not the fate of his Cruelty; which extorted
this saying, from the Emperor Augustus Caesar; Melius est esse Herodis Porcum,
quam Puerum; It is better to be Herod's Hog, than his Son.

Dr. Sparrow in his Ration. says upon the account of these three Festivals.
There are three kinds of Martyrdom. p. In Will, and Deed, which is the Highest.
2. In Will, but not in Deed. 3. In Deed, but not in Will. In this order they
attend. St. Stephan 1st, who suffered both in Will and Deed; next, St. John,
who suffered Martyrdom in Will, but not in Deed; being Miraculously delivered
out of the boiling Cauldron into which he was put before Pont. Latin in Rome.
Lastly, the Holy Innocents, who suffered in Deed, but not in Will; yet are
reckoned among the Martyrs, because they suffered for Christ, whose Praise
these his Witnesses Confessed and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying.

And thus we have done with the Festivals; only it is observable, that as the
Romanists open, so they close the year with a Festival in the Popish Rubric,
tho not in ours, which is the last day of December, and consequently of the
year as to our Method, being a Day Dedicated to the Memory of Sylvester, who
once sat in the Seat of Rome, and died a Confessor. This is in the Roman, not
our Rubric.

Now I conceive it will not be amiss to give you a just, but Concise account of
the Vigils and Fasts of the Church on the Eves of the Feasts. Vigil comes from
the Lat. Vigilo, and signifies to watch. In the time of the Apostles, and for
some continuance after, when Persecuted and Dispersed Christians durst not
appear in Public, by reason of the many Treacheries and daily snares laid for
them by their violent Persecutors, they were compelled for their own
Preservation, and Self-security to Assemble in private Holes, Corners, and
Subterranean Places, to Exercise their Religion, and Perform their Devotion to
their God. But in the Primitive times immediately succeeding the Blessed
Apostles, when they apprehended no danger of Persecution, they Fasted and
watched in their Oratories all the whole Easter-Week (but those Fasts are now
voluntary, and not enjoined; for there is no Fast commanded betwixt Easter, and
Whitsunday, Christmas, and Epiphany) and the Vigils of this Festival, by large
Waxen Tapers, were made as Light as day, through the whole City, to represent
mystically the Light of Salvation, then ready to diffuse it se^^ all over the
Universe. And this is the Original of that usage among Christians, both Men and
Women, to Watch and Fast on the Eves of their High Solemnities in the Churches,
and at the Tombs of the Saints departed; the Authors of which custom are
credibly Reported to be Diodorus of Antioch, together with Flavianus; but in
process of time, this Usage at watching and fasting at Sepulchers was at the
persuasion of Leontius, then Bishop of Antioch, restrained to the Church only,
Anno 375. The Watch by Night they used to divide into four parts: the 1st Vigil
began at 6 in the Evening, and continued til 9; the 2d. at 9, and continued
till 12; the 3d. from 12 to 3; and the 4th from 3 to 6 in the Morning. But at
length these Promiscuous Nocturnal Vigils were the Cause of Great Impiety, as
some are of Opinion, therefore Women were denied admission, because as the
Canon says, under the pretext of Prayer, many Crimes were secretly Committed,
at length the Vigils themselves were prohibited, (tho not for the reason
aforesaid, others are of opinion; but rather because Zeal and Fervor in
Religion grew cool, and Christians became more remiss in their Devotion) and
the Fasts now observed on the Eves of great Festivals were Instituted in their
room; yet they still retain the name of Vigils, as being the Denomination of a
Duty required therein, this was confirmed by Pope Innocent the 3d, about the
year of the Incarnation 1210.

Thus you have a short and true account of all the Feasts, Fasts, Vigils, both
of the English and Romish Rubric; with several other Holy Days not heretofore
taken notice of in Treatises of this Nature.

FINIS.

