FACTVM, For the English Merchants, interessed in the debts contracted in the
Levant by the Earl of Cery heretofore Ambassador for the Most Christian King
at Constantinople.
Against the Arrest or Sentence of the said Kings Council, given at Paris the
last day of December 1644.
IN the year 1620. the said Monsieur de Ceri having borrowed of the said
interessed, and afterward of several Merchants, French, Flemish, Turks,
Persians, and Jews, diverse somes of money, by order of the Mar^eillois, to
cause an Excise of two and a half per centum to be taken away, which the Turks
had imposed upon the wars, brought from those parts into France by the
French, by means of those borrowed somes caused the said Excise to cease; and
by his rekoning remained Debtor to the said English of the sum of 48500.
Piasters or Dollars in capital, which still is due unto them with the
interests of it from the said year 1620. after the rate of 33. 25. 23. and 20.
for hundred per annum interest upon interest, according they have paid
themselves after the use of Pera by Constantinople, and as his Most Christian
Majesty has adjudged and caused to be paid to the rest of the said Creditors
of the said Monsieur de Cery viz, to the Turks, Jews, Persians, and others 33.
25. and 23. per. centum, not only of their capital, but also of their
interests gathered with the principal, to John Scaich a French Merchant 20 l.
per centum, And likewise to the said Monsieur de Ceri (who made himself to be
subrogated for some small sums) 20. for hundred per annum, of which he was
really paid.

Nota, That the said English seeing how hardly they were used by the said
Monsieur de Ceri and since by Monsieur de la Picardiere and other Ministers of
France at Constantinople, and over charged with the huge interests that run
over them for want of payment of the said capital and interests, were forced
many times to address their complaints since the year 1622. to the Most
Christian King, deceased, by the Ambassadors and Agents of his Majesty, which
from time to time did remain in the Court of France; and that having
complained among others, of an unjust liquidation made by the said la
Picardiere in the year 1630. by which he adjudged to the Turks and others
Creditors aforesaid their capital and interest upon interest, as it is said,
and nothing to the said English but only their capital of 48500. Piasters
without any interest: his Most Christian Majesty upon complaint of that most
shameful distinction, ordained by his arrest or sentence of the 14. October
1632. that it should be proceeded to a new liquidation both by the said
Monsieur de la Picardiere and Monsieur de Marcheville, which was sent into the
Levant an Ambassador in stead of the said Monsieur de Ceri. And by that same
arrest or sentence, the Consulls and commerce of the City of Marseille were put
in possession of a Farm of 3. per centum established by his said Majesty for
the acquitance of the said debts upon all the wares which should be brought
from the Levant and Barbary into France, upon condition to acquit the said
Monsieur de Ceri toward his Creditors and to pay them the sums which should
be found due unto them.

And to the end the said liquidation should be made agreeable and pleasing to
every one, his Most Christian Majesty caused many of his letters to be sent to
the said Monsieur de Marcheville and Monsieur de la Picardiere to entreat the
Ambassadors of Venice and Holland to be present therein, and to work jointly
with them to the said liquidation, the Consulls of Marseille being present or
duly called, which was done in such a manner, that the said Ambassadors and
the said Monsieur de la Picardiere after they had many and several times heard
the said Deputies of Marseille, the said Creditors and the English Ambassador
for the said English gave many and several judgments to the benefit of the
said Creditors the tenth of January 1634. by which they confirmed the
liquidation made in the year 1630. to the benefit of the others Creditors,
adjudged yet unto them more interests for the years 1631. 32 and 1633. And as
for the English Merchants they regulated their principal and interests of the
said three years to 64700. Piasters, and condemned the said Monsieur de Ceri
to pay them the said sum.

And because by the said arrest or sentence of the Consul of the eleventh of
October 1632, it was ordained that the Consulls of Marseille should acquit the
debts of the said Monsieur de Ceri out of the money of the said Farm, the said
Ambassadors did also condemn the said Consulls of Marseille to pay the said
sum to the said English within six months to the acquittance of the said
Monsieur de Ceri. And for the interest of the years 1621. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
27. 28. 29. and 1630. demanded by the said English, they remitted them to the
Council of his Most Christian Majesty to be provided for.

In consequence of that Judgment the said English the 13. November 1637.
caused the said Consulls of Marseille and other Farmors of the said Excise of
3. per centum to be called before the said Council in the name of Rene Augier,
their attorney, to see themselves condemned to pay them the said 64700.
Piasters with the interest reserved by the said Judgment, and others expired
and to expire, as also their charges and damages, as possessors of the revenue
of the said Farm established for payment of the said debts. But in stead of
receiving any satisfaction after four years pursuit (though their right had
been recommended by this present Parliament to his Majesty, and by him to the
Most Christian King) Justice was absolutely denied unto them by the said
Council, as it may be justified by the certificate that the Earl of
Leicester, then Ambassador extraordinary for his Majesty into France,
delivered them under his hand the fourth of May 1642. a little after his
return into England.

And although the said interessed might in consequence of the said certificate
appeal to this Parliament for the liquidation of their debt, and obtain the
means for their satisfaction, yet upon the alterations happened in the
government and administration of the affairs in the said Courts of France
since the Cardinal of Richelieus death, they were adviced to try once more the
fair means. And to that effect Laurence Green, the chief interessed in the
said debts, having repaired to Oxford under the warrant of the said
Parliament, and from thence being come to Paris with letters from his Majesty
of great Britain, directed to the Queen Regent mother to the most Christian
King, and having begun again the former proceedings of this business in the
name of the said Augier, they were so far from receiving more satisfaction than
before, that to the contrary, since the coming of the said Rene Augier to
Paris from both Kingdoms of great Britain there was an Arrest or sentence
given in the said Council the last of December 1644. which serves only but for
to aggravate their grievances and to strengthen the said denial of Justice,
the tenor whereof follows.

The King being in his Council, the Queen Regent his mother present, has
declared and does declare, that it is due to the said English Merchants by the
Consulls, Communalty and commerce of the City of Marseille 48500. Piasters of
one part, and 16200. Piasters for the interest of the said principal sum and
damages suffered from the year 1630. to the tenth of July 1634. as it is
mentioned in the said Judgment of the tenth of January in the said year. The
said two sums amounting to 155280. Piasters after the rate of 48. solz for a
Piaster: Has excluded them of the demand of the interest from the end of the
year 1620. to the end of the year 1630. And in regard of the interest,
charges and expenses pretended by them from the tenth of July 1634. Has
adjudged them and does adjudge 44800. Piasters, the said sums amounting
together to 200000. Piasters, which shall be paid unto them in the City of
Marseille by the hands of the Officer committed to the receipt of the price of
the said Farms of 3. per centum, established in the Scales of Levant, and his
Successors in the said Office by preference, and out of the first money coming
from the price of the said Farms, that are to be adjudged from the beginning
of the first of February 1645. Nevertheless after the payment made of 29915.
Piasters, to which his Majesty has liquidated the capital and interest due to
the said Monsieur de la Hay, according to the Arrest or sentence of the
Council of the 29. August. 1640. Given in the Council of State of the King,
his Majesty being there, the Queen Regent his mother present, holden at Paris
the last day of December 1644. Subscribed L^ Lomeni^.

But the said Council approving by that Arrest or Sentence the said Judgment,
and confessing that the sum of 48500. Piasters is due in principal to the
said English by the Consulls, Communalty and commerce of the City of Marseille,
from the end of the year 1620. and 16200. Piasters for three years interest
of the said sum, viz. From the end of the year 1630. to the tenth of July
1634. besides the reservation of the interest, charges and damages made by the
said Judgment, could not in equity, first, reckon the said 2. sums at
155280. Piasters after the rate of 48 solz for a Piaster: Secondly, Neither
exclude the said English from the demand of the other interest of the said
principal, charges and damages, pretended by them: Thirdly, Nor appoint that
they should be paid of the price of the said Farms, only after the first of
February 1645. and after the payment made of 29915. Piasters to the said
Monsieur de la Hay.

1. Because by that rekoning and reducing of Piasters into Livers Turnois after
the rate of 48. solz for a Piaster, they intend to make them loose 32400.
Piasters. which is a most unjust thing, for besides they have lent Piasters to
Monsieur de Ceri and not Livers Turnois; and that then, for an example, the
quarts d'Escus were worth but 16. solz a piece, which his most Christian
Majesty has since raised to 20. solz for the commodity of the affairs of his
Estate, the said English ought not to be wronged by that raising which is not
their fact, but ought to be paid in Piasters or in quart d'Escus at 16. solz a
piece after the course of the coin at that time. But further his most
Christian Majesty by his Arrest or sentence of the fourtenth of October 1637.
having adjudged the Farm of three per centum established for their payment to
Gaspard Guil^ermeire, has adjudged also unto him the raising of the coins for
the sums, which were in the hands of the former Farmors about the time of his
said Majesty's Declarations in the behalf of the said coin; which thing cannot
be replied unto.

2. Because the said interests are of the same nature, and so lawfully due from
the end of the year 1620. to the end of the year 1630. and from the tenth of
January 1634. to the day of actual payment, as from the end of the year 1630.
to the tenth of January 1634. which is clearly seen by the said Judgment, in
which the parties, yea, and the public Ministers having charge from both
sides, have said, written and produced contradictorily all that they could
allege without excluding the English from the said interests, which to the
contrary were reserved by the said Judgments and constantly demanded, and
suited for, ever since the same, both by Sir Peter Wiche heretofore Ambassador
for his Majesty in the Levant, and by the said Rene Augier, in so much as to
adjudge them only 44800. Piasters in stead of the interests due unto them of
the said capital after the rate (...) 33. 25. 23. and 20 l. per centum
interest upon interest from the year 1620. to the end of the year 1630. and
from the tenth of January 1534. to the day of actual payment which make above
21. years, it is a mere mo(...) ^uch the more intolerable that the said sum
of 44800. Prasters is reduced to 12430. Piasters by ^^nes of the said loss of
32430. Piasters that they intend to put upon the said English by the said
reduction of Piasters into Livres Turnois at 48. solz for a Piaster.

3. Because they could not in equity to the prejudice of the said English put
to other use the money already received from the said Farm, since it is
expressly addicted to their payment, which Farm has produced more than
sufficient sums for all the said payments capital and interests; Neither
grant the said sum of 29915. Piasters to the said Monfieur de la Hay before
them, since he is none of Monsieur de Ceris Creditors, nor interessed in the
said debts.

But to show the injustice of the said Arrest or sentence, suppose the said
English should have contented themselves with the said 200000. Piasters, with
the conditions mentioned therein to be paid only from the beginning of the
first day of February 1645. and after the aforesaid payment made to the said
Monsieur de la Hay, and that they should have been willing to treat now with
the Farmor for a ready payment, it is very certain that the interest to be
abated for the advance, exchange, factoridge, and other charges and exceptions
that the Farmor could allege upon the delays in receiving the money of the
said Farms and other accidents and plausible pretenses should have swallowed
up a great deal more than the half of the said 200000. Piasters, which is as
much unworthy as intolerable.

To which it may be added, that by means of the money lent by the said English
to the said Monsieur de Ceri to cause the aforesaid excise of two and a half
per centum to be taken away, the French Nation did profit since 24 years at
least of 25000. Piasters per annum. And that the English Subjects trading in
France of wares of Levant, have constantly paid and do daily pay the aforesaid
right of three per centum, so that what they have contributed to this present
does amount almost to so much as the interessed did pretend, which seems very
hard, that after they have so usefully served the French Nation, the right of
three per centum established for their relief does become their ruin.

By all the aforesaid reasons, and yet much more by the acts of the Process, the
injustice of said Arrest or sentence does evidently appear, and that the said
English (which have proceeded with all manner of respect and moderation both at
Constantinople as the said Judgment does testify, and at the said Council
where they reduced their interest to the half of what they paid themselves in
the said Levant to endeavor to make a friendly end of that business) are at
this time very well grounded to complain that the Turks, Jews and Persians
are without comparison more considered and more equitably used in the Council
of France, than the English, and to demand thereupon that the Parliament would
be pleased to liquidate their principal of 48500. Piasters with the interest
of it after the rate of 33. 25. 23. and 20. for hundred per annum interest upon
interest, as they have paid themselves and do daily pay according to the use
of Pera by Constantinople from the year 1620. to the day of actual payment.
together with their charges, expenses and damages, sustained in that long and
chargeable pursuit, and consequently to be pleased to grant them for their
satisfaction such speedy means against the Marseillois and other Subjects of
the most Christian King, as have been formerly granted to others of this
Kingdoms Subjects in such extremity for the like oppressions.

FINIS.

