The Fifteen COMFORTS OF Rash and Inconsiderate MARRIAGE. OR, Select
Animadversions UPON THE MISCARRIAGES OF A WEDDED STATE. Done out of French.

The Fourth Edition, with the Addition of three Comforts.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, and Matthew. Gillyflower, 1694.

TO THE READER.
IT is an Old Saying, That every thing grows worse and worse, which the
Venusian Poet seems to confirm in these following words, ^uch to the same
purpose, Aetas Parentum, pejor Avis, tulit
Nos Nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem Vitiosiorem.


Notwithstanding whose Autho^ty, and the pretended Antiquity ^ereof, I Will be
bold to affirm, that ^is Adage in the Vulgar and mi^ken Application thereof,
car^s neither Sense nor Reason with (...) having no other Basis to support it,
but Malice, Ignorance, or both; and though this Treatise should not absolutely
prove the contrary, it will at least shake, if not totally explode^ that common
Opinion, viz. That Woman is the worst piece of the Hexameron Creation, and
consequently, according to the Masculine though in truth, merely Sophistica
Logic of this Modern Age, become (the more the pity) the Subject of all the
Raillery, or (in down right English) Railing against tha^ harmless and innocent
Sex; and question not but by this Discours^ all Dissenters will be of my
Opinion, that if ever Virtue did appea^ and shine with Glory, Splendo^ and its
own Native and Charmin^ Beauty in any created Substanc^ it is most visible and
constant in the Female, I must ingenuously confe^ that I have a particular
Inclination to, and Deference for that Sex, hol^ing my self obliged to vindica^
them from those Calumnies wherewith they have been so foulely and causlesly
aspersed by Ancient, as well as Modern Authors; nor am I to blame for deserting
my own Cause, to justify what may seem against my self, and espouse the
Equitable Condition and defense of the contrary, and so much injured Party.
This is the Composition of some Amorous Person, who animated with the same
Spirit and Affection as I am, has undertaken (and judged it his Duty too) to
satisfy you, and (he hopes) so far as to work upon you a Persuasion that the
Modesty, Bashfulness, De^onairete, and Civility, together with all
Qualifications that adorn and beautify the Soul, are as Exemplarily eminent in
Women of this Age, as ever they were in any of the former; and instruct you to
set a value on their Actions, as the ^est Creatures in the worst of Times,
whose Virtue must need shine with the greater Luster, being subject to the vain
Assault^ and Ineffectual Temptations o^ Men, grown old (like the Times in
Wickedness, Malice and Revenge.

Farewe^
THE PREFACE.
THE Philosophers and Sages of former Times, as well as those of a later Date,
have spent Operam and Oleum, exhausted their ^pirits, and wasted their Bodies,
till at last, (...) their Indefatigable Pains and Industry, ^ey crumbled into
dust, and all to inculate this Doctrine, grounded upon solid Reason; that it is
certainly a greater Happiness for a Man to enjoy Freedom ^ncontroul'd, than to
enslave himself for ^ver without Compulsion. He must of ne^essity forfeit his
Reason, that is of a con^ary Opinion; for as a Modern Poet ^ings truly; Surely
their Heads unpeopled are with Brains,
That hug their Fetters, and embrace their Chains.


That man is unquestionably senceless, ^ho enjoys his Freedom in the Vigor and
Sprightliness of his youth, living in the ^ream of wealth and the high Tide of
Pleasure and Delight, is caressed by Fortune, laden with Favors, and almost
cloyed with Comforts; a Person that may cry Sciolto to his Passions, give them
the loose Rein, gratify his Appetite and Gust, with whatsoever three of the
four Elements can furnish him; and yet this Person, notwithstanding all these
Advantages, throws himself into an Abyss of misery, confines himself to a
Person (a Wife) whose best Qualification is Peevishness, forfeits his Freedom,
Reason, Content, and Satisfaction, and loses his own, to enslave himself to
the Humor of another; and this too for Life, for whom the Art and Wit of the
Pregnant and Subtle can never procure a Ransom in order to Redemption. Would
not any rational Creature judge him guilty of Statute-madness, who being shown
the Loathsomness and Horror of a Dungeon, views the maigre and ghost-like
Aspect of the famished Prisoner, hears the hideous Shrieks and Groans of
shackled Malefactors, the rattling noise of whose heavy Irons is a Harmony only
fit to drive a serious Man out of his Wits; would not, I say, any Person gifted
with Reason, look upon him to be mad beyond the Cure of Drugs or Medicines, who
shall nevertheless shake hands with his Liberty, and the unaccountable delights
that attend it, and cast himself into a Goal, with a resolution never to be
discharged, but to lie there and perish? The very Brutes, though never so stupid,
or wild, value their Roaming Liberty at the highest Rate: hazarding, nay,
losing their Life, which is their All, their whole Being, their little Eternity
(pardon the Expression,) to preserve their Freedom; and shall Man, the
perfection of the Creation, endowed with a rational Soul, inspired by the
Deity, come short of Inanimate Power. Inconsiderable Animals, in a business of
such weight and concernment, upon which the Contentation, and in truth,
Felicity of Human Life does consist? Dii avertant.

Consider farther to confirm this argument the Desire and Love of Freedom and
Liberty, is so innate in all Persons, that not only Man, but Woman, the weaker
Sex, nay, Children, a weaker part of the weaker Sex, have hazarded, nay, lost
Wealth, Fortune, and Life, rather than part with so precious a Jewel. The sad
Catastrophes of Persons and Kingdoms, the horrid Massacres and Murders, the
Torments, Plagues, Battles, Quarrels and Discontents between Nations and
Parties, the Depopulation of Republics, the Demolishing of Kingdoms, the
Extirpating of Princes, the Assassinating Kings, Emperors (a Curse on the
Disciples of Lame Loyola for that King-killing Tenet) nay, most of the
Barbarous Tragedies that have been acted upon the bloody Stage of this World,
have had no other source than the natural Desire and Affection of Liberty (how
justly I dispute not) and Property, the Darling Twins of Mankind, ever since
the first Prevarication.

The wild Beasts of the desert are ensnared and taken in Pit-falls by the Craft
and Cunning of the wary Huntsman, who with Artifice contrives them so, that
they are narrow at Top, and broad at the Bottom, from whence there is no
possibility of Escape, but they must continue a Prey to the over-wily Man that
made the Sn^re, and so the Brute loses the Liberty which kind Nature conferred
upon him, and unkind Man Craftily deprives him of. The same thing may he said
of those that are married, when they are once enchained and fettered with the
Bands of Matrimony, a sad state (as it often falls out, if they once fall into
it) from whence there is no Redemption. The silly, mute fish, after the same
manner, labors with diverse turnings to wind it self into the Net, Baited
thereunto, till at last she loses her Life and Liberty. This Net in truth is
the Net of Matrimony, and the Youthful Precipitate, Heedless Hot-spurs of this
Age, whose Chins are searce covered with tender Down, are the Fishes without
the Net, who fancy to themselves, that they may Bathe and Swim in a Calm and
undisturbed stream of Pleasure, and at last launch out into a Torrent, or
rather Sea of misery, encompassed with nothing but Storms and Tempests to their
contimial disturbance and vexation, having lost themselves in an enclosure,
that they can neither break through, nor leap over, but there live
discontentedly, languish painfully, till they dwindle away to nothing, and so
at last Die miserable. It is a saying of the Learned Scaliger, that a Wife is
an Hectic Fever, never to be cured by any thing hut Death, nor can any wise Man
deny it.

The report is current of a famous Physician, Valere by Name, who being asked
by one of his Friends, (that had the misfortune to be caught in the Nooze of
Wedlock,) whether he had done well in changing his condition of single Life,
returned him this bitter, though true Answer; Friend (said he) could you not find
out some Precipice to cast your self headlong from thence into the Sea?
intimating thereby, that be had made a better Election, had he gained some high
Rock, and precipitated himself into the Fathomless Ocean, there to consummate
at once all his Miseries, rather than involve himself in a Turbulent Sea, the
distractions, discontents and Vexations of a Wedded State, never to be
redressed; a Malady that bids defiance to the power of any Drug or Doctor, how
famous or exquisite soever.

Great and inexpressible was the Regret and sorrow of the Archdeacon of Tours
in France, who being so infatuated (shall I say) or fascinated, as to forsake
the Happy, and Religious Life of a Clerk, with all its appendent Privileges,
married the Reversion of another, (a Widow) and foolishly fell into a
Quagmire, wherein one had been drowned before him; with whom being linked by
the Indissoluble and Gordian-Knot of Marriage, he led a tedious life, or to
speak more properly, endured a Vassa^ge almost insupportable; for which be sang
a mournful Ditty, to the Tune of -- (...) Fortune my Foe, why have thou married
me, and chaunted a Cordial Palinode, reserving to himself only this Comfort,
that he had some hope by his own Miscarriage, to forwarn others from the like
Inadvertency and Rashness, and to that purpose composed several Learned
Treatises, to dehort all Men from such unadvised Enterprises and Attempts. Nor
is he singular herein; for many persons of great Parts, and known Abilities,
have endeavored to discover the Servitude, and more than Egyptian Bondage of a
Coupled Condition; and in my Judgment, to be Free without Censoriousness, the
Eighteen Comforts of Matrimony herein fully displayed, and clearly laid open,
are the greatest Misfortunes, Pains, Discontents, and Torments that can enter
into the Thoughts of Man. Yet for all that is premention'd, I do not blame the
State of Matrimony (as now instituted by the Church) for beyond all dispute,
Marriage is an Ecclesiastical and Religious Tie, a Boundary to Extravagancy,
giving a Check to the exorbitant passions of the wild and hotheaded Youth of
both Sexes, and confining them to one person, which is but Just and Lawful, and
not permit them, like brutes to range about in Common, or the Sect of
Nicolaitans, who differed little from Beasts in that Profane and Dissolute
Tenet of theirs, Community of Women; nor do I find fault with those that marry;
I am of their Opinion, and say they do well; for we sojourn in this World to
endure and suffer Afflictions, to allay the height of our Pride, and give a
Check to all Eccentrick and Irregular Passions, that after the miseries of this
Life, we may thereby be prepared and fitted for a happy and blessed Estate
hereafter. And indeed I do not think that a Man can by the Compass of this Life
sail into a deeper Ocean of Misery and Affliction, considering the inevitable
Grievousness and indispensible continuance of a Married Life (I mean only such
as rashly and unadvisedly without due consideration of the Temper and
Constitution of one another meet and marry, the want of which good Election and
Choice renders the Wedded state so Burdensome and insupportable) which
undoubtedly exceeds all the Racks and Engines of Torment that the Barbarity of
Tyrants, and the malicious Wit of Man ever invented; but yet when a Husband is
once inured and accustomed to the Domestic Jars of a double Life, and like the
Ass, bears the burden patiently, which custom has made so Tolerable, that he
prides himself in his fondness, patience, and long suffeirng; of this, in fine,
there may be made a good Application, or at least be may make a virtue of
necessity: for that is but a Foppish and vain Conceit of some empty Pates, that
Patience per force is a Medicine for a mad Dog, and so consequent^y not worth
the refutation. To conclude, I have taken some Pains in composing these Fifteen
Comforts of Matrimony, for the satisfaction of those who are in that State; and
I am confident dare not contradict them, without they give their Wives the Lie,
when they are once fast and entangled in the Net; and for prevention of others,
by way of Caution, from running the same Risque, the utmost Remedy whereof is a
threadbare Patience, or a whining Recantation; or if they must venture upon
this Charybdis, to avoid Shipwreck in so dangerous a Condition, let them look
before they leap, according to the old Proverb, and elect such a Person as may
be linked in Temper and Humor, whose Souls may he united as well as their
Bodies, that so their Hourglass may run to the last Sand without Interruption
or Molestation, and they have a Numerous happy Issue, (the dear Pledges of a
Married Life) to perpetuate their Name and Memory, that their Ashes may leave a
fragrant smell to Posterity; for otherwise if they embrace this Holy Ordinance,
without due and serious Consideration, (upon which moment depends their
Happiness upon Earth) they deserve the Burial of an Ass, and by my consent
shall drop into the Grave without either Tears or Pity.

THE First COMFORT. Young Formality, and a Foppish Female Citt.
YOUTH is naturally inclined to Mirth and Gallantry, with all the Briskness and
Gaiety imaginable; has Limbs agile and active, fancying nothing but Music,
Dancing, Balls and Plays, where the Variety of Female Objects fire the Young
Sparks, in so much as Love soon breaks out, and many times to their Ruin and
Destruction. In this Heat of Passion the Youngster visits Ladies, Complements
after the new mode, Caresses them with all demonstrations of fervent
Affections, makes his Amors with a kind of starched Formality, which turns all
into Ridicule, tho possibly that set way of Courship may please the Foppish
Female Cit, and gratify her Childish Humor: Thus far he proceeds with
Applause and Acceptance, but this will no way satisfy the Young Gentleman, he
must come to Embraces, free her from the Curse of Barrenness, and himself from
the Scandal of Impotence; and now the Game begins; he is pregnant with Love and
must be delivered, tho the Remedy proves ten times worse than the Disease; in
short he plies the business so briskly, and pursues her with that Warmth and
Constancy, that she can no longer resist, but in spite of all her Maiden
Modesty, must yield to his Proposals, tho she perchance Counterfeit a Blush at
the Condescension, she being as ready to comply with him, as he to apply
himself to her, and as willing to understand the Sweets of the Marriage Bed, as
the Hot Youth that so vigorously pursues her. Thus in a short time the whole
Business is concluded, and the Solemnity of their Matrimony performed with as
much, or rather more Vanity and Expense than is consistent with the Ability of
either, or both of them; but fall back, fall edge, the Knot is tied, never to
be loosened, but by Death, the Priest having joined them so firmly together,
that it is impossible to un-hand them again; tho probably before the Moon has
run her Menstruous Course, the Husband may appear like that Grand Luminary in
her first Quarter, and she curse the Canonical Garb that fastened them in so
strict a Band as that of Marriage, as will appear, and that very suddenly.

Now you must imagine, that our Gallant minds nothing for the present, but the
satiating himself with Delight, Dancings, Treats, and such kind of Diversions
as usually attend such ridiculous and idle Conjunctions. There appears as yet
nothing but Mirth and Jollity, no Scene of Sorrow is admitted in this Comedy;
his whole design is to pleave and court his Wife with ravishing Addresses,
understands nothing but what she approves, nor entertains his Thoughts with any
thing but the Contrivance of presenting her with Bagatels and little Toys, such
as are apt to gratify the vain Humor of a foppish young Girl, drawn into the
Net, and wheadled or cajoled into the Pit of Marriage: well, no matter, let
them both run their own Career; these seeming Blessings, this Counterfeit
Felicity, this masked Love, and vizarded Content, will prove but short-lived,
and then let the troubles of the whole time after be balanced with those few
suppositious and imaginary Delights they enjoyed in the Infancy of their
Marriage, and the Vexations of the one will outweigh the satisfaction of the
other, by so many degrees, that Arithmetic it self can never describe its true
and due Proportion. Now the time of Dalliance being over, and the Cares of the
World coming upon them, you shall understand a strange and unexpected
Alteration, which we may call, (and I hope without Offense) the First Comfort
of Matrimony.

Now the Wife we must suppose to be well acquainted with the cunning Intrigues
of a married Woman, and is not to be taught her Lesson; Feasts, Gossipings and
Treats, have instructed her sufficiently how to personate the subtle Wife with
an Uxorious Husband, and she begins to make an essay of her Woman-Craft
according to the humor of those she conversed with in the Female Cabals,
usually frequented by her; and thus she begins to play her Pranks: The other
day she was invited to a Regale, a very noble Treat indeed, where there was
nothing wanting to gratify the Appetite; she took great notice of the Habit
and Attire of several Wives of her own Rank and Quality, how richly they were
accoutred, and after the newest Mode; this was so great ^n Eyesore to her,
that she watched an op^ortunity to disclose her mind to her Hus^band, thinking
it but reasonable that she should appear as gay and as Genteel as the best Dame
in the Parish. Now you must observe by the way, that that Woman, who is once
intoxicated with the Cup of Matrimony, is very strangely qualified, and
differently tempered from most of her Sex, if she be not once in twenty four
hours troubled with the Sullens or the Pouts (a Disease as natural to her as
Gossiping, and both incurable) tho counterfeit and causless; and where think
you is the Scene of her Sullenness? why, assuredly in Bed, a place where Women's
feigned Tears and Sighs have an excellent Faculty of persuasion; and now being
brought to Bed, let us examine her Deportment, there she lies like the Statue
of Niobe petrified, and for a time as senceless; whereupon the amorous Husband
begins to accost her with Accollado's and Embraces, asking her what is the
matter, prithee, my Dear, (says he) for he can forbear no longer, what ail'st
thou? To whom she snappishly replies, let me alone, don't disturb me, I am very
much indisposed, and have reason enough too, God knows, but you never regard
what I say, (...) or suffer, your Unkindness sticks so close^ to my heart, that
nothing will remove it^ but Death; I Am sure I shall never rest, but in that
place of undisturbed Rest (the only Dormitory of Mortals) the Grave. Dearest!
says he, you pierce my very Heart, and wound me to the Soul with such severe
Language: Why, If I should acquaint you with my Disturbance, it were to no
purpose; for I Am confident you would slight it, or which is as bad, think I
have private self ends or designs in it: No, no, you shall tell me, I am
resolved, come what will on it: Well Sir, since you impose your Commands upon
me, I will obey. You are not insensible, I Am sure, that not long since I was
invited to a Collation, tho I had not gone, but with your permission and
approbation; yet when I was there, with great grief I speak it, I heartily
wished my self at home again; for there was not one Individual Woman in the whole
Company, tho of the meanest Rank, but was more gayly clothed than my self; I
do not speak it out of Pride, tho, I think, I may say without Ostentation, that
I am as well extracted, have had as good Education, have as commendable a Face,
Carriage and Complexion, without the Artificial Embelishments of Paint, Patch
and Powder, as the proudest she of them ^ll. As to my own particular, I
solemn^y protest, upon the Faith of an honest Woman, I do not value the outward
Or^aments of Aparrel: For the gaudiest Robes are but the Badges of our Sin and
Shame: It is only for your Credit, and ^he Reputation of our Friends and
Rela^ions that I am so much concerned. Pre^hee how gloriously did they appear?
^ome in Flowered Satin Gowns, embroi^ered with Gold; Petticoats adorned with
^he best Point de Venise, attired with their Hair, and their ears adorned with
costly ^endants, their Necks encompassed with Pearls, and the graver sort in
the best ^hree-Pil'd Velvet; insomuch that I, ap^earing only in my wedding
Gown, and that, tho nigh worn out, the best Suit (...) my Wardrobe, could not
forbear blush^ng all the time I was in Company; nay, ^at which troubled me
most, was, that ^ne or two of our Neighbors told me, ^ey did admire my Husband
was not a^amed to see me go in so mean a Garb. ^o which the good man replies,
Sweet Heart, you know, that we have been at ^reat Charges to furnish our selves
so well as we are; that Trading decays, Losses have befallen us: I have a
chargeable Suit at Law to defend next Term for the Recovery of your Portion,
which will cost me many a fair Pound before I enjoy it. Ay, ay, (quoth she) I
did Imagine as much, and expect no other from you, but (what I am now sensible
to my Sorrow) Reproaches; and so in a Pet she flings out of his Arms with Scorn
and Indignation; pray let me alone, don't come near me; and I Will assure you for
the future, I Will never open my Lips to you again as long as I breath upon this
acount; therefore pray rest satisfied: But hold, Love, are you angry without a
cause? No, no, the contrary is too apparent; the Portion sticks in my stomach
as well as yours; had you had nothing with me I am not in a Capacity to bestow
any thing upon you now, my Love and Affection to you, methinks should prevent
such Reflections; but you know, as mean as I was, that I was Courted by several
before ever you made any Address to me, who would have been glad with all their
hearts to have married me without so much as a Smock to cover my Shame, had not
you interposed and gained my Heart, which now you study to plague and Torment.
O unfortunate Woman that I am! but I must be content with my choice, and bear
all as patiently as I can; would I were as deep in the ground as I am high, and
then you would be rid of me, and I of my trouble: Really Love, says the
Novice, you do not well in using of me thus, ask what you please, and you shall
have it to the utmost of my Ability; but yet I must have a Care of the main
Chance; prithee turn to me, my dear: for Gods sake, let me be quiet; if you
thought no more of fondness in this nature, than I do, you would never come
near me more, I am not so Bucksom, I Will assure you: Ay, but Child, says he, in
a Jocular way, if my Head were once laid, you would soon be Married again, I
war^ant you; would I, (says she) in truth, I find so little Pleasure or
Comfort in a Wedded Condition, that if I were once unmarried, I would be so far
from it, that ^he best he, that ever laid Leg over Woman, should never so much
as touch my ^ips, as long as I have a day to live, take that from me, and be
satisfied. With ^his kind of Dissimulation she entertains ^he Fop, who is both
in Pleasure and Pain ^t once; in Pleasure to think she is so Cold and Chaste a
Wife; in Pain, because he sees her so much disturbed. Thus she Treats him all
Day with a Contracted Brow, and all night with such flattering Discourses, not
one good word is he worthy of, so that he is forced to beat his Brains for
Money to purchase the Rich Gown and Petticoat, the want of which is the Source
and Original of both their Discontents. Well! they must be had, quo jure,
quaque injuria, by Hook, or by Crook, no slumher will seize upon his Eye lids,
till this be procured; away he goes, susque deque, hand over head, taking up,
upon Credit, Silks, Laces, Jewels, and what not, and then returns home in
Triumph, with the Spoil of the Mercer's Shop, and calls down his Wife to survey
the desired Purchase; which she no sooner spies, but like acunning Baggage
dissembles, and says, Fie, Husband, in troth, you are now to blame, these are
too Rich Vestments for a person of my Condition, they will not at all become
me, I fear: beshrew the hearts of those lofty Dames, that first invented such
costly Apparel; I would not give six pence for the best Gown that ever Female
body was Tenant to: but however, since you have been so kind, let me beg one
supernumerary favor of you not to hit me in the Teeth hereafter with it, and
say, I put you to this chargeable expense: for upon my Reputation (and that is
not to be valued) it was none of my intention; I desire no other Garb than what
is requisite for Warmth and Decency. Now all is well, and the Man shall have
his Mare again; they live lovingly and quietly till the day (O that fatal day!)
of Payment; the Money cannot be procured to stop the Mouths of his Creditors,
who being disappointed, use the utmost rigor of the Law against him, seize his
Body and Goods, extend his Lands, turn his Wife a grazing into the wide World,
where she has only the liberty of choosing what Kingdom she pleases to beg in,
and he, poor undone Man, is clapped into a Goal, there to endure a close and
beggarly Confinement, durante vita; where he has time and room enough to lament
his Deplorable Condition. The Woman she returns to her Friends, Cursing the
hour that she was born in: never such a disgrace befell a Woman of her Birth and
Education. Alas! Alas! (says she) have I studied oeconomie all my life long,
and taken so much pains in governing my Family, been as sparing as any good
Wife in the Parish, and all to keep both ends together, and is it come to this
at last? O Death, come and put a Period to my Misery! Thus the harmless Woman
bemoans her misfortune, lays all the fault at the poor Man's door, (poor Man
indeed) and now he is fast in the Net, and the more he struggles, the more he
is entangled; in short, he is laid up for his Life, and his Creditors, (for
that is all they are like to have) may make Dice of his Bones.

The Second COMFORT. The Credulous Coxcomb, the Gadding Jilt, and
Cousin-Gallant.
IT is the Misfortune of some Men, (and those some are too many, God wot) to
prepossess themselves with a Conceit, that Reason, Sense and Demonstration can
never convince them of; such is the case of the Husband that enjoys the second
Comfort of Matrimony we are now discoursing of, who will not be persuaded by
all the World, but she is the Hansomest Woman in it, tho he is much mistaken;
but I cannot blame him; for Beauty is nothing but mere Fancy, and if I conceit
black and blue to be a comely Complexion, it is so to me: Having thus in his
own Opinion Married a Fine Woman; he maintains her as finely: Her brisk humor
inclines her to Visits, Treats, and Jovial Meetings; tho this her Husband
disrelisheth, but all to no purpose; for she is of a gadding temp^, and out she
must for Health and Recreation; but how to contrive the way to effect it
quietly, hic labor, hoc opus; she is invited to a Feast, and a pretended Friend
or Relation (who is no more of kin to her than Sir George is to the Dragon)
however he comes to her, and she Salutes him by the name of Cousin, good
Cousin, dear Cousin! and her Mother, to palliate the business, calls him so
too, she knowing the better how to manage that Amorous Affair, because it has
been her own Condition formerly; but the Husband is unwilling to have her go,
alleging many faint and frivolous Excuses; yet to take off all Jealousy from
the Good Man, her Friend will say, in good Faith, Cousin, I have no mind at all
to go to this Feast, I have business to do, nor would I set a foot over the
Threshold, God knows my heart, were it not for your and my she Cousins Credit;
and you know it is neither Modest nor Modish, for a Gentlewoman of her Rank to
bestow Visits without an Attendant; tho I am satisfied she is averse to any
such kind of Promenade, or Collation; for of all Women, that ever I knew, when
she is abroad she makes such ado to come home, that she almost disturbs the
Company. The silly Fop now begins to incline and grant the Request; but first
asks what Company they expect at this Entertainment? Excellent Company indeed
Cousin! there will be your Mother-in-Law, my Wife, your Cousin, Mr. such a ones
Daughter, and most of the good Neighborhood; Company fit for a Princess, Men
and Women of Quality. Well (quoth the Man) you may go, for this once, but I
hope you don't intend to make a Trade on it, have a care of your self, and be
sure you don't bring Night home with you. Leave being thus obtained, the subtle
Lady feigns an unwillingness, saying, indeed Love! I care not for going out at
present, let me entreat you that I may stay at home; but he, having a great
Confidence in the Cousin, says, nay, nay, sweet Heart, I would not have you so
ungentile, as to disappoint your Neighbors, since you are ready, and the
Assignation is pre-design'd, prithee, Child go; whereupon away she frisks like
Lightning with her Cousin-Gallant, fleering all the way at the contented one at
home, saying, that he has some small smack of Jealousy, (and a great deal of
Reason for it.) To the Place they come, and are no sooner arrived, but she is
Nobly received for her Husband's sake, Treated with Airs, Balls, Banquets, and
a thousand pretty little Frolicks and amorous Gambals, not fit to be here
mentioned: All her Lovers are now met together, like Flies in Summer, every one
intending to have a lick at her Honey-pot; every one putting forward, as he
finds opportunity. One Complements her at a very Modish rate; the other
Presents her with a rich Diamond; one gives her the gentle Tread on the Toe, en
passant, as the Frenchman has it; the other gives her the amorous Squeeze of
the hand; another leaning dispondently upon his Elbow, reaches her with a
languishing Eye; So that she must needs be void of all Sense, if she depart
without understanding all their good intentions. Thus every Spark endeavors
(as much as in him lies) to make her Husband bear the Turkish Ensign of
Christian Matrimony in the Van; which at last proves the occasion of her shame
and his sorrow; for either by the mis-management, or mis-timing of her Amorous
Designs, or the discovery of her Frolicks by some special Friend or Relation,
the Husband comes to understand the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth,
which drives him into a strange Paroxysm of Profound Melancholy, that all the
Hellebore among the Anticyrae can never recover him: if he attempt to strike
her, that will not do, but only add fuel to her Fire; that will take off her
Affection, so that she will never dally with him, but only to pass away the
time for want of better Company, and make use of him only as a Cloak to shroud
and conceal her Lasciviousness. Thus is the poor Gentleman sensible of the
Second Matrimonial Solace, being now fast bound to Ixion's Wheel of Misery,
where he must live in a most laguishing, and die in a very miserable Condition.

The Third COMFORT. The Bonny Girl, Twatling Gossips, and Contented Drudge.
THE Youngsters of this Wanton Age, are so high-fed, live so much at ease,
their Blood is so plentiful and sprightly, that they cannot contain themselves
long without an Evacuation of the Extravagancies of the Fourth Concoction, and
so must take a Wife (the Remedy oftentimes proving worse than the Disease) and
eagerly pursue their own Misery and Discontent; for our young Couple being
Married, at the usual time the Teeming Bonny Girl grows big, tho possibly (as
it too frequently falls out) not by the supposed Father; and now he begins to
understand the Misery, Trouble and Affliction of a wedded Life; now must the
poor Fellow trot all about the Town on his Wife's Errands, to purchase all
things that may please her, if possible; for she begins to be squemish, her
Stomach fails, grows weak and peevish, like her self, and nothing will down
with her but what is of the best; now he must trudge about night and day,
ransack Heaven and Earth for Delicacies to cherish and comfort her, and empty
his Purse to fill her Paunch with Dainties; and this pleasant life must be led
for six or seven Months together, while his Wife Pampers her Carcass at home,
and can scarce get a good word for his pains (a poor Gratuity for his kindness)
nay probably, complains she is not so carefully provided for, as other Women in
her Condition; although the poor Man rises early, goes to Bed-late, and eats the
Bread of Carefulness, contriving all ways possible, for the provision of his
Family; but this is not all, the time of her falling in pieces draws near, and
here the poor Fellow is exposed to a world of Charge and Trouble; out he must
to procure Godfathers and Godmothers, and such as she approves of too, for in
this he is not allowed the freedom of his own Election the Midwife must be
fetched, dry and we Nurses provided (a sort of chargeable Slut^ who will lap up
more good Liquor in on^ day, than the good Husband swallows i^ a whole Week) in
short, her Throes com^ very thick upon her, and she is surrounde^ with a Crew
of Gossiping Neighbours^ the Good Man in the mean time is at h^ Devotion for
her safe Delivery, which being over, then all his Care is to plea^ the Woman in
the Straw, and her Twa^ling Companions, who eat and drin^ merrily, and he
spares no cost to entertai^ them, and if any thing displeases them it is forty
to one, but one of the Gossi^ starts up and says, in troth, Mrs. I do v^ry much
wonder, and so does all the Company, that your Husband takes (...) more care of
you and your Child, especially being your Firstborn; what wou^ he do, I trow,
had you five or six? say another, I Will assure you, if my Husban^ should serve
me so, I would study Nigh^ and Day to be revenged of him; Indee says a third, I
would not have you put up this Affront patiently; for if he serves you thus at
the first, his usage will be courser to you hereafter. Cousin, says a fourth, I
admire, that you, being so discreet a Woman, and of a good Family, that you can
endure his unworthy behavior to you, especially in this weakly condition:
Alas! replies the Wife, I know not what to do with him, he is so cross and
unkind to me. Upon my word, says the other, he is an ill-natured Man, that he
is not here in person to attend on this good company: Then starts up a Bold,
Imperious Housewife, and thus begins to chatter; All the Neighbors here know
very well, it was a common Rumor of my Husband, that he was the untowardest
Man in the World, and would often threaten to break my bones, and be the death
of me; but I thank my Stars for it, and my undaunted Spirit together, that I
have tamed him sufficiently; I have brought him now to that pass, that he dares
as well eat his Nails, as do any thing to disoblige me. It Is very true, when we
were first Married he began to be Lofty and Malepert, but I plucked up a good
Spirit, set my foot in the Stirrup, rode him with a Bit and a Snaffle, till I
quite tired; and cured him of his Resty, Skittish Humor: insomuch that he has
confessed, there is no good to be done with me by foul means: nay, if he had
killed me, I was resolved never to Truckle under him; and now I can say, and do
what I Please, without the least contradiction; for I will have the last word,
right or wrong; so that now he crosses the Cudgels to me, and submits: nay, I
will assure you Gentlewomen, there is no man living, how perverse soever, but
his Wife may bring him to be Complaisant, if she take right measures, and
manage him with Discretion; therefore, pray Neighbor, when your Husband comes
Home, ring him such a Peal as may make his Ears glow, and his Heart ache, or
you will never get the better on him as long as you have a day to live. Thus
these Gossiping Baggages, having cloyed 'emselves with good Wine, and plentiful
Cheer, abuse the poor Man for his Pains, and by their advice set the Husband
and Wife at variance, the Curse of parting Man and Wife light on them for their
pains. Well being thus gorged with Edibles and Potables, away they go, and
leave the Woman to play her part according to their goodly Instructions. At
length Home the Husband returns, having undergone the Drudgery of the Day with
Care and Pains, and no sooner enters his own Doors, but enquires how his Wife
does; the Nurse, like an Instructed Dissembling Slut, makes answer, that she is
in a very weak condition, and this bout had like to have cost her Life; I have
tended several in my time, but your Wife is the weakest Woman I ever looked to
in all my Life; thus they Teaze the foolish Man, who cannot rest till he has
seen his Wife; into the Chamber he goes, and the first Salutation is, how is it
my Dear? Truly Love, very sick and weak; I am very sorry for it; and fear you
fast too much: I cannot eat, my Appetite is Palled and gone: Well, I will order
you some Gelly-broths and Caudles to comfort you; which he does accordingly,
and sends 'em to her: Thus tired with running about all day long, he calls for
some Refreshment, which is brought him, being only the Reversions of the
Servants, which he is content with, whilst his Wife is cherished with costly
and comfortable Draughts, he only swells his empty Maw, with Flatulent and
Sower Sixes, and to Bed he packs up with his Head full of care and sleep; in
the Morning up he gets by Break of Day, visits his Wife, and asks her how she
rested; alas! (says she) I have not so much as closed my eyes, or had one wink
of sleep all this Night, tho she rested as well and soundly as if she had taken
a Dose of Opium. My Heart, says he, the Gossips will be here to day, you must
make much of them, and should think of rising to entertain them; for you have
kept your Bed above a Fortnight; Love we must be as saving as we can, Charges
are great, and I have much ado to keep both ends together. Think of Rising!
(says the Wife) a Curse on the Hour I was born! O, that I had died in Labor,
and then there had been an end of me! Is it come to this indeed; must I rise
already, and am not able to stand upon my Legs? Do you long to see me drudging
about the House before I am able to creep? You are a very kind Man, a most
loving Husband indeed; I find now you wish me dead, so do I too. Well! well! I
am content to rise to Morrow, come on it what will; I do very well foresee what
I must undergo for the time to come; what would you do, if I had ten or twelve
Children, which God forbid, and if it be his will, I hope this is the last? but
Gods will be done. As for Gossips coming to see me, I had rather they would
stay at Home, and so they would if they knew how little their Visits please me;
nor would you your self (if you had any respect for me) promote their coming,
when here were Twenty Discreet Women at least, who came to see me with a great
deal of Kindness and Respect, and the Cheer you provided for them, I would be
ashamed to set before their Servants; this is truth, Sir, I saw it with my own
eyes, overwhelmed with Tears, to hear that they should in a slighting, scoffing
way take notice of it. Well, My Dear, you are soon moved I find to Passion, tho
I give you no occasion; but satisfy your self, that henceforth, I shall be
content that you please your self, and rise when you think it convenient. Do
what you please, Sir, only I beg of you to talk to me no longer; for I am very
full of Pain, and would desire you to send to our Neighbors not to come
because I am so much indisposed; Love, says he, they shall come, and be well
treated too; for Gods sake let me alone, and do what you will. Then one of the
Nurses attaques him with her deceitful Tongue, pray Sir, do not force my
Mistress to speak, it is very dangerous; for she is a very weak Woman, and if
the Wind gets into her Head, it will do her and irreparable Injury (O brave
Doctresses!) then she draws the Curtains, and the Wife and the Husband are not
yet Reconciled; however she expects the Gossips, who will act their parts so
effectually, and give him such Flouts and Jeers, which will so tame him, that
he may be easily led any where by the Nose for ever after. However away he goes
and makes Provision for them in a more plentiful manner, by reason of the
Reproof he received from his Wife. The Gentlewomen at the time appointed
appear, he welcomes them all, and conducts them to his Wife's Chamber; where
they and the sick Woman Eat and Drink heartily, to a more than becoming
Festivity, and Flirt and Joke with the Master of the House, till they have
quite dispirited him, and made him a mere Mamma Mouchey; so that now he is
content to do any thing for a quiet Life, dandle the Brat in his Arms, dry the
pist Clouts on his Horns, for fear the Nurse curse him, or else his Wife
(having got the better end of the Staff) tell him plainly, he shall never more
enter her Premises. This comfortable Life he must lead; his Wife must be
maintained at a high rate, and have her Will in all things; he must live Meanly
and Penuriously, having his will in nothing; and thus he is caught in the Net,
where he struggles to no purpose, for there he must Live, in spite of Fate,
Despicably, and die Wretchedly.

The Fourth COMFORT. The decayed Gentleman, the Virago and her Topping
Daughters.
WHen a Man has been so Injurious to himself as to abandon a single Life, and
run headlong upon Marriage, without any Reason or Sense; and having ^ved in the
state of Matrimony for the pace of ten or twenty years, has his Ta^e
surrounded with Children, and the ^ack Ox has trod upon his Foot, all that ^e
can do, is only to keep the Wolf from ^e door, Charges daily increasing; and
among them three or four Daughters Mar^ageable, but not as yet disposed of,
whose ^od Qualities (I mean Pride and Inso^nce) are too Notorious to the World,
^d the Father has little, or no Portion (...) bestow upon them; he, poor
Gentle^an, must be in a kind of Troublesome ^ndition; for his Daughters must be
^aintain'd gentilely at home, and well ^tired when they go abroad a la Mode,
(...) these three Reasons:

First, That they may be the sooner put off, and by their Mincing Gate, and Gay
Garb, bait some Spark or other into the Net of Marriage.

Secondly, if their Father be Hide-bound, and will not do it, he shall have his
Hands and his Heart full, and they will do little or nothing for him, presuming
upon their Mother, who countenanceth them in so doing, like a dutiful Wife.

Thirdly, the young Women in the Neighborhood are maintained finely, and well
habited, and so must they too, and why not, as well as other men's Children, of
the same Rank and Quality?

Thus is the Man wearied out of hi^ Life, if he drudge not in the World to
support their Pride and Vanity, tho probably to their utter Ruin: sometimes he
beats the hoof twenty or thirty Miles about business, or, if he be Master of
an^ Horse, rides at other times 100, to attend the Parliament, or Courts in
Term-time about a Lawsuit, which has been depending from his Childhood, so
that h^ is forced, to save Charges, to go ver^ meanly accoutred, having a pair
of Boo^ Nine or Ten Years old, and so often vamp'^ and mended, that, like
Drake's Ship, the^ have not one piece of their first Materials his Spurs were
made in Harry 8th's time, and one of them wants the great gingling Rowel: his
clothes so mean and aged, that they will scarce hang together by the ^ssistance
of Patching, so as to cover his Nakedness, or keep his body from the in^ury of
the Weather: The Sword he years is a Hacking Morglay, which some ^f his
Ancestors took at the Siege of Troy: His Beast carries behind him an old
Knap^ick, that his Forefathers used at the Siege ^f Bouloigne; the Livery he
gives is well ^nown, for the Antiquity thereof, both in City and Country, the
Coat being worn (...) short that it scarce reaches the Pocket^oles, and in good
faith,'it is like to be long enough, e're it be longer: in short, thus he ^ves
sparingly abroad, to balance the great ^xpences at Home, whither he returns,
^ith a heavy Heart, and a light purse, the ^awyers, Attorneys, Sollicitors and
Bai^ffs having sufficiently purged his Bags, ^d sent him away with a Flea in
his Ear. ^eing arrived at his own appartment, be^ld now his comfortable
Reception, his and welcome by his Wife! who as soon (...) she espies him,
instead of Embracing, ^eats him with a sower Countenance, ^ds fault with some
miscarriage in the ^use, stamps and storms like a Bethlemite, the Servants
being all at her Beck, dare not give any Respect or Attendance: nay, the
good-natured Elf, dares not open his mouth for any thing, till the Storm is
over, bears all patiently, without the least noise, to prevent disturbance in
his Family, and sets him down some distance from the Fire, tho very cold, she
and her Children keeping all the heat from him; a^ length being moved with her
Dogged and Currish Usage toward him, he may say, Methinks Mistress, you look
very surly upon me, as if I had offended you, pray get me somewhat to refresh
me, for (...) am almost spent and tired off of my Legs being wet to the skin,
having neither Ea^ nor Drunk this day, and yet you cannot so much as afford me
a pleasant look: Yes says she, I had need take care of you indeed, you have
spun a fair Thread, I have lost more by my Hemp and Flax since your absence,
than you will get these fiv^ years, by taking your Man along with you, so that
I had no body to help me to Soak or Whiten it; besides, I have often wished
you, since your departure, at the Devils Arse of Peak, that you did not sto^
the holes in the Hen-house, for the stinking Pole-Cat has eaten three of my
be^ Laying Hens, whose loss is not so inconsderable as you imagine, and if you
steer his Course, you will be certainly one of ^he poorest Men in your Family:
Pray, ^ith he, Mistress, don't you give me such Language, God be praised, I am
content with what I have, and shall have more if (...) be his will, besides,
there are still some ^haritable, good People in my Family: Good, for what, says
she, for nothing? (...) know but few of them, if any, worth ^he mentioning: Ay,
says the Husband, I ^y good People: And what good do ^hey do you? what good?
as much good ^s yours: say you so, sweet Sir, but I Will ^e bold to tell you to
your Teeth, and spit ^n the face of those that shall dare to op^ose it, that
yours had been a poor stock, had it not been for the frequent Supplies of any
Friends and Relations, and if they should hear you say half so much to me, ^hey
would tell you your own, in good Faith, would they. Well! prithee sweet heart
(says he) be not so High, let us ^eave off this Discourse: and so he is for^ed
to acquiesce, for fear his Friends should be acquainted therewith. But the Fray
is not yet over, for it happens that one of the little Children falls a crying,
and as it falls out, it is the Father's Darling, whom ^he whips severely, more
to spite him, than any thing else; prithee Woman, sait^ he, why are you so
sharp with the Child in the Devil's name, says she, what d^ you concern your
self, you are not at the trouble of bringing them up, or lookin^ after them?
that is my Drudgery Nigh^ and day, as long as I am able to stan^ upon my legs;
shame on you, must I b^ thus controlled, that I must not correct my own Child?
if I take him up again, I Will fle^ him, and do you seek your remedy. The says the
Nurse, indeed Sir, you are not a home to see it, nor do you know what ^world^
heavy hand my Lady has in bringing them up: by my faith (says the Chambermaid)
it is a stark shame, that when you come home, instead of our rejoicing at your
Company, you create nothing bu^ Disturbance and Noise among us; Noise says the
Lady, go you Fool, this is no thing in comparison of what I have taken at his
hands, and must do so still, as long as it pleases my good God. Thus the whole
Family, by the instigation of the Mistress, is up in Arms against their Master,
who creeps to Bed Supperless and Comfortless, the Children in the Night bawling
about his ears, that he can take no rest, which is done on purpose to disturb
him; thus he spends his days in Care, his Nights in Torment; and so we ^ave him
to enjoy the Fruits of his Folly.

The Fifth COMFORT. The Doting Cornuto, and Young Brisk Girl.
LOve or Lust, call it what you please, may be counted (if at all) pardona^le
in Young; but in Old Men not to be ^ndur'd; when they have exhausted their
^umidum radicale, their Bodies being in^aded by Rheum, and those many
Infir^ities that attend Old Age. This is the Case at present of our Grave
Senior who (...) married to a Young Brisk Girl of a Nobler extract than
himself; but certain^y there is reason in this, for she might ^ave been Matched
to a far greater advan^age, but her Friends were forced to dis^ose of her to
any one (God wot) being but of a cracked Reputation, and hav^ng had a shrewd
Mischance, the effect of ^er Youthful Wantonness; and tho this ^ath been
frequently discoursed of about ^he Town, yet the doting Cornuto, is too
Credulous to believe any such Rampant Stories, but stands highly in her
Vindication. Thus he, being well stricken in years, abandons all sorts of
Pleasures, and only studies to turn the Penny to advantage, that he may
maintain her according to her port, Gentilely: but his Lady being of a Generous
Temper, and in the Vigor of her Youth, is no way inclineable to that
close-fisted humor of her Avaricious Bedfellow, but resolved to pas^ her time
jovially, and swim in Deligh^ and Pleasure. To this purpose her first Intrigue
is to get a Gallant, which is soo^ done by the opportunities She has at Treat^
and Meetings, whither She daily rambles, and an Assignation being made, they
caress and embrace one another without control or Suspicion; for her Honor
must be still preserved untainted; and having diverted themselves with all the
Amorous Sports and Love-Toys, that Wantonness ever could invent, the next
Diversion is to Droll at her Aged Husband, who is buffooned on all sides by all
Persons, but more particularly and bitterly by her Ladyship. Well! home she
returns, big with expectation of her Gallants appointed Visit the next Morning,
and to Bed with her Husband She goes, with as much love as the Devil has for
Holy Water; and by that time his frozen Limbs are somewhat thawed with natural
heat, the Cuckoldly Goat must be up and at her; but she pretends She is very
ill, drowsy and inclinable to sleep; therefore pray (says She) let me alone,
you will infinitely oblige me, if you will forbear till Morning, and then I
shall be fit for your service; at which the Old Oaf turns for fear of
displeasing her; whose head runs upon nothing but Meeting with her Friend, and
contrives withal, (consulting with her Pillow) how to put off the Old Man, that
he shall not touch her, when Morning comes; which she cunningly effects, as
follows; ^ither she rises very early, leaves the old Gentleman fast (for Age
is Childish, and ^onsequently sleepy for the most part) and ^s satisfied or
tired with her Gallant, before Father Graybeard awakes: and then ^ummageth
about the House, playing the Good Housewife seemingly: or otherwise, ^he does
not rise at all; but before day ap^ears, she sighs and groans o^ purpose, that
^he good Gentleman may hear her, who ^resently asks her how she is: indeed
love, ^ith she, I have such a pain in my side, ^ccompanied with the Gripes,
that I can ^ake no rest, I think it is my old Distem^er: prithee, sweet heart,
turn to me: upon my faith, my Dear, I am all in a sweat, and dare not for fear
of catching cold, which may cost me my life, being of a weak Constitution: then
he covers her close up, bids her be careful of her self, and he will take care
of her Household Affairs: up he gets without Fire or Candle, yet procures her a
fire against her rising: thus she takes her ease, and laughs in her sleeve at
the Old Man's Folly; when he understands she is up, he comes to see her very
lovingly, and begins to be Amorous, but she having a mind to disappoint him,
says, would it were God's Will that you would never meddle with me, till I did
ask you: and would you not then, says he? no, upon my Conscience, Love, I think
not, and had I known but as much before, I would never have Married: Why then
did you Marry, says he? indeed Love, I know not I was but a Young Girl, and
did it in obedience to the Commands of my Parents what is the meaning on it,
sweet heart, you are always, in this humor? I do not know, but indeed, love,
were it not to please you, I would never be troubled with due Benevolence, as
you call it: thus she wheedles the superannuated Fop into a strange conceit of
her Chastity: so tha^ this persuasion increases the Flome of hi^ Affection,
which he thinks can never b^ extinguished. But now observe the damn'^ subtilty
of a wily Woman, who never wants one contrivance or other to chouse any one she
has a mind to please. If she has a mind to Cajole him out of Clothes, Rings,
Jewels, Moneys, or any thing that she fancies, the Scene is quite altered;
then, when they are both warm in Bed, how the dissembling Gypsy Kisses, Hugs
and Squee^es him in her Arms, till his old bones ^attle in his skin, and helps
his aged Heaviness with her youthful Activity, so that ^he old Man is in a kind
of Ecstasy, to find ^er so prodigal of her Favor and Kind^ess; prithee my
Dear! (says she) have a ^reat care of your self, for my sake, as well ^s your
own; for my life is bound up ^ith yours, and one grave must contain ^s both:
Would to God I had no other ^aradise on this side Heaven, but to be In^mbed in
your Arms, this I speak cordi^ly, God is my Witness; and if any Man ^d ever
touch my Lips, but your self, and ^y Cousin, (and you allow of that by
^mmanding me to do it,) then let my ^unishment be never to receive Kiss or
^mbrace from you more, and that I am ^e would soon break my poor Heart; ^ I am
confident there is not a sweeter ^atured Man in the Universe, than you ^c. No,
Love, says he, except the Gentleman that Courted you before me: Pish Pish,
says, she, upon my Honor, I was smitten with you the first time I saw you, tho
at a distance, I may very safely swear it was Love at first sight; I think it
was a Match made in Heaven; for my Father would have Married me to that
Gentleman, but I would never consent to it; I can give no reason for it, but it
was Decreed it should be so. Thus she procures what she designed, tho at never
so dear a rate, and this kind of Caressing soon opens the Miser's Coffers, who
knows her temper so well, that she will never give over till she has her will,
whatsoever it costs. Now she begins, being furnished, to think o^ other things;
her Gallant, that she formerly maintained, must like her overwor^ Apparel, be
laid aside, and a new, rich on^ embraced; but she is too crafty to be to
forward, and keeps him at a bay for ^ time, refuses his Presents and Visits,
ti^ her Plots are brought to Maturity: The young Gentleman is Enamoured, an^
wants an opportunity to meet with he Maid, which he soon obtains: Sweet-hear^
quoth he, I must have a little Talk wit^ you; that you may, Sir, if you please:
yo^ know (says he) the extreme passion the I have for your Lady, do you think
the^ is any possibility of obtaining my desires? Did she ever mention me since
the last interview? In truth, Sir, she never opens her Lips, but to your
commendation, and I am satisfied she wishes you well: Well, Child! I do wholly
confide in you, do but have me so much in your thoughts, as now and then to
speak a good word for me, and you shall be no loser by it; I will bestow a new
Gown upon you, and here are five Guineys to buy you Gloves: Excuse me, Sir,
says she, I shall not take them; but indeed, Sweetheart, you shall, and so at
length, with some little persuasion, like a right Maid, she cries Nay, and
takes it: Away she hastens to her Lady, and acquaints her, that she had met
with her Gallant: well, and what says he? Why, faith, Madam, I think he is a
little Lunatic upon your account, for he neither knows what he does or says:
But how do thou like him, Girl? good Faith, Madam, I look upon him to be the
most Comely, Complete Gentleman that ever I set my eye on in my Life, and I am
of Opinion, that he will be a very Fond and Faithful Lover: nay, he is a
Gentleman every Inch of him, has a very good Estate, and is able to Gratify
your Kindnesses, by which Means you may embrace a Happy and Comfortable Piece
of Gallantry, as long as you have the enjoyment of each others Society. In
troth I am at a loss, almost at my Wits end, I can get nothing out of my
Husband, but what is absolutely necessary: Pray, Madam, Consider of it, for I
promised to return him an answer to morrow: But how, Girl, shall we curry this
Horse? how shall we manage this Affair? As for that, Madam let me alone, I
beseech you, I shall meet him to Morrow-morning, and then I Will tell him
plainly, that you would not so much as lend the least Ear to my Discourse, or
consent to any thing requested (do what I could) being so tender of your Honor
and Reputation, and I am sure I can Act a Dissembling Part pretty well. In the
Morning, after she had made him attend two hours at least, they meet together
according to Appointment. How now Sweet Heart, says the Gallant, how is it with
your Lady? She is very Thoughtful and Pensive, full of Grief and Sorrow for the
ill Usage of her Husband, who is so wicked a Man to her, that it is not to be
believed what the Poor Gentlewoman undergoes: I am sorry for it ( quoth he) with
all my Heart; but what did your Lady say to you? upon my Faith, Sir, I spoke to
her, for which I have gained a great deal of ill Will; she would not so much as
hear me, nor consent to any thing proposed, so highly does she prize her
Reputation, and if she had a mind to be kind to her Neighbors, and love them
as her self, she is under an Italian slavery, being so kept in and Watched by
the old Lump of Jealousy her Husband. I do not remember, that she ever
exchanged a word with any Man in Discourse, since I have waited upon her, and I
have been her Servant these four years and upwards, but only with your self the
other day, whom she remembers still, and for ought I know, to be plain with
you, would sooner love you, than any other in the World. Dear Child, (says he)
bring but that about, and I Will be your Eternal Friend. Truly Sir (says she) I
have done already all that lies in my power as to that, and dare not attempt
any further, but in any thing else feaseable, Command me, and I Am your Servant.
Prithee, advise me what to do in this Case: Why, your best way will be to make
an Address to her your self, and now is the most Critical time in the World;
for she and her Husband are at Variance, and you will find her at Church, where
you may make your Amors to her, Caress her, and present her, tho I Am confident
she will refuse all; but no matter for that, she will have a great esteem for you,
notwithstanding her Denial, and will set a higheou value upon your Generosity
and Worth than you can possibly imagine, do as I counsel you, and so all
happiness attend you. (Sanctified Advice indeed in so Sanctified a Place, to
make the Church a Brothel-House, and Religion a Pander to fordid Lust!) When
you have acted your part, as I have told you, (says this She-Emissary of the
Devil) give me what you intend her as a Present, and I will so order the
matter, that she shall accept of it, or do my utmost endeavor, tho I lose my
labor. You say very well, my Dear Child! and so they part. Away runs this
Gigling Baggage, and smiling at her Lady; upon my Soul, Madam, there are a
great many Persons in the World, who would wish for your Happiness; for he is
resolved to Accost you, and discover his whole mind; now summon all your
discretion together, let this be your dernier effort, as the Frenchman terms
it; carry your self strangely to him, and hold him in suspense for a time; for
you know, it is Expectation makes a Blessing dear; but be sure you be not so
severe in your deportment as to Dash the Young Gentleman quite out of
Countenance. Thus full freighted with hopes, she hastens to Church, stimulated
by Lechery, rather than Devotion; where arrived, her Gallant attacques her, but
she will consent to nothing, nor accept of his Presents; however she entertains
him so favorably, that he may plainly discover her Affection to be more than
ordinary: so they take leave with a light heart, and the Lady and her waiting
Gentlewoman Consult how to manage the Business cleanlily without suspicion: I
am satisfied, Madam, says her Maid, that he has a longing desire to be wrapped
up in your Embraces, and I will tell him my Master is gone into the Country for
some time, and bring him the backway to your Chamber, in the deepest silence of
the Night, (the securest time for such Secresies) yet so that you shall seem to
be altogether ignorant of my Design, and Counterfeit a real Passion for so
strange and unworthy a surprisal, and withal acquaint him that you will cry
out, and call upon me, and what he presents you with by my hands, do you
obstinately refuse at first; Chide me for it before his face, press me to
return it, but yet I hope you will have the grace at last to accept it, for in
truth there is no dealing with Men, but by out-doing them in Female-Craft, the
only weapons we have to defend our selves against that Sex. Now this cunning
Wench finds out the Gallant, who asks her what News? In short Sir (says she)
not to Trifle away time, which is very precious, if I could prevail with her to
accept the present you intend her, the Business would be done effectually, and
to your satisfaction; the Gallant being ravished with her Discourse,
immediately puts fifty Guineys into her Hand, as a present of his Affection to
her Lady. Well Sir (says she) I will undertake one thing more, for I know my
Lady has a kindness for you; therefore come you the back way, in the dead time
of the Night, now my Master is absent, and I will convey you to her Chamber,
she being Childish and consequently Sleepy, you will have the better
opportunity to uncloath your self, and to Bed to her without Delay, or
Ceremony, and in all probability the business will be done; for when you both
are naked in one Bed, and in the dark too, there is no Dispute of prevailing:
come, come Sir! Women are Flesh and Blood, as well as Men, and subject to
Failings as well as they: I question not but you know the old Proverb, Faint
Heart never won Fair Lady, therefore be Brisk and Active, and you need not
despair of obtaining your desire, I Will pawn my Reputation for it. The Lady is
informed of all Passages between them, the Presents are accepted, and the
Chambermaid finds the Lover at the Place and Time appointed. Conveys him to
her Ladies Chamber, and so leaves him: Now you may imagine that his Desires
being winged with Love, he was not long disrobing himself, but steals into Bed,
and embraces her in his Arms, at which she seems to startle out of a feigned
slumber, and says, what, my Dear, is it you? No, Madam, it is I, says the
Gallant? how you? says she, who are you? this is not to be endured; whereupon
she struggles to rise, calls upon her Gentlewoman, twice or thrice, but alas!
to no purpose: and great pity it is, that in such a time of Necessity the Maid
would give her no answer: Ah! (says she) I Am betrayed, and struggles for it,
till her breath failed her, so that she was at his mercy, who treated her very
kindly, she enjoying such gentle usage as she expected, and they both designed;
yet, to speak the truth, Men are to blame for these rude Assaults: and what
could a poor, weak Woman do alone, who durst not cry out as loud as she would,
for fear of losing her reputation? but to make the best of a bad Market, here is
their comfort still, the Curtains cannot, and the Maid dares not tell any
Tales. Thus they made the best improvement of their time, and when they had
sufficiently solaced 'emselves parted amicably, till they should have an
opportunity to re-enjoy their delights, the next Assignation. But at length by
some unlucky accident or other, old Erra Pater, the Husband, comes to be
certainly informed of the whole matter, and indeed more than he cared to hear,
which puts him into a Raving Jealous Fit of Melancholy, he stamps and stares
like one distracted; but she being now fleshed with Lust, and seasoned with
impudence, gives him as good as he brings, upbraids him with his beggarly
Relations, laughs him to scorn, and this is the only Mirth he is like to enjoy
with a continuando, till at last dried up with grief, and shrivel'd with Age,
he brings his Gray hairs with sorrow to the Grave.

The Sixth COMFORT. Jack-hold-my-staff, and Lady Pouting.
THE next Married Couple we meet with enjoy the Comforts of Matrimony, as much
as any of the five preceding: and here it is the fortune of a Man, to be
Wedded to a Woman of so cross and domineering a Temper, that she will wear the
Breeches and the Cap too, so that the poor Fop at Home is like John
Hold-my-staff, she must Rule, Govern, Insult, Brawl, understand all concerns at
home and abroad, answer all businesses, manage all Affairs, tho she be never so
well maintained, and want for nothing, yet he must be in the Family like a mere
Cipher, and her whole delight and design is to Plague and Torment him. And thus
she begins; when they have past away the Night very sportingly, and enjoyed the
delights of the Marriage Bed, as all good People ought to do, her Husband
leaves her in a very good humor, to dress and trim her self up, he, in the
mean time, while she is Tricking, takes care of the Domestic Affairs, and when
Dinner is ready, sends for his Wife to accompany him; but word is brought she
will not Dine to day, go again (says he) and bid her come, the Maid does so,
and tells her Mistress, my Master desires you to come, go and tell him once
more, that I will not come: the Good man is not satisfied with this answer, but
sends a third time, but to no purpose; so that at length he goes himself, and
asks her why she will not come to Dinner? not a word will she give him; what
ail'st thou, my Dear? not a Syllable will she return, but Pout and Frown, he
inquires of the Family what is the reason, but cannot receive any satisfaction;
when, as the truth is, she ailes nothing, but only resolves to be Dogged, and
perhaps will not come to Dinner, do what he can; at other times, possibly he
may prevail with her, when he has begged so long till the meat is spoiled at
the Fire, or cooled on the Table, and then he leads her to Dinner, but she has
no stomach, not one Morsel will go down, and he, like a Fop, to comply with her
froward humor, will fast likewise, but the more fool he, for the more kindness
he shows her, the more she slights him; and, in my Opinion, she is to be
commended, for what need any Woman Court his favor, that doats upon her
already? If he should despise and contemn her, then she had reason to scrue her
self into his affection, if possible. Another trick she has to vex him, and
that is this, when he is abroad, he sometimes accidentally meets with some of
his intimate acquaintance, to whom he is infinitely obliged, and has a design
to Treat them at his own House, which is more Gentile, and less chargeable than
at the Tavern; away he sends his Servant to her, who when he comes, says,
Mistress, my Master will be here in the Evening with three or four Friends,
Persons of good Repute, and desires you would provide every thing necessary for
their reception. Upon my faith (says she) not I, I will have nothing to do
with his Treats, why did he not come himself? I don't know that, Mistress, but
this he commanded me to tell you: Go, go, you are a very Rogue, and meddle with
that, that does not concern you. Well, to show her readiness and obedience, she
first sends all the Servants abroad, except a well-instructed Maid or two,
brought up to her own hand, that have the length of her foot exactly, and then
she whips into her Chamber, and locks her self up. When her Husband comes home,
he asks if every thing be ready, according to his order; truly Sir, says the
Maid, my Mistress is very ill, and there is no body at home to do any thing;
this puts our Master (if he may be so called without offense) into a great
Chafe, but however leads his Friends into the Parlour, where all things are out
of order, and therefore goes to his Wife, why have you served me so? says he.
Sir, you do command so many things at once, that I do not know which to turn my
self to first. Fie! Fie! says he, you have done me the greatest diskindness
imaginable; for these are the only Persons in the World, that I am obliged to.
And how can I help it? (says she) what would you have me to do? You show your
Wisdom in it indeed; well, do what you please; I Am sure it don't please me. But
hark you, Gentlewoman, why did you send the Servants out of the way? God bless
me, what a Question is that from a wise Man as you are? Did I know, or could I
divine, think you, that you had any occasion for them? When the mischievous
Wretch sent them out of the way, on purpose to disappoint and Fret him. Away he
goes again to his Friends in a fury, but she values it not, knowing the Storm
will soon blow over. To be short, he bustles about, and sets all things in as
good order as he can. Then he sends for some of the Table-Linnen, and word is
brought there is none to be had. He goes to his Wife, and tells her what a shame
and disgrace it will be, both for him and her, not to have fine Linen, she
tells him there is Linen out already, good enough for them; for I Am sure my
Friends and Relations are content with it, when they bestow a Visit on us, and
I Am sure they are as good as the best of them, but however to satisfy you, all
the best Linen is in the Wash, except what is under Lock and Key in the Trunk,
and the Keys were lost this Morning; but you had best go ask the Chambermaid,
and bid her seek them; for I know not what is become of them, I have so many
things running in my head, that I do not know sometimes what I do, I am in such
distraction and confusion. Then the Fop bites the Lip, scratches his empty
Nodle, and raps out a great Oath, being enraged (and cause enough too) that he
will quickly make the Locks fly, if they do not find the Keys, and that
speedily too. Say you so, good Sir, quoth she, I would I could see that once,
you would show a great deal of discretion in such an action, I confess; but his
heat being somewhat allayed, he considers she is in the right, and so they fall
to what is before them; the best Wine, Meat and every thing, being at her
disposal, but they are like to go without it, for all her Huffing Husband. Nay,
they must not have clean Sheets, but lie in Foul Linen. Well! in the Morning
they take their leaves, and divert themselves upon the Road with the Poor,
over-ridden Fools affliction, resolving never more to set foot within his
doors. When they are gone, he attacques his Wife (thinking to bestow a little
moderate reproof upon her) saying, indeed, my Dear, you are a very strange
Woman, and I do not at all understand your froward humor: Lord bless me, says
she, what ado you keep about me? I am weary of my Life, would I were as deep in
the ground as I am high; I am up early, and down late, feeding your Poultry,
looking after your Domestic Affairs, Spinning, Carding, and what not, never
Idle, I am sure the Care I take, will shorten my days; and yet all this does
not deserve (the more's my grief) so much as one good word from you, I scrape
at home, and am as sparing as can be, and you spend all abroad, yet you are not
content. Thus they live a discontented, wretched Life, old Age creeps upon him,
Grief seizes him; he grows a Sot, and she makes a Beast of him; he is
entangled in the Net, and if he makes himself away, or comes to some ill End,
he may thank himself for it, and verifies the old Proverb, Marriage and Hanging
go by Destiny, and there is an end of him.

The Seventh COMFORT. The easy Fool, and Madam Wheedle.
THE Grave Italians have a Proverb, that Honest Men Marry, but Wise Men don't,
and that is the Reason we have so many Fops in the World, and so few discreet
Persons. Our next Married Couple that we shall represent to you, we will
suppose to be well Matched, and they enjoy themselves for some time; but the
clearest Sun may be often overcast with Clouds, and then according to the
Lyrick Poet, Desinit in Piscem Mulier formosa superne.


A Fair Morning may end in a Lowering Evening. In the heat and vigor of Youth,
their days may be somewhat Pleasant; but the Woman decays not so soon as the
Man, let their condition be what it will, for he is often harassed and broken
with Carking Care, whilst she grows plump with Delight and Pleasure: And as for
her Pain and Peril of Childbearing, I do no more wonder at it, than at the
laying of a great Egg, by a Hen, or a Goose, the ordinary effect of Nature, no
more, notwithstanding all their Tittle Tattle, the Hen being always the fatter
for laying, whilst the Cock scrapes and provides for her, as the honest Married
Man for his Wife. And when the poor Man begins to decline, grow weak and
imbecile, the good Wife continuing still very Blithe and Gamesome, then the
former Delights, Amorous Tricks, Kind Expressions, Wanton Looks and Glances,
are turned into downright Scolding, and endless Contention. Well! at length she
begins to discover her good Temper, she looks sowerly upon him with a Cloudy
Countenance, slights and neglects him as insufficient, and is much concerned at
the Disappointment of his Impetuous Nerve, his Heat and Activity being lost, or
at least abated. Then she grows of Opinion, that God and the Laws did certainly
ordain a Woman more than one Man as well in England as in Turkey, and other
well Regulated Countries, and says she will run the Risque, and try how other
Men are Weapon'd and Qualified for the Sport, and now the Game begins, she
grows worse and worse to him, leads him a sad Life, that the foolish Man had
better have chosen a Halter than a Wife, because the former might have proved
the end, whereas the latter is but the beginning of his Misery: For now through
her loose course of Life, the Candle burns at both ends, they live at Rack and
Manger (as the old saying is) and all tends to Ruin and Destruction, both of
Soul and Body. Thus she Consumes with her unlawful Lust, what he has Raked
together by his lawful Care and Labor: Then he capitulates with himself, and
says, it is strange to me that my Estate should dwindle away at this rate, I am
sure, I have ever had a Care of the Main Chance, and paid every one their own,
lived sparingly, clothed my self meanly, and all to no purpose; for I can
scarce keep the Wolf from the door. At length he grows Jealous of his Wife, and
imputes all his Misfortune to her Miscarriage; but upon Examination of the
whole, she wheadles him so cunningly by her Woman-craft, that he is satisfied
those Reports of her Immodesty are false and malicious: She claps her hands
upon his Head and wishes the Devil had all that is under her Hands, if ever any
Man kissed her but himself: and so the Fool is reconciled to his good Wife: Nay
she proceeds farther; As for that Villain that misinformed you, since it must
out, I Will tell you the whole truth of the Story; this Base, Perfidious Varlet
has been these two years attempting my Chastity, but I have hitherto, (I thank
my God for it) kept my self Pure, Undefiled, and repulsed him to his shame, if
he has any in him, notwithstanding all his large Proffers and specious
Pretenses. Can it enter into your thoughts, Sweet Heart! that I should ever
defile your Bed, away with all such vain Imaginations! Can it be supposed, that
I should leave so kind and comely a Man as you are, for the Embraces of
another? I were worse than the Devil himself, if I should take such Hellish
Courses; however I forgive him that has so basely bespattered me; but I must
beg this Favor of you, that you never suffer him to set foot again within
these doors; for if you do I will shun him Cane pejus and angue, more than a
cursed Gur, or a poisonous Adder; and I Will assure you, if I find you keep the
least Correspondence with him for the future, I will pack up my Awls, be gone
from you, and will never live with you while I have breath in my body: God
forbid that you should ever live to see that day wherein I should defile your
Bed; no no, my Dear, it is not come to that yet, and then she bursts outwith
Tears, wringing her hands, and bitterly exclaiming against that Wretch with all
imaginable Female Invectives. Well! all is well; he is Banished the House, and
the Good man rails against him for a great Rogue, to abuse his good, Modest
Wife in so high a Nature. Thus he grows fonder and fonder, becomes a mere Ass,
is infatuated by his Wife, and transfigur'd into a Beast, without Sense or
Reason. Thus she has got the Day, wears the Breeches (and those Women are Fools
that do not if they can) has freer access to her Gallant, unsuspected, than
formerly, and the Fop her Husband is deaf to all Accusations: at length through
this Dotage he falls into extreme Penury, and finds to his Ghost, Sera est in
fundo Parsimonia, It Is too late to be saving, when there is nothing to save;
these are the Pleasures and Comforts of a Married Life; he is made the Scorn
and Scoff of the Neighborhood; some perhaps may be so kind as to pity the
Honest Man; Wise Men reject him, and slight his Company; his Wife smiles at his
Folly, enjoys her stolen Amors undiscovered: grows at length as common as a
Barber's Chair, no sooner one is out, but another's in; exposes her Body to
every Person, who is sufficiently Tool'd for her Salaciousness; and at last (as
a just Reward of her, Debauchery and Lasciviousness) gets the Foul Disease of
some Fouler Rascal, gives it her good Husband, in Retaliation of all his
fondness, so that they live in pain all the days of their lives, and at last
end their days unpitied, loathsomely and wretchedly.

The Eighth COMFORT. Father Noddy and Mother Snapp.
OUR next Married Couple that we are to discourse of, are Persons well enough
Matched, if they could be content with what they have: God has blessed them with
five or six sweet Children Living, and the Wife is as big as she can Tumble
with another. The time of her ^elivery, and his charges draws nigh, and ^l
things must be made ready for the ^od Wives that are about her; at length after
some sharp Throws, they give her ^er for dead, the poor Man is almost ^t his
wits end, when he first hears that ^ismal news, runs about like a Mad Man for
help, falls on his knees, prays ^r her safe delivery, his Prayers are heard,
and she is brought to bed of a Lusty Boy. ^ow there is nothing but Carousing
and ^ejoycing throughout the Family, the ^ap runs apace, but the Gossips
Tongues, ^l'd with Liquor, faster, interlarded with ^nutty discourse, suitable
to the present ^casion. The Spring of the Year is now ^ming on, and every one
of any Quali^ is preparing for the Country to View ^atures Green Tapestry, and
hear the ^arbling Nightingale Carol her sweet ^otes in the pleasant serenity of
the quiet ^vening, and among the rest, the Wife ^ust go to take the Country Air
after her ^ing in, and it is but requisite for her ^ealths sake: but how to
persuade him (...) take this Journey, there is the business. ^ow she begins to
set all Engines at work to that purpose; first she comes home discontented, and
is very Snappish to he^ Husband; what is the matter? Love! says he, what makes
you so out of humor (...) the matter quoth she, I think I have reason enough,
the Child is very much distempered with a Violent Burning Fever, insomuch,
that the Nurse protests to me^ (tho it was a long time 'ere I could get i^ out
of her) that the poor Babe has no^ taken the Breast these four days. I am
heartily troubled, and know not how t^ help my self; but that which afflicts me
most is, that upon my conscience, I believe God Almighty punishes the Child for
my sins, for I made a vow to go into the Country, and I shall never be at rest,
till I have performed it. Why, sweet heart^ says he, have a little Patience,
the time is not yet elapsed, you need not be so hasty: I have a great deal of
business to^ dispatch, and that of Concernment too now when that is over you
shall go where you please. In troth, says she, don't tell me of business, I
must go, and I will go, there is no necessity for my stay, I Am sure I can do you
no service; and as for the charges, which I know is all your grie^ and fear, I
will pinch them out some way or other, tho I abate it in Housekeeping; This
you do to persuade the world what a good Husband you are; but if the truth were
known, you will be found to save at the Spigot, and let it run out at the
Bung-hole. The poor Man being thus Schooled by his Wife, must provide for this
Journey, or else all the Fat's in the Fire; there will be no quietness, if she
does not go abroad. Well the time is come, and they must set forward. Horses
are provided, and a new Riding Garb for the Wife, he himself waits upon her,
and must be as Tractable as a Spaniel upon the Road; his Wife is always wanting
one thing or other; the Stirrup is too short, or too long, the Pillion is not
well fixed, her Scarf flies off; the Horse Trots too hard, and makes her sick,
so that she must light and take a Walk, then she must be helped up again, and
this unnecessary trouble has the noddy brought upon himself, besides the
distillations that she is troubled with every quarter of a Mile, she having the
Diabetes, and cannot hold water long. Being arrived at the place intended; she
is discomposed with her Journey, and her stomach grows so nice, that it Kecks
at such Course food, as Beef and Mutton, and she must have a Fowl to pick upon.
Well away goes the contented Fool, and Trudges about the Town for some Dainty
bit to please his Lady, cost it never so much; for you know, far sought, and
dear bought is fit for such Cattle; and when he comes home, if his Marketting
displeases her, then she as well as the rest of her Sex, falls fowl on the
Good man, saying, in truth you are the strangest person that ever lived, not at
all fit to Travel; not at all Complaisant, you know not how to oblige our Sex.
The Patient Fop hears all and bears all, being accustomed to such kind of
re-proof, as the Tinker's Dog is to carry the Budget. After they have solaced
themselves at this pleasant rate, as long as she thinks convenient, home they
return, find all thing out of order, the Horse dead in the Stable, the Servants
Gadding abroad after their own Invention, all their Money spent that he cannot
buy any more, and therefore must foot it about his own occasions, and she will
not set her hand to do the least chair in the House, till she has had a
Fortnights rest after her Traveling; only go a Visiting, Chat with her
Gossips, and complain of the unserviceableness of her Husband throughout the
whole Journey. The poor Man he settles to work, endeavors to set all things to
rights, takes a great deal of pains; and if any thing is in fault, he is hit in
the Teeth with it; but if all things be well and in order, that must be imputed
to her good management. In fine, she is so taken with her Country-Journey, that
she is resolved to be Traveling once a Year, what ever comes on it, and he
shall be at the Charge of it. Thus his Expenses increase with his Years, he is
afflicted with the Wracking Gout, and (which is a worse Distemper) a Froward
Woman, that makes the small Remainder of his days, comfortless; for she will
Rule the Roast, must have her Will in all things, will be Mistress and Govern,
whilst he stands only for a Cipher at Home, and at length through Grief and
Discontent, becomes a mere Skeleton, and Languisheth away to nothing.

The Ninth COMFORT. Old Age Insulted over.
WHen a Man has once thrown himself into the Net, or rather Prison of a
Family, and taken a brisk Wife, then the Comforts of Marriage daily flow in
upon him: This Wife you must understand is a Haughty, Proud Spirited Woman, and
would fain Domineer over her Husband; but he being a Prudent Man, manages his
Affairs with such Discretion, that she, to her great Grief finds, she shall
never get the upper hand. Thus for a time he is Head of the Family, and Governs
his Wife and Children with Credit and reputation; he is happy in a numerous
Issue of both Sexes; has Educated them all very well, and Matched them to good
Fortunes; but mark what follows, when all this is done, being full of years,
the Infirmities of Old Age at last seize him, and he is Fettred to his Chamber,
by some Tedious and Chronical Distemper, so that he is not able to move or stir
out of his Chair. Now the Domestic War begins de novo; the Wife will do
nothing but what she pleases, tho she was formerly kept under Hatches; the
poor man is now her Prisoner, and at her Mercy; the Wife grows Surly and Saucy,
the Children Masterless, the Servants Unruly; and if the Husband attempts to
Correct them, she is ready to fly in his face for it. Seeing himself thus
Abused by his Wife, Disobeyed by his Children, and slighted by his Servants, he
takes it very much to heart: But that which Afflicts him most is the
Extravagancy of his eldest Son and Heir, Bolstred up by his Mother, only to
break the old Man's Heart, and make him end his Life Miserably. If he thinks of
a Will, that he shall not be permitted to do, for fear he should bequeath
somewhat to his Poor Relations, or be too Lavish in Charitable Legacies: Now
the old Gentleman is Left in the Cold alone, unregarded, whilst she Gossips
about in the Parish, and declares the Currish Usage of her Husband; had I not
been (says she) a Woman of a matchless Patience, I could never have lived with
him half this time: but this is not all; for when she comes home she throws it
in his dish frequently, and tells him now upbraidingly, that God Rewards him
for it. The Good Man is resolved to Admonish her and her Children fairly, to
see whether that will work any Good upon her, and to that end calls them before
him: My Dear! you are the only person that I ever Loved, and yet give me leave
to tell you that I am not pleased with your Carriage in many Particulars: You
know I am Master of the House, and will be as long as I live (but, faith, Old
Gentleman you are mistaken, quoth the good Wife softly and smilingly,) tho I am
not used like one at present: You know farther how I have ever Cherished you,
as the Beloved Wife of my Bosom, and kept you as tender as the Apple of my eye,
but neither you nor my Children have behaved your selves as you ought to do.
What would you have done? I trow, says she, you are too well used, you do not
know when you are well; there is nothing we can do to please you. Would you
have us stand demurely before you with our fingers in our mouths? Not so
neither, I do not deserve this Taunting Language at your hands. Then he turns
to his eldest Son: Son, (says he) I have made some Observations of your
Behavior, with which I am very much Dissatisfied. You are my Eldest Son and
Heir it is true; but I see you Lavish away my Estate Profusely, with Profligate
and Debauched Company: I have been a good Father, have Improved your Estate,
and shall leave you a Plentiful Revenue, if you be Obedient and Dutiful, but
otherwise, I swear by all that is good and Sacred, you shall never enjoy my
Estate. What would you have him to do? says she, one shall have enough to do
to please you: Do you want for any thing? What would you be at I wonder? I
never saw the Peer of you, I vow to God; you are neither pleased full, nor
fasting. Pray Woman hold you your Tongue, and do not uphold him against me, tho
it has been ever your way to do so. This done, the Mother and her Son lay
their Heads together, and resolve to give out, that the Old Man is Crazed,
grown a Child again, and make the World believe he is Senseless: if any one
comes to speak with him, and asks the Good Lady for the Good Man; she presently
Answers, Alas, Poor Gentleman! he is fast enough in God Almighty's Dungeon; and
how came that to pass, Madam? God knows, Sir, for I do not, he is grown a
Dotard, I am sure I have no comfort or help of him, God help me, and grant me
Patience to undergo my Afflictions. Truly, Madam, I am heartily sorry for it.
Thus is the Old Gentleman Concealed from the World, and Confined to his
Chamber, so that he cannot Redress or help himself, nor undeceive the World of
the wrong done him. This he must needs undergo with a great deal of Grief and
inward Regret: but since he finds no other Remedy, he is resolved to bear it
patiently. For my part, I look upon this to be as great a Torment as can be
upon Earth, for a man to be well stricken in years, Diseased and Troubled with
a Painful Distemper, Sequestered from all Friends and Relations, debarred of all
Company, but such as rather add to, than diminish his Sorrow. Thus he Lingers
away in Grief, Pines with Pain, Languisheth with Sorrow, lives Wretchedly, but
I hope dies Happily; tho my Prayers shall be, that Fortune would bring her to
some shameful End, that occasioned it, and so Farewell, thou worst of Women!

The Tenth COMFORT. The Fool Rewarded.
HE that is once decoyed into the Net of Matrimony, must bear with his
Misfortune as well as he can; for it is a hard thing for him to get out of the
Nooz, when he is once fastened, as will appear by this ensuing Discourse. Our
Married Man here, that is to taste of the Tenth Comfort of Marriage (much good
do his heart with it) is but a Puny, Diminutive, Consumptive Animal, neither
gifted with Weapons nor Activity to please a Wife; and she, after an Essay made
of his Ability, complains to her Mother, that she cannot love him, he is so
Lean and Meager, that it is as good lying with a parcel of Carpenter's Tools,
as with him, his skin is so lanck, and his bones so sharp and extended, that
when he touches her in Bed, he pricks her like so many Needles, tho not in the
proper place, a life that no poor Woman can bear; she wants due Benevolence,
and requires more Milk than he can give her, and therefore is resolved to Lap
elsewhere. Now the Solace of Matrimony begins to appear, Tantalus-like, she i^
up to the Chin in Water, and can neithe^ drink, nor eat those Apples that ly
b^bing at her Mouth; a sad condition for ^ Hungry and Thirsty Soul: Abroad she
roams, picks up the first Stallion tha^ comes to Hand, and enjoys him as often
as she has opportunity. Stolen Waters ar^ sweet, they say, and it appears so by
thi^ Gentlewoman; but the Mischief on it i^ that by ill conduct of Affairs, her
Husband discovers her Amorous Intriegue* spoils her Gaming, and corrects her
severely for her Impudence; insomuch* that she deserts him, and goes to he^
Friends, Complaining with feigned tear^ of his Harsh Usage to her, and shows
the Marks of his severity to her Relations* who pity her, and curse him. This
i^ an excellent Comfort of Matrimony. Thu^ Pleasure salutes him in the very
Infancy of his Wedded Condition, and will undoubtedly continue to the end.
Howeve^ the Fond Fop, being deprived of his Wife, bemoans her absence every
night in his Widdow'd Sheets, and is at a great loss for a Bedfellow: He
cannot endure this Life long, and therefore the poor Cornuto must send for her
again; finding him in this Loving Pickle, Poor thing! the Bowels of her
Affection wamble not after a Husband (having been all this while stewed in the
warm Embraces of her Gallant) and procures her Mother to give out, that she
has been all this while under her Tutelage; then having an Opportunity to meet
with her Husband, Rattles him soundly for his Baseness toward her Daughter,
telling him, that her Poor Child was forced to run away from him, because she
went in danger of her Life all the time she co-habited with him: I had rather,
says she, by half, that you would turn her Home to me, and part good Friends,
than to abuse her so as you do; and withal take notice that your Behavior to
the Poor Girl is enough to make her do what she never thought of, and make your
Headake in spite of your Teeth, take that from me, Sir, since you are as you
are. Being thus Lectured by the Mother, he seems to be very sorrowful, and has
a Months mind to the Daughter; nothing will serve him, but he must have her
again, and has her de been esse, upon promise of Reformation. Overjoyed with
the repurchase of his Wife, he grows kind even to Wonder, hops about with her
from place to place, till his Money is all hoped from him, and then returns
home with an empty Pocket, but a heavy Heart, God knows. Or else, if this
Wheedle does not take, a Divorce is endeavored on both sides to be procured,
but for want of sufficient Cause of Separation, or by reason of a considerable
Flaw in the Evidence, the Judge condemns them to live according to their
Marriage Vow, and imposes a smart Fine upon them for their Folly; so that the
Case is worse and worse, they are both doomed to a Loathed Bed, and a Life
which an Idiot has sense enough to avoid, rather than be so tormented, and
expose themselves Ludicrously to the Censure of the whole World. Now if it
falls out, that there is sufficient Cause for a Divorce, their misery is not at
all abated; for they must never Marry while they live; and if they are not so
Continent, as to forbear Venereal Divertisements, they must even run the risque
of a Swinging Clap, and the loss of Reputation; so that by this means they are
caught, and faster in the Net than ever; and if they are of a Noble Family,
Rich in Lands and Possessions, then their Names are lost for want of an Heir,
and they go out of the World with an ill stench, their Reputation being rotten
before their Dust, and their memory is more nauseous than their Bones in the
Grave. He is sorely troubled at the Bad Report of his Wife, and can go into no
Company, but her misdeeds are displayed before him, to his Grief, and her own
Shame, an Envenomed Tongue making a deep and incurable Wound; thus he sees
himself the May Game and Sport of every Flouting Fellow, and silently bears all
that is thrown at him: every one has a fling at his Jacket, and the Gallants
many at his Wife's Placket, who keep her under his very Nose, to the grief of
his Heart, he pacing about the Town Acteonniz'd, and admired by the Boys and
Rabble, a Torment sufficient, I confess, to discompose a wiser Head; but no
matter, it is no more than he deserves, and all such contented Cuckolds: Let
him live as long, and as well as he can, I Will not envy his Happiness, and when
ever he Dies, I hope I shall die in a better, tho not so contented a Condition.

The Eleventh COMFORT. The Town-Fop with Flesh in his Pot.
WHen a brave young Gentleman is at his own freedom, and has the World in a
string, he may steer his own Course without care or control. This our Gallant
here, we intend to mention, has a good Estate, keeps high Company, Caresses
Handsome Ladies, gives himself over to all manner of Pleasure, is his Father's
only Son and Joy. At length this Spark meets with a Young, Comely, Brisk,
Sanguine Complexioned Lady, who can never long withstand a Suit well managed
with Judgment, and well-tim'd with discretion, (tho every Woman of what
Complexion soever will permit a Man to screw himself into her Constitution, if
she likes him) he has made many and tedious Addresses to her, laid close Siege
to her Chastity, so that the poor thing is able to hold out no longer, but must
yield up the Fort, grants his request, and exposes her self to his roose
Embraces.

But the worst is to come, this is not all; the little viripotent Youngling of
fifteen is Prolific, and proves with Child, for which there can be no other
Remedy than Concealment, and as good luck would have it, the Mother had been in
the Oven before, and understood well enough how to make the best of a bad
Market, for the poor Girl knows not she is with Child, tho the Mother does, and
she has not long to reckon; she pukes every Morning, making strange Grimaces,
and complains that her stomach is untoward, and out of order: Well! without all
Question, says the Mother, you are with Child; now mind what I am going to say
to you; as for your Gallant I have forbidden him my House for ever, he being
too mean a match for you; be sure, Hussy, you never open your lips of this
unlucky Job (which came by Jobbing) to any Christian Soul, and observe
punctually what I shall say to you. Did you never take notice of the young
Esquire that comes here sometimes? yes, Madam, says she; well, take special
notice of him next time, and he has promised to be here to Morrow: Behave your
self discreetly, and show him a Pleasant Countenance: and when you spy me a
talking with the rest of the Company, dart a favorable, fascinating Glance
upon him, cast a sheeps eye at him, do you understand me, Girl? yes, Madam;
observe my directions: if he will keep you in discourse, answer him Modestly,
if he proffers you Marriage, return him thanks innocently, but withal give him
to understand that you know-not what it is, nor do you desire to learn: If he
offers you a present either of Gold or Silver, be sure you refuse it harmlesly;
but if it be with a Jewel, Diamond, or Ring; do as Maids use to do, deny it
modestly at first, say nay, and then take it. When he takes his leave of you
ask him mildly, when you shall see him again? This Noble Blade is but an Inch
of this side of a Natural, has a vast Estate, but a mere Town-Fop, whom the
Mother will, if possible, work upon to Marry her Daughter, so that he is in
great danger of being caught in the Net, and finely Bubled. Well! he repeats
his Visits, as close as he can one upon the neck of the other: is very well
received, splendidly Treated, and after dinner withdraws with the young Lady,
and Complements her apart from the Company, takes her by the hand, and thus
(like a fool as he is) accosts her. Madam, I wish with all my Soul, that you
knew but the ^houghts of my heart. Alas! Sir, that is ^mpossible, unless you
discover them; I ^ope you think of no harm. Upon my Faith, not I, Madam, nor of
any thing but what I would willingly have you know, and that without my telling
it. Truly Sir, says she, and Ushers her discourse with a charming Smile: I
cannot Divine, and therefore it is impossible for me to understand you. If I
thought, Madam, you would not be displeased, I would faith^ully discover them.
Sir, replies the Young Lady, you have your freedom to say what ^ou please; for
I have so good an opinion ^f you, that I presume you can say nothing but what
is Commendable and Ci^il. Madam, says he, I am a Person, ^ must confess,
unworthy to Kiss your ^ands, and dare not presume to marry you ^eing a Lady
adorned with all Natures ^erfection: but if you please to do me that Honor,
(expect no Ceremony from me, Madam) I dare boast from my Heart, that I ^ould
love you with all my Soul, and that ^o man can love you better, nor serve you
^ith that submission and affection that I ^an and will, for I resolve never to
forsake you, let what will befall me, and I shall be (...) tender of your
Reputation, as my own. ^ return you thanks, Sir, says she, but I be^ seech
you, cease your Discourse, do not har^ upon that string any longer; for I know
not what it means, nor will I learn, that ^ flat and Categorical; This Discour^
would offend my Mother, if it should read^ her ear. Faith, Madam, your Mother ^
a very good Woman; but, if you please^ your Mother shall know nothing of it^ I
will be wholly directed by your Commands. Why do you say so, Sir, I am
confident it would not be for your Good, neither would your Friends advise you
to a^ ny such thing: Pray Sir forbear this kin^ of Talk; for if my Mother
should hear i^ I am utterly undone, here the Mother gav^ her a Nod, seeing them
both very earne^ in Discourse, for fear she should Miscarry^ and not Act her
part well: Then the Ne^ led Youth claps a Ring in her hand, an^ begs of her to
accept it for his sake; indeed^ Sir, I shall not; I beseech you, Madam wear it
for my sake; well, Sir, says she at last, since it must be so, it shall be so
and I will wear it upon your accoun^ Then the Mother comes to him, an^ tells
him, to Morrow, Sir, we design t^ ride a little way out of Town, to take ^he
Fresh Air; at which he rejoices; ^hen the time of Departure is come, the
^usiness is so ordered, that there is never ^ Horse in the Company carries
double, ^ut the young Gentleman's, at which ^e is not a little pleased; so it
falls out ^appily, that his Mistress is set behind ^im, who hugs the Pummel of
her Sadle ^r her own Security, I leave you to judge ^hether he likes his
Company or no: ^e Gentleman is very near the Net; for ^is Journey was only
undertaken to catch ^e Young Widgeon; he keeps close to ^is Mistress; and when
the Mother sinds ^n opportunity, she enquires of her Daugh^r how squares go,
and she tells her all: from henceforward, says she, Daughter, ^hatever you do,
carry your self discreet^, if he talks of Marrying you, tell him, ^ou must
acquaint me with it, but withal, ^at he is the only Man in the World you ^ve,
and that you will never have any ^ut him. Then they take a Walk in the ^arden,
then he takes her by the hand, and says, Fine Lady! take pity of me, I ^eseech
you: Pray, Sir, talk no more on it, ^r if you do, I will forsake your Com^any:
Spare me one word more without offense, if you would be pleased to Crow^ me
with this Happiness, I should take ^ for the greatest Honor that was ev^
conferred upon Mortal. Sir, says she, (...) must be proposed to my Relations,
or el^ I can say nothing to it: If I thought the would approve of it, I would
propose (...) my self; for God's sake, says the cu^ ning Gypsy, have a care,
that you do n^ say a word of my proposing any su^ thing, for I should die
through shame, (...) any such thing should be said of me; n^ I, upon my Faith,
Madam; and then (...) way he goes to the Mother, and discou^ ses the business
so respectively, that it (...) concluded, and they make up the Mat^
immediately; the sooner, the better, a^ things considered, for Hans in Kelda^
sake: Now the Poor Gentleman is ^ the Net, and no body as yet knows of i^ but
at last it comes to the Ears of his Parents, who are grieved at the very hea^
knowing it to be too inferior a Mat^ for their Son: thus they are Wedded ^
haste, and may repent at leisure; he w^ Married without License, unaskt (...)
Church, without any Ceremony; an^ way in the World, so that the business ^ once
over. Well, night draws on, the Moth^ takes her Daughter to task, and instills
some of her good, Motherly Instructions into her, relating to her Carriage with
her Husband that Night: she charges her to put him to it as a Virgin ought to
do; and farther, that as soon as he entered the Premises, with some feigned
Reluctance on her part, she must fall into a fainting shriek, as if she had
fallen into a cold water in a hot fit. Thus she Tutors her Daughter to deceive
the Young Fop. All things hitherto are very well, but mark what follows, there
is a cursed sting in the Tail; for within two or three Months, the Young Bride
groans, and falls all to pieces; it could be no longer hid, a Young Babe peeps
into the World, and that spoils all. Now all the Joy is converted into Sorrow,
and he knows not what to do with himself. He is quite at a loss: If he turns
her away, the whole World will be acquainted with it, and he cannot Marry
again, and for her part she will take care of one. It Is an ill Hen that cannot
scrape for one Chicken. If he keeps her and co-habits with her, she will never
care a Pin for him, nor he for her, there will be no Love lost of either side,
I Will be bold to say. Well! All is well that ends well, says the good old
Adage, and so say I too; but from such Comfort in the Close, from such an End
as this, Good Lord deliver me!

The Twelfth COMFORT. The Domineering Wife, and Contented Lap-Dog.
AND a sweet one it is too, if you knew all. Our Youngster in this Case is one
has beat about the Net so long, that at last he has found a hole to creep in
at; and to be sure has verified the Adage, fast bind, fast find, he has tied
an Indissolluble Knot, but here is his Comfort still, that he has Married such
a Non pareille, such a matchless Wom^ for Morality, Goodness, and Virtue, that
she is not to be Paralleled in the Universe: He admires her Discourse, extols
her Education, commends her Deportment, dotes upon her Face, is so Captivated
with the Distinction of her Sex, that he is Ravished with his Choice, and
boasts of his Prudent election; he is resolved to let loose the Reins of
Government, and permit her to bear the Sway; nothing shall be done, but what
has first the Stamp of her Approbation: She is his All, and He her Nothing,
nay, you will find at last, that she values him little or nothing: He is as
Tame as a Man, reduced by Phlebotomy to a weakly condition, and made up of
nothing but Obedience. There Is my Man (if he has not forfeited his Manhood) as
good a Husband ^s ever laid Leg over Woman. If His King and Country raise an
Army to op^ose a Foreign Invasion, he shall not stir (...) Foot, unless she be
in the Humor to ^ermit him, he shall not go to the Wars; ^or his Wife is too
tender of him to let ^im be so long out of her sight; Hang (...) he shall not
March, lest he returns ^ith Grinning or Cripled Honor. Come, ^ome, Sweet
Heart! says she, it is good ^eeping in a whole Skin; you never was ^t out for
Martial Enterprises; your Bo^ is too young and tender to be exposed (...) the
Hazard and Hardship of Ruffling ^ar: Let others purchase Renown, that ^ncy it,
at never ^o dear a Rate, you shall ^joy your self at Home in Peace and
Quietness. Thus is the fond Fop absolutely Governed by his Wife, she has him
fast, and will not lose an Inch of her hold If she has a mind to Juncket and
Sport with her Gallant, he must to Bed, and then the Goose is laid to the Fire.
Some times she puts him in mind of urgent Business, and then he must rise at
Midnigh to dispatch it; or else she exposes him to a Journey, that she may have
the bette^ Opportunity to enjoy her Friend; or h^ must rise all Hours in the
Night to fet^ her a Doctor to cure the Stich or Pain (...) the Side, and expose
himself to the injur^ of the Weather, when in the interim shadmits her Gallant,
who is so bold as t^ Scale the Walls, creep in at the Window and a thousand
such little Love-Toys, (...) accomplish his Design and Desire. Some times it
falls out that her Friend (...) Planted himself behind the Hangings, an^ her
mischievous little Lap-dog smells hi^ out, and she tells her Husband, they a^
Rats and Mice that he Barks at, and pe^ swades him it is the poor Cur's Custom
(...) do so; but at last she frightens him awa^ with, Out you little Foisting
Cur, what (...) Noise is here with you? and then he snea^ away like a dog that
has burnt his Ta^ She makes him dandle the Child to sleep, and sing a Nocturnal
Lullaby to the Innocent Babe, while he like an Innocent Fool does it without
Murmuring: she makes him carry the Distaff or Spindle, whilst she is cutting
out more work for him: she spins a fair Thread at last, and ^e to his cost
finds that, he has brought his Hogs to a fair Market. In short, like a Spa^el
he is made to fetch and carry, when, and what she pleases; the poor Fop never
^njoys a minutes rest or content, runs through (...) World of Sorrow and
Tribulation, and so ^et him, unpitied for me; for he seems to ^e created to no
other End. He has brought ^n old House over his Head, which is pre^ntly
until'd, if he speaks but one word ^ contradict her: she has got the upper Hand
of him, and it is now too late to re(...) her: had he taken her down in her
Wedding-shoes, there might have been ^opes of doing some good with her; but
(...) is in vain, nay impossible to work upon ^er now.

Thus he grows Aged through Care, ^rief and Vexation, is slighted by his ^ame,
like an old Faulkner, or to speak ^ore properly, like an Old Wife (the ^orst of
Creatures,) good for nothing. His (or rather-her) Domestic Affairs, he must
not intermeddle with: she is the Domina fac totum; and if any of he^ Daughters
be Marriageable, she disposes of them to whom she pleases, without his
Consent or Approbation: If they are well Matched, well and good: if ill he dares
not find fault with it, much less upbraid her for it. She plays the Wo^ man
exactly, and will have her Will in every thing, right or wrong, there is no^
gainsaying, unless he has a mind to make the House too hot to hold him. Now
Appeal to all Rational Men, what great Torment can there be to a Man that such
a Ruling Houswise? what great Plague to a Husband than such a Do^ neering
Wife? O the unutterable com^ fort of such an easy, pleasant Life, when the
good Woman takes all the B^the upon her own Shoulders, Manages a^ Affairs at
home and abroad, and he no^ so much as concerned with any, live happily and
free from the Cares and Tur^ moils of a Wedded Life, Dies with Grie^ and Shame,
to see himself so Conquer by his Wife, and so sneaks out of the World, quite
weary of it, without pit^ or compassion: There let him rest quie^ly in his
Grave, that never did so in his Lifetime, without Epitaph or Monument, but
that everlasting one of his Folly, that he left behind him to Postetity.

The Thirteenth COMFORT. The Wedded Widdower, and Single Wife.
THis Gentleman we are to treat of here, is of a quite different Temper from
the last, who will not be Ruled by his Wife, but is of a Noble, Martial Spirit,
and runs in pursuit of Honor and Fame. He is resolved to venture his Life and
Fortune in his Princes Service Beyond Sea, and in order thereunto first
acquaints his Wife with his unshaken Resolution; she Embraces and Caresses him
with Tears, in her Eyes: Alas! my dear, says she, can you have the heart to
forsake me and the Pledges of our Love, these sweet Babes? will you now desert
me, and leave me and my Children to the wide World, Comfortless and
Husbandless, when we have lived so contentedly, as Man and Wife, for some years
together? My Dear! says he, I must go, my Honor lies at stake, which is
dearer than Life and all in the World besides. I must obey my King, or forfeit
my Loyalty, and the Estate that I hold of his Majesty by Tenure to serve him in
his Wars; but in Grace of God I hope to see you suddenly, if he please to
continue my Life and Health, and he is best able to provide for you. Thus he
takes leave of his Wife with a heavy heart, and she is as big with seeming
sorrow at their parting; recommending her, and his Children to the Care and
Tuition of his Friends. As Soon as he arrives at the Camp, he being an active,
brave Soul, cannot rest without some attempt to signalize his Valor, and
attacques the Enemy with so brisk an assault, that he clears all before him, so
the Dispute continues hot on both sides a considerable time, but at last,
stimulated by Honor and Glory, presses too far into the Body of the Enemy, and
the Poor Gentleman has the misfortune to be taken Prisoner, and there is kept
three or four Years, before he can procure an Exchange or Ransom to obtain his
Liberty. His Lady is very Inquisitive after his Welfare, and at last receives
some slight and uncertain Information of his Death, which she seems to take
very Grievously, and falls into an excess of Sorrow; but certainly Women were
not Created only to weep; besides inordinate Grief is prohibited and sinful.
God be thanked, in a very short time this grief is over, and she is married to
another. The entire Affection she had for her former Husband and his Issue is
quite forgot and lost; all her fond Careffes and Embraces before, and at his
departure, are buried with him (as she thinks) in Oblivion, without hopes of a
Resurrection; she shows more love to the second than she did to her first
Husband; but that fickle Baggage Fortune will have it so, that her Husband at
length is Released, returns Home, tho much decayed and broken by the severity
of his Imprisonment, and the hard usage he received from the Enemy. No sooner
arrived, but he makes diligent Inquisition after his Wife and Children, and the
thoughts of their miscarriage, did certainly much aggravate the affliction and
grief of his Captivity. At last he understands the dismal and unwelcome news of
her Second Marriage: now judge you what a Confusion he is in at this stabbing
Relation. The anguish of Priam King of Troy, when he was acquainted with the
Death of Hector, was not certainly comparable to his; at last he comes Home,
and is fully informed of all the particulars. What a Distraction he now is in
may possibly be faintly imagined, but never fully expressed; what Course to
steer, or how to grapple with this Misfortune, is a Controversy that cannot
well be decided. What Revenge can he study suitable to her Crime? what
punishment does she not deserve to have inflicted upon her for Faithlessness?
As he is a Man of Courage and Honor he can never be so Puny-spirited as to put
up this Injury unsatisfied, nor can he buckle to so tame and unmanly a
Condescension, as to re-admit her into his Bed, tho her Husband should dispense
with it. On the other side, he who Married her last must needs be very much
disturbed at this unlucky Business, and having been satiated with her, must
hate and forsake her, for Love and Empire never admit of Corrivals. And what a
sad Case now is she in by her over-forwardness and Credulity? she has lost her
Reputation; both her Husbands and her own Honor, has buried all her Modesty
in the Grave of Infamy, and exposed her self to the Virulent Tongues of carping
Momi; her Children will be afflicted and disturbed at the Misfortune of the
Mother, the vexation of the Father, and consequently at the Infelicity of both
their Parents.

Thus they two, who might have lived comfortably all their days, by this
unlucky accident, are like to live miserably, to whom length of days, the
greatest Happiness on Earth, will prove their greatest Misery. Marry they must
not, cannot, dare not: This is one of the desirable Comforts of Matrimony: One
of the Enjoyments of a Wedded Life: One of the Pleasures of a Coupled
Condition. They must live asunder withour hopes of a reunion, he must die a
Wedded Widdower, and she a single Wife, an unhappy Mystery to both, and an
unfortunate, tho unheard of Paradox.

The Fourteenth COMFORT. The Disconsolate Widower justly punished.
HE that is senfible of this Comfort is one, who has taken such pains to find
a passage into the Net, that he is got in and ensnared by a young, beautiful,
and well tempered Woman; and they enjoy their Delights and Pleasures without
Contention or Disturbance; a happy life indeed, and such as might make a Man
thirst after the Cup of Matrimony. They Caress one another incessantly, like
two Turtles, for they are two in one united; and if the one is in the least
Discomposed, the other Sympathiseth in the pain and Affliction; but these are
Halcyon Days, too serene and calm to last long; for the Wife dies suddenly, and
puts a Period to all their Amors and Happy Enjoyments. The Young Man grows
very Disconsolate, bewails Night and Day the Irreparable Loss of his Wife;
sometimes complaining of Death, and other times of the Capriciousness of
Versatile Fortune, Nature's Whirlegig, that is always turning, and never fixed
or settled. Thus for some time he lives in Misery, shuns all Society, abandons
all Comfort, ruminating upon his Misfortune, the Deprivation of so good and
kind a Comfort: He dreams of her continually, thinks of her without
Intermission, and loves her Memory. But it is as true, as old a saying, nullum
violentum est perpetuum: Sorrows are short, that are sharp and violent. But
after all, this our young Gentleman tho he has been once caught in the Net,
and freed, must be so Foppish as to venture a second time, and is baited into
it again, to his great Grief and Discontent: by a Widow, who is a Person of a
quite contrary Humor to his former Wife, of a middle Age: First she carries
her self very demurely with tolerable Discretion; but at length, when she has
sufficiently pried into his Temper, and thoroughly understands his Constitution,
then she begins to show her Teeth, and play upon his sweet Dispesition (a Fault
too incident to that Sex) brings him to her bow, and manages him to her best
advantage, she studying nothing but her own, not his Satisfaction: And
certainly there are no such Vassals in the worst of Servitude, who are so
enslaved, as simple Young Men, when linked to Widdow'd Women, especially when
they are of a Cross and Sordid Humor; and he that is so unfortunate as to be
reduced to this Extremity, has no other Redress, but to pray to God to grant
him Patience to undergo this weighty Affliction; if that will not do, his utmost
Refuge is to have recourse to a Silken Halter, and so strangle himself together
with his Misery. Now she begins to appear in her Colors; she grows Jealous of
him (the very Bane of a Married Life) and is so insatiable that she is
dissatisfied, if he be but a minute out of her Embraces, cannot endure him out
of her sight, and every Woman he casts an Eye upon, he lusts after. When
Widows meet with young Flesh, they cherish it, because it renews their
Strength and Vigor; and there is nothing more Noisome, or prejudicial to a
Young man's Health, than a Lascivious, Draining, Old Wife: Yet I look upon an
Old Man to be the greater Bruit of the two, who Smugs and Trims himself up with
all Artificial Ornaments to make him appear Youthful, and then Marries a Young
Girl: That is a most intolerable piece of Vanity, a Foppery neither to be
allowed, nor imitated: His Nauseous Breath, proceeding from the corruption of
Decayed Lungs, must needs offend beyond Expression; Coughing, Sneezing,
Spawling, Groaning and Spitting (tho not a word of spitting in the right Basin)
must needs be very unacceptable to Youth, if not Odious and Loathsome: But to
return to our Young Gentleman, taken in the Net a second time (the greater his
Folly) his Wife grows so greedy after Man's Flesh, that she could find in her
heart to turn She-Canibal, and devour it she is stark mad with Jealousy, and
if he goes to Church with never such Real, Pious and Devout Intentions, she
suspects he has some Sinister and Wicked Designs. I am apt to believe, there
can be no Real Love without some smack or spice of Jealousy: for certainly no
Man or Woman would match themselves to a Creature, who had no good Quality, or
Parts to create an Inclination in a second Person toward them, that would
betray the Foolishness of their Choice; but this sort of Jealousy, or rather
Suspicion, occasions no Domestic Feuds, or Household Jarrs, because it is only
an Excess of Kindness or Affection; but that which creates a groundless
Suspicion and Diffidence of the Party beloved, and ends in Brawling and
Contention, must needs be the worst of Plagues, and the Cursed Sting and
Torment of Matrimony. If these be the Comforts of a Married Life, let me enjoy
my Liberty and Freedom in a single State, and live happily without
Dissatisfaction or Disturbance. I do not in the least blame the State of
Matrimony, mistake me not; but the Rash and Precipitate Election of those
Hotspurs, that run headlong into that Condition without deliberate
Consideration. Hippocrates, the Famous Greek Physician, has a smart saying,
and very pertinently Applicable to our young Gentlemen, Vetulam non novi, cur
morior? I never Wedded an old Wife, and why should I die? it had been well for
him, if he had laid this Sentence to heart, and matched himself to one of his
own youthful Temper, then he might have lived happily and contentedly, tho here
we must take our leave of him, gasping for his last Breath in a wretched and
deplo^able Condition.

The Fifteenth COMFORT. The double Cajoal.
THis is a great and Prodigious Comfort, a Comfort that cannot be expressed
significantly. Our Married Man here chances to meet with a Woman who is much
addicted to the shaking of her Elbow, as well as of her Tail, two good
Qualities in a good Wife, and the good Man is like to thrive upon it. This
course of Life she leads for a considerable time undisturbed, because
undiscovered, but at length he finds his Estate decay by her expensive Gaming;
suspects her Fidelity, and is resolved to watch an opportunity, to discover, if
possible, her Amorous Intrigues: And one day, as Fate would have it, he enters
her Chamber privately, and surprizeth her in the very Action, or in a very
suspicious and wanton posture. The Husband incensed with Rage and Fury, cannot
contain himself any longer within bounds, but flies at her Gallant with a
design to make him breath out his last upon the Spot, but as he is striking at
him, his Wife, kind Soul! (as it behooves her; for she ought not to stand by,
and be guilty of Murder,) comes and embraces her Husband; Ah! for Gods sake, my
Dear, have a care that you do not hit an unlucky Blow, and be Guilty of
Bloodshed; whereupon the Blade clears himself of his intended Assassine, and
shows him a fair pair of Heels; 'twas well he was nimble-footed, or else he had
certainly been sacrificed to his Fury; but Fear and Guilt have Wings as well as
Love, and in short he makes his escape. The Husband pursues him, but to no
purpose; for he has secured himself by Flight: whereupon he returns like a
Hungry, Rampant Lion into the Chamber, thinking to meet with his Wife, and make
her his Prey; but alas! the Bird is flown. Now what think you is become of this
Unfortunate and Disconsolate Woman? why she is fled to her Relations, and
acquaints them with all these Passages in a Mournful Dialect, with some seeming
Regret. At this Relation all the whole Family is in an uproar; sometimes
blaming him for his Severity, but her, most of all, for her Impudence and
Indiscretion. The Wife palliates the business to her Mother, at the first, but
upon strict Examination Confesses with Sighs and Tears the whole matter (the
Mother understanding very well how to manage a Cause of this Nature, who had
her self been guilty of the same miscarriage, tho with more Privacy and
Secrecy, without Injury to her Reputation by so Palpable and Notorious a
Discovery) Well! they meet and consult how to smother the business, and by
Menaces on the one hand, and Entreaties on the other hand, to reduce the easy
natured Husband to a better Temper, and by all means possible, to patch up a
Reconciliation, and make Peace between them. In order thereunto, first they
tamper with his Chambermaid, a Procureur d'Amour, a Procuring Bawd, or Female
Pander to her Mistresses Lust, and they ask her how it is with her Master,
since this unlucky Disaster? To whom she replies, he is in a very desperate,
discontented Condition, has taken no sustenance at all since that Misfortune
happened, nor had any Rest or Sleep to Refresh him. When he sat down to
Dinner, this Day, he did not swallow so much as one Morsel, his Stomach was too
weak to entertain food; then he sits as Melancholy as one that is
Hypocondriacal; has a ghastly, wan look, as if Grief had drunk up all the color
of his face. Sometimes he wrings his Hands, shakes his Head, bites his Fingers
ends, takes his Knife, and sticks it in the Table, and afterward throws it away
with great Indignation. Then presently, on a sudden, starts up and takes a
Promenade in the Garden, but returns with a distracted look, before he has
passed thirty Yards; he can neither sit nor stand still one minute in a place;
Night and Day he sighs, bemoans himself, that it would extort pity from a
Barbarian, to see him in this sad Condition. Well! at length, after some time
elapsed, when they Judged the storm was somewhat over, and that he was grown
more cool and temperate. Some of the most forward and crafty of that Female
Gang of her Friends and Relations attacque the Husband, like the Northern Wind,
blusteringly, and the Tempest being over, strike Sail, and discourse with as
great Moderation and Subtlety, commending his Wife for her Virtue, Modesty, and
Piety (a pious Devil indeed) and that they have known her for several Years to
live like a Modest Wife, with an unstained Reputation, obedient to your self,
respective to her Neighbors, and civil to all Persons of both Sexes. Now for
you openly to defame her, to the ruin of her Honor, upon some imaginary
surmize, is unkind, and injurious in so high a nature, that you can never make
her amends: besides, Sir, let me be plain with you in a business of so great
Concernment, say, or think what you will, to my own certain knowledge, two
persons may be closely engaged in Discourse together, in a very friendly
posture, and yet not do the thing that you imagine, nor ever so much as
entertain a thought of so Disloyal and Immodest an Action, as to defile their
Husband's Bed. What he might, like a bold Ruffian attempt, I will not here
dispute, that is none of my pretense, but Foreign to the matter in hand; yet
this I Will confidently aver and maintain against all opposition, that there is
no Man breathing, that your Lady hates like this Villain, who has so rashly
brought an old House over her Head; nay, I am satisfied in my Conscience, that
she would sooner see him suffer the most Ignominious Death that ever was
executed upon the most Notorious Criminal, than permit him to touch her in an
uncivil way. Let me persuade you to consult your reason, and not thus ruffle
and discompose your self with a mere Chimaera or Fancy; the poor Woman is so
swelled with Tears, that she has scarce an Eye to peep out of, wrings her
hands, bewails her condition, and laments without intermission, the displeasure
you have conceived against her; it lies in your power yet to make up the
business, with a Salvo to her, and your own Reptutation; for long she cannot
continue in this languishing condition, and I hope you do not thirst after her
blood, that were Inhuman and Unchristian. Come, come, Sir, let me tell you, you
must foget and forgive, if there were (tho I see no) cause for either, upon
your Wife's account: Besides, do you think, if your Wife were a Dissolute
Woman, a Woman of tainted Reputation, that we would undervalue our selves so
much, as to keep her Company? No, no, never cherish any such thought in you,
for that were to stab our Fame and Honor, as well as hers: Nay, Sir, I must
tell you farther, I have been acquainted with her from her Childhood, and am
so far from knowing harm by her, that I dare maintain, she has been the Pattern
of Virtue in this Country. What, says the Husband, will you persuade me out of
my Senses? I saw it with my own eyes. In good Faith, it is no such thing, say
what you will; the Senses are fallible, for want of a proper Medium, or through
some weakness or imperfection in the Optics. O Brave Dame! well Philosophis'd,
I protest: we use to say, Seeing is believing; but in this case, it seems, a
Man must not believe his own eyes. Well! the Husband begins to be of a more
Sedate and Serene Temper, and considers with himself, that Jealousy casts a
Mist before the sight, and makes a Man see double, or very imperfectly: So now
he is resolved tamely to put up all wrongs, wipe his mouth, and be silent for
the future; the Women smile to see the Business so well managed, promise to
bring them together again, and take their leave of him for the present. Thus
the facil Gentleman is convinced of his Error, and very much troubled, that
ever he entertained such a Thought, and so he receives his Wife again, and all
things are buried in their mutual Embraces. Now what think you will be the
Issue of all this? she upon this grows Insolent, and hits him in the Teeth with
his Recognition and Acknowledgement, upbraiding him with the Injury he has
done her. The Gallant and Neighbors must be Treated with a costly Collation to
put up the business, and now they may enjoy themselves without Control, her
Friend Canesses her, and she him, one good turn, you know, deserves another,
and Ingratitude is the Blackest of Crimes. Thus she is a Lady Paramount,
consumes his Estate with Gaming, wastes his Body with grieving him, persecutes
his Soul, till it takes its flight, and so at last, laden with Years and
Cares, is wafted over in Charon's Ferry, to the Elysian Shades; and there is an
end of his Misery.

The Sixteenth COMFORT. The Poor Man's Comfort.
NOw we are come into the Teens, and past through the better half of our
Matrimonial Solaces, we will discourse a little of this Sixteenth, which is a
poor and pitiful Comfort indeed; for here Penury and Pertinacy are Wedded
together, as well as Man and Wife, both of them are Children of the Mean Mob,
Profane Vulgus, or what you please to term them, mean in Parentage, as well as
in Parts and Purse, he but of ordinary, and she of no extraordinary Mold, yet
in time, after some Years Co-habitation and Cooperation, they are blessed with a
Numerous Company of brats (Chargeable Blessings indeed, and fitter for the
Parish to maintain than this Couple) they Drudge, Moil, Toil, and do all that
can as yet be required, but by and by you must be rounded in the Ear with
another dismal Story, and you know very well, or at least I will inform you,
that it is an old Proverb with the Phlegmatic Butter-box, when any thing is
done effectually and to purpose, they say, it is performed as poor men get
Children. But to proceed, if they prove negligent, the craving Appetite of the
Bawling and Prattling Babe will soon weary them into a remembrance of their
Parental Office, in providing for their Family, since they were not so cautious
as to make Provision before they engaged themselves rashly in that incumbent
Duty. Thus the Good Man after a hard days Drudgery, having been at it before
the Sun appeared in our Hemisphere, and continued it till he is gone to bestow
his kind influence upon the Antipodes, who when tired Nature requiring some
Refreshment, he sits at one end of the House like the Image of a Slovenly
Mechanic, and she like the sluttish Effigies of Charity, with one Child at her
Breast, a second in her Lap, a third upon the Ground, grasping her Knees, and
the rest about them crying for Bread, bawling for Drink, screaming to be
undrest, gaping and yawning to be laid to sleep: (a charming noise, and
ravishing harmony no doubt, enough to drive a man out of his wits, for not
having so much previous wit, as to consider it before) thus they have both
their hands and heart full, God help them, he Rocks ^e Cradle, and she feeds
the hungry ^mily, and all little enough to satisfy ^e grumbling of their
craving Maws. ^aving been thus, for some Years, so^ced with the Comforts of
Matrimony, ^e begins to find his Wedded Life irk^me, which makes him neglect
his Af^irs, slight his Business, Charges still ^creasing, and Trade decaying,
now he ^s taken heart, and is resolved for the ^ture to make use of the too
common ^ode of these times, to turn a Good ^llow, frequent the Tipling-House
^ore than formerly, and his Shop less; ^y if his Stock will at any time reach
(...) he will to Tavern, and there sing ^d Rose, till Night and the Constable,
^ho Summon all to go to their Rest and ^abitations; then he Reels Home with
^mptiness in his Pocket, Rage in his ^ooks, and Vexation in his Heart; and
there he meets with a second Ren^unter worse than the former, from his ^ife (a
Domestic, but sometimes ^tameable Animal) Well Thomas! ^aith she) do thou
think that I am ^le to endure this cursed Life? or can ^u imagine, that I must
be confined (...) Home, with a parcel of Children about my ears without Bread
and Drink to put in their Heads, whilst you are Revelling abroad Night and day,
among your Sottish Companions: I cannot bear it any longer, but am resolved to
go abroad too, and then do you take care and provide for the Children: I Will
learn out your Haunts, and find you out if you are above ground, never fear it;
and and then assure your self, I Will Ring you and your Drunken Associates such a
peal, as shall soon break up your Company. He being heated with Drink, and
naturally a surly, sower Fellow, lays his brawny Arms upon her, and corrects
her for her Scolding, insomuch that she is forced to keep House for a Week or
Fortnight, to prevent the battered black and blew Livery of her Eyes and Face
from being discovered by the Gossiping Neighborhood; he in the ^nterim gets up
in the Morning, and away to the Alehouse to refresh himself, and torment her at
Home for her last Nights Work. Now he is grown irretriveably lost, as to his
Trade and Family, works very little, and that more for outward show than any
thing else, is grown so bewitched to his new Gang of pot Companions, that he
has taken resolution to Rant, Tear and fling the Helve after Hatchet; ^ut Money
he must procure by one means (...) other, to maintain him in this Debauched
Course of life, partly by his ^wn Inclination, and the repeated Per^asions of
his beloved Friends; then the ^oushold Movables must march off, and be engaged
for the supply of his Extravagant Expenses, till there are no ^ore to move out
of the Cottage. The ^oor Woman at Home seeing all going (...) ruin and
destruction, grows Impa^ient at his Miscarriages, and resolves upon her Dernier
Effort, to make her ^ords good (as she had formerly pro^nised) she in a Rage
flies out, and is upon the quest to find him and his Haunts; (...) last, by
some information, or possibly ^y mere Accident (for Wives are very ^ccessful in
conjectures of this Nature, ^ven to admiration) she hits on it, and (...) she
dances with this Salutation to the people at the Bar, Is my Husband here? ^es,
in such a Room; away she goes, and as soon as ever she enters, finds them at the
height of their Mirth, ^moaking, Drinking, Singing, Swearing, and what not?
but that which exas^erates her most, is, a dirty Doxie Tippling among them, as
impudent in her Behavior as contemptible in her Garb, bu^ like will to like,
Jack will have his Gill, and Jone is as good as my Lady. Impatient at this
Baggage, that touches he^ Copyhold so closely, the Hurrican is nigh at hand
by black Clouds of he^ Countenance, and with a Volley of upbraiding words, such
as Jade, Whore, Bitch, what dare you keep my Husband Company, to the Ruin of
him and his Family? Then follows a Broadside o^ Pots, Cans, Candlesticks,
Pipes (and here the destruction of Pipes becomes the Generation of Stoppers)
and 100 to one, if in this sharp Counterscuffle n^ great Mischief be done, she
certainly gives the Gentlewoman some slight Mar^ of her Honesty, which she
certainly carries to the Grave. In this confused Scene of Rage and Fury, the
surprise does a^ bash the whole Company (but more particularly her Husband)
insomuch, tha^ they use all possible smooth Language t^ pacify her Wrath,
which with much ado is effected by discharging the Wenc^ privately by the
conveyance of some back way, and so break up the Company Now he knows not what
course to stee^ (for he is satisfied he shall never enjoy a quiet minute with
her for the future) unless it be to Barbados or Jamaica (the usual Receptacle
of Debauched and Cracked Artificers) which he soon effects, and so at last,
having sold all that he has, sells himself too, packs away, and is gone the
first Wind that serves for his turn; leaves his Children as an inheritance to
the Parish, and his Wife to the Alms house, if they will be so Charitable, as
to do it, considering her Misfortune. Thus you may soon guess at the issue of
this Comfort of Matrimony: the Wife has left this wide World to beg in, but
only the expectancy of a single Parish to maintain her: the Husband is
transported into another World, where through a stream of Excess and
Intemperance, with the heat of the Climate, swims into a third, in a very little
time, and so dies a Slave and Stranger, imperiously insulted over whilst alive,
and when dead, quoited into a hole, without the least Mourning, or indeed so
much as Christian Burial

The Seventeenth COMFORT. The fatal Couple.
AND this will appear to be more strange and incredible than al^ those that
preceed, by reason of its Villainy, and the fatal consequences thereof. Here a
Gentleman of good Learning and Education, but better Fortune, who by the
consent of his Parents is disposed of to as Opulent a Gentlewoman, and every
way correspondent to him in Youth, Parts and Portion: he Caresses with hot and
frequent Addresses of Love; wishes that he might grow to her Threshold, that he
might have the more frequent Fruition of her never-enough admired Society; she
returns answer to all his fervent Applications, with a most becoming and
charming Modesty; so that upon the strictest Observations of their mutual
Deportment, nothing can be discerned but a Matchless Amorous Passion between
them reciprocally. When a convenient time is thus sported away, by making their
Amors, the Nuptial Ceremony (after preparations necessary in Affairs of this
Nature) is Celebrated, (and nothing but Joy and Comfort seems to attend their
Cohabitation) which for continuance of time, delicious Viands, luxurious Wines,
together with all sorts of other Liquors, Balls, Music, Jollity, and other
Diversions, indeed for plenty of all things, besides the numerous Train of
Invited Guests, Servants and Attendants, was never exceeded; nay, it is yet a
question unanswered, whether ever equallized in this present, or some
preceding Ages. After the Ceremony of Solemnization is over, they Love as
affectionately, Live as splendidly, as their Port can possibly bear (and
further too, as you will speedily be satisfied) in their Country-Castle, during
the Refreshing and Healthful Summer, to enjoy the benefit of the Air, the
Pleasantness of their Evening Promenade, the delightful Prospects of the Meads,
Pastures, Fruitful and Delightful Fields of Corn, and all those inexpressible
satisfactions that usually attend the serenity of a Rural Life, and when
wearied, or rather refreshed with these Pleasures, return to their
City-Apartment; either for the Management of Affairs, or the enjoyment of the
Variety and Choice of the more Gentile and better sort of Company. Here they
both soon obtain by their Parts and Pence, Acquaintance of all Sorts and
Tempers, so that it is impossible in such a World of People, but they must
necessarily meet those that comply with them in temper and humor. To Plays,
Revels, Masquesat Court, they daily resort, and to other Places, when they
receive Information of them; so that there is no Public Treat or Diversion can
possibly escape, and in small time, gaining great Acquaintance, and that with
great Ones too, according as the times, he must needs Rencounter, as well as
his Lady, with no small or trivial Temptations. After they have steered this
course some years, the Real Estate sinks and impairs too too sensibly, and
which is worst of all, they both prove Improlisic (and possibly the Curse of
Barrenness is the punishment of their Debauchery) so that by a strange kind of
unusual, tho mutual consent, he procures a Chargeable Miss, and she an
Expensive Gallant, he shakes his Elbow, and she her Tail, and in process of
time, they become equally experienced in both these fashionable Qualifications;
so that in some few annual Revolutions, the Estate consumes, and moulders away
to nothing, by Mortgages and vast Debts contracted, the Retinue is turned off
for want of Means to support them, as formerly, Housekeeping laid aside, and
the Moveable Goods pawned or sold outright, to maintain them. Upon this, being
seared and grown obstinately Profligate and senseless of their Vanity and
Impiety, through customary sinning, they consult how to repair their
consumptive and almost expired Fortunes, by Injurious, Illegal, Base and Sordid
Actions, which at length bring them to a shameful Catastrophe, being both too
haughty and high Spirited, to live in a low and despicable Condition; therefore
he turns Pad, and she Buttock and File, (that is Highway-Man and
Pick-Pocket-Whore, in plain, honest English, according to the Canting of the
Roguish-Crew) into which they are now admitted and matriculate. Well! what
think you follows these wicked Resolutions, to take up a wicked course of Life?
why, you may soon guess, tho Fortune seem to favor them for some time, success
seldom smiles long upon such wretched Undertakers, but usually brings them to
Condign Punishment. Possibly, afte^ some perpetrated Villainies, the Product of
their as yet successful Crime^ may furnish them with a Stock, in ca^ of
unavoidable necessity, when the^ are firmly caught in the Net of the Law (as
formerly they were in that (...) Matrimony) This may prevail once o^ twice by a
Lucky and Chargeable -- bu^ this proving no caution, but rather a^
encouragement to repeat their forme^ Courses, they go on as vigorously a^
before, and by skulking in privat^ holes, and obscure recesses, stave
themselves off from the strict inquisition o^ Justice; but at length, (for now
their Wicked Reign is near its period) some crafty Officers, accustomed to be
employed in such Affairs, and by the means of some injured person, allure^
thereunto by the promise of a goo^ Gratuity, searches diligently, find^ them
suddenly, and, by the necessary of a Justices Mittimus, conveys the^
immediately, without Bail or Main^ prise, to a Loathsome and Fatal Gao^ The
Seisions are now at hand, and they in a Panick Fear, that they shall no^ come
off, being conscious of their Guilt: Well! to a Trial they are brought, and
their Indictment containing the Crimes for which they are accused: they then
have recourse to Newgate-Evasions, Presbyterian Shams (I mean Lying and
Dissembling) and such kind of insignificant Triflings with the Court, who,
tired out therewith, direct the Jury (who never Read Ignoramus) and they, upon
a full Hearing of the Evidence, bring them in Guilty: Upon this, Sentence of
Death is pronounced, and they are sent to their last Habitation here, as fast
tied by the Executioner here, as they by themselves formerly. The Warrant being
Signed for their Execution, and the day appointed, (there being no hopes of a
Pardon, having already despised and abused that Grace and Favor) they are
acquainted therewith in order to their Preparation, to undergo the deserved and
unavoidable Punishment of the Law, Death. The Fatal Morning appearing, they are
made ready for their last Journey, to their long Home, and so disgracefully
Carted to Tyburn; where by the way, being as notoriously known, as they were
notorious in the Transactions of their Life; some (who have Charity) pity them,
many (who have suffered upon their account) Curse them, and most blame them.
This is a hopeful Comfort of the Tie of Marriage, which brings them at last to
be Tied up by Ketch, both indissoluble Knots, except untied by the cold hand of
Death. Thus you see tho the Sunshine of the former part of their Life seemed
to be possibly glorious, 'twas at length overcast, and tho they might have
lived happily, did in the latter part live wretchedly, and died ignominiously,
so they might say of themselves, as the Poet did, with little Alteration -- Per
varios casus, and tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Laqueum --


Thus, with them, ends the Seventeenth Comfort.

The Eighteenth COMFORT. The Misery of forced Marriage
NOW (with this which is the last, and too many, unless they were better) we
shall run through a petty Jury, and a half, of Pretty and petty Comforts too,
tho this exceeds all that is premention'd, and may afford some Diversion, but
far more Admiration and Astonishment. The Story is as follows, which wants
neither Truth, nor Authentic Authors to maintain it. A Gallant and Heroic
Gentleman, altogether Martial, a Noted Commander, and of a very Ancient
Extract; it was his good Fortune, as he innocently and probably conjectured, to
make his Addresses to a Young Beautiful Gentlewoman, (but see how that Fickle
Baggage Fortune puts tricks upon Credulous Mortals) and after they had made and
received several Visits, and so united themselves by the Amorous Chains of
Passionate and Unfeigned Affection, that they thought nothing but that Cruel
Destiny Atropos could separate them. But it fell out, and very unluckily too)
that the Ladies Parents, (whose Eyes are always prying into such Intrigues) by
some means and rewards to encourage the Discoverers, to prevent their design,
shuffled up a Match between their Daughter and a very great Heir, with Menaces,
Threats, severe Usage, so that weary of their Carriage toward her, she was at
last compelled, tho with unimaginable regret, and great reluctance, to embrace
the Person she had an absolute indisposition, unfitness of mind, and aversion
for, ever likely to hinder the many Benefits of Conjugal Society, namely, Peace
and Comfort; but it is Decreed by a Law as unalterable as that of the Mede^ and
Persians, that she must undergo thi^ insupportable weariness. The Gentleman,
who in truth was, or at leas^ ought to be her Husband, endeavors to make way
for an Interview with her, bu^ finding all means ineffectual (she being so
closely mewed up, (another Comfort of Forced Marriage) by her Eagle-ey'd and
Jealous Husband, insomuc^ that nothing could be transacted, bu^ he must
necessarily find out, for Zelotypiae nihil impervium, Jealousy is to ^
quick-sighted to be disappointed by any endeavors whatsoever, whereupon he
resolves to take other measures, and therefore in great discontent (seeing he
could not possibly procure the sight of the so much admired and beloved) he
quits his Native Country to Travel in quest of some Comfort in Foreign Parts:
We will now leave him in his Journey, and return to see how this new Married
Lady bears her Affliction. She poor Inamorata, tho disappointed of enjoying the
Sole Object of her Love, (what a cursed Humor is this of Parents, for a crammed
Coffer to confine them to the Land of Affliction?) cannot be debarred the
Privilege of thought, and therefore to manage that with the greater Prudence
and Privacy, she affects Retirement, and there bewailes her Misfortune in the
enjoying this man, as well as in the utter Loss of her absent Lover (which
proved too true at last, to her own destruction) thinks hourly of the blissful
and harmless Embraces of her Valiant Mars, the mutual and innocent
Protestations that passed between them at every assignation, the Poems,
Acrostics, Anagrams, and the whole Artillery of Love, that they used between
one another. This was her sole delight, her daly pleasure, and all the
contentation that she ever enjoyed in her Matrimonial ( tho unfortunate)
Condition: and tho all these private Solaces were shrouded with all Honest and
Modest Contrivances, yet her Carriage to her Husband did not seem so obliging
to him, as he thought he might deserve, and therefore could impute it to
nothing but unto the sudden disappointment of the Gentleman, who formerly
Courted; who would certainly have studied to procure his Destruction by some
means or other, but that he knew he had deserted the country, and went a way
Incognito, so that there was no great Fear or Probability of his coming to
caress his Lady; but alas! he is mistaken; for his End is by superior Power
otherwise appointed. And now let us return to our Traveller; when he arrived at
the place, there happened to be War in those parts, who being Magnanimous and
Martial, (having lost his Lady, scorned his Life) he went immediately into the
Wars, and was entertained according to his Desert and Quality; the Enemy being
near at hand, he accoutred himself for an Attaque, which he did attempt with
that Briskness and Valor (among those in the Front) that nothing but one
stimulated by Love, and a Contempt of his Life and Person, could ever have so
valiantly performed; but behold the unlucky Chance of War! He in this
over-Manful Assault, received a Mortal Wound, to the great grief of those who
were spectators of his Valor and Courage, whereupon he was immediately brought
off, and conveyed to his own Lodgings; where arrived, he languished some little
time, and a little before his Death, he called an Ancient Servant to him (whose
Fidelity and Truth he had often experienced) and told him, that he had, at this
juncture of time, a weighty Business to unbosome to him, and entrust him with,
conjuring him by all imaginable, obliging Expressions and Desires to see it
effected, which was as follows: I am sensible (says he) that I am very near
my Expiration, and therefore after my Death, procure some Chyrurgeons to open
my Body, take the Heart out of my Breast, and put it into an Earthen-Pot, that
it may be Baked to the consistence of a Fine Powder, and having so done, put it
into a handsome Box with this Bracelet of Hair, that he had worn about his Left
Wrist (being a Lock of his Lady before mentioned) then place it in the Powder,
together with this little Billet or Note, written with my own Blood to her, and
after you have bestowed upon me the Rites of a Decent and Christian Burial,
make all possible speed to her in her own Country, (which you know very well as
well as her place of Residence) and deliver the said Box to her own hands. The
Old, True Servant, did perform all that his Master had given him i^ Command,
and so departed; arriving with great Expedition, at the Country and Place
designed by his Master; and coming one day to her House, he unluckily, tho
unexpectedly was surprise^ by the Ladies Husband, who knew hi^ very well, and
that he was Servan to that Gentleman who formerly mad^ Applications to his
Lady; and he examined him with a Brow-beating severity, and finding him
timorous, and he sitating in his Discourse and Repli^ made no more ado but
ransackt hi^ and found the forementioned Box i^ his Pocket, with the Note,
which sp^cified what was contained in it; h^ Husband upon this dismissed the Ag^
Servant with Menaces, charging him never more to approach his House upon his
own peril, and so the poor Servant departed reinfecta, and his Master's
Commands uneffected, though by Misfortune (as he thought certainly) disobeyed.
The Gentleman thereupon speedily reenters his House, sends for his Cook, and
delivers him the Powder, and withal charging him to make some small savoury
Dish of it, without losing the least particle of it, upon the forfeiture of his
absolute displeasure, because it was a very costly Cordial, and commanded him
to bring it in himself after the last Course at Supper; and the Cook did so
accordingly: as soon as it was placed on the Table, he ordered all Persons to
quit the Room, which was no sooner said than done; and so began to enter into a
most serious Discourse with his Wife; how that ever since his Marriage, he
observed her Dejected, Melancholic Carriage, and he did very much fear, that
it was occasioned by some inward Consumption, therefore he had made provision
of a very Sovereign Remedy, which he was very well satisfied would cure her
infallibly; thereupon he made her eat it all up, and when she had so done in
obedience to him, very earnestly importuned him to discover what it was, who
told her for satisfaction at last, that she had eaten her first Courtiers
Heart, so drew the Box out of his Pocket, and showed her the Note and Bracelet,
at which in a sudden Transportation, ushered with a deep sigh, said, This is
Precious indeed, and lickt the Dish clean, saying, it is so Precious, that it is
pity any other Meat should be taken down after it; thus she went to Bed, and
made good her words; for in the Morning she was found Stone-dead.

Now I presume you are satisfied with the strangeness of this unparalled
Comfort, the mere effect of a Compulsive Marriage against Reason, Sense and
nature, to the Ruin of their own Daughter, and the Death of a Worthy and
Valiant Gentleman, tho both to be commended as much for their Fidelity and
Constancy, as the Parent were to be blamed for their Violence and Covetousness,
tho she had at last the two Hearts joined together, inspight of Father and
Fate, yet upon my Heart I cannot away with this kind o^ Cannibal-like and
Unnatural Conjunction.

Thus we have done with these Eighteen Comforts of Matrimony; and I call them
Comforts, because those that are Married think them so, and will not be
persuaded to the contrary, tho I look upon them as the worst of Misfortunes. I
do not, nay I dare not say, that every Married Man tastes of all these
Comforts; But I will affirm this for truth, that there is no wedded Person
living, how Wise and Cautelous soever, but is sensible, at the least, of one of
these Comforts. Nor on the other hand do I say it is ill done to Marry; but it
is not well done certainly, for a man to be so Stupid and Insensible, as those
we here Discourse of apparently declare themselves to be, and so are enslaved
with a self-procured Bondage. I would not willingly disoblige the Female Sex,
nor indeed do I, if read without Prejudice, and rightly understood, the
Contents of this Treatise, tending much to their Honor and Commendation, in
all which Rencounters the Women win the day, come off Triumphantly, and Man is
most shamefully worsted by the weaker Sex: and it is but reason it should be so,
considering the Wrongs that they suffer by the Oppression and Severity of their
Husbands, by Violence, and without Reason; only because they are not of so
Robustous Constitution, and are sent into the World with no other Weapon but
the Tongue, nor any other Defense but their Chastity, tho daily exposed to the
crafty Assaults of Wily Man: Nature having sent them so weakly Armed into the
World, it is a prodigious shame, that Men should so barbarously insult over
them, who are so ready to serve and obey, without whose Society the World would
soon be a Desert, nay Men could not, did not, nor cannot live happily.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for Matthew Gillyflower, at the Black Spread
Eagle-in Westminster Hall.
THe Complete Gardener, or Directions for Cultivating and right ordering of
Fruit-Gardens, and Kitchen-Gardens, in six Books, by the Famous Monsieur De la
Quintinye. To which is added, his Treatise of Orange Trees, with the raising of
Melons, omitted in the French Edition, made English by John Evelyn, Esquire;
Cabala, Mysteries of State and Government, in Letters of Illustrious Persons
and Great Ministers of State, as well Foreign as Domestic, in the Reign of
Hen. 8. Q. Eliz. K. James, and K. Charles. To which is added in this Third
Edition, a Second Part of Choice Original Letters and Negotiations, never
before Published. Fables of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals
and Reflections, by Sir Roger L'Estrange. Brownlow Latini Redivivus, a Book of
Entries, of such Declarations, Information, Pleas in Bar, and Abatement,
Replications, etc. contained in the First and Second parts of the Declarations
and Pleadings of Richard Brownlow, late Chief Prothonotary of the Common Pleas,
(unskilfully turned into English) now Published in their Original Latin, with
Additions of Authentic Modern Presidents, under every Title. The Essays of
Seigneur de Montaigne, in three Books, with a short Character of the Author and
Translator, by way of Letter, written by the Marquess Halyfax, made English by
Charles Cotton. Plutarch's Morals, Translated from the Greek, by several Hands,
in 5 Volumes. Kalendarium Hortense, or the Gardner's Almanac, directing what
he is to do Monthly throughout the Year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in
prime. To which is added, a new Conservatory or Green-house, with many other
useful Additions, by John Evelyn, Esquire; Memorials of the Method and Manner of
Proceedings in Parliament, in passing Bills; with the Rules, Customs, and
Orders of the House, gathered out of the Journal Books, from the time of Edward
the 6th, by Hen. Scobel, Esquire; Cler. Parl. Remembrances of Methods, Orders and
Proceedings in the House of Lords, Extracted out of the Journals of that House,
by Hen. Scobel, Esquire; Cler. Parl. To which is added, the Privilege of the
Barronage of England, both in and out of Parliament, Collected by John Seldom,
Esquire;

