

THE Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF Don Bellianis of Greece, OR, THE HONOR
OF CHIVALRY: Containing His Valiant Exploits strange and dangerous Adventures,
with his admirable love to the Princesses FLORISBELLA, Daughter to the SOULDAN
of BABILOND.

Now newly written, by Francis Kirkman.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers.
1673.

To the READER.
READER,
THou have now in thy hand a History, both Ancient Famous, Pleasant, and
Delightful, and in one Word, it is equal too, if not exceeds all, or any of the
Books of this Nature; that were ever Written in the English Tongue: It being
properly called, The Honor of Chivalry: As indeed it is an Honor to all the
other Books of this Quality, and now you have it Complete in three Parts;
without any expectation of any Alteration or Addition. I my self have been so
great a Lover of Books of this Nature, that I have long since read them all;
and therefore shall give thee some Account of my experience, that may be both
Pleasant and Profitable to thee. As first, I tell thee be thou of what Age, or
Sex soever, it is convenient for thee to read these sorts of Historyes, if thou
art Young, begin now, or else when thou come to be Old and have any leisure;
and if one of these Books chances into thy hand, thou will be so pleased with
it, that read them thou must, and be in danger to be laughed at by those of the
Younger sort, who having already read them, and b^^^ past that Knowledge, Laugh
at thy Ignorance. For I have known several grave Citizens, who having formerly
minded the many matters of the World, has not only forborne reading themselves,
but forbid their Children so to do, as being a vain and Idle matter, and loss
of time; yet these very men in their latter days, having met with a Part of
this History, or that of the Famous Parismus, have fallen so much in love with
them, that they have become conceitedly Young and Amorous, and so highly
pleased that they have run through all the Books of this Nature and Quality.
This is a certain Truth, therefore I say, begin to Read, and that presently,
and to the end, thou may Read with the more Profit and Delight. I will set
down some of my Observations, and give thee some Order and Method that thou
may proceed in. First, I recommend to thee a Book called, The Seven Wise
Masters; which is a very pleasant Collection of variety of that Witty History,
and for the more Pleasure of the Young Reader, there is Pictures fitted to
every particular History. This Book is of so great esteem in Ireland, that next
to the Horn-Book, and Knowledge of Letters, Children are in general put to Read
in this; and I know that only by this Book several have learned to Read well,
so great is the pleasure that Young and Old take in Reading thereof. Next to
that, I recommend an other Book called, Fortunatus, which is one entire Story,
both Pleasant and Profitable; and also well fitted with Pictures; after thou
have read these, proceed to this Famous History of Don Bellianis of Greece;
which I am sure will highly content thee, for I have purposely fitted the
second and third Parts, with Stories acted and done in England and Ireland.
Next to this, Read the Historyes of Parismus and Parismenos. Mountelion Knight
of the Oracle: And Ornatus and Artesia, these I place together, being all three
written originally in English, by one Person, who indeed composed them very
Ingeniously. After these proceed to Valentine and Orson, which is a Famous
History, Of the Famous King Pippin of France and his twelve Peers; and of the
Emperor of Constantinople his Brother and their Children, who were Renowned
Knights of their times. Next read the Seven Champions of Christendom, which
tells you who those Famous Champions, St. George, St. David, St. Andrew, and
St. Patrick and the rest of them were, and much of their lives, Renowned
Actions and Deaths. Then read the History of the Destruction of Troy, which
acquaints you with the Original and nature of all the Heathen Gods, and
Goddesses, as Saturn, Jupiter, Pluto, Mars, Neptune, Ceres, Juno, Proserpine,
Venus; and the Renowed Heroes, Hercules, Hector, and the rest; With an Account
of the Building ten years Siege and Destruction, of the ever Famous City of
Troy, and by reading of this Book, you will be enabled to understand any piece
of Poetry wherein all sorts of Poets so often name the old Gods and Goddesses,
and their numerous Offspring. There are not many more Books of this nature
Written originally English, therefore you may for varietyes sake read them
also, as Fragosa, and his three Sons; Bevis of Southampton, Tom of Lincoln,
with the Red Rose Knight, Dorastus and Fawnia, and a few others.

There are more of these sorts of Historyes, which I also advise you to read,
as The Mirror of Knight hood, in nine Parts. Many having read these are so
well pleased, that they are desirous of more, and importunate to have them, but
I can assure them and you, that there are no more in English, nor any other
Language as I could ever see or hear off, although I have been curious in my
search and enquiry. Besides these there are Palmerin D' Oliva, in three Parts.
Primaleon of Greece in three Parts, Palmerin of England in three Parts.
Palmendos in one. All these are one continued History of an Emperor of
Constantinople. Palmerin D' Oliva, his Son Primaleon and Grandson Palmerin of
England and others, and therefore to be read in this order I have named them.
Then you may read the Famous History of Amadis de Gaul, which is in six Parts
in English, a History so Famous and in its time so well accepted off, that I
have seen about thirty Parts thereof in French, Spanish, Italian, Dutch, and
other Languages; we have but six Parts in English, and you are beholding to me
for one of them with the sixth, which I above twenty years since translated out
of French merely out of my love to that History, but I hereby gained the
knowledge of the French Tongue, which I learned only by that means. All these
with The Mirror of Knight hood, Palmenus and Amadis's, and several others, as
the four Sons of Aymon. Arthur of Great Britain. Arthur of Little Britain,
and the History of Mervine, are translations, and are now grown so scarce that
you can hardly purchase them, and yet they are not worth the Printing again,
being now out of use and esteem by an other sort of Historyes, which are called
Romances, some whereof are written originally in English, as namely, that
Incomparable Book of its time called, The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia, Gods
Revenge against Murder. Beutevolio and Urania. The Princess Clavia,
Parthenissa, and a few others, the rest which indeed are both many in number,
and exceed all but the last named Parthenissa, in worth and quality; are
translations out of French and other Languages, as namely, Astrea, Polexander,
Eromena, The Banished Virgin. Coralb^, Ariana, The Illustrious Bassa, Grand
Cyrus, Clelia, Cassandra, Cleopatra, Pharamend, and Grand Seipio, and some
others, (for I pretend not to be exact in this Catalogue.) All which although
they are excellent Pieces and were not long since in great esteem with the
French and English Nobility and Gentry, yet they are also thrust out of use, by
the present slighting and neglect of all Books in general, by the particular
esteem of our late English stag^ Plays. I could and would give you some
particular Character and Account, of all these several last mentioned Romances,
but that I have not convenience at present, wherefore again, recommending to you
Historyes in general, and this of Don Bellianis in Particular, I rest your
Friend,

FRANCIS KIRKMAN.

THE Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF DON BELLIANIS of Greece, OR THE Honor of
Chivalry.
PART THE FIRST.
CHAP. I. How Don Bellaneo Emperor of Constantinople was married to the
Princess Clarinda, Daughter to the King of Spain, of the birth of Don
Bellianis, and how being a hunting he par^ed from his Father by a strange
adventure, and how the Emperor went in search of his Son.
THe great City of Constantinople, whose Foundation was laid, and stately
buildings erected by the Emperor Constamine, who made it the Metropolis of the
Grecian Empire, had not enjoyed many Emperors before that Imperial Crown and
Scep^er was swayed by one named Don Bellaneo, and such an Emperor he was, both
for strength of body, and all other Princely Endowments as was hardly equaled
by any of his Predecessors, and was excelled by none. The death of his Parents
had put him into possession of his Empire when but young, and he being desirous
of novelty, left the Government thereof to travel about the World, and s^ek out
strange and hard Adventures, and in this employment he exercised himself so
long, that he thereby gained I^^ort^l Renown, and being thus full fraughted
with the Honor of his Worthy and Heroical Achievements, he at length returned
to his own City of Constantinople. He was so well and de^rly beloved by his
Subjects, that their joy for his return was Universally great, and that they
might still enjoy the blessing of his presence, they propounded a Marriage to
him, which he so well approved of, that in short time after, the King of
Hungaria and the Prince of Macedon (both were Relations to the Emperor) with
many other Princely Personages were sent Ambassadors to Toloj^n King of Spain
to desire the beautiful Princess Clarinda his Daughter in Marriage with the
Emperor; And so good success they had in their Embassay, that they were not
only royally welcomed by the Spanish King in his City of Hasp^lis, but by a
full and free consent of him and his Parliament, had the fair Princess
delivered to them, who being conducted by them to the Emperor, was joyfully and
lovingly received of him, and solemnly married to him.

By this Marriage was produced three Valiant Princes, who were thus called, Don
Bellianis of Greece, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of Thessaly,
Sons to the Emperor who were educated in his Court, in the Company of Don
Brianel Son to the Prince of Macedon, and Don Arsileo Son to the King of
Hungaria, all these Princes were bred up in the exercise of Arms, and in the
knowledge of Arts, especially that of M^sick, in which the Prince Don Bellianis
was excellent, but when this Prince arrived to the Age of twelve years, he
wholly applied himself to his Sword and Lance, that he became an excellent
proficient in all feats of Chivalry, and he had not practiced Arms above two
years, before he had occasion to make use of them in an Adventure that then
befell him: For one day attending his Father and Mother and being accompanied by
the Princes Arsileo, and Don Bria^el his Cousins, with many other Knights and
Ladies, they rode some Miles from the City on hunting, but their intended sport
was spoiled, by the arival of a furious Lion and ^^ngly Bear. The Lion run
strait to Don Bel^ianis, who drawing his Sword defended himself but not so well
but that the Lion sorely wounded him, but in the end was vanquis^ed by the
Prince, who Weary as he was, looked after the Bear, who he saw had not only
overthrown his Cousin the Prince Arsileo, but did then drag him over the
adjacent Mountains. Our Courageous Prince was so concerned in this spec^^c^e
that notwithstanding his Mothers cries, his own Wounds, and the persuasions of
all he pursued the bear, not only over the Mountains but through a most dismal
Grove, where for some time he lost the sight of the Bear and his Cousin, and
thereupon being possessed with a deep Melancholy, he sat him down, but long
had he not rested, before he again saw both the Bear and his Cousin; the Bear
did then leave his Cousin to assault him, but he being sensible of the Devilish
fury of that mon^^ruous Creature, let him pass by and saw him enter into an
adjoining Cave. Although the Prince was joyful at the sight of his Cousin, yet
he could not be persuaded from entering into the Cave to see what became of the
Bear, and therefore being accompanied by his Cousin Arsileo, he entered the same
but although he with much difficulty entered, his Cousin was in spite of all
his strength violently cast out, and our Valiant Prince met with mighty
opposition in his passage, but at length passing through that dark Cave, he
arrived at a fair Hall, where he saw a large Pillar with some Arabian
Characters, which he going to read, was hindered by a most furious and
monstrous Giant, who was accompanied by the forementioned Bear, who both at
once assaulted him, and although he drawing his Sword gave them both many and
mighty blows, yet he was not at all advantaged, for he could not Wound or hurt
them, but was so Wounded by them, that he fled to the Pillar to defend and
rescue himself, and there by good fortune he saw an excellent Sword fixed,
which he laying hands to, soon drew out, and thereupon was a most horrible
noise, and great Earthquake, and now being Master of so good a Sword, he again
assaulted the Giant and Bear, but with better success then before, for he soon
overcame and flew them both. and now his Cousin attempting to enter the Cave
did it with much ease, and coming into the Hall and finding him, was very
^oyful for his Victory, and so they both going to the Pillar, read as follows.

A Prophecy.
The fearful Keepers of my Cave being slain by the courageous Lions, and the
Sword won shall occasion the loss of the living and finding of the dead, who
shall be then restored.

Both the Princes were amazed at what they had read and seen, but the Prince
Arsileo was much troubled at his Cousins wounds which were many, great and,
dangerous, however he supported them with much cheerfulness and whilst he and
his Cousin were in discourse about the wonders of the place, they beheld coming
toward them a most beautiful Lady, who was supported by two grave Knights, and
attended by twelve Damsels, who all coming near the Prince kneeled on the
ground* he seeing that action did the like, and desired them to rise; but the
Lady refused so to do, until he granted her demand: the which he soon agreed
to do; and then she arising took him by the hand, and conducted him into the
Chamber from whence she came, which when he was entered, he found it to be one
of the fairest and most magnificent Chamber in the world; some time being spent
in discoursing about the rarities thereof, the Lady desired the Prince to
permit one of the Ladies who was well skilled in surgery to dress his wounds,
he at first refused her offer, but id the end being impartuned by her and the
Prince his Cousin he consdnted, rnd being undressed, he was lald in a most
sumptuous Bed, and his wounds being dressed most skilfully, he was left to his
rest, where we will leave him, and return to the Empress.

At the departure of Don Bellianis after the Bear, the Emp^ess made so many
outcryes, that caused many Knights to follow in our suit of him, but although
they could trace him by the blood he lost, especially where he had sat down;
yet none of them could discover the mouth of the Cave, and thereby find which
way he had taken, so that much doubting and fearing his loss they returned, to
the great sorrow of the Empress his Mother, but her sorrow was much more
augmented when she understood that the Emperor her Husband had armed himself at
all points, and being attended and accompanied by none but a Squire, and Don
Brianell had likewise left her to seek her Son. fully determined not to see her
till he had found him; she understanding of this his resolution, caused all the
Knights present, not only to spend all the day time in seeking for them both,
but night being come and they returned, she commanded them with lighted Torches
to renew their search, but all in vain, so that as sorrowful as she was, she
was forced to be content and with much sorrow to return to the City without
them.

CHAP. II. How the Emperor in search of his Son happened on a strange and
dangerous adventure. How Don Bellianis and his Cousin Arsileo left the Cave and
went with the Lady, and how they were both Knighted, and of a brave and
dangerous fight between the Knights of the Castle and the two Princes.
THe Emperor in the mean time took much pains to find the lost Princes, so that
riding hard all the day Don-brianell was at night so weary that he was glad to
disarm and rest himself in the fields, where he had not lain long, but he was
disturbed by a noise which he heard at some distance, whereupon he again armed
himself. and mounting on Horseback rode on toward the place, from whence he
supposed the noise came, till at length he arrived near to a Castle, and going
to the gate he perceived the noise came from thence; whereupon he knocked
loudly, but none answered, so that he searched round about the Castle, but
found no place to enter in, only he saw a Rope hanging from the Castle walls,
and hearing the voice of people and fighting within, and considering that he
might ascend the Castle by the Rope, he disarmed himself, and although Don
Brianell did all he could to diswade him, yet he soon by help of that Rope
climbed to the Castle walls, and that without any other arms but his Sword and
Shield, he intended to have drawn up his armor to him, but was prevented, for
he saw ten Knights pursued by two f^ere^ and mighty Giants, and therefore
calling to the Knights to free about and leave flying, he opposed himself to
both the Giants, who seeing a single Knight unarmed oppose them, were mightily
enraged, and fell both upon him, so that they (...) this Shield in two, and
wounded him in the head; he understanding of the danger he was in, gave one of
the Giants so great a blew that he cleft his head to his eyes, and soon after
closing and struggling with the other he threw him over the Castle wall to Don
Brianell, who by his command cut off his head: The second Giant being
dispatched, he looked for the Knights who were still engaged in fight, and were
worsted by the valor of one Knight, which he seeing took one of the dead
Giants Shields, and went to eppose him, where although he was wounded in the
Thigh by that Knight, yet in the end he vanquished him, as the other Knights
had also overcome the rest of their enemies, and now they all received him with
great joy and thanks desiring him to take care of his wounds, but he would not
permit them to be dressed, until his Squite and Don Brianell were let into the
Castle, who were joyful to see him in so good condition. His wounds being
dressed, and he laid in bed, the Knights desired Don Brianell to acquaint them
who the Emperor was, but he made hem no other answer, but that he was called
the Unknown Knight. So soon as he had rested and taken some case, the Emperor
enquired of the Knights the occasion of this fight in the Castle, to which they
replied, that being desired by these Knights their enemies to entertain them
that night as strangers in their Castle, they consented thereto but they were
no sooner entered, but they so set upon them as he had found them: The Emperor
being dissatisfied with this answer, enquired for the Knight with Azure armor
and understanding that he was alive, but wounded and in Prison. he ordered him
to be looked to, and his wounds dressed, which was done accordingly, and in ten
days the Emperor being cured, went to this Knight, and enquired of him who he
was, to this he would not answer, unless the Emperor would also agree to tell
him who he was. to this the Emperor consenting told him that he was named Don
Bellaneo Emperor of Greece, and that an adventure extraordinary had brought
him thither, the other Knight hearing this, much wondering cried out that then
he found his attempts would be in vain, and that the Souldan who had employed
him would be disappointed. for said he, Most Mighty Sir know that I came into
this Country at the instigation of the Souldan of Persia, who is your very
great enemy, and does so much abhor and hate you, that he is wil^ing to
purchase your head at the price of half his Empire: and therefore that he might
accomplish his purpose, he did declare that if any would undertake your death
and perform it, that he should as a reward have his fair Daughter to wife with
half of his dominions; now know Sir (said the Knight to the Emperor) that I
Don Gallaneo who am Prince of Antioch, and have great love to the Princess, did
undertake this exploit, and therefore being accompanied with five hundred
Knights, and thirty Giants am purposely come into these parts to perform our
enterprise, and by taking you at some advantage, to carry you dead or alive to
our Lord the Souldan; and to the end that I might the more easily accomplish my
design, we attempted to surprise this Castle. But (continued he) I now believe
it much harder to perform our enterprise then I expected, since I find you
possessed with so great valor. The Emperor at this recital was much
surprised, and blameing Don Gallaneo for his wicked undertaking, only ordered
him to be secured in the Castle; but he told the Emperor, that although he
were secured, yet he were best to take care of his own safety: for that the
forces which he had brought with him would endeavor to endanger him; to this
the Emperor replied he would provide against them, and so departed in Company
of Don Brianel, who desiring the Emperor to dub him a Knight was put off till
another time more convenient.

And now leaving them, we return to Don Bellianis, who remaining ten days in
the Damsels Cave, and being cured of his wounds was desirous of departing, and
therefore he requested the Lady to let him know what service she would command
him, she finding the time convenient thus related her story. I was Daughter to
Pompeiane King of Antioch named Aurora, but being nere kin to the most
beautiful Princess Florisbilla Daughter to the Souldan of Babylon, I was in
that Court bred up with her, and there I continued so long, that a very valiant
Knight arrived there, who was called the Knight of the three Images: This
Knight was not only very courageous but he was also very amorous of the
Princess my Cousin, and seeing me to be very familiar with her, he courted me
to intercede with her in his behalf, I thus became his confident, and acted for
him with all integrity; but to little purpose, for the Princess Florisbilla
would not accept him, but he still importuning her and me, she was desired to
acquaint the Souldan her Father with his suit, who not only disallowed of it,
but caused him to depart his Empire; which action so angered the Knight, that he
departing, went unto the King my Fathers Country. and resolving to be revenged
on me; slew my Father, gained possession of the Kingdom, and gave it to a
Prince of his Kindred, named Don Gallaneo; And I intending to return to my own
Country, was diswaded therefrom, by a wise woman, named Bellona, who caused me
and these my companions to be brought hither, telling me that e're long I
should be delivered by the Prince of Greece, and the Hungarian Prince his
Cousin, whose words I have found true hitherto, and therefore said she, I am in
good hopes of recovering my Kingdom by your hands. To this Discourse Don
Bellianis replied that he was ready in all things to obey and serve her and not
only in person but with a sufficient Army to execute so great an enterprise.
The Princess answered that only his Company and his Cousins would be
sufficient, and that in order to their business, there was Armor left by the
Sage Bellona for them both, which being brought forth, that was of an Orange
Taw^y color with a large Wave of the Sea. and on the Shield was painted a
Knight kneeling to a beautiful Lady, who turned away her face, with this
inscription. For your discourteous leaving me when I first saw you, now be gone,
despair and dye. On the Prince Arsileo's Shield was painted a Dragon and
Griffon fighting, parted by a Damsel. These arms did not only please, but very
well fit the Princes, who putting them on and mounting their Horses they left
the Cave, being thus accompanied with the Princess and her Damsels, who put on
their Masks, and thus rode on, but not far had they gone when they perceived
two Knights to come out of a Castle, and with them a third unarmed like a
Prisoner, one of the Kinghts was armed in an azure armor with imperial Crowns,
and on his Shield the God Mars was figured; the other had a white armor: our
Knights were desirous of knowing who these were that they met, and would gladly
have forced them to have delivered him, whom they supposed was a Prisoner, but
could not, because they had not as yet received the order of Knighthood; On the
other side the Knight in white armor, was desirous to try their valors, by
breaking of a Lance, and to that end, he sent his Squire to invite one of them
to that exercise, but they returned their sufficient answer that they were not
Knighted, but wished they were for his sake: and that, to that end they
intended to travel to the Emperor Don Bellaneo, to receive that order from his
hands. The white Knight returned this answer, that the Emperor was not in his
Court at present, and therefore if they intended to travel thither they would
loose their labor, but if they were fitly accomplished for, and desirous of
that order, the Knight his Companion would give them that honor, and he
assured them that he was such a Person, as was not for Nobillity, or Prowess,
exceeded by the Emperor himself. Our Knights being very desirous of Knighthood*
especially that they might try their valors against this new Knight, sent one
of the Damsels to the Knight in the azure armor, with their request, who being
satisfied of their Nobillity by taking their Oaths did presently admit them
into the order of Knighthood; the Princess Aurora girding on the Sword of Don
Bellianis, and the white Knight doing the same to Arsileo; and thus the Knight
in the Azure armor having given them his benediction they returning him many
thanks again, mounted on Horseback.

And now being in a Capacity to try their valor, the white Knight desired
Arsileo to perform his promise, who being as ready as the other, soon
consented, and thereupon putting their Lances in their Rests, they ran against
one another with such fury, that their Lances were broken into shivers, and
they both dismounted, thereupon drawing both their Swords, they began a
doubtful and furious Combat, whereupon Arsileo as being the best armed had the
better of it, sorely wounding his adversary, but so, that they were in short
time both reduced to a low condition, which Don Bellianis seeing, and he being
desirous to assist his Cousin Arsileo, having obtained leave of the Princess
Aurora, he invited the Knight in the Azure armor, to break a Lance, the Knight
of the Castle consented thereto, and accordingly they began their Course with
very great fury, but although their Lances were flown up into the air in
several pieces, yet their bodies were immovable; at which the Knight of the
Castle wandered, having been used to unhorse all whom he encountered but having
foiled with his Lance, he drawing his Sword gave Don Bellianis so mighty a blow
on the Shield that he lost it and was forced to lean on his horses neck, but
recovering himself he returned the Knight of the Castle so weighty a stroke on
the Helm, as astonished him, and forced the horse to set his knees on the
ground, never was seen so fierce a Combat as was between these Knights, who
^^rived to exceed one another, so that they were also very much Wounded. At the
same time thirty Knights and four Giants entered the Field, and seeing the
Knight in the Azure Armor in danger, they all pressed on toward Don Bellianis
to assault him, but the Knight that was Prisoner cried out to them to forbear,
telling them they were mistaken, and that he was the party that they took the
other for, they then coming to him, knew him to be Don Gallaneo, and he
acquainted them that the other who was in the Azure Armor which had been his,
was the Emperor Don Bellaneo as indeed it was, and the new Knight was Don
Brianel, who were traveling with Don Gallaneo their Prisoner toward
Constantinople, but were thus met with as you have heard, and now Don
Gallaneo's Knights and Giants understanding the whole matter from him, and that
their chief enemy the Emperor was before them, they all set upon him; and Don
Bellianis understanding that it was his Father with whom he had fought and so
Wounded, was much troubled, but however resolved to assist him against his
Enemies to the last gasp, and the Emperor seeing the danger he was in, drawing
his Signet from his finger delivered it to one of those that came from the
Castle with him, commanding him to hasten to the Court and deliver it to the
King of Hungaria and let him know the condition he was in, and that he should
immediately send him aid, and then seeing all the Troop ready to assail him, he
prepared to defend himself, and was assisted by Don Brianel, his Son Don
Bellianis, and Don Arsileo, and the two Old Knights who attended the Princess
Aurora, and thus did this unequal Battle begin wherein we will leave them, and
follow the Messenger, who made such have that in short time he arrived at
Constantinople, and finding the King of Hungaria delivered the Signet, and
related the Case, at which the King immediately assembled the Guards, which was
two thousand Knights, and with them departed toward the place of Combat,
commanding all the City to Arm, and with all expedition to follovv him, which
command was in short time executed accordingly.

CHAP. III. The end of the fight between Don Gallaneo and his Forces, and the
Emperor and Princes, and how the Princes departed without discovery, and what
befell them and the Lady in the dangerous Grove, and how the Emperor after
their departure knew who they were.
VEry bloody was the fight between the Emperor and his small party (being only
those whom we have told you, and eight more, who came out of the Castle) and
that band of Don Gallaneo's Knights and Giants, who all made it their chiefest
aim to kill the Emperor, but he so well defended himself being also powerfully
assisted by his Son Don Bellianis, that although Don Gallaneo himself getting
Armor, and assaulting him, yet all that party was in the end vanquished; and
Gallaneo very much Wounded, but scarcely had the good Emperor time enough to
return thanks for his deliverance, but he found himself in greater danger then
ever, for he beheld all the rest of Don Gallaneo's Knights and Giants to enter
the Field and ride fu^iously toward them; all that the Emperor could do was to
hearten himself and encourage his Companions who were all resolved to do their
utmost, and if they must dye to sell their lives at the best rate they could,
and therefore taking the body of Don Gallaneo and placing it before them, they
provided to receive their enemies with great courage, who now coming on
conducted by one Don Galfeo Cousin to Don Gallaneo he seeing the body of his
Cousin would not suffer those of his party to ride over him, but to alight,
which was some comfort to the Defendants, who received their enemies with
admirable courage, and kept them so long in play, that they saw the King of
Hungaria coming with his Forces, and then being in hopes of the Victory, they
laid about them like Lions, and as if they had but then freshly entered the
Fight, although the Emperor himself acted Wonders, yet he saw himself outdone
by his Son, at which he greatly marvelled, for he sometimes saw him kill two
Knights with one blow, and when it was to rescue his Father from danger he made
nothing of cleaving one Giant to the Wast, and of cutting another in two at the
middle so prodigeous were his blows, and he was very well seconded by Don
Arsileo and Don Brianel, who that day performed Wonders, so that in short time,
the Field was indifferent clear from their enemies, which Don Galfeo seeing,
and also that more Forces were coming from the City he privately causing the
body of Don Galianeo to be laid on a Horse before him, left the Field and fled
to his Ships: where he with all speed embarked.

And now was the Battle soon after finished by the Death of all these Knights
and monstrous Giants, who were pursued and slain by the other Forces, that
were now come from the City and now did the Emperor give great thanks to Don
Bellianis and Don Arsileo for their assistance, desiring them by all means to
tell who they were, and to disarm themselves that their Wounds which were many
and dangerous might be dressed, but they disguising their Voices refused to do
either, desiring by all means leave to depart, which the Emperor refused to
grant. And search being made for Don Gallaneo, they understood that he was
carried away by Don Galfeo, at which they were all troubled, especially the
Princess Aurora who told Don Bellianis that in his Death half of her business
would be finished, but since he was escaped, Don Bellianis told the Emperor,
that the first time he saw him, although in the presence of the Souldan his
Lord he would rid him of an Enemy by giving him his Death. The Emperor was
still desirous of detaining and knowing them, telling them that next to the
search of his Son and Kinsman he most desired to know them, to this Don
Bellianis replied, that he needed not further to trouble himself in searching
for the two Princes, for that they were both well, and were not long since
before that Castle, and that there they had been acquainted with them, although
this did somewhat please and satisfy the Emperor, yet he was still displeased
at the departure of Don Bellianis and his Company, who carried the two pieces
of his painted Shield with him, and so they Rode on three miles to the top of a
hill, where they were disarmed to have their Wounds dressed, but they were
found to be so many and dangerous, that the Damsels (...) were well skilled in
Surgery were very much dismayed and troubled, which caused great grief to their
Lady the Princess, while they were thus lamenting, they saw a Chariot in the
Air, coming toward them, which seemed to be of Crystal, and was drawn by
sixty Griffons, in it was only two Dwarfs, who told the Princess that they were
sent by the Sage Bellona, to fetch the two Princes, who were in great danger
without her assistance, wherefore at their request the two Princes were laid in
the Chariot and the Princess and her Damsels likewise mounted thereinto.

We left the Emperor troubled at the departure of the Princes, joyful that he
heard of his Son and Kinsman, but withal very dangerously Wounded, for being
retired into the Castle, and his Wounds dressed, he was light headed by reason
of one large Wound he had received in his Head; very much grieved were all
there present, but most of all the King of Hungaria, but he was much comforted
by the arrival of a Damsel, who told him she could cure the Emperor, and
therefore desired to be brought to his presence, the King accordingly conducted
her to the place where the Emperor lay in great danger, but she by applying
some Dyntments to his Wounds, first refreshed him, and then causing him to
drink off a Glass which she gave him, fully restored him to his former health
and strength, she having thus done departed, telling the King of Hungaria that
the Emperor was aided by the nearest of Kin to them both. They both wondered at
these passages, and the Emperor and the King did then conclude that the two
that fought so valiantly were the lost Princes their Sons, but considering they
were very much Wounded and could not be gone far, they sent abroad to find
them, and in the mean time they went to see Don Brianel who was also very much
Wounded, but when they came to the Chamber where they had left him, they found
he was gone, and on his beds head a Letter to this effect.

The Grecian Lion shall be much endangered by the Unknown, which shall be the
greatest Trial of my Skill. And now great Emperor leave off the search of thy
Son, aad guard thy Dominions which will be in danger; And further know (...)
thy Fame will be exceeded by that of the new Knight, which will be for thy
greater glory.

They were both satisfied with this Letter, and resolved to return to the City,
but they were first visited by the old Prince of Macedon, and the Empress with
thirty thousand Men. who came from the City, and now nothing but Joy was heard,
only they still doubted what was become of the Princes, but the Emperor
remembered there were two old Knights with the Ladies and Knights who were
killed or Wounded, these Knights were sought for and found, but were very much
Wounded, wherefore the Empress went to them, and they supposing her to be their
Princess answered her all questions she proposed so that she not only
understood from them that the two Knights that assisted the Emperor were her
Son and Cousin, but discovered all their designs, so that she acquainting the
Emperor with the certainty of these matters it caused a Universal Joy, and the
Emperor understanding that they were gone toward Antioch, was resolved to
assist them with a sufficient Army whereby they might perform their Enterprise,
and now the two Old Knights being cured of their Wounds they all departed to
Constantinople, where they began many Tryumphs, the Emperor making several
Knights, among the rest Don Castidel of the Rose, and Don Sabrian of Trebento,
Sons to the Duke of Trebento, Don Persiano the Courteous, Son to the Duke of
Pontus* and Don Briamore Son to the King of Argos, all which put themselves in
search of the valiant and redoubted Prince Don Bellianis traveling in Moorish
Habits to the City of Antioch.

CHAP, IV. How the Princes being drawn in the Chariot with Griffons were cured
of their wounds by the Sage Bellona, and then traveled toward Antioch, how
they happened into the Company of Duke Alfiron the Courteous, and of the
adventure of the Unhappy Bridge, and of a combat between Don Bellianis and the
Knights of the Bridge.
THe Princess Aurora with her Attendants being entered the Christaline Chariot
were drawn so swiftly through the Air; that in short time they arrived in
Persia, near to the famous City of Persepolis, where on the top of a Mountain
the Griffons descended hard by a dark Cave, out of which there issued a Woman,
who seemed to be above two hundred years old, but she was quickly known by the
Princess to be the Sage Bellona, who soon told Don Bellianis and Don Arsileo
who she was, and that now they were out of all danger being so near her
greatest friend. The Sage Bellona saluted them very all courteously, telling
them how she had healed the Emperor (who she had left at home) and also Don
Brianel, who was within her house, Don Bellianis was joyful at his Fathers
health and at her request entered her house which was so excellent within that
it resembled the most stately Palace, he and his Cousin being laid on rich
beds had their wounds cured dressed but not healed so soon as those of the
Emperor and Don Brianell who being healed was walking in his Chamber much
wondering at what had happened and whilst he was in serious meditation of what
had passed, the Sage Bellona led the Princess Aurora into his Chamber, he soon
remembered her and their ordinary salutations being passed the Princess
acquainted him with all things that had happened at which he was mightily
astonished wondering at the great valor of his Cousin Don Bellianis whom he
earnestly desired to see, wherefore the Sage Bellona gave him that
satisfaction, leading him to the Chamber where the Princess lay. Great was the
content they all received in this enterview and conference in which they spent
some time, so that in fifteen days they being all able to travel, the Sage
Bellona told Don Bellianis that it would be necessary for his safety for him to
conceal his Religion being to travel to the Souldan of Babilons Court where he
should be in very great peril, but she would always be his friend, he kindly
thanked her, and thus they all spending some more time with the Sage Bellona
and being ready to depart she furnished them with several suits of Armor, the
richest and fairest that could be seen. These of Don Bellianis were of a Tauny
color imbossed with many Pearls, and on his shield was pictured the same face
and Motto he had in the former which face was known by the Princess Aurora to
be the lively portrature of Florisbella daughter to the Souldan of Babylon, she
also gave him a Rich Scabbard to his enchanted Sword. The two others Armours
were also rich and glorious and now the Knights being so well accourred the
Princess Aurora was also presented with a garment of cloth of Gold, and the
Knights with very little Dwarfes to attend them, that of Don Bellianis named
Ordino being very small but witty; and now being fitted at all points and
having taken their leaves of Bellona they merrily began their journey.

They intended their journey for Antioch but by the way they met twenty
thousand Knights sumptuously armed, all belonging to and conducted by a Knight
called Duke Alfiron the Courteous, who was traveling to Persepolis to assist
at the Iousts and Tryumphs there to be held, in honor of the Wedding to be
solemnized between Don Gallaneo of Antioch, and the Princess Persiana Daughter
to the Souldan of Persia. Don Bellianis understood thus much from one of the
Train, and that although it was not certainly known that the Emperor of Greece
were dead, yet the Souldan was content that the Marriage should proceed because
the Emperor had been left sorely Wounded as has been already related, and he
was further told, that although the Duke Alfiron went to this Wedding, yet he
was very much dissatisfied therein because he was himself in love with the same
Princess, and beloved of her, though her Father enforced her to this Marriage,
and therefore the Duke rode on very melancholy, but however some of his Train
having shown our Knights and Ladies to him he courteously saluted them inviting
them into his company, to which gentle proposition of his they consented, and
accordingly rode along with him till they came to a Bridge which was difficult
to pass over, for that it was defended by four very Valiant. Knights, and two
Giants, who were upon unequal terms to combat with all Passengers, and from
them that were vanquished to take their Horses and Armor. The Duke doubting
that by reason of the Valor of the Defendants and unequallity of the fight,
they should not there have passage, would have persuaded our Knights to pass
another way, but they by no means would agree thereto, all three striving who
should first try the Adventure, at this time they saw on the other side of the
Bridge the Souldan, his Daughter and Don Gallaneo with their Attendants, who
staid to see the Adventure of the Bridge, and because of the contest, who
should be first in the Adventure, they agreed to stand to the ordering of the
Princess Aurora who appointed that Don Brianel should first try his fortune,
and next him Don Arsileo, and if they failed in the Enterprise, then Don
Bellianis should succeed them, according to this agreement they began, and Don
Brinel met one of the Brothers Defenders of the Bridge with such violence that
he was overthrown, and he himself hardly escaped from bearing him company. It
had not been known that any of the Brothers had been thus unhorsed, so that all
people wondered at what had happened, till the other three Knights and two
Giants came all out armed and mounted and one of the Knights soon ran against
Don Brianel, who met him with equal fury, so they both meeting in the Encounter
were both dismounted, whereupon the Men of the Bridge came to unarm him, and
another of the Brothers advanced to meet Don Arsileo who readily encountered
him, and that with such fierceness that he overthrew him dead to the ground, a
piece of his Lance being in his body, this action caused great admiration in
the spertators, who till then thought the Defenders of the Bridge to be
invincible, soon after one other of the Brothers now came against Don Arsileo,
but to his cost, for he was thrown from his horse in the encounter, but not so
but that Arsileo was likewise enforced to leap from his, which caused those of
the Bridge to come to disarm him, but he not thinking it to be Justice caused
him to loose his Head for his attempt. The other Brothers and Giants seeing
this drew their Swords and came to assail him, and Don Bellianis and others to
defend him, so that there began a confused Battle, which was stopped by command
of the Souldan, who ordered that Don Arsileo should not be disarmed, nor yet
permitted to Ioust or ^ight any more. To this he agreed and all was content,
except one Proud Knight who was near the Souldan who gave out very haughty and
arrogant speeches against our Knights so that Don Bellianis being angry defied
him to mortal battle, the other as proudly accepted it on condition that after
battle with the Proud Knight Don Bellianis if Vanquisher, must fight with the
Defenders of the Bridge, and if Vanquished loose his Horse and Armor. In this
time the Princess Persiana not knowing Duke Alfiron asked him who these Knights
were, he instead of answering, took the opportunity of renewing his Love-suit
to her, complaining of his ill Fortune, and she courteously answered him,
telling him that it was her Fathers violent commands, and not her inclination
that occasioned the breach, and that she still loved him* and further she would
have proceeded, but that she was ^indred by the Battle that was then beginning
between Don Bellianis and the Proud Knight.

Great was the anger and Rage that possessed Don Bellianis against the Proud
Knight, so that being resolved to dispatch him at the first blow, they
encountered with great fury, but Don Bellianis mist of his intent, for being
blinded with Rage and anger he clearly passed by him, who breaking his Lance on
the Shield of Don Bellianis past on* which Don Bellianis seeing turned about,
and disdaining to use his Sword caught, hold of him. and drawing him out of his
Saddle with much ease, rode to the River side, and threw him into the Water
where he was soon drownded to the great Wonder and admiration of the Souldan
and the rest of the Spectators, but greater was their amazement at what they
saw him perform soon after, for he encountered the two Giants and three Knights
without any Lance, scorning to use any, having miss's of his first attempt
against the Proud Knight, but as these Knights and Giants ran against him, he
either cut their Lances in sunder, or pulling them out of their hands by force
made them instruments of mischief to their owners, and then when they all did
set upon him in Combat, he laid so lustily about him, that he cut off Legs and
Arms from the Giants, and cleft the head of one of the Knights in two. and so
wounded the other two Knights that they begged their lives at his hands, which
at the request of the Souldan he granted to them and thus did he finish the
Adventure of the Unhappy Bridge, the Souldan greatly wondered who he should be,
but Don Gallaneo knowing him as well by his Shield as by the Lady, and Damsels
his Companions, told the Souldan that it was the very same Knight that had been
Knighted by, and fought with the Emperor of Greece, this answer gave the
Souldan Iome satisaction, but he was resolved to know more if he might, and to
that purpose he and his Train Rode toward them, which Duke Alfiron seeing, he
moved forwards to meet them.

CHAP. V. How the Knights were received by the Souldan and his daughter
Persiana, and of her discourse with Duke Alfiron, and the Knight of the Golden
Image, of a confederacy between Don Gallaneo and Don Galfeo to kill the Knight
of the Golden Image, and his Companions.
THe Souldan coming near to Duke Alfiron he dismounted and went to kiss his
hands, but he was raised and welcomed by the Souldan, as was also Don Bellianis
and his Companions, and then the Sophy praising his Valor to the highest,
desired a boon of him, which he courteously granted, but when he told him that
it was for him and his Companions to pull off their Helmets and tell him their
Names and Qualityes, as also that of the Ladies, he was somewhat troubled,
however he obeyed the Souldan, and told him that his Name was the Knight of the
Golden Image, the other p^inting to Don Brianel the Venturous Knight, and the
other, Arsileo Prince, and sole Heir of the Kingdom of Rasia, and that the Lady
was the King of Carcasias Daughter whom they were attending home, and then he
and his Companions did un^ace and pull off their Helmets, whereby Don Bellianis
did discover one of the loveliest, but withal the most magnanimous Countenance
that ever was beheld, the Souldan embracing him with great affection, and now
they having joined Companies, they traveled together toward the City of
Persepolis Don Gallaneo out of Courtesy and respect, leading the Palfrey of
the Princess Aurora by the Reins, which Don Brianel seeing he performed the
same Office for the Princess Persiana, and thus did they Travel, spending their
time in pleasant and familiar conversation till they arrived at the City of
Persepolis, where they attended the Sophy to his Palace, but although he
requested Don Bellianis and his Companions to remain there with him, ^et they
made their excuses resolving during their stay in that place to continue with
Duke Alfiron, who retiring to his Palace gladly received and welcomed them and
then Don Bellianis Wounds being dressed and he laid in bed, Supper was served
to them all with as great magnificence as if they had been entertained at home
in the City of Constantinople

Don Bellianis being weak with the loss of blood and Wounds he had received
against the Knights and Giants at the Bridge, the next day kept his Bed where
he was not only visited by Duke Alfiron and his friends, but also by the Sophy
and Princess Persiana, and most of the principal of the Court except Don
Gallaneo, who was otherwise employed as you shall know by and by. Don Bellianis
being resolved to serve the Duke Alfiron against Don Gallaneo, after the Duke
had acquainted him with his Love to the Princess and other private affairs, Don
Bellianis told him that if he would be ruled by him, he would find a Way to
destroy his Rival Don Gallaneo, and put him in possession of the Princess, the
Duke joyfully received the proposition, and thereupon Don Bellianis advised the
manner to be thus. That it should be given out that he being sorely Wounded
could not be the next day at the Iousts and Tournaments that were to be held at
the intended Wedding of Gillaneo and the Princess, but that he would keep his
Bed, but that however he was resolved to be there to kill Don Gallaneo, and to
bring the Princess to such place as the Duke should appoint, and to the end
they might accomplish their design the better, the Duke should cause a party of
his Knights to advance before on ^he Way whether they intended, that they might
be freshly ready to assist them upon occasion. Although the Duke doubted much
to come off well in this attempt, yet he was resolved to try his fortune, and
in all things to obey Don Bellianis, whilst they were in this conference, the
Sophy and his Daughter entered, who kindly saluted the wounded Prince, and there
the Duke had the opportunity to confer with the Princess Persiana, and receive
fresh assurances of her good Will and affection, she giving him a Scarf of her
own making as a favor, and wishing that the day of her Nuptials had been with
him, he finding her so flexible, acquainted her with the design of himself and
Don Bellianis for gaining her, which she well approved of, and having the
convenience of speaking with Don Bellianis alone, she discovered her mind to
him, and he also acquainted her with his intention, and resolution to serve
her, but she seeing him so Wounded, doubted of his performance, however he
assured her that he was able enough and would not be wanting in excuting what
he had promised, and in this assurance she left him to attend the Sophy her
Father who now having performed his visits to all departed.

Whilst this design was contriving and concluding on at the Palace of the Duke
against Don Gallaneo he was not idle, but was also contriving mischief against
Don Bellianis, for consulting with his Cousin Don Galfeo the unknown, and
believing that the Knight of the Golden Image was one of those that fought
against him at Constantinople, they therefore concluded him to be their Enemy,
and that he came thither for their harm and damage, wherefore it was agreed
that Don Bellianis being sick of his Wounds, Don Galfeo should the next day
(when all the Dukes Knights were at the Iousts and he left in Bed alone) with
five hundred Knights search the Dukes Palace and kill him, whilst that Don
Gallaneo himself should in the time of the Iousts destroy and kill his
Companions, and thus they resolved to rid themselves of their supposed Enemies,
and to this purpose they that Night put things in order to execute their
intention the next day.

CHAP, VI. How the Tourney being begun, of the danger the Adventurous Knight
and Arsileo were in by Don Gallaneo's Knights, how Don Bellianis defended
himself in the Dukes Palace from Galfeo, and slew him there, and how he going
out of Persepolis relieved two Damsels from certain Knights, und how he slew
the Dragon of the Riphean Wood.
THe next day which was the appointed time for the solemnizing the Nuptials
between Don Gallaneo and the Princess Persiana being come, all these great and
Royal Personages dressed themselves in their richest habiliments, but the
Princess exceeded them all, not only in gorgeous and Rich apparel but in the
multitude of Jewels that adorned her which were although very rich and
numerous, yet did her fair beautiful eyes exceed them all in brightness and
luster, and being attended by many Kings and Queens, Dukes and Dutchesses, and
other Royal Personages, she was conducted to the Temple, where according to the
custom of her Country she was married to Don Gallaneo. The good Duke Alfiron
was much troubled hereat, but he was in great hopes before that day was spent
by the assistance of his good friends Don Bellianis and his Companions to have
her in his Possession, and to that end he had put all things in the best order
he could, being accompanied with the two Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty; who
were his Friends and were attended by twenty five thousand Knights, yet were
these and all his own but a small number in comparison of those that were of
the Souldans Court, and did belong unto Don Gallaneo, but however not only the
Duke but also the Princess Persiana put great confidence in the promise of Don
Bellianis. And now Dinner being ended, and the Tilting begun Don Brianel who
led one of the Dukes Squadrons encountered with a Gyantlike Knight called
Pidasto the Cruel, who was one of those that Don Gallaneo had charged to kill
him and Arsileo, but he missed of his aim, for he was himself not only
overthrown in the Encounter but also Wounded in the Head. Many came to his
rescue and to fall upon Don Brianel, but he was releived by Arsileo and several
of Duke Alfirons Knights, so that in short time the Tilt and Tournament was
turned into a bloody fight, and all parties engaged in it, where we will leave
them to speak of Don Bellianis.

The Tournament being begun in the place appointed, Don Galfeo with five
hundred Knights, went to the Dukes lodging, with intent to murder Don
Bellianis, but he was up and ready to receive them, for being armed in one of
the Dukes armours, he was prepared to go to the Tournament, when Don Galfeo
entered the Palace, Don Bellianis seeing so many Knights enter, wondering asked
their business, Don Galfeo answered, to see the Knight of the Golden Image, he
is not to be spoke with said Don Bellianis; but Galfeo advancing forwards up
stairs, was hindered from entering, by Don Bellianis, who drawing forth his
Sword, defended the passage in such manner, that in short time, he had killed
Galfeo and several of his followers and forced the others back again into the
Court yard, where he pursued them, and several other people saw many fight
against one Knight came and assisted him, so that all the rest were vanquished
and fled. only Don Bellianis taking one of them Prisoner. forced him to confess
the intended treason against him. He having discovered thus much, taking a
lusty Courser and a big Lance, rode to the Tournaments. Where finding his
friends engaged in bloody fight, and endangered by Don Gallaneo's practice, he
was so enraged, that he overthrew thirty Knights e're his Lance did break, and
then drawing his Sword, he laid ^o about him, that he mightily encouraged the
Dukes Knights, who before that time were worsted by their adversaries, and
seeing his Cousin Prime Arsileo dismounted, he made way to him and again
mounted him on a dead Knights Horse. Don Gallane^ was by this time informed of
the ill success of his Cousin Galfeo, b^ one who had escaped and showed him the
Knight that had dissapointed them, wherefore he in great wrath and anger, was
resolved to be revenged, and therefore made toward Don Bellianis, who was then
fighting with a Grant, and in few strokes sl^w him to the amazement of the
Sophy, who wondering cried out, what Knight may this be, that performs such
incredible deeds, wish the Knight of the Golden Image were now here to behold
it. By this time was, Don. Gallaneo come near to Don Bellianis, whereupon they
quickly made way to meet and Encounter each other but to the great harm of Don
Gallaneo, who received such a blow from Don Bellianis as felled him from his
horse sorely ^^^ounded, our Knight being resolved to dispatch him alighted, and
Wounded him again, but was hindered of his purpose by some of Gallaneo's Knights,
but Duke ^lfiro^ arriving at that time with a Troop of Knights, and seeing how
matters passed Rode over him, and so caused him to breath his last to the great
grief and sorrow of the Sophy, who commander them to spare him but to no
purpose, wherefore he commanded all to fall upon and kill those that had killed
his Son which caused a cruel slaughter. The Kings of Armenia and ^essi^anty
with much persuasions, caused the Sophy to command the fight to cease but he
rested much troubled, resolving to be revenged on Duke Alfiron, and his
Daughter the Princess to disguise her joy did seem to be grieved for the Death
of her Husband, but her Father believing she dissembled and that he was slain
by her consent, caused her to be imprisoned in a Tower, and to be surely
guarded.

And now the Battle being ended, and every one returning to their quarters, Don
Bellianis that he might not be known left the City and went into the Fields,
where he was not able to travel by reason of the great loss of blood which he
sustained from his many wounds, so that he was forced to alight and sit on the
ground, but it was not long e're he was disturbed by the arrival of two Damsels
who came in great have and fear toward him, he asking the cause of their fear
and slight, they told him they were pursued by a terrible Dragon, and they had
no sooner finished their Discourse, but he saw the Dragon approach, whereupon
he drew his Sword and assaulted the furious beast, who flying against him threw
him down, and he being under him was cruelly Wounded with his Talons, so that
he was in great danger, but he whose heart was never possessed with fear, in
short time drawing his Dagger, mortally wounded the Dragon in several places to
the heart, so that he left our Knight and expired, for which deliverance our
Knight returned thanks, and the two Damsels who beheld the fight were greatly
amazed, and seeing him very much Wounded, they disarmed him and dressed his
Wounds, and leaving his Armor there, they traveled toward the City; by the
Way be discoursed with them, and by enquiry found that they belonged to the
Princess Floribella, who had sent them to hear tidings of her Causin the
Princess Aurora, and that in their Travels they were met by a Giant named
Fellistone, who having twenty Knights in his Company would have forced them,
but that they seeing twenty other Knights caused them to oppose the Giants, and
that in the mean time they had fled from them, in this discourse they continued
till they again met with three of the Giants Knights, who seeing the Damsels
would have again forced them but were again hindered by Don Bellianis, who
unarmed as he was encountered all the Knights, and combating with them all,
clove one of them from the Head to the ^^^ist that he fell down in two pieces,
and the other two he also vanquished, but withal he was very much Wounded with
a Lance, which being run into his Thigh fastened him so to his Saddle, that he
could not stir it, and now without any more Adventures he arrived at the Dukes
Palace, where he was joyfully received and welcomed by all, but when they saw
him so Wounded they were very much grieved, for he could not without help
alight from his Horse, and he was forced to be carried to his Bed, where his
Wounds were carefully dressed, but that in his Thigh was so large and painful
that he roared like a Bull. And now he being provided with all things
necessary, the whole discourse was about his mavelous and indeed prodigeous
Adventures, which were so admirable, especially those of that day that they
exceeded behalf, and then the two Damsels who came with him upon sight of the
Princess Aurora knew her, and that Evening they having the convenience of being
private together, discovered themselves to her, and the cause of their journey,
and how they fortunately met with Don Bellianis, and the Princess also
acquainted them with the good success of her affairs by his means, and how that
she was in part revenged for the Death of King Pompejano her Father by the
Death of Don Gallaneo who had usurped her Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. How the Shophy was grieved after the battle, and how Don Bellianis
Armor was brought to the City. How the Kings of Armania and Tessifanty
conferred with the Sophy; and how the Duke presented himself to the Sophy, and
what happened to him there; and how the Knight of the Golden Image, and Persiana
were challenged, by the fearful Fellistone, and his brethren, for the d^^^h of
Don Gallaneo, and Don Galfeo, and how the challenge was acceepted.
THe grief of the Souldan was very great for the loss of his Son and very
desir^ous he was to know who that Knight was that had performed such marvails
in the Battle, somewhat suspecting it to be the Knight of the Golden Image, but
that he supposed he kept his Bed by reason of his Wounds, and withal he
understood that the Knight went not home with the Duke but left the City,
wherefore he sent several Knights to seek him, who coming to the place where
the monstrous Dragon was slain, they were more fearful of his dead Carcass then
our Knight had been to encounter and kill him; there they found the Knights
Armor, by which they understood that it was he that had performed that
mavelous Combat, also at a little distance, they found the Giants slain
Knights, where seeing one of them so cloven in twain, they admired at the
prodigeous strength of the Knight, who had done those marvails, and thus being
laden with his Armor, they returned to the Souldan, acquainting him with all
they knew, who marvelled thereat, and was joyful for the Death of that mighty
Dragon of the Ryphean Woods whom none durst encounter but all fled from, as
from their Deaths, and now the Souldan being resolved to be revenged on the
Duke Alfiron, he provided to assault him, and the Duke also provided for his
own defense.

The Sophy continuing his resolution of being revenged on Duke Alfiron, caused
a Proclamation to be issued ^u^ that none should aid or assist him but to
proceed against him as against a Traitor. But by the Mediation of the two Kings
of Armenia and Tessifanty, the indignation of the Sophy was appeased on
condition the Duke would submit himself to Justice, to which they on his behalf
engaged.

And thereupon the two Kings going to the Dukes Pallacee spoke with him in the
presence of Don Bellianis to whom the Duke referred them for answer, wherefore
Don Bellian^^ acknowledging that he had slain Don Galfeo and Don Gallaneo, told
the Kings how that they had determined in ba^e manner to murder him in his
bed, and Traiterouslyrs kill his this friends in the Tournament, and therefore
he had done what he ought in causing them to fall by his hand, but he concluded
that in his opinion it would not be amiss for the Duke to present himself to
the Souldan and abide by his Justice, to which he consented, the two Kings
engaging on the Sophys behalf, and they being now determined to go to the
Souldans Palace, Don Bellianis desired his two friends Don Brianel and Don
Arsileo to accompany them thither, and if occasion were to undertake the
Combat against any Challengers on behalf of him and the Princess (...), which
they promising to do departed, leading him in Company of the Princess A^ror^,
and the Princess Florisbella's Damsels, who being very skilful in Surgery, very
much assisted him in the healing of his Wounds which as you have heard were
many and great.

The Duke accompanied by the two Kings and Knights was hardly arrived at the
Souldans Palace, when also there entered three great ugly and furious Giants
attended on by thirty Knights. He who appeared to be the chief being named
Pallistone the Fierce King of Cyprus, advanced to the Souldan, and told him
that he came to demand Justice against Duke* Alfiron, the Knight of the Golden
Image, and his Daughter Persiana, for contriving and acting the Death of his
Kinsman Don Gallaneo, and Don Galfeo his Cousin, and he said he had reason to
demand it being next of Kin to him, and hoped to have Justice against them,
because he understood the Sophy had already imprisoned his Daughter as guilty
of the fact, and therefore he termed the Duke and his Partakers Traytor^, and
to be such he would prove against them all himself in person, although there
were a hundred of them at once. The Duke hearing these haughty and presumptious
speeches, and viewing the Giant made as resolute a reply, telling him that he
was the Duke, and that what he had said was false, and that he lied most falsely
as he would prove against him, and Don Ar^^l^o hearing his Cousin Don Bellianis
defied and abused, told the Giant that what he had spoken of the Knight of the
Golden Image was false, and that he lied in his Thr^^t as he was ready to prove
and justify, Don Brianel said as much in the behalf of the Princess Persiana,
and that in her behalf he would ente^ ^he Cou^^^^ either against the Giant
himself, or against any of the other two Giants who were his Brothers, and came
thither for that purpose* The fieres Giant hearing himself so flighted (...)
these three ^nights could hardly contain his anger, flying into outrageous
expressions, offered to fight with them all himself, but the Sophy would not
consent to that unequality in the Combat, but consulting with his C^^^^ what
was fittest to be done, it was at length agreed on that Arfil^o should fight on
the behalf of Don Bellianis, Don Brianel on behalf of the Princess Persiana,
and that Duke Alfiron should pr^^^^e him a Champion in the space of twelve
days, when the Combat was to be fought with them three, and the King of Cyprus
and his two Brothers, to this the Princess Persiana was called, who did at
length consent that Don Brianel should be her Champion, and thereupon Gages
were delivered on both sides. The Princess was again committed to Prison, and
so was Duke Alfiron. The King of Cyprus being invited to remain in the Souldans
Palace consented, determining after the Combat, to demand the Princess for
his Wife, and being of Kin next to Don Gallaneo to have the Kingdom of Antioch
with her. The Princes Don Arsileo, and Don Brianel, with the Kings and others
returned to the Dukes Palace, where they acquainted Don Bellianis with what
had passed at the Souldans Palace, and he thereby understanding that the
Combat was concluded on without his being a party therein, he believed himself
to be very much wronged, and resolving to have it otherwise if possible, he
arose left his Bed and the Dukes Palace, and being only led by the Princess
Aurors, who supported him, and attended by Florisbella's Damsels, in this
manner he went to the Palace, being gaped at by all as he passed with the Eyes
of Wonder. And being arrived at the Sophyes presence, he being accompanied by
the King of Cyprus and his Brothers, the Sophy showed him to the King, telling
him of his great strength and Valor, but the King made so slight of the
Souldans Words that be again offered to fight with him and all the other
Combatants at once, and could hardly be dissuaded there from by the Souldans
persuasions.

CHAP. VIII. How Don Bellianis coming to demand Justice of the Souldan was
imprisoned till the end of the Combat, how he being disguised went out of
Prison and met with Don Contumeliano of Phaenicia, and then returned to the
City, and being armed with his Armor, he was admitted to fight, his Discourse
with the Princess Persiana before the Battle and what happened therein.
DOn Bellianis all this while looked as earnestly on the King of Cyprus, and
seeing the Discourse between him and the Sophy to be ended, he thus began. Most
Mighty Lord, I understand that I have been accused of Treason, against Don
Galfeo and Don Gallaneo, if it be a Treason for a Man to defend his Life
against those that come traitorously to assail him, then I must confess my self
guilty, for I do not deny but Don Galfeo fell by my Sword, but it was when he
like a Traitor as he was came to murder me in my bed, and I do not deny but
that that Don Gallaneo fell also by my Sword, but it was in rescuing my friends
from him whom he had also determined to slay. If to do these just actions for
defense of my self and friends be treasonable, then I must confess my self to
be guilty, but I hardly think that any person who loves Justice, will now
believe me guilty. However I understand that I am accused of Treason and so
accused that I am not permitted in my own person to defend my self; I
understanding hereof am come hither to demand Justice at your hands, and that I
wounded as I am may be permitted to fight my own battle, which I promise to do
ten days hence, and I question not the Justice of my cause assisting me to
prove upon any Knight or Giant that I am no Traitor nor guilty of any Treason
whereof I am accused* He having thus finished the Souldan replied that he was
accused of Treason, and according to custom no Man that was so accused was to
defend his own cause, for if so it would be unequal, especially with him whom
he thought did not fight like other Knights, but that he was assisted by
enchantment. Much other Language passed between them wherein Don-Bellianis
endeavououred to anger and provoke: he King of Cyprus to Challenge him the
Combat, but although many hot word* p^ssed between them yet the Souldan still
so took up the ma^ter that Don Bellianis was frustrate in his design being
forced to yield to what the Souldan had already determined, and withal he was
by the Souldans command carried to a strong Tower, there to be strictly guarded
until the day of Combat came, wherefore he was forced to stay only accompanied
by the two Damsels of the Princess Florisbella who were left to cure his
wounds. Arfi^eo and Brianell were both present at this Communication with the
Souldan but said little wishing for the day of Combat that they might justify
their friends that were thus wrongfully accused.

Ten days of the twelve (whereon the Combat was intended to be fought) were
already passed, to the great grief of Duke Alfiron, because he could not find
any that would undertake the Combat in his behalf so dreadful was these three
Giants unto all that beheld them. The Princess Persiana was also very sorrowful
on the same account. But when Don Bellianis understood so much, he was
marvelously afflicted and could not receive any comfort although both the
Damsels that attended him did all they could to please him, till at length one
of the two Damsels, whose name was Floriana bethought of a remedy for all their
sorrow, which was thus, it was agreed to give out that he was very ill of his
wounds, so that he continually kept his bed, and that she lying in the bed in
his stead, he being disguised in her Apparel might pass the Guards, and so
getting Armor might make one of the Combatants, this advice he very well
approved of, and the next night put in execution, but when he was Apparrelled
in Woman's habit he appeared marvelously beautiful, so that the two Damsels said
they had never seen any so beautiful except it were their Lady the Princess
Florisbella who they told him was exceeding fair, and to confirm their words
they showed him the Picture of their Lady which they still carried with them,
he receiving the Picture and earnestly considering it found that is was the
very same he had pictured on his Shield, which being so fair as it was he
supposed it to be a piece made by fancy and not truth, but now viewing of this
other and they assuring him that it was the true and lively Picture of their
Lady he was so surprised therewith that he became instantly in Love with a very
violent passion which had like to have brought him into a Trance, but he being
again recovered and desiring to have the keeping of the Picture departed
leaving the Damsel Floriana in bed in his stead, and just as he went out the
Kings of Armenia and Tesifanty were entering to see him, but he telling them
that the Knight of the Golden Image was in bed and weak with his wounds
desiring to take rest they returned commanding that the Guards should let none
to enter there to disturb him, and he pretending to go to the Tower where the
Duke was imprisoned, went another way, and leaving all company, went out of the
City into the adjoining f^ields where he laid himself under a fair spreading
Beech Tree the Moon shining he drew out the beloved Picture viewing it with
very great affection, and falling into as great a passion considering the great
difficulties that he must overcome in his love to the Princess Florisbella
whose Father being a Pagan would never admit of him who was a Christian to be
his Son in Law, and many other difficulties he considered of, yet however he
was resolved so soon as this adventure was ended, to leave all other concerns
and go visit her, and this passion held him so long, and became so violent,
that viewing of the Picture he fell into a Trance, in which he continued until
a Knight who traveled that way by the light of the Moon saw him in that
condition and supposing him to be a Lady in a Trance he discounted and used
such remedies as again restored his senses and he being come to himself, and
finding that he was in the arms of a Knight he wondered But considering what had
lately happened, he rested content; but so did not the Knight, who beholding his
beautiful face was as much surprised and taken in love therewith, as he had bin
with the Picture of the Princess Florisbella, and to that purpose he used many
amorous expressions, offering his service in all obsequious manner. Don
Billianis smiled at the Knights mistake, but however was resolved to continue
him therein, and thereby make some use of it; wherefore he presently desired
him to pull of his Helmet, and to declare his name and quallity: To this the
Knight agreeed, and unarming his head discovered a very lovely face, and that
young (not being above twenty five years of age,) and in order to the Ladies
request, he told her that his name was Don Contumeliano of Phaenicia; being Son
and Heir to the King of that Country. Don Billianis who now further desired a
boon of him; the Knight granted it: and then Don Billianis told him that he
lately left a Knight (a friend of his) in great distress, for want of a Horse
and Arms, (being the next day to use them upon an urgent occasion; therefore
the request he made, was, that he would so far pleasure him, as to furni^^ him
with his. Don Contumeliano readily consented, and having delivered the Arms,
helped the supposed Lady to mount, and would have kissed her hand: but Don
Billianis would not permit it; but embracing him very lovingly, told him that
if he would the next day come into the City, he might see his Arms used, and
that she would not fail to come again in the Evening to the place, and restore
them; and thereupon he departed, leaving the Prince of Phaenicia; who not
knowing what to do, lay down there to sleep till it should be time to enter the
City.

In the mean time Don Billianis traveling through the Wood, and coming to a
Cave entered there into, and putting off his woman's Aparrel, armed himself as
well as he could, and hid his Clothes by cutting down some boughs and spread
them thereon: And the daylight approaching, he mounted his Horse and entered
the City, where he had not ridden long before he saw the Prince of Phenicia,
who awaiting his coming, and knowing him by the Armor, soon mounting on his
Squirs Horse, rode along with him till they arived at the Palace; where when
they came, and Don Billianis was dismounted he knew not to whom to deliver his
Horse: which the Prince of Phenicia seeing, told him that his Squire should do
him that service, as being bound to do him any (though unknown.) Don Billianis
well enough understanding what he meant, kindly thanked him, and taking him by
the hand, they passed on toward the Souldan, whom was accompanied by the King
of Cyprus and his two Brothers, who were then arming themselves for the
intended Combat. After the usual reverence made to the Souldan; Don Billianis
told him that he had some business to impart to him, but could not do it until
Duke Alfrion were present: Wherefore he was presently sent for, and brought
thither by the Guards: He being come, Don Billianis acquainted the Souldan that
he was to be his Champion: The Duke hearing this, did in all obleigeing manner
render him many thanks, and freely put his Cause and Life into his hands. The
Knight having proceeded thus far in his design, desired to see who was the
Dukes Enemy and accuser: That am I, said the King of Cyprus fiercely, (thinking
to affright him) and now you have seen me do you still continue your resolution
of fighting? Yes, replied Don Billianis, I shall now do it to choose; for by
your outward appearance I cannot imagine one so monstrous as you are, can be
Master of no virtues, and therefore I believe your accusation false. You may
judge if this speech of Don Billianis did not inrage the furious Giant, who now
called out that they might presantly begin the Combat: whereupon the Prisoners
were sent for into the Field; the Duke was there already, the Princess was soon
after brought: But Don Billianis being sent for, and the Gaurds seeing him (as
they supposed) lie sick in his Bed, they at the request of the Damosel that
attended, went to the Souldan and acquainted him with the low condition of the
Knight; he was contented that he might be excused from coming into the Field:
And all things being in readiness for the Combat; and the Princes Don Brianel
and Arselio understanding that the Duke was provided of a Champion, they were
glad thereof, and entered* the Field; their Sheilds were borne by the two Kings
of Armenia and T^ssifanta, and their Helmets by Duke Gerirano and the Prince of
Brandalia; Don Contumeliano carried both Lance and Shield of the Golden Image;
these Knights meeting saluted one another courteously, and Don Billianis caused
his Armor to be closer buckled on; and now did Don Billianis mount his Horse
with his usual dexterity, but he strained himself so much that his wounds bled
afresh through his Armor. The two Princess Aurora and Persiana (who sat on a
Scaffold together) seeing that, and beleiving it was Don Billianis, called to
him, and so persuaded him that he discovered himself to them. The Ceremonies of
the Field being performed, they all six ran one aginst another: Don Billianis
undertook the Giant, and two Princes the two Brothers; the last four were by
the fury of their Encounter forced to leave their Saddles, all were wounded;
but Don Brianel was in the worst condition, having one foot so entangled in his
Stirop that he could not rise. Most furious was the Encounter of Don Billianis
and the Giant, for Don Billianis his arm was run through and fastened to his
body with a piece of the Giants lance that stuck in it: and the Giant was
thrown to the ground with great fury; Don Billianis was forced to dismount to
encounter the Giant, who made up to him; but before he dismounted, seeing Don
Brianel's foot engaged in his Stirrup, and the Giant (his adversary) ready to
mischief him, he threw down the King of Cyprus while he was on Horseback, and
then leaping off; he went to asist Don Brianel, but was hindered by the Giant
his adversary; and in short time the King of Cypius being again on his feet,
being as much enraged as any Tiger, came also and assaulted him so that he was
forced to defend himself against two, who both gave him many weighty straokes,
which did so inrage him that he gave the Kings brother (who had anoyed him) so
puissant a stroke on the Helmet that it was cut in two, and wounded him on the
head so that he was astonished, but withal his Sword flew in pieces, and he
thereby left without a weapon. Great was the fear and sorrow of the two
Princess, of Duke Alfrian, and of the Damsels of the Tower, who looked from
thence to behold the Combat, and of the Prince of Poenicia, by the badness of
whose Sword the life of the valliantest Knight in the World was in great
danger: in fine all his friends lamented, and his foes rejoiced. The King of
Cyprus advanced to finish the Combat with one blow he intended to give him, but
he was mistaken, for Don Billianis seeing his intent, threw the piece of his
Sword that was in his hand at the Giant with such fury that it again felled him
to the ground, and then considering what he had to do, and seeing a Symiter on
the ground, which the Giants brother had let fall when he was so wounded on the
head, he soon took it up, and leaving the fight, went to Don Brianel's Horse
and cut the girts, and thereby enabled him to stand on his feet. The Prince
Arsileo had endeavored to asist Don Billianis when he was in that extremity,
but he found enough to do with the Giant he had engaged. And now Don Billianis
again engaged with the King of Cyprus, and they wounded each other in marvelous
manner; but the Giant had the worst, losing his left arm with a blow Don
Billianis gave him. Don Brianel being at liberty undertook the other Giant, who
having lost his Symiter (which Don Billianis had recovered) fought with a
mighty Mace, they wounded one another very pitteously; and now the Combat was
equally maintained one to one; they had now fought five hours, when the King of
Cyprus being out of breath, and retiring to breath, Don Billianis took the
oppertunity to draw out the piece of Lance from his arm that had all the time
remained there; then they engaged again, and Don Billianis beginning to be
faint, and determining to finish the Combat, was resolved to venture one blow
from the Giant, so he ran in upon him, and when his arm was lifted up (he
seeing the unarmed place) ran his Sword into his very heart, so that he fell
down dead; and he himself was so wounded with the blow the Giant had given him,
that he fell down in a trance, but he soon after arose, and saw Arsileo with
one blow cut off one of Giants Legs, and with the next his head; and the like
did Don Brianello to the other, though the Souldan commanded the contrary, and
the Giant yielded himself vanquished, but he died as well as his Brothers, and
now great joy was made over all the Field for this great Victory.

CHAP. IX. How the Souldan would not release the Prisoners, and how Don
Billianis departed the City undiscovered, and how the Kings of Armenia and
Tessifanty devised a means to see them at liberty, and be revenged on the
Souldan. The strange adventure of the burning Pillar finished by Don Billianis,
and of Contumeleano's Love passions, and the strange Cure, and Don Billianis's
return to Prison undiscovered.
THe Battle being ended, the Princess Persiana descended the Scaffold, to give
thanks to the Knights that had taken so much pains on her behalf, and she more
particularly applied her self to the Knight of the Gilden Image, and so did
Duke Alfiron, for that it was on his behalf that he undertook the Combat; Don
Bellianis replied that he had done no more then he ought, being bound to
relieve all distressed persons by order of Knighthood. And now he knowing that
as the Combat was finished, it was necessary to desire the enlargement of all
the Prisoners; he therefore went to the Souldan to demand it; But the Souldan
being displeased with what had pasted, had commanded that his Daughter and the
Duke should be both returned to Prison, and although Don Bellianis cried to him
for their delivery yet he would not yield thereto; Don Bellianis seeing this
and being discontent thereat, refused to go with his Companions Don Brianel and
Arsileo to have his wounds cured as they desired, but left them all and the
City, being only followed by Don Contumeliano. The Knights and the Princess
Aurora returned to their Lodgings, and there their main discourse was about the
valor of their Companion, whom they supp^sed to be the Prince of Phaenicia,
talking of several particulars of his mighty Encounters with the Giant. And now
there being great need, they were disarmed and laid in Beds to have their
wounds dressed. The Princess Aurora having seen that done, went to the Palace
to the Princess Persiana, who at the request of Don Billianis had received her
liberty, but the Souldan continued his anger against Duke Alfiron, and was so
highly displeased with Don Brianel the adventurous Knight, because he would not
spare the life of the King of Cyprus brother, when the Souldan requested it,
that he commanded him to depart his Kingdom on peril of life. He consented to
obey him in dry days, but resolved to return and be revenged on him for his
injustice. The Souldan being attended on by a Guard of 10000. men reckoned
himself secure, and although the Kings of A^m^nia and Tessisanty desired him to
keep his promise yet he refused it; they seeing themselves slighted, went to
the Dukes P^llace to visit the wounded Knights, where they contrived a way for
the Dukes delivery, which was soon after put in execution, to the great loss
and effusion of much blood that was shed in the effecting thereof.

Don Billianis having left his Companions and the City traveled through the
Fields, where supposing himself alone he again renewed his thoughts of the
Princess Florisbella, and he was in so deep a study and contemplation about
her, that he forgot he was followed by Don Contumeliano, who seeing him enter a
Wood, asked him his reason why he so sore wounded left the City for that Desert
place, and also to see a fair Damsel that he had the evening before met withal;
Don Billianis in short time discovered himself to the party he enquired after,
which Contumeliano understanding and being astonished and confounded at his
mistake, he several times sounded, out of which he could not be recovered by
all the remedies that Don Billianis or Contumeliano's Page could use, so that
he lay as if he had been dead. This grief and the loss of much blood that Don
Billianis had lost by his wounds, brought him into a very low condition, and he
made com^^aints against his ill fortunes, whilst he was in this condi^^on, he
heard and saw a beast, the most deformed that could ^^e imagined, who
approaching him he arose, taking his ^urtelar in his hand to assail him, but at
his approach the ^east vanished, and a Pillar with a Letter thereon, compassed
with fiere appeared in his place, he stepped to the Pilter and taking the
Letter and opening it, read these lines:

The Sage Bellona greeteth the Prince of Greece. I knowing by my Art the
trouble thou would be in for the Solitary Knight, therefore sent this
remedy, which thou shall find in this Pillar of wonders, therefore try the
adventure, and thou shall have remedy sit for the cure of thy friend.

Don Billianis was glad that a remedy was to be had, and therefore was casting
himself into the fiere to attain it, but was hindered by the assault of four
Knights and as many Lyous, who all at once seized on him, so that he could not
use his ^urtelax, wherefore intending to make use of his Dagger which was at
his back, he reached his hand thither, but his arm was held fast my a most
beautiful Lady, at whose ap^earance the Knights and Lions vanished, he wondered
at the ^^rangeness of the Adventure, but the Lady hid him not mer^^ail, because
that was called the Pillar of Wonders, where^^ remedy may be found for despair
in love, the effects of which she causes him to see, for taking a Coal from the
Pil^er, and laying it on the breast of the Phaenician Prince, he ^^raight
recovered his senses and arose, giving thanks to Don Billianis for his
recovery, nay that is due to this Lady only said he, and then they going to
salute her, she suddealy went through the fire and vanished. They both stranged
at that was past, and Don Contumeliano told the Prince that so ^on as the Coal
of fiere was laid on his breast, he was with^^t any pain, but he should never
forget the deceit he found (...) that place; he then desired to know who Don
Billianis was, ^e told him that he was called the Knight of the Golden Image,
and that being prisoner, he came out in that disguise to undertake the Combat;
the Phaenician had heard of him and his adventure at the unhappy Bridge,
wherefore glad he was of his acquaintance, and they then began a friendship
which lasted till death. And now Don Billianis being unarmed and clothed in
Florianas garments, put the Prince of Phaenicia to the blush to remember his
mistake, but they being intended to part company, Don Bellianis desired the
other to go to a City^ about forty miles of, called Bollera, which belonged to
Duke Alfiron, and stay for him there, but before they parted they again went to
the Pillar where they read as followed:

Every one now that will adventure, may have remedy for despair in love as they
shall deserve. Those that have never been overcome in Love or Arms, the sage
Medea forbids them to make any trial hereof.

They having read this, after a little further conference they parted, Don
Contumeliano being armed and mounted rode to the place appointed, where he was
highly welcomed by the Inhabitants, because he brought them news that the Duke
their Lord was at liberty.

Don Bellianis after midnight arrived in the City, he went to the Souldans
Palace, which he found guarded by 10000. men, but he passing for a woman was
permitted to go through them all, even to the Tower and Chamber where the two
Damsels expected him, they expressed great joy for his presence, and causing
him to go to bed, they dressed his wounds, and gave him some victuals, he not
having eaten any since he went from thence, at their request he acquainted them
with all that had happened to him since he left them, but when he told them of
the passages between him and the Prince of Phaenicia, they could not stand for
laughter, by the strange effects of his beauty, they came to speak of that of
their Ladies the Princess Florisbella, and desired him to restore that Picture,
but he made excuse still to retain it. They then discoursed of the Prince
Perianeo, and he being jealous that he was not only a powerful Rival but
doubting he might be beloved by the Princess. Florisbella, asked several
Questions to that purpose, which they answered with much prudence, telling him
that the Princess did not love him nor did not know his Name or Quality: he
only passing for the Knight of the Images, and she knew not that he was so
great a Prince as to be Son to the Emperor of Persia; until he had conquered
the Kingdom of Antioch and thereby dispossessed the Princess Aurora of her
Kingom, and slain her Father who was our Princess's Uncle, being her Mothers
own Brother, and that for this cause she hated him. This News pleased Don
Billianis very well, and now pretending he was desirous to sleep, he desired
the Damsels to go to Bed, they did so, but doubting and hoping that the Knight
was in love with their Lady the Princess Florisbella; and believing they might
hear him utter some speeches that might clear their suspicion, they therefore
arose and listened to what he should say, neither did they lose their labor,
for they found him wholly taken up with discourses that discovered his love to
their Princess: and being his Friends they resolved at their return to their
Lady, to assist him in his love with all their power, this was the nature of
their discourse: so they fell asleep, and the next morning visiting his Wounds
which they found in so good Condition that they assured him in ten days to be
in Capacity to Travel; he was not a little glad of it, hoping in that time to
travel to Babylon, there to be blessed with the sight of his Princess.

CHAP. X. How Prince Arselio and the two Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty, in
the night ^et upon the Souldan in his Palace and released the Prisoners, and of
the great valor of the Princes, and Don Billianis, and of the great slaughter
they made of the Souldans Guard, and how the Souldan commanded his Couzin
Caroliano to raise a very great Army to pursue them, and bring back his
Daughter. And of the dangerous fight that was between the two Armies, and how
by the assistance of Don Contu^eliano, they obtained a great Victory.
PRince Arselio and the two Kings of Armenia, Tessifanty understanding that the
Souldan continued obstinately willful in his determination of keeping the Duke
and Knight of the Golden Jmage Prisoners; resolved to release them by force,
and that Don Billianis might be acquainted with their resolves, they sent the
Princess Aurora to him. He hearing of their determination, gave her great
thanks, and with further instructions and advice, that six days hence they
should assault the Souldan's Palace, and set the Duke at liberty; and take with
him the Princess Persiana, that the Prince's Arselio and Don Brianel, should
wholly employ themselves in that affair, and as for him being Master of his
good Sword he would not fail to be with them at their first assault. That it
would be necessary for her to take leave of the Souldan, and travel toward the
Dukes Country; where she might stay till they came to her, and that she would
take the two Damsels with her, and also that she would advise the Princess
Perfiana of all their resolves, that she might be ready to go with them at the
time appointed, as he knew she would. The Princess Aurora having their
instructions, went to the Princess Persiana, who consented to all that had been
proposed, being very desirous that their attempts might have the success they
all desired. And now all things being agreed on, they put themselves in
readiness for execution, and many motions were made to the Souldan, for
delivering the Knight of the Golden Image, and the Duke, but he would not hear
of any such matters resolving to keep the Duke Prisoner, till the return of his
Son Perianeo, whom he daily expected, and then to put him to death; so that he
would not yield to his delivery. The Princess Aurora, being in readiness to
depart would however take leave of the Souldan, and therefore going to his
Palace, and being in his presence she holdly told him, That instead of
Courtesies which she expected from so mighty a Prince she had received
injuries. He answered her very courteously but withal, as obstinately as before
refusing t^ do any thing but what was his own will; which Don Arselio who was
present hearing, he could not forbear some threatening Language: but she Souldan
replied, he nothing esteemed him nor his Companions nor their power, but
commanded him to speak no more, but instantly to be gone cut of his Dominions.
He would have replied but the Princess would not permit: and so taking leave,
they left the City, being accompanied six Miles of their way by the chiefest
Nobility of the place, who then returned and that Evening the Prince Arselio
did so likewise, where he put things in a posture to be executed the next
Evening: commanding all the men for the more commodious execution of their
design to keep their Rondezvous at the King of Armenias Palace. The Souldan
though he was thus resolute, yet was he not-without his great care, fear and
troubles, hardly trusting any person with his Watch and Sentinels: whom he in
person often disited. His Daughter the Princess was likewise much troubled at
her Fathers willfulness, but she was in hopes to be redeemed out of his Power,
by the Kinght of the Golden Image, and his Companiens.

The next day, was all the Knights Mustered by Arselio, Don Brianel, and the
two Kings who caused them all to be mounted expecting further Order.

Don Billianis his Armor was by his Dwarf, carried to the place where the
Princess Aurora stayed. And now these Troops, having the word; Phoenic^^ given
to them marched to the Palace, there they began their assault most resolutely;
but were by the Souldan's Forces, resisted as stoutly: it was the beginning of
the night, and they could not see one another, but they had also their Word,
whereby they distinguished one another. The entrance into the Palace was so
strongly Guarded, that although Don Brianel. Arselio, did their best, yet could
not they force their passage. Don Billianis in the mean time was not idle, for
he having heard the Alarm, only armed with his good Sword: descended the
stairs to go out, but he was set upon by the Guard; the Captain intendod him a
great blow, but he received it on his Sword, and cut off one of the Captains
Legs, and pulled his Shield from his Arm, which he having fastened to his own,
now was so hold with his Enemies, that he can upon them, and in short time had
killed thirty of the boldest: The rest running away, he them plucking the
Armor of one of the dead Knights, Armed himself therewith, and issuing out of
the Prison entered the Palace, where he saw the Souldan by the light of many
Torches: who with a Troop of Knights, was going to defend the entrance of the
Palace. Don Billianis, seeing him, made up toward him; and with a lous cry,
cried out, Behold, false Souldan, your greatest Enemy, it is I, The Knight of
the Golden Image: who am come to take Vengeance on you for your injustice
toward me.

Great was the amazements and fear of the Souldan and his Knights; who put
themselves in order to defend their Lord: But Don Billianis maugure their
multitudes flew amongst them like a Wolf amongst a flock of Sheep, and made
them flee away as fast: and the Souldan himself, dreading the danger made his
escape out at a Window into a back Garden, but he was much bruised with the
fall, as also, were the rest that followed him. Don Billianis lest them to see
how his Companions fared, but that the Souldans men defended the stairs, he
therefore assaulted them behind with such violence, that they thinking
themselves encompassed on both sides with numerous Enemies some fled; and
others lost their lives, in their defense. Don Billianis and Arselio, went to
the Princess Persiana's Quarters, and seized on her and some of her Damsels
forcing them away with them, but they were met by Don Brianel, and Duke
Alfrian, who had been delivered by him and was now come to see the Princess,
who was very joyful at his fight; and now all being finished that was intended;
the Retreat was sounded, but they could hardly be obliged, the Soldiers being
engaged in plundering the Palace: but they were drawn off, and by Don
Billianis's Command, Marched away toward the Duke's Country, he and all the
rest of the Company marching the next day to the place where they were stayed
for by the Princess Aurora. And now great was the joy of the two Princess,
Persiana and Aurora, and of Duke Alfrian and indeed all the rest that their
project had so well taken, and that they were so far out of the Souldans power:
and many thanks was returned to Don Billianis for the great service he had done
them, the two Kings were also with him, and resolved to continue their
assistance in all things.

If the Knights and Ladies were pleased with their Victory, the Souldan was as
much displeased at his loss, and his grief was increased when he understood,
that Duke Alfrian was released, and that his Daughter the Princess Persiana was
taken away: He was carried out of the Garden into his Bed, where he was almost
distracted with grief and anger. He called for a Conzen of his who was named
Caroliano; and who indeed was a very valiant Knight, him he commanded to raise
all the Forces he could in the City, and pursue his enemies, and bring back his
Daughter. Caroliano in obedience to his Commands, did all that he could upon so
sudden a warning, and soon Mustered together forty thousand men, who being
armed, he led out of the City: They kept no Order in their Marched but made all
possible haste to overtake their enemies, before they should get into their own
City and there us Fortified and Relieved. They made a half at one City by the
way, and intended to stay there all night, but being informed that the Duke and
his party intended by the next day at Noon, to be within his own City of
Bollera, they altered their intention and Marched on all night, hoping to
prevent them; and by break of day he espied them, at which sight he caused
Trumpets to be sounded. Don Billianis hearing this, and looking behind: seeing
so great a Company, supposed them to be (what they were) Enemies, and although
their Troop was far less, yet he resolved to oppose them. In an in^^ant the
Princess's were set apart with a Guard of five hundred valiant Knights; and he
having encouraged his men, went in Company of Duke Alfiron, the two Kings and
his two Companions, to meet his Enemies. Caroliano had in this time put some
order to his disordered Forces divi^ing them into two hands: one he Commanded
himself, and the other he rest to be Conducted by his Brother Boraldo. They
were now near one another, and therefore soon met, but with such fury, that
many Knights were discomfited at the first Encounter. Don Billianis and his
Company performed Wonders in the fight, killing multitudes, but so great was
the number of their Enemies Forces above their's, that the dead nothing
dicrouraged the living; and their two Commanders Caroliano and Boraldo, were
such valiant Knights, that they much encouraged their Forces by their Example.
They several times met with Don Billianis and his Companions: and being
assisted by their great numbers, much endangered and wounded them. Boraldo
giving Don Billianis two wounds and two blows together, one on the side and
another on his head: cutting the Buckles of his Helmet and leaving his head
unarmed; but Boraldo was with one other from Don Billianis thrown wounded down
to the ground: Caroliano seeing that, killed Don Billianis Horse, and did him
some more mischief, so that he was at that times in great danger, but by his
great force and valor, be escaped with the loss of the lives of many of his
enemies who opposed him. The Kings of Armenia, and Tessifanty performed
valiantly, but were in danger to be taken Prisoners in this mean time; a party
that was appointed by Caroliano, wheeled about a little and came to the place
where the Princess were Guarded, they assaulted their Guards who defended them
with much vavalcur, but not so but that the Princess were in great danger to be
taken, had they not been relieved by a fresh Trop of well appointed Knights,
who were Friends, and Commanded by the valiant Prince Don Contumeliano of
Phoenicia who being known by his Armor brought great joy to Duke Alfiran and
his Forces, who were then in low Condition. He first relieved the Ladies and
put them out of fear of their Enemies, and then with great courage assisted the
Duke and his Forces, he ranged about the Field ayding those that were in
greatest need, and at length be came to the place where Don Billianis was
engaged with a multitude of enemies: there he saw him do wonders. Boraldo being
nere, and seeing Don Contumeliano, believing it was he that had killed the King
of Cyprus, and knowing him to be a good Knight, durst not come boldly before
him, but lifting up his Sword gave him a mighty blow behind. Don Billianis
seeing it, supposed he would fall from his Horse, but he only stooping turned
about and gave Boralda a great blow, which being seconded by one from Don
Billianis, who was come to his assistance; felled him from his Horse
dismounting and taking off his Helmet, and believing him dead, he did not cut
off his Head as he intended, though it had been better he had: and these two
Valiant Princes, Don Billianis and Contumeliano, saluted each other.

Don Billianis his Horse being killed he mounted on that of Boraldo's, and then
falling again upon their Enemies, they soon vanquished them, so that they fled
and were so pursued by their Enemies that an infinite number were slain, in all
five and twenty thousand of the Souldans: and not above two thousand of the
Dukes Forces. For this Victory thus obtained, they all rendered thanks to the
Gods, only our three Christian Princes gave thanks to that alone God to whom it
was due. The Princess's were met, and congratulated each other, and all
rendered great thanks to the Prince of Phoenicia as thinking himself more then
ordinarily obliged to him for being his Champion in his late Combat, and would
have kissed his hands, but the Prince of Phoenicia being minded to undeceive
them all and not being desirous to receive honor for that which he had not
deserved, did in public tell all the Company that it was not he that had the
honor to finish that dangerous Combat: but the Knight of the Golden Image in
his Armor, and the manner how he lent it him. This was supprising news to them
all, and caused several discourses, but all being over they put forward to
Bollera; although Don Billianis was of advice to return back to Persepolis and
destroy it, which he said at (that time, might be done with ease) but the
Princess Persiana dissuaded him, and so they putting on, arrived at Bollera:
where they were entertained at the Dukes Palace, and their wounds dressed: the
two Princes Don Billianis and Contumeliano, taking up their quarters there.

CHAP. XI. How the Souldan being enraged at the overthrow of his Army, raised
300000. Horsemen, thinking to be revenged on the Duke and Princes. How the
Duke and Persiana were Married and of the great joy, and or the strange
Adventures in Justing.
THe Souldans Army being thus overcome, fled and dispersed themselves leaving
much booty to their enemies, some mingled themselves amongst the victors, and
there understood by Don Contumeliano's discourse, that it was the Knight of the
Golden Image, that had vanquished the King of Cyprus. When it was dark some of
the Souldan Knights searched for the bodies of Caroliano and Boraldo, to carry
them to Persepolis Caroliano was found alive and in pretty good case as to his
senses: but Boraldo though he was not dead, was still in his Trance, they put
them both on Horseback and a man to support each of them, and so carried them
to the City: although the Souldan was mightily troubled when he heard of the
discomfiture of his Forces: and complaining against his Gods, Raged like a mad
man, yet was he very well pleased when he saw his two Kins-men brought back and
ordered them to be placed in a Bed in his own Chamber, that the greater Care
might be taken in the cure of their Wounds. The Knights returned, told him that
he was mistaken in believing that it was the Prince of Phoenicia that fought
with and vanquished the King of Cyprus; for although there was such a one, and
he a very valiant Knight, yet it was not he, but the Knight of the Golden
Image, who had come out of his Prison to that purpose. The Souldan was
surprised at this news, and said: that he might have discerned it by the Blood
that issued out of his Wounds through his Armor before he began the Combat:
but his hard Fortune had blinded his Eyes, that had occasioned all this
mischief to fall upon him, which however he was resolved to revenge and to that
end, caused Proclamation to be made throughout all his Dominions, to cause all
able to bear Arms, in two Months, to come to Persepolis: and by this means he
gathered mighty Forces, for within one Month he had Mustered together thirty
thousand valiant Horsemen with which Army, he questioned not but to be revenged
of, and vanquish his enemies, to overcome and subdue the Kingdom of Asia, and
to pass further against the Grecian Emperor. All this he intended, and only
waited for the return of his Son Perianeo, whom he had caused to be sought for
in several Countries.

Don Billianis and his Companions being now at rest and ease, were safe cured
of their Wounds, only that of Don Billianis which he had received at his heart
by the sight of the Picture of the beautiful Princess Floribella. The grief
that he received for his absence from her caused him to consider of the joy
that the Duke Alfiran and Persiana enjoyed in being together, and that it would
be fully consumated if they were married, therefore he judging it a convenient
time, propos'o it to the Princess and the Duke who joyfully received the
proposition, and appointed the Wedding day to be solemnly kept ten days after,
against which time great preparations were made by all the Knights for a solemn
Turnament then to be held: and understanding of the great preparations of the
Souldan, they sent to all their Friends and Allies for their assistance.

Don Billianis being thus employed that he could not go to Babylon, and see his
Princess did somewhat consolate himself in discoursing with her two Damsels
about her, and at either times he talked with the Princess Aurora about her
affairs in Antioch; and concluded it necessary to write a Letter and send it by
Don Brianel unto one that was Governor there. This was done and Don Brianel
dispatched away accordingly.

And now the intended Wedding day being come, it was kept with as much
solemnity as their affairs would permit for they kept 8000. armed men as a
Guard always in a readiness. The Princely Bridegroom and Bride being Married
with the usual solemnities and dinner being ended, and some Dancing over, the
Knights that were to perform that days Tilting as Challengers entered the
Field, they that were appointed for the first day, were Arfelio, Contumeliano
and a valiant Couzin of his, called, Fliorispiano of Swevia, who that day
before he lost his Stirrops dismounted thirty Knights, whose Shields were hung
up in token of his Conquest. Leave was demanded for four strange Knights that
were at the City Gates to enter and try their Fortunes, they were accordingly
admitted: three of them was armed alike, in Rose colored Armor, on their
Shilds were Eagles both Black and White. The fourth Knight was Irmed in Black,
and on his Shield was the Whoele of Fortune: and a Knight on the top of it but
tumbling down with this Motto:

He that does presume so high
Deserves on the Ground to lie.
He appeared to be a very valiant Knight, and approaching to the Scaffolds
where the Duke sat, asked who was the chiefest of that Company, the King of
Armenia replied: that there was none chief or above an other, being all
Friends, and if he had any thing to say, he might speak it unto all: then said
he, my desire is, that we may have freedom, to Just and return unknown if we
pleass: That is granted said the Duke: but said the Knight, methinks it would
be better for you, who I suppose to be the Duke and this day Married, to mount
your Horse and try your own valor rather then fit there to behold others.

Don Billianis to this replied that there was no need thereof, there being so
many Knights besides, that were all on his behalf ready to do it for him. The
Black Knight seeing this, prepared for the Just; but one of his Companions went
first and ran against Fliorispiano who bravely received him and caused him to
measure his length on the Ground, he himself being much shaken, the vanquished
Knights Shield was placed amongst the rest higher then them all, which so
angered. The Black Knight that he would not let the rest proceed but ran himself
against Fliorispiano. who was thrown to the Ground: the Black Knight passing
on, only loosing one Stirrup.

The Prince of Phoenicia then encountered the Black Knight who was termed the
Knight of Fortune: but they both had the Fortune to sit their Horses this first
Encounter: And Contumeliano had the worst of the two, at which all the Company
much admired, but more especially Don Billianis who was very desirous to know
who this Knight should be, but the Princess P^rsia a seen resolved him of that
doubt, by telling him that she very well knew that it was Prince Perianeo her
Brother; and she believed he came to be the death of Duke Alfiron That shall
not be at this time replied Don Billianis so long as I live: and so commanded
his Armor to be brought him. In the mean time the Knight of Fortune had so
wounded Don Contumeliano that he forced him from his Horse he himself being
wounded in several places; Prince Arfelio seeing this, began his Encounter
against the Knight of Fortune with great violence, but they both kept their
Saddles: and so they did the second, but at the third they both being equally
enraged, met with such violence that Arfelio was thrown to the Ground: and the
Knight of Fortune was so shaken that he could hardly avoid the same misfortune,
and now were all the other Sheilds taken down, and those of the three
Challengers set in their places and that by the order of Don Billianis who
seeing the Knight of Fortune sole Conqueror armed himself f^r the Encounter.

But Don Billianis was prevented of his intention by the arrival of two strange
Knights armed with White Armor, whereon was engraven many Emperial Crowns, who
desired him to spare the labor of arming himself and permit them to try their
Fortunes; he courteously permitted them so to do, and one of them wanting a
Shield he lent him his, whereon was the Picture of his Princess. He being thus
furnished, went to the Knight of Fortune, and propounded, that if they should
be dismounted by their Horses defects, that then they might proceed to Combat
on foot: to this the Knight of Fortune readily consented, and so they began
their Encounter; but in the mean time the other Knight of the Crowns having
invited the other Knights of the Eagl^^ to break their Lances: they accepted
his propositions, but were in their Encounter overthrown. But now the two
valiant Knights of Fortune and of the Crowns, began their courses spurring
their Horses with so much violence, that their Lances pierced their Shields
and Bodies and their Horses falling dead under them, they were also forced to
the Ground: Never did the spectators ^^e so fierce an Encounter, nor was the
Shield of Don Billianis till now pierced with any Weapon. The Arms of the
Knight of Fortune were the best in the World. being made by the wise Friston,
against which no Enchantment would prev^il. Don Billianis supposed the two
Knights to be dead, and was going to see, when behold they arose and seeing
what condition they were in, they were so enraged that drawing their Swords
they did cut and wound each other in many places; when they were tired with
fighting with their Swords, they went to wrestling but little prevailed against
one another, and they continued till night; when the Princess Persiana desired
Don Billianis to bid them give over, saying it was great pity that two such
valiant Knights should thus destroy each other, he went to them and desired
them to leave off, but they would not till they had appointed to meet thirty
days after in the Valley of the three Fountains, and then and there to finish
their Combat. The Knight of Fortune was angry with Don Billianis for disturbing
him and would not stay though he was entreated, which Don Billianis seeing,
bestowed a Horse on him instead of his own that had been killed; and so he
taking leave departed with his Companions.

The Princess Persiana did not guess amiss, for the Knight of Fortune was her
Brother Perianeo; and his Companions were Don Fermosel of Solsticia, the others
were Brothers named, Don Crisalaneo and Don Gramalis of Thrace; who now
traveled to the City of Persepolis, to the great content of the Souldan and
his Forces, who for joy of the arrival of their Prince, were ready to March
when he pleased.

CHAP. XII. Whow the Knight of Fortune was, and the Knights of the Crowns, and
the end of the Justs, and the causes of the Emperors coming. How Prince
Perianeo approached the Walls of Bollera with 300000. Horsemen: How the Emperor
was gone to the three Fountains to finish the Combat with the Knight of
Fortune, and of the strange effects of the Combat.
DOn Billianis was discontent at the departure of the Knight of Fortune, and
seeing likewise the Knights of the Crowns likewise preparing to depart, he
desired them not to be so discourteous as the other, but to stay and have their
Wounds Cured; and withal to discover themselves to him, to this the Knight that
had Combated with the Knight of Fortune did consent, and pulling off his Helmet
discovered himself to be the Emperor Don Billaneo. This amazed Don Billianis
and Arsileo who knew him; and they can to perform their duties to him, and in
the Greek Tongue asked who was his Companion, he told them Sabian of Trebanto
who had come out of Constantionople with him. The other Prince and Princess's
although they knew not his true quality, (for Don Billianis told them he was
his Uncle and the other his near Kinsman,) yet were they joyful and gave them
very great reverence, and conducting them to the Palace, the Emperor laid in a
rich bed to have his Wounds cured. The Princess Aurora knew the Emperor as
having seen him before, and he did so resemble Don Billianis that setting his
age aside, they were very like one another, she spoke to the Emperor making her
excuses, that she could not conveniently pay those high Respects that were due
to his Imperial Majesty. The Emperor received her with many thanks. Sabian of
Trebanto, was likewise welcomed and treated by all who enquired of him if he
knew who was the Knight of Fortune, to this he answered that he did, for he was
named Perianeo, Son to the Emperor of Persia; Duke Alfcian hearing this, as
knowing his intent was against him chiefly: and that now the Souldan would not
be long ere he approached with his Forces; against which he knew he must make
large Prodision, but he being accompanied by such Valiant Knights feared the
less, and going to Bed to his Bride had an enjoyment of that which he had so
long desired. He being in Bed. Don Billianis only accompanied with Prince
Arselio and Sabian of Trebanto: went to visit the Sentinels and Watch, and by
the way enquired of Sab an the cause of his and his Fathers coming, to which
Sabian replied, that when he and the Emperor left Constantinople, they were
accompanied by his two Brothers Don Clarineo at Spayn, and Don Lucydamore of
shessaly, with a great Navy of Ships, and about 200000. fighting men, all
intended for Antioch; where they supposed to find him, that by the way he and
the Emperor had Landed and lost their Company, and by several Adventures had
arrived there. This News pleased Don Billianis wh^returned to the Emperor, and
acquainted him with his Adventures in that Kingdom. Thus did they spend part of
that night, and the rest in sleeping: And the next day, continuing the Iusts,
Sabian of Trebanto being Challenger won the Honors of the day. A full Month
they rested quietly by reason of the Winter, which hindered the Souldan in
advancing to them. Don Billianis grieved for the absence of his Princess, and
would not be comforted by the Damsels nor Princess Aurora, to whom he had
discovered his lovs, but grieving worse and worse; his Father perceiving of it,
demanded the cause, but could not learn it of him, so that being in the Fields,
the Emperor asked of him the way to the Valey of the three Fountains, telling
him that he was by appointment there to meet with the Knight of Fortune. Don
Billianis told him where it was, and would have gone with him but he would not
permit it, only taking a Lance from his Dwarf departed and left him, but he
intended to go back and frustrate the Battle, as you shall presently hear; but
first I must acquaint you with other matters.

The Sage Friston, who was the greatest Magitian of his Age, who lived in
Persia; and there writ this Mighty and Renowned History: Was a great Friend to
the Prince Perianeo; and employed all his skill and industery in doing what in
him lay, for the Persian Prince. For which purpose, he had intended for him a
very rich and good Swo^d which Meda had forged for her Lover Jason, and after
w^r^s left to the House of Greece, in such a place as Don Billianis had won it.
This he intended for his Prince, but k^^wing that Don Billianis was Master of
that, made him another which equalled it in richness and strength, and in every
thing did all he could for the House of Persia. But turning over his Books in a
pl^^e where he dwelt, which was called, The Desert of Death: and there finding
that although the Persian was very valiant and so that few could equal him, yet
he might be in danger in this Combat; not being able to know what would be the
success and end of it, he therefore was resolved to disturb the Combat in such
manner as shall presently understand.

Don Billianis having left the Emperor his Father, hasted to the City and there
meeting with Sabian of Trebanto, he prayed him to lend him his Armor, Sabian
did accordingly and now he being thus Armed, was in all things like his Father,
and mounting his Horse he made haste to the place where he supposed he should
meet with Perianeo. He went by the place where he saw the Emperor his Father
lying under a Tree, and looking about he saw a convenient place where he
intended to stay till Perianeo came. The Percian Prince was not mindful of his
promise, but having 300000. Horsemen besides footmen in his Company he had the
day before left Persepolis, and made such expedition in his journey, that he
came undiscovered to the walls of Bollera; but Duke Alfiran and those within
the City hearing of it, issued out; and then there began a very bloody doubtful
Battle. Perianeo seeing both Armies engaged, and remembering his promises with
the Knight of the Crowns, left them to go to the place appointed; he was then
armed in a Sanguins Armor, without any device in his Shield, so that Don
Billianis who expected him did not know him, but he believing Don Billianis to
be his Adversary, told him that he was come to finish the Battle. They had some
words before they begun, whereby they understood from each other, that they
both loved the Princess Florisbella, and therefore at that knowledge their
anger increased, and encountering one another they were both sorely shaken but
both kept their Saddles, their Swords being drawn they began a C^mbat the most
furious that had ever been seen, supposing one another Forces to be more then
humane. They wounded each other in many places, and complained of their ill
Fortunes. that they could not overcome: At last Don Billianis grew outrageous
and was resolved to finish the Combat with one blow he was going to give his
Enemy, but he was hindered off his intention by a Lady who appeared to him,
that resembled his Princess Florisbella, who cried to him to help and deliver
her from four Giants who drew her away, he seeing that, pursued her and them,
which was but an Illusion, and went down the Valley and his Armor was changed
in Color, resembling that of the Prince Perianeo, who had not seen any thing
of this, wondering what was became of his Adversary, wherefore he looked abont
for him and in his Steed saw the Sage Friston, who addised him not to follow
his Adversary, but to return to his Fathers Camp ners Bollera; he knowing him
to be his very good Friend, did not disobey him but went thither. And there I
will leave him to return to Don Billianis.

CHAP. XIII. Of the strange Combat between Don Billianis and his Father the
Emperor, (caused by the Enchantment of the sage Friston,) and how they came to
know one the other, and how the sage Bellona arrived and cured them, and took
Don Billianis with her, to finish a strange Adventure, how the Emperor coming
to Bollera found a great Army before it, and of his strange adventure there,
and of the terrible fight between the Dukes Army and the Souldan.
DOn Billianis had not long persued those imaginary Giants before by the virtue
of his Sword, the Enchantments having no force, ended, only his Armor was
changed in color, and so was that of his Father whom he saw before him, and
supposed him to be his enemy the Persian Prince. there mistakes were alike, and
the Emperor seeing his supposed enemy without a Lance, throwing away his and
^rawing his. Sword went to assault him, they both flew at one an other with
like tury, and gave and received many a struck, that piteously wounded them,
and the Combat lasted with great violence, until Don Bellianis giving his
Father a mighty struck on the Helmet, cutting the Laces, his head was disarmed,
and he was about to give him another, which would certainly have stain him, but
that looking on him he saw and knew him to be his Father, and thereupon he
cried out, Oh Heavens, what billany has been dove by my hands, and what more
am I about to do, and then unlacing his own Helmet his Father knew him, great
was the ^^a zement of both, and sitting down together, they began to study how
this mis fortune had happened, the. Emperor a^^ing him how he came to be armed
in the Prince of Persia's Armor, he replied it was not so, but belonger to
Sabian of Trebanto, and they discoursing further of this matter, both concluded
they had been enchanted, and resolved to depart, but they were very week with
the loss of blood. Just as they were going the sage Bellona arrived, who went
to kiss the Emperors hands, but he took her up, and she knowing they had need
of her assistance, gave them somewhat to eat, which when they had done, their
Armor came to their right color, and their wounds closing, they were as fresh
and lusty as they had been before the Combat. And then she having given them a
satisfactory answer to all their request, she told the Emperor that he must
permit his Son to go with her to finish an adventure of very high consequence,
he willingly consented and offered likewise to accompany her, but she denied
that, desiring him to go back to the City of Bollera, where the Duke had need
of him, and that when his Son had finished the adventure she intended he might
return, and that it would not be long first; the Emperor was contented with
their reasons, and his son having asked him blessing, which he gave him, he
mounted on Horseback, and went with the sage Bellona.

The Emperor traveling toward Bollera came thither by break of day, and
wondering to see so many men in the Fields, he judged them enemies, and
therefore rushing among the Tents, he saw one wherein a Knight lay that was
talking with several others that were near him, him he believed to be the
Sophy. and near him was the Prince Perianeo they discoursed about another
Assault to the City, he hearking to them, did not mind a Knight that was
Commander of these Guards, who coming near him and seeing him a stranger, asked
what he made there, and delivered him to four others to carry him to Prison,
but he would not permit them so to do, wounding them all one after an other,
and the first Knight hardly escaped him calling out for help. The Emperor
hearing that, and knowing he must be gone, resolved first to do some execution,
and therefore he thrust his Lance into the Tent and Bed of the Souldan, but
missed of his aim, running between his arm and side, however those that were
about him supposed him to be slain, and his Son went out to see who had been so
hold to attempt such a deed; this being done, the Emperor with great fury
passed on wounding and killing all those that were so bold to oppose him, till
he came at length into his own Camp; there was he joyfully received, though
they were much troubled when he told them that the Knight of the Golden Image
was gene upon a certain adventure, and being arrived at his quarters he want to
rest himself. The Prince Perianeo returned to his Fathers Tent, who told him
that rhis must needs be the Knight of the Golden Image, and thereupon he
counted to his Father the several Battles which he had under taken and
performed, I am very desirous to have further trial of his strength said the
Prince, do you know him said the Souldan, yes r^plyed he, and yesterday we
began a Combat, but was hindered from finishing it by the arrival of my friend
the sage Friston. This was the discourse between the Souldan and his Son, In
the mean time the Duke Alfiron desired the Emperor in the absence of the Knight
of the Golden Image, to take upon him the charge of General over all, he did it
though unwillingly, and thereupon he mustred and divides his men into five
Squadrons, the first of 2000 he gave to Don Contumeliano and Fliorispiano, the
second to Duke Alfiron with the like number, the third to the King of Armenia
and Tessifanty, the fourth to Sabian of Trebanto, and the fifth to the Dukes
brother, called Sallatel of the Valley, he himself only Commanding all in
general. Prince Perianeos troop being very large, were also divided into
Squadrons, and 40000 were particularly ordered to assault the City, so that he
being so well provided of men, and all manner of Military engines, questioned
not but to win the City at the first assault.

It was now the Spring time of the year, when their two Armies lay in sight of
each other, and the various colors that the Souldans bore upon the points of
their Spears made a glorious show, which together with the bright shining of
their Armor was very pleasant to behold.

Don Bellaneo the Emperor being frequently used to these affairs, arising early
in the morning, and ranging about the Field, accompanied by Arsileo, saw an
avantage that he should have over his enemies, the rising Sun then shining in
their faces, which well near blinded them, he resolving to make use of this
advantage, commanded his forces presently to assault them, they did so with
good effect, for they were upon them, and they had done execution before they
were seen by them, and in short time that first Squadron consisting of 30000.
men was overcome, being either killed or wounded. The Prince Perianeo
accompanied by his friends Don Fermosel Crisalaneo and Gramalis seeing this
disaster, came to prevent the further proceeding of it, and therefore bringing
great forces furiously assaulted the victor, and Don Bellaneo doubting he
should be overpoured by the multitude of enemtes, sent for Duke Alfiron to
bring on the rest of their Forces, the Battles being thus joined, the Prince of
Persia seeing Sabian of Trebanto, and supposing him by his Armor to be the
Knight of the Golden Image, whose Armor he had on, assaulted him with mighty
force, so that Sabian although he defended himself very well, yet he had
miscarried, had not the Emperor and other Princes his friends come to relievs
him, at the same time came the Souldan himself in person accompanied by twenty
Giants, and they began a truel fight; the Emperor seeing Parianeo much endanger
his beloved friend Sabian fighting on foot, overthrew the Persian from his
Horse, and killing and dismounting a Giant, mounted Sabian thereon; the Prince
of Persia foamed like a chased Boar, resolving to be revenged, and at the same
time the Souldan and Duke Alfiron encountered and wounded each other on the
heads, and Caroliano and Boraldo being in the Battle, very much assisted the
Souldan, that was much endangered. And now they were thus engaged in the Field,
the City was also assaulted, and notice being given thereof to the Emperor, he
caused much of his Forces to enter, and relievs the Defendants; and the night
now approaching, caused all the Emperors Knights to enter, and the Souldan and
his forces retire. The two Princesses Persiana and Aurora was very joyful at
the return of all the Princes although the Princess Aurora was very much
concerned with the absence of Don Billianis, but being ^old he went with the
sage Bellona, she was very well satisfied, well knowing that in her company he
was in little danger. They without the City being thus repulsed were much
troubled, but having every day fresh supplies of forces, they often assaulted
it but with different success, for they sometimes lost, yet commonly they
gained upon the Besieged, because they had not received any aid; but now we
will leave them all, to prosecuts the adventures of Don Billianis.

CHAP. XIV. How Don Billianis and the sage Bellona traveled into Egypt, where
the Emperor Brandezar was Enchanted, and how Don Billianis slew him and ended
the Enchantment, and took from him a precious Ring and Armor, which no
Enchantment could have power off. How the Princess Florisbella had been
Enchanted and carried away by the same Friston, had non Don Billianis and the
sage Bellona arrived at that very instant.
THe Sage Bellona and he traveled so long, that at length they arrived upon a
high Mountain, which she told him was after the Kings name, called Nycaon, that
it was in the Kingdom of Egypt, and that there was an adventure to be finished
by him there, the like to which he had never accomplished; she further
particularly told him, that in times pust that Kingdom being Governed by a
King, named Nycaon, he was in Contest and War with an Emperor of Babylon, named
Brandezar, who so overpressed him, that he forced him (...) enclose himself in
a City, which he straightly Besieged, he not being able to resist his enemy by
force, being very well skilled in Magic Art, resolved to try his skill, and
leaving his City and Subjects, he by art Magic seized on Brandezar, and put
him into such Enchantment, as was very great torment to him, and that he might
be the more sensible of his pain, he put a Ring on his finger to keep him in
senses, and such virtue is in that Ring, that he which wears it, shall not be
offended by Enchaatment. Nycaon having done this returned to the City, but
being met by the way by his Brother, who in his absence had usurped the Kingdom
he slew him, that he might still continue King, and Nycaon being dead was
buried at the foot of this Mountain. Now (said Bellona) you have great need of
the Ring, without which you will lose the Princess Florisbella, who the sage
Friston intends to get for the Prince Perianeo, and nothing can hinder him but
this Ring therefore it is absolutely necessary that you be Master of that, and
also of the Emperors Armor, which is of the same virtue as the Ring, and will
be of excellent use to you. The sage Bellona having given this instructions to
Don Billianis left him, who now proceeding on, saw a fair Castle, but no way to
come at it but by a Cave which looked very dismally, there he perceived a
Pillar, and on it this inscription:

The little Wolf shall conduct the strongest Lion to this strange Lodgings, to
make use of my skill. He that will attempt this adventure, must disarm himself,
and only accompanied and assisted by his own valliant heart, must excel the
force of my Monstrous Guardians.

Don Billianis not much minding the sense of what he had read, drawing his
Sword approached the Cave to enter it, but upon his first attempt it vanished.
He by that knowing that he must disarm himself did so, and only with sword in
hand proceeded, but he soon fell into a most dismal dark place, where he was
opposed by a monstrous Giant, two Centaures, and as many Lions, here he began a
mervaillous Combat, and not being able to hurt them with blows, he caught one
of the Lions by the throat and choked him, he attempted to force the Fauchion
out of the Giants hand, which prejudiced and wounded him, but the Giant avoided
closing with him a great while, till in the end Don Billianis flew at him, and
seizing on his Fauchion, wrong it out of his hands, and with it going to strike
the Centaures, they and all the rest banished in an instant. He being now
Master of the Fauchion ascended a pair of stairs to a Hall, the passage or
entrance to it benig so narrow, that he could hardly pass through, and there he
was opposed by many armed Knights, who were placed there as the Emperor
Brandezars Guard, he being unarmed and to venturous, was wounded both in the
head and begs, and much endangered, he therefore became more wary, and only
defending himself against them, awaited his opportunity, and seizing on one of
them, forced his Shield from him, and row being armed therewith, he rusht in
amongst them, and laid so lusty about him, that after a three hours fight they
were all vanquished, and now he being forely wounded disarmed one of the dead
Knights, and armed himself in his Armor, and proceeding up an other pair of
stairs, he saw on the top an ugly infernal Monster, who coming furiously
against him beat him down again, he rising and again avancing, saw that monster
accompanied by a terrible Dragon, he seeing them advance toward him, setting
his back against the Wall, and the pomel of his sword against his breast, the
monster ran upon it, and gave himself his death. This encounter had so weakened
him, that he was forced to sit down on the stairs as he supposed, but they were
soon converted into a large green yard, in the middle whereof was a Pillar with
this inscription:

That Knight who has had the courage to proceed thus far, let him enter that
door, and if he can excel the Emperor Brandezar in valor, he shall finish the
adventure.

Don Billianis being desirous to finish what he had begun proceeded according
to directions.

But he was not sooner entered, but he heard great and heavy groans and
lamentations, and looking about him he saw a Knight armed in a fiery Armor, as
if he were in flames, and round about him were many Snakes, Adders, and
Bassilisks, that all seized on him, and bit him so, that he was in excessive
torments causing him to roar out, and make the saddest Complaint imaginable.
This was the Emperor Brandezar, as Don Billianis well understood by speeches he
uttered in his Company. Don Billianis knowing well what he was to do,
approached him; in an instant all the Snakes, Adders, and Bassilisks, left the
Emperor and seized upon him, and so cruelly bit him, that they made his bones
rattle, he endeavoring to kill them lost his labor, for his blows were as
well bestowed in the Air as upon them, finding this, he endeavored to get from
them, and with very great difficulty he went to the Emperors Chai^ and there
they left him.

The Emperor Brandezar, seeing a Knight to near him and supposing him to be his
old Enemy the King Nycaon, he seized on him and Don Bellianis on him, although
he wished himself further from him, seeling a violent heat proceed from his
Armor, but they struggled so together that the Emperors Chair fell, and then
they separating drew their Swords and began a terrible Combat, wounding one
another in most piteous manner, the Emperor was very strong and lusty and Don
Bellianis weary and faint with his several Combats, but supposing that would be
the last in that Adventure, he plucking up a manly Courage gave the Emperor so
mighty a stroke on the Thigh, that cut it in sunder so that falling down he
soon after dyed at which time there happened a great peale of Thunder,
Lightning and Earthquake so that our Knight fell into a france, but when he
came to himself which was soon after, he was not only recovered of his Seafes
but also of his Wounds, so that he was fresh and lusty, and no Cave or Castle
appeared, only the dead Bodies of the Emperor and his Knights he disarmed the
Emperor and put on his Armor, and took from him the precious Ring, which being
a Carbunckle gave very great light. This done, he saw a very fair Monument
exactly made and garnished, on the top was a Shield with the Emperors Arms,
and this Inscription:

This Monument was Erected by Nycaon, in Memory of his Revenge upon Brandezar
Emperor of Babylon, Persia, and Trebanto; who was Vanquished by the Hands of
the best Knight in the Universe. He're shall he lie ^ill the Son of the brave
Lion, shall by force obtain the sight of what is herein enclosed,

Whilist Don Billianis was beholding the rarityes of the Tomb, the Sage Bellona
arrived, to whom he recounted what he had done, and would have attempted the
further Adventure of the Tomb, but she would not permit him, telling him there
was danger in his stay, so at her request he departed being armed in the
Emperors Armor, and she bestowed a Shield on him like the Armor, and on it
was the Figure of his Princess being thus accommodated, they proceeded on their
Journey, where we must leave them to treat of other matters.

The Sage Friston, having as you have heard withdrawn the Prince Perianeo from
the Combat with Don Billianis, and being returned into his own Habitation; and
there consulting what further service he might do for the said Prince; and
being above all things very desirous to gain the Princess Florisbella for him
to Wife, and finding by his Art, that if he did not gain possession of her
suddenly, it would afterward be in vain to attempt it; he therefore resolved
on the rarest Enchantment that had been seen, he being fitted with every thing,
traveled to a place nere to the Walls of Babylon, there he erected a marvelous
Rich Tent. The Souldan hearing of it, being accompanied by Silvyana his Empress
and Florisbella his Daughter, and others went to see it, there did they hear
rare harmonious Music which being ended, there issued from the Tent four
Beauteous Ladies, led by as many Knights who approaching nere the Souldan
kneeled, and one of them made this speech:

Most Mighty Emperor, the Gods who have given thee so large an, Empire grant
the length of days, and all worldly happiness. The misfortunes of others have
brought us to thy Country for relief, knowing that thou art endowed with all
Princely Virtues, and therefore wilt in all things relieve the oppressed. Our
story in short is this; In yonder Tent remains Gorgiana King of Sosia and his
beautiful Daughter the Princess Meridiana who being courted by Herod^ano King
of the Istand of Pearls; who was also a great Magitian, and refused by her and
her Father, raised this strange Enchantment which in yonder Tent is seen, and
seizing the King and his Daughter have there placed them, ^^ere they remain
Prisoners being guarded by sour Knights the valliantest in the World, and
although many of our Kings Subjects have attempted to release him, yet were
they not able, neither is it possible to be done, unless the Knight that fights
with the Guardians of the Tent, he Master of a Sword which the Princess
Meridiana holds in her hand, and which she can give only to a Lady, and that
to such a one as exceeds her in Beauty, and therewith these Knights that are
her Guardians may he vanquished, they released, and the Adventure finished. And
now knowing that there are many fair Ladies in your Court, but more especially
the Princess Florisbella your Daughter: We are therefore hither come to desire
your permission, that the Ladies may try the Adventure. The Souldan and
Princess's were highly pleased at this strange Adventure, and promised that
trial should be made thereof; only the Souldan said that his Knights should
first make trial of their Valor against the Guardians, this was agreed upon,
and they made trial accordingly, the first that essayed it was Baltasano Prince
of Numidia, Couzin to the Emperor, who was soon foil^d by the Enchanted
Knights, as were all others that attempted it. And now the Ladies seeing they
must make trial of their Beauties; the Princess Florisbella went toward the
Tent, and with her the Infanta Mararosa her Couzin, who had much discourse
about it, for said the Princess Matarosa, I hope Couzin you will give me leave
to try the Adventure before yon, for I have a very good opinion of my Beauty,
and although I will not presume to compare it with yours, yet I know a Knight
that would maintain my Beauty to be equal to any Ladies living, but now I think
of it I must except yours, because he wears your Picture portrayed in his
Shield. What presumptuous Knight is that, replped the Princess Florisbella. if
he should come hither and he so bold to do it, I may chance to make him lose
his Head for his presumption. I know not that said the Infanta Matarosa, but I
hear he is the most beautiful and valiant Knight in the whole Universe, and
that he going by the Name of the Knight of the Golden Image, has done many and
incomparable Adventures in the Kingdom of Persia. In this discourse these two
P^erless Princess continued until such time as they arrived at the Tent door,
and then by consent the Infanta was first to try the Adventure: she being led
by a Knight, entered the Tent and ascended two of the three steps that led to
the Princess Meridiana, so that every Body supposed she would finish the
Adventure, but they were all mistaken, for she attempting to mount the third
step, was thrown down; and found her self at the door of the Tent, at this the
Princess Florisbella laughed, and was just ready to proceed in trial of her
Fortune, when she saw a Knight enter the Field armed in a very rich green
Armor, adorned with Basilisks and in his Shield was her Picture drawn so
naturally that it was known whose it was intended for, and by him rode an old
Lady that was masked, who carried a naked Sword in her hand: they went directly
to the Tent; which Friston seeing and not at present being able to know what
was intended, because our Knight, which was Do^ Bellianis, was Armed in the
Emperor Brandezars Armor, which had power against Enchantments and the Sage
Bellona had the Sword of the same Virtue, Friston therefore being by all means
desirous to get the Princess Florisbella into his possession presently
transforming himself into a Monstrous Griffin, seized on her but not so
suddenly but that the Knight of the Basilisks arrived, and striking a blow cut
his Feathers, wounded him and made him to return to his own usual form bleeding
apace, but he was carried into his Tent by the Enchanted Knights. Don Bellianis
seeing the Princess Florisbella faint through fear, desired her to take Courage
and he would warrant her from all harm, having said so, he being instructed by
the Sage Bellona what he had to do, proceeded to enter the Tent, but was
opposed by the Enchanted Knights, who all set upon him, but he who had nere
done any thing before his beloved Princess, resolved to conquer in despite of
all opposition, and so he did forcing his way until he entered the Tent, and
striking the steps with a great stroke all vanished, nothing remaining but the
two dead Knights. Great was the wonder and amazement of all, especially of the
Souldan, who seeing the Knight of the ^^^^^^ks was mounted on his Horse to be
gone, he went to speak to him.

CHAP. XV. Of the great thanks that the Souldan gave to Don Bellianis for
preserving his Daughter Florisbella from the Enchanter, and how Don Bellianis
gave her the Ring which he took from the Emperor Brandezar, which would
preserve her from all Enchantment; and how she was struck in love with Don
Bellianis and of his departure. How Don Brianel arrived at Antioch.
DOn Billianis being ready to depart, was desired by the Souldan to stay, but
he replied, that he was not at his own dispose being wholly guided by the
Ancient Lady that accompanid him.

By this time the Sage Bellona was come to him and with her the two Princess
Florisbella and Matarosa, at whose approach he fell into a Swound, but in that
time he recovered.

In this time the Sage Bellona was known by the Souldan; and received with
great joy and many thanks he gave her for coming at such a time when as they
had so great needof her assistance. I must confess said she, I did know you
would have occasion for the assistance of this Knight, who has greatly
labored to attend you, and without whose aid your Daughter would have been in
danger; for I^le assure your Majesty he is such a one as is not equalled by
sew, and excelled by none. I believe it said the Souldan, by the Wonders we
have seen him do, and that we may give him some reparation for the danger he
hat^ u^dertaken on^our behalf. I pray desire him to discover himself to us, and
remain with us for some time. You must pardon him replied Bellona, for there is
an obsolute necessity for his present departure. In this time the two Princess
Florisbella and Mattarosa were in conference with Don Bellianis and desi^ed him
to put of his Helmet, but answering them as he had done the Souldan, that he
might do no more then what the Sage Bellona would permit him; they requested
her to give him leave so to do. But she replied that they must excuse her and
him both for that time, in doing what they desired his life would be in great
hazard, but instead of granting that request she acquainted the Princess
Florisbella that her Cousen Aurora was in good health, and her two Damsels
whom she had sent to attend and seek her, and that she was in Persia whither
they must go to her assistance. And now Don Bellianis being about to depart,
told the Princess that he was infinitely sorry that he could not at present
obey her Commands, but that he would in short time, when he could be free to
dispose of himself, return and attend her, and desired that in the mean time
she would accept of a Ring which he presented to her, which was that of the
Emperor Brandezars which he said, cost him much Blood in purchasing it only for
her sake, as knowing that it would be of excellent use having the Virtue to
preserve and keep her from the power of all Enchantments, and thereupon drawing
off his Gaunlet he presented it to her, but she being unwilling to receive any
such presents from any Knight whatsoever, did not at first accept it, till she
was desired by the Infanta Matarosa so to do, and commanded by her Father and
withal her own inclination prompting her thereto, she took it of him and told
him, that she would receive it as a Pledge of his sudden return to receive
satisfaction from her Father, for the service he had done them. She also
desired him to acquaint her with the circumstances of the late Adventure, but
he referred that Relation to the Sage Bellona, who having finished her
Naration, took her leave to depart, but in this time the Princess Matarosa,
seeing the reserved silence of Don Bellianis was resolved to venture a question
with him, and thereupon she said: Sir Knight, I believe the Sage Bellona is so
great a Mistress over you, that without her leave you dare not let your Tongue
walk: Therefore I intend to ask her to give you your speech, that we may
understand somewhat more from you. Ah dear Madam said he. I hope you will
excuse and pardon me, and not attribute my silence to rudeness or neglect, but
to an other passion that at this time so overpowers my heart, that the Organs
of my speech are wholly stopped thereby. But Madam, I hope ere long at my
return to do you some service, that may be some part of amends for my unhamsom
departure at this time; well replied the Infanta, so let it be then, and make
have that I may understand what you mean. And now the Sage Bellona, being on
her departure having finished her Salutations to the Emperor, and the two
Princess's; he nimbly leapt on his Horse, and bowing his Head to the Pomel of
his Saddle, in token of Reverence, departed on his journey where we shall for
some time leave him.

The Sudden departure of the Knight of the Basilisks had so distempered the
Princess Florisbella, that she hardly observed the motion of the Souldan, and
her Mother who were returning to the City, for her eyes were so deeply engaged
in looking after the Knight, that she beheld no other object; The Infanta
Matarosa seeing this, called on her, and entered into discourse with her about
him, until they arrived at the Court, but being arrived there, she went to her
Chamber, and casting her self on her bed, she began to complain of her hard
fortune, that had given her so much trouble, for the sight of one, whom she
knew not, and it may be was but a poor extravagant Knight, and that the sage
Bellona as she had done her one kindness, in bringing one to relief and help
her, so she had done her a greater discourtesie in bringing him to captivate
her liberty and disturb her mind; she complained of the Gods, that they had
permitted her to be so overcome, and then again, thin^^^g that he might be
himself one of them, for by the actions she had seen him perform, she could not
judge him humane; These were her complaints, and her thoughts were so troubled,
that she could not express them. The Infanta Matarosa observing her actions and
sudden retirement, and judging that she was love stricken, had followed her
and hearkened at her Chamber door to hear her complaints, but they were so
disordered, that she could not understand them, but in short time after the
Princess Florisbella gave her a true account of the passions of her heart, and
she received some consolation from her, who continually talked of, and expected
the return of the Knight of the Basilisks. The Souldan did also expect him, and
much doubted that it was the Prince Perianeo of Persia, because he refused to
discover himself; but some of his Nobility, who had seen and observed them both
alleged the contrary, and that this became his Armor more completely; this
were their thoughts and maginations, wherein we shall at present leave them.

We have already told you that Don Brianel was dispatched away for Antioch, to
take the best order he could in the affairs of the Princess Aurora; and be made
such expedition in his Journey, not being hindered by any considerable
Adventure, that in short time he arrived in that Kingdom, and coming to a City
called Mi^iana, which was within twelve miles of Antioch, he there took up his
quarters at the house of one of the best Knights in the Country, who although
he was but poor in regard of the distractions of his Country, yet he was a
good Knight, and Loyal to his Sovereign, as you shall understand by the sequel.
Don Brianel having supped with his Host, enquired what news that Country
afforded, and who was their King; at this the Knight replied that they had in
few years had several, but that their last true Sovereign Prince had been named
Pompeiano, who was despised and slain by the Prince of Persia, and the Kingd^m
bestowed upon one Don Gallaneo, who also was lately slain, and since him
another who was named Tramolcano, and Brother to the King of P^^^gia had seized
on the Kingdom, as pretending to be nearest of Kin to the late Don Gallaneo, he
at that time Reigned, and keep us all in hard and cruel Bondage, having
imprisoned several of the Nobility, but especially one Damartino, who had been
sometimes Governor of our Country under our King. But (continued Don Brianel)
had your King Pompeiano any Children, he had said the Host one Daughter named
Aurora, but we know not whither she be alive or dead; but if she be alive and
should come hither (said the Prince) would the Country receive her and restore
her to her Kingdom; That they would with all their hearts, replied the Knight,
but that they are at present so kept under by the Tyrant Tramolcano, but if
there were any person to appear in her behalf, and to encourage the people much
might be done on her behalf. These were the discourses between the Prince and
the Knight, who further added, that the only fittest person to serve her would
be Governor Damartino, if he were at liberty, but that he was strickly guarded
in a Castle near the City, and that there was a Mine from the Castle to the
City, even to the Palace, and that although the Guard of the Castle was but ten
Knights and a Giant, yet they could quickly through that Mine go to the Palace,
and raise 30000. men in arms. Don Brianel having heard all these particulars,
and knowing that the Knight was a person fit to be trusted in the affairs he
intended, asked him if he were willing to assist him in releasing the Governor
and serving his Princess, to this the Knight replied, that although there was
much hazard and danger in the undertaking, yet he weuld venture his life, and
judge if he lost it in so good company, and in so just a cause that it was well
employed, he therefore the next morning arming himself, and telling his family
that he had some affairs to dispatch at Antioch, he traveled thitherwards with
Don Brianel.

CHAP. XVI. Of the strange Combat Don Brianel and Palineo performed at Antioch:
and how they released Damartino out of Prison, and of a stranger encounter
between Don Brianel and Palineo with two strange Knights, and how they came to
know one anothor, and of their design to surprise the City by night, and of the
strange arrival of Don Billianis, and of the joy there was between these
Princes at their meeting, and of the great victory, and how all the people
rejoiced at the news of their Princess Aurora.
DOn Brianel and his Companion soon arrived within sight of the stately City of
Antioch, which made a pleasant and stately show, few Cities in the Universe
exceeding it in every thing, there being above 100000. Families within the
Walls. These two Knights being desirous to know the names of each other, Don
Brianel he was called the Adventurous Knight, the other, said his name was
Palineo, but said he, let me advise you not to be called by that name here,
because one of that name was present at the death of Don Gallaneo, and in the
Battle with the King of Cyprus. Thus did they discourse, till they arrived at
the City where there was a Turnament and Just held between several Knights and
Giants, but their arriving turned it to earnest, for after they had done some
execution with their Lances they drew their Swords, and flew about them, doing
great execution upon the Giants Knights, which the Giants seeing they both fell
upon Don Brianel, he judging their intention spurred his Horse and came within
them, so that their blows were ineffectual, only his Shield was cleft in
sunder, but he taking his advantage, ran his Sword through the body of one of
them, so that the Sword appeared at his back, and fell down dead to the Earth;
and at the next stroke cut off the other Giants arm, who seeing himself mained
fled roaring away. King Trancolcano seeing this was astonished and displeased
so highly, that he commanded all his men to seize on those two Knights,
purposing to be revenged on them, and which Palineo seeing and being desirous
to prevent the danger, called to Don Brianel to depart, he seeing himself so
stricktly beset thought it was best to follow his advice, and therefore
retired, but the King still commanded his Knights to pursue them, and bring
them dead or alive to his presence, but they knowing the danger spurd away so
fast, and ( Palineo being well acquainted with all the private corners of the
Country) went till they came to an odd Guarden, near to which was a Shepherds
Cabin, there looking about and seeing none pursue them, they entered and there
dismounting, they found prodianter for their Horses, and staying until it was
night they then resolved to issue out from thence, and visit the City for
provisions, and to hear what news was at the Palace.

Palineo finding a Shepherds Cloak in the Cabin, and he having disarmed himself
and put on the Cloak, went out of the Cabin to the City, and passing for a
Shepherd entered with the King, who had been in pursuit of the two Knights that
had slain his Cozins, he entering the Palace went to the Mines mouth, he found
the door fastn^d with an old weak Lock, having seen this and gotten some
victual, he returned therewith to Don Brianel, who then supt together, and made
have to return to the Palace before it should be too late, whereupon they
armed themselves, and Don Brianal took the Shepherds Cloak to cover his Armor,
and Palineo wanting one supplied himself of one, by taking the next Pages Cloak
that he met, at which account the Prince laughed, and they made sport together.
And now they being both so well supplied, they arrived at the Palace, where
although they were seen and questioned, yet they passed by telling the Guards
that they had been in sarch of the two Knights that had killed the Giants, and
now being in the Palace, they went to the door of the Mine, which Palineo soon
broke open, and being entered they fastened it on the inside with a Chain, and
passing through the Mine, they at length came to the other door that brought
them into the Castle, which they opened, and fastening it again, and feeling in
the dark for the Prison door, found it, but fast looked, then they consulted
what they were best to do, first they agreed upon a watch word, that they might
know each other, and then going to the Castle Gate, Palineo seeing it fast
locked, and believing it necessary to secure that, he took some Earth and threw
into the Lock at the Key hole, that they who were within might not at pleasure
issue out thereat, then all their difficulty was to get open the Prison door,
and deliver Damartino who was therein Prisoner, and that they attempted to do
but were heard by one of the servants, who cried out that strangers were in the
Castle and had surprised it. The Giant and Knights hearing this arose and armed
themselves, and at once six Knights and the Giant came upon them; Don Brianel
desiring Palianeo to undertake the Knights, and keep them in play while he
assaulted the Giant, Palineo did so, and the Prince seeing the Giant raise a
mighty mace to give him a puissant stroke therewith, ran within him, so that
the Giant missed of his blow. The Giant being disappointed of his intentions
that way, caught the Knight and intended to stifle him between his arms, but
our Prince being sensible of the danger he was in drew a Dagger, and gave the
Giant two or three terrible wounds therewith, which he feeling let go the
Knight and drew a Curtelax and stroke at Don Brianel so that he sorely wounded
him, but Don Brianel soon gave him his payment, for at the next blow he cut off
one of his legs, and thereupon he fell to the Earth as if a Tower had fallen
and soon after died. This done Don Brianel went to his Companion, who had
behaved himself so valiantly, that he had slain four of the Knights that
assaulted him, and now all the Knights of the Castle joined against them, but
to little purpose, for at the two first blows that Don Brianel made he gave two
of them their deaths, which the rest seeing, they fled toward the Gate to go
out and call for help, but they nor the porter could not open it, Palineo
having prevented them in that intention, which they seeing desperately flew
upon him and the Prince, but they soon received their deaths at their hands,
and they being dead, they searched about for more enemies but could find none;
and now seeing the Keys at the Porters girdle, they took them from thence and
opened the Prison door, where they found Damartino the late Governor, but so
pale, weak and feeble that he was hardly to be known; He supposed they had been
Knights that were come from the Tyrant King to dispatch him of his life, but
when he was informed the contrary, and that he was free, he was very glad,
rendering thanks unto Palineo whom he knew, but Palineo told him that all thanks
for that was only due to Don Brianel, without whose assistance there had been
nothing done nor attempted, Don Brianel was unwilling to receave this praises,
but rendered them to Palineo. But now the Governor Damartino being at liberty,
he told them that it was necessary to deliver several others that were there
Prisoners and were his servants, to this they agreed, and seeking about found
and delivered them; this done the Prince and Palineo were laid in two Beds to
have their wounds dressed by one belonging to Damartino, who was skilful in
that Art, and there they continuel several days till they were well, ordering
that if any came from the King to admit them, and Don Brianel being very
curious of his Horse and careful to have him, he was hardly to be equalled,
sent one of their servants to fetch them both, which they did in the dark of
the evening, and now all things being in good state and condition with them,
Don Brianel being now at leisure and in company with Damartino and Palineo,
told Damartino that although he had done thus much for his deliverance, yet he
had other business to dispatch, having a Letter from their Princess Aurora
directed to Damartino, which he gave him, and he opening it found these Lines:

Aurora the disinherited Queen of Antioch, Princess of Miriana to her Loyal
Knight and Subject Danartino, greeting: It is not unknow to you and all the
World, of the strange disasters of our Family of late years, and how that I
have lost a Father and you a King, and have my self been forced for safeguard
of my person from the power of my enemies to banish my self from my own
Country, and flee to strangers for aid and succor. The Gods I hope have now
looked on my suffering; and are willing to put an end to them by my
acquaintance with this vallerous Knight, and several of his Alliance, who have
promised to assist me in the recovery of my Kingdom; And to the end it may be
done with the more ease and facility, I have desired him to take the trouble to
travel to you, and advise with you of what is most needful to be done, as what
forces I ought to have for the accomplishing of my designs, and when and where
to order them. Of these matters I have given him Commission to treat with you,
of whose Loyalty I make no question, therefore I pray take such order herein as
may best conduce to the service of your distressed Princess, Aurora.

Damartino was so joyed at the recept of this Letter, that he embraced the
Prince Don Brianel with very great affection, and so did the valiant Knight
Palineo, and they both promised their utmost assistance, and that they would
spend their lives to the very last drop of blood that was in their bodies, but
considering the great strength and policy of the Usurper, they did believe the
attempt would be very difficult, however being resolved to proceed in it, they
purposed the next day to leave the Castle in the custody of Damartino's
servants, who had directions how to answer all that came, and secure it till
their return, and that they would visit the Duke of Silviana, who was a man of
great power, and from whose assistance they had great expectation, in order to
this design, they having changed their Armor departed about midnight.

It was near morning when these three Knights accompanied only by two Pages
issued out of the Castle, and advanced on their way, they had not traveled
above six miles, before they met with two Knights, completely armed in Rose
colored Armor, with many Crowned Lions, they being as courteous as they
seemed to be valliant one of them advancing, asked if any of our three Knights
were lately come from Antioch, yes replied our Knights, and desired to know the
cause of their enquiry, we seek for a Knight said they that wears a Tawny
Armor; and the Picture of a fair Lady in his Shield, Don Brianel knowing that
they enquired for Don Bellianis replied thus, let me know your name and
quality, and I shall give you a true account of your demand, I am, said the
other, called the Knight of Lions; I am no wiser with that answer, said Don
Brianel, then I was before: I can resolve you no more said the Knight, then I
shall not perform promise with you, said the Prince, I wonder said Palineo Sir
Knight of the Lions how we should know you, since I believe your deeds of Arms
have not yet ^lazoned forth your worth, your arms seeming as if it had hitherto
been engaged in few mortal fights, you were best try my courage, replied the
Knight of the Lions: content said Palineo, and if I am vanquished, my friend
shall acquaint you with what you desire, and if not, your fair Armor shall be
mine, content said the Knight, and to this Don Brianel also ^greed, and
thereupon they began their encounter, which was performed with such fierceness,
that the Knight of the Lions lost his stirrup, but Palineo was dismounted, yet
would not yield himself vanquished, nor suffer Don B^ianel to ac^uaint the
Knight of the Lions with his demand, whereupon the other Knight of the Lions,
and Don Brianel began (...) Combat, wherein Don Brianel, received such a blow
on the Helmet, that breaking the Laces it flew from his Head ^eaving it wholly
uncovered: Great was the anger and ^age of Don Brianel, for this misfortune
which he was re^olved to revenge; and thereupon drawing his Sword, approached
his enemy with marvelous fury, the Knight of ^he Lions was as valiant as he,
and resolved to prosecute ^he Combat, but approaching near Don Brianel and
know^ng him, he cried out in the Greek Tongue, It is enough, Prince of Macedon,
I must not fight with you. Don Brianel ^earing that, and wondering who should
know him in so ^trange a place, asked who he was; the Knight of the Lions
without any reply: unlaced his Helmet, and Don Bri^nel soon knew him to be Don
Lucidamore, Brother to Don Bellianis, and asking who was his Companion, he was
answered that it was his Brother Don Clarineo of Spayn, ^hey all embraced with
much joy, to the great wonder of Damartino and Palineo; and now nothing passed
but loving Speeches, the two Princes acquainting Don Brianel that ^hey came out
of Constantinople with the Emperor their Father, and 100000. Men, which were
not far off, intend^ng to come to Antioch, to find their Brother Don Bellianis
who was to restore the Princess Aurora: that a certain Adventure had bereft
them for the present, of the Emperor and Sabian of Trebanto, who was alone with
him, and that they were come according to their first intententions to a^sist
the Princess Aurora. Damartino and Palineo heard them talk, but know not about
what, only they supposed them to be Friends, Don Brianel having considered what
was most necessary to be done, told his Friends that it were best for them to
say, that they came from the Emperor of Babylon, etc. that those two Knights
would be the more ready, and he also told them that he left their Brother, Don
Bellianis in Persia, in a bloody contest with the Souldan, about the death of
Gallaneo, they were glad to hear of the death of that Traitor; and now being
satisfied in all particulars, and instructed in what they should say, they
likewise told their Pages, that they should say that they came from the Souldan
of Babylon.

This done, Don Brianel and his Couzins advanced toward Damartino and Palineo,
and presenting them to them said, that they had cause to render thanks to the
Gods for their good Fortune, in ordering it so as that they met, these Knights
who were his Kinsmen, and were come about the same Employment that they were
engaged in, and to that end, had brought from the Souldan of Babylon, a very
strong Army, which however should be disposed and ordered as they should
direct. Palineo made a very courteous Reply: being as he said, very well
satisfied in the misfortune of his Encounter, thinking it no dishonor to be
dismounted and vanquished too, by Knights of his alliance. And Damartino
concluded that as to the ordering of their affairs, it would be necessary for
them to go back to the Castle, and there advise further thereof, only sending
to the Army to stay where they were till further order.

Thus did they ride back to the Castle, whereupon Advice taken, it was resolved
that Prince Lucidamore and Damartino, should go that Night to the Army, and the
next morning bring them before the Walls of Antioch. They understood that the
King had already heard of the Forces, and believing them to be Enemies, had
provided against them an Army of 100000. men, to fight without the Walls, and
40000. men, to defend the City: However, Don Clarineo, Don Brianel, and
Palineo, resolved to pass through the Mine into the City, and surprise and open
one of the Gates, whereby their Army might have entrance. This being agreed
upon Don Lucidamore and Damartino went to the Army, the Prince having himself
commanded the Soldiers to say that they came from Babylon.

CHAP. XVII. The cruel fight between Don Clarineo, Don Brianel, Palineo with
Tumolcano and his Giants: And other f^ats in the City, and how strangely they
were Relieved by Don Bellianis: And how by the Policy of Damartino, all the
Tyrants Army and Citiz^ns turned to them, all jointly submitted and declared
for the Princess Aurora: And how they rewarded Palineo, and left Damartino
Governor, till the return of the Princ^sse Aurora.
TWo hours before day did Lucidamore and Damartino bring their Forces to the
City Walls, intending to surprise it, and they made up toward that Gate which
was intended to be opened for them: neither were Don Clarineo, and Don Brianel
and Palineo, unmindful of what they had promised, but passing through the Mine,
and hearing the approach of the Army, they went to the Gate, their passage was
indifferent clear, because the King and his Forces were gone another way, but
when they came to the Gate to put their determinate purpose in execution, they
there found a sufficient Guard to defend it; however being resolved to
prosecute their intentions, the politic Palineo, went to the Porter that had
the Keys, and giving him a great blow over the Head, that cleft it in twain; he
took the Keys from him, but how ever he could not perform his intention in
opening the Gate, for he was set upon by several Knights at once, he defended
himself very well, and offended his Enemies by the assistance of his two
Princely Companions, but the King Tramolcano, hearing of this attempt, and
being resolved to prevent it, went in company of Count Garino and a great Troop
to assist his Guard; they spurred on with great fury thinking to overcome the
Princes, which Clarineo seacute;eing, ran the Giants borse through, who being
mortally wounded overthrew his Master, Garino intending the same, was prevented
for Palineo stepping aside, with one blow beat him from his Horse, but they did
both arise again, and they and their Forces did so furiously assault our three
Knights, that they were in great danger of their lives, had they not been
rescued as you shall presently hear. It was near morning when a little without
the City might be seen a Pillar of fire, which approached the Walls: after it
two Giants that carried a Ladder, and set it against the Wall, and a Knight
whose Armor was garnished with Basilisks, who dismounting from his Horse,
mounted the Ladder up to the City Wall. Don Lucidamore who was without and saw
this, did likewise mount the Ladder and follow him; they were opposed by some
that were on the top of the Walls, but the Knight of the Basilisks either
killed them or threw them down headlong, and seeing certain steps in the Wall
he thereby descended, being still followed by Lucidamore; when they came down
they made great slaughter, till they arrived where the three distressed Knights
were: Don Brianel not knowing him to be their Friend, made a blow at him, but
he knowing him, warded it, and proceeded against his Enemies, at one blow
killing the traiterous Count Garino; and then he cried out, Courage brave
Knights, for you are relieved: And immediately at another stroke he cut off the
Giants leg, so that he fell down dead; and now the Forces without seeing they
could not enter at the Gate, made a breach in the Wall, and entered there, and
soon after Palineo being recovered, opened the Gate. But so great was the
Multitude of King Tramoleano's Forces that it was almost impossible to overcome
them, and they knowing that they must all dye if they were overcome, fought
like mad men or in despair; Damartino considering hereof, and grieving that so
many men should perish, considered of a way to prevent it, and therefore he
commanded all his men to cry aloud: Antioch for the Princess Aurora, those of
the City hearing this, although they were before engaged for their King
Tramoleano, as they thought in their own defense against foreign Enemy, yet
now hearing their Princess Aurora named, and supposing her to be amongst those
that they believed were their Enemies, they soon turned Parties, and sought for
them and helped to destroy those that were the popper Forces of the Tyrant: so
that in short time there was none left among them. And now our Princes being
together, and all j^yfull for their Victory: they sought out the Knight of the
Basilisks who had given them so great Aid, and he was mounted on horseback to
depart, but at the earnest request of the Princes, unlaced his Helmet, and
discovered himself to be the valiant Don Bellianis.

Never was greater amazement and joy then these Princes had at his wished for
sight, they all ran to embrace him, and so did the other Knights to give him
thanks for his asistance. And now they returned to the Palace, and care being
taken for the cure of their Wounds. Don Bellianis and Damartino went into the
City, and having caused the Citizens to assemble, he acquainted them that he
came from their true Princess Aurora, and that he would acquaint her of their
Loyalty which he promised should be rewarded: he showed them her Letter to
Damartino; at which they were so satisfied, that they undertook that in few
days the whole Kingdom should be at her dispose, and all their Enemies turned
out. To which purpose they sent Messengers to all places of Importance in that
Kingdom.

It was not long ere Messengers came from most places of the Kingdom to ensure
them of the utter subversion of their Enemies, and that all places had quietly
submitted i^ the Government of their Princess. Don Bellianis supposing all
affairs were finished; called all the other Princes's and considerable Nobility
to Counsel, where he ordained the old Governor Damartino, to be Governor and
Vice Roy; till the Queens return: he would have excused it, pretending his
great age, but he was so well approved of by all, that he accepted the
Government. Don Bellianis being well acquainted with the great pains and merits
of the Knight Palineo, and being resolved to reward him; gave unto him all the
Lands and Revenues, of the late Count Garino; promising that the Princess
Aurora should not only confirm his Gift, but also consider of somewhat further
as a Reward for his Loyal Actions, this was also allowed off, and confirmed by
all, so that Palineo who was now called Count Garino, gave many thanks to Don
Bellianis, promising that not only the estate, but his person should always be
ready to be sacrificed for the service of his Princess. The Assembly being
broken up, and all things thus orderly settled; he thought of his departure, and
having acquainted his Brothers and Cousen, where he had left his Father, and
that it was necessary for them all to go to him, they agreed to send the Army
before by Sea, to the City of Persepolis in Persia, there to attend his or the
orders of the Emperor his Father: They being thus dispatched away, (he and his
Brothers) and Don Brianel stayed eighth days longer in the City of Antioch, to
see all things put into quiet and order. And every thing being as they wished
for, they desired to depart: but the Governor, Damartino and Count Garino, had
so importuned them to know who they really were, that they in the end told
them, however, oblieging them to keep their knowledge thereof private. They
rested amazed and contented, that their Kingdom was settled in such quiet, by
the asistance of such great Princes: And ordering Guides to wait on them, and
direct them out of that Country, the nearest way to Persia, they departed; and
in this Journey we shall leave them, and withal, here Conclude this First Part,
of this Honorable HISTORY.

FINIS.
THE HONOR OF CHIVALRY: Or, The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF DON BELLIANIS
of GREECE.

CONTINUING As well the valiant Exploits of that Magnanimous and Heroic
Prince, Son to the Emperor Don Bellaneo of Greece; as also the Wars between him
and the Souldan of PERSIA.

Wherein is likewise described the strange and dangerous Adventures that befell
him in the prosecution of his love toward the Princess Florisbella, Daughter
to the Souldan of Babylon: His Releasing of her Father the Souldan from a
strange Enchantment, and vanquishing the Emperor of Trebizond.

The Second Part.

Now newly Written in English by F. K.

Licensed and Entered, according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, for Fran. Kirkman, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Thames Street, over against the Custom-House, 1671.

To the Reader.
THis Second Part having already received a very favorable acceptance in a
former Impression; I shall not need to enlarge my self in an Epistle, and
therefore I only tell you that I have now prosecuted the Story in a third and
last Part, and hope it will be to your content, and that is the utmost ambition
of

Your Friend and Servant, Fran. Kirkman.

THE SECOND PART OF DON BELLIANIS of GREECE: OR, The Honor of Chivalry.
Continuing the valiant Expliots of that Heroic Prince, Son unto the Emperor
Don Bellaneo of Greece
CHAP. I. How the City of Bollera being straightly besieged by the Souldan was
well near taken, but that it was rescued by Gorino Brother to the Duke Alfiron,
and the Knight of the Basilisks and his Companions.
IT is now full time to return to the City of Bollera, where we left the thrice
renowned and most magnificent Emperor Don Bellaneo, in company of so many
valiant and renowned Knights and great Personages, who were straightly besieged
by the Souldan of Persia, and his son Perianeo Knight of the Images. After the
last Battle was ended, which is largely described in the 59th Chapter of the
First Part of this excellent History, the Emperor commanded that a strict and
just account should be taken of how many Fighting men were left in the City and
Trenches; which command being put in execution by Duke Alfiron and Sabian of
Trebanto, who were very vigilant and careful therein: and after they had taken
a just account thereof, they delivered it to Don Bellaneo, whereby they found
that there was not above fifty thousand men both in the City and Trenches, and
that they had lost ten thousand men: for the Duke brought twenty thousand men
with him from Persepolis, and there was ^ithin the City besides forty thousand
fighting men: when as on the other side the Souldan had at least four hundred
thousand fighting men, besides above fifty thousand which were slain in the
last Battle, and the Souldans men daily increased, and many good and hardy
Knights and Giants from all parts of the Empire of Persia came in daily to them
at the brute of these Wars, and for the love that they bore to their
magnanimous and redoubted Prince Perianeo Knight of the Images, for whose
return there was great Joy throughout all those Countries.

On the other side, great was the grief and sorrow of the most peerless
Princess Persiana, (who was married to the Duke Alfiron, as is before
recounted) and for whose sake alone all these Wars were begun, and in whose
Quarrel many redoubted Knights had lost their lives. As much troubled was the
beauteous Princess Aurora, for the absence of Don Bell^anis the Knight of The
Golden Image, and Don Brianel, whose success in the winning of her kingdom and
other strange Adventures she had not yet heard of. But all these sorrows were
somewhat mitigated, in that the City was so well guarded by Don Bellaneo Knight
of The Imperial Crowns, and the rest of those invincible Princes and Knights.

The Prince Perianeo being greatly desirous to put an end ^o these Wars, and
being vexed that one City manned with so ^^w Knights should be able to
withstand so mighty an Army as he had under his command, desired of his Father
to give him leave to assault the Place, and in order thereunto one morning very
early, two hours before the Sunrising, he being before provided of all things
necessary for so great an Attempt, took part of the Army, which he divided into
four parts, one Squadron of fifty thousand men he gave to be commanded by
Caroliano another o^ fifty thousand men was commanded by Boraldo, the third of
fifty thousand men by Don Fermosel, and the last he commanded himself, being
fifty thousand well resolved Knights, and forty Giants. In this manner, with
the greatest silence that could be, they approached the Outworks of the Enemy,
which was near half a league from the City; The defendants, who kept an
excellent order in their Camp, were ready in short time to receive them, being
commanded by the Kings of Armenia and Tesifante, who hearing of the approaches
of the Enemies, presently caused the Clarions and Trumpets to be sounded, and
buckling on their Armor went to receive them: Caroliano approaching the Tents
of the Defendants; couched his Lance, and furiously unhorsed twenty or thirty
Knights before he met with any that could withstand him; but the King of
Armenia seeing him do so much mischief, and had so weak resistance, without any
Lance drew his sword, and cut the Lance of his enemy in two pieces, and then
redoubling his blow made him bow his body to his horse neck: but he soon
recollecting his spirits drew his sword, and began a terrible Fight: By this
time they in the City having taken the Alarm, issued out under the Conduct of
the Emperor and the Duke Alfiron, leaving only a Guard of five thousand men to
defend the City and the Ladies that were therein: but when they came near to
the Camp, they met their own Soldiers flyin^ for safety into the City with all
the speed they could, being pursued by heir enemies who came so powerfully upon
them: whereupon the Emperor, Duke Alfiron, and the rest were much dismayed,
however encouraging them in the best manner they could, they caused them to
return and face their enemies, and then the fight began to be very hot and
bloody, Don Bellaneo couching his Lance unhorsed twenty Knights before he brake
it, and then taking another, ran so fiercely on into his enemies rancks, that
they all made way until he met with Boraldo, with whom he encountered so
fiercely, that breaking his Lance into shivers, he caused him to measure his
length on the earth, and so passed on, drawing his sword and killing many of
his enemies: thus was the fight again renewed, and his forces seeing the
undauntedness of his courage, followed him so vigorously, that like a torrent
he bore down all before him, till at length he met with Perianeo, who then came
up with all his Force to renew the Battle: then did the good Emperor bestir
himself, and indeed he had great need, for he was encompassed with six Giants,
besides the Knight of the Images, all which did their uttermost endeavors to
assail him: some of their blows he received on his shield, and others were
delivered with such puissance on his helmet, that he was enforced to hold about
his horses neck to keep him from falling, but he soon revenged himself of them,
for like a raged Lion he cut off the arm of one of the Giants, and another he
cut off one side of his face, so that now he was delivered from two of his
enemies; but the Prince Perianeo knowing him by his Arms to be the only
considerable Adversary he had, desired the other four Giants to leave him alone
with him, thinking himself to to overcome him that he might gain the more
honor: then began one of the most terrible Fights between these two undaunted
Warriers that was ever heard of, both of them resolving to do their utmost
devoirs, and they behaved themselves so fiertely, that as well many other
Knights, as the four Giants, stood still to behold that incomparable Combat.
During this time, in all other places the Fight was continued with much vigor,
and the brave Knights Alfiron, Contumeliano* and Florispiano performed wonders:
the valiant King Armenia was all this while engaged in Combat with Caroliano,
where he gave and received many wounds, and their Fight continued so long, that
both their horses were slain, and the King of Armenia was in a great jeopardy*
for many of the Knights of Caroliano's Squadron (seeing their Commander likely
to be overcome by the King of Armenia) did violently assault him, and brought
him to great extremity, having wounded him in many places, and he had very nigh
fainted with his great loss of blood, when the King of Tesifante accompanied
with 500 Kts. came to his rescue, and again mounted him on the horse of one of
the knights that he had slain.

Thus the Battle continued indifferent on both sides, till Boraldo and Don
Fermosel arrived with their several Squadrons of fifty tho^^and men a prece,
brake through the^ rancks of their enemies, and attempted to force their way
into the City; which they endeavored by all means possible to effect, for they
brought Scaling Ladders, and all other instruments of War, fitting to assault
it: which when Duke Alfiron, and the rest of the Knights heard, they
immediately retreated into the City, knowing that it was but weakly manned, and
not able long to resist the furious assaults that would be made.

Thus the Emperor (who as I told you before was engaged in a bloody Fight with
the Knight of the Images) was forced to leave the Combat unfinished, to retire
to the City to rescue it, which he heard was well nigh taken: being come near
the gates of the City, he saw that the enemy had gotten possession of part of
the wall, and likewise he saw the Knight of the Images coming behind him with
all his Forces, wherefore he seeing the extremity of the business hasted into
the City, and stood in the rear of all his Forces, and was the last man that
entered, holding a continual Fight with his enemies, till he saw all his own
Forces were within the walls, and then he himself entered, not permitting any of
his enemies Forces to enter with him, which they by all means attempted to do:
so soon as he was entered, and the gate strongly fastened, he repaired to that
part of the wall which he saw was possessed by the enemy, and mounting thereon,
being followed by several valiant Knights, soon tumbled the enemies from the
wall, and kept the possession thereof; but all this, and what ever else they
could do, did not hinder the enemy from getting the possession of the wall in
many places, which they at last kept in despite of all the Forces of the City,
and were ready to descend the wall and enter the City, when they heard a great
noise of Trumpets and Clarions, and a great company of armed Knights behind
them, who gave a great assault to those of their Forces that were below; at
which they were greatly astonished, and seeing them come forward with a great
deal of impetuosity and destruction of many of their Forces, the chief
Commander who had getten the possession of the wall, came down to help their
companions, and the rest, who still remained on the wall, were soon forced from
thence, and thrown headlong down, where they ended their lives.

Thus was the Battle again revived, and many of the Souldans Knights and Giants
lost their lives, by the invincible arms of four or five Knights, who came in
company of the late Forces that came to relieve the City: but among the rest,
there was one Knight who was armed with an armor garnis^ed with Basilisks, that
put all men to amaze, for they rather judged him to be a raging Tiger, or
hungry Lion, then any mortal Knight; for in a short time he dismounted above
fifty Knights, and killed four Giants, and yet he was not at all wearied, but
still bestowed such deadly strokes amongst the Souldans knights, that they all
fled from him as from their immediate death, till at last the two brothers,
Caroliano and Boraldo, both assaulted him, and laid many weighty strokes both
on his shield and helmet, but he reached one of them so great a blow, that he
made him catch hold on his horses neck, to save himself from falling, and then
being much enraged gave the other such a thrust that he tumbled him from his
horse, and so he proceeded killing and destroying all that durst withstand him.
In the mean time his other four companions were not idle, for they behaved
themselves with extraordinary courage. It was two hours before day, when this
battle first began, and now it was about four of the clock in the afternoon,
and yet it was not ended: but at last the Souldans Knights and Giants being
much wearied, were about to retreat when they once more saw fresh Forces coming
toward them, which was indeed commanded by the Souldan himself, w^o seeing the
Battle continue so long, and understanding by a messenger that the City was
likely to be relieved, came on with all his Forces to assist his Son, whereby
he might, as he hoped, put an end to this troublesome War: but he found himself
to be bravely received by the Knight of the Basilisks and his companions.

When they in the City saw this, they informed the Emperor Don Bellaneo
thereof* who commanded one of the Gates to be immediately opened, out of which
he issued with ten thousand men, and went immmediately to the place where the
Knight of the Basilisks was engaged, and seeing him do such wonders, and
supposing him to command the rest, he said to him: Knight, since you have,
though unknown, endeavored to give us so great aid, I yray let it be used to
the best advantage, which will be at this time with all convenient speed, to
retire into the City, else you will presently be overpowred by their great
Forces, and then your asssistance will be of little effect. The Knight of the
Basilisks gave attention to this advice, and knowing not only the person that
gave it, but that it was also very good, endeavored by his own example and
actions, to retire to the City, and so he and his companions did with all their
Forces, only with the loss of two thousand men which were killed in the
Battle and retreat. And the Souldan and his Son, the Knight of the Images,
seeing themselves forced to retire from the City walls, by reason of the
approaching of the night, which was now coming on, retired into their enemies
trenches, with a resolution to abide there till they could take the City, but
they were prevented, as hereafter shall be declared.

CHAP. II. Who the Knight of the Basilisks, and his Companions were, and how
the Siege was raised, and the Souldan and all his Forces retired to Persepolis.
SO soon as the Knight of the Basilisks and his Companions were entered the
City, the Emperor caused a strait Guard to be placed on the Walls, and then
retired to the Palace, where he was welcomed by the two Princesses Pe^siana
and Aurora; but greatly was the joy of all increased when the Knight of the
Basilisks discovered himself to be Don Bellianis, Knight of the Golden Image,
and his Companions to be his two Brothers Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, and his Cousin Don Brianel of Macedon: but there was
one Knight who continued still unknown to all but the Duke Alfiron, who being
unarmed, knew him to be his brother Don Gorino; and indeed to him they were
very much engaged for his help and assistance, for he was not only a good
Knight himself, but he had brought twenty thousand valiant Knights and Soldiers
with him, to aid his Brother: and the Knight of the Basilisks and his
Companions, overtaking him in their return from Antioch* and understanding that
his design was only to relieve the City of Bollera and their Journey being
intended for the same place, they discovered themselves to him to be friends to
his Brother the Duke Alfiron, and thereupon they joined themselves together,
and arrived at the City in so fortunate a time, that had they not come as they
did, the City must needs have been taken by the Enemies, by reason of their
great forces, and the small power that was within to oppose them: but their
arrival in so fortunate a time, caused the Souldan to loose his design, and
made him retreat, as we have before told you, with the loss of one hundred
thousand men, and many valiant Knights and Giants. But however he was resolved
not to leave the City walls, till he had not only taken it, but also destroyed
it and razed it to the ground, in revenge to the Injuries he had received of
Duke Alfiron and his Companions But here we will leave him without the City,
and return to our Champions within; who little feared him and all his Forces.

The Princess Aurora being informed of the return of Don Brianel, sent for him
to give her an account of his adventures in Antioch, and it was not long ere
he, accompanied with his two Companions, Don Clarineo and Don Lucidamore, came
into her presence, and falling on his knees to kiss her hand, she refused to
grant it, but raised him and his Companions from the ground with much freedom
and joy, he being somewhat emboldned by her freedom, did arise and salute her,
which she courteously received: and then she seating her self in her Chair,
caused other seats to be brought for Don Brianel and his Companions: where they
being seated, and Don Brianel knowing for what cause he was sent for,
immediately declared unto her the good success of his Embassy, and how that by
the assistance of those two Knights there present, and of their brother Don
Bellianis, as also by the advice and help of Palineo and Damartino, he had
flain the Usurping King Tramolcano and the Count Garino, and reduced the
Kingdom to her obedience; and that there was nothing now wanting but her
presence to make her subjects happy, and that they were all ready to obey her
in every thing, and in the mean time till she could come thither, they had
sworn Oaths of Allegiance to Damartino, according to her orders and command.

This news greatly contented the Princess, and she returned many thanks to Don
Brianel and his Companions, after which they departed from her presence, and
went to the place where the Emperor, his Son, and Duke Alfiron, which the rest
of the Commanders, were in Counsel about what was necessary to be done, as well
for the defense of themselves, as for the offending of their enemies, and there
it was concluded to send Don Clarineo to Persepolis, to attend the landing of
two hundred thousand men, who were come from Greece with the Emperor, and ^ave
him orders that he should conduct these Forces directly to Persepolis to
assault it. that thereby the Souldan hearing thereof, might be enforced to
withdraw his Forces to aid that City, and so they should be left free. This
determination was immediately put in execution, and Don Clarineo in company of
fifty Knights, presently departed, and traveled so long that night, that the
next morning they arrived within two leagues of Persepolis, and then they took
another way, and went somewhat about, that they might travel undiscovered, and
so they did till they arrived at the Seaside, where they immediately embarked
themselves, and ranging about the Sea for some time, they at last discovered
the Navy, and approaching to them, went aboard the Admiral, and immediately
causing the principal of the Captains and other Commanders to come aboa^d, he
declared the will of the Emperor; to which they all promised ready obedience,
and thereupon they presently set sail for Persepolis: and they had not sailed
six hours before they discovered the shore, where they landed without any
interruption, and leaving a sufficient company to guard the Navy, they
immediately marched on to Persepo is, where they arriving endeavored to enter,
but were strongly repulsed by the Souldans Forces, and the place being very
well fortified, they were forced to retire, and fortify themselves in Trenches
near the City, till they had further orders from the Emperor.

The City of Persepolis being thus assaulted, some of the Forces went
immediately to the Souldans Camy before Bollera, to certify him thereof, where
hey arrived one morning early, just as the Souldan and his Son wit all their
Forces, were going to assault the City: but they were much astonished with this
news, and did greatly wonder from whence all those Forces should arrive,
however commanding the Messengers to silence, they resolved to give the onset
to the City before they departed, and thereupon went forwards with all their
accoutrements of War. Perianeo Knight of the Images being extraordinarily
enraged, immediately got a Ladder and mounted the wall, where he soon either
cut in pieces, or tumbled down all such as were placed there to oppose him, and
was ready to have descended the wall and entered the City, when the Emperor
himself, and several other valiant Knights in his company; came and resisted
him: Many fierce and hardy blows were given and received on both sides, for
they had both an implacable hatred to each other, and the Emperor knowing that
if he could vanquish that enemy, he should easily force the rest to retire,
laid mighty strokes on the Knight of the Images, so that in the end he put him
quite out of breath, and enforced him to retire from the wall in despite of all
the resistance he could possibly make: all this while the rest of the Knights
and Giants on both sides, were not idle, but did their uttermost endeavors, the
one to posses, and the other to defend the wall, which indeed was to well
guarded by so many valiant and magnanimous Knights, that indeed the flower of
all Chivalry was there present, and therefore the Moat which encompassed the
City, was in a manner filled with the blood and dead bodies of the assaylants;
which the Souldan perceiving, and knowing that his presence was required, and
endeed more necessary in another place, he caused his Forces to recreat, which
he could hardly effect, in regard of the desperateness of the Fight in all
places, at last he withdrew his Forces, and finding that he had gained nothing,
but that this on^^e had cost him the loss of fifty thousand men, he resolved to
depart that might, and retire to Persepolis.

Those in the City seeing their Enemies withdrawn in good order returned to
their several Quarters, where they greatly rejoiced in their good fortune: The
Emperor and his Son with all the rest of those courageous Knights, resolving
the next day to issue out of the City, and set upon their Enemies in the open
field: but when the next morning was come, and they were read to put this their
resolution in execution, they found that all their enemies were departed,
having taken the benefit of the night for that purpose, wherefore they went and
disarmed themselves, and then went again to counsel, where they resolved to
(...) as follows.

CHAP. III. How Don Bellaneo the Emperor, and the rest of the Knights and
Forces followed the Souldan to Persepolis, and that which happened ethre.
THe Emperor Don Bellaneo, and the rest of the Knights being entered into
Council, it was concluded that every one should provide himself to depart from
that City, and follow the Souldan: they very well knowing that the Forces of
the Emperor, under the command of Don Clarineo, being arrived at Persepolis,
and the Souldan being informed thereof was the cause of his so sudden
departure, wherefore Don Alfiron, the Emperor Don Bellianis and the rest of the
knights, went immediately to put their Forces in readiness; which when they had
done, they came to the Court to the Ladies, to take their farewell of them.

The Princess Parsiana was much troubled and perplexed, that she should so soon
leave her husband the Duke, and was greatly discontented that all this War was
occasioned thorough her Marriage with the Duke, whereby the lives of so many
brave Knighes were put into continual jeopardy, wherefore she besought the Duke
her Husband, Don Bellaneo, and his son Don Bellianis, to use their utmost
endeavors to reconcile this difference between her husband and het Father,
without the effusion of any more blood, which they promised to endeavor.

The Princess Aurora was like wise much troubled that her affairs was thus
hindered by these Wars, but her discontent was the greater in that Don Brianel
and she must p^rt, wherefore she applied her self to Don Bellianis, and calling
him Her Deliverer; desired him to make all the haste he could possible in his
return thither, that he might put her in possession of her Kingdom; which he
promised to do, but she not satisfied with this, desired that some one of his
campanions might be left in that City for the guard thereof. He thereupon
resolved to give her all the pleasure he could, told her that he would so order
it, that Don Brianel should be left behind for that purpose, at the naming of
whom she blus^ed, and returned him thanks therefore. So he took his leave of
her, and of the two damsels that belonged to the Princess Florisbella, and
departed to his Father, and the rest of the Knights, telling them what he had
promised to the Princess Aurora, and that it was necessary to leave Don Brianel
for guard of the City, which was accordingly done. Thus these brave Warriors
lest the City in guard of Don Brianel and ten thousand men, and marched onward
to Persepolis with sixty thousand men.

The Emperor and his company with easy martches, at length arrived near
Persepolis, where they found Don Clarineo with all his Forces ready to receive
them, who informed them, that the night before, the Souldan and his Son, with
all the rest of the Army arrived there, and with the loss of many men had
entered the City.

Thus these Forces being united, made a very considerable Army, and therefore
Duke Alfiron did not question but he should in short time compel the Souldan
his Father in Law to consent to his Marriage, and therefore he desired that the
rest of the Knights would give him leave to write to the Souldan, to know his
mind whether he would be for peace or war: To which they consented, and he writ
to him accordingly, and sent it by one of his Knights, who coming to the Gates
of the City, was questioned what he was, and what he would have: Who replied,
That he came to speak with the Souldan from his Lord the Duke Alfiron, and the
rest of the Knights in his company; whereupon the Souldan being advertised
hereof, commanded that he should be brought before him, which was done
accordingly, and he coming to the great Hall of the Souldans Palace, made his
due reverence to him, and to his Son the Knight of the Images, and the rest of
those high Personages there assembled, and delivered his Letter to the Souldan:
who gave the same to his Secretary, who opening the Seal, found therein written
as follows.

The Letter of the Duke of Alfiron to the Souldan of Persia.
MOst Mighty Sir, it is not unknown to your Highness, the great love and
affection that I have for a long time bore to the most incomparable Princess
Pe^siana your Daughter, and how that I have always been ready to do all
reasonable things to testify to her my Love, and to your se^f my service: but
so it is, that your Highness being blinded with revenge on Don Belleano the
Emperor of Greece, did decree, that whosoever should vanquish and kill the said
Emperor, should not only have your Highnesses Daughter to wife, but half your
Highness Dominions with her, which was proudly and indiscreetly undertaken by
Don Gallaneo of Antioch, who though he attempted it, could never bring the same
to pass, but was forced to return to your Court, and there fasly reported that
he had effected your commands, which though it was altogether untrue; yet he
expected your Daughter as a Guerdon of his merit: accordingly your Highness
though much against the good will and liking of your said Daughter) caused them
to be Married; but he for his other wicked doings was justly flain, and the
Knight of the Golden Image and his companions, vindicated her credit and mine,
as to your Highness is fully known: but such was the continual anger of your
Highness, that contrary to the word of so great a Personage, you kept me in
prison till both my self, and your Daughter were released by means of the Kings
of Armenia and Tessifanty, and many other Knights, who with your Daughters free
consent caused us to be lawfully married, as in justice we ought, whereupon
your Highness has since still followed us, with all the violence possible,
endeavoring to destroy us (but the Gods be praised) we have hitherto valiantly
defended our selves from all your Forces, and question not still to do. But
however our inclination to peace is such, that we humbly and heartily desire
it, and that you will give us your royal word for the same, in expectation of
which; or of such other answer, as you shall send, I rest

Your Son and Subject, Duke Alfiron.


This Letter being read, the Souldan was much perplexed, that any one should in
so open a manner declare his unjust actions, and charge him with unjustice;
told the messenger that he might depart, and the next day he would send an
answer by a messenger of his own.

The Knight being gone, the Souldan and his Son entered into consultation, what
was necessary to be done, and the Knight of the Images knowing that the Emperor
of Greece, and his Son Don Bellianis, and many of their kindred, were in the
Camp of Duke Alfiron, for they had learned so much by some prisoners they had
taken of the Emperors Army, they therefore resolved to be revenged of all their
wrongs in general, and that they might the more easily bring their
determination to pass, they concluded that the Knight of the Images, the two
brothers Caroliano and Boraldo, and Gramalis of Thrace should enter in Combat
with the Emperor of Greece, his Son Don Bellianis, Duke Alfiron, and any other
Knight of their Army: and in order to this their resolution, the Souldan writ a
Letter, and sent it to the Camp according as he had promised.

The messenger that carried the answer of the Souldan arriving at the Camp, was
conducted to the Tent of the Emperor, where he and the rest of the Commanders
being assembled he delivered the Cartel to Duke Alfiron, who immediately caused
the same to be opened, they read as follows.

The Letter of the Souldan to Duke Alfiron and his Companions.
I Know not what reason thou had to contradict or hinder our will in the
marriage of our Daughter to Don Gallaneo, or any other to whom it was our
pleasure to bestow her but that thou would show thy self false to our
Imperial Crown and Dignity, in taking part with our greatest enemies, and those
whom we have the greatest cause to hate, such as is the Emperor of Greece and
his Son, and many of the Knights of their lineage, by whose help and assistance
thou have fasly stolen away our Daughter, end do still unjustly detain her,
and with whose help thou endeavorest to destroy this our Empire, contrary to
thy Allegiance; Therefore we let thee to understand that our pleasure i^, that
thou either presently send us our Daughter, and assist us in the destruction of
those Christians our mortal enemies, or prepare thy self to be chastised
according to thy demerits: but if thou thy self, and they are still so hardy to
resist us, we have given leave to our noble Son Perianeo, our Cousins Carolia a
and Boraldo, and Gramalis of Thrace, to meet th^e and the said Emperor and his
Son, and any other Knight you shall choose ^o mortal Combat, promising that our
Army shall not, during the Combat hinder you, and we exp^ct your performance of
the same condition. This, if you will do, we shall be ready to perform to
morrow before our City gates, this is all at present from

Your Lord, the Souldan.


Great was the amazement of the Duke Alfiron, and the Kings of Armenia and
Tessifanty, and the rest of the Pagan Knights, when they understood that the
Emperor of Greece, and his son and kinsmen, were those who they had so long
entertained amongst them, but they were soon satisfied when the Emperor Don
Bellaneo arose from his seat, and spoke as follows.

KIngs of Armenia and Tessifanty, and Duke Alfiron, with all the rest of your
Companions, it cannot be unknown to you how unjustly the Souldan your Master,
has endeavored oftentimes to take away my life, as the undertaking of Don
Gallaneo does sufficiently testify, and I do not conceive but any of you being
so wronged, would use his utmost endeavors to revenge himself: in order to
which I came from Constantinople, accompanied with these Forces, but they have
done little yet in prosecution of my revenge. As for my Son, he came not hither
to injure the Souldan, but to do justice to the Princess of Aurora (who is
truly Princess of Antioch) and to destroy that Usurper Don Gallaneo, who
usurped the same. Since our arrival, many occasions have presented themselves
whereby we have lost much blood in your Cause, and have wronged none of you,
and do and do resolve still to continue constant to you, till we shall cause the
Emperor to do you justice, and that shall be our satisfaction; therefore
resolve your selves what Answer to return him, for I and my Son will undertake
the Combat.

After the Emperor had finished his speech, the Kings of Armenia and Tessifante
thanked him, and his son, and the rest of the Knights, for what they had said
and done, and resolved, that since the cause at present was but to bring the
Souldan to do Justice, that they would still continue with them and force him
to do it, or venture their lives and fortunes in the compelling him thereto.
And Duke Alfiron, who was one of the persons that was challenged, answered,
that he was of the same opinion with them, and thanked the Emperor and his Son,
and the rest for the assistance they had given him, and told them that he was
willing to accept the Combat propounded, whereupon Contumeliano Prince of
Phenicia desired that he might be the other Combatant, which was granted, and
the Messenger was sent to the Souldan to signify the same accordingly,

CHAP. IV. Of the Combat between the Eight Knights, and of the end thereof.
NO sooner had the Golden Charioteer of Heaven set forward on his daily
journey, to illuminate the world with the refulgent Beams of his Countenance,
but all our Combatants prepared themselves for the Combat. Don Bellianis of
Greece, in whose heart was not only revenge but jealousy, desired that he
might combat with his Rival Perianeo Knight of the Images. The good Emperor his
Father resolved to try the Valor of Gramalis of Thrace, and Duke Alfiron and
Contumeliano desired to undertake the two Brothers Caroliano and Boraldo,

Thus every one having made choice with whom to fight, resolved to overcome or
die in the place, and they only expected the coming of the Challengers out of
the City. About ten of the clock before noon, the Souldan with a guard of forty
thousand Knights issued out of one of the Gares with the Champions, ready for
the Combat. The Souldan being seated in a place appointed for that purpose, and
the Guard placed without one side of the Lists, the Challengers with the found
of Drums and Trumpets entered the same, where they had not long continued, but
the Defendants likewise entered, and the Guard on their side being placed on
another side of the Lists: the Souldan commanded the Signal of the fight to be
given by the Trumpets, at whose sound the Knights with armed fury made against
each other in such sort, that they rather seemed to many sudden flashes of
lighting, breaking through the airy passage of the Heaven, than men and horse
met in the midst of the field with so mighty encounters, as if so many pieces
of Ordnance had been discharged. Don Bellianis thinking himself concerned more
then ordinary, encountered the Knight of the Images so violently, that he caused
him to lay hold on his horse neck to save himself from falling, and with the
shock that he received, he lost both his stirrops: but they both soon recovered
themselves, and turning about, with a brave grace and courage drew their
swords, and gave one another such strong and mighty blows, that their pure
cutting swords soon made the blood to appear through their Armor

The Emperor and Gramalis of Thrace encountered each other so furiously, that
the Emperor threw Gramalis on the ground, and disabled his horse, and received
so great a shock himself that he lost both his stirrops, but he recovered
himself, and drawing his sword went to meet his Adversary, who was coming to
him on foot, which he seeing, likewise dismounted himself, and came on foot
likewise valiantly to meet him: but Gramalis being more ready then the Emperor,
gave him so mighty a blow on the Helmet, that it astonished him, which made his
rage to kindle in his br^ast, that the very fire sparkled in his eyes, and like
a hot chased Boar or hungry Lion bent to his prey, wounded Gramalis that had
struck him with so puissant a blow on the Helmet, that he cut it in two as if
it had been of Paste-board, sorely wounding his head, resting to astonished,
that he knew not whether he was alive or dead. Grama is in short time recovered
himself, and seeing what danger he was in by reason of one blow received from
his enemy, was greatly abashed, so that covering himself with his shield, he
gave the Emperor many wounds: which he feeling, and resolving to be revenged
of, gave his enemy so great a blow on the shield, that he cut it in two pieces,
and wounded him so sorely on the head and arm, that he in short time fell to
the ground: which the Emperor seeing he left him, and went to Duke Alfiron who
wanted his assistance.

Alfiron and Contumeliano encountering the two Brothers, gave to each other so
mavelous encounters, that they all measured their lengths on the earth: but
like valiant Knights they soon got on their feet and began an excellent Combat,
which continued a long time without any great advantage; but in the end
Garoliano, with whom Alfiron fought, gave him so great a blow on the head, that
he cut the laces of his helmet, and somewhat wounded his head; but Alfiron
resolving to revenge himself, gave Caroliano so mighty a blow on the helmet,
that it much astonished him, and passing from thence wounded his shoulder very
sorely: but the blow having found so great resistance, his sword brake in two
pieces; whereupon Caroliano though sorely wounded, seeing his Adversary without
helmet or sword, went forward with a resolution that one blow should put an end
to the Combat: but just as he went to perform what he intended, the Emperor met
him and rescued Alfiron, who seeing the desperateness of his condition, being
without a sword, espied that of Gramalis lying by him, suddenly took it up, and
went to receive his enemy, who was now fighting with the Emperor. Contumeliano
and his enemy were not idle, but did their utmost devoirs like good Knights, to
endanger each other, so that the ground where they stood was dyed with the
blood that came from the great number of wounds they received.

This battle had continued eight hours, and neither of the two Knights, Don
Bellianis nor Perianeo, showed any kind of weariness; and though they were much
wounded, yet continued they as vigorus and strong as at the beginning. Don
Bellianis being much enraged hereat, did his utmost endeavor to put his enemy
out of breath, which he did perform by his quickness and multitude of strokes
which he gave him, so that in the end his enemy could not hurt him, and bid
nothing but defend himself. But Perianeo being enraged that he was so likely to
be overcome, resolved to put all his strength to one blow, which he did in such
sort, that striking Don Bellianis on the helmet, he put him out of all
remembrance, and his horse being somewhat wounded, ran about the field with him.
So soon as he came to himself, and found in what condition he was, and that his
enemy pursued him to take away his life, he caught hold on his sword which hung
to this wrist with a chain, and being enraged far more than any Bull or Lion, he
lifted up his sword and gave his enemy so great a blow on the thigh, that he
cut him to the hard bone, from which wound issued much blood; and redoubled his
stroke in such manner on his Adversaries helm, that he beat him quite from his
horse without any sense or understanding: and looking about him, saw the Duke
Alfiron likewise on the ground with one blow he had received from Caroliano on
the head, where he had nothing to defend it: but the Emperor soon revenged this
wrong, for he gave Caroliano so mighty a blow on the head, that he laid him on
the earth. Contumeliano and his Adversary Boraldo were both grown very faint,
and Contumeliano was at last forced to retire. Don Bellianis perceiving how the
day was likely to be their own, dismounted from his horse with a resolution to
kill Don Perianeo, if he were not dead already: but on an instant there happened
a great flash of lightning and thunder, and there issued from a Cloud a
Chariot of Fire drawn by six Griffions, and in the Chariot there was an old
man, who with the help of a Dwarf ^ook up the bodies of Perianeo and Gramalis
of Thrace, and placing them in the Chariot mounted therein himself, immediately
ascended the Skies, leaving behind him a great fire and smoke; which being
gone there appeared a Pillar of Marble, on which was engraven in boass these
words following:

Souldan, i^^ necessary ^^^l the preservation of the life of thy dear Son, and
his Companion, to carry them to such a place as I have provided: but assure thy
self that they shall be both ^^^ded of their wounds, and the young Sicani^n
Lion shall make large ^^^nds for the l^^^s of his Father, delivering thee and
him from the (...) of the (...) con^e^^ed, for when thou art in the greatest
danger of thy life, thou shall be delivered.

This Pillar and the Prophecy thereon, was beheld and read by many: and Don
Bellianis and his Father went to Duke Alfiron, and took him, he being in a
swoond and sorely wounded; and delivered him to some who carried him to a Tent:
and both the Knights Contumeliano and Boraldo with weakness and loss of blood
having long wrestled together, fell down in a trance; but Caroliano was quite
killed with the blow he received from the Emperor. The field being thus cleared
of the dead and wounded, the Souldan came from his seat to see what was
engraven on the Pillar; which when he had read, it immediately vanished away.

Thus this Combat being finished, the Souldan with all his Guard returned to
the City in great sorrow, carrying with them Boraldo much wounded, and the dead
body of Caroliano: and the Emperor and his Son returned to their Tents with the
wounded body of Contumeliano, Alfiron being sent before.

CHAP. V. How the Souldan of Persia and the Emperor of Greece concluded on a
Peace, and that which happened afterward.
THe Souldan of Persia was extremely discontented for the loss of his Son and
Gramalis of Thrace, but the Inscription on the Marble Pillar somewhat satisfied
him: but when he had considered the end of the Combat, the death of Caroliano,
and the desperate estate of Boraldo, and how that all the Knights on the other
part were alive, and but too of them any thing hurt with their wounds he
resolved with himself on Peace, considering that he knew not what was become of
his Son, and therefore it was very necessary for him to take care of the
welfare of his Daughter.

Duke Alfiron and Contumeliano being carried into their Tents in the Camp, were
looked to so diligently, that in short time they were cured of their wounds.
And one day they being altogether in the Tent of the Emperor, to consult of
what was most fitting to be done, there arrived a Messenger from the Souldan,
who being admitted before them, gave a Letter unto Duke Alfiron, which he
according to his usual manner, delivered unto the Secretary to Read, who
opening the same, read as follows.

The Letter of the Souldan of Persia, to Duke Alfiron.
DUKE, We greet thee well: For as much as the lives of many valiant Knights
have been lost in the late Controversy between Me and Thee, which has been
great grief of heart to me for the loss of so many of our Subjects, whose lives
we ought to conserve, And to the end that a period may be put to this bloody
War, we advise thee forthwith to send our Daughter Persiana to our presence,
that we may understand from her own mouth, whether she be contented to receive
thee for her Husband, which if we find she be willing to do, we promise thee
upon our Imperial. Word to give her to thee accordingly, and with her such a
sufficient Dower, as thou thy self shall be well contented. And likewise we on
our Royal Word promise, that so soon as the Emperor of Greece will send away
his Forces, that we will Disband ours, and make such Peace with him as shall be
thought convenient. And we do further promise, that we will not only forgive
thee and the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty all the wrong thou and they have
done us by this late Rebe^lion, but also give such VVriting signifying the same
under our Hand and Seal, as shall be thought fitting, therefore fail not
forthwith to send us our daughter, that we may put an end to this unhappy
difference.

Signed, The SOULDAN.


After these great Personages had heard the Determination of the Souldan, there
was none of them that rested discontented, for these Wars had held them a long
time from prosecuting their other adventures. And therefore Don Bellianis being
more than ordinary desirous of Peace, that he might once more go visit his
incomperable Lady the Princess Florisbella; arose and and spoke as follows.

Most renowned Knights, I see no cause why we should not all conclude with
Peace, since the Souldan has sent us such fair Propositions, wherefore my
opinion is, that the Princess Persiana be forthwith sent for, that the Souldan
may receive the satisfaction he desires, which I am confident she will give
him: And since the Souldan is so reasonable, I am fully satisfied; for my only
business was to restore the Princess Aurora to her Kingdom of Antioch, which
was usurped by Don Gallaneo, who since he is dead, we have gotten possession of
it. I am confident we shall persuade the Souldan to confirm her in the
possession of the same, and that he will give us all the satisfaction we shall
desire.

After this Speech was ended, there was not one of the Company but rested
contented, and thereupon a party of five thousand Horse was immediately
dispatched away under the Conduct of Don Gorion, Brother to Duke Alfiron, to
conduct the Princess thither: and the Messenger of the Sonldan was sent back
with another Knight of the Duke Alfirons part, to signify to the Souldan, that
all that he desired on behalf of his Master, and the rest of the Kings and
Princes, should be performed to his own satisfaction, which Message being
delivered to the Souldan greatly contented him.

CHAP. VI. How Don Gorion arriving at the City of Bollera, delivered his
Message to Don Brianel, and how the Princesses Persiana and Aurora left the
City to travel to the Camp.
DOn Gorion and those who went in his company, made so much haste, that in a
short time they arrived at the City of Bollera, where they were soon admitted
to enter, and arriving at the Palace were quickly permitted to come into the
presence of Don Brianel, who in the absence of the Duke was Governor of the
City. Don Gorion then in short gave an account to Don Brianel of the success of
the War, and how at last they had received a Letter from the Souldan, wherein
he signified his desire of Peace, and that there was nothing wanting for the
consumation thereof, but the presence of the Princess Persiana.

Don Brianel was very well satisfied with this Message, and went immediately to
the two Princesses to certify them thereof; which when they heard, they were
both very well contented: the Princess Persiana, in that her mind was wholly
accomplished; and the Princess Aurora, in that she now hoped ere long to be
fully settled in her Kingdom: wherefore they both prepared themselves to depart
the next morning and accordingly commanded their Damsels: to get all things
ready.

Don Brianel this evening sought for an opportunity to discourse with his Lady
the Princess Aurora, and thereupon coming into her lodging to know what
Commands she would give him against the next day, he found her all alone,
wherefore resolving not to let slip this opportunity, he began to her as
follows.

Madam, It is now many months since I had the happiness first to see you, ever
since which time I have had a desire to serve you, and my actions in hazarding
my life for the recovering of your Kingdom, has given you some testimony
thereof: And Madam, were I capable of reducing all the Kingdoms in the world to
my Obedience, I should willingly surrender them with my self; to be disposed of
by you; therefore dear Madam, since my love is so great, I beseech you
vouchsafe me yours, whereby I may be eternally blessed.

When he had finished this Speech, fetching a green sigh, he held his peace:
and she who as earnestly loved him as he did her, replye^ to him:

Sir Knight, I have understood your love to me, and therefore have formerly
reposed so much trust to you, as I never did to any other; for to you alone I
committed the disposal of my Kingdom, and for the good you did me there, I
heartily thank you. Assure your self that so soon as I shall be peaceably
settled therein, I shall dispose my affairs in such order that I shall do all
things to your content and liking: and assure your self, that none other living
shall enjoy my person and kingdom but your self.

At the ending of the speech, she blushed extremely that she had been so free
in discovering the thoughts of her heart: but Don Brianel was extremely
satisfied herewith, and not being able to speak with the excess of joy that he
was in, he fell on his knees, and straightly embracing her legs, he very
amorously kissed her fair hands, and then at her desire he arose and gave her
many amorous kisses and kind embraces, promising for ever to be her true
Knight: and she promised no less to him, that she would not fail to be always
his, and in token of her love, she gave him a Scarf embroidered with Gold,
where in Letters of Gold was her Name; which he thankfully received, and
promised never to leave off wearing the same, till he had the free enjoyment of
her person in marriage. And hereupon they broke off their friendly and amorous
discourse, taking a farewell of each other, he returning to put all things in
readiness for the next days expedition, and she retiring her self into her
Closet, to contemplate what she had done.

Thus every body employed themselves in somewhat for the next days journey, till
it was time to go to rest: but the two Levers Don Brianel and Aurora could
sleep but little that night for the content they had received in the evenings
conference, and therefore they were the first that did rise, by whose example
all the rest soon rise and made themselves ready. Don Gorion and Don Brianel
summoned the Knights and Magistrates of the City together, to whom they
declared the will of their Lord Alfiron. And leaving a sufficient guard in the
City, they went to the Palace, where they found the Princesses in a readiness
to depart. Chariots being brought for them, they quickly mounted therein, and
so accompanied with several Damsels and a guard of ten thousand Knights, they
departed from the City, and took the right way for Persepolis.

CHAP. VII. How Don Brianel and Don Gorion arrived at the Camp of the Emperor
of Greece. and how the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana presented
themselves before the Souldan.
With much joy and pleasure traveled this company, especially the Ladies, the
one being in company of her most beloved Lord, and the other going to her
loving Husband: but the joy of Don Brianel was extraordinary, for the favors he
had received at the hands of the Princess, and as a testimony of his joy he
wore the Soarf which she had given him on his arm.

Thus traveled they with much content, till at length they met with some of
the Knights of the Emperors Army, who were come on purpose to meet them: and
then some were sent back to signify to the Emperor and the ^est of the
Princes, the approach of those Princesses; which they no sooner understood, but
they went out to meet them. Two leagues from the Camp they were met by the
Emperor. Don Bellianis, the Duke Alsiron, the Kings of Armenia and Tessisanty,
and all those other most renowned Princes and States, who coming near them,
dismounted from their horses to salute them. The Princesses seeing that,
descended from their Chariots and kindly received them: Then two stately
Palfreys were brought whereon the two Princesses were mounted, and Don
Bellianis took hold of the Reins of the Princess Aurora's Palfrey, and the
Emperor himself did the same for Persiana.

Don Bellianis during the remainder of their Journey, asked the Princess Aurora
whether she had received any content in the company of Don Brianel? for, says
he I see by his countenance that he is very much pleased, and he she weth very
gloriously with the Favor that he has tied to his arm, and therefore I desire
to know what Mistress he has gotten since our departure. To which discourse
the Princess replied: Sir Knight, the content that I have received in his
company cannot chufe but be much in respect of the service that he has already
done me, in helping to restore me to my kingdom, and therefore in token of my
gratitude, I have given him that Scarf as a small token of my Favor to him.

In such like communication spent they their time, till they arrived at the
Camp, where they alighted and were received with great Joy, signified by the
sound of Drums and Trumpets, and Clarions: The Princesses Persiana and Aurora
were conducted to a Tent for that purpose provided, where they both lodged
together: the Duke Alfiron being contented not to lie with his beloved
Princess, till she should be given him by her Father, which he hoped would be
done the next morning. Night being come every one repaired to their several
lodgings and their took their ordinary repose, only Don Bellianis was much
troubled that he was still kept there, and hindered from visiting his Princess
Elorisbella, and besides he knew not how to go to her for his Father expected
upon the conclusion of the Peace, that he would return with him to
Constantinople.

In these meditations he spent most part of the night, and when morning came he
arose and dispatched a messenger into the City, to certify the Souldan of his
Daughters arrival, and to know his pleasure what should be done. To which the
Souldan returned answer, that he expected her and the Duke to come to his
presence that day, in company of what other Knights they pleased.

The Duke and Princess being certyfied hereof, prepared themselves for that
purpose, and about noon, only accompanied with the Princess Aurora, Don
Bellianis, and Don Brianel, they entered the City, and came into the presence of
the Souldan, who was seated on a throne, and his great Lords about him. The
Princess Persiana and the Duke humbled themselves on their knees, and she
humbly desired her Father to forgive her rashness, for it was only, true love
that caused her to do the same and promised him that if he would deign to
pardon that great fault, she would in all things continue his obedient Daughter
during life, and concluding her Speech, she shed many tears: To which the
Souldan replied, that her disobedience to his commands, had occasioned the loss
of the lives of many of his Subjects, and that therefore she might expect the
Gods to be continually angered with all her undertakings; but as for his part,
seeing she had made so free a confession of her fault, he did freely forgive
her, and then arising from his Throne, he came down and took her by the hand,
and raised her from the ground, and then caused the Duke Alfiron to arise, to
whom he gave her wishing the Gods to bless them.

Thus this being done to the content of all that were present, the Souldan
commanded the Tables to be coveted, and desired the strangers to sit down to
dinner, promising in the afternoon to give them satisfaction in order to a
general peace.

CHAP. VIII. How the Wars were ended between the Souldan and the Emperor, and a
Peace concluded for ten years.
NO sooner was Dinner ended, but the Souldan entering into his Council Chamber,
sent for Don Bellianis and Don Brianel, and told them, that since he was
satisfied in his Daughters marriage, which had been the greatest cause of these
wars. it should be at their own dispose whether they would have Peace or War.

To which Don Bellianis replied, that his coming thither was for no ^ther end
but to assist the Princess Aurora in recovering the Kingdom of Antioch from the
hands of Don Gallaneo, who had wrongfully possessed himself of the same, as it
could not be unknown to the Souldan: and that now Don Gallaneo being dead, as
also the King who had lately usurped the same, and all her Subjcts being
desirous to come under her obedience, he humbly desired that his Highness would
(...) her that justice, as to let her peaceably enjoy the same.

The Souldan having understood for merly of the affairs of that Kingdom, and
that it was now in the possession of her Deputies granted the request of Don
Bellianis, on condition that She and her Heirs would for the future pay the
accustomed Tribute, the which she on her part promised to perform. The (...)
^^ing that was propounded. was Peace between the Emperor and the Souldan, which
the Souldan consented to hold firmly for ten years. And to conclude all,
promised a free Pardon to the Kings of Armenia and ^essifanty, who were his
Tributaries. Whereupon Don Bellianis and Don Brianel departed from the Souldan
to carry this news to the Camp. where the chief being assembled joyfully
received the News, and for that night made continual Bone-fires, so that both
in the City and Camp it was all night as light as day.

The next morning early a Messenger arrived in the Camp, to give an Invitation
to the Emperor and the rest of those great Lords, to come into the City to dine
with the Souldan: which Invitation was accepted of, and accordingly about
Eleven of the Clock they all set forwards and so entered the City, being
attended with great Ceremonies and Pomp by many of the Souldans Knights. As
soon as they came near the Palace, the Souldan had notice thereof and came to
receive them, and although till now they had been the greatest enemies in all
the World, yet the Souldan and the Emperor embraced one another with much
freedom and amity: and thus the Souldan received all the rest of the Principal
Knights, and so conducted them into the great Hall of the Palace, where all
things were provided for Dinner in most sumptions manner; which being ended,
the Souldan and Emperor ratifyed and confirmed the Peace which had been before
concluded on: And to signify his love to Duke Alfiron, and gave him the
Kingdom of Shyraz, which was a place under his subjection and belonged to his
Empire, and then the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana his wife were
immediately owned by all for King and Queen of Shyraz: nothing was now wanting
in the Court of Persia to give it its full luster, but the presence of the
Prince Perianeo, whose absence much disc^ted the Souldan.

All things being thus fortunately concluded, the Souldan disbanded his Army,
and the Emperor sent his away by Sea, under the command of S^bian of Trebanto,
who accordingly embarked himself, and within ten days departed: here was
nothing now wanting, but to put the two Princesses in possession of their
Kingdoms, the Princess Aurora into her Kingdom of Antioch, and the Princess
Persiana and her husband into possession of the Kingdom of Shyraz, for which
purpose he writ Letters to the present Governor to give them possession
thereof, the Princess Aurora desired the Company of some Knights to go with
her; the first that offered his service was Don Brianel. and then Don Clarineo
of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, because they had formerly been there,
desired to attend her, and so did Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia, and
Florispiano of Swevia his Cousin, these all chose to attend the Princess
Aurora: On the other side Don Bellianis desired his Father to permit him to
attend the Princess Persiana and her husband to Shyraz, and he chose rather to
go thither, because it was nearest to Babylon, where his beloved Princess did
remain, and to which place he intended to go. His Father intending to carry him
home with him, hardly consented to this separation, but at length at the
entreaty of the Princess and her Husband, he was content provided his Son
engaged to return home again in six months which he consented to do. They that
accompanied the Princess besides, were the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty, so
that there was not any left to accompany the Emperor home, but Arsileo Prince
of Hungary, and Don Gorino was sent back to the City of Bollera, to signify
the conclusion of the Peace. Thus all were appointed to travel, only Boraldo,
Don Fermosel, and Crisalaneo who stayed with the Souldan. Things being thus
concluded, every person after they had taken leave of the Souldan, within two
days after departed.

CHAP, IX. How the Princess Aurora and Don Brianel with the rest of their
Company, arrived at Antioch, and what happined to them there.
SO long traveled the Princess Aurora and the Princes and Knights that
accompanied her, that at last they arrived in the Kingdom of Antioch, without
happening on any considerable Adventure: and when, they were come near the
City, Damartino the Governor, and Count Garino. with several others of the
Nobility, being advertised of their coming, went out to meet them. So soon as
they approached near to the Princess, they dismounted from their horses, and on
their knees bid her welcome: but she likewise dismounted, and entered a Tent
that was prepared and set up for that purpose, where she permitted her hands to
be kissed by several of the Nobility. Great thanks was returned to Don Brianel
and his companions, not only for the good they had done them in recovering the
kingdom, and in that restoring their Liberties which were formerly lost by the
usurpation of the late Tyrants, but also for their making them so happy in the
sight of their dear Princess, whom they had now brought home to them. After a
short repast which was provided in the Tent was ended, they all mounted again
with a resolution to enter the City: the place where they had stayed was a
league from the City, yet all the fields and places during their passage was
beset with multitudes of people, who cried with continual noise, The Gods
preserve our Royal Queen Aurora. Being thus accompanied, they entered the City,
and in good order arrived at the Palace, where by reason it was night, the
Princess dismissed the multitude with thanks, and so every one being much
wearied with this days journey, went to take their ordinary repose. The next day
they were no seener up, but the cry continued, and great was the acclamations
that were made by the multitude.

That which the Queen took first into her consideration, was the ordering of
her household, and the firsh Officer she made was the Controller thereof, which
Office she gave to Don Brianel, intending ere long to make him Controller of
her Person. This joy continued many days, and many were the Iousts and
Tournaments that were exercised to delight the Queen, in which exercise the
Knights that accompanied her thither, still bore away the prize, however the
Count Gariano demeaned himself like a valliant and hardy Knight, maintaining
the Iousts for one day against all Knights-adventurers, in which time he
dismounted above twenty Knights.

The Queen understanding one day that Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, Don
Contumeliano, and Florispiano intended to leave her Court, and to go seek out
adventures elsewhere, resolved before their departure to consumate her marriage
with Don Brianel, to whom she communicated the matter, and he had demeaned
himself so courteously, that he questioned not but that it would be to the
general satisfaction of her Nobility, and therefore knowing the mind of the
Princess, he discovered it to Damartino, and Gariano, and several others of the
Nobility, and the next day the Queen being in Counsel, one of her Nobility
propounded a husband to her, which proposition was no sooner made, but the
general debate of the Counsel was of that matter, and after several
propositions, Don Brianel was by several of his Friends propunded, and indeed
for the restoration of the Princess, was so far had into consideration, that he
was by common consent propounded for a fit Husband for their Queen, who no
sooner had the proposition made her, but she willingly assented thereto, and
presently orders were given for the solemnization of the Marriage, which was
intended to be kept within a fortnight after. This news gave great satisfaction
and content to Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, that their Cousin had so great
good fortune, to be wedded to so vertuons a Princess, and therefore
notwithstanding their former resolutions to depart they and Contumeliano and
Fliorispianio resolved to stay, and assist at the Solemnization of those
Ceremonies, where we will leave them in great content, to treat of other
matters.

CHAP. X. How the Princes Perianeo of Persia, and Gramalis of Thrace, were
carried into the Desert of Death, and of that which happened to them there.
THe Sage Fristone made such haste through the air with the wounded bodies of
Perianeo and Gramalis, that in short time they arrived at the end of their
journey, where being arrived, the Sage Fristone caused them who were all this
while in a Trance to be taken out of the Chariot, and placed in beds in two
several Rooms, and then commanded several Damsels to attend the end of their
fainting, which they accordingly did: the Prince Perianeo was the first that
came to himself, when opening his eyes and looking about him, he fetched a
great groan* the Damsels who were left to attend him, hearing thereof,
presently came to him, and seeing his eyes open, they presently gave him
something to drink out of a vial which he, ^^^k, and then with a weak voice
asked them in what place he was? They desired him to rest satisfied for the
present, and he should know more of that hereafter, and in the mean time they
desired him to permit^ them to dress his wounds, to which he consented, and
they presently being very skilful in that mystery, applied such Remedies that
they assured him that in few days he should be able to walk about his Chamber;
and they further desired him for the present to dispose himself for rest, which
he did accordingly, and they departed to inform the Sage Fristone thereof, who
was marvellously well satisfied in what they had done.

Gramalis continued in his swooning fit twelve hours longer then Perianeo, but
so soon as he had recovered any sense, he cried out, by the Gods I will soon be
revenged of this blow, and therewith endeavored to rise from his bed, but
could not through loss of blood, but fell down again: whereupon they who were
left to attend him, gave him a cordial, and then dressed his wounds without
speaking to him. Perianeo after he had taken a sleep of about six hours awaked,
and seeing no body near him, he drew one of the Curtains of his bed, and
perceived a Candle, by the light of which he deem^d that he was in a large
Chamber all hung with black, and that there was no other light in the Room, but
what one Candle afforded, wherefore finding his wounds to be bound up, and
remembering that he had some company, endeavored to arise, but through
faintness could not; then he called to mind the Eattel in which he was lately
engaged and remembered that he had well nigh overcome his ad, versary, but
remembered nothing of the two last blows that he had received which had brought
him into this condition. Thus lay he musing and wondering with himself what
place he was in sometime believing all that he saw to be only fancy, and
another while supposing himself to be in his Fathers Court laid out for dead in
some Chamber there: and this he was persuaded to by reason of the blackness of
every thing about him.

At length two Damsels entered the room at a door placed in a corner thereof,
they were both habited in black, the one carried a Candle in her hand, and the
other followed her with a Box wherein were Dyntments and Plasters: coming to
the Bedside they found him awake, and in pretty good condition. He seeing them
continue their silence, began thus to them: Ladies I have received one kindness
from you already, for which I render you thanks, and desire you to bind me to
you for another, which is, that you will tell me in what place I am, and how I
came hither.

The Ladies hearing him speak with so great moderation, gave him this Answer:
Sir Knight, how you came hither we know not, but yesterday you were brought in
hither by the Lord of this place, whose name is Fristone, and delivered to our
keeping, telling us that we must apply these Medicines to your wounds, showing
us likewise that you were such a person as was very well able to requite what
kindness we should afford you: As for the name of this place we cannot tell
you, for it is not long since we were brought hither by an adventure, of which
we shall tell you more hereafter.

Thus after they had ended their discourse, they desired him to permit them to
searth his wounds, which he consented to, and they, after they had applied
remedies to his wounds, departed, leaving him somewhat better satisfied than he
was.

Thus these two Knights continued in this place several days* till at length
they were so well recovered of their wounds, that they could walk about their
Chambers. All this while was Fristone in his study, turning over many Books to
find out what should be the fortune of the Prince Perianeo, and finding that
when ever he should meet with Don Bellianis, his life would be much endangered:
and well knowing that the Prince would endeavor to go to Babylon, if he were
out of his possession, and that there he would meet with Don Bellianis, he
resolved to prevent that meeting: wherefore one day as Perianeo was walking in
his Chamber, the ^age ^ristone entered to him, and told him that he was very
glad of his so sudden amendment in his health, to which Perianeo knowing him,
replied:

Reverend Father, many have been the obligations wherein you have bound your
poor Knight, but this last has been the most con^^derable, in that you have
given help and assistance to me when I was not capable of helping my self: and
good father, I have now but one request in you which I pray you to grant me,
which is that you will tell me by what adventure I came I came hither and what
wa^ the i^^^e of the Com^^^.

To which discourse Pristone thu^ an^mene^, Sir Knight, it was not of a long
time unknown to me of the Battle that you and your friends (...) undertake
against the Emperor of Greece, his son, and friends, and of the danger that you
should under^^ therein, which I ondeavoured to prevent by my Art, but your
enemy Don Bellianis by reason of a^sword and ^rmor which he has lately won,
cannot be hindered from the performance of any adventure, notwithstanding all
the art of incantations that I can use, wherefore finding it in vain to attempt
any thing by art to hurt him, I therefore applied my self to help you when
there should be occasion, and understanding that your life, and that of two of
your friends would be in great danger, and knowing that by my art I should be
able to help you self and one other of your friends, I therefore provided me a
Chariot, in which I mounted the air at such time as you and your friends were
^ntred the Combat, and arrived at the place of your fight, just as it had like
to have been unfortunacely finished; for Don Bellianis was just then about to
deprive you of your precious life, and then he recounted to him, how he found
him in the field in a Trance, and how that Gramalis of Thrace, and Caroliano,
being in as desderate a condition as himself, he chose Gramalis and left the
other, and brought both himself and Gramalis to that his habitation, where he
had ordered the matter so well, that they were in pretty good condition.

Perianeo much wondering at this adventure, said: But good father, how will the
Souldan my Father be satisfied with my condition? Then Fristone told him ^f the
Pillar he left there, and the inscription thereon which had given satisfaction
to him, and therefore advised him to rest contented; and so taking him by the
hand he led him out of that Chamber into another adjoining, which was as dark
as his own, and there they found Gramalis of Ibrace walking about: Perianeo was
not so much amazed to see him, as Gramalis was surprised to see the Prince
enter his Chamber, for he knew not in the least where he was for his wounds
being somewhat more desperate then Perianeo's, Eristone had commanded those
that attended him, not to use any discourse with him, least ^hrt should
prejudice his his health. They being thus met, kindly saluted each other, and
then Perianeo recounted to Gramalis the manner how they were brought thither,
the danger they had been in, and the care of which Fri^tone had taken of their
healths, for which they both kindly returned him thank. Thus these two friends
being together, Fristone left them in loving communication, and went to take
order about his other affair^.

They had not long walked together, but the two Damsels that had attended them
in their sickness, came in to them, and brought with them several Comists and
preserved. F^^its and Wines wherewith ^hey covered a Table and caused the two
Knights to sit dow to eat, which they did, and then the Table being removed,
Perianeo taking one of the Damsels by the hand, (...) her to the bedside where
he thus spoke to her.

Lady, my condition has been so low of late, that I have been very much
o^^^ged to your care and pains, that I am now in so good a plight, for which
your great care I render you all humble had hearty thanks, as^uring you that
when ever you have occa^^on to use me, you shall had that there shall be
nothing so diffi^ult, ^ut I will be ready to undertake it with exceeding great
^p^^asure, so that I may serve you therein and therefore Lady I beseech you
inform me of your condition, and the place where I now remain, The Damsel
perceiving that be had concluded, thus answered him: Sir Knight, I humbly thank
you for your acceptance of my mean endeavors, and am glad that and thing that I
can do will give you any pleasure, and to the end that I may satisfy your
desires know Sir, that I belong to an honorable Princess called Merediana sole
daughter and heir to the valiant King Georgiana of So^ia, who living at home
with her Father, was taken out of her Court one day by the Sage Fristone, who
desired her Father toware her, to put an end to an adventure that could not be
finished without her presence: her father well knowing the Sage Fristone to be
his friend, consented to her departure, and so she taking six of her Damsels
with her, whereof I and my companion are two, we traveled toward Babylon,
where when we arrived, the sage Fristone told us that his design was to get the
beauteous Princess Florisbella into his custody, whereby he might pleasure a
Knight his very good friend; which adventure he had accomplished, but that
there arrived at that instant a Knight armed with a rich Armor, beset with
Basilisks, who hindered our attempt: then told she the Prince the whole manner
of his adventure: as it is at large set down in the forty second Chapter of the
first part of this History, and then she thus proceeeded: We being thus hindered
from finishing this adventure, were immediately carried through the air till we
arrived at an Island, where when we came down, we found it to be the most
pleasant place in the whole world, for it was adorned with a most delightsome
Palace, and all manner of Gardens and Walks so delicious, that we having been
there above six months, are not sensible of my inclemency in the air, but it
still continues as pleasant as if it were the month of May, and it is now about
a fortnight since the sage Fristone coming thither, requested our Mistres to
give us leave much satisfaction in our journey, and that we should speedily
return: and as for the place where now we are, we know no other of it but that
it is called the Desert of Death, and indeed it may properly enough be termed
so, for I never was in any place so dalesome and melancholy as this is, there
being us other light coming into this place but what a candle produces, and
the fields, which are but few, look as if no grass nor any other herb had ever
grown there, and there a^^ no trees but Yew grow here. This Sir Knight, is all
that I can tell you of this adventure.

Gramalis of Thrace had likewise been attentive to this discourse, and they did
much marvel at the strangeness of the Damsels recital, but Perianeo asked the
Damsel how far off it was to that pleasant Island where her Lady remained, and
what company was with her. To which she answered, That it could not be very far
to that Island, for they were but three hours in coming from thence, and that
their Princess was only accompanied with a Lady named Altea, who they found
there, and which was very fair and beautiful, and the four Giants who keep the
Palace as a guard, besides the Damsels who waited on the two Ladies, and the
two old Women who provided all manner of provision. Thus these two Damsels
having finished their discourse, they took their leaves of the two Knights and
departed.

CHAP, XI. How the two Princes Perianeo of Persia, and Gramalis of Thrace,
being thoroughly cured of their wounds, and walking in the Desert of Death,
came to the water sides and finding a Barque went into her, which carried them
immediately to the pleasant Island, and of that which happened to them there.
THese two Knights being thus cured of their wounds, and being desirous to
depart, besought the sage Fristone to let them have their Armor and furnish
them with Horses that they might be gone: but he knowing the danger that
Perianeo would undergo if he went away, resolved to prevent it, and therefore
would not consent, telling them that in short time an Adventure would happen
wherein they would, if they performed it reap great benefit and content. This
was all the satisfaction they could receive from him, wherefore they getting
them Swords and Hunting-Iavelins, spent their time in that Desert in hunting
the wild Boar, and such like exercises. One day as they were hunting together,
they went so far in pursuit of a Bear, that they came to the water side, and
presently the beast took the water and quickly swam out of their sight; at
which they being much troubled, sought for a Boat or some Barque to follow
their Game, when suddenly looking about them they espied a small Barque coming
toward them; which being come on short, they stepped into it and looking about
for Oars, they were immediately varried from land, and carried a great way into
the Sea, but on an instant the Sun shined so bright, and the Waters ^^re as
calm, and the air so se^^^n and clear, that they much wondered, being come from
a place that was dismal and cold. Thus the Barque went forwards without either
Sail to Oars till in the end they discovered Land, and saw that the Barque made
speed thither; at which they rested contented, and in short time after they
went ashore, not knowing were they were but going to take hold of the Barque to
fasten it to somewhat against they should have occasion to use it, it suddenly
vanished, at which they were much troubled: thus seeing there was no way to go
back, they were resolved to go forwards, and only armed with their Swords and
Spears they set forwards: they traveled two hours in the pleasantest walks and
helds in the world, without meeting with any thing, and hearing no none only
the continual mellady of the Birds gave them singular contentment at length
they espied a great Castle situated in a pleasant meadow, and encompassed with
all manner of fruit trees, upon one of those trees there was a tablet whereon
was inscribed:

If thou art so valiant as to undertake the entrnce into this Castle, blow this
Horn, and prepare thy self to be received.

This Inscription teey had no sooner read, but they resolved to try the
adventure, and therefore they cast lots who shoul first begin: The lot sell
upon Gramalis, and therefore Perianeo going somewhat out of the way, left
Gramalis to undertake the adventure. He had no sooner blown the horn which hung
by the Tablet, but two gates opened, and there issued out from thence a huge
and monstrous Giant, armed at all point^^ with a great Iron Mace in his hand,
who seeing the Knight before him, said: Presumptious villain, how dairest thou
unarmed unde^take so great an enterprise, as to disturb the quiet of this place?

To which Gramalis answered, trouble not thy self at my being unarmed, but if I
must combat thee before I gain my entrance, prepare thy self to Battle and
defend thy self: at which words the Giant lifted up the Mace, and come forward
th^nk^ng with one blow to end the Battle, but Gram^^^^ qui^^ly a voicing the
stroke of the Mace with his hunting sp^^^, wo^nded the Giant in the Thigh, and
the dert stroke ga^^ him ^n gr^^t (...) blow on the arm, that he could not draw
out his spear, but was forced to leave it sticking there: whilst the Giant drew
the spear from his arm, Don Gramalis drew his sword, and went to finish the
combat: but the enraged Giant did hit the Knight so great a blow on the
shoulder, that he sorely bruised him, whereat Gramalis being greatly enraged,
gave the Giant so great a blow on the other arm, that he let fall his Mace and
roared like a Bull, and with the quantity of blood he lost, fell down: at which
a Dwarf that was placed on the top of the Tower blew a horn, and immediately
another Giant came forth, more deformed and horrible then the first, who
resolved to revenge the wrong of his fellow, and therefore soon made up to
Gramalis and assaulted him most f^ercely, giving him many wounds, so that in
the end Gramalis through the want of blood, and the pain he felt in his side,
fainted and fell down. At which the Giant went forwards to kill him, but
Perianeo soon prevented him, assaulting him in such mavelous manner, that he
made him keep company with his fellow on the ground: at which the Dwarf once
more sounded his horn, and then their issued out two Giants of a very great
size, who carried great Maces on their shoulders, and cutting Faulchions at
their sides, and without any discourse they both fell upon the Prince, and gave
him many weighty blows which he received on his spear; but in the end that
being broken he drew his sword, and valiantly defended himself, still avoiding
their blows, and dammaging his adversaries, so that they seeing that that they
only beat the air, or the ground, were much enraged and came near to him to
destroy hem, but he nimbly stepping with in them, madk them lose their blows,
and he hit one of them on the leg so great a blow, that he made a great wound,
and the Giant not being able to stand, fell on the earth, whereupon the other
Giant his Companion seeing that if he continued that manner of fighting, he
should remain vanquished as well as his Companions, he threw away his Mace, and
ran with great eagerness on the Knight, thinking to catch him in his arms, and
there to squeeze him in pieces: but he being very strong, sorely wounded the
Giant before he got within him, and then wrestled so with him, that they both
fell to the earth, the Giant holding Perianeo close in his arms; but he
remembering that he had a dagger in his pocket, quickly drew the same and
stabbed him in three or four places in such manner, that he let go his hold,
whereat Perianeo got on his feet, though sorely wounded, and approached to the
gates of the Castle, which being open he entered, and walking through a great
Hall he went into a Parlor, the most beautiful in the World, where he saw two
Ladies who were placed above the rest, and about twelve Damsels attending on
them, to whom he said:

Divine Beauties, for no less can I esteem of you, Providence having brought me
on shore on this Land, I made bold arriving at this Castle to enter therein but
I was hindered by s^veral whom I suppose were left to guard the same, whom I
have so ordered in combat, that I remain the victor, and therefore I make ^old
to approach your presence, humbly craving your pardon, and desiring to know of
you whether there be any thing further to be done whereby I may do you any
service, and whither what I have already done be not prejudicial to you.

To which speech one of the Ladies replied, That indeed the Giants were placed
there as Guardians of that place, but since by his invincible valor they were
subdued, he was as welcome as themselves, and all things there was free to his
disposal: at which speech he rested satisfied, only he desired that the
wounded might be taken care of, and more especially a Knight who was wounded,
and a friend of his: at which discourse several of the Damsels went out with
him where they found the Giants and the Knight still lying on the ground,
wherefore he helped to convey them to beds, and the Damsels applied such
plasters and medicines to their wounds, that in short time they were cured of
the same.

Being cured, the Giants and Knights remained loving friends, resolving to
assist each other, and the Knights had no desire to go from that place, for the
Ladies whom they saw were the two Princess Meridiana and ^ltea, who took very
great good liking to the two Knights Perianeo and Gramalis, who loved them as
well, so that in the end their friendship arrived to that height, that they
resolved never to leave one another all days of their lives: and the Prince
Perianeo was so amorous of the Princess Meridiana, that he quite forgot the
Princess Florisbella, and she no less ^o^^^ him, so that at length he enjoyed
the Princess as fully as if she had been his Wife and she permitted him to crop
that Maiden-flower, and enter that Virgin Zone, which had cost the lives of
many valorous Knights.

On the other side Gramalis of Thrace and the Princess Altea loved each other
with as fond affection, and she permitted him to be Lord of her body, and to
take such fruit from thence as pleased him best.

Thus these two Ladies and Knights lived together in all manner of delight, and
the two Knights plied themselves so well in their Nocturnal Embraces, that both
the Princesses were with Child; which was great joy and content to them all:
which pleasure we shall leave them, and return to give you an account of other
Adventures.

CHAP. XII. How the Princess Persiana and her Husband Duke Alfiron were
conducted to Shyraz by Don Bellians of Greece. and the Kings of Armenia and
Tessifanty, where by the way they met with an Adventure.
THus having left these two Princes and Ladies in all content and pleasure, let
us reurn to the Princess Persiana and the Company that attended on her, who
traveled many days without happening on any Adventure: at length Don Bellianis
being very pensive, traveled one day before the rest of the company, and being
very melancholy for he thought of his dear Mistress the Princess Florisbella,
on a sudden he heard a voice call to him, saying, Sir Knight, I beseech you
tell me where is the next City, that I may go quickly to it and procure some
aid to some persons of great quality that stand in need of help. Don Bellianis
giving attention to this discourse, and seeing it was a Lady that spoke to him,
he thus replied: Fair Lady, if you be not in extreme great haste, I beseech yon
relate to me the occasion of your travel, it is possible that I may furnish you
with that assistance you expect. Ah Sir Knight; replied the Lady, it is not in
the power of any one particular Knight to effect that which must be done;
therefore good Sir either Answer me the question, or permit me to go forwards.
Lady, said Don Bellianis, not far from hence there is much company coming who
will be with us presently, therefore I pray relate to me your business while
they come to us, and then I shalf furnish you with such help as shall be
needful. The Lady understanding that he spoke nothing but reason, thus replied:
Know then, Sir Knight, that I belong to the virtuous Princess Mattarosa,
Daughter to the King of Numidia, and Niece to the Souldan of Babylon: this
Princess has for many years lived at the Court of the Souldan her Uncle, in
the Company of the Princess Florisbella her Cousin, but of late her Father
being grown Old, and desirous to dispose of her in marriage before he died,
sent her Brother Baltasano to the Court of the Souldan to bring his Sister to
him: Baltasano after he had continued some time in the Court of the Souldan,
desired leave to depart with his Sister to her Father that expected them; to
which it was a long time e're he could get the Souldans consent in regard of
the great love that has been between her and his daughter Florisbella. About
two Months since there was great Iousts and Tournaments held at the Souldans
Court in honor of his Coronation Day: at which time many strange Knights and
Giants repaired thither to do their utmost devoirs, amongst the rest that came,
there was one Giant called Altifer the Proud, Lord of an Island in the Sea, and
his two Brothers, and forty Knights. This Giant beholding my Mistress the
Princess Matrarosa, began to affect her, and performed some things for her
honor, hoping thereby to get her good Will: but she who always hated him, as
v^ell for the deformity of his mind as body, would by no means consent to come
into his Company much less to receive him as a Servant, and he having desired
her of her Uncle the Souldan, and her Brother, who both refused him; went away
with all his Company in much discontent resolving to put in practice some
treasonable action that he might obtain her.

Our Princess and her Brother, who suspected no such treason, some time after
he was gone, having taken leave of the Souldan and the Princess Florisbella,
departed in the Company of twenty Knights for their Guard: but we had not
traveled above two days when this Traitor Altifer with all his company set
upon us, flew many of our Knights, and took the Princess and her Brother
Prisoners. I seeing that they were taken, fled from them, and have followed
them these three days to see still where they lodged at Night, and endeavoring
to find some help to relieve them, and Sir Knight, this is the last day before
they will embarque themselves for the Island whereef he is Chief, and then all
the means that I can use, will be ineffectual for their Release. This Sir
Knight, is the substance of my Message, and therefore pray fail not to give me
the best directions you can.

Don Bellianis having heard this Discourse, and considering that in relieving
the Princess Mattarosa, he should do his Princess her Cousin a considerable
service, resolved to undertake it, and therefore the Company being now come up
to him, he went to the Princess Persiana and her Husband, and recounted to them
the Damsels discourse, and told them that he must beg leave of them to go and
relieve the Princess and her Brother, promising them to return with all speed
possible, as soon as he had effected his Enterprise.

They not only consented to his departure, but also gave him leave to take what
company of Knights he desired: but he choosing only twenty of the most hardy,
left the rest to conduct them to Shyraz, and so he took his leave and departed
with the Damsel, who seeing her Journey turn to so good account, was very
thankful, and Rode on apace to assist her Princess.

CHAP. XIII. How Don Bellianis went with the Damsel of the Princess Mattarosa,
to relieve her out of the hands of the Giant Altifer and his Company: And how
he and his Company overcame the Giant and his two Brethren and Company, and
Released the Princess and her Brother Baltas^no: And how she knew him to be the
Knight of the Golden Image, and how she and her Brother left him, to depart
toward Babylon,
IT was yet but early in the morning when Don Bellianis and his Company parted,
and therefore we will leave them in their Journey toward Shyraz, to tell you
what befell Don Bellianis, who traveled so long with the Damsel that at last
they arrived in sight of a Castle seated on a Rock, which when the Damsel
espied, she said, Sir Knight, this is the Castle where the Giants and the other
company lodged this night, and I believe they are not as yet come out of it,
because he that is Lord of this Castle is of kindred to the Giant Altifer, and
therefore I pray let us attend here for their coming forth. Don Bellianis
therefore advising with himself, left two of his Knights to attend there,
whilst he and the rest traveled on the way the Giants were to take, and there
they hid themselves in a thicket of Trees.

It was not fully an hour before the two Knights came galloping amain to Don
Bellianis, informing him that the Giants and their company were come out of the
Castle, and were coming thither-wards with the prisoners. The Prince Baltasano
they tied on a horse with his hands behind him, and so they did to about twelve
Knights more that were prisoners, and the Princess Martarosa and several of her
Damsels, were carried before certain Knights on horseback, and did make great
lamentation.

The Knights did likewise advise Don Bellianis not to set on the Giants and
their eompany as yet, for that the Giant of the Castle where they lay was come
out with them, with above twenty Knights to bear them company a little way, and
therefore it was best to forbear setting on them till they were gone: To this
advise Don Bellianis could hardly be persuaded, so earnest was his desire to do
some signal Service for his Lady the Princess Florisbella; but in the end he
was overruled by the Damsel, and promised to attend their parting for an hour
or two, and if they did not by that time leave one another, that he would set
upon them all. And in this resolution he marched forwards, commanding the two
Knights to go back and give him notice of what should happen, which was done
accordingly. Thus did Don Bellianis march on for one hour in great expectation,
till at length the two Knights came to him to inform him that now was the time,
for the Giants kinsman was departed, and there was not above thirty five
Knights and three Giants, and ten of the Knights were employed in guarding of
the prisoners that were with them.

Never was Don Bellianis so well pleased in all his life as he was at this
instant, and therefore commanding all his Knights to be in a readiness, the
urned back his horse, and went to meet the Giants and their company. Don
Bellianis had not rid far before he met with them, the two Giants brothers to
Altifer, riding before the rest on great horses, and with Iron Maces hanging on
their Sadle-bows. Our Knights went strait up to them, and some of the
Princesses Damsels making a lamentation, Don Bellianis enquired what was the
cause why they forced Ladies to go with them against their wills? to which one
of the Giants proudly answered, It were best for you, Sir Knight, to keep on
your way, and not to meddle with the affairs of others, not being called
thereto. To which he answered. that he and all other Knights were bound to
enquire into the affairs of distressed Ladies, and to relieve them to their
power, whereupon one of the Giants laid hold on his Mace, thinking to dash him
in pieces, but he turning his horse on one side, couched his Lance and run so
fiercely on the other Giant, that he forced him to measure his length on the
earth, at whose example all the rest of the company did the like, and they
performed their parts so well, that sixteen Knights and two Giants were
dismounted, and six were slain out right.

The Giant Altifer seeing himself so beset, presently couched his lance and did
some mischief: But Don Bellianis soon hindered him from proceeding, for he
reached him such a stroke that he made his ^o^s^ bend his knees to the Ground,
and his Master catch hold of his horse neck to keep himself from falling, and
then crying Florisbella, and Victory, he gave two such mighty strokes to two
Knights that stood in his Way, that he sent them tumbling to the Earth, and
then coming to the Prince Baltasano, he immediately unbound him, and gave him a
Sword, by whose example the rest of his Knights released the rest of the
prisoners and then began the fight to be most bloody.

The Giant Altifer, and his two brothers seeing the valor of that one Knight,
resolved to set upon him, and so they all three came with the same resolution,
but he quickly seeing the danger he was likely to run into, if he did not
dispatch, gave one of them so powerful a blow, that he cut off his Arm, and
forced him to let his Mace fall to the Ground.

The two brothers seeing this, came with both their Maces at once, intending to
beat him to pieces; but Baltasano who he had unbound having gotten a Sword,
Buckler and Helmet, received one of them, and gave him in return so puissant a
stroke, that he cut off one of his arms and wounded him in the shoulder; the
enraged Giants did all they could to revenge the Wounds they had received, and
Altifer himself seeing that he was like to loose his Mistress, left the Combat,
and coming to the Knight that had the Princess in guard before him, and took
her and set her on his own horse before him, and did ride away with all the
speed possible: at which action the Damsels gave a great screech, which Don
Bellianis hearing much wondered, and leaving the fight, turned himself about,
but he had no sooner perceived the cause, but like lightning he made have after
him, and being very well mounted, he soon overtook him, which the Giant seeing,
he let fall the Lady, and turned about to encounter Don Bellianis, being glad
that he had gotten him alone; and Don Bellianis was no less glad then he, not
only for that, but also in regard that he had let go the Princess, fearing much
that if he had held her still she might have been hurt in the combat. Thus
these two Combatants equally resolved, affaulted each other, and gave and
received many Wounds, but Don Bellianis whose valor was not to be equalled ^y
any Giant or Knight, resolving now in the presence of his Ladies kins-woman to
show the utmost effects thereof, gave the Giant two such mighty blows, that
with the one he cut off his Leg, and with the other he quite killed him.

The Princess all this while beholding the Combat and seeing the mighty blows
Don Bellianis gave the Giant, could not imagine who it should be, and that so
much worth and strength should remain in one single Knight, but well viewing
his arms, she remembered him to be the Knight of the Basisisks, who had done
such brave acts at Babylon for the relief of her Cousin the Princess
Florisbella, and viewing her Picture on his Shield, she immediately cried out,
Ah worthy Knight? pattern of all true Valor and Magnanimity, much am I bound to
you for your great aid and assistance, and many thanks have I cause to render
you for this so mighty deliverance in this my most extreme necessity: Having
thus said, she came near him to kiss his hands, but he refused that and kindly
embracing her, said: Madam, it is time for us to return back to see in what
condition the Prince your Brother is, and if occasion be to lend him my
assistance: wherefore he caused her to mount on the Giants horse, and he
mounting on his own, set forwards toward the place of the Combat; in which
time she again thanked him for the aid he had afforded her, promising him to do
him all the affairs of Love or friendship that she could, if he would please to
come to the Souldan of Babylons Palace as he had formerly promised; telling him
that she was now resolved to return back thither, and assuring him that the
Princess Florisbella her Cousin had an extraordinary esteem for him, and
expected his coming: and she assured him that she would endeavor to increase
her good affection toward him.

Much joyed was Don Bellianis at this discourse, and thus they arrived at the
place of Combat, where the two Giants and all their Knights were either slain
or vanquished: Thus was this fight happily ended to the eternal honor of Don
Bellianis.

The Damsels of the Princess presently applied some Remedies to the Wounds of
Don Bellianis his Knights, and then every one mounting his horse, they rid on:
The Prince Baltasano was very thankful for this assistance, and promised Don
Bellianis an eternal friendship; thus they Rode on together sometime, till at
length the Princess and her brother were resolved not to proceed in their
journey with so slight a guard, but to go back to Babylon, to which place they
invited Don Bellianis, who made his excuses for the present, promising them
that within a month he would not fail to wait upon them there: and thus after
many several discourses, they coming to a way that went toward Babylon, they
took their leaves of Don Bellianis, and parted thither-wards, leaving him and
his Knights to travel to the City of Shyraz to meet with the Princess Persiana,
and Duke Alfiron.

CHAP. XIV. How Don Bellianis and his Knights overtook the Princess Persiana,
Duke Alfiron, and the rest of the Company, and how they all entered into the
City of Shyraz.
DOn Bellians and his Knights traveled so fast, that within three hours after
they overtook their company, for the Princess and her Husband made but easy
marches, and had stayed at a Town not far off to dinner: When Don Bellianis
came before the Duke and the Princess, they asked him how he had sped in his
enterprise? whereupon he gave them such an account, that they rested very well
satisfied: they were now come within two leagues of Shyraz, and many of the
Nobility had already come to them to give them the welcome, which they
thankfully received.

After they had passed the Tapyrian Mountains, they came to a great River
called Bradamir, which waters the City, and afterward falls into the
Persian Gulf with twenty miles circling about on the land: when they came near
the City, it was the pleasantest thing in the World to behold, so stately a
Building, twenty stately Temples appeared at one time, and the Palace with its
lofty Towers made an extraordinary splendorin the eyes of the spectators.
Infinite was the resort of the Plebeans that came out to behold their new King
and Queen, and when they were a mile off from the City, the Chief Magistrates
came out to do their homage to the King and Queen, and in this manner they
entered the City, which is one of the most ancient and famous through all that
part of the World. Here Art Magic was first hatched. Here N^mrod, after the
confusion of Babel, lived and was buried. Here Cirus the most excellent of
Heathen Princes was born, and all but his head intembed. Here the great
Alexander glutted his ambition and drunkenness. Here the first Sybilla sung our
Saviors Incarnation. Hence the Magi are thought to set forth toward Bethelem,
and here many Kings have swayed their Scepters: in fine it is a place defended
by nature, inricht by trade, by art made lovely, the Vineyards, Gardens,
Cypresses, and Temples, ravish the eye, and smell in every part sweet and
delightful.

These excellent persons were received into this most delightsome place, with a
great deal of solemnity and joy, and in all the principal places of that City,
and all other places of the nation, they were immediately Proclaimed King and
Queen of Shyraz, Larr, and Jaarown, Lord and Lady of Ormus, Maqueroon, Cermoen,
Chusestam, Sigestan, and Farsestan, Prince and Princess of the Gulf of Persia,
and of the Isles there. These were the titles, and great was the joy and
acclamations of all that vast kingdom, which reaches above six hundred miles
round about. If I should recite to you the many shows, pageants, and triumphant
arches that were built, and the several congratulatory Speeches that were that
day made to their new King and Queen, I should as much weary you with the
reading, and my self with the writing thereof, as they were that day wearied
with the hearing of them, and indeed they were so tedious, that although they
came to the City by two of the clock afternoon, yet was it nine of the clock at
night before they came to the palace: whither they being arrived, they
dismissed most of their subjects, and being much wearied they went to take
their ordinary repose, which through weariness every one enjoyed, except Don
Bellianis whose desires were wholly fixed on the incomparable Florisbella, from
whose presence he had been so long absent, that he was in great doubt of his
reception into her service, but the promise that day made him by the Princess
Mattarosa, did somewhat consolate his disturbed fancy. Thus spent he the whole
night in continnued contemplations till day appearing, he rose and went to
salute the King and Queen, and humbly besought them since he had seen them
safely received into their Kingdom, they would be pleased to give him leave to
depart about his more weighty affairs. This discourse much troubled them,
hoping tha^ they should enjoy his company for a longer season, but since he was
so desirous to be gone, they prayed him that he would do them so much honor as
to stay ten days longer, in whith time they intended to be Crowned.

Don Bellianis not well knowing how to deny any thing to persons so, obliging,
consented to this Request, provided that as soon as the Solemnity was ended,
they would no longer desire to detain him from his Adventures: To which they
both engaged themselves, and thereupon that day the King issued forth his
Commands to all persons concerned to repair to the Court on that day seven
night, to assist at the Ceremonies which were accustomed at the Coronation,
with free liberty for all Knights, as well Christians as Pagans, to go and come
at the same time, and during their stay to show their Valor and Manhood in
Tilting, Iousting, and all other Knightly Exercises. This proclamation being
sent abroad occasioned many Knights to resort to the Court, so that by the time
prefixed for the Triumph, as well the fields adjoining to the City, as the City
it self was silled with Knights, so that it was a most delectable sight to
behold, and most delicious to hear the sound of so many Warlike Instruments as
was at that time heard. And the King caused certain Rayls to be made on the
outside of the City, within which the Knights were to Tilt and perform their
Deeds of Knighthood, and causes a Throne to be placed there for himself and his
Queen, and Seats for the rest of the Nobility, where they might sit and see the
Tournaments: and he further ordained twenty Knights of his own, who were
commanded by one Don Lorino Son to his Brother Don Gorino, a young and hardy
Knight, to resist all strange Knights.

These things being thus ordained, all people with a great deal of impatience,
till the appointed day for the Solemnity of the coronation was come; which day
being now come, there happened that which shall be declared in the chapter
following.

CHAP. XV. How the Day of the Coronation being come, there entered into the
Court a Knight, who termed himself to be The Knight of the Island of Pearls,
and demanded the Kingdom of Shyraz as his right, and offered to defend his
Title in single Combat against any one Knight; which Combat Don Bellianis
undertook, and vanquished him, and of his departure for Babylon.
THe Kingdom of Shyraz, whereof the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana were
now in possession, had for many years belonged to the Souldan of Persia, Father
to the Princess, who had given the same to his Daughter, as has already been
declared: but we have not yet told you how the Souldan of Persia came by the
same.

So it was, that the Father of this Souldan only had tribute for the same of
one Gozmin, a valiant Knight, but the said Gozmin for some traiterous
enterprise was dispossessed of the same? He being executed, and his sons for
ever disenabled to possess the same, for a just reward of their fathers
treason, and then the Souldan took the same into his own possession, and ever
after that took the immediate Profits thereof to his own use, only appointing
a Governor there, whom he placed and displaced as often as he thought fit, and
in this condition he left it to his Son when he died, who (as I told you) gave
it freely to his Son in Law Duke Alfiron, as a Portion with his Daughter. Now
this Gozmin left two Sons behind him, both valiant and stout Knights, the
eldest whereof lived in an Island in the Persian Gulf. called The Island of
Pearls.

The day being come wherein this great Ceremony of Crowning the King and Queen
was to be performed, every one arose early either to assist at, or behold the
Ceremony: The King and Queen being ready, mounted in a Triumphant Chariot, and
by four Unicorns were drawn to the great Temple, where they being arrived
mounted on a Scaffold prepared to that purpose and then the Chief Flamin of the
City, after the ordinary Ceremonies, placed two Crowns of Gold, enriched with
many precious Stones of inestimable value on their heads, praying to the Gods
to bless them with perpetual blessings, and blessing all their friends, and
true and loyal Subjects, and cursing all such as were or should be their
enemies. This Ceremony being performed, they both descended from their Thrones,
and walking through the Temple remounted their Chariot, riding therein through
the City with their Crowns on to the Court, where they were no sooner arrived,
but the Tables were spread with all manner of delicious Viands that the Country
could afford, many Healths going round the Table for the prosperity of the King
and Queen. After Dinner was ended, before any person did arise from Table, the
Herald at Arms (according to custom, did after the sound of an innumerable
company of Trumpets) again proclaim the said Duke and Princess to be King and
Queen of Shyraz, Larr, and Jaarown, Lord and Lady of Ormus, Maqueroon, Kermoen,
Chusestan, Sigestan, and Farsestan, Prince and Princess of the Culph of Persia,
and of the Isles there.

These words he pronounced twice, and at the end of every such Proclamation he
said, if any one had any right to the same, or any part thereof, he bid them
come forth and declare the same. This had been done twice, and the Herald was
about to begin the third time, when a Knight armed in an azure Armor, commanded
him to hold his peace; which he obeyed, and then the Knight going up to the
place where the King and Queen sat, spoke as follows.

Duke Alfiron, for by no other name shall I own you: It is not unknown to most
of the people here present, that my Title to this Crown of Shyraz, and all the
Territories thereto belonging, is just and good, when they shall know that I am
Son to the famous Gozmin, sometimes King of this place, I had long since
expected that the Souldan would have restored me to my undoubted right, but
since I see that he has been so unjust as to give it away, I am to tell thee,
that if thou will enjoy it, I must first be dead; and therefore I will thee
presently to appoint at thy Champion to defend thy Title, and to enter into the
Lists with me immediately, not questioning but the Gods will so far do me
justice, that I shall be enabled to destroy thy Champion.

Having thus said, he held his peace: This Speech gave a wonderful astonishment
to all the persons there present, and gave the King and Queen a sensible
trouble to be thus interrupted in the midst of their Solemnity. The King
answered That he was so well satisfied in the Justice of the Quarrel, that he
was ready himself to enter the Field to vindicate his Right, but the Queen
diswaded him therefrom, not questioning but that they should find some other
Champion.

Many Knights presently arose, and desired the King and Queen that they might
have the Honor of the Combat, but the King was resolved not to venture his
Title in the hands of any, but such a one as he should be very confident of his
worth, Don Bellianis thinking himself obliged to do somewhat, was resolved to
undertake the Combat, and therefore arising from his seat, desired the King
and Queen to admit him to be their Champion, and to put the trial of their
Cause into his hands. The King would willingly have excused it, by reason of
the many Obligations which he had already received from him: but Don Bellianis
who was resolved not to be denied, pressed them so hard, that at length they
condescended. Whereupon he desired that the Combat might presently be
performed. To which the other Knight willingly consented, and the place
intended for the Iousts, was the place appointed for the Combat; to which
place every one presently repaired, much wondering at the presumption of the
Knight of the Island of Pearls, for so he was called, and was known to be the
best Knight in all that Country.

Don Bellianis having Armed himself, presently repaired to the place appointed
for the Combat, where when he came, he found the Knight of the Island of
Pearls, and the King and Queen, and most of the Nobility seated near the Lists,
to behold this Combat. Both the Combatants were armed with very good Armor,
Don Bel^ianis being armed with that famous Armor enriched with Basilisks, and
his Shield whereon was the Picture of the Princess Florisbella, and mounted on
an excellent Horse. The other Knight was as well armed and mounted, when taking
each of them a Lance, at the sound of the Trumpets they couched their Lances,
and Don Bellianis with the great desire he had to hit his enemy, missed his
encounter: but the other knight did not so, but hit his enemy so fircely on the
Shield, that Don Bellianis lost both his Stirrops; whereat he was so extremely
enraged, that throwing away his Lance without making any use thereof, he drew
his Sword, which his enemy likewise did, and gave Don Bellianis a mighty blow
on the Helm.

The Knight of the Island of Pearls having given his enemy t^o such notable
strokes without receiving any, did certainly assure himself of the better of
the Combat: but was quickly of another mind, when Don Bellianis being
thoroughly enraged, lifting up his Sword, gave the Knight so mighty a blow, that
he tumbled him down from his Horse: But he soon recovered his Legs and Sword,
and went on to kill the Horse of his enemy; which Don Bellionis seeing, he
quickly dismounted and assaulted his enemy with many strokes, which were
returned with great strength. During the time of this Combat with the Knights,
their Horses began a fiterce Combat, for they ran violently against one
another, and lifting up their fore feet wounded each other, and what they could
not do, they performed with their teeth, biting one another in marvelous
manner, to the great astonishment of the beholders. Thus continnued they a good
while, but in the end Don Bellianis his Horse caused the other to run away,
which was taken notice of to be a good Omen to his Master, who in the mean time
was not idle: But resolving so soon as this Combat was finished to be gone,
therefore he did his utmost endeavor to vanquish his enemy, whom he had so
wounded in several places, that it was impossible for him to continnue much
longer. But Don Bellianis being much vexed at the tediousness of the fight,
lifting up his Sword very high, gave the Knight so great a stroke on the Helm.
that it cut it in pieces, and wounded his head in such manner that he fell to
the earth, when presently setting the point of his Sword to his Breast, he
asked him if he would acknowledge the King and Queen to be his lawful
Sovereigns? To which the Knight replied, He would never consent to any such
thing during his life. Whereupon Don Bellianis without any more a do,
immediately cut off his Head, and then he went to the Herald, and commanded
him to go forward with his Proclamation, which he accordingly did in open
field, with the general acclamations of many thousands of people who were there
present.

Thus this Combat being ended, Don Bellianis went to the King and Queen, and
desired them to give him leave to depart immediately, which they were very
unwilling to do, but he telling them that he was consident that they would have
no further service to employ him in, and that he would ere long return and
visit them, they consented to his departure: but the King was very desirous for
him to take some number of knights along with him, which he wholly refused: But
the Queen offered him a Dwarf which she brought with her from her Fathers
Court, whose service for the Queens sake he accepted, and so he presently
departed on his Journey, in company of his own Dwarf and that which the Queen
gave him, and they attended with all their Train, retired to the Palace.

CHAP. XVI. How Don Bellianis traveling to Babylon, met with a Damsel that was
sent to find him, and how he returned with her to the Souldans Palace.
With great Joy and Content traveled the worthy Don Bellianis toward
Babylon, being very earnestly desirous to arrive in the presence of his Lady,
and in this manner he traveled two days without happening on any Adventure.
The third day being mounted on Horseback early in the morning be had not rid
above an hour, contemplating on the divine Perfections of his most excellent
Lady, and ruminating in his thoughts what service he should do that he might
pretend to somewhat of her favor, and wishing for some extraordinary Adventure,
that he might show forth his worth, at length he met with a Lady attended with
two Knights, who came riding on amain: They no sooner saw him, but the Lady who
knew Don Bellianis by his Armor and Shield) immediately with excess of Joy
cried out, Oh most fortunate I that have so soon finished my Journey by meeting
with the most Magnanimous and Valiant Knight: that ever drew Sword, and that at
such a time when there is the greatest need in the world!

At which words the Knight of the Golden Image much wondered, not knowing how he
should be discovered in so strange a Country: But the Lady soon satisfied him
of that doubt, by telling him that she belonged to the Princess Mattarosa, and
was one of those that was with her Mistress released from the power of the
Giant Altifer and his Companions, by the strength and power of his invincible
arm.

Don Bellianis much wondering to see her, courteously asked her in what health
her Lady was, and the cause of her travel, To this, Sir Knight, replied she, I
shall give you an answer, on condition that you forthwith go along with me to
Babylon, and there present your self to my Mistress and the Princess
Florisbella, and there receive such Orders from them as they shall give, to
which Request he readily consented; wherefore they setting forwards on these
Journey, the Lady began her Discourse as follovveth.

Know then most valiant and redoubted Knight, that never since the Walls of
Babylon was built by the brave Semiramis, was greater sorrow within that City
then there is now, and never was there greater cause of mourning; for it is not
a week since one of the greatest pieces of Treachery was committed that ever
was heard of.

One day the Souldan, our Dread Lord, accompanied by his Emperess Silviana, the
Princess Florisbella, the Princess Mattarosa my Mistress, and many other great
Personages, having been a Hunting, were met by a grave Old Man and two Damsels,
they were all three drawn in a Chariot, and coming near our company, they all
made the most pitiful complaint in the world: The Souldan taking compassion on
them, demanded what was the cause of their so great complaint: To which speech
the old man replied, that he being traveling to Babylon with those two Damsels
and his Daughter, two Knights seeing his Daughter of admirable beauty, desired
her company to abuse her, which she not consenting to, they endeavored to force
her, and in the end notwithstanding all the resistance they could make, they
drew her out of the Chariot, intending to execute their lusts upon her: but she
resolving rather to dye than loose her honor, so long resisted them, that one
of them most inhumanly drew his Sword, and gave her so great a wound on the
head, that she immediately fell as dead to the ground, which they seeing,
immediately mounted there horses and departed leaving my poor daughter stretehed
along the grass struggling for life: In this manner we all remained making
exceeding lamentations, when an old Matron coming by, and being told the
accasion of our complaint, commanded us to bind up the wound, and lay her in
the Chariot, telling us that she was not to be cured, but by one single touch
of the fairest hand in the world, now sir, we are going to Babylon, to see if
we can find the person that shall cure this Lady.

The Souldan and his Daughter having heard this discourse, and seeing the Lady
lie stretched along in the Chariot, presently were desirous to see where the
wound was given, for which cause they both entered the Chariot, at which time
the old man whipped his horses to make them go on, but they stirred not one
jot; at which he much wondered, and the Princess coming to the body of the
extended Lady, and touching her wound, she presenly lifted up her head, and
opening her eyes heartily thanked the Princess for her cure, for by her
touching the wound she was immediately cured. Much did the old man wonder, that
not withstanding all he could do to the horses that drew the Chariot he could
not get them to move one foot, but they stood as if their feet had been fixed
to the ground: and as much was the Princess, and the rest of the company
pleased with the finishing of the adventure and therefore the Princess seeing
there was nothing else to be done, descended from the Chariot, which she had no
sooner done, but the horses that drew it immediately fell a running in a very
violent manner not giving the Emperor leave to come out; which the Ladies and
Knights seeing, were greatly abashed thereat, and the Empress commanded many of
the Knights who were best mounted, to follow the Chariot and bring back the
Souldan, but all their have availed them nothing for the horses that drew the
Chariot, ran with incredible swiftness, till they who pursued them quite lost
sigh thereof. Great was the lamentations and sorrovv of the Empress, the
Princess her Daughter, and all the rest of the spectators, not knovving what
was become of the Souldan, but they still hoped that some of the Knights would
overtake the Chariot, but though all the company stayed there six hours, and
all the Knight^ were returned, yet no news was brought of the Souldan, only
that the Chariot was gone out of their sight.

Great was the sorrow of the Empress and her Daughter, and all the rest of the
company, but it growing late they were forced to go back to the City in much
dolor; by the way as they went a Damsel came, and meeting the Empress gave her
a Letter. and immediately departed, which she greatly wondering at, caused the
same to be immediately broken open, wherein was read as follows.

The Letter of Bellona to the Empress Silviana.
MAdam, although it has for many years been my greatest study and care to do
all that I might for the preservation of you and your family, yet this late
adventure could not be helped by me, and had not your Daughter been possessed
of the Ring, which she sometime since received at the hands of the Knight of
the Basilisks, she had fallen into greater danger of her person, then is now be
fallen her Father, who is carried to such a place that it is impossible to
release him, but by the best Knight in the world. Therefore Madam, rest your
self contented, and be assured that he who gave your Daughter the Ring, ^^most
capable of finishing this adventure. It will not be long before he arrives at
your Court, and then if he travels to the Caspain Sea, he may give you and
himself the satisfaction you desire.

Subscribed Bellona.


Much content and satisfaction did this Letter give to the Empress, and much
more to her Daughter, considering the good she had received by your means,
when she accepted of the King; and in this satisfaction they entered the City,
and went to the Palace, where they presently fell into consultation about what
was necessary to be done: Some were of advice to expect your coming to the
Court, according to the tenor of the Letter from Bellona, but the Empress and
her Daughter were too impatient to attend your coming, and therefore the
Princess Mattarosa having sometime before that given them an account how you
had rescued her, they were vety destrous to know which way you took when you
parted from her: To which question she quickly answered, that you were then
g^ne to Shyraz, but intended not to stay there long, wherefore they immediately
hearing that I knew you by your Armor, commanded me in company of these two
Knights, to seek you out: and this Sir Knight, was the occasion of my journey.

Don Bellianis rested much perplexed and amazed at the discourse he had heard;
perplexed, that his Lady was in so great sorrow but withal he was very glad that
fortune still pointed out something for him to do, whereby he might in part
express the zealous love and affection which he had toward his Princess, not
esteeming any thing that he could do, though with the extremest hazard of his
life, a sufficient merit for the last favor that he should receive at the hands
of his Lady. This discourse had held them a good part of the way, and they
being come near Babylon, they resolved to reach thither that night wherefore
they made the greatest haste they could, so that before Sunset they arrived in
the City, and rode presently to the Court, where they were received by the
Empress and her Daughter, and other great personages, as shall he delated to
you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII. How Don Bellianis arrived at the Souldan of Babylons palace and
how he was received by the Empress and Ladies, and of his discourses with the
Princess Florisbella and Mattarosa.
BEfore I tell you how Don Bellianis was entrtained at the Palace, it will be
necessary to tell you what was become of the Souldan, The sage Fristone, friend
to P^rianio, and enemy to Don Bellianis, being desirous to use the utmost of
his Art to pleasure P^rian^o, and knowing of the great love that he bore to the
Princess Florisbella, did, as was related to you in the first Book of this
History, enveavor by means of the enchanted Tent, to get her into his
possession, but hindered of his purposes by the sudden ar^oal of Don Bellianis,
who by means of the Enchanted Sword and Armor that he had on, finished that
Adventure to the disgrace and trouble of Fristone, he being himself wounded,
his Tent vanishing away; and the Princess Florisbella saved: This misfortune
vexed him so much that he endeavored all that he could to be revenged, and
therefore knowing that Don Bellianis would about this time come to Babylon, and
be very likely to win the Princess, resolved to prevent him, and therefore
caused that Chariot to be provided, and all other things which met the Souldan,
as is declared in the fore going chapter, hoping to get her into the Chariot,
and then assuring himself that when he lashed the horses, they would run so
fast, that he needed not fear to be overtaken: Being thus furnished, he arrived
near Babylon. as is related in the fore going chapter, and having by his
piteous discourse induced the Souldan and his Daughter to come into the
Chariot, he was very joyful, but when he thought himself most suxe he failed
of his enterprise, by means of the King which Don Bellianis gave her, which had
the power over all Enchantments; but so soon as she was descended from the
Chariot, his Enchantments had their full power, and by that means he carried
away the Souldan, as is already declared.

So long did they travel that at last they arrived at a riverside, and such
power had Fristone with his spells, that the Souldan remained all this while in
a Trance, whose body they took out of the Chariot and placed in a barque which
lay there ready, and so having embarked themselves, they presently set saly
and sailed so long that they arrived in the Caspian Sea, which they crossed,
and on the north part thereof landed in the Island, whither being come, they
conveyed the body of the Souldan into a most strong Castle, and there Fristone
put so strong a Guard upon him, that he though it invincible; in which place we
must leave the Souldan to return to his Court at Babylon.

Don Bellianis being arrived there, as I have told you, he accompanied with the
Lady that conducted him entered into the presence of the Empress, who was at
that time accompanied with her fair Daughter the Princess Florisbella, the
Princess Martarosa, the Prince of Numidia her Brother, and many other great
personages. The Princess Florisbella was at that time attired in Purple Velvet
beset with many Oriental Pearls, and a Crown of Gold and Jewels of mighty value
on her head; but all her habit, though it was of an inestimable value, was but
a foyl to set forth her rare personage: her eyes shinining far brighter then
all her Jewels, and indeed nothing did so well resemble them, as the pure light
of the Sun, there came so many radiant beams from them, that Don Bellianis
being approached the presence, and having pulled off his Helmet, was so blinded
with the pure light that issued from them, that he was in a manner dazeled: and
all her other parts were so perfectly rare, that Venus her self had she been
there, would have blushed to have seen her self out-gone in beauty.

The Princess on the other side, having never till now seen the face of Don
Bellianis, was so surprised with his manly beauty, that she concluded him to be
the only Paragon in the world, and that all beauty and valor was worthtly in
that one person coucentred.

The Lady who conducted him thither, seeing that he continued silent, thus
began: May it please your Excellent Highness, to behold an end of my Journey,
for by the help of our Gods here is before you the person that shall so far
content you, that you may certainly expect the deliverance of my Lord the
Souldan in short time to be accomplished.

Don Bellianis being very sensible of the error he ha^ run into by his silence,
said to the company: Most excellent Princesses, what ever my mean labor can
accomplish either in releasing the Souldan, or in any other Affair, assure your
selves I shall be most willing to undertake it, and shall thank my good fortune
if any thing I can do to the utmost hazard of my life, shall give you any
pleasure; and therefore most illustrious Empriess, give me the honor to be
commanded by you, and I shall run to the accomplishment thereof, though it be
to my certain death, and shall think that part of my life best bestowed,
wherein I can in any manner please or content you.

The Empress having heard and beheld him, replied: Noble Knight, your presence
at this time is most acceptable, and we are so far obliged to you for your last
company, and the hazard that you then underwent for the deliverance of our
Daughter, that I cannot with modesty tell how to desire you to hazard your
person any more for us: but since the Gods are pleased to place all their
virtues within your bosom, and so to decree it that none but your self was born
to assist us, I shall be thankful to the Gods for so providing a person, who
may be rightly termed The deliverer of the House of Babylon, for without your
help we should infallibly perish, and therefore good Sir Knight, repose your
self for a few days, and then take such help for the accomplishment of this
adventure as you shall think fit, and which the whole Empire will afford that
you may once more restore a Husband to me a sorrowful wife, a Father to an
afflicted daughter, and a Prince to his loving subje^^s.

Having thus said. she descended from her Throne, and came to the place where
Don Bellianis was kneeling, and raising him from the ground, he humbly kissed
her hands, and then went to the place where the Princess Mattarosa sat, not
daring as yet to go to the Princess Florisbella, and humbling himself on his
knee he kissed the hand of the Princess Mattarosa, saying to her: Madam, when I
last left you, I gave you my word that I would e're long wait upon you at this
place, to obey your commands, and in order thereunto I was coming hither, when
the Lady met me and relating to me the misfortune of the Souldan, which has
given me a very sensible affliction to see that any thing should give a trouble
to such divine personages as are here present: But Madam, assure your self,
that I will employ all the remaining part of my life in finishing this
adventure, but I will give you the contentment you expect and desire in the
presence of the Souldan. Mattarosa, who was sensible of the love and affection
that the Princess her Cousin had for the valiant Don Bellianis, and being
resolved to pleasure her, said: Dear Cousin, you need not question the
performance of this adventure, since it is put into the hands of such a Knight
whose worth I am very well satisfied, and without whole aid I had e're this
time been in my grave: for (...) would certainly have given my self a violent
death, rather then have consented to the lubidinous desire of that monstrous
Giant who had me in his possession. The Princess Florisbella now thought it fit
for her to speak, and therefore she said, I am so well satisfied in the worth
of this Knight, that I question not the performance of any thing he will
undertake, and I have had so sufficient proofs both of his judgment and valor,
that I have found the affects to be such, that I am much engaged to him
therefore, and I my self had either been a prisoner or worse twice ere this but
for him, for which two remarkable Services I am still bound to him, and shall
always acknowledge my self his debtor, both for the service he did me, and for
the precious token he left with me, without which I had now been in company of
my Father, and therefore none has more cause to esteem of his virtue then my
self: and then turning her self toward him, she said: Assure your self, Sir
Knight, that I esteem my self more bound to you then to all men living, and
shall always acknowledge it, and next unto my parents I shall be always ready
to be disposed of by your commands.

She having thus finished her discourse, Don Bellianis was almost ravished with
delight, and humbly kissing her fair hand, and fetching a great sigh, he
replied: A^ dear Madam, all that I have yet done for you, or shall be able to
perform the remaining part of my life, is already sufficiently recompensed by
this immense favor you have so prodigally bestowed in the humblest of your
servants. He would have proceeded, but that the Prince of Numidia came then to
him, and humbly thanking him for the aid he had lent him in releasing him and
his Sister from the Gianc Altifer, and so he led him from the Ladies, into the
company of several Knights that were here present, who much honored him for the
worth they understood him to be endued withal.

Thus he spent some time in this company till it was time to disarm himself,
which when he had done, the Princess Mattarosa sent him a rich Mantle, and by
the messenger that brought it, she destred that he would not fail to let her
have the happiness of his company some time that evening: To which message he
returned answer, That he would not fail to wait on her. Most of the evening he
spent complementing the Knights of the Court, and they in showing him the
rarities and novelties thereof, and there he with great wonder and amazement
beheld the pleasant Gardens and Fountains there, having spent much time in
walking, he at length desired the Prince of Numidia to show him his lodging,
which he did accordingly, and as he walked thither the Prince told him which
was the Souldans, and which was his Sisters, and which was the Princess
Florisbella's. Now the Princess Mattarosa's, and the Princess Florisbella's
were adjoining together, and his lodging was not far from either of them at
which he was very well pleased: Having thus spent much time he again went into
the Presence, where was the Empress, her Daughter, and Kinswoman, and many
other Ladies; and thus they spent much of that evening in several discourses,
at last every one withdrew to their several appartments. Don Bellianis
remembering the Message he had received from the Princess Mattarosa, appointed
his Dwarf Ordino to attend her going to her Lodging, and to take notice of some
one of her Damsels, which the Dwarf performed, and his Master being retired
into his chamber and alone, he came to him and told him that the Princess was
now in her Chamber with us other company but two of her Damsels: Don Bellianis
therefore commanded the Dwarf to go thither and tell one of her Damsels that he
desired to speak with her Lady, and when he should come into her presence to
present his service to her and let her know that he waited her commands. The
Dwarf soon executed his message, and returned to his Master, and told him that
the Princess expected his coming to her Lodging, he therefore immediately left
his own Chamber and went to her, where she received him with a great deal of
freedom, and causing him to sit down by her, she thus began.

Sir Knight, the great favor you did me in releasing me from she power of the
Giant, is so deeply engraven in my breast, that all that I can do for you
through the whole course of my Life, I shall esteem to little for a recompense,
and if you remember when I then parted from y^^, I desired your company here,
that it might be in my power to do somewhat to g^ati^^e you, if therefore you
know any thing wherein I may pleasure you speak boldly and freely, and let me
know it, for the time you have co stay here being not long, an opportunity of
doing you service may soon be overslipt. Don Bellianis having attentively
listened to this discourse, did much marvel thereat, wondering what the issue
thereof would be: but while supposing that his fortune might so fall out, that
she her self might be in love with him, at which he would have been much
discontented, and then another while supposing that she might do him some great
kindness in his love to her Cousin, he was therefore resolved to try her mind,
and after some s^^euce he thus began.

Madam, if I have done you any service, it was no more then I was bound to do
by the Order of Knighthood; besides it has been already sufficently
recompensed by this your acknowledgement, therefore you rest no longer indebted
to me for that: but there is one thing Madam, wherein you may greatly pleasure
and oblige me of new to be your humble Servant. It is now Madam; some years
since I received the Order of Knighthood, and with it a suit of Armor which I
have since lost, only I have preserved the Shield that belonged ^^ereto, not
for any extraordinary worth therein, but only for the sake of a Picture that is
therein pourtrayed, I do believe that you have seen it, and may remember that
it has some small resemblance with the Princess your Cousin, and indeed for
her sake alone have I kept it, and under the Name of ^he Knight of the Golden
Image have I gone ever since, and have won many Combats thereby, so that
whatever Act I have done worthy of remembrance may be wholly attributed to her
Virtue, this has caused me now twice to come to this Court, not as yet daring
to give her any notice of my desires, now therefore if you are pleased to do me
any further friendship, let it be this, to desire her to be pleased to admit me
to be her Knight, and then I question not but I shall be sufficiently able to
perform any Enterprise, though never so difficult and perilous.

Don Bellianis having thus finished his discourse, the Princess was fully
satisfied that in doing him a courtesy, she should likewise pleasure her
Cousin, whose mind she knew very well, but like a discreet virtuous Lady, she
was resolved to know what Parentage he was of, and whether that disproportion
would not hinder that which they so much desired, and thereforr she thus
replied:

Noble Sir, I give you many thanks for your freeness with me, and assure your
self that in this matter I shall execute your will that you shall have your
destres, provided that you engage me in nothing that may be a blemish to the
Honor of my fair Cousin, and therefore Sir, I pray tell me who gave you the
Honor of Knighthood, that if I be demanded that Question by my Cousin, I may be
provided with an Answer. To this he soon replied, He who gave me the order of
Knighthood was as then unknown to me, and so was I then to him, but since I
knew him to be the Emperor of Greece. Then Sir, quoth the Lady, I question not
but he was satisfied that by birth you were worthy of it. Ah Madam, said he, he
was then told that I was of Noble Lineage by a Lady that was present: but since
he has known me, and I him better, for indeed he is my Father. Then recounted
he to her the manner of his first Adventures and how he was Knighted by his
Father, and how afterward did fight with him, as it is ^t large set down in
the First Part of this excellent History,

This Discourse so well satisfied the Princess, that she told him that since he
had been so free to her, as to tell her his greatest secrets, she would in
recompense thereof tell somewhat that would give him equal content, and
thereupon she sail: Sir Knight, I do, now assure you that you may account your
self happy in your love, for the Princess Florisbella my Cousin is altogether
amorous of you as you are of her, and has been as desirous to discover the
same, as you your self; and therefore so carry your self in this business, that
what ever you do may redound to the honor of you both, and to the end that you
may receive the same satisfaction from her own mouth I will immediately go into
her Chamber and bring her hither: At which words Don Bellianis fell on his
knees to the ground and straightly embracing her legs, he said: Ah dear Madam;
what thanks, what services, what returns shall I make for this extraordinary
favor: But she knowing that a little time would be soon lost, got from him, and
leaving him in this ecstasy, went into the chamber of her Cousin, where she had
not stayed long but she returned with her Cousin in her company, who now being
undressed, was attired in a Mantle of Crimson Velvet, and such other Garments,
that Juno in all her Bravery did not appear half so stately, nor Venus when she
courted Adonis was not half so lovely: when they came into the Chamber, they
found the Knight on his knees, his ecstasy of Joy had been so great, wherefore
the Princess Mattarosa taking her Cousin by the hand, led her to him, saying:
Behold here, Madam, the best Knight in the world prostrate on his knees,
expecting from your lips the gracious favor of your admitting him to be your
Knight, Arise most noble Prince, answered the Princess, for so my Cousin
informs me you are, and indeed it could not be expected that so great
Perfections of Valor, Magnanimity and true Virtue, should abide in the breast
of any one but the greatest Prince in the world.

At these words Don Bellianis humbly kissing her hand arose, and then the
Princess Mattarosa caused them both to sit down: when they were sat, the
Princess Florisbella demanded of him how he performed the Adventure of settling
her Cousin Aurora in possession of her Kingdom; for said she I hear that she is
bound ^o y^u for that favor? then he Recounted to her all that happened in that
Adventure, how he killed her usurping Enemy Don Gallanco, and the many hazards
he ran thorough when he went disguised in the Apparel of one of her Damsels,
and how at last he procured the Souldan of Persia to Confirm her in her
Kingdom, and then said he, Madam, I had gone along with her to have seen her
settled therein, but that the remembrance of your divine Beauty, was as
attractive to my heart as the Loadstone to the Needle, which caused me to leave
that Charge to two of my Brethren, and some other of my Friends, to apply my
self hither to wait upon my Comnands. And said the Princess Mattarosa, it was
most happy for us both that you went not thither; for I had ere this perished
without the assistance you brought me, and the Princess my Cousin had still
wanted one to undertake the Redemption of her Father,

Ah most noble Lady, replied he, I see now that Fortune and my good Stars have
brought me some sweet with much of biter I have hitherto run thorough, in that
they have given me some opportunity of testifying to you my service, in which
point I wish my Destinies will still continue me to my lives end, for it will
be the greatest good that can come to me, to spend the remainder of my life in
the service of so Divine Persenages, and therewith he took the fair Hand of his
Mistress, and amorously kissed it. In these terms continued these Lovers for
two or three hours, an then they gave^d each other such assured Testimonies of
their loves that it endured for ever

The Princess signified much sorrow that he was to depart in so short time, to
hazard his person in so great perils, but he assured her, that since she
thought him worthy of being hers, he did not question but to overcome all
difficulties, and in short time return with her Father. Than she desired him to
take some company with him, that he might be the better enabled to perform his
Enterprise: but he refused that, desiring to perform it himself, that the
Souldan her Father might be obliged to none for this Deliverance but to him
only, that thereby he might have the more cause to grant him what he should
afterward desire of him.

But the Princess Mattarosa knowing that her Brother the Prince of Numidia
intended to accompany him in this Adventure, persuaded him that since the
Journey was long, and that he was to travel on the Caspian Sea to some
uncertain place there, that he would not refuse his company, which he at last
assenced to. Thus having spent much of the night in these Discourses, after the
two Lovers had given each other new Obligations of Promises of an everlasting
Love and Friendship, they every one with great silence departed to their
several Lodgings.

CHAP. XVIII. How Don Bellianis had a second Conference with the Princess
Florisbella and her Cousin Mattarosa and how he, after he had taken his leave
of the Ladies, departed in quest of the Souldan, accompanied with Baltasano
Prince of Numidia.
THe satisfaction the two Lovers received in the Evenings Conference,
occasioned them to take but little rest that night: never was Don Bellianis so
contented as now, all his Travels, Combats, Conflicts and bloody Fights, he
accounted as nothing, and that they were all more than fully recompensed by the
kind and loving Discourse he had receivod that evening from his Princess.
These thoughts accompanied him all night so that he slept not at all, but still
ruminated in his mind how he should contrive his good fortune, and how he
shoould give so good a satisfaction to the Souldan, that he might be willing to
accept of him for his Son in Law: These thoughts took up all the night, so that
morning coming the Prince of Numidia came to his Chamber to give him the Good
Morrow, whereupon he presently arose, and very lovingly received him.

After he had apparelled himself, he left his Chamber, and wa^^rd with the
Prince in the Garden, where the Prince told him that he had one Boon to beg of
him, and therefore prayed that he might not be denied. Don Bellianis answered,
that he might freely ask any thing of him, for he took it as an honor if he
could pleasure him in any thing. Then the Numidian Prince told him that the
Request he was to make was this, That he would be pleased to permit him to have
the bonor to attend him in this intended Expedition, for, says he, I cannot
but acanice much honor and renown in being in the presence and company of so
brave and worthy a Knight.

Don Bellianis who had already promised his Sister that he would permit him to
go with him, told him, that he could not acquire any fame in his company, but
however if he would give himself that trouble, he should be glad of his good
company. The Numidian being very glad that he had granted his Request, gave him
many thanks, and cold him he should esteem his life happy so long as he had the
enjoyment of his good society, and said he hoped, that having so good a Pattern
both of Chivalty and Virtue, he did not question but he should profit himself
very much thereby.

In these Discourses they continued some time till all the Cour was risen, but
it was somewhat late before the two Princesses arose, they having sat try to
late the night before, that it was Noon before they came into the Presence
Chamber, being come, the Tables were covered, and every one sat down to
dinner: Don Bellianis could eat but little for observing the rare Perfections
of his Divine Princess who was seated just against him, who attired her self in
most sumptuons manner, that her Clothes might give some luster to her Beauty:
but although she was habited in an extraordinary manner, yet her face and
person appeared like the Sun, and they like clouds that obscured her other
beauties. She often cast amorous glances at her Knight, and seeing his eye
still fixed on her she was often moved to blush.

Dinner being ended and every one risen, the Empress taking, Don Bellianis by
the hand, said to him: Sir Knight, I am very sorry that so unfortunate occasion
has happened that will suddenly cause us to loose your good company, but I
hope that with the Assistance of the Gods, your incomparable Walor and the
continual good fortune that still accompanies you, will put an end to all our
troubles; and therefore that you may go provided with all things necessary for
so hazardous an Expedition, I have ordered the Council to sit this Afternoon,
to know of you what you shall think necessary, that it may be provided
accordingly, To which he replied, All that I desire, Madam, is only the
company of the Prince of Numidia, and I question not but my good fortune will
soon bring me to the place where I shall be enabled to serve you: But ^he
desired to confer with the Council of this matter, in order to which that
Afternoon he went to them, and they propounding to raise a great Army, and a
Navy of Ships proportionable to receive them, and so with this power under his
Command, to search all the Caspian Sea, but he utterly refused that Offer, and
only desired that one ship might be ready at the Seaside to receive him
against his coming, and he told them he intended to be going within three days.
They not willing to contradict his reasons, and much less to offend him,
answered, that his will should in every thing be performed, and so they took
order accordingly.

Thus did he spend two days in the greatest content and satisfaction in the
World, still accompanied by the Prince of Numidia and by that means he had the
opportunity with him of courting the Princess his Cousin with the greater
freedom, sometimes they walked in the pleasant Walks and Gardens of the
Palace, and at other times they went abroad in the Fields to divert themselves
in all which time he endeavored by his most ordinary actions, to let her see
the esteem he had of her Virtues. The night before he was to depart he took the
opportunity to speak to the Princess Mattarosa, humbly desiring her that since
his time was so short that he was to depart the next day, she would do him the
favor to speak to the Princess Florisbella to give him the happiness of her
Company in the Chamber, that he might take his farewell of her, to which his
request she soon consented.

So Evening being come, and every one retired to their several Lodgings, he
attended not long before one of the Princesses Damsels came to his Chamber, to
advertise him that the two Princesses were together and expected him; He
thereupon very joyfully went to the Chamber where they were and prostrating
himself on his knee, he humbly kissed her hand, but she not permitting it
caused him to arise, and seating her self by him, said unto him:

Worthy Sir, Since it has pleased the Heavens to put so great a cross upon us,
as so soon to part us, I beseech you by the friendship and love that you have
so zealously professed to me, that you will not only make all the expedition
you can in returning back from this Adventure, but also do the best you can to
secure your person, not thrusting your self into any unnecessary hazard; for
know Sir, that since you are become my Knight, I resolve to keep such a strict
power over you, that I shall not be won to consent that you shall do any thing
to endanger your person, and were it not on so necessary an occasion I should
not give you leave to depart.

Having said thus, she hung down her head and fetched a deep sigh expressing by
that the sorrow she took for his departure, wherefore he thus replied to her.

Gracious Madam, Since it has pleased you to give your self so much trouble to
have some care of my unworthy person, I shall endeavor in this, as well as in
all other things, to obey your commands, assuring you that this Adventure being
finished, I shall immediately return back, and shall not hereafter undertake
any Adventure without your leave first obtained, not questioning but I shall be
able to perform whatsoever I shall begin, through the mighty assistance I have
received by being under your protection.

Thus did these two Lovers discourse with one another, sometimes embracing each
other: and Don Bellianis knowing that he was to be gone the next day, took more
freedom than ordinary, and Kavished from her lips many amorous kisses, which to
him were more pleasant than Nectar and Ambrosia, or the food of the Gods. Thus
spent they much time, and would have continued their amorous discourses longer,
but that the Princess Mattarosa caused them to break off and depart, which they
at last very unwillingly consented to: Thus at length they retired to their
several Longings and went to Bed, taking their ordinary repose.

The morning being come, Don Bellianis arose early to put all things in order
for his departure, but he had not been long up before the Prince of Numidia and
two of his Kinsmen came to wait on him in his Lodging, but not finding him
there they walked into the Garden where they found him, and there the Prince of
Numidia told him that he was ready to go with him whenever he should appoint
him, but told him that he humbly begged him to permit those two Knights to go
in their company. Don Bellianis who was unwilling to deny him any thing he
should ask, at length at the entreaty of the two knights themselves consented;
and thereupon he bid them be ready, for that Afternoon he intended to set
forward on his Journey, they resting very well satisfied, and prepared all
things acordingly.

Thus Noon being come and Dinner ended he took his farewell of the Empress, the
Princess Florisbella, and the Princess Mattarosa, and all the rest of the
Court. The Princess Florisbella gave him a new Shield, wherein was her own
Picture drawn to the Life, and Rickly gilded, whereby he went by the Name of
the Knight of the Golden Image. The Prince of Numidia was armed in an Azure
Armor, and in his Shield he had a Boars-head; he having formerly killed a
monstrous Boar, and therefore he was called the Knight of the Boar. The other
two Knights were armed in White Armor, they being new Knights: the one, who was
amorous of the Princess Mattarosa, had Hope painted in his Shield, and the
Princess gave him a Scarf as a Favor from her, and the other had a flaming
Sword painted on his Shield, because when he was Knighted it was with a Sword
that resembled a Flame.

Being thus most richly armed and bravely mounted, after several Complemental
expressions had passed between many of the Souldans Knights, and Don Bellianis
and his Companions, wishing them a prosperous success in their intended
Adventurs, they took their leave of all the fair Ladies, and only attended by
Don Bellianis his two Dwarss, they left Babylon and journeyed toward the
Caspian Sea.

CHAP. XIX. How Don Bellianis and his Comparions traveled to the Caspian Sea,
and how there they embarked themselves in quest of the Souldan of Babylon.
THree days traveled Don Bellianis and his Companions without meeting with any
Adventure and indeed he was not at all discontented thereat; for he was
resolved to obey the Commands of his Princess, and avoid all things that might
hinder his Journey: wherefore they traveled very hard, till within one days
Journey: of the Caspian Sea, they saw before them several Knights and Ladies
journeying together,, but he being desirous to avoid all company, rode on
without saluting them; whereupon a Damiel Riding after him, said, I am come
from one of those Ladies yonder, who say that he who gave you the Order of
Knighthood did not do well, in that he did not instruct you in your duty to
Ladies when you meet them, and therefore desires, if you be not in great have
that you, or some of your company, would break a Lance with so me of her
Knights, to the end she may know whether you are better furnished with valor
than with courtesy.

Don Belliar is being somewhat troubled at this Message, replied, That his have
would not permit him to give her that satisfaction which she desired, but the
Knight of the fl^ming Sword who was in his company, desired him to permit him
to break a Lance with one of the Knights, to which Don Bellianis at last
consented, so that after that they should not be enjoined to any further stay,
to which the Damsel consenting, departed. She was no sooner come to her Lady
and delivered her Message, but one of her Knights advanced toward them, which
the Knight of the flaming Sword seeing, took a Lance and went to meet him. They
soon couched their Lances and met each other with so much vigor, that they both
lost their Stirrops and broke their Lances, when taking new ones, at the next
encounter the Ladies Knight measured hi^ length on the earth, and the Knight of
the flaming Sword was forced to get hold of his Horses neck to save himself
from falling. No sooner was this done, but out came another Knight, and desired
since the Knight of the flaming Sword was well nigh down, that the Knight of
Hope would try his fortune with him: To which he consented, and thereupon they
both couching their Lances, the Knight of Hope performed so well that the
Ladies Knight measured his length on the earth, and so he served two more, but
at last when he was running with the fourth Knight his Horse tumbled, and they
both fell on the earth.

Then the Knight of the Boar stepping forwards, ran against the Knight who had
dismounted the Knight of Hope, and turned him off from his horse: and often
Knights there remained four who had not tried their Valor, but he running
against them dismounted them also.

Don Bellianis seeing there was no more to be done, sent his Dwarf to the Lady
to present his service to her, and hid him tell her, that the next time she
expected to compel Knights to Courtesy, she must provide her self with more
valiant Defendants, which the Dwarf having done they all departed.

Thus did they travel on their Way all that day till they came near to the
Seaside, where they took up their Lodgings for that night on the shore. No
sooner was the Sun gotten up into the Firmament, but our Knights all arose, and
Arming themselves went to the Seaside, where they met with their Ship, and
presently they embarked themselves and horses, and having a fair Wind they set
Sail and departed.

Long time sailed they about this Sea, coasting the Country, and landing in
several places to enquire after news of the Souldan but all was in vain. One
day a great Calmness happening, they sailing very slowly, descried a Ship from
afar off sailing this therwards, wherefore command was given to the Mariners to
bear up to them, which was done with all the expedition they could; when they
came near the Ship they heard the voice of a Woman who made great lamentation:
At which noise Don Bellianis wondering, caused them to call aboard to them, when
presently two great Giants armed at all points but their heads, demanded what
they required? The Numidian answered, That they desired to know the cause of
the lamentation that they heaed. ^he Giants seeming very angry at his demand,
replied, That they might meddle with their own affairs for that did in no wise
concern them.

Don Bellianis hearing these proud speeches, commanded the Ship to go nearer to
the other and grapple with her. which was done accordingly, and the Giants
clapping on their Helmets, drew their mighty Symitars to hinder the entrance of
the Knights, who by the example of Don Bellianis, were all p^ovided to assail
the Giants in their own Ship: but our Knights so laid about them, that one of
the Giants was soon laid along the Ship. At this noise ten well armed Knights
who were below, came up, and drawing their Swords went to assail our Knights,
who defended themselves very bravely* and Don Bellianis so stoutly laid about
him, that he soon dispatched four of them, and threw their bodies into the Sea:
which the Giants seeing made up to him, and gave him so firce a bloow on the
Helmet, that he was astonished, and forced to lay both his hands on the side of
the Ship to raise himself up: but he was no sooner got on his seet but he
buickly revenged that blow. and gave the Giant such a return, that lighting on
his head he cut he Helmet quite in two pieces, and also his Head was cleaved
down to the Iaws.

Thus this Giant being dispatched he turned him about to help his Companions,
but he saw they had behaves themselves so well that they had either killed or
vanquished all the Giants Knights, wherefore he putting up his Sword, commanded
the Mariners to conduct him to the place from whence they heard the noise,
which they did acordingly: and being come thither saw a Damsel who made great
lamentation, but he demanded of her the cause of hdr Complaint, she arose, and
seeing him knew him by his Armor, when falling on her knees, she said: Ah most
courteous Knight! I now know that I am released from the slavery and bondage I
was going to having met with you, Don Bellianis knew not the Damsel, wherefore
raising her from the ground, he demanded of her how she knew him; To which see
replied, I am confident Sir Knight, that I am not mistaken in my knowledge of
you, for without doubt you most needs be the valiant Prince Don Bellianis of
Greece, of whose Prowess and Virtue I am sufficiently acquainted, wherefore
know Sir, that I belong to the sage Bellona our very good Friend, who
understanding of the Enterprise that you were going about to release the
Emperor, and knowing that all the skill and art that your Mariners could use
would not be to any purpose, (...) for it is impossible to find out the place
where he is kept without her help, she therefore sent me to conduct you
thither: and commanding me to go toward the Court of the Souldan of Babylon to
meet you, I being on my way thither, was met by these two Giants and Knights,
whom you have happily dispatched, who seeing me alone forced me to go aboard
with them, and wither they would have carried me I am uncertain but thanks to
your valor I am released from that peril.

Don Bellianis having heard this Relation, was very glad that he should now be
able to find the place whither he was to go, and therefore thanked the Damsel
very kindly for the pains and peril she had undertaken for his sake: and
thereupon he caused her to go out of that Ship into his own, where she was no
sooner come but she espying the Numidian Prince, began to renew her
lamentations; at which they all wondering, asked her the cause of her sudden
sorrow? to which she replied, Ah, Sir Knight, when I came from my Mistress she
gave into my custody a Sword, which she commanded me to present to her Couzin
Baltasano, which she told me he would ere long stand in need of, for it had so
hidden a virtue that it would make its way through any Armor, though it were
enchanted, and told me that next to the Sword which you had it was the best in
the world, and these two Giants when they took me, forced the Sword from me,
and what they have done with it I know not.

The Numidian Prince hearing of this was much troubled, fearing lest it should
be lost or thrown into the Sea with some of the dead Knights, wherefore he and
the Damsel immediately went into the Ship to search for it: so after a little
search they found it in one of the Cabins of the Giants, at which he was very
glad; and so returning into the Ship of Don Bellianis, they showed it to him,
and the Sword was very plain, only the Hilt was made of entire Emerald.

This being done they desired the Damsel to direct them to the place where the
Souldan remained: but she told them that if they would take her directions,
they must first sail to the Mouth of the River Araxis, and being there she then
knew how to conduct them. They having heard this commanded the Mariners to obey
her command, which they forthwith did, and set sail for the River Araxis. In
few hours they came thither, and having informed the Damsel thereof, she
advised with the Master of the Vessel, and told him that he must sail cross the
Sea directly northwards, which he accordingly did: thus they leaving the Giants
Ship behind them, sailed cross that great Sea.

Don Bellianis being very impatient of their delays, thinking that every day he
had bin absent from his Princess to be a year, and therefore he discoursed with
the Damsel of many matters during the Voyage, that he might pass away the time
the better: And she told him that her Mistress had given her no account of the
particular dangers that he was to undergo in that Adventure but said that it
was the most perilous that he ever undertook; for the sage F^^stone who had
placed the Souldan there, had used his utmost skill in his Enchantments, that
he might still continue him there a prisoner, but she said that you with the
help of the Numidian Prince, should be able by your great skill and valor, to
put an end to all the Enchantments, and deliver the Souldan.

CHAP. XX. How Don Bellianis and the Knights his Companion, landed on an Island
in the Caspian Sea, where the Souldan was kept prisoner by Enchantment: and how
Don Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia, after they had fought with many
monstrous Giants and Serpents, ended the Enchantment.
LOng had they not sailed before they descried Land, and coming near they found
that there were close by several small Islands, in one of which they saw a fair
Castle, wherefore Don Bellianis supposing that to be the place where the
Souldan was, as indeed it was, he caused them to make to shore, but as they
were approaching the shore they saw several Sea Monsters with much fierceness
approach the Vessel, and made a hideous noise: The two young Knights with their
Swords in their hands, went down out of the Ship into the Shallop to get to
shore, but these Monsters so laid about them that they soon overturned the
Eoat, and had not the Mariners immediately thrown out Ropes the two Knights had
been drowned.

Don Bellianis seeing this, and that these Monsters would endeavor to hinder
his landing, and seeing that the shore was so shelving, that it was impossible
for the Ship to come so near it as to land him, taking his Sword in his hand he
threw himself into the Sea, where he was assaulted by these Monsters who came
all about him. but he being well skilled in swimming, did so bravely behave
himself that in despite of them he got to land, killing one of them at every
stroke he st^nck. By his example the Numidian Prince followed him, but with
very great peril of his life, for he ws marvelously assaulted, but at last
having killed many of them with his sword, he got to shore.

The Knight of Prope seeing this, resolved to do the like, but he failed in his
Enterprise; for many of these Monsters came about him, and in despite of him
bit him in many places, and not withstanding he struck at them with his sword,
yet it did no more execution upon them than if he had struck upon an An^ile,
for his Sword had not the virtue in it to withstand Enchantments, wherefore by
the advice of the Damsel he came back again to the Ship, where he and all the
rest were forced to stay, not being able to land.

Thus these two Knights by the help of their pure-cutting Swords got on shore,
but they were unarmed, wherefore they caused them in the Ship to throvv their
Arms out as far as they could toward the shore, where they went and took
them up and armed themselves: But there was no way how they could get their
Horses on shore, at which they were much troubled: but Don Bellianis seeing
that the Castle was not far off, hoped he should have no great occasion of
them; wherefore commending them in the Ship to vvait their coming thither
again, they departed and marched right on to the Castle: When they came near
it, they savv that it was marvel ours strong, being seared on a Rock, and
though they vvalked round about it, they could not find any way to enter into
it. at last they espied (...) Cave, but the en^r (...) into it was like a Well,
for it was down right, and they sini^^ed it to be a Well, but that there was
^oo w^ter in it: Hereat thinking that that was the way into the Castle, they
cut down one of the tallen Trees thereabouts, and Don Bellianis causing the
Numidian to hold the one end of it, was let down into the Cave, but it reached
not to the bottom, wherefore he was forced to take a great leap, and so he fell
to the ground sore bruised with the fall, and before he could well get up he
was assaulted by two great hideous Serpents, who ran upon him and trampled him
under their feet, but he soon arose, and wounded them most piteously, whereupon
they again came upon him, and gave him such lashes with their monstrous tayls
that it cracked his Armor, but he waiting his opportunity cut off their tails,
so that they could not offend him that way and they making a hideous noise,
coming on him to be revenged, he cut off both their Heads at one blow, After he
had done this, he walked on, and perceiving some light went furcher, and saw
before him a Courtyard, and in it a Fountain, at the foot whereof were two
mighty Dragons, who no sooner saw him approaching, but they run to assault him:
He taking his Buckler in his hand, and fast grasping his sword, cut the wing of
one of them, which cauled him to make a hideous noise, and the beast finding
himself wounded, ran upon Don Bellianis and catching hold on him drew him on
the ground, and with his Tallons grasped him so hard, that he was very much
wounded, and the other likewise caught hold on him with his teeth, and bit him
by the thigh: at which he finding himself in great peril, arose, from the
ground, and thrust his sword down the throat ofone of these Mo^^ters, cleaving
his heart in twain so that he fell down dead. The other Dragon was now got upon
the back of our Knight and pulled him down backwards, but he nimbly got from
the ground, gave the Dragon such a blow that he cleaved his Head in two.

When he had done this he sat down, being so faint with the loss of blood that
he could hardly stand, after he had taken the air a little be walked about the
Courtyard and their he found a Basket and a long Rope tied to it, wherefore
pondering with himself what use that should be for, he believed that with it he
might draw the Numidian Prince up into the Castle, and so walking about he saw
a Pair of Stairs which went up to the Battlements of the out Wall of the
Castle, where he being come saw the Prince walking about the Green prying
whither he might find any place to get into the Castle, Don Bellianis seeing
this called to him, and told him if that he would come in to him, he would help
hem up by that Rope and Basket, to which he readily assented, and so lifting
of it down, he drew him up accordingly.

When they were come down into the Court-^a^d, he perceived that Don Bellianis
had not been idle, for he saw the ^wo Dragons that were slain, at which they
much admired, and so they passed forwards, when coming to a great gate they
savv a s^all Horn, which one of them having sounded the Gates ^^w immediately
open: but as they went to enter, there was two mighty Giants opposed themselves
to forbid them, and taking up their mighty Eattel-Axes. laid many strokes on
the two Knights but they who were undaun^ed repaid them with many weighty
blows: and Don Bellianis being angered that as yet he could not see to what end
all this should come, with one blow cut off the Giants leg, and so he fell to
the ground, at which he went to him and cut off his Head.

Having so done he went to assist Numidia, but he savv that he had likewise
killed the other Giant; for being fresh, he laid about him so that he had stain
him without receiving any vvound, but one in the arm.

Thus these two friends having finished this Combat; went forvva^ds and
entered into a brave Hall paved with Marble and supported with saverall Pillars
of Iasper^ vvalking about here they savv a Door that let them into a Garden
where were many pleasant Walks, amnog the rest one led them to a Vault, at
the door of which they savv an Inscription thus written:

They who shall have so great prowess as to kill all the Guards, and Pass
hither, shall yet fail in their expectations, unless the Fire that is here
preserved be Put out; which being done, this E^chantment shall end.

The Kinghts having read this, were somevvhat satisfied that they knevv what
would put an end to this Adventure, and therefore they resolved to use their
utmost power to accomplish it: but they knevv not how to enter this Cave, the
door being very strong 'searching further they savv another door belonging to
the same Cave, and a Bell hanging thereto, vhich they rung and then the door
opned, and their they savv a small. Fire in the middle of the Cave: As soon as
they were entered they were assaulted saulted in mavelous manner, but t^^y
could ^^^ee by whom; they felt many mighty ^^^kes, is that ^omet^mes they (...)
driven to fall down on their k^^es, but they could not see any body that gave
them, and it was in vain to use their Swords, for they cut nothing but the Air,
at which they both marvelled. And the Numidian Prince understanding by the
Inscription that they had read, that the quenching of that Fire gave an end to
the Enchantment, he left Don Bellianis and went out of the Cave to the Fountain
which they had seen in the Courtyard, and taking off his Helmet, intended to
fetch some Water from thence, but when he was come near the Fountain, and went
to dip his Helmet therein for Water, there issued out of the Water a fierce
Crocodile, and flying in his fare wounded his head, so that he bled
exceedingly: at which being amazed, he brew his Sword and had a great Combat
with the Crocodile, but in the end the Crocodile remained dead, and he dipped
his Helmetet into the Fountain and took some Water from the^^e and hasted to
the Cave, where he found Don Bellianis still (...) batle with those Fantasms,
he gave many blows, but could not heat any (...) of them, but he himself was so
beaten that he was well nigh out or breath. Thus the Numidian arrived in the
Cave, and following ^lose to his friend, beying, Courage Sir, proceed to the
Fite, for I have gott^n ^spand^ put (...) At which Words Don Belliani^ went
forwards, and the Numidian to^^^ed so close, that at (...) is the Fire he th^ew
the Water therein, which he had no soonet ^nne, but there happened much
Lighthing and Thundes, and immediately they foun^ themselves in the plain
Fields, no sign of any Cave or ^a^^e Nonely the Castle Ge^^mamed. At which they
be^^^^ the Enchantment to be ende^, want toward the Castle, where when, they
came the doors of the Castle were ^p^hod, and they Wa^^ing into the Mall law
any there door which conducted them into and the^ R^^m, where they me^ the
Souldan Walking in great haste to see what was the ^^asion of that gr^^t noise:
but whea^^ hono^^^ (...) hights; he grea^ly warve ^^^not (...) the Enchentment
be (...) they ^^^ting their knee^^ to the ground (...), that if (...) her to
he: had been a prisoner, he was now by the bounty of Heaven free; and thereupon
the Prince of Numidia pulled off his Helmet, which the Souldan seeing ran to
him, knowing him, and said, Ah good Cousin Baltasano, how much am I indebted to
you for this great travel that you have undertaken for my Delivery? But
Baltasano answering, replied, Good Uncle, all my endeavors had been fruitless,
had you not been assisted by this good Knight, to whom you are much beholden,
and so is your daughter or else she had kept you company.

The Souldan hearing this, went to Don Bellianis, and lifting him from the
Ground, said: Indeed good Knight, he who brought me hither, told me that if I
would not conient that he should dispose of my Daughter, he would ere long
force her to keep me company, and we should end our wretched lives together,
but I resolved rather to suffer any Torment than to consent to so great an evil
as the delivery of my Daughter to him, trusting that the Heavens would be so
good to her as to preserve her out of his hands, and rather choosing to have
perpetual imprisonment than that she should he given into the power of any
person: If I would have consented to this, I had long e^e this been delivered,
but thanks be returned to Heaven in that they have been so courteous, as to
send you to deliver me without such hard conditions: and thereupon he asked
them how his Daughter did, and his Empress, and all the rest of the Court^^
asking them how far he was off from his Court, he yet knowing thereof, for he
had continued in a Trance all the Way coming thither both by Land and by Sea,
and did not come to himself ^il he was placed within the Castle.

To which questions he was answered how that it was many days Journey from
Babylon, but if he was ready to go with them, they had brought a Ship of his
own to carry him into his own Country: At which he was glad, and therefore
they having looked round about the Castle, departed therefrom, and as they
were walking to the Water side, they perceived the two New Knights coming
toward them, who when they had ^each the great Thunder and Lightning which was
at the ending of the Enchantment, they supposing some such thing attem^^^ed
once more to land, which they did with great ease; for all those Mousters that
had formerly opposed them, were at the end of the Enchantment vanished away, at
which they much marvelled, and so coming on Land, went directly toward the
Castle, but when they saw the Souldan in company of the two Knights, they were
amazed, and falling on their knees they humbly kissed his hands, and then
Baltasano telling him who they were, he greatly rejoiced. Thus they returned
and went to the Seaside where they soon embarquing themselves, set sail and
departed on their Way to Babylon.

CHAP. XXI. How the Souldan of Babylon in company of the Knight of the Golden
Image, the Knight of the B^ar, the Knight of Hope, and the Knight of the
Flaming Sword, traveling toward Babylon, met with an Adventure, whereby they
understood of the danger of the Princess Florisbella, and how they arrived in
Babylon.
SO long sailed these great Personages on the Sea, that in the end they all
came to share, and landed in the Kingdom of Armenia, where providing themselves
of Necessaries to travel they set forwards for Babylon They traveled through
all the Kingdom of Armenia without (...) Adventure; and came into some part of
the Empier of Trebizo^d, when one day several Troops of Knights overtook them,
Don Bellianis being desirons of Novelty, put forward from his company, and
joining himself with, them ^esired to know whicher they were going: To which
question, the Knight (...) kingdom Don Bellianis, said, Sir Knight had though
you could not be ignorant of the Wars that out Emperot in ends to make against
Babylon.

Don Bellianis hearing of this, was wondrous desirous to know with truth of
this marries, and therefore be thus replied: Truly Sir ^night. I am (...)
stronger in his Country, being but ^^^olg come into these pa^^^, therefore I
pray you give your self the trouble to give me a particular account of this
matter. Know then Sir Knight, q^^^ the other, that you are now in the Country
of the Emperor of Trebizond, which is now governed by an Emperor called
Morello, who has not long ruled the same: for it is not yet above six months
since his Father dyed, and till his Father dyed be spent the greatest part of
his time in travel, in seeking out strange Adventures to get honor and Renown,
and under the Name of The Black Knight he brought to pass many a hazardons
Adventure: At the time of the decease of his Father, he was in the Court of the
Souldan of Babylon, and there under that title, though unknown, he exercised
many deeds of Knighthood and thereby got great fame, but hearing of the death
of his Father, he lest that Court and returned home, where he was received by
all his Subjects with much content and joy: but during his being at Babylon, he
beholding the matchless Beauty of the Princess Florisbella, Daughter to the
Souldan, he fell deeply in love with her, but durst not discover the same
because there has been much Wars between their two Fathers, but after he was
come home, and had been some time Crowned, he opened his mind to some of his
Nobility, they liked well thereof, and knowing that the said Princess is sole
Heir to the Crown, did well approve of the Match whereby these two Empires
might be joined, he therefore resolved in his mind to send Ambassadors to ask
the said Princess in Marriage of her Father, which was done accordingly, but
when they arrived at the Souldans Court, they found that the Souldan was
absent, having been lost some time before, and the Court was in great for row
for his absence; however the Ambrassadors delivered their Embassierd the
Emperess and her Council, who returned Answer, That they could not by any means
dispose of their Princess without the cons^nd of her Father. But they
impor^^^ed the business further, and the Princess her self being asked the
question, she made the same excuses at first, but the Ambassadors in the end
importuned her for her absolute Answer, which she g^^^ the^^ to their small
cont^n^, for she very boldly told them, that though her Father were returned,
yet should she always c^^^me in this opinion, that s^e would never accept their
Master for her Husband: with which Answer they at last returned, being very
sorry that their Embassy turned to no better effect.

Arriving at Trebizond, and returning this Answer to their Master, he was at
first much troubled, but in the end understanding of the absence of the
Souldan, he resolved to make use of the present opportunity to be revenged, as
well for the old wrongs his Empire had sustained by the Souldan, as for the new
affront so lately put upon him, and thereupon he immediately commanded that a
great Army should be^levied, and sent Commissioners into all parts of his
Empire to raise all the Force he could suddenly, intending forthwith to travel
toward Babylon, and spoil the Dominions of the Souldan. And this, Sir Knight,
is the occasion of these Troops so sudden marching, for we are going to the
General Kendevouz at Trebizond.

The Knight having given this Declaration to Don Bellianis, left him and went
forwards, and he stayed behind in a, very deep melancholy, considering the
Estate of his fair Princess: but however he was somewhat joyful that he had
this occasion of serving her, hoping to do such acts for the defense of the
Empire, that the Souldan would be thereby induced to bestow his daughter upon
him, In this consideration he was, when the Souldan and the rest of the company
overtaking him, asked him what was the occasion of his leaving them, and what
was his large Discourse with the Knight? To which he soon replied, and
recounting the whole matter to the Souldan, gave him the greatest amazement in
the World.

In much trouble did they ride the rest of the Journey, being all disturbed at
the late news; but the Souldan was very much pleased in that he was freed
himself from his imprisonment, that he might in person be able to resist his
enemies, and help his country, resolving that he would loose his Empire, rather
then consent to the Marriage of his Daughter without her own assent. This gave
Don Bellianis some satisfaction, in that he knew if the Princess had the
liberty to dispose of herself, that he should be ascertained to have her.

And therefore he desired the Souldan to trouble his mind as little as he
could, for, said he, as I have been instrumental in re^toring you your liberty,
so I shall not fail to do all that ^lies in my power to rid you of your
enemies, and I have so good friends in the World, that if occasion serves I
shall be able to raise such a power as shall easily overthrow the desigus of
your enemies to their confusion, and your own Honor. In these discourses spent
they the most of the time that they traveled, and the Souldan was forced to
disguize himself, till he came into his own Country, lest he being known by
any of his enemies, should be taken and kept Prisoner: but it was not long ere
he arrived in his own dominions, and then he traveled the more boldly but he
as yet saw no preparations for War, at which he much wondered: but the Emperor
of Trebizond had been so sudden, that News of his Expedition was hardly yet
arrived to the Court: When they came within one days journey of the Court, they
saw some preparations for the War, and the Souldan met with many of his
Knights, who knowing him were exceeding glad for his deliverance, and that at
such a time when as there was most need for him. Thus the nearer he approached
the court, the more company he gathered, so that by that time he came to
Babylon, he had above forty thousand Knights in his company, which gave him
much content and joy: but that was not half so pleasant to him, as the sight of
his own City, where he was no sooner entered but the Inhabitants had notice
thereof, some running to inform the Empress hereof, and others running to meet
him, still enquiring which was the Knight that delivered him, and having known
him, great was the praises they gave them. In this manner they Rode thorough
the City, and arriving at the Court, they was met by the Empress, her Daughter
the Princess Florisbella, the Princess, Mattaros^, and many other Gentry, and
great Personages, and so great was the content of the people, at the return of
the Souldan and his company that they went exceedingly for joy. The Souldan
alighting from his horse, went first and embraced the Empress most lovingly,
and then the Princess his Daughter, who received him on her knees, but he
raising her up kindly saluted her. Don Bellianis was now on his knees before
the Empress, humbly desiring to kiss her hand. but she knowing how much she was
engaged to him would not permit that, but she raising him from the ground most
lovingly sainted him, giving him many thanks for the great pains he had taken
for he calling him the Restorer of Babylon. and bestowed many thanks upon him,
when he had received his welcome from the Empress, he went to the Princess her
Daughter, and falling on his knees, humbly kissed her hands, but she soon
raised him from the ground reitterating all the thanks that her Mother had
already given him To which discourse he replied, and said: That since she had
been pleased to admit him to the honor of being her Sarvant; he questioned not
but he should be able to overcome any Enterprise how difficult soever, and
since thera was an decasion given him of expressing hin duteous service to her,
he was resolved to do such acts as might render him worthy of the esteem she
had of him, or in the prosecut of them, lose his life as testemony of the duty
he owed her

Thus he discoursed with her, and then he went to the Princess Mattarosa to
receive those Welcomes that she had prepared for him. which were in affect the
same he had received before of the Empress and her Daughter: and thus taking
her by the hand the Souldan doing the same to the Empress, and the Numidian
Prince to the Princess Florisbella, they walked into the great Hall of the
Palace, where being come the Ladies hesped to disarm them, which when they had
done and had clothed themselves in rich Mantles, they sat them down to repose
themselves: many of the Nobility came into the Presence to congratulate the
return of their Sovereign, and to kiss his hands and thank the Knight of the
Golden Image for the great good he had done them, in restoring their Prince to
them in such time when they most stood in need of his presence.

But Don Bellianis returning them thanks, told them that without the assistance
of the Prince of Numidia he had not been able to have performed that
Enterprise, but however what power he had, he should willingly at all times
employ in defense of the Souldan and his Country, they were glad to hear these
expressions pressions from him, doubting that now he had performed this
adventure, he would depart; but understanding that he was resolved to stay and
assist them in the Wars, they humbly supplicated the Souldan that he would be
pleased to order Don Bellianis to be General of such Forces as should be raised
to go against Trebizond: To which the Souldan soon consented, but he would not
accept of so great a charge except the Prince of Numidia might be joined in
Commission with him: To which they at last consented, and it was ordered as
soon as a sufficient Force should be ready, he should advance toward the
Enemies countries, and the Numidian Prince should stay at the Court to guard
the City, and obey such further orders as should be necessary. In these
consultations they continued most of that evening, till it was time for every
one to go to rest, at which time he commanded his Dwarf to give him notice of
the departure of the Princesses to their Lodging, because he was very desirous
to have some conference with them which the Dwarf did so effectually, that he
brought Word that the Princesses were both together in the Lodging of the
Princess Florisbella, wherefore he sent him to the Princess Mattarosa, to
know vvhither he should give them a trouble of a visit in that place, she
acquainting the Princess her Cousin therevvith, they so ordered it, that she
dismissed all her Damsels but one who was acquainted with her Love, and so
telling the Dwarf that his Master, might come when he pleased, the Dwarf
returned with this answer to his Master, who being glad thereof departed out of
his own Lodging ro^^^o into that of the Princess, which he accordingly did,
as shall be declared to you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XII. How Don Bellianis went to the Chamber of the Princess Florisbella,
and of the discourse they had there; and how the next day he departed toward
Trebizond with fifty thousand men.
THe Dwarf had no sooner delivered his Message, but Don Bellianis repaired to
the Chamber of the Princess Florisbella, whither when he was come, he kindly
saluted her and the Princess Mattarosa her Cousin; which having done, they all
seated themselves, and the Princess his Mistress thus began to him:

Six Knight, since I have admitted you to be mine, it is necessary that you
give me ordinary satisfaction of telling me the order of your proceedings in
this Adventure; and since I have not yet heard the particulars thereof, I pray
let me have the knowledge of them from your own mouth.

Madam, replied Don Bellianis, the actions that I have done in this occasion
are so inconsiderable, that it is not fit that your ears should be troubled
with matters of so small moment; but since it is your desire to give your self
so much trouble, I shall give you a small relation of them.

Then did he begin to tell her all the passages of that Adventure, beginning
from the time that they took shipping, the happy meeting with the Sage Bellonas
Damsel, the rescuing her from the Giants, his desperate attempt in throwing
himself into the Sea to get to shore, his killing of those Monsters, his
descending the Cave, fighting with the Serpents and Dragons, and all those
other Actions which he and the Numidian Prince performed for the Releasing of
the Souldan: At which recital she was so sensibly afficted when he related any
thing wherein he was in any peril, that the crystaline tears ran from her fair
Epes down her Cheeks in great abundance, which made him leave off his
discourse, and say to her:

Madam, the trouble that I thought I should put you to in recounting these
Adventures, made me desire to be excused in discoursing them to you; but if I
had thought they would have given you so sensible a displeasure, I should for
once have so far disobeyed your Commands, as not to have given you an account
of these past Actions.

She hearing that he had done, wiping her fair face, said: Sir Knight, the many
difficulties that you have run thorough for my sake, could not choose but make
me accompany you in rears, but praised be the Gods who have delivered you from
these dangers, and I hope these wars once ended, there will be no further
occasion for you to endanger your person. Ah Madam, said he, if my discourse
has given you any sense of sorrow, assure your self I was much more afflicted
when I had first the relation of your misfortunes about the Emperor of
Trebizond, and although I did not question your Loyalty, yet I knew not what
you might be compelled unto by a fearful Mother, and a Nobility without a Head:
but I am to render you infinite thanks for your so resolute answer to his
Ambassadors, not questioning but some considerations of me the meanest of your
servants, occasioned you to return that answer.

Sir, said she, I never had any inclination for that Prince, for his person
does not please me, and besides that, there is such an antipathy in my nature
to any one of the Family of Trebizond, though never so well accomplished, that
I should have refused him; but were there presented to me the most accomplished
person for virtues and magnanimity, and were he likewise sole Potentate of the
whole Earth, set in competition to you, Sir, and were you but a bare
Knight Errant, my choice should quickly testify that the love I have promised
to you, is not counterfeir, but absolutely real. He hearing her in these
terms, fell down on his knees, and strictly embracing hers, exped out, Ah
Madam, how do you undo your creature with heaping so much blessings upon him,
which in all his life, although spent in your service, can never merit? The
Princess Mattarosa seeing them in these terms commanded him to arise, and leave
off these impertinent precestations; for, faith she, I am consident you are
both so well satisfied of each others affections, that these words are
impertinent, and must needs give you both some sensible trouble. They very well
knowing that she spoke a great deal of reason, fell from this discourse to some
other, as what order he intended to take in his Expedition: To which he
replied, That he intended the next day to be upon the march with those Forces
that were already raised, and go meet the Enemy, if possible, in his own
Quarters, and so hinder him from hurting the Country: To which the Princess
was somewhat unwilling to give him leave to depart so soon, but he telling her
that the sooner he went, it was most probable he should return the sooner, and
that during his absence, he would send his trusty Dwarf with Letters to the
Princess Mattarosa to be delivered to her, and under that pretense Answers
might be sent without any suspicion: These things being concluded of, and he
taking his hearty Fare well both of her and her Cousin, after many amorous
Salutes, he departed to his own Lodging, and so he went to take his ordinary
repose.

The next day he was up early in the morning, and the two Knights Of Hope, and
The Flaming Sword, desired that they might be admitted to wait on him in this
Expedition: to which request, he being sufficiently satisfied of their Valor,
assented, and gave them does sufficient Commands tinder him, which when he had
done, he sent for the Prince of Numidia, and they after some Conference
together, resolved immediately to master all the Forces that was then in the
City; which they having done, found that there was eighty thousand men. And Don
Bellianis resolving to be gone, divided the Forces into two parts, and took
under his Command fifty thousand men, knowing that the Forces of his Companion
would increase daily; and therefore commanding them all to be in readiness that
Afternoon, he repaired to the Souldan, and desired his leave to depart, telling
him that old Maxim in War,

That the least delay,
Spreads Palms, and scatters Roses in Rebellions way.
The Souldan after he had heard his reasons, gave consent, giving him a large
Commission to raise Forces all the way he should go, and promising to send him
more Aid with all the expedition that might he.

Thus this brave Martialist taking his leave of the Souldan and Ladies,
departed from that great City, and that evening marching ten miles to a little
Town, where for that might he took up his Quarters.

CHAP. XXIII. How Don Bellianis marching toward Trebizond, and increasing his
Army, arrived at last near to his Enemies Camp.
EArly the next morning did Don Bellianis arise, and caused the Drums,
Trumpets, and all other Warlike Instruments to sound a March; which Command
being accordingly obeyed, they advanced forwards, but he was much hindered in
his Marches, by reason of the great quantity of Forces that still came in to
him, so that before he had marched one hundred and fifty miles, his Army was
one hundred thousand men complete, at which he was very joyful; and therefore
he made all the expedition possible to meet the Enemy before be should be come
cut of his own Kingdom. But the Emperor of Trebizond having carried on his
business with great privary, had gotten his Forces together, and mustring two
hundred thousand men, besides many fierce and strong Giants, he was advanced
with his Army very far, and was come into part of the Dominions of the Souldan
of Babylon, before he heard the News of the Souldans being returned, which did
somewhat trouble him, but however he resolved to go on, and not leave his
Enterprise unattempted.

Wherefore hearing of the approaches of his Enemies Forces, he sent to see what
number they were, and who had the commanding of them. The Messenger returning
to him, told him that the Souldans Forces consisted of one hundred thousand
men, and that they were conduced by a famous Knight, called The Knight of the
Golden Image.

Hearing this news, he was somewhat discontented thereat, for he had been in
the Wars between the Souldan of Persia and the Duke Alfiron, and there he had
both heard and seen the valiant Aas of the Knight of the Golden Image: but
however he resolved to persist in his Enterpri^e, and like a good and hardy
Knight to go forward, and endeavor to give his Enemy battle before he should
increase his Forces, not questioning but through the magnanimity of his own
Valor, and that of his Knights and Giants under his Command, he should be able
to encounter his Enemy with good advantage, and considering he had double his
number, he might vanquish and overcome his Forces before Aid came to him:
wherefore he hearing that he was within a days march of his Enemy, caused his
Army the next morning to march forwards, intending that if his Enemy continued
his march to join Battle with him. Don Bellianis likewise hearing that his
Enemy came forward, advanced apace, being resolved as well as he to give him
Battle that day, if it were possible: but when they approached near to one
another, their men were so wearied with that days travel, that before they
could put them in any good order, and bring up the Rear of their Armies, the
evening came on, so that they were both forced to alter their resolutions; and
therefore they both encamped themselves in sight of one another, and all that
night both Armies made great Fires, so that it was an artificial day, now and
then running into one another Camp in small parties, and doing some barm: but
the morning approaching they let the Fires go out, and Don Bellianis caused
them all to prepare themselves for the Battle, and so they did, encouraging one
another in the best sort that might be, resolving to lose all their lives, ere
they would permit themselves to be overcome by their enemies. Don Bellianis
knowing what was necessary to be done by a good General, having been in many
other Battles, ordered his Army and divided his Squadrons, as shall be showed
you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXIII. How Don Bellianis ordered his Forces, and of the cruel bloody
Battle between the Emperor of Trebizond and his Army, and the Forces under the
command of Don Bellianis.
THe morning being come wherein this great Battle was to be fought, Don
Bellianis arose early, and dividing his Army into three Squadrons, took forty
thousand men under his own Command, twenty thousand men he ordered to be
commanded by the Knight of Hope, and twenty thousand men under the command of
the Knight of the Flaming Sword, and twenty thousand men more he ordered to be
under the command of the Prince of Mesapotamia, and not to stir to the Battle,
until there should be an absolute necessity, or that he should be commanded by
himself.

Thus having ordered his Eastalions, he commanded the Heads of every Troop to
come to the Front of the Army, where he encouraged them by this following
discourse: Gentlemen, and fellow Soldiers, the cause of this War I shall not
need to inform you of, you being already satisfied in that particular, the
Courages of your Enemies you likewise are acquainted with, having by often
experience found that never any of your Nation was overcome by them, but that
you still matched away Conquerors, giving Laws to them rather than obeying any
of their Commands.

Their presumption that your King was absent, was the chief occasion of this
boldness in them, or else they would not have been so hardy as to enter your
Land, and now being awamed after all this provision to turn back again without
aviding the harard of a Battle, then with much unwillingness expect you; their
intentions was to force your Princess, command your Estates, dispose of your
Persons, and to make all the Inhabitants of this Kingdom their Vassals, hoping
to have found you in disorder, and without a Head, but thanks be to Heaven you
have not only a Head to rule over you, in that your gracious Sovereign is
restored, but also a General who will harard his person to the utmost with you,
and therefore I question not but you will have hearts to follow my Example; and
if you see any thing of courage in me, to imitate me therein and follow my
Example; and assure your selves that I resolve to conquer or die: thus hoping
you have all the same courage and resolution, let us bravely fall on our
Enemies.

This Speech being ended, caused a great shout throughout the whole Army, and
presently every one repairing to his own Command, they marched on to assault
their Enemies, who all this while were not idle; but the Emperor not forgetting
what was necessary to be done, did likewise order his Battle, and divided them
into four parts, one of fifty thousand men he commanded himself, the prince of
Albania commanded the like number, and two mighty Giants of his kindred,
commanded the other two Squadrons.

Thus having divided his Forces, and ordered his Battle, he was likewise about
to make an Dration to his Soldiers, but the noise which his Enemies made in
their Approaches diverted him, and therefore causing his Trumpets and Drums,
and all manner of Military Instruments to soun^, he being armed at all points
in the Front of the Army, went forwards to receive the Babylonians. Don
Bellianis being likewise in the Front of his Army, seeing his Enemy approach,
and believing it to be the Emperor, because he had on his accustomed black
Armor, in which he had gotten great Renown, anger and jealousy so incensed
him, that taking a strong Lance and couching the same, he ran full against him;
and the other being also provided did the same in such brave manner, that their
Lances shivered into pieces, and their horses meeting, sad like to have
overthrown one another: but these two brave Warriors soon recovering
themselves, and drawing their Swords, assaulted one another with incredible
fury: Long did their Combat endure together, so that both Armies joined, and
as well the Soldiers as the Commanders performed wonders, making an incredible
slaughter: At length one of the Giants, Cousin to the Emperor, advanting with
his Troop, arrived at the place where the two Generals were in Combat, and
resolving to dispatch Don Bellianis, towardly came behind him, and gave him so
weighty a blow on the Helmet, that he fell backwards on his horse, and he going
to redouble the same, had certainly killed him at the second blow, had not the
horse of Don Bellianis run away with his Master, who soon coming again to
himself, and being extraordinarily enraged, perceived that it was the Giant
that had used him so hardly; for he still pursued him to take away his life;
which he seeing, being more enraged than any Numidian Lioness hereaved of her
whelps, the fire sparkling from his eyes, let fall his Target, and taking his
Sword in both hands, laid so puissant a blow on the Giant, that he did cleave
him down from the head to the middle. The Black Knight seeing this, cried out,
Oh ye Gods! with how much force and valor have you endued one single Knight?

Don Bellianis having done this execution, spurred on his beast, and more
furiously than a baired Bull entered the Army of his Enemy, where he did kill
and slay all that came within the reach, of his Sword. The Black Knight did the
like, till at length he was encountered with by the Knight of Hope, who in
despite of his resolution to go forwards, made him stay and bravely received
him: but the Black Knight being of admirable force and derterity so handled
him, that in short time he left him without sense or motion, and so he departed
and went forwards, killing and slaying all that had the valor to oppose him.
Thus continued he a long time, till one came to him, and told him that his
presence would be very necessary in his own Army, for that the Knight of the
Golden Image, and those who followed him, had put one of the Squadrons of his
Army to the rout, which he hearing presently departed; and coming to the place
where Don Bellianis was, he saw him perform things incredible, for he was in
pursuit of many Knights, none of them having so much resolution as to turn
their faces toward him, for if they did, they certainly met with their deaths.

The Emperor seeing this, was forced for the safety of his own men, to engage
himself once more in Combat with him, which Don Bellianis was not at all
discontented at, but renewing his forces, be likewise renewed the Fight with
him. These two valiant Champions continued long in fight together, and gave to
each other such violent blows, that those Forces that were there stood still
and forbore fighting, to behold them: But Don Bellianis, whose match was not to
be found throughout the whole Universe, being angered that the Fight continued
so long, gave the Emperor so mighty a blow on the arm, that he wounded him so
mightily, that his sword fell out of his hand; which Don Bellianis seeing, and
intending to redouble his blow, was prevented: for many valiant Knights who had
till then stood still, seeing their Prince in so great danger, went and
succored him, and in despite of Don Bellianis carried him away to his Tent,
where when his wo^^ds were dressed, he would have entered the Fight again, but
his Surgeons would not in any wise permit it.

Thus the absence of the Emperor caused Don Bellianis and his party to prevail:
but although he behaved himself with great valor, and killed many Knights and
Giants, yet their great numbers still freshly coming on, in the end tired him,
so that when the night approached (he having continued the Battle all that day)
he withdrew his men, and contented himself with what he had done, for the next
morning having taken an account of the numbers that he had lost, he found that
he wanted but fifteen thousand men, when on the enemies part were slain at
least fifty thousand men.

That day the Knights of Hope, and of the Flaming Sword, did perform bravely,
and not having ever been in any Battle before, they by the example of their
General performed excellently both in commanding and executing, and the Prince
of Mesopotamia though a most valiant Knight, and much against his will, this
day performed nothing, for he remained where his General had commanded him, and
there was no occasion to use that force that was under his command till it was
night, and then they retreated in good order to the place where he was placed,
and there taking up their quarters expected the aproach of the next mornings
sun to renew their fight. News was soon carried every where of the good fortune
of the Knight of the Golden Image, and the forces under his command, and how
that in single Combat he had so wounded the Emperor of Trezibond in the arm,
that he was forced to leave the fight, and of those other advantages that he
had gotten, which caused many more of the Souldan of Babylons Subjects to come
in unto him, and the next day there arrived a fresh supply of fifty thousand
men from the Prince of Numidia; with promise and assurance that he himself
would within few days be with him in the head of one hundred thousand men, and
then they did not question but they should be able to expel their enemies out
of the Country.

But Don Bellianis believing that he had Forces enough already to perform that
without any new Additions, resolved to try the fortune of another day with his
whole Army, resolving to die or drive his enemies out of the field. In this
resolution he continued, and therefore gave order that all should be in
readiness to fall upon their enemies, whenever he should command them.

On the other side the Emperor of Trebizond was much discontented at the wound
he had received, but resolved that should not hinder him from fighting in his
own person in the next Battle which he intended should be within two days, for
by that time he expected a recruit of fifty thousand men which were already
raised, and only staid behind to expect his Command for them to advance: which
Forces he sent for with this resolution, that as soon as they were come to him
he would again hazard another Field-battel, but he was hindered of ^is purpose,
for Don Bellianis according to his resolution he had already taken, did engage
him and all his Forces in another Field battle, before the arrival of his other
Forces, as shall be she wed you at large in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXV. How Don Bellianis fought another Battle with the Emperor of
Trebizond, and how he forced him to leave the Field; and how he followed him
into his own Country.
TWo hours before day the next morning did Don Bellianis, without any noise of
Trumpets, or other warlike Instruments, leave his own Camp, and with his whole
Forces marched to assault his Enemies, who having kept a strict Watch took the
Alarm, but before they could put themselves in a readiness, Don Bellianis and
his Forces had sacrificed the lives of above twenty thousand men.

The Emperor of Trebizond being enraged at this supprisal, soon called for his
Armor, and having armed himself therewith and being mounted on a lusty Courser,
soon revenged himself of some of his Enemies, for before he brake his Lance he
dismounted above twenty Knights, and being accompanied with twenty fierce
Giants (who were appointed for his Guard by reason of the last days misfortune)
they with their broad and sharp cutting Cymetars and Battle ares made a woeful
destruction, to what place soever they came present death followed to those
that resisted them: at length they met with the Prince of Mesaporamia, who
having bin idle all the last battle, was resolved to make amends in this days
combat, and went with a Guard of a hundred Knights, killing and forcing their
ways throw their enemies Camp: him and his Knights did the Emperor and his
Giants assail, and between them happened a bloody Conflict; for the Giants being
of the best in the whole Army, had presently slain above twenty of his Knights,
which so enraged the Mesapotamian, that maugre all their resistance, he sent
two of their black souls immediately to accompany his Knights, and fiercely
breaking through the midst of them, he ran against the Emperor with great
advantage, for be well night dismounted him from his horse: for he not being
provided for the encounter, was forced to catch hold of his horse neck to save
himself from falling. At which assault he recovering himself, and being
enraged, with his sword gave his adversary so mighty a blow on the Helmet, that
he bent his head to the horses neck, and would have soon dispatched him of his
life, but that the Knight of Hope came timely enough to prevent him, and so
received the blow, and returned it so fiercely on the Emperor, that he was
wounded on the Thigh: and by this time the Prince of Mesapotamia had recoveerd
his senses and finding the danger he was delivered from, was first thankful to
the heavens, and then revenged himself on one of the Giants, who was next him,
whose arm he cut off, and wounded him so in the side, that his life was
sacrificed to his revenge.

Thus the Battle was in this part of the field, but the Knight of the Golden
Image, and the Knight of the Flaming Sword keeping company with one another,
made very great havoc of their enemies, and being followed by a great party of
valiant Knights, gave the enemy so terrible an On set, that after two hours
contention they fled and left the field, having first left it thickly strewed
with the dead bodies of the Emperors Forces. Don Bellianis pursued him so long,
that in the end they came to a great River, and seeing that death was both
before and behind them, they made a stand and bravely resisted him and all his
Forces, where they fought so desperately, that the streams of the River which
were wont to be of a crystal hue, were now by means of the great slaughter was
there made, become of a s^arlet die.

All this while the Emperor and his Giants, with great part of his Forces, were
engaged, as I told you, with the Prince of Mesapotamia and the Knight of Hope,
where though they on both sides performed miracles, yet in the end in despite
of all the resistance he could make, after the death of many of his Giants, and
a very great slaughter of his men, was likewise forced to retreat, which he did
with a great deal of sobriety, hoping that the other part of his Army was in
better case than that which he commanded. But he was not long without the
knowledge of what had happened to them: and hearing that they were engaged at the
River side, he then commanded some of the most valiant of the Giants to make
good the Retreat with the best advantage, and the least loss they could, while
he himself went in all haste to his Forces, hoping by his presence to put new
courage into their breasts. When he came to them, he found that they had made a
mighty resistance, and that the Fight was very bloody; wherefore that he might
exercise the part of a discreet General, and bring them off with the least
loss, he knowing that there was a Bridge not far off, sent to possess it: which
when he had done, he commanded his Army to retire thither as fast as they
could, he himself, with the most valiant Knights of his whole Army making good
the Rear as well as they could; but notwithstanding all the diligence and valor
that they could use, Don Bellianis and the Knights with him plied their
business so well, that ere they got over the River many of them lost their
lives: At length they got to the other side of the River, and in despite of
Don Bellianis and all his Forces, they cut down the Bridge, so that there was
no way for him and his forces to follow them

This being done, he left a strong Guard at the Rivers side, and then returned
to the place where the Emperor had encamped, where they found great Treafure,
for so great was their haste in their retreat, that they had not timeto take
any thing with them. All the Booty of the Emperors Camp he gave to the
Soldiers, which gave them a great satisfaction, and caused them ever to have a
great esteem of him.

This being done, he dispatched Messengers to inform the Souldan of what he had
done, not forgetting to write to his Dear Princess, the remembrance of whom
made him the more desirous to put an end to these wars, that he might solace
his spirits in her company. The Emperor of Trebizond being thus forced to leave
the field, and seeing that Fortune was a little contrary to him, yet being of
an extraordinary courage, resolved still to persevere in his enterprise, and
not to leave off basely, hoping in the end to attain his desires, and in order
to the strengthening and recruiting his forces, he sent tommands to those Forces
that were be hind, to await his coming to a City called Pharez, which was the
first City in his Empire; which being accordingly done, one evening leaving
some horsemen at the Rivers side, he raised his Camp and departed to Pharez,
and the next day those that he had left behind at the water followed him: He
thus being arrived at the City, fortified it both within and without, and sent
throughout his Empire to all places for help, resolving to make that place the
seat of war, for else he knew that the Souldans Forces would follow him further.

The next day after their departure, Don Bellianis was informed thereof by
those be had left at the water side, wherefore he marched down thither, but do
what he could it was two days before he could mend the Bridge, which the
Emperor of Trebizond had caused to be broken; which when he had done, he passed
over with his whole Army, resolving to pursue his enemy, which he did
accordingly: and thus in good order he marched till he arri^ed near the City of
Pharez, where he saw that the Enemy had made strong entrenchments without the
Town, so that all he did at present was to encamp himself near them; which when
he had done, he prepared to give them an assault, which he did, as shall be
showed you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXVI. How the Emperor of Trebizond being besieged in the City of Pharez,
sent Ambassadors to Albania, Georgia, Muscovia, and several other Kings his
Allies, to help him in his Wars with the Souldan of Babylon; and how Don
Bellianis assaulted his Forces that were encamped without the City.
DOn Bellianis being very desirous to do all that might be possible for the
overcoming of his enemy, before any other help came to him, that he might
acquire the more honor thereby, resolved to set upon his enemies Camp, that was
without the City, and (if possible) force them to retire into the City, that he
might lay a close Siege thereto, and so hinder them from going abroad for
provisions. In order to which resolution, after his men had rested themselves,
he commanded them to provide to assault their enemies.

On the other side the Emperor resolving to abide him there, fook care for
fresh supplies, for he not only sent through all his own Dominions for more
help, but likewise sent Ambassadors to those Kings that were either his Friends
or of his Alliance, such as were the Kings of Albania, Georgia, and the Emperor
of Musoovia, desiring them not to fail him in this occasion, and the
Ambassadors who went, made such expedition, and had such good success in their
Embassies, that the Emperor had great assistance, as you shall hear herafter.
In the mean time, knowing that he had not only a valiant, but a politic enemy
to deal with, he kept strict Guards hoth within and without the City, lest he
should be surprised.

Don Bellianis notwithstanding all the diligence he took, did surprise him; for
having drawn out a Squadron of sifty thousand Knights, the most accomplished in
the whole army, caused them to put a piece of white silk, or cloth in their
Helmets; that then might know one another though in the dark: and in the middle
of the night, when his enemies expected no such matter, he came to the Camp,
and killing the Sentinels, fell in among the Emperors Forces, and slew many of
them before they could arm themselves, and such was their confusion in the
dark, that they without knowltdge slew one another, not knowing their enemies
from their friends by reason of the darkness of the night, and their not being
acquainted with his stratagem. In this manner he run through the Camy, and
being followed by the best of his Army, came to the walls of the City, desiring
them to open, persuading the Guards that they were of their own party, telling
them that they must needs speak with the Emperor: but the Guards who had
commands to the contrary, went immediately to the Emperor and told him thereof,
who arising from his bed, came to the wall, and then he very well understood
that the Army was alarmed; wherefore he refused to open the Gates, not knowing
whether they were of his own Army or enemies.

Don Bellianis perceiving this, and that it would be to little purpose to
continue there, departed, and so returned thorough the enemies Camp, killing
and slaying all that were in his way, and so being gone throught the Camy and
passed all the Guards, he caused the retreat to be sounded; which his Soldiers
hearing, soon understood the meaning thereof, and so left the Camp and came to
him; who when they were come, fairly retreated to their own Quarters; But Don
Bellianis who had an intent to surprise the City, and failing therein, as you
have heard, was some what vexed: but however he considered that he had done
them a sufficient mischief, for he had killed above twenty thousand of his
enemies, and came off with the loss of not above five hundred men.

This action gave the Emperor a sensible displeasure, and did resolve if
possible to revenge it, but he could not at present put his resolves into
execution, wherefore he gave strict command to keep double Guards; and more
strict Watches, hoping in short time to have such aid that he might be able not
only to revenge that loss, but to beat his Forces out of the field: But before
any Forces came to his assistance, Baltasano Prince of Numidia arrived at the
Camp of Don Bellianis with one hundred thousand men, and with new Orders from
the Souldan, that if the Emperor would pay the cost of the War, and disband his
Forces, that then he should have peace, otherwise that they should prosecute
the War against him to the utmost; such was the desire and inclination that the
Souldan had for peace

These Orders much troubled Don Bellianis, being bery discontented that the War
must end, and that he could not sacrifice the life of his Rival, fearing him so
long as he should live, lest he should so propound the having of the Princess
Florisbella, as the Souldan should accept of it, and indeed when the
propositions were sent to the Emperor, he was willing to accept of them
provided he might have the Princess for his wife, otherwise he would stand to
the utmost hazard of the war, not questioning but by the help of his Allies and
Friends, but that he should not only be able to beat his enemies out of his
Country, but to assault them in theirs, and give them such trouble that the
Souldan would be willing to propound his Daughter for a composition of the War.

This answer being returned to the two Generals, Don Bellianis and Baltasano,
displeased them bath, but the anger that Don Bellianis was in at this
proposition was so great, that I am not able to express it; for rising from the
place where he sat, he delivered this answer to the Messenger:

Go tell thy Master, that so long as the Souldan of Babylon has Subjects in his
whole Empire, that he shall never compel him to such baseness as the
prostituting his most Royal Daughter to one so base and unworthy: and were all
the Treasure of the Souldan exhausted, all his Subjects slain, and none left in
his whole Empire to defend him, yet I would command such an Army from other
parts in defense of the Royal Princess Florisbella, as should not only be able
to expel thy Master from the Souldans Dominions, but also to destroy him, and
all his in the very heart of his own Kingdom. And tell thy Master, that since
he has neglected the gracious and favorable Propositions of the Souldan, that
he now expect no more, but prepare himself for all the misfortunes that a cruel
and bloody War can bring him: And tell him, that I the Knight of the Golden
Image, do resolve when next I meet him, to bereave him of his life or lose my
own in the attempt, and hereupon I bid him mortal battle.

This was the Answer of Don Bellianis, and it was spoken with so much
fierceness, that the very fice issued out of his eyes for anger, and he could
hardly utter his words for the inward vexation that he took at the Demands of
the Emper or. Thus the Messenger being returned, Don Bellianis and Baltasano
resolved both to assault him on the next day, and use their utmost endeavors to
gain the City, and thereupon they provided all things ready for an Assault.

CHAP. XXVII. How Don Brianel Prince of Macedon was married to Aurora Queen of
Antioch, and of the Tilts and Tournaments that was held at the Wedding, and of
an Adventure that happened there.
WE will now for a while leave the two Princes of Greece and Numidia, and all
their Companions and Armies in their field, encamped before the City of Pharez,
as you have heard in the foregoing Chapter, and turn back to Antioch where we
left the Princes Dou Brianel of Macedon, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, Don Contumeliano of Phenicia, and Fliorispiano of
Swevia, who attended there to assist at the Solemnization of the Wedding.

There was so great joy for the return of the Queen, that most of the Nobility
of the Country resorted to Antioch to see her, and to tender her their dutiful
Allegiance, which she graciously accepted; and they still stayed to continue
the Triumph that should be at the Wedding. The day being come, and all things
provided, the Queen and Don Brianel were married in great pomp, and she that
day was most richly attired, so that notwithstanding all her sorrow in her
travels, she appeared to be one of the most handsome Princesses in the world:
Dinner being ended, every one resorted to the Tilt-Yard, which was near the
Palace, where a Scaffold was erected, and on that was placed two Chairs of
State for the King and Queen to sit and behold the Tournaments and Feats of
Chivalry that was to be performed.

Don Clarineo, Don Lucidamore, Don Contumeliano, and Fliorispiano, and a young
Knight called Trion, or the Knight of the Wolf, who was Son to Damartino the
late Governor, were the Challengers, who undertook to Ioust, and keep the Field
against all comers for six days, and accordingly they being armed at all
points, entered the Lists, and commanded the Trumpets to sound, and the Herald
to proclaim, that if there were any adventurous Knights that would in honor of
the King and Queen break a Lance, they were there ready to receive him; which
was no sooner done, but there came a Knight armed in white Armor, who taking a
Lance entered the Lists, and expected the sound of the Trumpet that he might
begin his Course: the Knight of the Wolf did the like, and they bravely meeting
brake their Lances in the encounter, and so passed on; at the next encounter
the Knight of the Wolf had so good fortune, as to overthrow the other Knight
out of the Saddle, and passed on being unshaken, and expected another
Assaylant, when presently another Knight armed in Azure Armor entered the List,
and doing his obeisance to the King and Queen, expected the encounter, which
was so fierce that he lost both his stirrops, and the horse of the Knight of
the Wolf was on his buttocks, but he soon made him rise and so went bravely on,
when taking another Lance, and resolving to be revenged of his late disgrace,
he ran so fiercely against the Knight in the Azure Armor, that he sent him from
his horse to the ground with his Saddle between his legs.

After this, another Knight entered the List armed in a green Armor, and d^ his
Shield was painted a Knight leaning on the ground under a tuft of Trees, and he
went by the name of The solitary Knight: this Knight after his due reverence to
the King and Queen, pranced about the field with great grates at last he
arrived at the end of the Lists, and taking a Lance from one of his Pages, at
the sound of the Trumpets began his Caress, and peoform'd so well that he made
the Knight of the Wolf lost both his stirrops, he being very little shaken with
the encounter: At the second course the Knight of the Wolf in revenge of the
former blow, ran so fiercely that he threw the Solitary Knight horse and man
both to the earth: at which there was a great shout.

And thus did the Knight of the Wolf throw many Knights from their horses, so
that he that day dismounted sixteen, and the night coming on they left off that
sport, and retiring into the Court, they disarming themselves, fell to dancing:
In which exercise they were as perfect as the other, so that they are as fit
for Venus as Mars. Much of the evening they spent in these kind of exercises,
but at length they left off, and conducted the King and Queen to Bed, where the
fair Princess gave to Don Brianel as full and free possession of her Body, as
he had formerly given her of her Kingdom, and there he received a full
satisfaction for all the travels he had sustained in her service.

Much was the content they both received, and I suppose there was but few
Knights in the Court but did envy their happiness, and would, have been glad to
have had the company of so sweet a Bed fellow as he enjoyed; in which enjoyment
we will leave him and the rest to their several thoughts till the morning,
which being come they all arose, and the Queen signified by her blushes, that
she had parted from that Jewel which till then she had preserved.

They being all drossed, mon was come when they sat down to Dinner, which
being done they all went to the Tilt pard to prosecute that sport they had
begun, where every one being seated in the same order they were the day before,
the five Champions rid about the field expecting the arival of some adventurous
Knight: they had not stayed long ree they had their desire for there entered a
Knight into the field armed in black Armor, causing his Horse bravely to prance
about the Field, performed his Duty to the King and Queen, and then taking a
Lance expected the sound of the Trumpet, which being heard he put forwards, but
he was encountered with such force by the Knight of the Wolf, that he was thrown
from his horse, and forced to measure his length on the earth; which having
done he retired and then there entered into the Lists a Knight armed with a
white Armor, as a new Knight, and on his Shield he had two Keps of Gold painted
very artificially: this Knight gave all the Spectators cause of admiration, for
he demeaned himself very courteously, not only in his saluting the King and
Queen but in his respects to all the Spectators, and taking a Lance in his
hand he ran against the Knight of the Wolf so furiously, that at the first
encounter he threw him to the earth, to the great amazement of the Company, who
now took him for a very brave Knight. Having performed so well with the Knight
of the Wolf, he faced about and expected to meet with some other Knight, and he
fa^^ed not long in his expectation, for Elorispiano of Swevia taking a strong
and knotty Lance, at the sound of the Trumpets met him with so great fury,
thinking to revenge his Companions quarrel, but he was deceived therein; for he
only brake his Lance upon his Enemies Shield without doing him any other
harm, and the Knight of the Keys having likewise broke his Lance, took
another, and so they began a new Car^eer: but that s^^ond was more to the
disadvantage of Fliorispiano them the former, for he lost both his Stirrops;
but before he came to the and of the Li^ts he bravely recovered himself, and so
they did both, and taking new Lances ran again, but to the greater misfortune
of Fliorispiano than before, for he was now tumbled from his horse. This gave
much wonder to all present to think who the Knight of the Keys was, for he was
wholly unknown there, and came then by chance, as shall be told you hereafter.

The Knight of the Keys having performed so valiantly, expected another Knight
to encounter him, when presently Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia prepared
himself for the Encounter: and taking a Lance in his hand went forwards to the
Knight of the Keys, and said to him: Sir Knight, I have one request to make to
you before we try our fortunes with the Lance, which is, that you would tell
me your Name, and of what Country you are.

To which the Knight of the Keys courteously replied, Sir Knight, I am known by
no other Name than the Knight of the Keys, and to tell you any other Name would
little satisfy you, for I was born in a Country so far from hence, that it
has seldom here been heard of; and I Will assure you I came hither by accident,
and never was in your company, nor in this place before till this day, and
therefore if you have nothing else to say to me, let us proceed with our
Lances. To which the Prince of Phenicia replied, I to my experience know, Sir
Knight, that you do perform very well with the Lance, therefore I pray grant
this Request, that if we chance both to break one or two Lances without any
effect, and neither of us have any advantage, that you will proceed to the
Sword where we may have more oceasion to try our valors. To this Request the
Knight of the Keys consented, and so they forthwith brake off their discourse,
and began their Career.

Great was che fury with which both these Champions met and they resolving to
show all their strength, brake their Lances in pieces, and so passed on; at the
next encounter they resolved to perform better, and so they did, for they not
only brake their Lances, as before, but meeting with their bodies with great
fury, fell both to the ground. Great was the admiration at this wonderful
encounter, and both the Knights were themselves much amazed, but they nimbly
got on their feet, and the Knight of the Keys being angered at this misfortune,
went to the Prince of Phenicia, and said: Sir Knight, it was your desire before
we tried our fortunes with the Lance, that if we should have no advantage with
the Lance, that we might end the Controversy with the Sword: Now since we have
both had an equal misfortune, and thereby are incapable to end the difference
with the Lance, let us finish it with our Swords: To which the Prince of
Phenicia consented. And so they drew their Swords and began a mavelous brave
Combat, to the satisfaction and admiration of all the Beholders: they being
equally resolved to make amends with their Swords for the default of their
Lances, laid on many lusty strokes.

The Knight of the Keys being a young and lusty Knight, behaved himself very
nimbly, giving his Adversary very many strokes, and still avoiding those of his
Enemy, which so enraged the Prince of Phenicia that he should be so used before
so many brave Knights his Friends and Companions, that he resolved to fasten
one blow on his Enemy that should end the Combat, but he was deceived, for
though it was so mighty a stroke that the Knight of the Keys was forced to lay
one hand on the ground to save himself from falling, yet he quickly recovered
himself, and gave his adversary a mighty blow on the Thigh, so that he was
wounded there extremely: Which the King and Queen seeing, and doubting that
what was begun in Jest and for R^^reation, would end in earnest, and in the
execution of one or both of their lives, caused them to be parted; much pitying
that two such brave and valiant Knights should injure one another upon so
slender an occasion. They being parted, the sport for that day ended, and every
one returned to the Palace, much wondering who the Knight of the Keys was.

CHAP. XXVIII. Who the Knight of the Keys was, and some of his Adventures, and
an end of the Tournament.
IN the west part of Christendom there is an Island called Ireland, in which
Island the Knight of the Keys was born, in a City called Wexford, scituating
near the Seaside: his Parents being Christians at the time of his Baptizing
gave him the Name of Peter. His Father was Earl of one of the Provinces of that
Island, called Munster, and Brother to the King of that Island. This was the
place of his Birth, where being the only Son of his Father, he was bred up
with all the diligence and care that might be, he providing Masters to instruct
him in all things fit for so great a person.

At the age of eighteen years he being dubbed Knight, begged leave of his
Father to seek Adventures: to which his Parents hardly consented, in regard he
was the only Comfort and Joy of their old Age: but his importunity prevailing,
providing himself of things necessary, he caused a strong Suit of Armor to be
made, and in respect his name was Peter, in remembrance of that holy Saint and
Apostle, he caused two Keys to be painted on his Shield: And providing himself
of all things necescary for so great a Voyage as he intended to take, he took
his leave of his Parents, his Mother giving him three rich jewels at his
departure, and her Blessing, and so he departed, taking shipping for England,
where he arrived and performed many valiant Deeds of Arms: but his resolution
being to see strange and far Countries, he took shipping again, and crossing
over the narrow Seas arrived in France, where at the Court of that King he
performed brave Feats at Arms at the Marriage of one of the Noblemens Daughters.

And leaving a great fame of his Valor behind him, he traveled through all
France: and arriving at Marsellis he again embarked himself, intending to sail
to Constantinople, resolving there to spend some time in seeking out
Adventures: but as he was sailing thither, the Ship was forced to put in at an
Island called Sardinia, and being advertised that a great Feast was held there
in Honor of the Kings Coronation Day, and that there was many Knight who
approved their valors in running a Tilt, and such kind of honorable Exercises,
he resolved to spend some time amongst them; which he did to his great
advantage, for he so well demeaned himself that he got the sole honor of the
Tournament, and he carried himself so courteously to all, that he not only got
the good will and affection of the King and Queen, but also of their Daughter
the beauteous Magdalena, who was so wounded by the little God Cupid that she
knew not what to do: in vain was it to smother her affection, which she strived
by all means possible to do, but could not, so that an ancient woman her Nurse
with whom she had been bred, did discover that somewhat was the matter more
than ordinary with he Mistress, and although she used many ways to find what
should be the matter, yet she failed in all, till at length the Princess not
being any longer able to smother her affection, discovered it to her Nurse,
begging of her not only to keep it concealed, but also to give her the best
advice that she could.

The Nurse now knowing the Disease of her Mistress began to apply Remedies, and
like a discreet person told her, that it was altogether unfit for her who was
the Daughter of a King and so great a Beauty as she was, that the greatest
Princes in the world might account themselves happy in the enjoyment of her,
that she should set her love and affection on a simple Knight, one who was but
a private person, and it was unknown whether he was nobly destended, or not.

To which the Princess soon replied, That she was confident he was not of mean
Parentage, but of Princely Birth, in respect of the Princely Endowments and
Qualifications that she saw he was endowed with; and therefore if she would do
her any service it must be in this occasion, to find some way to discourse with
him, and gain some knowledge of him from himself, for she was resolved in her
love, and that it could not any ways be diverted.

The Nurse seeing this, desired her to smother her passions as well as she
could, that the King and Queen might not discover any thing from her, and that
she would take some speedy occasion to give her some satisfaction.

In these terms she left the Princess, who promised to be guided herein by her
addice, and sought opportunity to speak to the Knight, which she soon found,
for he was so deeply in love with the Princess, as she was with him, and
desired nothing more than to have an opportunity to speak to this old Lady, who
he saw was very conversant with the Princess, and did believe was her
Confident. They being both equally desirous of one and the same thing, meeting
together she began to him thus:

Sir Knight, I much marvel that you keep your self so concealed for I know very
well that the King, Queen, and the fair Princess Magdalena, would be very glad
to know your Lineage, and Country, Country, especially my Lady Magdalena; and
if you would be pleased to tell it to me, I shall inform her therein, which I
know will be a great satisfaction to her.

The Knight hearing this discourse, and perceiving that it was occasioned by
the Princess, gave her this Answer.

That since his departure from his Parents he had not discovered himself to
any, and that the Princess should command more from him than any person in the
World: but she must excuse him in this particular, only you may certify her
in general, that I am born of Princely Pa^entage, and that I am her very humble
Servant: And I pray Madam (said he) remember my hearty Love and Service to her,
and give her on my behalf this Jewel. And thereupon he gave her one of the
Jewels his Mother had given him, which the old Lady received, and so they
parted.

She in all haste coming to the Princess, gave her the effects of her
discourse, and the Jewel; at which she was extremely satisfied, and still was
every day more and more entangled and ensnared in the bonds of Love: and
thereupon she caused the old Lady to have another Conference with him. At which
second Conference he told her, that if the Princess would be pleased to grant
him private access to her, he would give her a satisfactory account of his
Estate and Condition: the which the old Lady promised to effect, and thereupon
he gave her another Jewel to present to the Princess in his behalf, which she
did accordingly, and then the Princess was more satisfied than before, longing
for the appointed time when he was to come: which prefixed time being come, he
accordingly ca me to visit her, and was admitted into her Presence, where after
his Civilities tendered to her, he discovered himself to her, and of what
Lineage he was, and not only so, but seeing how matters went, he discovered his
Love to her: at which she was not at all discontented, but told him of hers to
him, to the great satisfaction of them both; and there they so ordered the
matter, that they concluded to be at the dispose of one another during life,
and he in testimony of his love gave her another Jewel, more worth than both
the former; all which he had, as I told you ormerly received of his Mother: and
she in return took a Gold Chain from her Neck, and bestowed it upon him; the
which he received in hearty good will. All this was done in private, not so
much as the old Lady being present; and when they has thus done and the old
Lady was come, after many farewels, though unwilling, he departed.

This business being thus concluded on, he lived long time in the Court, and
still was in the same credit with the King and Queen. At length he was resolved
further to try the Constancy of his Princess, and thereupon took an opportunity
to speak to her, and told her that now he had been there a long time, and saw
no way how to gain the good will of her Father and Mother, and therefore
resolved to go home and visit his Parents. At which discourse she was much
troubled, for her great love to him would not permit of any separation, but she
rather resolved to leave Father and Mother, and all her friends than be without
him, and therefore it was resolved that she should go with him, and he prepared
a small Barque to that purpose: which when it was ready at the time appointed,
he in company of his Princess entered, she taking with her a good quantity of
Gold and Jewels, and so they departed and left Sardinia, with a resolution to
go toward his own Country.

No sooner were they gone, but the Princess was missed at Court, and the King
after some enquiry, hearing which way they were gone, sent several Ships after
them, but it was in vain; for a Tempest had forced the Barque in which the
Knight and the Princess were, quite another way, and drove them on shore at
another Island called Sicillia, where their Barque being split they got on
shore, being both glad and sorry for their good and ill fortune, where the Lady
after some travel by land to find a house where to repose themselves, being
weary, fate down, and drawing forth a little red Purse, showed her Knight the
three Jewels he had given her: at which he was joyful that she had not left
them behind; and laying it by her, she being very weary, fell asleep, and he
lay lovingly by her; but some ravenous Fowl flying by, and seeing the red
Purse, supposing it to be a piece of flesh, descended from thy Sky and took it
up, which the Knight seeing, and knowing what it was, arose, looking to see
whither the Fowl would fly, which did soon alight on a Tree, but he soon
followed her, and disturbed her by throwing stones at her, till he forced her
to fly away with the Purse; he being more angry than before, still followed
her, and she flying toward the water side, he still pursued her with stones,
which the Bird perceiving, at length let the Purse fall into the Sea, but it
was in so shallow a place that he could see it lie at the bottom, but could not
come at it, it being a great way in the water: he attempted many ways to come
at it, at last he discovered an old Boat hard by, to which he repaired, and
finding a staff therein, he intended to push the Boat to the place where the
Purse lay, to the end he might recover it: which he could not do, for the Boat
coming into the strength of the stream, in despite of all he could do, he was
carried a great way from the place where he took Boat, and at length he came
into the main Sea, when, though too late, he would have thrown himself into the
Sea, if by that means he could have got on shore. Thus was his Princess left
alone on shore, sleeping in an unknown Land, of whose misery we shall hereafter
speak more.

But now we return to him who made heavy complaints not only for his own
misfortune, but that of his Princess: And thus his Boat was at the mercy of the
Sea for three days, he expecting every moment when he and the Boat should be
devoured by the Sea; but his Destiny having prepared him for better fortunes,
at last he was forced by the impetuousness of the waves, on a little Island in
the Mediterranean Seas, called Zanie, where when he came on shore, he praised
God for his safe deliverance from the Sea, not without many tears for the loss
of his dear Princess. There when he had in some manner recovered his health,
which was impaired by his long fasting, he hired a small Ship to search up and
down all the Islands of the Archiepelago to find his Princess out, not knowing
the name of the place where he had lost her: but all was in vain, for he had
lost her quite another way.

Thus being crossed at his ill fortune, he at last landed at Constantinople,
and then not caring whither he went, such was his sorrow for the loss of his
dear Princess: His destinies after many weary Iourneys, at last brought him to
Antioch, where he arrived at the Triumphs held for the Solemnization of the
Wedding of the King and Queen, and there he performed such Knightly Deeds of
Chivalry, as has been told you in the foregoing Chapter.

The next day after the Combat between the Knight of the Keys and the Prince
of Phenicia, all the Champions resorted early into the Lists, and there the two
Knights destred of the King to give them leave to finish their Combat: but the
King would not assent thereto, but ordered that they should both desist
therefrom; and in regard there had been so much equalling in the Knights both
at the Lance and Sword, neither of them should be accounted Vanquished, or
Vanquisher; and that they should neither of them come into the Field all the
following days of the Tournament, but that the two Knights Don Clarineo, and
Don Lucidamore should keep the Field only; which at last they all assented to,
and they pecformed it to their great honor: for in that time they dismonuted
many hardy Knights but still kept the honor of the Field till all the days of
the Tournament were accomplished.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Don Clarineo, Don Lucidamore, Contumeliano, Florispiano, The
Knight of the Wolf, the Knight of the Keys, did all take their Leaves of the
King and Queen, and journeyed toward Babylon to meet with Don Bellianis.
THese Iousts and Tournaments being ended, and most of the Nobility departed to
their own Dwellings, the Knights Don Clarineo and his Companions, desired leave
to depart in quest of their Brother Don Bellianis, and the King and Queen
hearing that he was at Babylon, or there abouts, knowing of the Wars that was
between the Souldan of Babylon and the Emperor of Trebizond, and that Don
Bellianis was engaged therein, they not only consented to their departurs, but
also would have furnished them with many brave Knights to! have gone with them,
but they refused that kindness.

The Knight of the Wolf like wise knowing their intentions, and that, in their
company he should be certain to get glory desired his Father Damartino to give
him leave to accompany them, which he did likewise consent unto, knowing the
worth of his companions would be able to keep him from harm: thus were they
accompanied and ready to go, when Peter of Ireland, the Knight of the Keys,
being almost hereaved of his srnses for the loss of his dear Mistress the
Princess Magdalena, and being resolved to search all the World over but he
would find her; and having a very great esteem for the Princes Don Clarineo,
Lucidamore, and the rest of their Companions, for the great worth and valor
that he saw them endowd with, he came likewise to them, and desired them to
admit him to be a Companion in their adventurous Travels: To which his request
they soon consented, for they had a very great esteem for him, having seen him
exercise his valor.

Thus accompanied, they came one morning to the King and Queen to take their
last farwell, when the King told them that since they would not take any forces
with them, he desired that if his Cousin Don Bellianis, or any of them had, or
should have any occasion for Forces, he would at any time assist them with
fifty thousand men, and come in the head of them him self, and give such
testimouies of his good will and affection for them, that he would merit the
esteem and servic they had done for him. Having thus said, the Queen likewise
heartily thanked them for the honor they had done her, and desired to be kindly
remembered to Don Bellianis, hoping that he and they all, the Wars being ended,
would take that place in their way home, whereby she should again have the
satisfaction of their good companies: to which Request of hers they assented
to, kissing her hands they departed, and set for wards for Babylon.

The Knight of the Keys was very heavy and pensive, as you have heard, which
gave them all some trouble, but Don Claneo having a more particular esteem for
him than the rest, so the occasion of his melancholy: which when he had heard,
he was likewise much troubled thereat, participating in the sorrows of his
friend, and promised him that so soon as he had seen his Brother Don Bellianis,
that he would return with him to Constantinople, and there would cause such
diligent search to be made, that he would find her if she were any where in all
those Seas, vowing unto him an eternal friendship; which the Knight of the Keys
not only accepted, but promised the same should continue to him to the end of
his life.

This discourse being ended, they passed on their Journey in somewhat more
pleasant communication in such manner, that in short time they arrived near to
the City of Babylon: In which travels we will once more leave them, and turn to
Don Bellianis and his Companion, the Numidian Prince, and the rest of those
valiant warriors that were set down before the City of Pharez.

CHAP. XXIX. How Don Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia assaulted the Emperor
and his Forces, and forced them all to retire into the City.
GReat was the vexation and anger of Don Bellianis, for that he saw the Wars
had held him so long from the fight of his dear Mistress the Princess
Florisbella, and therefore he resolved to assault his Enemies, and force them
to a Battle, and the Prince of Numidia was likewise of the same resolution:
Wherefore they providing all things ready, divided their Army into two parts,
which they took between them, and so with their whole Forces set upon the Enemy
in their Entrenchments, and having given them the Alarm, followed it with so
much puissance, that they soon forced them to retire to the City Walls.

The Emperor of Trebizond being advertised hereof came forth, and at the Head
of fifty thousand valiant men went to meet Don Bellianis, whom he soon found
and knew by the mightiness of his blows: the presence of the Emperor gave some
new courage to his Soldiers, and he engaging with Don Bellianis caused them
that were about to flee into the City, to face about and return upon their
Enemies, and then there was a fierce Slaughter upon all sides.

The Prince of Numidia with a Party of fifty thousand men rode up and down the
Field, to give his assistance to that part or place where there was most need:
and there was one party of the Emperor of Trebizond's Foof-soldiers of about
fifty thousand, who kept close together, and did much harm to his Soldiers,
being commanded and guarded by ten strong Giants, whom the Numidian attempted
to disperse, but they were all so resolute that he could not break through
their Ranks; wherefore he attempted them a new way, and retiring from them
first, ordered his Squadrons in the fashion of a Wedge, the Front not being
above twenty Knights, but the Rear was above five hundred men broad, and he in
the Head of this party forced with his twenty Knights into the ranks of his
enemies Squadron, and maugre all the resistance of the Giants and the rest, he
went into the body of the Army, and being gone so far, the rest followed him,
till at length the Rear of his Squadron opening to the right and left, and so
wheeling about both ways, encompassed the Enemies Squadron, engaging them in
Front, Rear, Flanks and Middle, and indeed on all sides at one and the same
time, he had such success that in short time he killed most of them, so that of
fifty thousand men there was not left one thousand aside.

All this while the Emperor himself was fighting valiantly with Don Bellianis,
where he ^a^e, and received many wounds, but there was little advantage between
them, by reason they were hindered by the multitude of other Knights that fought
about them. This incensed Don Bellianis, being full of wrath that he could not
execute the Revenge he intended on his Enemy; but before they were parted he
gave him one large wound on the shoulder, and then he company increasing he was
forced to leave him, and so he fell into the Ranks of his Enemies, being much
angered; the effects of which caused the death of many persons, for he seldom
gave a stroke but death presently followed. He was attended by the Prince of
Mesapotamia, the Knight of the Flaming Sword, and the Knight of Hope, who did
very well testify themselves to be valiant Knights, and good Practitioners in
Bellonas Field: great was the slaughter where they came, but far greater where
the Prince of Numidia was; for he had destroyed all his foes, and was now
coming to Don Bellianis to assist him, but he needed little of his aid: for
like a roaring Lion he flew like Lightening into all places of the Field.

The Emperor of Trebizond hearing of the ill fortune of his Squadron of Foot,
in whole strength he put much confidence, was greatly dismayed at that
Overthrow, and being angered at his ill fortune, he caused a Retreat to be
sounded, but it was in a very ill manner performed; for he was forced to draw
all his Forces into the City, not being able any longer to keep the field
leaving his entrenchments to his Enemies, and with great difficulty did he get
into the City, for he was hotly pursued by his Enemies, and many of his men
slain: but at length into the City he got and made fast the Gates, and then Don
Bellianis, Baltasano of Numidia, and all their forces being hindered from going
further, were forced to stay: But coming into the place where their Enemies had
encamped, they found very good Booty, which gave a great satisfaction to the
Soldiers, their General having given them free leave to take all they could
get. This being done, they fortified themselves in their Enemies Entrenchments,
the two Generals resolving not only to continue close Siege to the City, but
also to assault them there, setting Pioneers to work to undermine some part of
the City-wall, that they might make a breach and so enter to them, and all the
other ways that they could invent or imagine they put in practice: but the
design at that time was hindered, for the City was soon after relieved by the
arrival of fresh Supplies, as shall be hereafter declared to you. And now we
will for a while turn back to Babylon to the Souldans Palace, and see what the
Ladies did, which we will show you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXX. How the Souldan of Babylon received a Letter from Don Bellianis,
who sent others to the Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa: and of the Arrival
of the Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, and the rest
of their Companions at Babylon, in quest of Don Bellianis.
THe Souldan of Babylon had not heard any News of the success of his Forces
under the command of Don Bellianis, since the departure of the Prince of
Numidia, only such News as report gave our, and therefore much desired to be
satisfied in his Affairs: however he continually raised more Forces, and kept a
great Guard about him, to be ready at all times when occasion should serve to
be upon the march. In these Affairs was he employed, when one day sitting in
Council, an express Messenger came with Letters from the Camp, which he
delivered to the Souldan, who immediately causing them to be opened, there was
written as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Souldan of Babylon.
Dread Lord,
Since my arrival with your Forces I have been indlfferently fortunate, for I
have not only satisfied the minds of your own Subjects in the way that I
marched, but have also received much aid by their voluntary assistance, which I
accepted of according to the Orders that you sent me, and we have had some
Engagement with the Enemy to a very good advantage; for we have forced him to
leave your Country, part of which he was entered into and retire into his own
with much loss and disadvantage. The Arrival of the Prince of Numidia was very
importunely done, for we were then engaging the Enemy, who is so wilfully
resolute, that without the aid he brought we should have had some disadvantage.

The Offers of Peace you sent were tendered to the Emperor of Trebizond, but he
in hopes of Assistance from his Neighboring Kings, is still resolute to proceed
in the War, unless he may have the Princess your Daughter offered up to him.
Which Propositions of his we wholly declined, and such is the anger of your
Subjects at his Arrogance in propounding things so unreasonable, that rather
than their Princess shall be exposed to a thing so disagreeable to her
inclination, they will all lose their lives. If, Sir, you continue in this
opinion (as I hope your Imperial Majesty will never condescend to a thing so
base and mean, as the Prostitution of your Daughter, to have peace with your
Enemy) I then question not but to force your Enemy to very good terms, and much
to your advantage. If the aid the Emperor expects does come in to him, it will
occasion the lengthning of the War, and you some trouble to send fresh
supplies, which I question not your readiness to perform; And Sir, assure your
self, that in so just a cause as this, I shall not only hazard my own person
to the utmost perils, but rather than condescend to any thing that is base, I
shall be able of my self to raise such Friends as shall bring me two hundred
thousand men to justify this Quarrel, and be revenged of your unreasonable
Enemies: But I hope, Sir, e're any fresh Supplies come to the Enemy, that we
shall be able to compel him to put an end to this War: And assure your self
that all my utmost endeavors shall not be wanting in execution of this public
Affair, as hitherto I have been ready to hazard my Person in the preservation
of your Majesty, and that of your Family, and I shall think my self
sufficiently satisfied, if for all my trouble and travel you will do me the
honor to permit me to be a servant to You and your Family, and more
particularly to be admitted by your fair Daughter as a Servant to her Virtues;
In expectation of which I shall account nothing dear, so as I may be admitted
for her Champion, and I question not but I shall give a satisfaction to you
all; which I make my resolve to do, or die

A Faithful Servant to your Imperial Majesty, The Knight of the Basilisks.


Great satisfaction did this Letter give to the Souldan, not only for the good
success that his Forces had already obtained, but for their resolution to
continue constant to him: He considered that he had great cause to be thankful
to the Knight of the Basilisks (for so he was called at the Court, being
unknown by any other Name there:) he had been much bound to him already for
delivering him and his Daughter from the Enchanment of the Tent, as it was set
down in the first Book of this History, for the assistance he had given to his
Cousin the Princess Aurora, in helping her to her Kingdom of Antioch; for his
delivering his Cousin the Princess Mattarosa, and her Brother the Prince of
Numidia, from the power of the Giant Altifer and his Companions, and more
especially for releasing him from the Enchantment in the Island, to the
extraordinary great peril of his person, and now at last he was engaged in a
long and troublesome War, and had performed very well already in it, and had
sent him his resolutions to persist therein, and all the advantage he desired
and propounded to himself for all these so signal Services, was only to be
admitted a Servant and Champion to his Daughter, whose Cause he was now
fighting in.

These he thought so reasonable, that he immediately sent for his Daughter, and
being resolved to do nothing as to her person without her consent, he cold her
the effect of the Knights Letter, and withal informed her with his Request,
desiring her that if it were not wholly against her inclination, that she would
grant the Request of the Knight.

She who was as desirous of this as he was, and had not only a good will, but
an extraordinary affection for him, answered her Father, That she considered
the Obligations they were all boound to the Knight of the Basilisks in were so
many, and binding, that she was ready to do that, as also any thing else that
her Father should desire that would give satisfaction to the Knight of the
Basilisks, who she said, she believed was sent by the Gods for the preservation
of her and all her Family, and was certainly the Titular Angel of their
Country. And she further added, that were she knowing of the Birth and
Parentage, and that it were equal to hers, and the good Will of her Father and
Friends joined to her own Inclination, she should do that willingly for him
which the Emperor of Trebizond endeavored to force her to, so greatly was she
satisfied, not only in the Courage and Magnanimity, but also in the Virtues of
the Knight of the Basilisks.

When she had said thus she held her peace, and somewhat blushed that she had
so plainly discovered her affection to her Father: but she was somewhat
satisfied when her Father gave her this reply, That he was wholly of her
opinion, and that he questioned not but that one so well accomplished, was
likewise of an Illustrious Birth; and that he would endeavor to satisfy
himself in his Birth, in the mean time he advised his Daughter to write to the
Knight, and give him some satisfaction, such as she should think fit: And he
said, he questioned not but he was of an extraordinary Quality, for he
propounded the raising two hundred thousand men to fight under him in this
Service.

This was the discourse between the Emperor and his Daughter, which being ended
she retired into her Closet, where she was expected by her Cousin the Princess
Mattarosa, who had received Letters from Don Bellianis, one for her self, and
another for her Cousin. When the Princess Florisbella came there, she found her
Cousin reading of that to her self, but she quickly left off that to deliver
the other to her Cousin: which she no sooner received, but she opened the Seal,
and found therein written as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Princess Florisbella.
MADAM,
I First crave your pardon for my silence hitherto, and give you this for
excuse, that my Sword has till this time been so employed, that I had not time
to exercise my Pen. My Sword has been exercised in the destruction of your
Enemies, and indeed we have had so good effects (the justness of our Quarrel
commanding it) that your Enemies are not only expelled out of your Kingdom,
but they are in some kind of distress in their own; for we have at last (by
the help of your valiant Cousin the Prince of Numidia, and the Forces he
brought with him) forced the Enemy with great loss to leave the Field and
retire to the City, where we have now encompassed him. The Propositions your
Father sent were not accepted of, though very reasonable, and the Emperor of
Trebizond is still so presumptious, as to desire your Person in marriage, and
upon these terms he will leave the War; and this he questions not to force you
to do by the help of more Forces he is raising, and by the Aid he expects from
some of his Alliance: how pleasant this Proposition was you may easily judge,
and that be might as well have said that we should all suffer our selves to be
slain without any resistance, and I for my part should sooner have consented to
that, than this so unjust command. This his presumption caused me to defy his
Person, and I had a resolution to kill him, or die at our next meeting, but
hitherto I have been hindered from executing this my just Resolution, but I
still keep in the same Determination. Madam, this is the present condition of
your public Affairs, but I continually suffer Martyrdom in my long absence
from your Divine presence: Madam, I beseech you pardon my presumption in
writing so plainly to the Souldan your Father, I did it to understand somewhat
of his inclination: I pray let me by your answer know his resentments thereof.
Thus Madam, hoping and not questioning your Constancy, and that your
inclination will still continue to make me happy, I rest

Your Eternal Servant, Don Bellianis.


The Princess having read hers with much content, desired to know the effect of
the Letter sent by her Knight to the Princess Mattarosa; which she delivered
into her hands to give her that satisfaction, and in exchange took hers: the
Princess Florisbella read as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Princess Mattarosa.
MADAM,
I Shall not trouble you with an Account of our proceedings in the War, my
Letter to the Souldan, or that to my Princess will give you that satisfaction:
but to tell you in general, that all things here are well, and we want nothing
but your pleasing companies to divert us. Madam, I hope you sometimes have some
thoughts of us, and that that friendship which has been contracted between us,
is not forgotten; and I hope you have a particular care of the Affairs of your
poor Servant, whom out of nothing you have made so happy: I beseech you
continue me in the good opinion of my fair Princess your Cousin, and assure her
that I will ever endeavor to give her daily effects of my Duty and Service.

The Prince your Brother is in very good health, and has performed Wonders in
this War, and the young Knight of Hope is very diligent in preserving the Favor
you were formerly pleased to give him, and in honor of your Name he acts
marvellously, and gives great testimonies of a valiant mind, the effects of
which have caused the deaths of many of your Adversaries; and indeed he is such
a one as deserves an esteem from you, having your name and person in great
veneration. This is all I shall at present trouble you with, yet once more I
beg you to continue my Princesses esteem toward me, and in doing thereof you
shall eternally oblige

Youa Servant, Don Bellianis.


The Princess having read this Letter, returned it to her Cousin, and then they
conferred together what was necessary to be done. The Princess Florisbella
informed her Cousin of the Discourse that had happened between her Father and
her self about Don Bellianis, and said that there was nothing wanting to gain
the Souldans Consent, but the discovery of Don Bellianis his Quality, and then
she questioned not but her Father when he should be informed of his High Birth,
would be very well satisfied in every thing; and therefore, said she, I think
it will not be amiss for you to discourse of this matter to your Aunt my
Mother, and you may take occasion to declare somewhat of Don Bellianis his
Extraction, telling her that you heard it by some of his Company when you were
released from the Giant Altifer.

To this they both agreed and resolved, but they had no occasion thereof; for
not long after arrived at the Court the Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, and the rest of their Companions, in search of Don
Bellianis, when they arrived at the Palace, they enquired for the Souldan, who
was with his Council communicating to them the good News that he had received
by Letters from the Knight of the Basilisks.

Being come into the Presence, Don Clarineo in behalf of himself and his
Companions, told the Souldan that they came from the Court of the Princess
Aurora from Antioch, who desired to be recommended to him in all humility, and
had sent him a Letter, and then kneeling on his knees, he delivered the same to
the Souldan, who causing the same to be opened, it coutained these words.

The LETTER of Aurora Queen of Antioch, to the Souldan of Babylon.
Most Illustrious Uncle,
MY hard misfortune in being expelled my Kingdom has long since arrived to
your knowledge, and now having so great a good as to be restored thereto, I
thought convenient to inform you of the truth thereof. The Illustrions Prince
Don Bellianis of Greece, and Son to the Emperor, has (by the appointment of the
Gods) been the chief Instrument of my Restoration; for not only he and his
Friends killed the Usurpers Gallaneo and Tramolcano, but also have caused the
Souldan of Persia to give me full and quiet possession thereof, where I am now
peaceably settled: And I have also joined my self in Marriage with Don Brianel
Prince of Macedon, and Cousin to the same Don Bellianis, who as I hear under
the Names of the Knight of the Basilisks and the Golden Image, has done you
some Services. Assure your self, Sir, that he has not his equal throughout the
whole Universe, as I by sufficient experience can testify, both for valor and
virtue; and I think my self happy in his Alliance, having married into his
Family. This Noble Company that are now come to you are his Brethren and
Alliance, and are come in quest of their Brother and Friend. What kindness you
shall do to them, I am confident they will deserve, and it shall be like wise
acknowledged to be done to

Your affectionate and obliged Kinswoman Aurora of Antioch.


Greatly satisfied was the Souldan when he had read this Letter, for now he
knew that which he so much desired, the Quality of Don Bellianis, and seeing
his two Brothers, and knowing that they were all of his Alliance, be arose from
his Seat and kindly embraced them, and bid them heartily welcome, telling them
that he accounted himself extremely happy in their company, and that he was
more obliged to their Brother and Friend Don Belliahis, than to all the Persons
on the Earth.

They gave him many thanks for the good esteem he had of them, and told him
that they were likewise ready to serve him in what occasion soever he should
employ them: and since Don Bellianis was absent, they desired his leave for
them to depart toward him. The Souldan consented to this, but withal he
desired them to tak^ some Forces with them, which was accordingly agreed on.

Thus after this Discourse with the Souldan, he conducted them to the presence
of the Empress and her Daughter the Princess Florisbella, and her Cousin
Mattarosa, and the rest of the Ladies; which pleasant sight gave a great
content to all the Knights but Peter of Ireland, but in him it renewed his
sorrow for the loss of his Princess Magdalena. The Emperess and Ladies being
informed by the Souldan of the Quality other Knights, and that they were
Brothers and near Relations of Don Bellianis, was much pleased with their
company, and giving them their hands to kiss, told them that she was very
joyful to see them: the Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa did likewise
kindly receive them: and the Princess Florisbella was not only joyful for
their arrival, but also greatly contented that now her Father was satisfied in
the true Quality of Don Bellianis.

The Knights were all very sensible of the occasion that continued Don
Bellianis in the Souldans service, and did truly think that it was for the sake
of the Princess Florisbella, whom they did esteem to be the most beautiful Lady
they ever saw, and therefore worthy to be served by so good a Knight.

At length after several Complements the Knights were disarmed, and after a
short repast the Souldan called them to Council, wherein it was concluded, that
they should depart the next day, and carry with them fifty thousand men who
were all ready for the march, to go and assist Don Bellianis.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Emperor of Trebizond was relieved by the Arrival of the
Kings of Albania and Georgia with one hundred thousand men, and fifty thousand
men sent by the Emperor of Russia, and how he appointed a pitched Battle with
Don Bellianis, and Baltasano Prince of Numidia, and their Armies; and how the
two Princes Brothers to Don Bellianis, and all the other Knights came with the
Aid of fifty thousand men, and engaged with Don Bellianis and his Army against
the Emperor of Trebizond, whom in the end they conquer and take him Prisoner:
And so leaving one hundred thousand men in the Field, under the Command of
Baltasano, Don Bellianis and the rest of his Friends and Alliance, with the
rest of the Aamy, marched back with their Prisoners to Babylon.
IN some distress was the Emperor of Trebizond, by reason of his being closely
besieged in the City of Pharez, but the expectation he had to be relieved by
his Friends, gave him some satisfaction, and still continued him in his former
resolutions of not agreeing to the end of the War, unless it were on the
Conditions he had formerly propounded to Don Bellianis who you know was
resolved rather to die than to yield to any such Proposals, and therefore he
and the Prince of Numidia endeavored all they could to gain the City, but it
was so well fortified that it was very difficult: however they caused the Mines
to be made to undermine the Wall, but before they had ended that, News came of
the Arrival of fresh Supplies to the Emperor; whereupon they prepared
themselves to resist them, and to hinder (if possible) their entrance into the
City.

But the Kings of Albania and Georgia who were arrived within three Leagues of
the City, and heard that they must fight their way through the Souldans Army,
prepared for the Encounter, and so in good order marched on until they arrived
within sight of each other, and then Don Bellianis and Baltasano with fifty
thousand well approved Knights likewise advanced to meet them, where they soon
encountered one anothar.

The two Kings of Albania and Georgia being both valiant and redoubted knights,
couching their Lances went to encounter the two Generals, the Princes of Greece
and Numidia, who likewise couching their Lances ran against them, and breaking
their Lances without much prejudice to one another, they passed on, and so both
Armies joined to mortal Batrel, where great was the noise of the sound of
Trumpets and all manner of other warlike Instruments, and the clashing of
Armor: but greater was the terror that the two brave Generals Don Bellianis and
Baltasano gave to their Enemies where ever they came; for whoever came within
the reach of their well-cutting Swords; did pay dearly for that presumption.
The two Kings of Albania and Georgia did likewise behave themselves like hardy
Knights, and valiant and discreet Generals, for their great and valorous Deeds
gave both encouragement and valor to their followers. Very bloody was the Fight
when News came to Don Bellianis to advertise him, that the Emperor with great
Forces was come out of the City, and had assaulted his Camp. At which News he
went to Baltasano, and advertising him thereof, they concluded that the
presence of one of them would be very necessary, and therefore Don Bellianis
out of the desire he had to be revenged on his Enemy and Rival the Emperor,
those to go thither and leave the Prince of Numidia to continue the Fight:
which being agreed on he quickly departed, and arriving at his Camp he found
that the Enemy had made a valiant Assault, and that they had been as well
resisted by the two valiant Knights, the Knight of Hope, and the Knight of the
Flaming Sword, who were fighting valiantly in the midst of the Emperors Forces:
Don Bellianis seeing that encouraged them by his presence, and so departed to
find out the Emperor, who at length he overtook, and knowing him by the many
hardy strokes he saw him deliver, he cried out to him, Sir Knight, you will
gain more honor by leaving those people and fighting with me, who am resolved
to conques you or die. The Emperor hearing these words, soon turned about to
see who had been so hardy as to speak them: but he was soon satisfied when he
saw they were uttered by the valiant Knight of the Basilisks; wherefore leaving
his other enemies he came toward Don Bellianis, and so they both making their
ways through the Ranks of their Armies, joined in fight together.

The Emperor heated in battle, gave Don Bellianis a mighty blow over the
Helmet, but he soon requited it by returning him another on the shoulder, which
descending, wounded him on the Arm. Thus was the Fight on all sides vigorously
prosecuted: But the Kings of Albania and Georgia being wholly desirous to force
their way into the City, made it their whole business to get thither, and so by
degrees they got ground, till at length both the. Armies came in sight of one
another, and then the Emperors Forces seeing that they were likely to be so
well relieved, gave a great shout, and joined all their Forces together: the
noise that they made gave some disquiet to Don Bellianis, who was still
fighting with the Emperor, and being desirous to know what was the matter, he
reached the Emperor so mighty a blow that he remained without feeling, and so
he turned his horse toward the place from whence the noise came, and then he
soon discovered that the occasion of it was the arrival of the two Kings into
the Army with their asistance. He presently rode furiously through all the
Ranks of his Enemies, doing much execution, till h^nrrived at the place where
the Prince of Numidia was engaged in fight with two mighty Giants; one of which
he presently assailed, and with less than three strokes laid him dead at his
feet, when turning about he saw that his Companion the Numidian had likewise
killed the other: and so they both agreed to retire to their own Forces to see
how the Fight was maintained, and so making their way by the death of many of
their Adversaries, they arrived at their own Camy, where they saw the two
Knights of Hope and the Flaming Sword, bravely engaged with six courageous
Knights, and yet they defended themselves very valorously: they soon joined
with them to the loss of all the lives of the six Knights.

In the mean time the Emperor being free endeavored to withdraw his Forces, and
so coming to the Kings of Albania and Georgia, after some Complements, he
desired them likewise to draw off their Forces, which being done they all
retired into the City, but with the loss of twenty thousand men, Don Bellianis
and his Forces following them to the very Gates. When they were entered the
City, the Emperor conduced the two Kings to the Palace, where be entertaind
them and gave them many thanks for this their aid and assistance, and then they
concluded to rest their Forces for two days, and by that time the Emperor told
them he was confident he should not only have aid from the Emperor of Russia,
but likewise more of his own, and so soon as they were arrived he intended to
take the Field, not questioning but he should quickly force the Enemy to leave
his Country.

Don Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia retired up to their Camp, and resolved
very suddenly to give them a general Assault: but the next day the Forces of
the Emperor of Russia arrived, and in despite of Don Bellianis entrenched
themselves and kept the Field. The Emperor being thus well relieved, resolved
now to take the Field, and give a Field-battel to his Enemies, which he
concluded to do the next day: and in order thereunto, early the next morning he
with one hundred thousand men under his own Conduct issued out of the City, one
hundred thousand men under the Conduct of the two Kings of Albania and Georgia,
and fifty thousand men under the Command of the Knight of the Tiger, Kinsman to
the Emperor of Russia, who had brought those Forces thither.

In this equipage the Emperor was in the Field, and on the other side the two
Generals Don Bellianis and Baltasano, divided their Forces only into two
parts, and resolving on all sides to fight valiantly and conquer their Enemies,
they bravely assailed each other: Bloody was the Fight in all places, so that
soon was the Fields green Apparel turned into purple. The Generals on all sides
performed wonders: the Emperor on his part did very valiantly, resolving to get
the Field or never return to the City: and Don Bellianis being resolved this
day to show the invincibleness of his Courage, he being accompanied by five
hundred Knights, as his Guard, in despite of all opposition forced his way
into the Camp of his Enemies, where with his own Arm he soon killed fifty
Knights, and those who followded him imitating his Example, slew many of their
Enemies.

The Prince of Numidia had likewise in another place forced his way into his
Enemies Camp, and there he encountered the Knight of the Tiger, who was
encompassed with ten strong Giants, but maugre all their opposition he
furiously forced his way through them, and assaulted the Knight of the Tiger
with so mighty a blow on the head, so that he was not only astonished, but the
Sword falling on the horse his head, cleved him down right, and he fell down
dead under his Master. The Giants who were near him soon assisted him, and
mounted him on another horse. but it cost two of them their lives, the one
being slain by the Prince of Numidia, and the other by the Knight of Hope, who
was now arrived with some Forces to the place where Baltasano was, and then
they all joined Forces, and the Knight of the Tiger being very valiant,
revenged himself by the loss of the lives of many of his Enemies.

Don Bellianis having run through his Enemies Camp with great fury, returned
and rode up and down to find out his Rival the Emperor, whom at length he
found out and encountered, and many fierce strokes were given to one another,
the Emperor resolving to revenge himself on Don Bellianis, showed the utmost of
his skill and courage, and gave him a blow on the Thigh, so that the blood
issued out thereat through the Joints of his Armor: he was greatly enraged
hereat, and gave the Emperor another wound on the side: thus they continued
fighting together, till at length the multitudes of both Parties came to
assault each other parted them, and then they ranged about the Field killing
and destroying many Knights.

It was now the Noon day, and the Fight had continued eight hours, and yet
there was not much advantage on either side, till they heard the sound of
Trumpets, and at some distance they might perceive fresh Forces enter the
Field, but to which they belonged it was yet unknown: at length they arrived in
sight, and then by their Colors they were known to belong to the Emperor, and
indeed they were forty thousand men under the Conduct of the Knight of Fame,
Nephew to the Emperor, who hearing of the Fight made haste thither, thinking to
get Honor in the Battle, but he fared not so well as he expected, as we shall
declare to you anon.

Don Bellianis seeing this, quickly drew out forty thousand of his men and went
to meet him, and taking a new Lance couched the same, and ran fvriously against
his Enemy, who did the like, but not with the same advantage; for Don Bellianis
only lost one of his stirrops, but his Enemy came horse and man to the ground.
He soon recovered himself, and being angry at his misfortune, revenged himself
by the death of six Knights, whom he soon killed or overthrew: thus was these
two Battles joined, but Don Bellianis soon abated some of the vigor of his
Enemies, by the puissant and mighty strokes he gave them, killing ten Knights
ere he brake his Lance, and then drawing his Sword he soon after sent twenty
Knights more to accompany their Companions, so that now they were not so
furious to assault him as they had been: He quickly made his way through all
his Squadron, and having testified to them his strength and valor, returned and
went to assault the Knight of Fame, who was now engaged with his Enemies: but
at the arrival of Don Bellianis they soon gave way to him, and he trached him a
mighty blow on the head, so that his Helmet flew from his head, and he was
likewise wounded, and Don Bellianis intending to give him a second blow, was
prevented; for two furious Giants opposed themselves to him: but he who was
used to deal well enough with these sort of people soon let them know his valor
by the cutting off one of their legs.

In the mean time the Knight of Fame had recovered another Helmet, and came to
revenge himself on Don Bellianis, so that now he was engaged both by a Giant
and the Knight of Fame, but he did will enough to maintain the fight with them
both. In the mean time the two Kings of Albania and Georgia had engaged
themselves among their Enemies, and at last they arrived where the Emperor was
engaged, but they brought him such Aid that he caused the Souldans Forces to
retire, and many of them lost their lives, so that they being without any
valiant Commander did in a manner fly: this gave great encouragement to the
Emperor and the two Kings, and they pursued them some way, till they saw a Body
of men afar off who came on a great pace, and the nearer they approached the
more they appeared, and at length they were likewise known to be Forces of the
Souldans: This caused the Emperor and those that were with him to make a stand,
much wondering at this business, and not daring to go any further. They made up
toward them a great pace and meeting with some of those who fled, informed
themselves of the manner of the fight, and caused them to face about and return
on their Enemies.

The Emperor seeing this was resolvdd to receive them, but they still made
haste, and arriving near the Emperors Forces, six Knights advancing forwards
and couching their Lances, ran upon the Emperor and his Forces, and with the
furiousness of the Encounter they dismounted five Knights that opposed them,
and the Emperor who was the sixth, lost both his Stirrops; they quickly passed
on and ran furiously into their Enemies Squadrons, and showed the admirableness
of their valor by the mighty blows they gave, for in less than a quarter of an
hour they had slain and dismounted above a hundred Knights: and in this time
their Forces by their example followed them, and joining with theie Enemies
soon compelled them, in despite of the Emperor and the two Kings of Albania
and Georgia, to retire to the rest of the Army. When they were all arrived
there they gave a loud shout, and cried out, Babylon, Babylon: This noise gave
a fresh Alarm to the Armies, and Don Bellianis wondering thereat, went to see
the occasion, doubting that the Enemy had got more Aid: but he was soon
satisfied of the contrary, for he knew the Common Soldiers by their Colors:
but he was much more astonished when he saw the incomparable Deeds of the six
valiant Champions, and indeed they were all unknown to him, he coming nearer to
them discovered one of them by his Armor to be Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia,
wherefore he went to him, and said: Ah worthy Friend! great pains have you
taken to come thus far to my assistance: the Phenician courteously replied to
him, Noble Prince, I should not think it any trouble to travel throughout the
whole world to serve you, especially in so good company as I have brought with
me; then he knowing that Don Bellianis was willing to be informed who were in
his company, told him that his Companions were his two valiant Brothers, Don
Glarineo and Don Lucidamore, and his Cousin Florispiano of Swevia, and the two
other Knights were somewhat strangers, but both valiant Knights; and so they
were indeed, the one being the valiant Peter of Ireland, Knight of the Keys,
and the other the Knight of the Wolf, and that they had brought from the
Souldan of Babylon fifty thousand men for his assistance.

Don Bellianis being very joyful hereat soon entered the Fight, and was now
again resolved to conquer or die, and that this day should put an end to the
War: In this resolution he went to his Companion the Prince of Numidia, and
informed him hereof, and telling him that he would with a Party of Horse break
through his Enemies Forces, and get between them and the City and hinder their
entrance, and that he would only desire him to prosecute the Fight, assuring
him that there were such valiant Knights come, that he questioned not to have
the Victory.

Thus did he leave the Numidian and went to execute his purpose, and so he did,
and soon brake through the Forces of the Enemy. The Prince of Numidia being
thus encouraged, drew up all his Forces and freshly assailed his Enemies, and
in short time by the assistance of the six Champions, and the Forces they
brought, he got so great advantage of his Enemies, that he forced them to
retire; which they did not do so well but that many of them were slain. Among
the rest, Peter of Ireland did gloriously; for he slew the Knight of Fame,
Cousin to the Emperor, and many Knights and Giants that were near him. The two
Princes Clarineo and Lucidamore took the King of Georgia Prisoner, maugre the
resistance of all his Guards, and the Knight of the Tiger hardly escaped with
life, being very much wounded by Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia.

The Emperor of Trebizond seeing that by the means of this fresh Supply he
should lose the Day, resolved to retire before he should be quite vanquished,
wherefore he caused a Retreat to be sounded, and so retired to enter the City,
but Don Bellianis who expected him, hindered him therefrom and fiercely
assaulted him: greatly surprised was the Emperor when he saw himself assaulted
on both sides, wherefore he advanced forwards to see who it was that hindered
his Retreat; but he was so bravely received by his Rival, that notwithstanding
his utmost endeavors he could not get off; but after he had received many
wounds by Don Bellianis, was taken Prisoner: the rest of his Forces in the mean
time seeing the Field lost, left him and fled in great disorder into the City.

Great was the sorrow in the City for the loss of the Emperor, they not yet
knowing whether he were alive or dead, none of the Commanders returned back but
the King of Albania: the King of Georgia being taken, and the Knight of Fame
being killed, the Knight of the Tiger was brought in wounded, and thus the
Night being come the horror of the day was covered.

Don Bellianis seeing the Emperors Forces were got into the City, caused a
Retreat to be sounded, and so repaired to his Tent, which was set up near the
City Walls, and the prince of Numidia being come to him, they delivered the two
Prisoners, the Emperor and the King of Georgia, into safe custody under a
strong Guard, commanded by the Knight of Hope, and then they sent for all those
valiant Knights who had assisted them. They quickly came to the Tent, where
they were kindly embraced by the two Generals, the Prince of Numidia being very
joyful to see his Friend Don Bellianis his two Brothers, who had discovered
themselves: they were on all sides joyful for this happy meeting, and much more
in that it had been so fortunate.

The Prince Don Clarineo delivered two Letters to his Brother, one from the
Souldan, and another from his Daughter the Princess Florisbella. Don Bellianis
looking on that from the Souldan, was greatly abashed when he saw the
Superscription to be thus: For the most accomplished Prince and valiant Knight,
Don Bellianis of Greece: but he was astonished when he had opened it, and found
therein these Lines:

The LETTER of the Souldan of Babylon, to Don Bellianis of Greece.
Noble Prince,
I Must beg excuse for the mean Treatment I gave you, the cause was my
ignorance of your Quality: had I known your Princely Extraction I should have
used you like the Son of so great an Emperor as is the Emperor of Greece: but
your Virtues and Magnanimity did well enough declare your Descent; wherefore I
once again ask your Pardon, and do promise you as a requital, my true
Friendship, and so soon as by your incomparable Valor you have put some end to
this War, I shall desire your presence, that we may by some Action testify the
Esteem we have of your Friendship. We question not but you will receive a
satisfactory Answer from the Princess our Daughter, who testifies not only a
Respect, but some Affection for you, and assure your self that we shall not
hinder it, but give her her freedom, which we suppose will be to your
satisfaction. We have gained so much favor for your sake, as to have the
Assistance of your Brothers and Relations, whom we have sent here with some
Supplies, and do intend to send you more, if occasion be, but we hope that this
will be enough, not only to make our Enemy to be reasonable, but also to give
him some sensible trouble for that he has given us. Thus desiring of the Gods
a Protection for you, We rest

Your Friend, The Souldan.


Great was the astonishment and joy of Don Bellianis at this Letter, now
concluding himself to be the happiest of all men living. Having read this
Letter, he ^^^cted the reading of the other for a more private occasion, and so
again welcomed his Friends, but especially the valiant Knight Peter of Ireland,
who was a stranger to him, and in whom he saw a great magnanimity. Thus leaving
off Consultatious till the morning, every one departed to Tents provided for
them: After they were departed, Don Bellianis breaking open the Letter from the
Princess Florisbella, he found in it thus written:

The LETTER of the Princess Florisbella, to Don Bellianis.
SIR,
YOur Letter gave me much satisfaction, but your presence would give me much
more: and now the arrival of your Brethren and Relations with a Letter from my
Cousin the Princess Aurora, has given that satisfaction to my Father that I
was in much trouble how to do it. He is very well acquainted with your
Condition, and has desired me to accept you for my Knight which he needed not
to have desired, had he known how deeply your dear remembrance is fixed in my
heart: in fine, there wants nothing now but your presence to make me happy, and
I question not but this will the more stir you to the destruction of your
Rival, who I account for my mortal enemy; yet although I desire his ruin, I
would not have it purchased with your danger, therefore as you are mine, fail
not to preserve your self, and hazard not your person beyond the ordinary. I
hope the arrival of these your Relations, and the Forces they bring with them
will put an end to the War, that my trouble for you may end with your presence,
which I continually wish for. My Cousin Mattarosa fails not to keep you in my
remembrance, although she needs not give her self that trouble; ho^^^er it is a
pleasure for me continually to hear of you: all that I desire is, that I may
see you with all expedition. that I may have the satisfaction of your Company,
in the mean time I will prepare things with my Mother that shall be to your
satisfaction; I pray for the future question not my Constancy, but assure your
self I shall ever be

Your constant Friend, Florisbella.


Don Bellianis having read this Letter kissed it a thousand times, and could
not satisfy himself with once reading of it, so pleasant were these charming
Lines, and in this satisfaction he went to rest, where though he took little by
reason of the great content he had received by the Letters, yet he was up early
the next morning, and mounting on his horse he viewed the Field, which was the
bloodiest spectacle that ever was beheld, it being bestrowed with the bodies of
almost two hundred thousand men, whereof one hundred and fifty thousand were of
the Enemies. Afterward he retired into his Tent, where some of the Commanders
and Knights were come to wait on him to know his pleasure, so he sent for the
rest of the Chief of the Officers, who entering into Consultation, did resolve
to leave the Field in possession of Baltasano, and one hundred thousand men to
prosecute the War, and he and the rest would return with their Prisoners to
Babylon, to know the pleasure of the Souldan. This was generally well liked of,
and accordingly executed, so that the next day they departed, as they had
agreed, and marched toward Babylon.

CHAP. XXXII. How Magdalena Princess of Sardinia being left alone in the Island
of Scicillia, made a great Complaint for the absence of her Knight Peter,
Knight of the Keys, and how she traveled into Ireland to find him out, where
missing him she caused a Monastery to be built, resolving there to live in
disguise in expectation of his return.
WE will now for some time leave the Princes Don Bellianis of Greece, and his
Brethren and Companions, with their Prisoners and others in their return to
Babylon, who marched thither-ward in great content and pleasure, they being
greatly satisfied in what they had done, only Peter of Ireland still continued
extremely discontented for the loss of his dear Lady the Princess Magdalena, to
whom we will return, who as we told you was left in the Island of Sicillia,
being very weary of her travel, slept a great while, but at length she awaked,
and fetching a deep sigh, lifted up her head, and looking about her for her
Knight, she could not see him; whereupon she arose from the ground, and walking
about she could not find him, at which she much wondered; and in great
perplexity she made many turnings and walks about the place where she lay,
sometimes she went to the water side to look that ways, and then again she
returned, but altogether unsatisfied; at length the night grew on and he
returned not, then was she much dismayed, and fell into these grievous
Lamentations:

Oh unfortunate Princess! how much unhappiness has thy rashness caused thee
already, and to what end will this turn? but yet how could I expect any
blessing in my actions, having left my Parents and Friends, who it may be at
this time are in as great perplexity for my departure as I am in, and it is but
the Justice of Heaven that I should bear them company in their Complaints: but
alas they are safe and well in their own Court, and I am here in a strange
place, having newly escaped the danger of the Seas, in which it had been better
I had been drowned, than now to be devoured by wild Beasts, or to expect a
wor^er death: It had been far better for me to have lost my life in the Seas,
for then I should have had my beloved Friend to have born me company, but now I
must perish alone and most miserable. Ah Knight of ^h^ Keys, what is become of
the? whither art thou gone? ^^^^^^nly this was not done by thy good will, for
so much barbarousness could not enter the heart of any man, as to leave me here
in such an inhumane manner. But why should I condemn thee, or complain on thee,
for certainly thou do more deserve my pity than anger: it may be thou by some
mischance wandering in these Woods art devoured by wild Beasts, who have by
this time entombed thee in their hungry Maws. Oh that I were certain of that,
and that I knew where that beast should remain, I would go seek him out and
offer my self to be devoured by him, so that I might at least accompany thee in
death.

Having thus finished her Lamentation, she with extreme grief fell down to the
ground; but bethinking her self that she was a Christian, and therefore was
bound to preserve her life so long as she could, she arose and sought about for
a place at present to ly down more conveniently to repose her self till the
morning: after some travel she found a place near the water side that was
somewhat commodious for that purpose, being encompassed with great Reeds, where
she laid her self down expecting the morning; which being come, she not having
taken any rest, arose; and not knowing what to do, nor whither to go, being in
a great Wood, at length with much difficulty climbed up a Tree, and being come
to the top looked about her, to see if she could discover any Houses or People:
At length she saw some People afar off walking, being glad of that, descended
the Tree and went forwards to that place, which was a Common Road; and seeing
people coming she retired into the Wood a little way, to consider with her self
what was necessary to be done. Then she resolved not to go home to her Father,
but rather to travel toward Ireland the Country of her dearly beloved Knight,
believing that if he escaped with life he would go thither, and thither she
intended to go and expect him: but the habit she was in being very gorgeous and
costly, she knew that it would be very inconvenient to travel in, and therefore
she resolved with the first convenience to alter her Apparel: she quickly had
the opportunity of putting this her resolution into execution; for the next
woman that went by was a Pilgrim, to whom she went, and desiring her to come a
little out of the way they retired into the Wood, where the Princess told her
that she had a request to make to her, which she desired her to grant, and that
it could not be in the least to her prejudice.

The good woman seeing her in so rich Apparel, thought that it would be ill
manners in her to deny her any thing, and therefore she consented to her
Request: Then the Princess told her that she desired her to exchange her
Apparel with her. The woman at first was unwilling, but at length she
consented, and so changing their Habits, the Princess likewise gave her some
money, and so they parted.

The Princess being thus accoutred, desired to know the way to the next Port
Town, to which she traveled, and being come thither, she desired to embarque
her self: and enquiring for shipping she found one going for England, into
which she embarked her self, resolving never to return to her Father, but
still to travel in search of her Knight.

The Ship in short time arrived at England, and there she was exposed to a new
travel through that Country, and then taking shipping again she went for
Ireland, where when she arrived she traveled toward Wexford, the place of her
dear Knights Nativity: At length she arrived there, and enquiring for the Earl
his Father, found him and all his Family in much discontent for the absence of
his Son.

Thus being arrived here, and resolving to abide in this place, she caused
Workmen to build a small Monastery with the Money she brought from her Fathers
Court, and when it was builded she Dedicated it to the Honor of Saint Peter the
Holy Apostle, in memory of her dear Knight.

In this place she enclosed her self, resolving to live a religious Life all
her days in expectation of the return of her dearly beloved Knight. Here she
got an acquaintance with the Earl and Countess, Father and Mother to the Knight
of the Keys, who seeing her of so Religious a Life and Conversation, acquainted
themselves with her, delighting much in her Society, and likewise did very much
countenance her in her Undertakings, and oftentimes invited her home to their
Habitation: to which place she sometimes went, otherwise she never departed
from her Monastery, still entertaining poor sick Travelers therein. Thus did
she shut up her self from all the world, while he was much afflicted for her
absence, and was in continual care and trouble for her Loss.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Earl of Munster and his Wife the Countess did believe
their Son Peter to be drowned, and how they informed the Holy Magdalena
thereof, and of the great Sorrow they all made.
THus continued these Personages, the Earl and his Wife, and the Holy
Magdalena, in continual care and fear, but they were all continually in hopes
one day to hear of the safe Return of their Son and Friend: but they were much
perplexed at an Adventure that happened one day, which was in this manner.

Certain Fishermen having been abroad at Sea a fishing, amongst other Fishes
which they caught one happened to be a very fair Sturgeon, at which they wondered,
and at their return to Wexford they went to the Earl, and presented the Fish as
a great Novelty to him: the which be thankfully received, and showing the same
to his Countess, she caused it immediately to be cut in pieces: But oh strange
Accident! in the Belly of this Fish she discovered somewhat that was red, which
having taken out, they found it to be a red Purse of Cloth, and having opened
the same there was in it three Jewels, which she earnestly beholding, knew to
be the same she had delivered to her Son Peter at such time as he departed from
her, when he first began his Travels.

This sight gave her great astonishment, and she going immediately to the Earl
her Husband showed them to him, and he knowing them was as much troubled, and
then they certainly concluded and saw that all their hopes of the Return of
their Son Peter was in vain; for they verily believed that he had been east
away at Sea, and the Fishes had devoured him: and in this opinion they
remained, making great Lamentations for the loss of him, never more expecting
to see him. Then they immediately put themselves and all their Family into
Mourning Apparel, and hung all their House in Mourning, and ordered every thing
as if he had been certainly dead, and they had seen him buried, so confident
were they of the truth of this adventure. And thus continued they in geeat and
private mourning for many days, being seen of none but their own Family. So
soon as the Countess went abroad, she went to the Monastery to visit the Holy
Magdalena, where when she was arrived she expressed by her outward looks and
habit, the inward sorrow of her mind.

The Holy Maid being desirous to know the occasion of this, believing it to be
some extraordinary matter, desired the Countess to inform her of the cause of
her immoderate sorrow, the which she did with many tears, and the Holy Maid
accompanied her in her tears, verily believing this to be true, and that now
she should never more see her dear Knight Peter. The Countess supposing that
she shed those tears out of affection to her loss, thinking to be consolated by
her, was forced her self to give her some consolation, so great was her grief,
but she little thought that the Holy Maid was so deeply concerned in this
occasion.

After many lamentations and tears, the Countess desired the Holy Maid that she
would come and visit her oftener, that they might lament together, and so she
departed, leaving the fair Magdalena in the greatest grief in the world. The
Countess being gone, she retired her self into her Chamber, where throwing her
self upon her Bed, she thus began: Ah unfortunate Maid, how far better had it
been that thou had never been born, than thou should be the occasion of so
much grief: I was the cause that the good Knight Peter adventured himself in
such manner, that he has now lost his life; and therefore it is my cause that
so much grief is come to his Parents for his loss. Certainly he loosing of me,
has traveled so many Countries in searching for me, that he is now cast away
at Sea and become food for Fishes. It had been much better that I had never
been fair, or at least that I had never consented to have left my Parents, so
to torment and afflict them; but Heaven is just and has now deservedly sent
this loss to punish mefor my disobedience: Ah what shall now become of me? I
shall never again see the fare of my dear Knight, nor never give any comfort to
my dear Parents in my sight, for (since I have been so unfortunate) here will I
end my life, and for the future do better service to God for the expiation of
my sins.

Thus did she lament, and thus continued she in this place in the greatest
devotion in the world, never stirring out but to the Earls, where she went
sometimes, to accompany them in their Lamentations for the loss of their Son
and her Friend, resolving that so long as she lived she would not discover her
Quality and Condition to any one: and in this place we must for some time leave
her, and return to her dearly beloved Peter, and the rest of the Princes and
Knights who were in their way to Babylon: but we will first by the way tell you
the News that came to Babylon to the Souldan and the fair Princess Florisbella.

CHAP. XXIV. How News came to the Souldan at Babylon of the Victory obtained
against the Emperor of Trebizond, and how the Souldan and many of his Court
went out to meet Don Bellianis and his Companions.
THe Souldan of Babylon was very joyful for the Arrival of the two Princes
Cla^ineo and Lucidamore, Brothers to Don Bellianis and the rest of the Knights
their Companions, and he and all his Court had much hope that they and the
Forces which they conducted to Don Bellianis, would be able to reduce the
Emperor of Trebizond to better terms than had been already propounded. The
Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa were greatly satisfied at the Arrival of
the Knights, and did both believe that in short time they should have the
company of their Knights; and therefore the Princess Florisbella endeavored to
put her Affairs into such order, that Don Bellianis at his return might give
her and himself the satisfaction she desired, wherefore she taking an
opportunity when only her self, and Mother, and her Cousin the Princess
Mattarosa were together, she began to her Mother thus:

Madam, good fortune have we had, that the Gods have at so necessary a time as
this, sent us so valiant Knights to defend our Empire when it was most in
danger: but withal I am very sorry and discontented that my person should give
so great on occasion, as to endanger the lives of such valiant Knights, and I
would to the Gods that we could invent some way to prevent this trouble for the
future.

The Empress replied, I question not Daughter, but what Forces are already goue
(with the assistance of the Gods, a just Cause, and the Aid of so many brave
Princes and Knights) will be able without any more trouble to bring home
Victory, or at least to force the Emperor of Trebizond to such a Peace as shall
be as disadvantagious to him, as he intended to us: but there is something else
further to be considered of, for so long as you remain unmarried, you being the
only Heir of this Empire, we shall be in the like danger, either the love or
ambition of some Persons will readily promyt them to give us a trouble;
therefore dear Daughter, since your years of childehood are past, and you are
capable of making a Choice, it would be necessary and convenient for you,
amongst so many Princes and great Personages that sue for your favor, that you
would choose one whom you think fit to make your Husband, that thereby all the
rest may be satisfied, and we left quiet, and that your Father and I in our old
age may live without this trouble.

Madam, replied the Princess, if either you or my Father would propound some
one that were fitting for my Quality and Condition, I should be ready to bend
my inclinations toward him, and willingly content you therein.

Madam, said the Princess Mattarosa, I suppose the Princess my Cousin would
willingly satisfy your self and her Father in this particular: but if you
please to hear my advice, I shall endeavor to please you both. I believe it the
most necessary thing to be considered of in this Choice, to have one that shall
be both valiant and able to defend this Country from all its Enemies: these
Wars have testified that you have Enemies, and therefore it is necessary as
well to prevent a future danger as to end this: there are several brave Princes
and Knights engaged in this war, and out of the same one might be thought of,
that might be a fit Match, and if I may with freedom speak I shall name the
Person.

The Emperess who had heard her Cousin, liked well of her counsel, and
therefore told her that she should willingly not only hear her, but also give
her consent thereto, provided it were such a person as was every way both by
Descent and Valor, deserving, and if her Daughters good will and inclination
were added thereto.

The Princess Mattarosa (very well knowing that she should give no distaste to
her Cousin in preceding) replied, That the person whom she thought most fit
for a Husband for her Cousin was the most accomplished Person for Valor,
Virtue, and Princely Descent in the whole world, and the person that that
Empire and they all were most obliged to: and, says she, I shall not need to
name him further, for this Character does sufficiently testify that it can be
none other but the Prince Don Bellianis of Greece.

The Emperess replied, That truly she always had a very great esteem for that
Prince, and she supposed that gratitude had caused some inclination in her
Daughters mind; and says she, I am sure that he has deserved more of him than
all men living: and could I sinde that she would be willing to accept of him, I
would not only give my own consent to the Match, but I would endeavor to
persuade the Souldan my Husband thereto, and I question not but the many
Services which that good Prince has done him, will engage him to give him that
satisfaction, if he desires it.

As for that Madam, said Mattarosa, I am sure that the valiant Prince Don
Bellianis is extremely amorous of my Cousin Florisbella, and that it has been
the sole cause of his coming hither, which has been so much for the advantage
of us all, he himself told me this, and I think my self not only obliged to
tell you, but to do what else for him I can.

The Princess Florisbella seeing things brought to this pass, thus answered
them, Dear Mother, since it is your pleasure for me to speak in this occasion,
I shall do it with all freedom, and therefore assure your self that ever since
I first saw the Prince Don Bellianis, I have had a very great inclination for
him, but I have smothered it till now I hear he is a Person not only fit by his
worth and desert, but your esteem of him to be so, and therefore if you and my
Father should be so contented, I shall think my self happy in having a person
so every way accomplished for my Husband, and I question not but his worth will
sufficiently plead for him to my Father.

The Emperess being highly satisfied in the Answer of her Daughter, said that
she would immediately take such Orders with the Souldan, as she would not only
know his mind herein, but also if occasion be, persuade him thereto to the
satisfaction of all, and so she departed from her Cousin and Daughter, leaving
them in the greatest satisfaction in the world.

The Emperess went to the Souldan her Husband, and discoursed of this matter to
him, who was so pleased therewith, that there was nothing wanting but the
presence of Don Bellianis to put a conclusion to the matter, and therefore they
all wished for an end of the war. In these t^arms they were when a Knight armed
at all poines came into the presence of the Souldan, and doing his ordinary
Reverence, told him that he came from the valiant Prince Don Bellianis, and his
Companions, and had brought a Letter to him, and thereupon the Souldan caused
it to be opened, wherein he found these words written.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Souldan of Babylon.
Dread Lord,
Since my last to you, our Success in your Wars has been very various, for the
Emperor of Trebizond continuing in his wilfulness, endeavored all he could to
lengthen the War, which he effected by the continual arrival of fresh Forces:
but however the Justice of your Cause gave us sufficient Success; for alrhough
your Forces did rather diminish than increase, yet we still joined the better:
At length we being wearied with the tediousness of the War, resolved though to
our disadvantage, to hazard all in one Battle which we both began and continued
with equal success till new Forces arriving at his Army somewhat discouraged
your Soldiers; but however I resolved to put an end to the War with that one
days Battle, if possible, and therefore giving your Forces fresh encouragement,
by my endeavors we continued the Fight; but most fortunate was it for us that
those Forces you sent under the Conduct of my Brothers and Friends, came at
that time so opportunely, for it so discouraged our Enemies, and gave so much
encouragement to your Soldiers, that all resolved to make this use thereof,
either to conquer or die. This their Resolution they well enough performed, for
after a long and bloody Battle, our Enemies were forced out of the Field (which
they had before kept) into the City, to their great loss: not only the Common
Soldiers and many brave Knights suffered and lost their lives, but the Chief
Commanders also. The Emperor it was my fortune to take Prisoner, and the King
of Georgia who had assisted him with fifty thousand men, was taken by my two
Brethren, and the rest put to flight, so that we may conclude the War to be at
an end. I have left the City with a hundred thousand men besieged by Don
Baltasano, and with the rest am coming toward Babylon, to know your further
Commands, which what ever they be, shall be surely executed, for since your
incomparable Daughter has had so much goodness, as to admit me to the honor of
being her Servant, I sind my self capable for any attempt.

I shall bring with me the Emperor, whose presumption gave her a, discontent,
who shall either ask her pardon for his so bold attempt, or be otherwise
disposed of as you shall think fit. I thought good to send you this Messenger,
that you might participate in the Contentment we all receive by this Victory,
which you may account absolute, or else if you please to command it shall be
quickly perfected, either to the gaining of the Empire of Trebizond, or what
other Kingdoms you shall please, or else to the loss of the life of

Your humblest Servant, Don Bellianis.


If this News was pleasing to the Souldan you may easily judge, and he soon
expressed it by his Commands that a general Ringing should be made throughout
his whole Empire: And he then immediately assembled his Council together, to
advise what was necessary to be done; wherein it was concluded that he himself
and all the Grandees of his Court, and all the Forces that were then in the
City prepared for the War, should the next day march in triumph to meet the
valiant Don Bellianis and his worthy Companions.

The Princess Florisbella was soon informed of this Victory, not only by that
Letter of her Fathers, but by one of her own sent by Don Bellianis to her,
which when she had received it, she opened and read as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Princess Florisbella.
Dear Princess,
THe tediousness of the War has given me a very sensible trouble, not for any
thing of difficulty I found therein, but for my absence from your Divine
Presence: but now (thanks to the Gods) we have put a Period thereto, the
Justice of your Cause commanding no less; for we have not only sacrificed the
lives of many of of your Enemies to your just Anger, but I have in my custody
the persons of two of the most considerable, the Emperor your Grand Enemy, and
the King of Georgia one of his Alliance. I beg an Excuse for my not giving you
a particular account of our Battle and Victory, doubting the tediousness
thereof would displease you. I shall bring the Emperor my Rival into your
presence, but I suppose he will not be so impudent as to persevere in his
wilfulness of having your Divine Person at his dispose, nor at the least
discontent you; if I thought he would, I should hinder him there from by
bereaving him of his life: It was my intention to have sacrificed his life long
since to your just displeasure, and thereby have rid my self of a Rival; but he
fell into my hands at such a time that I could not in point of Honor kill him,
wherefore he shall come and receive his Doom from your own mouth, and I am
indifferent whether you give him life or death, so you will pronounce so
favorable a Sentence for me, that I may enjoy that with your good will which
he would have compelled you to. Madam, I hope, and partly expect your
performance of this, not for any merit or desert of my own, but out of the
excess of goodness and mercy the Gods have so plentifully endued you withal.
Madam I shall now cease writing till I come to your presence, but be confident
of this that I shall never cease to be

The humblest of your Servants, Don Bellianis.


The Princess was sufficiently satisfied in the receipt of this Letter, but she
hoped for a further satisfaction in that of his presence, which she expected in
a few days, and was glad she had used the late discourse with her Mother. Thus
was both Court and City in great content, and the Souldan the next day went out
of the City, accompanied by his Nobility and many others, to meet the Prince
Don Bellianis and his Companions.

CHAP. XXV. How the Souldan of Babylon met the Prince Don Bellianis and his
Companions, and how they all arrived at the City of Babylon.
WIth great content and pleasure did the Souldan and all his Company ride to
meet Don Bellianis and all his Companions, who were all merry and jocund for
the good fortune they had in vanquishing their Enemies; but he who was best
pleased was Don Bellianis himself, in that now he was so near the presence of
his Honorable Lady, at whose hands he hoped to receive so much favor, as would
sufficiently satisfy him for all his pains and travel. Thus did they all ride
on, when coming within half a days Journey of Babylon, a Messenger came to them
to inform them that the Souldan himself in person, and several of his Grand^es
and Nobility, were in the way coming to meet them: At which N^ws they all put
themselves in order to receive him, and so in very good order they marched
forwards: Don Bellianis being mounted on a stately Horse came in the Front,
riding between his two Princely Brothers Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, next
to them came the four valiant Knights, Contumeliano of Phe^icia, Florispiano of
Swevia, Peter of Ireland, and Trion Knight of the Wolf, and all the rest of the
other Knights and great Personages in good order. In this equipage and order
did they march when the Souldan and his Followers met them. At the sight of
whom Don Bellianis lightly leaping from his Horse, marched on foot to the
Souldan; who seeing him dismaunted did likewise alight, and Don Bellianis
falling on his knee, humbly desired the Souldan to permit him to kiss his
hands: but the Souldan refusing that, caused him to arise, and then the other
Knights being come together, the Souldan having embraced Don Bellianis with
much affection in the sight of all those many worthy Personages, then in the
hearing of them all he said as follows:

Most Mighty Prince, We have great Cause to be thankful to the Gods for the
Mercy they have showed us, in sending you into this Country at a time when we
were in so great distress; for without your presence we had all e're this time
bin in so great a strait, that our fortunes, nay our very lives had been in
very great hazard: there is none of us here but if he enjoys Wife, Children, or
Estate, or Liberty, is obliged to you for the protection thereof, so that this
whole Empire is of right belonging to you, it having been so marvellously
protected, and miraculously defended by your invincible Valor. Therefore most
noble Prince, as all We have or enjoy is absolutely your Right to possess, so
let us know what, or how We shall make you some satisfaction: As for our own
part, Our Self, Our Empress, and Our Daughter, shall be wholly at your dispose,
and we shall all joyfully obey your just Desires or Commands, knowing that the
Gods who have endowed you with so much Valor, have certainly bestowed on you
the like quantity of Virtue; and therefore most Noble Prince, I beseech you let
us know your desires, and they shall be absolutely performed and obeyed.

Don Bellianis held his peace with very much difficulty, being very unwilling
to hear the Souldan go on in such Commendations of him, but with^l he was
unwilling to disturb him till he had done: but so soon as he saw he had ended
his Discourse, he thus replied:

Most redoubted Souldan, I am very sorry that I should give your Highness so
much trouble, as to come thus far to meet your poor Servants, but much more
discontented and ashamed that you should here before this Noble Company heap so
many commendations on me who have acted the least of all this Company: but if I
had done any thing worthy of note, it is no more than I am bound by the Order
of Knighthood, and the Bonds of Civility and true Virtue to do; for what I have
done bath been to relieve the oppressed, and nothing but Justice; with which
Actions the Heavens are pleased we should exercise our selves, and for that end
are we created, one bare acknowledgment is a sufficient recompense: but what I
have performed has been by virtue of the Commands of that Incomparable Princess
your Daughter, who has made me so happy as to admit me to be her Servant, and
in whose just quarrel I shall dare to do any thing that she shall further
command me, not questioning but her goodness will give me a reward sufficient:
and if you please to let me continue her Servant, and give me freedom in that,
I shall esteem my self in the greatest height of happiness.

To this the Souldan replied, Prince of Greece, I am so far satisfied in my
Daughters mind, that she has not only a great esteem of your Virtues, but
also an affection for your Person, and if you are pleased with her, and think
the enjoyment of her Person will be any recompense for your great Labors, be
confident that you may have a free possession thereof, and we shall think our
selves happy that we can have so brave a Prince for our Son in Law, by whose
power and magnanimity we question not but we shall be able to defend this
Empire.

Don Bellianis having heard this, immediately fell on his knees, and
notwithstanding all the resistance of the Souldan* kissed his hand, and
straightly embracing him, in most humble manner.

Ah Mighty Sir! What Thanks or Rerurns am I able to make for this so immense
and most desirable Favor? were I possessed of the whole Worlds Empire, I
should yet esteem my self too mean a person to enjoy so great a happiness as
that of the Person of your most Incomparable Daughter, whose rare Perfections
command all the Potentates in the whole World to be at her dispose: And Sir,
assure your self, that for the future it shall be my endeavors to conquer
Kingdoms, and vanquish-Kings, that I may lay their Crowns at her feet, as a
just Tribute to her Virtues.

Having thus spoken, he arose from the ground, and retiring back a few steps,
he permitted his Brothers and Companions to go forwards and be received by the
Souldan, and then he himself went forwards and kindly saluted the Nobility of
Babylon. Thus having done they all remounted their Horses, and in good order
marched toward Babylon, but it grew so late that the Souldan resolved not to
enter the City that night but to stay at a Palace of his a league from the
City: at which place they being arrived, took up their Quarters for that night
and prepared for their entrance into the City the next morning; which being
come, they all again mounted their horses and set forwards. This day the Prince
Don Bellianis and the Souldan rode on together, and then his two Brethren, and
so the rest of the Princes and Knights in order: When they came near the City,
the Magistrates thereof came and presented themselves in their richest
Habiliment, and made a Congratulory Oration to Don Bellianis: and so all the
way that they rode he had several Orations and Presents made him; for which he
gave them many thanks.

The two Prisoners, the Emperor of Trebizond and the King of Georgia, came in
the midst of the Army, being placed in two Chariots with Chains and Ferters of
Gold, and a great Guard about them, and thus did arrive at the Palace, where
they were met by the Emperess and her Ladias. The Princes and Knights soon left
their horses, and on foot advanced forwards, where Don Bellianis falling on his
knees was kindly and lovingly embraced by the Emperess; but when he came before
the presence of his Princess he kneeled on the ground, not daring to cast one
glance of his eyes upon her divine countenance. She was this day dressed in a
Gown of Sky-colored Satin embroidered with Gold, and richly beset with
Diamonds and Rubies, represeneing Stars in the Heavens, but her Face appeared
to be more glorious that the Sun when he is in his greatest luster: her Bosom
fitly represented the Milky whey, and in all her parts there was so much
excellency and divinity, that it dazzled the eyes of the Beholders. Our poor
Prince was all this while on the ground, not daring either to look up or speak:
but having her by one of her hands more white than the driven Snow, he most
amorously kissed that, and fetching many sighs, bathed it in tears. She well
knowing that he was surprised, said to him, What, most Noble Prince, after
having conquered many enemies, have you not confidence to behold a Lady your
Friend? He then recovering himself, and looking on her Face, said: Dear
Princess, so much transcendent light proceeds from your divine Countenance,
that I am not holy enough to look up, lest for my presumption I be stricken
blind. But considering with himself that he was observed by many in that
passion, he again saluting her hand arose, and making an obeisance passed on
toward the Princess Mattarosa, who kindly received him: and so the rest of the
Knights having performed their duties to the Ladies, he went to his Princess,
and seeing the Souldan was leading the Emperess amay, he likewise took the
Princess by the hand and went after them: after he was come into the great Hall
they disarmed themselves, and a costly banquet being prepared they all sat
down; which being done, the Souldan did then declare to his Emperess and
Daughter what he had promised to Don Bellianis, wherewith they were so well
satisfied, that he intended forthwith to have them married; and therefore not
only caused all those Princes that were there present to continue in the Court
till the Ceremony should be performed, but he likewise sent into all the
adjacent. Countries to summon all the Knights to come at that time, which he
intended to be within fourteen days.

CHAP. XXXVI. How the most Renowned Prince Don Bellianis of Greece, Son to the
Emperor of Constantinople, was married to the Princess Florisbella, Daughter to
the Souldan of Babylon; and of the Solemnity of the Wedding, and the Tilts and
Tournaments then holden in honor of the same.
GReat was the Preparations that were made for the S^lemnity of the Wedding
between the Prince of Greece and the fair Princess of Babylon, and many were
the great Personages that came to Babylon to assist or attend at that
Solemnity. The King and Queen of Antioch, Don Brianel and Aurora, with a Troop
of five hundred gallant Knights came tither (as they believed they were by duty
bound) to wait upon their Relations: and the King and Queen of Pharez, Don
Alfiron and Persiana, with another Troop of five hundred Knights likewise, came
at this time to tender their love and service to the most accomplished Don
Bellianis, and great was the resort of several other Princes and Knights,
Princesses and Ladies from all parts, to see and assist at this great Ceremony,
so that not only the City, but all the adjacent Towns were filled with rich
Tents, and Companies of Ladies and Knights.

Don Bellianis and his Princess Florisbella spent much of their time in
welcoming and treating these persons that came so far to honor them: and the
Souldan and his Emperess were excream joyful that they had been so fortunate as
to match their Daughter to so brave a Prince, and one so well beloved, not
questioning but now their Empire would be more flourishing than ever, and they
should be out of all fear of the power of any of their Neighboring Enemies.

At length the day so much expected and desired came, when all things being in
readiness, those great Personages set forwards to the Temple: The Fair Princess
Florisbella was led thither by the two Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, both Brothers to Don Bellianis; and he was led thither
by the Princess Mattarosa of Numidia, and the fair Princess Cynthia Sister to
the Prince of Mesapotamia, the rest of the Princesses and Princes, Ladies and
Knights, in great state and very good order attending: Being come to the
Temple, and the usual Solemnities performed, they returned back again to the
Palace, where a most rich and gallant Dinner was provided. The Tables being
furnished with all man^er of Delicates which the Luxury of Asia could produce.
Afner Dinner was ended, every one made haste to the place appointed for the
Tournament, the Princesses and Ladies seating themselves on a Scaffold erected
on one side of the Tiltpard for that purpose, in the midst of which Scaffold
was placed two Thrones, on the one was seated the Souldan of Babylon and his
Emperess, and on the other the Prince Don Bellianis and the Incomparable
Flonisbella his Bride, and the rest of the Kings and Queens, Princes and
Princesses, Knights and Ladies in several places appointed for that purpose. No
sooner were they all seated, but silence was commanded, and after the sound of
twelve Trumpets, Protlamation was made that all such Knights as were there
present, orshould during the term of the Tournament arrive, should have free
liberty of showing their utmost endeavors in the Acts of Chivalry both at the
Sword and Lance, provided they did conform themselves to such Orders as were
appointed, or should be appointed either by the Souldan or Don Bellianis. And
it was further proclaimed, that the Tournament should continue for four days.

The first day Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia had leave with fifty Knights to
maintain and keep the Field in Honor of the new Married Pair, against all
Opponents. The second day was appointed for Peter of Ireland, with the same
number of Knights, The third day for Don Lucidamore of Thessaly. And the fourth
and last for Don Clarineo of Spain,

Soon after this Proclamation was made, the Prince Contumeliano entered the
Field accompanied with fifty Knights, and after he had done his usual Reverence
to the Souldan, and the rest, he took a Lance from one of his Attendance and
passed forwards: But he was no sooner arrived at the further end of the Field,
but he heard a noise of Trumpets, and after small attendance he saw a Knight
completely armed in a white Armor, with a Bear painted on his Shield, who being
accompanied with a brave Train of Knights entered the Lists, and having passed
on to the place where the Souldan and Don Bellianis sat, and made his
Reverence, he advanced forwards to the other end, and there prepared himself
for a Course against Don Contumeliano; which Contumeliano seeing prepared
himself to receive him, and so accordingly they ran against one another with
such force, that their Lances flew into the Air all broken into shivers without
any other disadvantage, but that of the Knight of the Bear loosing his
Stirrops, which he soon recovered, and by such time as he came to the end of
his Course, he had resetled himself on his Horse in as good a manner as he was
at the first.

This equality in our Champions raised a new vigor in them, and taking fresh
Lances they again essayed which should have the better: and not only they
themselves ran the second time, but also twenty of each of their Knights; but
this Course was much to the disadvantage of the Knight of the Bear and his
Companions; for he was thrown out of his Saddle, and with him twelve of his
Company, and only six of the Prince Contumeliano's Knighis were foiled, and
himself was forced to lay hold on his Horse neek.

This Course raised an anger in both the Champions, which made them and their
Companions quickly remount their h^rses, and then it was agreed on, that at the
third Course they and their whole Squadrons, which was easily divided into
fifty in a Squadron, should again run with their Lances, and after that try
their fortunes with their Swords. Which Agreement was quickly put in execution,
and they accordingly ran against one another with indifferent equality of
fortune; for there was about twenty of a party thrown to the ground, but they
quickly possessed themselves of their horses, and remounting drew their Swords,
and began a brave Skirmish, to the great delight of the Beholders, many of them
being beaten from their horses by the mighty and puissant strokes which they
gave and received each unto other. But there was this Provision made before the
Iousts, that none should enter the Fields whose Swords were sharp, but only
whose Swords were dnd'd on the edge, to the end that none should be killed, and
that the Recreation of some might not be the destruction of others; however
many of the Knights on both sides were with the violence of the strokes beaten
from their horses, and much bruised with the falls, and the trampling of the
horses killed some outright.

Thus this Skirmishing continued the space of four hours, but in the end the
Honor of the Day was won by the Prince of Phenicia, the Knight of the Bear by a
fall which he had received, being disabled from sitting his horse, and being
carried out of the Field by several of his Knights was conveyed to his
Lodgings: And then Proclamation was made, That that days Tournament should end,
and so they all departed the Field and went to the Palace, where they were no
sooner arrived and seated in their places, but at the sound of Music many of
them began to dance.

In this and such like variety of Recreation they continued for some hours,
till it was time for every one to take their rest, and then our pair of
Incomparable Lovers retired into their Lodgings, went to Bed and received the
Enjoyment which they had so long wished for, and was now accomplished, to the
great Joy not only of the two Lovers, but of all their Friends and Relations:
In which Content we will leave them till morning, which being come they all
arose, and the fair Princess Florisbella by the crimson Die which appeared in
her lovely Cheeks, did well enough express that she had exchanged her
Maidenhead for that of a Wife: and the Prince of Greece by his outward
gestures did sufficiently testify the satisfaction of his spirit in the
enjoyment of his Incomparable Lady.

Noon being come and Dinner ended, they did all repair again to the plate
appointed for the Tournament, where the Valiant Peter of Ireland with fifty
Knights did bear away the Honor of that Day.

Thus were three of the four days spent in Iusting, Tilting, Tournaments,
Skirmishing, and dancing, and all other manner of delightful Exercises: And the
fourth day was now come and Dinner being ended, and every one seated in their
several places, the Valiant Prince Don Clarineo of Spain (who as you have heard
was to maintain the Field for that day) was entered the Lists at the head of
fifty valiant Knights, when after the accustomed Civilities done to the Souldan
and Ladies, he placed himself ready for the Ioust, when presently entered a
Knight in black Armor, having the Figure of Envy painted on his Shield. This
Knight coming in a time of Mirth in such an unaccustomed manner, caused great
Admiration in all the Beholders: but the Actions which he did gave them greater
cause of anger, for no sooner had he placed himself at one end of the Lists in
the head of all his Knights, but he ran with great violence against the Prince
Clarineo, intending to kill him with his Lance, for which purpose his Lance had
a long Spike of Steel at the end, and was made of the strongest wood; but he
missed of his aim, for he only ran the Prince through the left arm, and there
brake his Lance. All his Companions did run with the like violence, and
intended the like mischief, but some of them were thrown from their horses: but
they being thus armed, did much mischief to several of the Princes Knights,
killing fifteen out right.

Don Bellianis and his Relations were extremly angered herewith, who were all
unarmed, or at the best had only blunt Swords according to the Agreement of
the Tournament, but extreme great was the Cry, Noise, and Confusion of the
Princesses and Ladies, fearing lest they should have been all destroyed in this
unfortunate Skirmish. This raised the anger of our Grecian Prince to such a
height, that he was ready even to run amongst the throng, unarmed as he was,
when suddenly he saw another Troop of above one hundred and fifty Knights enter
the Field, who soon testified to whom they did belong by the strokes which they
gave; for at eveey stroke blood followed their Swords, so that he soon knew
thein to be his Enemies: which he seeing, and being now so far come to himself
as to consider the danger, he caused all the Ladies to depart, and he himself
with all his Friends, ran hastily to their several Chambers to arm themselves;
which they did in the best manner they could, and returning to the Field they
found that above five hundred of his Friends and Knights were either slain or
wounded. He soon made head against his Enemies, and assaulted them with a great
deal of rage and anger, to the great help of his friends, and to the loss and
discouragement of his Enemies. Many were on both sides slain by the hands of
Don Bellianis and his Enemy, the Knight of Envy, who now met together and began
a furious Fight, to the great amazement of all the Beholders. They were both
greatly wounded and astonished at each others strength, when in the midst of
their fury there appeared over their heads a great Cloud: which breaking there
was seen and heard great Thunder and Lightning, which amazed all in the place,
and a great Darkness was over all the place for the space of a quarter of an
hour: at the end of which there appeared a small Castle in the place of the
Combat, and by it lay Don Bellianis along on the earth, and many of his
Friends: There also appeared an ancient woman who taking a Bottle, put it to
the mouth of Don Bellianis, and some of the Water that was in it passing into
his Body he revived and arose, and looking about him saw that which was happened,
and saw the old Woman, and knew her to be Bellona the Enchanteress, who desired
him to go about the Field, and pull off the Helmets from the heads of those
Knights that lay there, that she might assist his Friends; which he did
accordingly, and there they found his two Brothers Clarineo and Lucidamore,
Contumeliano, and Peter of Ireland, with many others much wounded: to whom she
gave some of her Water, and they presently arose in very good estate and
condition, much wondering at that which had happened. Don Bellianis seeing this,
did suppose that all that had happened this day had been bone by Enchantment,
and therefore he asked Bellona who and what these Enemies were? and whether
they were real men, or only Enchantment?

To which she replied, That in general they were men, and valiant Knights, as
he and his Companions could well enough restifie, that they were his Enemies,
and came to disturb the peace he was in: and that they might not for the future
be in a capacity to injure him further, she had provided that Castle which she
showed him, and thereinto she said it was necessary they should be put: in
order to which they all went about the Field, and as many of the Knights their
Enemies which were about fifty, as they could find yet alive, were presently
put into that Castle.

This being done, Don Bellianis and his Brethren, Friends, and Knights, in the
Company of the sage Bellona, set forwards toward the Palace: being met by the
Souldan, the Emperess, and Princesses. Being all seated, the Sage Bellona spoke
to them thus:

Most Noble Souldan and Emperess, and you other Kings, Queens, Princes and
Princesses, Knights and Ladies, It is many years since I foreknew the
misfortune that would this day happen unto you, and many days and nights have I
spent in considering of a way to prevent this mischief, but I could not find a
better expedient than what I have now executed. You are all now in good health,
and the ill that was intended is now prevented, so that you may assure your
selves that you are out of all danger of any present harm. What they are that
thus disturbed you, you need not care to know at this time, for they are safe
enough from doing you any further mischief; wherefore proceed now in your
Mirth, since nothing whatsoever shall be able to disturb you.

She having spoken thus held her peace, and the Souldan and the rest gave great
thanks to Bellona for the Service she had done them. Thus Reader we will make
an end of this Part of this History, leaving our Princes in great quiet, and in
the Third Part we shall tell you who were the Knight of Envy and his
Companions, and the cause of their coming at this time; As also an end of the
Wars between the two Empires of Trebizond and Babylon, and what became of the
two Princes Perianeo and Gramalis of Thrace in the Pleasant Island, and mamy
other pleasant and delightful Adventures.

FINIS.
THE HONOR OF CHIVALRY: OR, The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF DON BELLIANIS
of GREECE.

CONTINUING As well the valiant Exploits of that Magnanimous and Heroic
Prince, Son to the Emperor Don Bellanco of Greece, as of his two valiant
Brothers, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, and several of
their Princely Champions, more particularly, that valiant Prince, Peter of
Ireland, Knight of the Keys.

Wherein is concluded the War between the Souldan of Babylon, and the Emperor
of Trebizond; and several Marriages made between those Great and Royal
Personages.

The Third Part.

Now newly written by Fra. Kirkman.

London: Printed by Ed. Oaks, for Fran. Kirkman; and are to be sold at his
Shop, next door to the Sign of the Princes Arms, in St. Paul's Churchyard,
M.DC.LXXII.

To the Reader.
THe encouragement I received by writing the Second Part of this History, has
induced me to prosecute it with a Third Part; wherein, I will assure you, I
have outdone the Second, both in language, and contrivance of the Story. And I
have taken more then ordinary pains in describing the ancient Kingdom of
Ireland, and many principal Cities and Towns long since ruined. If what I have
written be but pleasing to you, I may in short time pleasure you further, by
writing another History of this nature; whereby you may still be pleasured by

Your Friend, Fra. Kirkman.

THE THIRD PART OF Don Bellianis of Greece: OR, The Honor of Chivalry.
Continuing the Valiant Exploits of that Heroic Prince, Son unto the Emperor
Don Bellaneo of Greece.
CHAP. I. Who the Knight of Envy and his Companions were, and the cause of
their coming. A continuation of the Triumphs for two days longer; at the end
whereof is an Enchantment upon the Knight of Envy, and a Prophecy who is to
end the Adventure: several Knights make trial, but to their damage. The
Emperor of Trebizond not agreeing to several Propositions that were made him,
the War is resolved upon: a Messenger being sent to Baltazano, he brings an
answer, wherein he desires help; for that Floreza, Sister to the Emperor, had
relieved the City of Pharez; whereupon 100000. men are sent away by the
Souldan, under the command of the Knight of Hope and his Companions.
IN the last Chapter of the second Part of this honorable History, an
Adventure happened that was a great trouble to the Solemnities and Triumphs
intended to be continued at the magnificent Wedding of the thrice Renowned and
Valiant Knight Don Bellianis of Greece, and the Peerless Princess Florisbella,
Daughter to the Souldan of Babylon: for, as you may read in that place, on the
fourth day of the Tournament, which was hold in honor of thut Wedding, it
being agreed that the valiant Prince Don Clarineo of Spain, Brother to the
Prince Don Bellianis of Greece, should maintain the Field for that day; he was
encountered, and assaulted by a Knight in black Armor, having the figure of Envy
painted on his Shield; who with the assistance of some valiant Knights that
accompanied him, made great slaughter among the Knights that accompanied Don
Clarineo; and had not Don Bellianis himself, and several of his Friends, left
the place of the Tournament, and, arming themselves, returned and assisted in
the fight, much more mischief had been done by the Knight of Envy, and his
Companions: but he and his Assistants being vanquished, and Don Bellianis, and
his Friends, relieved by the coming of the sage Bellaneo, that hazardous
Adventure was finished; and, at the conclusion of that Chapter, it was
promised, that an account should be given you, who this Knight of Envy was, and
the occasion of his coming thither at that time.

Now, that you may be fully acquainted with the truth of this Adventure, it is
necessary that you look back to the fifteenth Chapter of the second Part of
this History; where you may find, that on the day of the Coronation of Duke
Alfiron, and the Princess Persiana his Wife, Daughter to the Souldan of Persi^,
now King and Queen of Shyraz, that days Solemnities were obstructed, at the
present, by the arrival of a Knight armed in azure Armor, and afterward known
by the name of the Knight of the Island of Pearls, (who being one of the Sons
of one Gozmin, and formerly King of Shyraz, under the Souldan of Persia; but
for some traitorous enterprise dispossessed of the same by the Souldan;) this
Knight of the Island of Pearls coming at the day of the Coronation, and
attending until the Herald, who proclaimed the said Duke Alfiron, and his Wife
Persiana, King and Queen of Shyraz, Larr, and Jarrowne, and all the rest of the
Territories and Dominions hereto belonging, had proclaimed it twice, according
to custom, and being about to do so the last time, he then, going to the place
where the King and Queen sat, told them, that he did come to contradict the
Proclamation; saying, that so long as he was alive, there co^ld not be any
other lawful King, for that he was the Son of the said Gozmin; and that, to
justify his Title, he was ready to enter the Lists with any Champion that they
should appoint. This, as you may remember, was a sensible trouble to the King
and Queen for the present; but Don Bellianis un^ert^king the combat on their
behalf, and vanquishing the said Knight of the Island of Pearls, and because
he would not acknowledge any other King but himself, he therefore cut off his
head, and so finished the combat; as you may read more at large in the said
second Part. Now you may also read, that the said Knight of the Isla^d of
Pearls had a Brother, and he it was, that under the name of the Knight of
Envy, came and disturbed the last days Triumphs at the Wedding of Don Bellianis
and Florisbella.

We need not acquaint you with the cause of his coming at this time to disturb
this Royal Assembly; for you may soon judge it was to be revenged on Don
Bellianis for his Brothers death. But withal he had a further design in it, for
he intended either to seize on, or murder Alfiron and Persiana, the King and
Queen of Shyraz; who, as he alleged, had usurped upon his right to the
Kingdom; and that being done, by the help of his Friends, to have gotten
possession of the Kingdom: but he was prevented, as you have already heard. And
now these Troubles being over, nothing was thought of but Joys and Triumphs;
and to that end another Tournament was proclaimed to be kept for two days more;
and Don Clarineo of Spain, who had been obstructed and disappointed by the late
Adventure, was to keep the Field for the first day; and the Knight of Hope, who
was Servant to Mataroz^ Princess of Numidia, was appointed to keep the Field
the second day: wherefore, according to this agreement, Don Clarineo of Spain,
with fifty Knights in his company, entered the Lists, and gave the Ladies as
much satisfaction by their valiant behavior on that day, as they had received
trouble on the la^^. And now the last day of the Tournament being come, the
Knight of Hope, being ar^^ed in a white Armor, inlaid with the figures of
Anchors of blew, and a picture of Hope on his shield, entered the Field; and his
Lady the Princess, the more to ho^our him, had bestowed a rich Scarf of blew
Silk, embroidered with Stars of Cold, which he wore about his arm; and in this
equipage accompanied with fifty Knights, all in the same colored Armor, he
entered the Lists, and expected his Assaylants; and now, it being the last day
intended for the Solemnity of the Wedding, all the young Knights of the Court
resolved to try their Fortunes, intending to gain Honor; but although several
of them performed very well, yet he kept the Field to the last, and clearly
bore away the Honor of that days Triumph, to the great satisfaction of the
whole Court; but chiefly to the great pleasure of his Princess.

And now the Triumphs being ended, and all the Court ready to rise and leave
their seats, a great voice of Trumpets was heard, at which every one wondering,
looked toward the place from whence they supposed the noise came; but behold
there was nothing but a great cloud, which being in some short time vanished,
they saw the Castle where the Knight of Envy was; and at the four corners of
this Castle were placed four Trumpeters, who still continued sounding their
Trumpets: also at the entrance of the Castle there were two Giants armed at all
points, with Iron Maces in their hands, and broad cutting Faulchions by their
sides; and six foot on this side the Giants, there was a Pillar of Jasper, and
on it hung a Table, whereon was written this Prophecy.

The Adventure of Redeeming and Releasing the Knight of Envy, and his
Companions, from this C^st^e, is reserved to be finished by the young Syconian
Lion, and the Grecian Whelp, who must accidentally meet here, and, by
vanquishing the Guards, deliver them: Therefore let none be so bold, as to
attempt their Deliverance; for it is to be accomplished by none but the two
best Knights in the whole World, who shall here become acquainted, and, to the
joy of their Parents, be reconciled, and shall be the occasion of an Universal
Peace.

These were the words written on the Table; which when Don Bellianis had read,
the Trumpeters ceased to sound their Trumpets; and he went back to his Father
and Princess, to acquaint them with what he knew of this Adventure. But it was
now so dark, that nothing further could be done in it, so that it was resolved
to go to the Palace; whither they being come, it was the general discourse of
all the Assembly; and it was resolved, that the next day trial should be made
of this Adventure: wherefore the next morning being come, and spent in the
Palace, and dinner being ended, all the Court set forwards to the place of the
enchanted Castle; and now none were to make trial of the Adventure, but such as
should be thereto appointed by Don Bellianis; wherefore he ordered that the
first that should attempt it, should be the Knight of Hope; who having
performed so well in the last days Tournament, was in good hopes of obtaining
more honor; but he was disappointed: for no sooner was he come in reach of the
first Giant, who was Guardian of the Castle, but the Giant, scorning to use any
arms against him, only took him in his arms, and grasped him so hard, that he
made his bones crack; and notwithstanding all his struggling, he held him so
f^st and so long, that his breath being spent, he was disdainfully thrown as
far as the Pillar of Jasper. But he had not lain long there before he came to
himself; but he was so sore and weak, that he had no mind to renew the combat;
wherefore the young Knights, who before were all very forward in trying their
fortunes, but now, seeing the misfortune of the Knight of Hope, desisted: but
however several approved good Knights offered themselves to the trial of this
Adventure, but Don Bellianis would not permit any single Knight; for
considering the mighty force of one of the Giants, he thought it impossible for
any single Knight to vanquish them both; and therefore he ordered that no less
then two at once should be permitted: the first two that made trial, were the
Knight of the Flaming Sword, and the Prince of Mesopotamis; but all they could
do, was to force the Giants to handle their Iron Maces, but it was to their
cost; for at the first stroke they were laid breathless on the ground. The next
two that offered themselves were Contumeliano Prince of Phae^icia, and
Fliorispiano of Swevia, his Cozen; but they also, after half an hours combat,
were reduced to the same condition with the former: and now all the rest seeing
the difficulty of the Adventure declined the combat; only the two Brothers of
Don Bellianis, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, set
forwards to try their valors. These two valiant Knights marched up with a
confident bravery, and drawing their sharp cutting Swords, and embracing their
Shields, assaulted the two Giants with two such blows over their helmets that
they made the fire fly out, and forced the two ^^^^ers to bow their heads; but
they a^vancing their Maces, reached the Knights two such blows as made them
kneel down; and had they not been himble to have risen before the blows were
doubled, they had certainly perished in this encounter; but knowing the danger
of the blows they shoule receive, they nimbly got up, and stepping on one side
avoided their fury; but so mighty were the forces of these Giants, that both
their Maces were forced two foot at least into the earth, and they could not at
present get them out again; which the two Knights seeing, came upon them with
so great courage and force, that they enforced these two Giants to kiss the
ground; but they soon arose, and being sensible of the blows they had received,
drew out their Maces, but only laid them by them, and drawing their Faulchions,
attended the approach of the two Knights; who being encouraged by their last
two blows, again approached the Giants, but to their cost, for they received
two such blows on their Helmets, that they were cut in pieces, and their heads
disarmed; and they seeing the danger they were in retired, and so went to take
other Helmets: but Don Bellianis would not permit them to attempt the combat
any further; which the Giants seeing, put up their Faulchions, and took up
their Maces, and stood in the places and manner they had formerly done: and
this was all that for that time was done, or attempted in this Adventure; for
all the Knights present seeing the ill success of the combat with these
Knights, who were known to be of the valiantest in the World, made no further
attempts; only Peter of Ireland had a great desire, but Don Bellianis would not
permit him.

And now this Adventure of the enchanted Castle being prosecuted as much as was
convenient, and all the Triumphs of this magnificent Wedding being ended, Don
Bellianis did propose to the Souldan, his Father in Law, the finishing the War
with the Emperor of Trebizond, and offered his service to go in person about
it; but the Souldan would not by any means consent to that: neither would the
Princess Florisbella hear of any such proposition, telling him, that she had
rather lose ten such Empires, then permit him to take so long a journey,
especially in so hazardous and troublesome a War; wherefore another way was
proposed; which was, that the Emperor of Trebizond, who was then in prison,
should be treated with, to see if he would grant that willingly, which it was
impossible for him to hinder; and thereupon Messengers were sent to treat with
him, who had fair propositions to offer; for they alleging, and that with
truth enough, that the Emperor was the only cause of the War, it was therefore
but just and fit, that he should pay all the damage and expense of the same;
and if he would do so, or leave the Souldan in quiet and peaceable possession
of that part of his Dominions which he had already conquered, then he should
not only have a peace, but be restored to his liberty. These were the
propositions that were made to the Emperor; who as low as he was in his present
misfortunes, yet he was high in his own opinion, and so in his reply; for
having lost that which he chiefly aimed at, the Princess Florisbella, he was so
enraged, that he cared not what he did; but replied, that his pretensions to
the Princess Florisbella, being the effects of his love, he thought they were
but just, and therefore he could not be justly taxed with being the only cause
of the War; for if the Princess had been granted to him, the War would have
ended; but since it was so, that the Princess was otherwise disposed of, and
thereby he was frustrated in his expectations, he thought it was but just, that
he should be restored to his liberty, and his Empire restored to him: but he
thus elosed, that if this would not be granted, he questioned not but that he
had so many loyal Subjects in his own Dominions, and so many Friends and Allies
abroad, that he should gain that by force which was denied him. This was the
answer of the Emperor, which was judged to be so unreasonable, that it was
concluded on all hands, that the War should be vigorously prosecuted; and to
that end Letters were presently sent away to Don Baltazano, to know of him the
condition of the Army under his command, and in what condition the Enemies
were; that they might from thence conclude what Forces were necessary to be
raised. A Messenger being dispatched to Don Baltazano, who was left with an
hundred thousand men at the siege of the City of Phatez, which was fortified,
and defended against him by the King of Albania, and the Knight of the Tiger,
as is before declared: This Messenger was not long before he returned to the
Souldan, and brought this Letter.

The Letter of Baltazano to the Souldan of Babylon.
Dread Lord, and most Honored Uncle,
WHen the worthy Knight Don Bellianis left this place we were victorious, and
no Enemies appeared against us, but such as were enclosed in the City of
Pharez, which we also reckoned to be inconsiderable, in regard the Emperor
their Lord was your Prisoner, and the King of Georgia was also taken, and no
General left to head the Forces but the King of Albania, who was wounded, and
the Knight of the Tiger in worse condition then he; but no sooner were part of
your Forces withdrawn, but new Recruits came from further parts of the Country,
and being led by a Virgin named Floreza, Sister to the Emperor, the City was
relieved; and notwithstanding the frequent assaults that we have given them,
yet we have not been able to carry it, so great is the courage of the Princess
Floreza, that by her presence and prudence she kept all things in very good
order, until the two Generals (the King of Albania, and the Knight of the
Tiger) were recovered of their wounds; and then they had so great a respect for
her, that she still continues Commander in chief: and to encourage her further,
they have sent to their Countries for more fresh Forces; and so great love and
respect have all the Commonalty of the Country for the Princess Floreza, that
they take up Arms generally in all places, and have mustered in great numbers,
so that we daily expect, by the ^ddition of these Forces, that she will in
short time be able to take the Field: wherefore if your Majesty intends to
prosecute your Conquests here, I humbly conceive it will be necessary to raise
more Considerable Forces. In the mean time nothing shall be wanting to be done
for your Majesty's service, that is in the power of

Your Majesty's Subject and Kinsman, BALTAZANO.


This Letter being read before the Souldan and his Counell, it was presently
determined that an hundred thousand men should be immediately raised, and sent
away under the command of the Knight of Hope, who had given such rare proofs of
his valor; and that more Forces should follow with all convenient speed.
Hereupon the Drums were beaten up, and those Forces which Don Bellianis brought
back with him being recruited by the new levied Forces, they made up the
number; and being all fitted with necessaries for the War, the Knight of Hope
advanced; in his company marched Trion Knight of the Wolf, and the valiant
Peter of Ireland, Contumeliano of Phaenicia, and F^iorispiano of Swevia. Don
Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, Brothers to Don Bellianis, likewise offered to
go, but it was not permitted them at present so to do.

CHAP. II. How Alfiron and Persiana, King and Queen of Shyraz, go home; and she
is brought to bed of a Daughter, named Belliana. Don Brianel and Aurora, King
and Queen of Antioch, Likewise go home; and she is brought to bed of a
Daughter, named Aurora. Perianeo, and Don Gramalis, had a Son and Daughter in
the pleasant Island, by Meridiana and Altea, named Gorgiana and Altea, who are
nursed by Friston. The Princess Floreza issues out of the City of Pharez, and
fights a bloody Battle with Baltazano; who gets the honor of the day, but is
deeply fallen in love with her.
THese Forces being thus sent away under the command of the Knight of Hope, in
short time after Alfiron and Persiana, King and Queen of Shyraz, desired leave
of the Souldan, and Don Bellianis, to depart, and travel to their own
Countries, promising to raise Forces there that should be ready to assist in
the War; and at the same time Don Brianel and Aurora, King and Queen of
Antioch, likewise departed, with promise to raise Forces that should be always
ready to wait upon the commands of Don Bellianis: and it was not long after the
arrival of these Personages at their own Courts, but that the two Queens were
brought to bed of two lovely Daughters; that of Don Brianel and Aurora was
named Aurora, like the Mother; and that of Alfiron and Persiana, was named
Belliana, in honor of their great Friend Don Bellianis. And now we have given
you an account of these proceedings of the Friends of Don Bellianis, we will
also give you some account of those of his Enemies: wherefore we having so long
for atten Perianeo, Son of the Souldan of Persia, and Gramalis of Torace, we
will return to give some account of them. If you turn back to the eleventh
Chapter of the second Part of this History, you may find that these two valiant
Knights were by the means of the said Friston conveyed into the pleasant
Island, where they spent their time in all manner of delights, in the company
of the Princess Meridiana, daughter to the valiant King Gorgiana of Soria, and
the fair Lady Altea; and the Prince Perianeo had so much freedom and enjoyment
of the Princess Meridiana, that she, being with child by him, was brought to
bed of a fair Son, whom they named Gorgiana, after the name of his
Grandfather; and the Lady Altea likewise had a Daughter by Gramalis of Thrace,
which they named Altea, like the Mother: and as this Son of Perianeo proved to
be one of the best Knights of his time, so this young Lady Altea was the only
Paragon for Beauty throughout the whole Universe. These young Children were no
soon born, but they were taken from their Parents by the sage Friston, who
promised that he would take care of their education, and at all times be
answerable for them to their Parents; and in this condition we will again leave
them for the present, and return to the Knight of Hope, who was on his journey
to the City of Pharez, having the command of an hundred thousand men, and being
accompanied by^ several vali^^^ Princes his Comp^ni^^^^. He being commanded to
make all expedition in his march, di^ not stop to make any addition to his
Forces, but proceed to fast as he could; but he was not ^^^^ed there so (...)
best fresh supplies (...) sent into the City which had so (...) Forces of the
Princess Fl^r^^^^, that she being ambi^^^^^ of gl^ry, and (...) within to City,
valiantly came out, and (...) the Field. The Prince B^^^^ano seeing her
resolution by her action, disin^ath (...) himself, and (...) resolutely to
encounter her. This brave (...) p^^^^^^ing ^^her he intended, first a Herald to
him to let (...), that if he would stay until the next (...) Sun, (...) would
sade him the labo^ of coming to her, and meet him half way; but if he (...)
resolved (...) otherwise, and assault her presently, she would be (...) to
(...) him. He hearing her generous resolution, was reso^^ed to (...) her (...),
and wait (...) the next day; and therefore sending her such word, he again
re-ert^ed his Camp. Although this Princess had several times sent out small
parties, that had assaulted him in his Trenches, and headed several parties in
the City when he had assaulted it, yet he had not yet seen her; but report
rendered her a brave Person, and as complete in the outward lineaments of her
body, as she had shown her self in the braveness of her mind; and therefore the
Prince Baltazano was deu^rous to oblige her, and resolved, if possible, to see
and encounter with her in the next days Battle: wherefore that he might be
ready the next morning ^^he kept strict guards all that night; and the time
appointed being coming, he again left his Camp: but as forward as he was, the
Princess was as ready as he; for she had likewise quitted the place where she
had encamped that night, and was advanced toward him. She had divided her
Forces in three Battalias; one, which was the Van, she led her self, and under
her command were forty thousand men; the second, which was the Body of the
Army, was commanded by the King of Albania, and he had under him sixty thousand
men; and the Rear was led by the Lieutenant General of the King of Georgia, who
was a very valiant Knight, and known by the name of the Knight of the Lions,
who also had forty thousand men: and the like number of forty thousand men was
left in the City, under the conduct of the valiant Knight of the Tiger. Thus
was she accompanied, but her Armor and Accoutrements were extraordinary; for
she rode on an excellent Horse, who was covered with white Armor; and her own
was greenena melled with Gold, richly set out with precious Stones; she had a
Lance is her hand, and a good Sword by her side, which b^^ng there (...) a
green Scarf with Gold fringe.

The Prince of Numidia was not one of behind her in magnificence; for he was
armed in a Silver Armos, which sho^^ so bright, that it dazzled the eyes of the
beholders. The Forces which he led were somewhat less then hers, but they were
modelized in the same manner, being divided into three Squadrons, led by three
trusty and valiant Knights; he himself took no particular command, as thinking
it to be more convenient to be free, that he might be every where, as occasion
served; only he had (...) a thousand valiant Knights to attend him as his
Guard^, and he also had left twenty thousand men in his Camp, to guard that,
and to be as a reserve to the rest of his Army, as occasion should require. In
this order, and thus prepared, did these two valiant Generals march at the head
of their Armies, and, slowly advancing before their Forces, at length met. The
first that encountered were the two Generals, the brave Numidian, and the
gallant Floreza; who putting the Lance to her Rest failed not to encounter him,
and that with such violence, hitting him on the Shield which he held out to
receive her, that he was so shaken with the blow, that he was forced to catch
hold of his Horses neck, to keep him from falling. He had never met with the
like force in any man before, wherefore he was mightily astonished; but he
being resolved before hand what to do, did not put his Lance in his Rest, but
carried it so, that it flew over her head without encountering her. She soon saw
the reason of his missing her, and, being angry at his generosity, turned back
her Horse, and cried out, Sir Knight, although you so much contemn the forces
of a Woman, yet, I hope, before I leave the Field, to make you sensible of my
valor; and if you will turn back, let us again encounter. He stayed not to
return her an answer; but, being followed by his Troop of one thousand Men,
passed on to the Body of her Army, and then he showed, by the mightiness of his
blows, that he was not guilty of any cowardice; for he had killed, or
dismounted, six, before his Lance brake; and then, drawing his Sword, he at six
blows sent as many more into the other World: and being angry at the blow the
Princess had given him, he was resolved to revenge it on her Followers. By this
time he was passed the first Battle, and was come to the second, which was
commanded by the King of Albania, and him he met to his damage; for although
he was a very valiant Knight, yet he gave him a wound over the arm, and the
Sword falling heavily on the Horses neck, cut off his head, so that he was
dismounted: but he was soon rescued by his Followers. And now our Numidian
Prince thought it was time to wheel about, and see how his Army was entertained
by their Enemies; and indeed full time it was for him to do so; for he found
the Forefront of his Army in very great disorder, by the valiant exploits of
the unmatchable Floreza, who had so laid about her, that she had killed, or
dismounted, above twenty, with her own hand, and had thereby made such way for
her Followers, that that whole Squadron was almost put to the rout. The Prince
of Numidia seeing this, fled to the Rear of them, and there caused them to face
about, and in short time, by this stratagem, he had brought all those who were
flying in the Van, to be in the Rear; and those in the Rear, who had not known
of the disaster, were now in the Van: and he did then, in the head of these
Forces, so lay about him, that he stopped his Enemies, and gave his own Men the
time and convenience to rally. By this means his Forces were in as good
condition almost, as they had been in the beginning of the Battle; which the
Princess Floreza seeing, was resolved again to assault him; wherefore
commanding that an hundred of her best Knights should keep near her, and by all
means keep the Numidian from passing from her, she set forwards; and being come
within hearing of him, she cried out, Now, Sir Knight, since you would not make
use of your Lance against me, let me see what you can do with your Svvord; for
assure your self, that I will do my utmost endeavor against you with mine;
and I hope to make you know, that I have an arm as capable and strong to
vv^ild a Svvord, as it was to manage a Lance against you. He heard her well
enough, but was intended to leave her, as he had done the time before; but he
was hindered by those who attended her, and thereby she had the means to come up
to him: when she was within reach of him, she again commanded him to defend
himself; and advancing her Sword in the air, she let it fall on his Shield with
such violence, that it forced him to bend his body; and she again redoubled her
blow in such manner, that she wounded him on the shoulder: the smart of the
wound made him alter his resolution; and seeing it was impossible to get from
her without blows, was resolved to give her one, and so be gone; whereupon he
raised his Sword, and intending to hit her cross the top of her Helmet, to
astonish her a little, his blow fell with such force, that the buckles of her
Helmet breaking, that fell off from her head, and thereby she discovered the
loveliest, but withal the most majestic face that Nature ever produced; all
her long golden locks flew about her shoulders, and the color of her face was
so rubified with the head of the fight, and the anger to be thus used, that it
was much like that of Roses; and indeed throughout all she seemed to present
those two Goddesses, Venus, and Bellona, the one in the face, and the other in
all the other parts of her body. The Numidian Prince was so surprised with this
unexpected, but most pleasant sight, that he stood with his Sword in his hand
like a dead statue; but she soon put life in him again; for now her anger being
raised to the highest pitch, she likewise raised her Sword, and saluted him
with a powerful blow on the Helmet; which although it for the present blinded
his eyes, yet his understanding was clear, and he refused to take the advantage
he had against her, of assaulting her unarmed as she was; but resolving to be
gone, he was likewise resolved to have some benefit of the combat; for he
seizing her in his arms, caught hold of that fair green Scarf that held her
Sword-scabberd, and lifting it over her head, turned his Horse, and in despite
of all the resistance her Knights could make, he made his way through them, and
so returned to his Army. During the time of this combat all the Forces of both
Armies had the leisure to engage themselves, and that with indifferent
fortunes; for as he possessed his Soldiers with a courage, so did she those
under her command: and those Chiefs that they had appointed on both sides over
their several Squadrons, being Persons of great conduct and valor, had
worthily discharged their places. But the Army of the Prince of Numidia having
been always used to conquer, were resolved to do so now too; and therefore they
laid about them so valiantly, that their Enemies were fored to withdraw. The
Princess Floreza seeing this, and being enraged as well at the misfortune of
her self, as that of her Army, she seen away immediately to the City, to
command those Forces there, under the conduct of the Knight of the Tiger, to
advance; and in the mean time she used all possible diligence to rally her
scattered Forces: she did so, and had put them again in the best order that
time and place would permit, When she saw her fresh Forces issue out of the
City, as this caused an universal Joy to her and her People, so it was as much
cause of sorrow to the valiant Numidian; who by this understood that the fight
would be very bloody, and that he must be forced to fight it out to the last
man: he was sorry to find it so, but being resolved, to do all things that
might be done by a good General, he sent away to his Camp, to command those
Forces that he had left there to quit the Camp, and advance toward the place
of Battle; put not to make their approaches so near as to be discovered by
either Army, but to stay in some near convenient place, and expect his
Commands. His Orders were obeyed; but before they could arrive at him, the
Enemy was advancing with the recruit of fresh Forces. He has in this time
Marshalled his Army, and was ready to receive them, and so went on, and joined
Battle: he was still ho^e^ing at some small distance with a small party, and as
he saw occasion, went and relieved those that stood in need of his assistance;
and that done, he again retired to the place from whence he came, where he made
his observations; and in fine, by this his good and prudent management, he saw
that his Army had received the first brunt of the onset of his Enemies Forces
with valor enough, and had made a considerable resistance; and that his
Enemies, having failed in their expectation, were now wearied, whilst his Men
kept close to their ground; and seeing that there was no advantage on the
Enemies part, he wheeled abo^t, and went to those Forces he had ordered as a
Reserve; when he came to them, he cried out, Come, Fellow Soldiers, there is
only your assistance wanting to put an end to this days work, and reap the
advantage of Battle that has been well fought; do but now show your
resolutions to continue what you have been, Conquerors, and we shall soon be
so. They answered him with such a shout, as demonstrated their joy and
willingness to follow him: wherefore he, being at the head of this Party, flew
like lightning, and in a instant was up with his Enemies, who were mightily
surpized with this assault. They bore it as courageously as they could; but
these fresh Forces coming with fresh resolutions, to die or conquer, made their
Enemies know, that they were led by one who was no ^dvice in the Art of War.
The gallant Princess did all she could to hinder her Enemies, from a Victory,
which she saw they were resolved to have; but seeing it was in vain, she, like
a prudent General, caused the retreat to be sounded. The Numidian Prince
hearing of it, was resolved not to disoblige her further, but give her the
satisfaction she desired: but although he, as well as she, had caused the
retreat to be sounded, yet his Soldiers could not be easily brought off from
the work they were engaged in, in killing and vanquishing their Enemies. But
now the night coming on, did that for them both which they were so desirous of,
for it separated the two Armies; and the valiant Princess found her loss so
considerable, that she thought it necessary to quit the Field to her Enemies,
and enter the City, being the better place of security. She put this her
resolution into execution, but not so well, but that she had a great loss by
it; for several believing that now they should be again enclosed within the
City walls, chose rather to flee away, or fall into their Enemies hands, and so
they did: and also the Camp of the Numidian was much enriched by the plunder of
the Field. Thus was the fortune of the Wars altered; and what this valiant
Princess had been some months in gathering together, was in one day separated,
or vanq^ished. The next day, upon a view of the Field, there were an hundred
thousand Men slain on both sides; but it was supposed two thirds of them were
of the Princesses party: but she, who began with less Forces then now she had,
was not so much discouraged as to despair, but hoped for a better day; and in
expectation thereof, was content with her present fortune. In order to the
management of her Affairs, she sent out to raise Forces, not only in all the
Dominions of her Brother, but she also sent to all her Allies, which were so
many, and they so forward in her assistance, that she questioned not but, in
short time, she should be in condition to take the Field again: till when she
made several excursions; and notwithstanding all that the Prince of Numidia
could do to hinder her, yet she several times got in some Recruits, with all
necessary provision; and he indeed was so concerned for her ever since that
fatal day whereon he disarmed her head, that he knew not what to think of it;
but in the end he discovered that the little god Cupid had wounded him so
deeply, that he must be conquered, and yield to those whom he had conquered.
But the relation of that, and other transactions that happened upon that
account, being many and various. I shall here conclude, referring the
prosecution of them to a new Chapter.

CHAP. III. How the Prince of Numidia, being enamoured of the Princess Floreza,
sends her a Letter to acquaint her therewith; which she civilly answers. She
and the City of Pharez is relieved by the arrival of Perisano, Knight of the
Panther, with sixty thousand men; and he is reinforced by the arrival of the
Knight of Hope, and an hundred thousand men. The Knight of the Panther, being
her former Lover, now endeavors to gain her by fair or foul means. He promises
to perform wonders; but attempting the Army of the Prince of Numidia, is beat
back with loss. The Princess Florisbella is brought to bed of a Son, named
Meridian, and a Daughter named Clarinda, who are threatened by a Prophecy. The
arrival of the young Princesses, Aurora of Antioch, and Belliana of Shyraz, to
be bred up with the two young Princes; who being brought out on a solemnity,
are carried away by a strange enchantment.
ALthough the Prince of Numidia had gained great advantage over the Princess
Floreza in the precedent Battle, yet he could not much brag of his conquests,
he himself being wounded by the eyes of Floreza, more deeply then she had
wounded him in the body; but the wound on his body was sooner cured, then that
he had received at his heart; for at an instant her beauty was so powerful,
that it pierced his Armor, and gave him an incurable wound. He being sensible
of his ill fortune, complained to the great god Mars, that he had permitted
him, who was his absolute Votary, to be overcome by that little god Cupid. But
considering the all-powerful charms of Venus, who oftentimes enforced Mars
himself to submit to her, was resolved to be content; and since he was wounded,
to endeavor a remedy. There was none capable to cure him, but she alone that
wounded him, and he know her to be his enemy; but however, believing her to be
as generous, as she was fair and courageous, he took pen, ink, and paper, and
writ these lines to her.

The Letter of the Prince of Numidia to the Princess of Trebizond.
Madam,
ALthough fortune declared her self to be somewhat on our side, by giving us
somewhat the better against you on the last day of Battle, yet you have made
the greater Conquest; and indeed, how could it be otherwise, since you come so
doubly armed, not only with Sword and Lance, but also with what is more
powerful then either, and is indeed more conquering then all the weapons in the
World, your Fair Eyes, whose rays are so subtly penetrating, that they
pierce the choieest Armor? the truth of this I have experienced by the effects,
and must confess my self your Captive. Indeed we have the honor of keeping the
Field which you quitted, and found some Trophies there which were considerable;
but all to me is inconsiderable, in respect of that glorious Scarf which I
obtained of you, and which I prize above all else I could have purchased. I
hope, Madam, since I won it in the Field, you will give me leave to wear it as
a glorious Trophy; and not to take it as other people may do, that I wear it in
sign of victory over you, when as all my ambition in having the honor of
wearing it, is to signify that I fight under your colors: although this may
seem to be a paradox, yet assure your self of the truth of it; and setting
aside the trust I have of commanding the Forces of my Uncle, I should come
immediately and present my Person to be commanded by you. Madam, consider my
condition with you, and consider my quality with my Uncle, and command me any
thing which you think is generously fit to be done, and assure your self you
shall command

Baltazano of Numidia.


This Letter was conveyed to the Princess, who received it of the Messenger
with much civility; and being told from whence it come, and expecting that
there was some State matters in it, she directed the Messenger to stay till the
next morning, and then she would return him an answer. He waited accordingly,
and the morning being come, and he receiving a Letter, went presently to his
Tent, where, breaking open the seal, he found these lines.

The Letter of the Princess Floreza to the Prince Baltazano.
Sir Knight,
YOur Letter has very much surprised me; for I expected somewhat in it in
order to the prosecution of the old War, and you propose a new one: it were
necessary that the first were finished, before any treaty of the second; for
how can I think you to be my Friend, when you are in arms in my own Country
against our Subjects, and have already sacrificed so many of their lives to
your ambition of Empire? You may answer, that the War was begun by my Brother,
and prosecuted by you as an Enemy to him: but I cannot take him to be my
Friend, who is his Enemy. As for your generosity in offering your service to
me, I thank you, and found you friendly, when in arms I took you for an Enemy.
If you are obliged to serve, and be true to your Uncle, who has entrusted you
with his Army, I have a double obligation on the same account; for I am not
only entrusted by the Emperor my Brother, but the love of, and my duty to my
Country, requires my assistance of it in this extremity. As for those Trophies
you won in the Field, as I cannot hinder, so I shall not forbid your using them
as you please. And as you desire me to consider your condition with your Uncle,
so, I think, you ought to consider of mine with my Brother, and my Country, to
whom I am more obliged then you can be; otherwise, setting this aside, it may
be I should be as generous as you. I confess, you might have prosecuted your
Victory against us with somewhat more rigor; for you did spare, where you might
have killed: but I hope, if the War continue, I may have the same advantage
against you, when, you may expect, I will make the same use of it. This is all
at present from her, who although she is obliged to be your Enemy, yet she will
endeavor to answer your generosity:

Floreza of Trebizond.


The Prince of Numidia was highly contented with this Letter, and had great
hopes of a handsome prosecution in his love; which although it was not
encouraged, yet he was not bid to despair. But as he was a Lover, so he was the
General of an Army, and his care was to be employed in prosecuting the War: he
had some inclinations to propose of a Peace to the Princess; but he thought it
would be better to wait till the arrival of those Forces, who he heard were
approaching, under the command of the Knight of Hope, which in few days came up
to the Army.

It was then supposed necessary to proceed, and lay a close siege to the City;
but they were hindered from doing so, by the arrival of sixty thousand men,
under the conduct of Perisano, Knight of the Panther, who was one of the
principal of the Nobility of Trebizond, and withal was amorous of, though not
beloved by, the Princess Floreza. This Knight of the Panther was a proud
ambitious Person; and had carried himself so arrogantly in the count ship of
the Princess, that she had wholly refused him: but he now, supposing he should
either oblige her by fair means, in bringing this assistance to her in this
extremity, or else be able to compel her by force; he therefore had raised
these Forces, and now came to her assistance. Although she knew his
pretensions, yet she took no notice of that; but welcomed him, and told him,
that the Emperor, her Brother, would acknowledge this as a very remarkable
service; and, that she would endeavor, that her Brether should, in due time,
recompense him. He returned this answer, that he did not, nor could not expect
any recompense from him, who was himself in prison, and whom he looked upon as
one out of the World; but his reward he expected from her self, whom he
acknowledged his only Sovereign; and the recompense he expected, she very well
knew of: and in requital of it, he questioned not but to rid her, and that
Empire, of all their Enemies; that they together might reap the fruits of such
a Peace as he would assuredly give her. She, hearing his arrogant expressions,
answered, that she should never think otherwise of her self then as a Subject,
so long as her Brother was living; and therefore to be wholly disposed by him:
but if he would join with her, in opposing their Enemies, she was ready to
accept him. He replied, be was come for that purpose; but withal, that she knew
his mind. This valiant and discreet Princess was very much troubled at the
arrogance of this vainglorious Knight, but was resolved to dissemble her
knowledge of his intentions, and, if possible, to gain the Chiefs of his Army
to her dispose: but as yet, she thought it would be convenient to be silent,
and see how the fortune of the War was likely to proceed; and therefore
proposed to issue out of the City, and assault their Enemies in their Camp. The
Knight of the Panther was very ready to entertain this proposition; and
therefore told her, that he was provided to execute her commands when she
pleased, and promised to do great marvels on the day of Battle; but when the
day came, and he and all his Forces were joined with their Enemies, yet,
although he was s^^^^e and courageous enough, he found such warm entertainment
in the Enemies Camp, that he was, in short time, forced to retire into the
City, with the loss of ten thousand men of his party. He st^^ing that the War
was likely to continue much longer then he expected, and believing that he
should not by force gain his en^s, was resolved to try what he could do by
treachery; and to that end, he intended to take the same course with the
Officers of the Princesses Army, as she intended to do with his, by gaining
them to him. And the Prince Baltazano was full of uncertainties, what course to
take in the prosecution of his love; for he had intelligence that the Knight of
the Panther, who commanded the Forces that lately relieved the Princess, was
also her Servant; but whether he was accepted, or countenanced by her, he knew
not. Wherefore in these irresolutions we will at present leave him, before the
City of Pharez, engaged both in Love and War, in both which he will be for some
time engaged; and now we will return to Babylon, where we left the Souldan and
his Empress, accompanied by their valiant Son in Law Don Bellianis, and their
fair Daughter Florisbella; the two valiant Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don
Lucidamore, and several other great and worthy Personages.

The Court of the Souldan of Babylon was never filled with more joy and
tranquillity then on this occasion, especially when it was known, that the fair
Princess Florisbella was with Child: this was very pleasing, not only to the
whole Court, but to all the Subjects of this great Empire: and the time of her
lying in being come, great and splendid provision was made to entertain the
Princely Babe. But the joy of all was more then ordinary when she was brought
to bed, not only of a brave Son, but he was accompanied by as lovely a
Daughter: These two were wonderful in their births; for, besides that the
ordinary lineaments of their body were in the highest perfection, they had
extraordinary marks: the Son had the perfect figure of three Crowns on his
breast, lively represented; and the Daughter had as many Roses on her left arm.
At the sight of these so remarkable marks, all the Cout was full of discourse,
what should be the meaning; for it was concluded by all, that they did admit of
some extraordinary interpretation. Various were the opinions of all; and
nothing being agreed upon, the Sages, and Wise Men of the Kingdom were sent to,
who sent this answer.

A Prophecy.
IT shall not be many months before as great sorrow shall possess the Court of
Babylon, as now it is filled with joy, and it is impossible to hinder it; the
Fates having decreed, that the two Princes shall be lost, but not
irrecoverably; and their second birth shall bring as much joy, as their loss
had brought grief to their Parents. They are born to command as many Empires,
and Kingdoms, as are represented on their bodies; and by them shall peace be
given to the greatest Empires in the Universe.

This Prophecy was brought to the Court, and presented to the Souldan, and Don
Bellianis, who seeing the contents of it would not be very pleasing, they
therefore resolved to conceal it from the knowledge of all, trusting Fate to
dispose of them, and hoping for the best. But withal, they made the stricter
provision for the nursing of the two young Princes, who, with their Purses,
were placed in a Castle adjoining to the Court, and a strict Guard set to watch
it night and day. By the consent of all, the young Son was named Meridian,
after the name of the Souldan his Grandfather; and the Princess was called
Clarinds, it being the name of her Grandmother, the Mother of Don Bellianis.
These two admirable Princes being thus named, were delivered to certain Ladies,
to be nursed by them in a Castle, and under a Guard, as we have already told
you; and there they continued ^^x months, without being visited by any but the
Father, Mother, Grandfather, and Grandmother, and such of the Court as they
permitted to go with them; and in these six months they were grown so large,
that it was admirable to all that faw them. The Father and Grandfather of
these two Princes were very glad that six months were passed; hoping that they
by taking the same care of keeping and guarding them, might hinder the effects
of the threatening Prophecy. The Princess Florisbella was mightily well pleased
with the thriving of her Children, but was dissatisfied at their being so
strictly guarded; and had several times inquired of her Husband the cause why
they could not be bred up in the Court with her. Don Bellianis still concealed
the true cause of their confinements, and replied, that it was out of state;
and that it would be better for the Children; while they were so young, to be
bred privately then otherwise; promising, that so soon as one year was past, by
which time they would be capable of knowing them, to permit them to be brought
to, and bred up in the Court: and with this answer the Princess was forced to
rest satisfied.

The news of the birth of these two heave Princes being spread abroad, was soon
carried, not only to all parts of the Empire, but it also came to the hearing
of Don Brianel and Aurora, King and Queen of Antioch, who, believing they
should oblige Don Bellianis and his Princess, sent their Daughter Aurora to be
been up with them in the Court of Babylon: and, by their example, Alfiron and
Persians, King and Queen of Shyraz, also sent their Daughter Bellians; for
whose arrival at Court, great joy was made. And now the Princess Florisbella
was again desirous that her two Children might he brought to Court, to
accompany these two Princesses. Don Bellianis promised her, that her desire
should in short time be granted; but that he must first have the consent of her
Father, the Souldan, before it could be done. The Princess hearing, and
understanding, that if she could have her Fathers consent, her Husbands would
be had; she therefore became a Suitor to her Father in that be half: He
answered her, as her Husband had done, that in short time she should have her
desires fulfilled. But she was so importunate with both her Husband and Father,
that she caused them to promise her that on a day prefixed, which was to come
within one month more, the two Princes should he brought to Court.

She waited the coming of that day with some impatience; and when it was come,
a great Feast was provided, and Triumths were intended to be solemraze^ in
honor of the two Princes; and all the Court went in a kind of procession to
the place where they were kept. They were brought out of the Castle by their
Nurses, and placed in a Golden Chariot, drawn by two milkwhite Palsreys. They
were attended by several other Chariots, wherein were the most eminent of the
Court; and guarded by those who had formerly been the Guard of the Castle. They
being brought to Court, and dinner ended, they were in the same mam^er drawn in
their Chariots to a place scaffolded, and railed in, where the Tournament was
to be kept. All Persons here took their places according to their degrees and
abilities; and the two young Princes were placed on a Scaffold where were none
but themselves and their Nurses, and the two young Princesses, Aurora, and
Belliana: and opposite to them was the Scaffold whereon sat the Souldan and his
Wife, and Don Bellianis, and the Princess Florisbella, who was very joyful at
the sight of her two Children; but her joy was converted into sadness within
few hours after.

All People being placed on the Scaffolds, and the Combatants, who were to
perforin this days Triumph, being entered the Lists, they rode about, making
their usual obeysances to these Princes, and so passed on to their several
stations; where, at the noise of forty Trumpets, they began their carere, which
was performed with much gallantry; and so indeed was all the action of the day,
to the great content of all the Spectators. But a little before the approaching
of the night, when the Combatants were separated, there were two Chariots seen
in the Air, drawn by six Griffons apiece; they came from several ways, for one
came from the East, and the other from the West; and meeting in the Air, they
began a furious Combat with each other, which continued for some time in the
Air, to the admiration of all the beholders; but they in the end separated, and
both wheeling about, alighted in the place where the Tilting had been
performed: out of one of these Chariots issued a Giant, and in his hand two
Lions, who went toward the Scaffold where the two young Princes, Meridian, and
Clarinda, were seated; but before they could come thither, they were met and
opposed by another Giant, and two fierce Lecpards, who came out of the other
Chariot; between these two Giants began a fierce and cruel Combat; for they
drawing their mighty broad Falchions, soon drew blood from one another: in the
mean time the Beasts were not idle, for they assaulted each other with great
violence; and in the end of a cruel Combat, which was begun, continued, and
ended by these Giants, and Beasts, to the admiration of all the beholders, the
Giant with the Lions was vanquished by the other; and a great peal of Thunder,
and flash of Lightning happening, the Chariof out of which the vanquished Giant
and Lions came was vanished, and so was the Giant and Lions; and the other
Giant seeing himself Conqueror, taking his Leopards in his hand, went up to the
Scaffold where the two young Princes were, and taking them into his arms, bore
them away; and carrying them to the Chariot, he entered with them there, and the
two Leopards, lying at the feet of the two Princes; immediately the Griffons
flew up into the Air, drawing the Chariot after them: and thus were these two
Princes born away, to the great grief and astonishment of the beholders.

CHAP. IV. How Don Bellianis is comforted himself, and comforts his Wife, for
the loss of his Children, by means of a Letter which he received from the sage
Bellona, signifying her care of them. The Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don
Lucidamore, in their return to Greece, meet with a Damsel, who was going to
Constantinople to get relief against a Giant called Fustagon, who had gotten
into his custody the Princess Leonarda, and her Father, and Lover, the Prince
Arsileo; they hearing this news, went with the Damsel to deliver them; which
they performed by the death of the Giant.
GReat sorrow, confusion, and grief, did this Adventure cause to all the Court;
but more especially to the Princess Florisbella, who fell from the Scaffold in
a swoun, and was so bereaved of her senses, that she was put into a Chariot,
and carried into her Lodgings in the Court, before she came to her self; and
then her Ladies, using all convenient remedies, brought her again to her
senses: but she then made the greatest lamentations in the World. Neither was
her Husband, Don Bellianis, less troubled then she: but as he was taking Horse,
to return to the Court, a Dwarf presented to him a Letter, and departed; he
opening the paper, read these words.

The sage Bellona to Don Bellianis, greeting.
KNow ye, that as it has been the greatest of my care and study, to preserve
the Honor of the House of Greece, and much more particularly your own Person,
so it is not unknown to you, how often I have given you testimonies of my care
in that behalf; and although sometimes, through malignity of the Heavens, and
the great power and skill of my Adversary, some misfortunes have befallen you,
yet they were but for a season; and the bad influence of some Planets being
over, all your actions have again been prosperous enough. Even so will it
happen in this late Adventure, which you may account a misfortune befallen your
Children: but you may assure your self, and the Princess Florisbella, from me,
that all shall turn to the best; and that I will be answerable for the Persons
of your two Chilnren, and be careful of their education; and in the place where
I shall dispose them, they shall be more safe, then either in the Court of
Babylon, or the Castle where you had before placed them: therefore satisfy
your self for their absence, and assure your self, that the joy you shall take
in recovering them again, shall make large amends for what sorrow you have
received in this their supposed loss. This you may assure your self from

Your constant Friend, BELLONA.


Much satisfaction did the valorous Prince Don Bellianis receive at the reading
of this Letter, knowing that whatever the sage Bellona did undertake and
promise, was true, and would turn to his advantage; and therefore he spurred on
amain, and coming to the Chamber where the Princess Florisbella was in this
lamentable condition, and accompanied by her Father and Mother, who made as
great lamentations as she, he told them, that they might cease their
lamentations and complaints, for he had already received intelligence of his
Children; and to satisfy them what, he drew out the Letter he had received,
and read it unto them. At the reading of this Letter, and the discourse he made
upon it, and the arguments he used to convince them of the truth of it, they,
in the end, rested very well contented, and were resolved to be satisfied with
their condition; which although they concluded it to be a misfortune, yet since
the sage Bellona had promised, and undertook for them, they questioned not but
in the end of all, things would happen as she had declared.

This unfortunate Adventure being ended, and all the Princes indifferently well
satisfied, the Princess Florisbella, having lost her own Children, was mightily
comforted by the presence of the two young Princesses, Aurora of Antioch, and
Belliana of Shyraz, whose excellent beauties were the ornament and wonder of
the whole World; and although their Parents (hearing of the loss of the two
Princes) did send for their Daughters, yet the Princess Florisbella made such
Apologies, and used so many Arguments to retain them, that, in the end, their
Parents were content they should continue where they were.

And now the two valiant Princes, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of
Thessaly, seeing their Brother so well bestowed in marriage, they desired leave
of him to return to Constantinople, to attend their Father. He knowing that
their desires were but reasonable, and that he was in duty bound to do the
same, and his own Affairs (considering the present War with the Emperor of
Trebizond not being ended) not permitting him to leave the Souldan at present;
he therefore gave leave unto his two Brothers to depart with what convenience
they could, promising them to follow with all convenient speed; and sending
Letters by them from himself, from the Souldan, and from his Princess
Florisbella, to his Father and Mother, they departed, in company of several
Grecian Knights who had accompanied them thither, and who now made up a
considerable train.

They being thus accompanied, traveled through all those vast Countries that
separate Babylon from Greece, without meeting with any considerable Adventure;
and they were now entered upon the confines of their own Country, when, one
morning early, they were overtook by a Damsel, who seemed to be in great haste,
and made pitious lamentation. These two worthy Princes, knowing that by the
Order of Knighthood they were bound to assist all distressed Damsels, asked her
the occasion of her haste. She answered, that she was with all speed journeying
to Constantinople, to carry news thither that would not be very pleasant; and
to see if she could get any remedy for a misfortune that was lately befallen.
They told her, that their journey was thither also; and that they were so
concerned with the Affairs of that place, that if she pleased to acquaint them
with her business, they promised her their assistance, She seeing them such
likely Knights, and so well accompanied, and hoping she might save her self the
trouble of any further travel, answered them thus:

Know then, worthy Knights, that I belong unto a Princess named Leonarda, whose
Father is a considerable Subject to the Emperor Don Bellaneo; and this Lady,
being both fair and virtuous, was beloved and courted by several great
Personages; but more particularly, by the virtuous Arsileo, Prince of Hungary,
and near Kinsman to the Emperor: he had long courted her, but the Emperor
having occasion to travel in search of his Son Don Bellianis, took the Prince
Arsileo with him; and in the time of his absence, amongst others that courted
my Mistress, Fustagon, the fierce and cruel Eiant, pretended to be chief. The
Lady Leonarda did never admit of any courtship from this fierce Lover; but he
living in a Castle, near to that where she dwelt with her Father, and sometimes
riding abroad, he would take some opportunities of seeing her, and tendering his
love to her. She, who was resolved to have none but the Prince Arsileo, refused
Fustagon, and all others; and notwithstanding his many Letters and Presents,
wholly refused him. But he, being very amorous of her, was re^^lved to have
her, either by fair means, or compulsion; and to that end he laid many plots,
how to surprise her: but she, being kept with her Father, in his Castle, which
was defended with many Knights of his retinue^, he had not the opportunity of
surprising her by force; but at length he, waiting all opportunities, found
one, to execute his villainous design. For news being brought that the Emperor
Don Bellaneo, and the Prince Arsileo, with several others, were returned to
Constantinople from Persi^; the Father of the Princess Leonarda, out of dutiful
respect to the Emperor, thought it necessary for him to go to Constantinople,
and welcome him home: accordingly he, and most of his retinue, went thither;
but no sooner was be set forwards on his journey to the Emperor's Court, but
the wicked Fustagon, waiting his opportunity, gasned possession of the Castle
where Leonarda was; and first attempting her by fair means, and s^^ding that
ineffectual, he at length forced her to leave her own Castle, and go with him
to his. I being one of her principal Damsels, attended her in that unpleasant
journey; where, when we came, the poor Princess was made Prisoner, and, without
any respect to her sex or condition, unkindly treated: and she refusing to
accept him for a Husband, he told her, that then she must resolve to permit him
to enjoy her, or else he would compel her by for^e. She gave him the best words
she could at prefect, hoping for relief from her Father, and the Prince
Arsileo; who soon after had notice of her misfortune, and therefore b^th left
the Court, and traveled thitherwards to relieve her. But this cunning Villain,
Fustagon, suspecting some such matter, and believing that if he could get the
Father, or Lover, into his power, that then he might accomplish his ends upon
the Princess; he therefore put himself in the way that they were to come; and
having a parcel of Knights, as wicked as himself, who had promised to assist
him in his wicked design: such was the misfortune of my Princess, that he met,
fought with, vanq^ished, and took Prisoners both her Father and Lover; and
having them in his possession, surely guarded, carried them to his Castle, and
presented them to the Princess; telling her, that now, if she would not grant
to his desires, and agree to marry him, he would cause them both to be murdered
before her eyes. She was mightily perplexed at her great misfortune; and all
that she could gain of this Monster was, to give h^^ a months time to consider
of this matter, promising then to give him a positive answer. And this she did,
in hopes to be relieved by some of her Fathers Subjects; but they faling her,
she made such shift, as she not me out of the Castle, commanding me to go with
all speed to the Emperor's Court, to get asu^stance from thence.

And thus, continued this Damsel, have I given you a brief, but true account of
my Princesses misfortunes, and the cause of my hasty journey; and therefore if
you are willing to assist me in this enterprise, make no delays, but face
about, and I will conduct you to the place where all these unfortunate People
are kept.

The two Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, needed not many arguments
to induce them to assist in so just a cause; not only the defense and
assistance of all Ladies in general obliging them thereto, but that in
particular, of a Lady their Fathers Subject, whom they very well knew; and
their near and dear Kin^ma^, Don Arsileo, for whose assistance and deliverance
they knew themselves very much obliged: and were very joyful, that, after so
long an absence from their own Country, they might now, at their return, be
instrumental in acting any thing that should be worthy of them; wherefore they
soon faced about, and bidding the Damsel put on, they and their whole Troop
followed her. And now being upon their way, they inquired several things of
her; as first, how far it was thither? To which she replied, not above one days
journey. Then, how this Giant, Fustagon, was accompanied? and how they might
get into his Castle? To this the Damsel replied, that he had two hundred
Knights in his company within the Castle, and had twice that number in places
not far distant; and that several wicked Knights did every day come (...) to
him to his assistance, all which he entertained, fearing and expecting Forces
from my Ladies Fathers Subjects, or from the Emperor, to come against them: and
therefore he is so well provided with Knights within and without; and the
Castle is so well fortified, that it will be a very difficult enterprise to
gain it by force; wherefore it will be better, in my opinion, said she, for
some to get in by policy, and so surprise it. The Damsels counsel was very well
approved of; and they, now riding on, and coming within two miles of the place,
again consulted what was to be done; and thereupon they resolved; to divide
themselves into three Squadrons, which should all be that night, about
midnight, within hearing of the sound of a Trumpet of the Castle, and then
should attempt to enter; and that Don Clarineo, and five more valiant and
resolved Knights, would get in as Friends to Fustagon, and so let in the rest,
and perform their enterprise. This being thus resolved upon, Don Clarineo, and
the five other Knights in his Company, marched on alone (leaving the Damsel to
conduct the rest) and wheeling about, approached the Castle, as (...) coming
from a strange Country; and being espied by the Centries, they still came
nearer; and being come within hearing, the Centries demanded who they were? and
what they would have? They replied, they were Friends, and came to speak with
their Lord Fustagon. When they had thus answered, they came nearer, and were
come to the Castle Gate; and the Guard there seeing them so few in company,
permitted them to enter; and they were presently conducted to the presence of
Fustagon: When they came near him, Don Clarineo saluted him, telling him, that
he belonged to a near Kinsman of his, named Ba^stoon, who, desiring to be
kindly remembered to him, and understanding that he might have some occasion for
his assistance, had sent them to wait on him for that purpose; and intended
himself, with larger assistance, to come to him in few days. To this Fustagon
answered, that they were very welcome; but he did believe, that he should not
have any occasion to trouble his Kinsman; for he hoped that the Lady Leonarda
would grant his desires fairly, and then all would be well again: but, said he,
since you are come, I pray stay with me two or three days, and then, if my
business be accomplished, I may send you back to my Kinsman, and acquaint him
how things are. They were well enough satisfied with this answer, and thereupon
walked about with him in the Castle, he giving them an account of his affairs,
and showing them the strength of the Castle; this was much to their purpose,
and therefore they took good heed to all things; and so they were conducted to
their lodgings, where they were disarmed, and supped with Fustagon; who brought
out the sorrowful Lady, Leonarda, into their company, telling her, that his
Kinsman, Barstoon, had sent him those Knights for his assistance, and was
coming with a great Train; so that he knew himself able to keep that by force,
not only against all her Fathers Subjects, but also against all the Knights in
the Emperor's Court: therefore, said he, it will be discretion in you to grant
that fairly, which will be so much to your prejudice to deny, and in the end
must, in despite of you, be obtained; for, concluded he, I vow solemnly, if
you do not grant my request, and that within these four days, I will cause the
heads of your Father and Lover to be smitten off before your eyes, and then
force that from you which you cannot hinder. At the hearing of this sad
senten^e, the poor Lady answered him only by her tears, which she poured out
plentifully before them. Supper-time being enter, and every one conducted to
their lodgings, Don Clarineo went to his, and, being wholly unsuspected, his
Companions went with him. And now all People, but the Sentinels and Watch,
being asleep, and our Knights being arined, issued out of their lodgings, and
went to the Castle Gates, where they quickly slew some of the Sentinels and
Watch; but there was such a noise, that the whole Castle was alarmed; whereupon
one of the Knights went up to the Battlements of the Castle, and sounded a
Trumpet; and Don Clarineo, and the other four, so laid about them, that they
had killed most of the Guard; and possessing themselves of the keys had opened
the Castle Gate, expecting their aid. The Giant, Fustagon, was not so soundly
asleep, but that, at the noise he heard, he arose; and inquiring, what was the
cause thereof? he was told, that the six Knights, who were entertained the day
before from his Cousin Barstoon, had attempted to possess themselves of the
Castle; that they had killed several of the Guards, and had possessed
themselves of the keys. F^st^gon, hearing this news, called presently for his
Armor, doubting there was some treachery in the case; for he could not imagine,
how six Knights alone should be so bold, as to attempt so hazardous and
difficult an enterprise, without further assistance, which he supposed was at
hand; and now he heard the sound of the Trumpet, he judged, that that was the
token to be given; all this he knew, and was resolved to prevent: and therefore
he, being armed and attended by a sufficient number of Knights, went to the
Castle Gate, where he found our Knights were, and that they had opened it. He
pressed forwards to secure it; but he was so well resisted by Don Clarineo, and
his Companions, who had the convenience of a narrow place, (so that their
Enemies could not come to them behind) that they not only kept them off, but
laid s^veral of them dead at their feet. But Fust^gon knowing of what
consequence the possession of the Gate was, commanded all his Knights to press
forwards, and so they did; and would certainly have forced our Knights to lose
their st^tion, if just at that instant one of their Squadrons had not come in
to their assistance; they seeing them approach, and knowing who they were,
opened to the right and left, and permitted them to gallop in upon their
enemies; which they did with so much violence and fury, that the Knights of the
Castle being on foot, many of them were trodden down, and killed under their
Horses feet. And now, they being entered the broad yard of the Castle, began a
very valiant fight; for Fustagon seeing their number, and knowing his own in
the Castle to exceed it, did not question but to vanquish and overcome his
Enemies; wherefore he himself, at the head of his People, fought very
valiantly; but he was soon of another mind; for it was not long after ere a
second, and after that the third Squadron, entered the Castle, so that he
believed it would be to no purpose to resist: however, he was resolved to do
his utmost; and what he could not execute by force, to perform by policy; and
therefore he retired; intending to secure himself of the Princess Leonarda, and
if his Enemies would not desist, to cut off her head. With this resolution he
left his Knights fighting, and went to her lodging; but not so cunningly, but
that Don Clarineo, who had an eye upon him, and doubting some such desperate
act, followed him: when he came to the Princesses Chamber, she was up in her
nightgown, and seeing him come in all bloody, was mightily aghast; but he soon
taking her by the arm, led her to a large window which looked into the
Courtyard, where the fight was maintained, and there he thus spoke to her: Do
you see, Minion, how much blood is shed on your occasion? if you have a mind to
preserve your self, call to them, and that presently, and command them to leave
the fight, and be gone, or else I will deliver you to them, but it shall be
headless. She shrieked out at this discourse; which the Knights hearing, looked
up, but knew not the meaning; only Don Clarineo, who was at the very heels of
Fustagon, and heard his discourse, and doubted would do as he had said, took
hold of the Lady by the other arm, and drew her from her Enemy, and presented
himself in her stead, saying, Come, Monster, exercise you self on Knights that
are armed, and not on poor defenseless Ladies. Fustagon seeing him, advanced
his Sword, and gave him a mighty blow over the head; but he soon requited him
with another, so puissant, that forced the Giant to kneel on the ground: but he
recovering, they began a terrible fight, which ended with the death of the
Giant.

CHAP. V. How the Giant, Fustagon, being shin, and all the Princes being ready
to leave the Castle, they were interrupted by the arrival of several parties
belonging to him; who had like to have re-taken the Castle, but that they were
relieved by the Knight of the Stars, and others in his company; and then, all
the Giants Knights being vanquished, the Castle was left to his care. The
Princes traveled first to Leonarda's Fathers, and from thence to
Constantinople, where they were welcomed, and the Prince Arsileo married to the
Princess Leonarda. Don Clarineo, traveling in search of Magdalena, Princess of
Sardinia, meets and falls in love with the Princess Florida of Sicilia, her
Cousin; who being acquainted with his true name and quality, under the promise
of marriage, permits him to enjoy her. He departing on his voyage to Ireland,
she attends him, disguised like a Page, named Florello.
Just as the Giant, Fustagon, fell breathless on the ground, Don Arsileo
entered the Chamber where the combat had been fought; for he hearing a great
noise in the Castle, and the Guards which were upon him leaving him to assist
their Lord, he found the means to break open his Chamber Door; and descending
into the Court, and seeing the fight, he missing Fustagon, and inquiring for
him, heard he was gone toward the lodgings of the Princess; wherefore doubting
some desperate act, he seizing on a Sword, a Helmet, and Target, went
thitherward, intending to assist and relieve the Princess, or else to lose his
own life in attempting it: with this resolution he entered the Chamber, just as
the Giant fell; and seeing Don Clarineo, his and his Ladies deliverer, he fell
down on his knees to render thanks to him for that great service he had done
them; but he was soon taken up by Don Clarineo, who, pulling off his Helmet,
discovered himself to his Kinsman; who soon knowing him, cried out, Oh, my good
Lord! how much am I engaged to you for this great and immense favor? He would
have proceeded in further discourse of that nature, but that Don Glarineo
interrupted him, and leaving him in the company of his Lady, went down to see
how causes went there; but before he went, he cut off the head of the Giant,
and placing it on his Swords point, went amongst the Knights who were still
fighting. He therefore beholding them, advanced his Sword, and cried out, What
is the intent of this your wilful fighting, since behold here the Head of your
greatest Enemy, which should put an end to this combat? All the Combatants
beheld, and heard him: and the Giants Knights seeing the head of their Lord and
Master, and withal finding themselves over-powred, threw down their weapons,
and cried out for quarter; which was soon granted them. And the Castle being in
all parts secured, the Giants Knights disarmed and imprisoned, the two valiant
Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, again went to the Princesses
lodgings, where they found her not only accompanied by her Lover Don Arsileo,
but also by her Father, who was come thither to her, At the entrance of the two
Princes, they would all three have fallen on their knees, but they would not
permit it; but, being disarmed, sat down by them: and the Damsel who had met
the two Princes, now entered, and joyfully fell down at the feet of her Lady,
embracing her knees; but she, understanding that she was by her means relieved,
soon took her up, and embracing her, gave her many thanks for her so good
service. In the end all Persons were very well pleased; and our wearied Princes
having refreshed themselves with such viands as the Castle afforded, lay down
to take some rest; during which time Don Arsileo took charge of the Castle: and
considering how their condition was, and that although they had overcome all
the Forces within the Castle, yet there were more without who might interrupt
their quiet; he therefore, by the advice and consent of the Princess and her
Father, dispatched away certain Knights (who were taken Prisoners with them,
and now released) to the Country of his Princesses Father, to acquaint his
Subjects of their Victory, and to command them to attend him there immediately,
in the best manner they could. These Messengers being sent away, made such
dispatch, that they soon arrived at the Castle of the Princess Leonarda's
Father, where they found a young, Knight, a Kinsman of hers, called the Knight
of the Stars, that had gathered a considerable hand of Soldiers together, with
intent to relieve their Lord and Lady; and now hearing of the joyful news of
their deliverance, and that they only wanted their assistance in conducting
them home, they soon put themselves in a readiness to march thitherwards: and
now many more, who before were fearful of the Giants power, knowing him dead,
joined themselves to this Troop, so that their Forces were very considerable.
And they being upon their way, we will leave them, and return to the Giants
Castle; where the two Princes, and their Companions, and Knights, having
refreshed themselves, and being now met together, to consult what was necessary
to be done, resolved to leave the Castle, and journey toward the Princes: but
they, knowing that the Giant had Forces in the way, thought convenient to
attend till the Subjects of the Prince, who had been sent to, should come. But
before their arrival there, a Squadron of the Giants Knights, who were
quartered abroad, came to the Castle; but not being admitted entrance, much
wondered at the cause, till at length they understood it; wherefore they sent
to, and acquainted the other Squadrons with the matter, desiring them to come
presently to them, and they would attempt the re-taking of the Castle. At this
summons all the other Forces came up, and being met together, and resolving
what to do, they knowing a private and unknown way into the Castle, several of
the most courageous and adventurous of them entered a Vault which led into the
Castle, the rest still standing before the Castle Walls. Our vastant Princes
stood upon the Battlements, expecting the assault; but they were mightily
surprised and amazed, when they saw a great number of armed Knights were entered
the Castle, and they knew not which way; at length they perceived that they
issued out of a Vault, and therefore they went thither to stop it: but those
who were already entered hindered them, and engaged in ^ight with the Princes,
while more of their Companions entered. Those who were without the Castle,
seeing our Knights to quit the Walls, understood what was the occasion of it,
and that some of their Companions were entered the Castle, and had begun a sight
which they intended to assist them in; and thereupon, they being provided, with
scaling Ladders, and other such like warlike instruments, they mounted the
Castle Walls; which our knights seeing, were forced to divide themselves, and
run, part of them, thither to resist them. Thus were they engaged in two
several places, and the fight became very bloody; and in the end would have
been very hazardous to our Princes, but that they perceived a great Troop, at
some distance, marching up toward them, and it was not long ere they knew them
to be their Friends; for they set upon the Assaylants so violently, that they
caused them to leave the assault, and descend to assist their Companions; our
knights seeing this, now bent all their Forces against those who came up out of
the Vault, whose numbers did not long increase, as they had done, because they
staid in the Field, to help their Companions without the Castle; so that our
Princes seeing that their enemies were but small, and not likely now to
increase, they laid so lustily about them, that they put them into much
confusion; for they did not understand the condition of their Companions
without, and wondered that they had no more of their assistance. The Prince
Arsileo, as being chiefly concerned, performed wonders, killing several knights
with his own hand: and the Prince Clarineo again advanced the head of the Giant
Fustagon on a Spear, on the Walls of the Castle: at the sight of this, both
Parties, as well those within as without, seeing the head of their Chief, whom
they did not believe to be dead, were so dead-hearted, that they gave way to
their Enemies, and, throwing down their weapons, fled. Those who were within
the Castle were taken Prisoners, and disposed amongst their Companions; and the
rest without were pursued, and most of them slain by the hands of the merciless
Countrymen. And thus was this Adventure fully finished, to the perfect joy of
all the Princes; who setting open the Castle Gates, admitted the knight of the
Stars, and all his Company, to enter the Castle. And now it was concluded that
all the Princes, and the Princess Leonarda, should leave that place, and travel
to her Fathers Castle; and the custody of that Castle was given to the knight
of the S^ars, and some of his Companions, who were left to keep it for the
Princess Leonarda, to whom it was given by the Princes Don Clarineo, and Don
Lucidamore, who promised so to undertake with the Emperor their Father, that
she should have a grant of that, and all other Possessions of the Giant
Fustagon. And thus having secured every thing in the Castle, by a sufficient
power which they left, and taking a considerable Euard with them, they
departed, and in short time arrived at the Castle of the Priness Leonardas
Father; who made them very welcome, and promised to attend them to
Constantinople, to the presence of the Emperor. Few days stayed this Company to
refresh themselves, and then they set on: the Company consisted of the old
Prince, and his Daughter, the two Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore,
and Don Arsileo, and several good knights in their Company: and during this
journey, Don Arsileo enjoyed so much pleasure in the company of his beloved
Lady, that he thought himself very well rewarded for all the pains he had
taken, and the hazards he had underwent for her; and to make his joys the more
complete, not only she, but her Father also promised, that at his arrival at
Constantinople, if the Emperor consented, he should be married to her. He
having received this pleasing answer, desired his Cousins, Don Clarineo, and
Do^ Lucidamore, to assist him with the Emperor for his consent: they promised
to effect his desires. And thus did they travel till they came to that great
and famous City of Constantinople, where, when they came, they were met by the
noblest of the Citizens, without the City, and soon after by all the Court; and
at the Court Gates, by the Emperor and Empress. Great was the joy, on all
sides, for their so happy return; for the Emperor had heard of all the
Adventures at the Castle of Fustagon, and had intended to send them relief, but
that he heard all was very well accomplished. The Empress was joyful at the
sight of her Children; and after she had embraced them, she kindly received the
Princess Leonarda, and her Cousin Arsileo; and she and the Emperor,
understanding the love that was between them, consented to their marriage; and
sent unto Hungary, to the king his Father, to acquaint him therewith. But the
Emperor not questioning his consent, in regard the Lady was not only fair, but
discreet and virtuous, and the addition of Fustagon's Dominions, to those of
her Fathers, being added, would make her a considerable Fortune; wherefore the
Wedding was agreed to be solemnized within ten days after: against which time,
and as well in honor of the Wedding, as for joy of the safe return of the two
Princes, Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, great provision was made for several
Triumphs to be then had and kept, not only in the Court, but also in the City.

The long wished for Wedding Day being come, great joy it was to all; but more
particularly to the Prince Arsileo, and the fair Princess Leonarda, whose joys
were now completed, and he reaped all the happiness he was capable of in the
Company of so lovely, and beloved a Brite. But although the joy was universal,
and the triumphs many and delightful, yet they had an end; and now our Princes
had time to rest at home, for the pains they had taken abroad. But so great was
the pleasure that these valiant knights took in seeking Adventures, that it was
not long ere Don Clarineo, remembering the promise he had formerly mate to his
Friend Peter of Ireland, knight of the Keys, to make search after his lost Lady
Magdalen^, Princess of Sardinia, he was therefore resolved to make a diligent
search and inquiry after her; and to that end, pretending to take a short
voyage about the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, he armed and equipped a
Vessel for that purpose; and being only accompanied by a Dwarf, who usually
attended him, he embarked. He caused the Master of the Ship to put in at
several Islands, where he went on shore, to inquire and seek after the Princess
Magdalena, or to find out some other Adventure; but he, meeting with nothing
that was considerable, resolved to sail to Sardinia, and inquire what news was
there to be heard of her. He, being landed at the Port, rode up into the
Country, and his ears were soon saluted with the pleasant noise of a Horn, and
the cry of a pack of Hounds, that were in pursuit of a goodly Stag; he saw the
Beast, and soon after the Company, which was large and gallant; for, upon
inquiry, he understood, that there was the king and Queen, and most of the
Court, and one Lady, who was more remarkable then the rest, who was called
Florida, and was Princess of Sicilia. This Lady was not only beautiful, but
also of a brave, gallant, and generous aspect, and so used to ride on hunting,
that she sat upon her Horse in a very becoming posture. Don Clarineo was
mightily taken with this Lady, and therefore rode up to her, and kept near her
all the time of the hunting; and she seeing him so gallant a Personage, was as
curious in beholding him. The hunting being ended, by the death of the Stag,
and the king, Queen, and Princess, being about to return to the Court, our
knight turned about toleave their company: the Princess seeing that, cried out,
Nay, Sir Knight, be not so discourteous to leave us; but as you have taken
pains in hunting, so go with us, and participate of the prey. He, seeing he had
an invitation, came up to her, and making his due reverence to the King and
Queen, and then addressing himself to her, replied, That it was enough for him
to have the honor of her company abroad, and not to presume any further. The
King replied, That he should be welcome; his Court being always ready to
receive and entertain Persons of his quality. Our Knight would not now be so
discourteous as to leave them, but attending them to the Court was disarmed;
and then he appeared to be one of the most personable and lovely Personages of
that age; and now, if the Princess Florida had any esteem for him when in
Armor, it was then very much increased: and indeed she did so look upon him,
that the little god Cupid wounded her; and from her fair and sparkling eyes
shot back darts that wounded the very heart of the Prince Clarineo. He very
well understood her quality to be Princely, and therefore suitable to his own,
and thereupon resolved to love her: and the only obstacle that arose in her
breast, why she did not make the same resolve, of loving him, was, because she
was ignorant of his. But she, being desirous to know it, commanded a Damsel,
who attended her, to inquire it of his Dwarf. But eating-time being come, he
was invited by the King to sit down-with them; to which he consented. The King
also desired to know his Quality: but he, being resolved to conceal that,
replied, That he was a Grecian Knight, of little fame, known by the name of the
Knight of Cupid (he having the resemblance of that blind god on his Shield.) At
this answer the King was content; but so was not the Princess Florida, who
earnestly desired to know his Quality; and therefore, that evening, she
employed her Damsel; who although she inquired of the Dwarf, yet she lost her
labor: for he gave her no other answer, then his Lord had already given the
King. Don Clarineo chanced to come by, where he saw the Damsel with his Dwarf;
wherefore knowing her to belong to the Princess, he had some hopes of his suit;
he believing that he might gather somewhat from the Servant of the mind of her
Mistress, took her by the hand, and asking, if she pleased to command any thing
of him? she replied, No. Whereupon he asked his Dwarf, Whether she had desired
any thing of him? He, not daring to conceal any thing from his Lord and Master,
presently acquainted him with the desires of the Damsel. Our Knight hearing
this, told the Damsel, that his Dwarf, indeed, knew no more of him then he had
said; but if her Lady desired any further knowledge of him, if she pleased to
admit him to a private conference, he would satisfy her in all she pleased,
and be ready to obey her in all her commands. The Damsel, making an obeisance,
left him, and went to her Lady; to whom she recounted the substance of her
message, and withal added, that the Knight of Cupid was a very courteous
Knight. The Princess spent that night, and the next day, in consulting with her
self, what to do; and at last resolved, to give him a meeting in the Garden
that evening: and therefore commanded her Damsel to acquaint him, or the Dwarf,
with her intentions. Our Knight, in the mean time, had made all diligent
inquiry about the Princess Magdalena, but could not hear any news of her since
she left the Court with the Knight of the Keys: and although the King, being
much grieved for the loss of his Daughter, had made all diligent search
throughout all the adjoining Countries, yet he could never hear any news of
her, or of the Knight. After he had made his inquiry, and was passing through
the Garden, he was met by the Princess of Sicilia's Damsel; who seeing him gave
him the opportunity of saluting her. He soon inquired of her Ladies health;
and, whether she was still desirous of knowing any thing of him? She replied,
that, indeed, her Lady was desirous of a further acquaintance with him; and
that, for her own part, she should be very willing to assist and contribute all
she could thereunto. He kindly thanking her, replied, that he should be very
thankful to her for any thing she should act for him, and should endeavor to
recompense her kindness; and withal, as an earnest of his good will to her, he
pulling a Diamond King from his finger gave it unto her. She kindly accepted of
his Present, and told him, in requital, that if he would please to meet her
there that evening, about eleven of the Clock, she would come; and she hoped so
to order the matter, that her Lady should come with her. He, being glad of this
proposition, was very thankful; and, begging her to perform her promise, he
promised not to fail on his part. She, having now very well discharged her
message, returned to her Lady, whom she acquainted with all passages: and she
thanked her for her discreet management, promising her a reward: but when she
looked on that Ring which the Prince had given the Damsel, she, considering the
richness of it, concluded, that he must be a Princely Person that could give so
costly a Jewel on so small an account; and from thence concluded a good omen to
her affairs.

The time appointed being come, our two Lovers failed not to be at the place
appointed, he alone, and she attended with her Damsel. The Prince, seeing her
approach, stepped forwards, and, falling on his knee, kissed her hand; and thus
began: Madam, how great a favor you have done to me, I am not unsensible of;
and I shall for the future endeavor, by my utmost service for you, to
acknowledge, although I shall never be able to requite the kindness you do me
at this present: Therefore, I beseech you, Madam, if you have any particular
service to employ me in, do but command, and I shall readily obey you. She,
hearing him make a stop, replied, Sir Knight, I am not ignorant of my duty to
those of your quality; and that I ought to be courteous to all strange Knights,
but more especially to such as resemble you, and are so obliging as you seem to
be: but before I can make payment of one debt, which I owe you for your
courtesy, I am desirous to be indebted to you for another, which I hope you
will not refuse me. Madam, replied he, there is nothing within the compass of
my power, but I shall readily obey you in; therefore, I pray speak, and I shall
obey you. Then, Sir, said she, I pray, think it not strange, if I desire to
know of you the present occasion of your travels; and withal, to acquaint me
with your true quality and condition. Madam, said he, there is nothing else
that I had a desire to conceal from you, only these two things; but since you
have my promise to satisfy you, I shall do it, and that freely and sincerely,
although I should run a very great hazard thereby: Therefore, Madam, as to your
first request, I am a Friend unto a Knight, who was sometime since well known
in this Court, by the name of the Knight of the Keys, who so far gained the
good will of the Princess Magdalena, that she, leaving her Parents, went with
him toward his Country of Ireland: but so great was their misfortune, that he
never arrived there since; but by misfortune losing her, he travels about the
World in search of her: and I, being his particular Friend, according to a
former promise to him, have searched several Countries for her, but hither^o in
vain; wherefore, hoping to hear of her in her Father's Court, I am come hither
for that purpose. And now, Madam, continued he, I have given you an answer to
your first demand, what is the occasion of my present travels; and I hope you
will take it as an answer to the second, because I have told you, that I am a
Friend to the Knight of the Keys. Truly, replied she, you have given me full
satisfaction to my first request; and I am as well as you sorry, that you
cannot accomplish your desire in hearing news of my dear Cousin the Princess
Magdalena, whose loss has sensibly grieved me; but have some kind of hopes,
that she may be heard of, because I did believe, she and the Knight of the Keys
did perish together; but since he is alive and well, I have good hopes, that
one day we shall find her so too. But, Sir, although you have given me great
pleasure and satisfaction in answering my first desire, yet I shall not rest
there; but desire you to answer my other more particularly, and I question not,
but I shall be as well, if not better, pleased with the knowledge of your true
quality: wherefore, I pray, refuse not to give me the satisfaction I expect.
Our Knight, seeing the importunity of the Princess, and partly guessing at the
reason of it, replied thus: Madam, since it must be so, I will be contented to
obey you; provided you likewise promise me, not to declare your knowledge of me
to the King, Queen, or any of the Court; but to carry your self to me, as if
you had not been acquainted with my quality. The Princess, being very earnest
to know this secret, promised all he desired: whereupon he thus replied; Madam,
although my many occasions have, for the greatest part of my life, kept me in
remore Countries, yet, I suppose, you have heard of me by my name, when I shall
tell you, that I am called Clarineo of Spain, and am Son unto the Emperor Don
Bellaneo of Greece. Oh, my Lord! (replied the Princess) how will you pardon the
disrespect I have had of you? and thereupon would have thrown her self on her
knees, and have kissed his hand; but he, seeing her intent, held her in his
arms, kindly saluting her; and so they placed themselves on a bench there
adjoining, where, when they were seated, the Prince thus began: Madam, I hope
the knowledge of my name and quality will not prejudice me in your opinion; for
I had rather be the meanest Knight in the World, and be esteemed by you, then
be Master of the greatest Empire, and not in your favor. Ah, my Lord (replied
she) if I had a great esteem for you, which I cannot but acknowledge, before I
knew your quality, it is now much more increased, since I better know you; but,
I doubt, the knowledge hereof will be to my disadvantage, there being so great
a distance in my quali^y from yours. Further she would have pr^ceeded in her
discourse, but doubting she had discovered too much already, she held her
peace; and he, not being ignorant in the affairs of Love, seeing what condition
she was in, made her no answer, but what she received by caresses, and strict
embraces, which he gave her.

Although they spoke again, it was but to discover that to one another which
they well enough knew already; which was, their love to one another; and that
they discovered more with their eyes, then their tongues were able to express.
But he, knowing it was convenient and necessary, promised her a lasting love:
and she confessed that hers was very violent ever since she first saw him. And
now, my Lord, (said she) I have made this confession to you, what use will you
make of it? will you leave me? or how will you dispose of me? or order me how I
shall dispose of my self. To this so passionate discourse, he replied, That she
might command him what she pleased, for he would be wholly directed by her: but
(continued he) if it might stand with your good liking, I would prosecute my
intended voyage, in search of the Princess Magdalena; and upon the first
knowledge of her, or my return home, which shall first happen, I will certainly
visit you, either here, or in your Father's Court, and desire you in marriage.
She thanked him for this loving promise; but withal she replied, That although
he was very desirous to hear news of her Kinswoman Magdalena, yet there was so
much hazard and danger in traveling to unknown Countries, that she could
hardly give her consent to it. He replied, That he would make all possible
haste of his return, and then inviolably keep his word with her. She, hearing
his resolution, did not absolutely contradict him, but then desired to know,
when he intended to depart? He replied, in four days. She was unwilling he
should be gone so suddenly. And thus did they spend some hours together in an
Arbor in the Garden, and the Damsel still walking at some distance to spy if
any should chance to come to disturb them; but she, in the end, being weary of
this employment, came to them, and teld them, that it would be more convenient
for her, and them both, to leave the cold Garden, and enter the Chamber; for,
said she, I see that you are so well agreed here, that there is no ranger of
your falling out there. The Prince hearing her proposition, was very well
pleased therewith; and desired the Lady, to let it be as her Damsel had
directed. She answered, and consented, by her silence; and so they went on.
Being entered the Chamber, they sat down on the side of the bed, and there they
renewed their protestations of an inviolable love, which should last till
death. And now, having said all that could be on that occasion, the Prince was
desirous to proceed further with her; the opportunity of the time, place, and
her great and accent affection to him, persuaded him, that she would not refuse
him; wherefore he again began with kissing and embracing her, and used all
those amorous actions that might induce her to be kind to him; so that in the
end she meltingly fell into his arms, and, as being wholly overcome by him, she
permitted him to take his full content and pleasure with her. The Damsel was
not far off, but had retired into an adjoining Chamber, where she lay till she
thought this love-passion was over, and then she came out to them, telling
them, that it was time for them to part, and him to be gone, for the day then
approached, and it would be dangerous for him to stay there any longer. She
understanding that the Damsel said true, and doubting the worst again, conjured
the Prince to constancy, and had a further promise of marriage, which he
protested should be at the furthest when he had ended the search of the
Princess Magdalena; and thereupon he gave her a King, before the Damsel, as a
pledge of his faith, and as a token of the promise he made her; and then,
sending out the Damsel to see if, any body were in the Garden, he took a solemn
farewell of her; and the Damsel returning, and telling him that the coast was
clear, he lest his Lady, and departed to his Lodging. And now our Lovers had
proceeded thus far, they were more inamored of each other then they had been;
and during the time of his stay, he spent all the nights with her: and the
fatal day being come of their separation, they both seemed to be very much
disturbed; but she, being resolved to put a project she had in her head into
ex^cution, was the better satisfied, and made provision accordingly. He again
promised to obey her in all things, and not to fail in any thing he had
promised her; and now the very hour of his departure being come, and that he
had taken his leave of the King and Queen, and also of her, telling her, that
he should within one hour set sail; and so he left her. She, in prosecution of
her intention, having put all things into readiness before, discolored her
Face, and made that somewhat brown that was before very fair and clear; and
putting her self into a Suit and Coat, habited like a Page, and turning up her
own Hair, which was as yellow as the Gold, or rather as radiant as the
Sunbeams, she put on a Periwig of another color, and so disguised her self,
that she was hardly knowable to her self; and putting a parcel of rich Jewels,
and some Coin, into her pocket, and a Letter, which she had written, into her
hands, she went to the Seaside, where she had not waited long before he came.
She had so perfect a confidence, that he did not at all distrust her; but she,
coming up to him, delivered a Letter to him; which he opening, read these words.

The Letter of the Princess Florida, to the Prince Clarineo.
Sir,
AS a trial of your Love, and an effect of your Promise to obey me in all
things, I make bold to request this of you, to entertain this Donzel into your
Service; I dare warrant his Fidelity. And although you are supplied with a
faithful Servant already, yet, I pray, accept of this from me, who has
commission from me, only sometimes to put you in mind of

Your faithful and constant Friend, FLORIDA.


Don Clarineo, having read the Letter, looked steadfastly on the Messenger, and
she as firmly upon him; but he made no discovery: but thus he said, Most
amiable Youth, how welcome you are to me, my usage of you shall testify; and
you shall always find that in me, as if my beloved Princess were present. Good
Sir, (replied the disguised Lady) your only acceptance of me into your Service
is all I desire; and if I can serve you in any thing, assure your self of my
Fidelity to my utmost ability.

This discourse being ended, he presently went aboard, and carried his Page
Florello with him, for so had she named her self; and the wind serving, they
hoysed up sails, and departed. When night came, the Prince not only caused his
Page to lie in the Ca^in, but also in the same bed with him: he was very
unwilling at the first, but it being the Princes absolute command, he obeyed.
But although they lay together all the term of the voyage, yet did not the
Prince suspect his sex and quality; but he passed with him, and all others in
the Ship, for a Boy. And thus did they travel up and down all those Seas, and
searched several Islands, but to no purpose, till at length to Ireland they
came, as shall be declared in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. How the Knight of Cupid traveled into England, went to the famous
City of London, and from thence to Windsor, where a Combat was to be fought;
for that a Countess was accused of Adultery by one of her Damsels, who was
hired thereunto by the Countesses Brother in Law. The King ordering that the
Damsel should provide a Champion to fight on her behalf, she had a fierce
Giant; and the Countess being unprovided of a Champion, the Knight of Cupid
undertook the Combat on her behalf: he fights with, and kills the Giant; and
thereupon the Damsel, confessing the accusation to be false, is burnt; and the
Countesses Brother in Law is banished. How the Knight of Cupid had in vain
sought for the Princess Magdalena in England, and, taking shipping at
Westchester, traveled into Ireland.
THus did the Prince Clarineo travel from one Country to another, in search^ng
for the Princess Magdalena, wishing by all means to find her, that he might
return to his beloved Princess Florida; who although she was very near him, yet
he was ignorant thereof: but it was great joy and comfort for them Lo^h, in
regard she did always see him, and converse with him, and their discourse
being, for the most part, about her. And now, our Prince having sailed to the
western parts of the World, he arrived at England, and there he landed,
resolving to visit most of the considerable parts of that Kingdom; and
therefore he caused three Horses to be disimbarqued, for himself, his Squire,
Florello, and his Dwarf; and ordering his. Vessel to sail about most part of
the Island, and meet him at Westchester, which is the nearest Seaport Town in
England to Ireland, whither he also intended to travel, and see if in the
Country of his Friend, Peter of Ireland, he might hear any news of the Princess
Magdalena. He and his Attendants being thus mounted on horseback, they rode on
toward the great and famous City of London, where the King of that Country
kept his Court; being come thither, the King, and all the Court, were just then
removing to the ancient Castle of Windsor, for the trial of a Cause that was
there within few days to be ended by Combat; the occasion of which Combat was
this:

A Countess of that Kingdom having three Children by her Husband, he died,
leaving her a Widow; and she seized upon the Estate for the use of her
Children, they being as yet but young: The Earl, her Husband, had a Brother,
who was very desirous of having the Children in his keeping, because he might,
under that pretense, receive the Rent of his Brother's Lands; but to this the
Countess would in no wise agree. Wherefore her Brother in Law was so angry, and
being of a wicked and perverse nature, being ambitious of Honor, and covetous
of the Estate of his Brother, he had contrived a way how to gain all the Estate
to himself; wherefore he, by great presents in hand, and many fair promises of
greater matters, drew into confederacy with him a Damsel, who had lived many
years with his Sister in Law; and her he caused to give out, that the three
Children of her Lady were not begotten by the Earl her Husband, but by another
who kept her company; by this means proving her Lady to be an Adultress, and
the Children Bastards. He seemed, at first, to be surprised at this strange
discourse, which he himself had framed; but, as he said, his Brother's Honor
being in question, he caused the wicked Damsel to be carried before the King;
where she not only justified this report, but made oath of the same; whereupon
the Countess was sent for, but all the answer she could give, was in the denial
of the fact, with asseverations and tears. The King hearing the case, and
intending, like a good Prince, to do justice, took this order; that, by a day
prefixed, the Damsel should provide a Champion, who should maintain and
justify what she had said; and that the Countess should likewise provide her
Champion, to fight with the other in vindication of her honor; and that if the
Damsels Champion should be vanquished, the Damsel should be burnt alive; and if
the Countesses Champion should be vanquished, she and her Children should be
bereft of all the Estate of her dead Husband, and left to seek their fortunes
where they could. This was set down by the King as absolute. Now the time of
this Combat approaching, the King was going to Windsor, which was the place
appointed where it should be fought. The Earl's Brother did before hand believe
what would be the King's order in the matter; and therefore he had provided a
Champion for the Damsel, who was a monstrous great Giant, bred up in the Isle
of Man, a Country thereto adjoining. The Damsel being thus provided for, was
out of all care and fear of further harm: but the Countess could not procure
any to undertake her cause, (though all men believed her virtuous) so great was
the terror every one had of this monstrous Giant. And now was the time very
near come, when the Combat was to be sought; and all Persons concerned, and a
very great Assembly of People were come together to Windsor. Our Prince
Clarineo, now known by the name of the Knight of Cupid, went among others, and
was very much concerned on the Countesses behalf; for he could not hear of any
Champion that she was provided with. He had some discourses with his Squire
Florello upon this occasion, telling him, that he wondered at the cowardice of
the English Knights, that would not undertake this Giant; adding, that if the
Countess had no Champion, he himself would undertake her cause. Florello
hearing this, and doubting some such matter, replied, I question not, my Lord,
but that the Councess is wronged, and that she has bad fortune to have so
monstrous an Enemy, and none to undertake him; but withal, I think it would be
deemed rashness in you, who are wholly a stranger to her, to endanger your life
in a Combat so hazardous. The Prince replied, That he was bound, by the order
of Knighthood, to assist all Ladies, especially those that were distressed;
and that he could not exercise his valor better then on this account: and
(continued he) I should not be worthy of my Lady Florida, if, for her sake, I
shall not assist those that resemble her. I, but (replied Florello) I know
this, that if she were here present, she would hardly give consent that you
should, upon any consideration whatsoever, put your Person into so great
hazard. I question not but I should persuade her thereto, replied he; and to
the end that you may hereafter acquaint her with this affair, we will go
together to the Countess, and see in what condition she is, and accordingly
engage for her. Hereupon they presently went to the Countesses Lodgings, where
they were admitted. The Knight of Cupid being entered, and sat down, asked her,
Whether she was yet provided of a Champion? To which she replied, No; and that
the next day was the day appointed for the Combat: and then, continued she, my
Children will be undone, and it shall be the last day of my life; for it will
be impossible for me to our-live my shame: and if all fail, I will be my own
Executioner. She having ended her lamentable discourse, finished with such a
deluge of tears, that drew compassion from all there present.

The Knight of Gupid seeing so many accompany her in her lamentations, and none
offer to assist her in her cause, told her, That he had so much confidence in
the justice of her cause and innocence, that he would undertake the Combat in
her behalf. She, hearing what he had said, replied, Ah! Sir Knight, how much am
I obliged to you for your kind offer, which I dare not accept of? not so much
out of a sense of my own misfortune, as for fear of yours; for the Monster, who
is the Champion of my Adversary, is so mighty, that he is thought to be able to
encounter with four of the best and valiantest Knights in this Kingdom:
therefore, Sir Knight, I should be mighty sorry to adventure you single against
so vile a Monster; and then, should you miscarry, as I doubt you must, although
I am innocent, I should be then concluded guilty, and you would to no purpose
lose your life in my defense; therefore I think it best to conclude my self
unfortunate, and not make others, who are wholly unconcerned, suffer with me.
To this the Knight of Cupid replied; Madam, if you please to accept of me for
your Champion, do not question any thing else further; but leave all to Fate,
that has formerly strengthened me to overcome and vanquish Enemies altogether
as redoubtable as this Monster. His Squire, Florello, hearing this, and being
no longer able to forbear, said, Good my Lord, consider what you do; and
remember, that as this Lady supposes she can have little benefit by your
assistance; so (you know) the Princess Florida will (if you be unfortunate)
receive so great a grief, that it will be the ending of her days: and so you
will thereby be the occasion of the death of her your self, and do no kindness
for the Countess, but rather leave her the more suspected. All that you can say
(replied the Knight of Cupid) is nothing, for I question not the Victory, if
there were two such Monsters; so great confidence have I (said he to the
Countess) in the justness of your cause, and the assistance of that power that
has never yet failed me: therefore, if you please to accept me as your
Champion, I will undertake the Combat on your behalf. The Countess, hearing his
resolution, kindly thanked him; and he promised not to fail the next day to be
ready Armed at all points in the Field; and so they parted.

The next day being come, and the hour of the Combat approaching, and all
things provided to receive the Combatants, Judges, and Spectators, the King
entered, and mounted on a Scaffold, where was also the Queen, and the chiefest
of the Nobles; two Judges, who were appointed to be Judges of the Field, sat
at the King's feet. The Countess, and her three Children, being clad in
mourning apparel, sat by themselves; and the Damsel, with the Brother of the
Earl, by themselves, on another Scaffold. All things being thus ordered, at the
sound of several Trumpets, the Giant entered the Lists; he was mounted on a
mighty Horse, and armed with an Armor made of the Shells of several Fishes,
which were harder then any Diamond: his Helmet was carried by one Knight on
foot, and his Lance by another. He being entered, the cause of the Combat was
proclaimed, and the King's award thereupon: that done, the Judges demanded of
the Damsel. If she would still justify what she had said? She replied, Yes:
and thereupon produced the Giant for her Champion. The Counfess was then called
to, and asked, Whether, or no, she was guilty of the fact wherewith she was
charged? She replied, Not guilly. And her Champion being demanded, she told the
Judges, That her chiefest Champion was the God of Justice, from whom she
expected and hoped for Justice; but for any humane Champion, she was
unprovided. The Giant hearing this, began to prance about, and boastingly to
say, What is it that deters these cowardly Knights, that they come not forth to
the Battle? surely they all conclude her guilty, or else are fearful of my
presence; but if that be the cause, if any be so bold as to undertake her
cause, I will engage with any two, three, or four of them. That shall not need,
proud Monster, (replied the Knight of Cupid, who was now entered the Lists) for
I my self (if the Lady please) will undertake you alone; and I question not,
but, the justice of her cause assisting me, to make you, in this place, repent
these arrogant speeches. Young Dastard, (replied the Giant) what madness
possesses your brain, to be so bold to come into my presence, whose very looks
have vanquished twenty such Knights, and made them run away like sheep? You
shall find it much otherwise then you expect, (replied the Knight of Cupid) as
I hope, ere many hours are past: and therefore, Madam, (said he to the
Countess) I hope you will admit me for your Champion, and then I will do my
utmost devoir to vindicate your Honor. Alas, Sir, (replied she) I must, and do
accept of you; and if you have but as good success as my cause deserves, you
may (though as yet improbably) expect the better in the Combat. He made his
reverence to her; and then went to the Judges, who accordingly admitted him. He
had hitherto been bare-headed, and thereby discovered one of the most manly,
but withal, the most pleasant countenances that had been seen; and he did
somewhat resemble that blind god Cupid that was pictured on his Shield: so that
all the Spectators did much pity, that one so young and handsome should
endanger himself against so monstrous a Creature. He having now made his
reverences to the King and Queen, rode to the end of the Lists, and took his
Helmet from his Squire Florello, and his Lance from his Dwarf; and buckling on
his Helmet, he, putting his Lance in his Rest, expected the sound of the
Trumpets, which beginning, he spurred on amain, and encountering his Enemy on
the breast, made him bend backwards; and he himself had such an encounter on the
Shield, that it much bruised it, and so they passed on: but both of them
finding that their Lances were yet whole, and that they had not much dammaged
one another, they again began another carere, which was performed with such
violence, that the Giant fell from his Horse; and the Knight of Cupid was
dismounted, with his saddle between his legs. The Giant, who was fallen, soon
got on his feet, and, being enraged at his misfortune, drawing his Sword, came
up to the Knight of Cupid, who was hardly ready to receive him, he was so
encumbered with the saddle, so that he received a mighty blow on the Helmet,
that he thought all had been fire; but he coming to himself, returned the Giant
so mighty a blow on the arm, that finding the way where the shells were closed,
it much wounded him. He who had never found so weighty a blow from any Knight,
or Giant, in all his life, was now so enraged, that seeing his blood come, he
roared like a Bull, and lifting up his mighty Sword in the Air, intended to
cleave the Knight in pieces; which he seeing avoided, but not so well, but that
he was wounded in the leg. And now they, being both wounded, gave and received
several blows, which made the blood to issue out of their wounds. Great was the
wonder of the Spectators, seeing the Knight of Cupid hold out so valiantly
against the Giant; who being so assured, as he thought, of the Victory, before
he began, and now kept off so long, was grown mad with anger, and let fall so
many blows, and so fast, that he was out of breath. This the Knight of Cupid
saw, and only warded them with his Shield, or stepping aside avoided them. The
Giant, although he was near tired with the continual pains he had taken, yet
believing by the Knights only defending himself, and avoiding his blows, that
he was near vanquished, laid on the faster, and that so long, that he was
forced to retire for breath; which the Knight of Cupid seeing, he made up to
him, and now, being in good heart and lusty, he poured so many blows upon the
Giant, that he wounded him in several places, he being so unweildy, that he
could not turn away with that nimbleness the Knight of Cupid had done; and now
all were in good hopes that the Knight of Cupid would have the better of the
Combat; for the Giant was so tired, that he could hardly defend himself, much
less offend his Enemy; and the smart of his wounds much more tormented him. He
was now therefore so much enraged, that he fell in upon the Knight, and
desperately wounded him, though he received one himself; but being now near one
another, the Giant advanced his Sword, and intended to have cut the Knight in
twain; and much hurt it must of necessity have done him, had it hit him fully;
but however, he was much prejudiced by the blow: for their Swords meeting, the
Giants Sword cut the Knight of Cupid's Sword in two. Thus was our poor Knight
distressed, being thus disatmed; and he had no way to help himself, but only by
avoiding the blows of the Giant, who now forced him about the Field at his
pleasure. Much was the sorrow of all the Assembly; but that of the Countess
exceeded them all: but the Page Florello, at this killing spectacle, had fallen
down in the Field, if the Dwarf had not catched hold of him. The Knight of
Cupid, seeing the condition he was in, like a valiant Knight, did not despair;
but watched all opportunities to close with the Giant, and dispossess him of
his Sword; but that was not only difficult, but dangerous: wherefore he seeing
a Battle-ax hanging at the saddle-bow of the Giant, resolved to possess himself
of that; wherefore he retired thitherwards, and being now near the Giant's
Horse, he threw the Hilt, and that part of his own Sword that remained in his
hands, at the Giants head, that he was astonished at the blow; and in the mean
time seized on the Battle-ax. The Giant soon came from his astonishment, and
now believing his Enemy to be quite weaponless, advanced toward him, but to
his cost; for he not doubting any such matter, came so near, that the Knight of
Cupid, hitting the Giant a blow with the mighty Battle-ax, cut off one of his
arms, at which he roared like a baited Bull; and the Knight again following his
blows, in two more laid him flat upon the earth, and so coming to him, and
possessing himself of the Giant's Sword, he therewith smote off his head.

The Knight of Cupid having now, to the joy and admiration of the whole
Company, killed his Enemy the Giant, and cut off his head with his own Sword,
put it on the Swords point, and presented it to the Countess; saying, Now,
Madam, behold! the effects of your Prayers and Tears have given me the Victory
over your Enemy; and if this be not enough, let me know what is further to be
done. The Countess, coming down from the Scaffold, threw her self at the
Knight's feet, with many fears, embracing him: but he, taking her up, went to
the King, and the Judges, who told him, The Conditions of the Combat should be
performed: whereupon the false Damsel was seized on, and a pile of Faggots
being in readiness, she was carried thither to be burnt. She seeing that the
end of her life was at hand, and being accompanied by some Religious Persons,
they so far wrought with her, that she confessed, That the Accusation she had
made of the Countess was false; and that she was hired thereto by the
Countesses Brother in Law. The King, and the Judges, hearing of this, commanded
her to be burnt immediately, as a punishment for her offense; and withal,
banished the Countesses Brother in Law; so that, if after twenty days he should
ever be seen in England, he should be hanged. And now justice being done on all
sides, the Queen took the virtuous Countess, and her Children, into her
company; and the King desired the valiant Knight of Cupid to go with him: the
which he did, and stayed there with him several days; being all that time
highly and honorably feasted and entertained by the King, and all the Court.

But some few days being passed, and he hearing no news of what he searched
for, the Princess Magdalena, in order to his resolutions, he passed through the
principallest places in England, till he came to Westchester; where, meeting
with his Ship, he soon after embarked, leaving the fame of the Knight of Cupid
spread abroad in all that Country. Being now embarked, with his trusty Squire
and Dwarf, he sailed cross those Seas, and landed near the Port of Dublin, then
called Ballicleagh, or the Town of Hurdles; it being, as most of all that
Country is, built upon Hurdles laid upon a Bog. The whole Country of Ireland
was at that time governed by one Monarch, who kept his chief residence at
Dublin; but it was divided into four small Kingdoms, or Provinces, called,
Lemster, Munster, Ulster, and Conaught: and over these there were several
Kings, Earls, or Governors. The principal King himself, whose name was Owen Roe
Oneale, governed the Province of Lemster particularly; the Governor of Munster,
who was his Brother, and Father to Peter of Ireland, was named Mac Guire; the
King, or Governor of Ulster, was named Owen O Coneele; and the King, or
Governor of Conaught, was named Owen Mac O Brian. These were the several
Governments, and these were the several Governors of this Kingdom, whose
Monarchy was as ancient as any in the World; for it was first formed into a
Monarchy by King Gaelus, Son to Pharaoh King of Egypt, in the time of the
Patriarch Abraham, which was two thousand years before the Incarnation of our
blessed Lord and Savior; and it continues in the same way of Government to this
day, never admitting of any but a Kingly Government.

CHAP. VII. How the Knight of Cupid, being arrived in Ireland, was set upon by
four Knights whom he vanquished, and afterward more of their Companions; but
at length he being overpowered by the Multitude, and refusing to yield to the
King, was well nigh slain. How he submitted to the King, who told him of Wars
in his Kingdom about Honna Princess of Ulster, who was beloved by the Prince of
Conaught, but could not be suffered to Marry him by reason of the Giant
Flusteron, who would compel her to be Married to him against her will. How the
King with the Knight of Cupid went to the Wars, and after many bloody Battles,
and the Destruction of many Cities, the War was ended by the sole valor of the
Knight of Cupid, who in a single Combat slew the Giant Flusteron.
THe valiant Knight of Cupid had no sooner set footing on the Irish shore, but
he commanded his Horse to be disimbarqued, and he mounting his lusty Courser,
armed at all points, and attended on by his dear Squire Florello, and his
trusty Dwarf, who were also mounted, he advanced toward the City of Dublin;
but long had he not traveled, but he was met by four Knights, armed at all
points, who commanded him to stand: he did so, and asked their business. They
replied, He must go with them to the King their Master, and take such an Oath
as he would impose on him; or else leave his Horse and Arms behind him. He
hearing their terms, and not being used to be compelled to any thing so
unreasonable, answered, That he should not, with his good will, take any Oath,
much less leave his Arms. They told him, That this he must do, or else they
would compel him: and thereupon one of them drew near to seize on his Bridle;
but he who was so forward, paid for his holdness; for he gave him such a blow
on the head, with the great end of his Lance, that he beat him breathless under
his Horses feet. His Companions seeing this, went all three to seize on him;
but he turned his Horse to avoid them, and thereby they passing on, he had the
leisurs to put his Lance in his Rest, ready to receive them. They seeing him
thus provided for them, all three ran against him; and although all three did
hit him together, yet they moved him no more then if he had been a Tower: but
they fared not so well, for he encountered one with his Lance, so that he was
thrown over his Horses crupper; and he seized on another in his arms, as he
passed by, and drawing him out of his saddle, threw him on violently against
the ground: and the third, who at that time escaped, was worser treated; for at
the next encounter, he threw him to the ground, and his Horse upon him: and
thus these four Knights being dismounted, he passed on. But they in short time
recovering their Horses, and mounting again, pursued him, but at some distance,
so that he was near the City Walls before they overtook him; and then they rode
up to the Guard there, crying out, Stop the Traitor who has outraged us. The
Guard, which consisted of six Knights, and above twenty Halberdiers, at this
cry, put themselves in a posture to seize on him; and one, who was holder then
the rest, reaching out his arm to seize on his Bridle, for his presumption, had
it cut off near the shoulder; for the Knight of Cupid, having already lost his
Lance, had now only his Sword, with which he did such execution, that although
they pressed all forwards together, yet he made them stand further off; and
those that came within the reach of his Sword, were either killed or maimed:
(...) in short time all this Company were so routed, that they (...) the City
Gate for refuge; and shutting it too, kept him from (...) He seeing this, was
forced to be content, and wait there to consider what he had to do: but he had
not waited long ere the Gate was opened, and a large power was ready to receive
him (...) the middle of them was one who seemed to be their Chief, (...) who
indeed was their King, Owen Roe O Neale; who hearing of the wonderful valor of
this single Knight, was himself come in person to see him. But he not taking
notice of the great quantity of Men, or the presence of the King, made his way
toward them, who now having their King in their company, laid lustily about
them, and he defended himself very courageously; but however, being overpressed
with the multitude that assaulted him on all sides, he could not hinder his
Horse from being slain. He finding that his Horse was killed, leaped from him,
and again put himself in a posture to withstand his Enemies; and as his Horse
had served him living, so now he was serviceable to him being dead; for he
leaving him behind him, hindered his Assailants from injuring him that way. The
King all this while seeing the mighty valor of the Knight of Cupid, was aghast;
but he had so great a power with him, that he was sure to kill him, if he
pleased; but being desirous to have him alive, he cried out, Sir Knight, cease
this fruitless exercise of your valor, for in the end you must cerrainly be
slain, and surrender your self to me; who, on the word of a King, promise, that
no harm shall be done to you. Our Knight, hearing this, replied, I cannot
believe any one in a Country where I have been so discourteously used; and
therefore I shall stand upon my own defense; and I hope before I die, yet to
send a great number of your discourteous and villa nous Subjects to the other
World: and thereupon he still so laid about him, that the dead he had killed
lay on heaps about him. The King now seeing the death of so many of his
Subjects before his eyes, and finding his mercy slighted, commanded a fresh
party to fall on him, and hew him to pieces.

Just as the King gave this command, the Squire Florello, who had been all this
while weeping at the sad condition of his Master, made way up to them, and
throwing himself from his Horse, fell on his knees before the King, desiring
him to stay the execution of his commands but for one minute, while he s^^ke
with his Lord. The King, by his gestures to his People, commanded them to stay:
And then Florello, approaching his distressed Master, fell on his knees before
him, Increating him for Heavens sake, and for his dear Lady Florida's, to yield
to the King, who, be know, would be merciful. By this tune the fury of the
Knight of Cupid was as^waged; and considering, that if (...) should proceed in
fight, he must needs miscarry; it being impossible for one single Knight to
oppose an whole Kingdom; ^e therefore said to Florello, For her sake you named,
I shall be ruled by you: and thereupon he advanced toward the King, and taking
the point of his Sword in his hand, he presented the shell of it to the King,
saying, I who never yet submitted to any Person throughout the whole Universe,
do now commit my self into your hands and power, advising you to make such use
of it, as that no other Knight Errant, for my sake, may have cause to complain
of your breach of promise. The King accepted his Sword, and commanded he should
he guarded to the Castle: when he was come thither, he demanded, Why he had
disobeyed his first commands of being brought before him, he intending no more
to him then to all others who arrived in his Coasts? which was, to impose a
reasonable Oath. The Knight of Cupid replied, But it seemed to me to be
unreasonable to be compelled to any thing, I being willing of my self to do all
reasonable things: therefore, Sir, (continued he) if you please to let me know
what the Oath is I am to take, I shall then resolve you, whether I think it
reasonable; and if so, I shall willingly subscribe to it; but if it be
otherwise, and that in point of honor I cannot do it, I will die before I
yield to it. Although (said the King) the loss of so many of my Subjects, by
you slain, calls to me for justice, and vengeance against you, yet I shall, as
a lover of justice to you a Stranger, pardon that, so as for the future you do
not disobey me. Know then, (said he) that the Oath I would have you to take, is
this, That you will not, without my leave, take up Arms for any other Prince in
this Land: and there is but justice in the case; because it is owned by all,
that I am the Supreme Governor in this Kingdom. I do not contradict what you
say, (replied the Knight of Cupid) but however, I desire, before I take an
Oath, to be further satisfied in the meaning and reason of it. The King, being
very willing to-gain this Knight to his party, told him, that although the
relation of the full cause was somewhat long, yet he would relate it to him,
and thereupon began. This Kingdom, of which I am principal King and Governor,
is also governed by three other Princes under me, whereof one is my Brother,
and the other two, though allied to me, yet are at this time somewhat
disobedient; for, contrary to their Allegiance to me their Sovereign, they have
made War against one another, to the disturbance of my whole Kingdom; and
although I have sent to them to desist, yet they are so obstinate as to
proceed: and now, I being intended, according to my duty to force them to
theirs; and to that end, intending to raise Forces to go against them, have
thought fit to take order, That no strange Knights that come into my Dominions,
shall assist either of them, and so prolong the War; and to that end I impose
this Oath.

I do believe, Sir, (replied the Knight of Cupid) that you have reason on your
side; but yet I am not fully satisfied of my taking any Oath, un^il I know the
cause why these two other Princes make War. That you may so, I am willing to
satisfy you in every thing, replied the King. I tell you, that one of these
Princes, named Owen O Coneele, who is Governor of a Province called Ulster,
has a Daughter named Honora, who is very fair and virtuous; and, as I
understand, is beloved by the other Prince named Owen Mac O Brian, who is
Governor of another Province called Conaught; and, I believe, this Princess
does also love the same Owen Mac O Brian: but her Father is not willing (out of
some former feuds and quarrels between them) to give her in marriage to him who
loves her; but rather chooses to bestow her in marriage with Flusteron, a
furious Giant, who lives on the Mountains of Callingford, in the Province of
Ulster, and is indeed but his own Subject. The young Lady is very unwilling to
be married to this Giant: and her Sweetheart, the Prince of Conaught, out of
desire to have her himself, or at leastwise to hinder her Father from
bestowing her on the Giant, has raised an Army; and the Prince of Ulster, her
Father, by the assistance of his intended Son in Law, has raised another; and
they have already engaged in a War: which although I have commanded them to
desist from, and to leave off, yet they still proceed with such violence, that
many have, on both sides, been slain; and all this whole Country, which has
for many years been governed by me in Peace, are now engaged in a bloody War,
either on one side or the other; and we are likely, if some speedy course be
not taken, to ruin one another: and for this end I thought fit to impose the
Oath I have told you of.

The Knight of Cupid having given good attention to the King's discourse, made
this answer: Sir, I must confess you have Justice on your side,; and I am
freely willing, not only to take the Oath you impose, but also to give you my
utmost assistance in the War: but withal, I make bold to tell your Majesty my
opinion, that it is very unjust to compel the Princess Honora to be married to
the Giant, whom she loves not; and therefore I am unwilling to assist in any
thing to compel her thereto: and setting aside that particular affair, I shall
be ready to obey your Majesty in any of your Majesty; commands; and, I hope,
with so good success, that I shall make your Majesty some part of amends for
the loss of those Subjects who have (through their own rashness) fallen by my
hand: for had they acquainted me with the matter, as your Majesty has done, I
should have been as obedient to them, as now I am unto your Majesty.

The King replied, That since what was passed could not be helped, he hoped he
would not take any thing amiss on his part, and then all should be forgotten.
And thereupon the Knight of Cupid, taking his Oath, had his Sword deliv^red to
him, and was conducted to Lodgings appointed him by the King; whitherto being
attended, by his Squire and Dwarf, he retired, and disarming himself, lay down
to take some rest, which he had great occasion for, in respect of the great
travel he had been at that day. And now the King having the Knight of Cupid in
his Court, was resolved forthwith to march with his Army, and try if he could
compel these two angry Princes to agree, and lay down their Arms; and therefore
he soon after marched toward the famous City of Drummore, in the Province of
Ulster, where then the Prince of that Province resided. Being come near the
place, he sent^a Messenger to command him, in his Majesty's name, to disband
his Army, and suffer all to depart; and promising that if he did so, he would
command the Prince of Conaught to do so likewise; and if he should refuse so to
do, he would turn his whole force upon him, and compel him also to do the same.
The Giant Flusteron, who was then in the Prince of Ulster's Army, and reposing
much confidence in his own strength, returned answer, That if he intended to be
obeyed there, he must first see the Prince of Conaught obey him in what he
said; or else they were resolved to defend themselves.

The King hearing of this proud answer, was resolved to proceed against them:
and the Knight of Cupid, who had no a fection for the Giant Flusteron, but
rather inclined to the part of the Prince of Conaught, advised the King to
assault the City, and take it by force; and thereupon, in short time after, the
assault was given, and that so courageously, that notwithstanding all the
resistance of the King of Ulster, or the Giant Flusteron, it was taken; and
this furious Monster, seeing that he could not hold it, was resolved, rather
then any else should, to destroy it himself; wherefore he caused it to be set
on fire in six several places: so that in few hours that proud and losty City
of Drummore was ruined, and still remains a sad spectacle to all Travellors.

The King of Ulster being forced out of this ruined City, fled, with the rest
of his Army, to another City of his, called Dundalk, and there fortified
himself: and the Giant, Flusteron, going to his own Territories, in the
Mountains of Callingford, gathered together a-very strong party, among which he
brought many furious Monsters, and with this Recruit he relieved his intended
Father in Law, the Prince of Ulster, then in Dundalk; and now believing
themselves strong enough, not only to oppose the King, but to meet him in the
Field, they went out of the City, but to their loss; for the Knight of Cupid,
who commanded the Van of the Kings Army, did set upon the Giant, and his Party,
so vigorously, that notwithstanding all the apposition he could make, he forced
them into the City. The King had many approved good Knights, and some Giants
who lived on the Mountains of Wicklow, in his own Province of Lemster; but more
especially one who commanded the rest, and who was indeed but little inferior
to the Giant Flusteron; and these two did often encounter each other, so that
the Knight of Cupid had not yet had the opportunity of trying the force of the
Giant Flusteron himself, but employing his courage in other places, soon made
them fly before him. And now the Enemy was again enclosed within the City, and
summons being again given him to obey the King's command, and he proudly
refusing, they were assaulted with the same success as before; for after a
violent resistance it was taken; and now the Knight of Cupid seeing they so
much delighted in streing the former City of Drummore, caused the City of
Dundalk to be also stred; and thus in few days were two brave Cities ruined.
And now the King of Ulster being still obstinate, and persuaded by the Giant
Flusteron, or else indeed overruled by him, they fled from one place to
another, till they came to the City of Dundrom, which being a famous Seaport
Town, was reckoned to be very secure, and there the Princess Honora, Daughter
to the King of Ulster, resided, she who had been the unhappy cause of all these
Wars, which she confidering of, and that she might be the cause of her Father's
ruin, considered also which way to prevent it; and therefore sent to her
Lover, Owen Mac O Brian, Prince of Conaught, to desire him to lay down his
Arms, and leave her to the disposal of her Father; for if he obstinately
persisted, she would never have him, although free to dispose of her self; and
seeing his first taking up of Arms against her Father had been for her sake, to
hinder her marriage with Flusteron, so she desired him, that for her sake, he
would also lay down his Arms; and then she questioned not but her Father would
be induced to do so too, and a Peace would follow; and she hoped then so to
order affairs, as that she might content him and her self. This Prince who was
still in Arms in his own Province, and only waited the motions of the two other
Armies, now hearing the desires of his Princess, knew not what to resolve on;
but being willing to oblige her in all he could, and not thinking it convenient
to lay down Arms till the War was ended, he resolved on a third course, which
was, to take past with her Father, relieve and assist him against the King, and
thereby, as he hoped, oblige him to bestow his Daughter on him; and therefore
away he marches with all his Army toward the City of Dundrom, where the King
and the Knight of Cupid had besieged the King of Ulster. The news of his
approach surprised the King; neither did the Prince of Ulster know what he
intended: but he soon sent a Letter to acquaint him, that although he had
appeared his Enemy when alone in the Field, yet now, that he saw him likely to
be oppressed by the King, and his numerous and victorious Forces, be would join
interests with him, till he had free^ himself of so potent an Enemy; and that
then afterward it would be time enough for them to consider of their own
private quarrel, which, he hoped, would be put to a good end; and that at
least, if he would not let him have the happiness of having his Daughter, yet
he would not compel her, against her will, to be married to another. The Giant
Flusteton hearing of this message, and supposing it might turn to his
disadvantage, would not permit the Prince of Ulster to return him any answer;
but told him, that he would take such order, that the King of Lemster should
soon be enforeed to withdraw his Forces: and the way he propounded was this;
that they, being we^^ fortified, need not fear any assault in that place; and
if they ^ould be put to the utmost extremity, they might escape by sea; but he
did not expect any such matters, because the Prince of Conaught would hinder
the King from proceeding so forwards; and he leaving a sufficient Party to
secure the Princess, left the City of Dundrom, and went to his own Country, and
there raising another great Party, he roved up and down, and at length entering
the Province of Lemster, in the King's absence, did much mischief, burning and
destroying all places where he came, thinking by this means to force the King
to raise his siege, and return home to guard his own Country. But the King not
knowing of this mischief, but seeing the Forces of the Prince of Conaught, sent
to know, why he came thither armed? commanding him to depart, and disband his
Forces. He answered, that he could not indeed deny but that he was his
Sovereign, and therefore ought to be obeyed; but that withal, what he did was
for self-preservation, and to serve a Mistress whom he esteemed above all; for
he believed that if he should permit him absolutely to conquer his Neighbor the
Prince of Ulster, and thereby his Mistress would also be destroyed, it would
not be long before he served him in the same manner, and so become absolute,
not permitting them their ancient Principallity, to which they had as much
right as he to his absolute Sovereignty; and therefore the cause why he could
not obey him at present, was, because he was resolved not to sit still, and
first see his Neighbors Principallity taken from him, and then his own. This
was the answer he sent; whereupon the King sent away to his Brother Mac Guire,
Prince of Munster, and Father to Peter of Ireland, to raise what Forces he
could, and come to his assistance, resolving to compel these two Princes to
obey him. The Prince of Munster knowing of the War, and doubting of the events
thereof, had already raised an Army to be in readiness, and therefore was
quickly on his way to his Brother before Dundrom: but in the mean time the
Giant Flusteron had committed many villainies; for he had surprised the ancient
City of Tredagh in Lemster, and destroying the Inhabitants, very much ruined
the City it self; and now hearing that the Prince of Munster was engaged
against his Party, he marches into his Country, and spoils many places there,
but more particularly the Town of Rabennee, which he set on fire: and now all
the Kingdom of Ireland was engaged in a War which was very bloody, and all
occasioned by the wilfulness of this Monster Flusteron, who now, supposing it
necessary, makes all haste possible to the City of Dundrom, and getting into
it, gives an account of his villainies. By the assistance which he brought, the
City was so well relieved, that it was resolved they would no longer be
enclosed within the walls, but go out and face, and fight their Enemies;
knowing that if the Prince of Conaught did them no good, he would not harm them
by assisting their Enemies; wherefore he, making all the Forces he could,
marched out of the City, and being fleshed and encouraged by the success he had
abroad, hoped to have the same here in the Field: and now, being resolved to
fight, he questioned not but he should conquer; and therefore was so bold, as
to send to the King to defy him, and to appoint a pitched Battle three days
after, or sooner, if he would. The King, hearing of his presumption, called his
Council, to advise what was to be done. And there the Knight of Cupid advised
the King, to agree to the Battle to be fought three days after; and in the mean
time to have a Truce, so that any single Persons might be free to visit their
Enemies Camp, or City. All this was agreed on by all Parties: and the Knight of
Cupid having leave of the King, and power to treat as he thought fit, was
resolved to treat with all Parties, and see if by his prudent management he
might put an end to this War without fighting: Whereupon, the chief occasion of
this War being about the Marriage of the Princess Honora, he first went to her;
and there he, examining her to every thing, found that she had an absolute
antipathy against, and hatred to the Giant Flusteron, her intended Husband; and
that rather then have him, she would destroy her self: and that, withal, she
had as great a love for the Prince of Conaught, Owen Mac O Brian, whom she
would with all her heart be married to. The Knight of Cupid having heard her
mind, told her, that he would endeavor that she should have her desire; and
therefore he went next to her Father, Owen O Coneele, Prince of Ulster, of whom
he likewise desired to know, If he had any inclination to Peace? The old Man
replied, he desired it above all things, being weary of the War long time
since; and that he would have left it off, if the Giant Flusteron would have
permitted him. The Knight of Cupid hearing this, told him, The occasion of the
War (as he understood, was, because he would compel his Daughter to marry with
Flusteron against her own mind. Truly (replied the old Prince) I had no
inclination that she should be married to Owen Mac O Brian, Prince of Conaught,
because we have been ancient Enemies, and therefore was willing the other, my
Friend and Subject, should have her; and that has occasioned this unhappy War:
but I now wish that it were otherwise, and did not care if she were married to
the Prince of Conaught, or left to whom she her self should please, so I knew
how to rid my self of Flusteron, who is grown now too potent for me, and
overrules all my Councels. As for that, (replied the Knight of Cupid) if you
please to give your Daughter free leave to marry, I question not but I shall
end the War without much more bloodshed, and that you shall be well enough rid
of Flusteron. If it may be so, I should be content, replied the old Prince, and
so they parted. And now the Knight of Cupid thought it expedient to go to the
Giant Flusteron; where when he came, he told him that he had been the whole
cause of the War; and that it would be well done of him to endeavor an end of
it, by permitting the Lady Honora to choose whom she would for a Husband. Why,
whom should she choose but me, (replied the Giant, fiercely) who have best
deserved her? It may be so she will, (replied the Knight of Cupid) and that it
will be the best way to give her her own freedom. I shall not trust the peevish
Baggage, (said the Giant) but I will have her alive or dead; and as I have, so
I will always hazard my life to gain her. I would that young Princely Puppet of
Conaught would either fight with me for her, or produce any body else that
would do it, and then it should be soon seen who best deserves her. I must
confess (said the Knight of Cupid) that for force and valor you may exceed
him, but there are other qualities that a Lady expects above that. What should
any Ladies expect, (replied the Giant) but to marry where their Parents think
fit, and to obey those Husbands who can gain most from others, and thereby
enlarge their own Dominions? This is your opinion, replied the Knight of Cupid;
but I still advise you to let the Lady have her own choosing. Yes, if I were
sure she will choose me, replied he; or else, if she will renounce all her
interest to her Father's Principality, and he give me present possession of it.
That were unreasonable, replied the Knight, I rather believe that the Prince of
Conaught will produce a Champion to fight in hers and his own behalf. I should
be glad to see him, (replied the Giant) and that shall be the end of the War. I
will go ask him, replied the Knight, and so departed. And now, at last, going
to the Prince of Conaught, he told him, That he had been much too blame to
engage a Kingdom in a War, out of pretense of assisting of a Lady. Then I
perceive, Sir, replied the Prince, you have never been in love; for if you had,
you would not value ten Kingdoms to a Ladies enjoyment. Well, but how do you
think to gain her? replied the Knight; for I know that you must never have her,
unless the Giant Flusteron be first dead, and that, I think, is somewhat
difficult to be done. Truly, replied the Prince, rather then lose her, I would
venture my own Person against that Monster. But do you imagine, said the
Knight, that you should vanquish him? Truly, I much doubt it, replied the
Prince; but I then could but die, and then all my sorrow would at once be at an
end. The Knight of Cupid hearing him thus resolute, and pitying all Parties,
and being desirous to make an end of this War, for the doing whereof there was
but one way, told the Prince, that he would undertake the Combat on his behalf;
and therefore desired him to agree to what he should direct, and then he
questioned not but he should suddenly put an end to the War, to his own
content. The Prince knowing well enough the great valor of the Knight of Cupid,
as having heard of his fight at his first arrival in that Kingdom, and withal
having seen other testimonies of his valor during the War, and believing that
if he undertook the Combat, he should be successful, he therefore kindly
thanked him for his generous offer, telling him, That if he would, on his
behalf, enter the Combat against his Enemy, and conquer him, as he did not
question, he would freely give him his Principality, only contenting himself
with the in joyment of the fair Princess Honora. The Knight of Cupid hearing
the generous offer of the Prince, replied, That he desired no other requital,
but the honor of having done him that particular service, and, as he hoped, a
general good ^o the whole Kingdom, that was now involved in a desperate War.
The matter being now agreed upon as to the main, the Prince, at the directions
of the Knight of Cupid, writ this Letter.

The Letter of Challenge from Owen Mac O Brian, Prince of Conaught, to
Flusteron of the Mountains of Callingford in Ulster.
IT is not unknown to the whole Kingdom that the chief cause of these Wars has
been your pretensions and mine to the Princess Honora; and you and I both know,
that but one of us can lawfully enjoy her to Wife; and I have often heard, that
you have several times sworn, that none should have her so long as you were
alive; whereupon I have often thought, that there is but one way to conclude
upon Peace, and that must be very difficult and dangerous for me; however, I
being now resolved to spare all further effusion of blood, as much as in me
lies, do make this further offer, That I will, within these two days, expose
either my own Body, or some others as my Champion, to fight with you body to
body; and which soever shall remain Victor, shall have the Lady Honora as the
Prize of his Conquest. If therefore you accept of these terms, I expect that
you give sufficient Pledges for performing of the Conditions, as I on my part
am willing to do. These Propositions being so reasonable, I expect your present
Answer:

CONAUGHT.


This Letter was conveyed to the Giant Flusteron, who was so joyful of the
news, that he told the Messenger, that his Pledges should return with him; and
thereupon he went immediately to the Prince of Ulster, and told him, that the
War would now in few days be ended, showing him the Letter, and telling him,
that he was resolved on the Combat, and therefore desired him to propound his
Pledges for the performance of the Articles. The old Prince gladly accepted of
the terms, and soon sent the Pledges, and then the Prince of Conaught sent his;
and every one of the Princes, being acquainted with the terms of the Combat,
sent Pledges to each other.

These nows were not carried so privately, but that the Squire Florello heard
thereof, and understood that his Lord, the Knight of Cupid, was to perform the
Combat with this monstrous Giant; wherefore, as being sufficiently concerned in
the great hazard he would undergo, he used all the Arguments he could to
dissuade him therefrom: But so great was the Knights love of Glory, that I
believe he would have proceeded, although the Squire had truly discovered
himself to be the Princess Florida; for notwithstanding the many tears which
were shed to dissuade him, he persisted in his resolution. And now all the
Princes were joyful that there was so great a probability of ending the Wars.
But when the Giant Flusteron heard who was to be his opposer, and fight against
him, he so much disdained him, that he now ascertained himself of the Victory.

The day and hour appointed for the Combat being come, both the Combatants met
in a place in the view of all the Armies, and being both ready fitted, they ran
at each other with such violence, that both their Lances flew into hundreds of
pieces in the Air, and they encountering with their Bodies, made one another
sensible of the great strength that was in them. But they wheeling about, drew
their sharp cutting Swords, and laid on most courageously. The Knight of Cupid,
who was no Novice in this art of fighting, gave the Giant so mighty a blow on
the Shield that he cut it in two, and descending, wounded the Giant in the
thigh; but he soon paid him for that blow, by returning him another, and
wounding him in the shoulder. And now our Knight was in short time at the same
loss here, by the same defect of his Sword, which flew in pieces, as he had
been at Windsor; and the Giant struck him so furiously, that his also brake
near the hilt; wherefore they seeing the disadvantage they both had, they
resolved on a second way of fighting, which was with closing, and trying the
strength of each others arms, the Giant supposing he should be too hard for his
Enemy in that manner of fighting; but the Knight of Cupid not only cleared
himself from his Enemy, but drawing a Poniard stabbed him in several places. He
seeing this, was as furious as a Lion, and running to a tree that grew thereby,
and plucking it up with violence by the roots, began a new fight therewith. But
our Knight had by that time possessed himself of a Battle-ax, which he had
hanging at his Saddle-bow, and therewith closing with the Giant, still as he
had made a blow, wounded him in several places, so that he grew faint and
weary; and cursing, swearing, and blaspheming, he ran about the Field like a
Madman: the Knight of Cupid still following him, in short time seeing his
advantage, with one blow cut off his Legs, when, he falling on the earth, he
with another blow cut off his Head from his shoulders.

CHAP. VIII. How the Giant Flusteron being slain, all Parties consented to the
Marriage of the Prince of Conaught, and the Princess Honora. How the Knight of
Cupid acquainted the Prince of Munster, and his Princess, of the life of their
Son Peter; and how he found out the Princess Magdalena, by means of his Squire
Florello, who also discovered her self to be the Princess Florida. How the War
between the Souldan of Babylon, and the Emperor of Trebizond, was ended by the
death of the Emperor, and the marriage of the Prince Baltazano with the
Princess Floreza: and of the marriage of the Knight of Hope, and the Princess
Mataroza. And lastly, of the arrival of the Knight of the Keys in Ireland, at
the Wedding of the Prince of Conaught, and the Princess Honora, the Knight of
Cupid, and Princess Florida.
THe Giant being thus slain, there was no Person dissatisfied, only some few of
his particular Friends; who although they were troubled at his loss, yet at a
time of so general joy, they put on as pleasant countenances as the rest. The
Princess Honora, in few days, by the importunity of the Prince of Conaught, and
with the consent of the Prince her Father, agreed to be married to him. And now
all the several Armies were disbanded; and all who had not a design to mirth
and jollity, at the Wedding which was suddenly to be solemnized, went to their
particular habitations. And the Prince of Munster, who had a very great love to
the Prince of Conaughr, desired all Parties to go to his Court at the City of
Wexford, desiring that the Wedding might be kept there; he promising to be at
the whole expense of it, as not having had any joy, or recreation, at his
Court, since the news of the supposed loss of his Son Peter of Ireland, Knight
of the Keys; and new all Parties, at this invitation, went thither, and nothing
was thought on but Triumphs, and Tournaments, to be held for some days, when
this Wedding should be solemnized.

The Knight of Cupid having happily accomplished the affairs of others, now
thought of his own; and being in discourse with his beloved Squire Florello,
who had entreated him to dispatch, and return to his Lady Florida, had promised
so soon as this Wedding was over to return to her, and cease his fruitless
search after the Princess Magdalena; for he had inquired of the Prince of
Munster, but could hear no news of her. But he had not as yet undeceived the
Prince, who supposed his Son Peter to be dead, by acquainting him with the news
of his life, and good health; wherefore he was resolved now, at the time of
this general joy, to tell him the whole story, and thereby cause a particular
joy to himself, that intended it only for the Fathers sake; and knowing that
the Mother of the Knight would be as much joyed as the Father, he therefore one
day told the Prince, that he had some news to tell him, which he believed would
please him; but withal, he desired that his Wife might be present at the
relation. The Prince, at this, presently taking him by the hand, led him
directly to the place where his Lady was, telling her, that this fortunate
Knight of Cupid had somewhat to acquaint them withal, which, he questioned not,
would be pleasing to them, since his coming into that Country had been so
pleasant to all in general. Ah! replied the Princess with a sigh, I never
expect any good news again, since I had that unpleasant sight of the red Purse
with the Jewels, which I gave to my unfortunate Son Peter. Madam, replied the
Knight of Cupid, before I shall relate to you what I intended, I desire of you
to tell me what you mean by that red Purse with Jewels, for I know somewhat of
that Adventure. I shall soon satisfy you in that unfortunate story, replied
she, and so began. I had (said she) a Son, named Peter, who was a very hopeful
Person, and being Knighted, desired, as other young men do, to travel abroad in
the world to seek Adventures; his Father and I, both unwillingly permitted him;
and at his departure I gave him a red Purse, and in it three Jewels, giving him
a charge to be careful of them: but so it is, that he in some unfortunate
Sea-voyage lost them, and, I believe, his life; for the very same Purse and
Jewels came since to my hands in the belly of a Sturgeon; and from thence I
conclude, that he at that time perished, for I could never hear any news of him
since his departure. And at this she concluded her discourse, with a great
sigh, followed by some tears. The Knight of Cupid much wondered at the strange
adventure of the Purse; but however he soon guessed how formerly it had
happened, and soon gave them a particular account of their Son Peter. The old
Prince, and Princess, hearing this joyful news, were so glad, that she, good
Lady, fell into a swoon for joy; but, by the assistance of her Damsels, soon
recovered, and would have embraced and kissed the Knight of Cupid for his good
news: but he desired her to be patient, and he would relate the whole of her
Sons Adventures to her; and thereupon he acquainted them of his arrival in
Sardinia; his love to the Princess Magdalena; her leaving her Parents to travel
with him; their shipwreck on the Isle of Sicilia; the loss of the Purse and
Jewels, which occasioned the loss of the Princess; and his great pains in
searching for her; in which search, said the Knight of Cupid, I am now engaged.

And thus did the Knight of Cupid finish his discourse, not only to the great
joy and satisfaction of the Parents of the worthy Knight Peter, but also all
the Family, all the City, all the Province, nay, all the Kingdom rejoicing
thereat: and now was the Knight of Cupid much more honored by all then he had
been; more especially by the Prince of Munster, who entertained him in his own
Palace, and was very desirous to know his Quality, which our Knight as yet
concealed, telling him however, that he should know it before he parted.

And now the Court being filled with this good news, it was not long before it
came to the ears of Magdalena, who was much joyed thereat, and thought to
discover her self; but she was prevented by the Squire Florello, who, seeing
Magdalena, knew her, and being admitted to her presence, thus began: I am very
much mistaken if I have not formerly been very well acquainted with you; and
that, if you look earnestly on me, as I have done on you, you may know me
through the disguise I am now in, as well as I do you though disguised, as I am
sure; you are Magdalena. Knowing that the Speaker was in the right, as to her
disguise, she looked earnestly; but all that she could answer, was, That indeed
the features of the face were known to her, but in that habit she could
discover no further; but, said she, if you do know me, as you say, I pray tell
me of that knowledge, and then I shall the better judge who you are also. I
know, replied Florida, that you are the Princess Magdalena of Sardinia; and if
you look well on me, you may also know me to be your Cousin Florida, Princess
of Sicilia. At these words they joined arms and bodies, and embraced one
another; and having spent some time in that pleasing exercise, the Princess
Magdalena said, Dear Cousin, since you know me, you also know the reason of my
present disguise; wherefore, I pray, tell me the reason of yours. The very same
reason, replied Florida; Love is the occasion: and now you are found, my
Adventures are at an end. Whereupon she acquainted her with all her particular
Adventures; as, her Love to the Knight of Cupid, and her strange attending him
thus disguised. And now these two Ladies became pleasant, and consulted what
was necessary to be done to complete their happiness; and therefore it was
concluded, that the Princess Florida should, with the first convenience,
discover all to the Knight of Cupid; and after that several discourses had
passed between them, how they should manage their affairs, they separated.
Florida soon found out the Knight of Cupid, who could not well endure her out
of his company; and they coming into a convenient place, she thus began. My
Lord, I hope you intend in few days to leave this place, and return to my Lady.
Yes, replied he; but I would gladly find the Princess Magdalena, and then I
would make all possible haste to see my Lady. And will you, replied she, be
married to her so soon as you see her? Assure your self, replied the Knight,
that the first moment I shall see her, I will be married to her, if she desires
it; and I will never have any other desires but what shall please her. Well
then, replied Florida, I shall tell you some news that will please you; and
thus it is, I have heard of the Princess Magdalena, and to morrow I will
acquaint you further of her. The Knight of Cupid hearing this, desired
presently to be further satisfied; but Florello asked leave till the next
morning to perform his promise: and that being come, they both arose; and
Florello, who must now lose that name, left the Palace, and went to the
Monastery; where, according to appointment, a very fair Gown, and other
necessaries, according to the quality of a Princess, was provided, and Florida
dressed therein: by such time as this was done, the Knight of Cupid was come,
and admitted to the presence of the Principal; where he thus began: Madam, I
was informed that you could give me some account of a strayed Princess, named
Magdalena. Truly, replied she, I know somewhat of her: but there is a Lady in
this place, that can give you certain intelligence of her. I beg the favor
then, said the Knight, to see and speak with this Lady. That you may, said
Magdalena; and thereupon coming into the Room where the Lady was dressed, took
her by the hand, and, being veyled, led her out. She came near the Knight of
Cupid, and stood some time veyled; and he earnestly expecting to see and speak
to her: but at length she turned up her veyl, and discovered her self to be the
true Princess Florida. Our Knight now looking earnestly on her, started back,
as amazed, and cried out, What do mine eyes behold! I come to inquire after
another Lady, and find my own, or one so like her, that they may be well of
near kin to one another. Speak, Madam, I beseech you, said he; and satisfy my
troubled spirit. You are not at all mistaken, replied the Princess; and seeing
you made such tarriance, I have left my Country to find you. He hearing her
speak, and that in her perfect tone, ran and saluted her; and inquired how she
got thither? and so many questions he asked together, that it was impossible to
answer him. He told her, that a Squire whom she sent to serve him, had told
him, that at that place he should hear of the Princess Magdalena; but, said he,
though I should have been very joyful to have found that Lady, yet I am much
more glad to see you. That Squire of yours, replied Florida, can be as good as
his word. Then I will soon find him, replied the Knight. But without my help
you cannot, answered Florida; and with my help you may find not only him, but
the Princess Magdalena also. Oh, dear Madam, said the Knight, make me so happy
as to unfold these riddles. Yea, replied she; but withal, you will first,
before this holy Woman here, said she, promise to perform your promise of
marriage to me. With all my heart, replied the Knight; and I am very joyful
that you propound that which will make up all my happiness: and thereupon he
promised to be married to her the next day, or so soon as she pleased. He
having finished his promise, she said, And now I will be as good as my word;
and taking the Principal by the hand, she presented her unto him, saying, Here,
behold the end of your travels, for this is the Princess Magdalena. The Knight
was now as much astonished at the discovery of the Princess Magdalena, as he
had been at her own discovery; and kissing her hand, told her, that he now
accounted himself happy indeed; in that he had not only recovered his own Lady,
but performed his promise to his Friend Peter: But, said he, I am beholden to
my Squire Florello for all this happiness; and therefore although I am much
delighted with your companies, yet I shall be glad to have his, who only can
resolve me of all things. I tell you, replied Florida, that you cannot without
me speak with him. You tell me wonders, replied the Knight; and I shall after
this rate believe, that all I have seen this day is but a dream, and that you
are but my imaginary Lady. Nay, replied she, if this surprises you, I am sure
that what I shall next tell you will do much more. I beseech you, Madam, said
he, let me hear it, that all my wonders may he over wonders, I may well call
them, and this the day of wanders to me. You desire, replied she, to see
Florello, your Squire; look on me, do you see me? Yes, said he. And do you know
me? Yes, said he, for my Princess Florida. And do you know Florello when you
see him? said she. I think I do, said he; it is not long since I saw him. That
is true, replied she; but withal I tell you, you do not know him, nor never
shall again. Why? was he a Spirit? replied the Knight; if he were, he was a
blessed one to me. No, said she, no more a spirit then I am; and lest you
should suppose me to be one, I give you my hand to feel. I am sure, said he,
that this is flesh and blood. And so was Florello, said she? but now no more
Florello, but Florida: I was he. Now! Madam, said the Knight, this cannot be
possible; I am amazed indeed, and confounded, and shall distrust the rest, and
all to be a dream, or else conjuration. I will assure you, Sir, said Magdalena,
all that has been hitherto told you, is true; and to convince you of the truth
of this last particular, which you so much doubt, behold the habit this Lady
wore this morning when she came in hither; and therewith produced the clothes
of Florello. Nay, then, said the Knight, I do believe all the rest: and then
running to the Princess Florida, and strictly embracing her, he cried out, Ah
my dear Princess, my beloved Florello, what shall I call you that have so often
deceived me when I lay in bed with you, and wished for you who was so near me,
and you unkind refused to acquaint me. Well, replied the Princess blushing, let
all that be forgotten; and now, I hope, you will conclude all true, and are
confirmed in my love to you. A dull Fool I was, replied the Knight, that I
could not all this while make this pleasant discovery: I now remember the
tenderness you had for me when I fought with the Giant at Windsor; the pity you
had for me, when by my rashness I had like to have thrown away my life at my
first arrival in this Kingdom; and the arguments you used to dissuade me from
fighting with the late Giant Flusteron here. Any of these considerations had
been enough to have opened mine eyes, and discovered you: but I by that now
know your great love, which, Madam, said he, I shall endeavor through the whole
course of my life to retaliate, in being wholly at your dispose; and thereupon
he again kissed and embraced her.

And now some time having been spent in this discovery, they all three sat
down to consult what was necessary to be done: and after various propositions,
it was concluded, that the Princess Magdalena should discover her self to the
Prince and Princess of Munster, to the end their Son Peter hearing of it, might
make the more haste home. And therefore the Knight of Cupid went that day to
the Prince, and told him, that he had more good news to acquaint him withal;
and his Lady bellig in company, he told them, that as he had brought them news
of their Son, so he could quickly bring him home, by putting that Lady, the
Princess Magdalena, whom he was in search of, into their custody. They both
told him, that if he could do that, it would be an infallible way, and
therefore he told them the whole story; that the Principal of Saint Peter's
Monastery, was the Princess Magdalena; and that he was assured of this by a
Lady, and Princess of his, named Florida, who was lately come into her Company.
So joyed were the old Prince and Princess of this news, that they went
presently to the Monastery; and after many discourses with the fair Magdalena,
they brought her, and the Princess Florida, to Court: and the same of this
Adventure quickly can through all the Court and City, so that the Princess
Honora soon came to visit them; and so did all the Princes and Princ^^es, Lords
and Ladies of the Court; who all joyed, and wondered at the great Beauty of
these two excellent Princesses, Magdalena, and Florida. And the Story of the
Adventures of these two Ladies was so rare and excellent, that it is remembered,
and celebrated throughout Ireland to this day.

And now nothing but Triumphs were thought of against the Wedding of the Prince
of Conaught, and the Princess Honora: and the Knight of Cupid intended also on
that day to be solemnly married to the Princess Florida. Nothing was wanting to
complete the happiness of all this Court, but the presence of the valiant
Knight Peter, whom we having lest in the Army, before the City of Pharez, we
will go thither to him.

Many assaults did the Prince of Mumidia give to the City of Pharez with
different fortune, for he was not always Conqueror. And the Knight of the
Panthar, in hopes to gain the affection of the Princess Floreza, behaved
himself very valiantly; but he finding that his valor did not produce the
^es^^ed effects, applied himself to treacherous courses, and so managed his
design, that he gained the absolute command, not only of the whole City and
Army, but also of the Princess Floreza. The Prince of Numidia understanding of
these affairs, leaving the command of the Army to the Knight of Hope, disguised
himself; and being accompanied with Peter of Ireland, and several valiant
Knights, they were, as Friends to the Knight of the Panthar, admitted into the
City; but although they really were Friends to the Princess Floreza, yet they
approved themselves to be Enemies to him, and his designs; for the Prince of
Numidia in short time so gained upon the affections of the Citizens, that the
Princess Floreza was released, and the Knight of the Panthar first put into
safe custody, and in short time after executed as a Traitor. And then the
Princess Floreza, understanding that it was the Prince of Numidia to whom she
was obliged for her deliverance, she not only acknowledged the kindness, but
they agreed upon a truce for the present, and soon after, news being brought
from Babylon of the death of the Emperor her Brother, a^^ir^ Peace was agreed
upon, which was fully confirmed by the marriage of these two worthy Personages,
Baltazano Prince of Numidia, and Floreza now Empress of Trebizond. And now this
long lasting War being finished, to the content of all Parties, they all
designed and took their journey to Babylon; where when they were arrived, they
were highly welcomed, and entertained by the Souldan, and Don Bellianis, and
his incomparable Princess Florisbella: and to complete the joys of all the
Court, the Knight of Hope was recompensed for his services by his marriage with
the Princess Maturoza. These things being thus happily dispatched at Trebizond
and Babylon, the valiant Knight Peter of Ireland, thought it high time to leave
that part of the World, and travel homewards, and in his way to search for his
beloved Princess Magdalena; but although he had great trouble in the inquiry,
yet it was to no purpose; till in the end he arrived in his own Country, and
there he soon heard of a great triumphant Feast, that was to be in few days
after held at the Marriage of Owen Mac O Brian, Prince of Conaught, and the
Princess Honora, and his beloved Friend Don Clarineo and Floreza; he was
surprised at the recital of his Friend Clarineo's being there, but much more
when he understood the joyful news of his Princess Magdalena; but however he so
well contained his joy, that he won the honor of the day at the solemn Tilting
held in honor of these Nuptials; and at night he discovered himself to his
Father, Mother, and Lady, and their Friends, to the great joy of all, and
completed the joy of the Irish Court, by the solemnization of his Wedding to
the Princess Magdalena, which was in few days after performed. And now having
joined these great Personages together to their great joy and contentment, I
shall conclude this History.

FINIS.

