Thomas Crisp's ENVY DETECTED AND FOLLY MANIFESTED Herein, and the Addition
following by R.R. BEING AN ANSWER To his BOOK Entitled, The FOURTH PART of
Babel's, etc

Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a Fool in a Mortar among Wheat with a
Pestil, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

Verse 4. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is out-ragious; but who is able to stand
against Envy?

Psalm 11.2. Lo, the wicked bend their Bow, they make ready their Arrow upon
their string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

But, Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that
hope in his mercy, to deliver their Soul from Death, and to keep them alive in
Famine.

By one that according to his measure prays for the peace of Jerusalem and
prosperity of Sion, which God is making the beauty of Holiness, and praise of
the whole Earth, notwithstanding the Rage of all her Enemies, and fury of her
Adversaries.

By J. F. Junior.

London, Printed for Benjamin-Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
Bookseller, 1682.

Thomas Crisp's Envy Detected and Folly Manifested herein, and the Addition
following by R. R. being an Answer to his Book, Entitled, The Fourth Part of
Babel 's, etc.
UPon the 20th of the First Month, 1681/2. I received from Thomas Crisp's hand
a Book entitled, The Fourth Part of Babel's Builders, etc. which he told me I
was concerned in, which upon perusal I find my name, or the Letters for it is
mentioned near thirty times. And I therein termed and charged by him several
times to be a false Witness, and with grand falsehood and called Inquisition
Officer, and such like. All which Reproaches I might and willingly could bear,
and forbear thus to mention, and Rejoice that the Lord has counted me worthy
to be of that little number or Remnant, which are Reproached for the name of
Christ, knowing that the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon such. And they
and I have indeed cause to rejoice, etc. as Christ Exhorted; it being falsely
spoken -- though this was of old the Lot or portion of several of God's
Servants, and also of his People: for remember David said, Psalm. 102.8. Mine
Enemies Reproach me all the day, and they that are mad against me, are Sworn
against me. And did not Rabshakeh reproach Israel in days past, and yet said,
The Lord said to me, go up against this Land and destroy it. And for my part I
shall leave it (to the manifestation of God's Spirit in every ones heart
thereby to judge whether or no the same Spirit that led Rabshakeh (so to
Reproach Israel and the living God) has not entered Thomas Crisp and his
Adherents and Abettors; though they may as Rabshakeh say (or pretend its the
Lord and it is his Cause they stand for, and its his Rule and Government in the
Conscience they would Exalt; but blessed be God in and by the blessed and
divine Light of Christ Jesus (which a Remnant was first turned to, in which
they have believed and have fellowship with God and oue another) they clearly
see, that it is not his Government, viz. Christ's, etc. that they would Exalt,
(notwithstanding their pretenses) but the Rule and Government of him, who Rules
in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, whose unfruitful Works of
Darkness they are bringing forth, though they Nickname them; and would put off
their corrupt dross for pure Gold, guilding it over with a few fair words and
fine Specches, by which they would delude and deceive the hearts of the simple;
but blessed be God who has so preserved a Remnant in his fear, that from him
they have received Wisdom, and thereby are taught, not to buy, or receive
though offered any of these men's corrupt Wares and false Doctrines; and I
believe the time hastens, in which they like their Brethren of old shall
(because no man buyeth her Merchandise any more) weep and mourn over their
Mother Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth,
that had as fair pretenses, and as gilded a Cup, and as highly conceited of
her Seat, as T. C. and his Company are of theirs; and if they Repent not, I
question not, but they shall as surely be Judged, plagued and tormented as she
was: For strong is the Lord that Judges her.

Now the Paper out of which he Collects what he takes occasion, to charge me
with falsehood and being a false Witness, and draws his Conclusion from: that I
am not a Minister of Christ, is a Paper which I had set down his Doctrine in,
and to that had as in that which was Printed in S. Crisp's Book set my name, as
a Witness, in which Paper was these words he so charges upon me, and mentions
so often in his Book. I therefore thought meet here to set down a Copy of it,
which he calls in his 18 page, J. F 's Bull of Excommunication against me, but
why he calls it J. F's he has not told. It is as follows, Viz.

Several years since as it does and may appear by our Monthly Meeting Book,
Thomas Crisp and his Wife in the tender Love of God were visited by Friends (in
order to bring them unto a Sense of the Evil they had done in being Married by
a Priest, for which there is no president nor Example in the holy Scriptures of
Truth,) for about It Is thought it was 11 Mo ths in the other, but if so it is a
mistake.
7 Months, and his Wife did give in a paper into Friends, wherein she Condemns
that practice or thing, and the Spirit that led her thereunto, etc. But her
Husband did not come so far, as to Condemn it; notwithstanding Friends visits
from time to time when they were all Clear, left visiting of him, and be
remained, and has and does unto this day, a man out of the Unity of Friends
whose Unity and fellowship stands in that Eternal Spirit which leads all them
that are faithful thereunto to be all of one mind and to speak the same thing,
and by the same Spirit a remnant are joined together in the same mind and in
the same Judgment among whom there is no division, and these with the one mind
and mouth glorify God, and Serve him, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ
with one mind and one accord, etc. And have no Unity with Thomas Crisp nor his
Doctrine which is as follows. The 8th of the 9 month. 1681.

Thomas Crisp said that he had lately paid Tithes, and that the Spirit of God
did or might allow him to pay Tithes or Marry by a Priest. And that by the same
Spirit of God another might be required not to pay them, or not do the same
things.

This Thomas Crisp spoke, the day and year above said And Consented to have it
Writ and printed and took a Copy of the aforesaid words: Witness

John Field, Junior.


And now I shall take some notice what T. C. says in his 4th part of Babels,
etc. page 19. which is as follows, And I. F. has falsely asserted that T. C.
did Evil, in that proceed of his Marriage, also he says for which there is no
Example in the holy Scriptures for there is president and Command in Scripture
for what T. C. did.

Answer Observe the words of that paper which he calls mine, are as follows
T. C. and his Wife, in the tender Love of God, was visited by Friends (in order
to bring them to a Sense of the Evil they had done in being Married by a Priest
whom he had disowned, etc. now T. C. a few lines after in the same 19. page
says, viz. Although it is commonly said Married by Friends, but more properly
before them; so was ours before the Priest, but not by him. Answer, How then
has, I. F. falsely Asserted, who said Friends visited him? viz. T. C. in order
to bring him to a Sense of the Evil he had done in being married by a Priest;
and if this was a false Assertion, and what thou did there be president and
Command in Scripture for; why did thy Wife Condemn it? etc. and thou in the 18.
page diridingly calls paying Tithes and Marrying by Priests black Sins, and in
the 19. page say it was thy principle, viz, to Marry by a Priest, or Pay
Tithes, and in the same page thou say thou was not Married by a Priest.
Answer, Then not according to thy Principle, and what man of Reason or
understanding think will Regard such a man that is not true to his own
principle, what grand Hypocrysy Contradiction and Babilonish Confusion is this
to say its thy Principle to pay Tithes; and in the same page say, It was in
requital of a kindness readily and freely granted by the Person to my self and
another Concerned, and not as Tithes, etc. and yet say thou have lately paid
Tithes. Note, The Act of Parliament which lays so much upon a House in the new
Buildings, per l. as the House is rated at for the Parish Priest calls that
rate Tithes.
And yet behold he is an Abettor, of the true Christian Quakers canse, falsely
so called. But come Thomas, show me where J. F's false Assertion is, and what
Chapter or verse in the Scripture there is either president or command for
being Married by a priest? and then I. F. will confess he has asserted falsely
concerning thee in this thing, but I Conclude thy eyes will sink in their holes
before thou find that place though it be thy principle. Again, in the said 19.
page you say I Condescended to take my Wife in the presence of a Priest
[what need of such a Condescension if there be president and Command in
Scripture for what thou didst] and Acquainted him that I did it not on any
point of Religion but to Answer the Law. Answer, What is there no point of
Religion in it, and yet president and Command in Scripture for it as thou
say; but I affirm, Marriage is an Ordinance of God and Instituted by him in
Paradise. Well Thomas, But if there was such a care upon thee, to Answer the
Law, let us examine how thou have Answered that? seeing in page 15. Thou say,
It Is a wonder to me when I Consider how many have been Encouraged to deny or
refuse Submission to Authority, on pretense of Conscience -- Again, But for
being Subject to the Magistrate for Conscience sake, that is accounted
Submitting to the Pope [I think to speak more to this wicked and false
Assertion.]

Answer, But does not the Authority, Magistrates and Law, require more a great
deal to be done, by Persons that join in Matrimony or Marriage than thou
Relates thou did Read the form of the Solemnization of Marriage in the Common
Prayer Book, which all Priest's in Orders are obliged and bound by the Acts of
Uniformity to do, and upon failure to be deprived of their Benefice ipso facto
as it dead; for the Common Prayer herein well and reasonably provides, that the
Banes should be Asked or Published three several times in their Assemblies or
Church (so called) that no Person might be deprived of their Children, etc.
without their knowledge. And are they not to give their Troth, one to the
other? and say thereto I plight my Troth. And yet says the Man should give
unto the Woman a Ring, laying the same upon the Book with the Costomed Dutys to
the Priest and Clark, and the Priest taking the Ring, shall deliver it to the
Man, to put upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand. And the man holding
the Ring there and taught by the Priest shall say, With this Ring I thee Wedd,
with my Body I thee Worship, and with my Worldly Goods I thee Endow, etc. Now
Consider how T. C. has Answered the Law and who they are that now may be
Wondered at, and that are Guilty of Idolatry, etc. Now if T. C. has not thus
done how he has Answered the Law, been Submisive and Subject to Authority, let
the unprejudiced Judge. Note, And let W. R. F. B. L. K. and such that Abetts
this man and his work, consider if it was, thus practiced by Friends in the
beginning, or since thus, to Marry, and have. a Ring, and a Priest, which let T.
C. if he will or can deny he had; only I would desire and advise him to
remember what I said to him at his House about it, and what he then Answered;
and this I would add. It seems he is not only against going before the Women to
lay his Intention, but the men also, and is neither for laying his Intention of
Marriage before either of them, neither once (...) twice, but for doing it
clandestinely.
And I desire all tender hearted Friends, to whose hands these may come, to
consider whether this be as it was in the beginning (of Friends) what did they
get a Priest and three or four of their Acquaintance, under pretense of
Answering the Law and take one another before them as T. C. page 19. of Babels,
etc. says he did, certainly nay, or did they declare their Intentions first to
the People of God, and then take one another before a Meeting with the Consent
of Parents or Relations concerned, I hope they in whom any tenderness is, and
whose understandings are not wholly darkened, will see what Spirit this busy
and great Abettor of the Cause of W.R. J. W. and such like is led by, who so
highly commends the Charity and Christian condescension of the Priest, that he
says in his Book page 19. its to much, there to Insert. But he shows little,
nay no Charity but abundance of Enmity, when he most wickedly, falsely, and
maliciously says, That for being Subject to the Magistrate for Conscience sake
is accounted (by Friends) Submitting to the Pope, much may be said hereto, to
show his great Enmity and falsehood, and how he would hereby Stir up and
Incense, the Magistrate against us especially at this time when our Friends in
the City of Bristol and elsewhere lie under hard and grievious Sufferings, but
let this Serve to give a Relish of the man's Spirit and who it is setts him to
Work, etc. whose present loose principle never will lead him to lose any thing
for Christ's sake, and the Gospel.

But page 19, 20. T. C. says, But it is observable, that about the time that
J. F. published this against me Ellis Hooks was dead (the Clark of the
Marriages) and had left a considerable Estate; and it is said, much of it was
gained by Fees and Gratuities about Marriages, which was more gain to him than
to several Priests in London put together. This so profitable an Office (as is
thought) J. F. wanting or coveting, might be glad of this opportunity to gain
the favor of G. F. etc. Also to make others be afraid of being so Exposed: if
they should let others have the profits of their Marriage Certificates, etc.
Thomas Crisp seeing thou have brought Ellis Hooks's name in public Print, who
is dead, and cannot now Answer for himself to thy Calumniating and Slandering
Tongue; and thou say. That E. Hooks left a considerable Estate, and it is said
much of it was gained by Fees, and Gratuities about Marriages; and then says,
Which was more gain to him than to several Priests in London put together. I do
charge T. Crisp to mention and bring forth their Names in public Print, that
has said this of Ellis Hooks, and prove that he has gotten his considerable
Estate that he left behind him by Fees and Gratuities about Marriages, and now
T. C. is positive, when he says which, was more gain to him than several
Priests in London put together. This I charge him again to prove, if he can,
concerning E. H. But let this foul mouthed Busy body T. C. ask E. H's Brother
the Councellor, if his Father did not give him an Estate; besides, it is known
to the Friends of Truth in this City, that E. H. was a Stationer; and by his
Industry in that Employ, gained a considerable part of his Estate; and other
lawful and considerable Employs he had which augmented his Estate But T. C's
Envy against Truth and its Children is so large, and he in it so restless, that
therein he abuses and belies both the Living and the Dead.


Answer, What an Observable matter this is, that Ellis Hooks was dead, the
Clark of the Marriages at this time and left a Considerable Estate. What then?
why, Thomas Crisp thereby has gotten an oppertunity out of the abundance of
his malicious heart to vent some of his Envious thoughts and malicious words
against J. Field and says (if he may be believed) much ( viz of E. H. Estate)
was gained by fees and gratuities as its said, this is like his Brother W. R.
whose Example he herein follows who often says if report be true: But says T.
C. This so proffitable an Office, as (its thought) J. F. wanting, or Coveting,
might be glad of this opportunity, to gain the favor of G. F. etc.

Answ. As (its thought) Aye, but had T. C. or any of his Abettors or Informers
so said I should have told them it was a palpable untruth and base thought, as
its both a base and unworthy Action of T. Crisp thus publicly to defame and
Scandalize me in print, upon an Evil thought, this is not like the Spirit of
Christ but I can Expect no better of him, that may well be compared to a
rageing wave of the Sea casting up mire and dirt. But blessed be God J. F. has
through the Lord's blessing, and his Endeavor that whereby he has hitherto,
honestly provided for himself and his Family, without either Coveting or
receiving that which is another by griping or overreaching any man and can say
with the Apostle his own hands have ministered to his necessity, and he has not
been chargeable unto any. And hopes he shall unto the End of his days, through
the Assistance of the Lord and by his grace manifest himself to be an honest
man, though not so rich as T. C. that writes thus maliciously against him, for
whom his prayer is and shall be (if it be the Lords will, that he and such as
he) may come to see the Evil Work he is about and Repent of it before it be to
late.

T. C. page 18 deridingly says, As for those black sins (of paying Tithes and
marrying by Priests) so often charged on T. C. by S. C. and his Confederates
(on which J. F. has grounded his Bull of Excommunication against me) and say
they have no Unity with me.

Answer, I desire the Bull of Excommunication as he Scoffingly, and maliciously
calls that paper may by the Christian and unprejudiced Reader, be well perused
to See if they can find that any thing therein deserves, such a Scornful name,
for he is not therein Cursed, that being wholly Contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, and is for ever utterly disowned by us, (the true
Christians called Quakers.) What, Thomas, must we say we do own Persons, that
are not of us, and have Unity with them that thou gives, this frightful term
of Bull of Excommunication to that Innocent paper, that I believe and am fully
Satisfied was writ and given forth to manifest, and tell others, that knew
thee not so well as thy Neighbors do, what thou art, and what thy practice
has been, for peradventure, they might think thee by thy fair words to be
that, thou art not, and is it not pity but such should be better informed.
Well, Thomas, my desire is thou may Repent of these black Sins of Envy and
Falsehood, and not encourage others to do the same, lest thou become guilty of
their Sins also.

Here follows a short Collection of some of Thomas Crisp's many Falsehoods or
Untruths, with short Notes thereupon to show his Envy and detect his Folly in
using my name so often, etc. and repeating some Sentences of mine (relating to
Friends Unity, and being of one mind an judgment, etc.) in all which he leaves
out the material words, as apparently as if a wicked Atheist should say he
would prove from the Psalmists words, Psalm. 14. and 1. That he said, There is
no God; he should leave out these words, viz. (The Fool has said in his heart
there is) after this manner has this unfair Adversary dealt with me, as I with
the Lord's help shall show.

In the 20 p. And for J. F. to say their Unity stands in the Eternal Spirit, it
is false, says T. C.

Note, But who, Thomas, do think will believe thee, for my part I shall not,
neither take thy word herein who art so Hypocritical and unfaithful, as to act
contrary to thy own principle (as I have before showed.) And I do affirm that
our (and all faithful Friends and true Christians) Unity and Fellowship, does
stand in the Eternal Spirit of God, and that it is grand falsehood and untruth
in thee to say otherwise.

P. 18. T. C. says, As for those black sins (of paying Tithes and Marrying by
Priests, so often charged on T. C. by S. C. and his Confederates (on which J.
F. has grounded his Bull of Excommunication against me.) And say they have no
Unity with me.

Note, Why, Thomas, do thou say thou have Unity with us that thou art so
Angry at that Paper thou call my Bull, as to use my Name seven times in a
page, and more than four times seven in thy three Sheets and half of Babel,
etc. because that paper says thou, remainest a man out of the Unity of
Friends, etc. Prithee Thomas is this a breach of that Reveased will of God thou
speak of, p. 12. to say, thou remainest a man out of the Unity of Friends,
that thou art so Angry, to term and compare me to an Inquisition Officer. This
is not the way to convince me, that the Spirit of Christ in the Heart moves
thee thus to write, or rather scribble against me and Friends, whatever thy
Conceits are of promoting and contending for the Rule of the Gospel of the
Spirit of Christ in the heart. I suppose you may know whose Phrases these are.
And my desire is that I and all tenderhearted honest Friends may never know
the Rule nor Government of that Spirit thou art led and instigated by; thus to
vent thy malicious words, prating like some of old against the Truth.

And in the 19 page T. C. says, And on other discourse with J.F. the next day
per ceiving he intended to publish it, did say hemight do it -- therefore
consented to his writing those words.

Note, Yes, Thomas, and to the Printing of them too (thou consented) otherwise,
for all what thou say, thou perceived (I Intended) it had never been Printed,
as it was. And I question not but thou and P.E. then in company with thee,
knows and may remember, that thou said (vauntingly) it would cover or hide but
a little spot of the Beast, etc. and took a Copy of it with thee.

And in the 21 page T.C. says, If you were in the Eternal Spirit as J.F.
falsely says, your Unity would not stand in forms and Ceremonies and Orders.

Note, Prithee, Thomas, who ever said, it did? sure it was not J. F. that has
been so often termed false Witness, etc. for saying it was in the Eternal
Spirit; don't quarrel and fight thus with thy own Shadow or sancy, who in thy
Babilonish Spirit, would insinuate as if Friends Unity were in Ceremonies and
Orders, which we deny, though we own the order of the Gospel and Law of Life,
and what are the products of the Spirit of Truth, and that which it leads into
and tends to virtue and good Report, and to the Testifying against vice and
looseness, and that which would bring an ill Report (though thou may
scoffingly call them G. F's Orders and Laws, etc.) and though to our grief
some, (who for want of keeping in the holy fear of God, and a diligent waiting
upon him in lowliness of mind, therein to be guided by his Wisdom and Council)
have not so practiced them as they ought, which has been as a Feast to thee,
and such as thee; and a grief to the tender and upright hearted; yet this does
not prove those wholesome Instructions of Friends, (which thou scoffingly calls
Order) bad.

T.C. in the 2 page, says, The Apostles said, who have not the Spirit of
Christ, are not his; therefore no wonder that they give such black names, to
them who cannot give up all their Faith and Consciences to their Women's
Meetings, hereby it is -- proved that G. F' s, etc. Vniver sal Spirit is not
that of Christ and the Apostles, and Ancient Friends -- therefore not the same,
but a private Spirit or Party which adore him and his Laws, as S.E. and C.T.
have done.

Note, T. C's wicked and ungodly Insinuation as if Friends required people to
give up all their Faith and Consciences, to Women's Meetings, which is as much
as if he said, Friends required persons to have no Faith in Christ, nor no
Conscience to deal justly, etc. for if they must give up all to them, they
leave none for any thing else, let the Reader now judge whether T. C. has the
Spirit of Christ, or is excited thereby thus to write, yea or nay that thus
insinuates, for though I believe Christ is served in the Women's Meetings; and
that they are according to his mind; yet I don't place All my Faith and
Conscience in them; neither does this prove that G. F. etc. Universal Spirit
(by which I take him to mean that Universal Spirit G. F. and Friends bear
Testimony of and direct unto) is not the Spirit of Christ, the Apostles and
Ancient Friends, but a private Spirit which adore him and his Laws, for I
charge it upon T. C. as a grand untruth or a Lie. For T.C. to say S. E. and
C.T. have adored or worshipped C. F. or his Laws; for I affirm all true and
Spiritual Worship (which is the Worship we own) is only due unto God and
Christ, and is performed in the Holy Spirit.

T. C. in the 10th page, says, That G. F. etc. will not admit that any have
the least measure of the Spirit that subnot to his Laws.

Note, This is another of his untruths or Lies, for its well known he has
often testified unto the Universality of the Grace and Spirit of God, and has
said with the Apostle that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal.

In the 11th page, T. C. says, Whereby it is manifest what high Esteem and
great Authority you Ascribe to your Orders; that the bare obeying them, can
Acquit in Gods sight.

Note, This is another of T. C's great and palpable untruths or Lies and Thomas
prove if thou can that any owned by us so high Esteem, and ascribed such
great Authority to those Good, Orders and wholesome Instructions given by the
Spirit of the Lord through his Servants concerning the outward Conversation and
performance of things amongst the People of God; which thou in dirision
commonly calls G. F. orders, etc. For we are of the Apostles mind that some may
retain the form of Godliness, and be out of, and Enemies to the power thereof
and such never were, nor are owned by the Lord God nor his faithful people, for
Hypocrisy was and is an Abmination unto the Lord. And a blind Sacrifice was
neither under Law nor Gospel owned by him, And they that have the form of
Godliness, and are out of the power and Enemies to it, are not acquitted in
Gods sight for being in the form, neither can they that are Born of God, have
Unity with them, that have the form of Godliness, and are out of the power
thereof though we say its possible, as it was in the Apostles days, that some
may have the outward form of Godliness, to wit, a profession of the Light,
Grace, Spirit and Power of God, and yet be out of and Enemies to the same, but
we know and therefore say, that they that walk in the Light, Spirit, Grace and
power of God, the same gives them a good understanding and accordingly leads
them, in their Doctrine, life and Conversation, into a sound Christian form and
order, for as the Apostle said, God is the God of order and not of Confusion,
in all the Churches of the Saints.

Page 20 T.C. says, And for J.F. to say their Unity stands in the Eternal
Spirit it is false; for it is manifest to be in forms and needless Ceremonies:
for such as Conform and preach them up, have been, and are guilty of shameful
Miscarriages, and yet they are Suffered to continue as Preachers and no
Judgment or Excommunication against them as out of Unity, and they have
received what they have given and Spent on them of others Estates, and not from
the Vniver sal Spirit of God.

Note, This I Charge upon T. C. as a grand and fivefold untruth or Lie until he
proves it, which I am well Satisfied he never can, though he would by this and
such like ungodly unchristian, and abominable falsehood, begett jealousies in
the mind of some against them that God has raised up to publish his Truth, and
that sreely give up to spend and be spent in the Service of it and seek not any
earthly thing, but the glory of God and Exaitation of his Truth according to
their several measures and gifts and have a Testimony from God in their hearts
against that lying Spirit that has entered him and his Abettors which if he and
they Repent not of, the plagues and Judgments of the Lords will certainly be
their portion, to all Eternity for no Liar can enter the Kingdom of God. For
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, is
their portion. Oh! that God may (if it be his Will) give T.C. and them a Heart
to Repent before it is too late.

In T. C's Postscript he says, Also that grand falsehood of J. Feild's asserted
in his Bull of disowning me, etc.

Note, Disowning thee for my part, I have known thee some years, but never knew
thou wast owned by Friends, or the People called Quakers, or was one of them;
for I never so looked upon thee I am sure. T. C. also in his Postseript speaks
concerning the use of the word Company. And says, Although the same used by
G.F.J. Field, S. Ecdes, etc. are Guilty of.

Note, J. Field denysthat there is any such word, viz. as (Company) in that he
writ. And charges it upon thee among the many untruths that thou have writ
concerning him and Friends, some (and but some) of which he has here set down.

I shall now say little more to this Babel Builder but set down the words of
the paper (which he calls mine) and has helped to fill his book with, (which
he omitted) and show how he has perverted them, to make them speak to his mind
and Answer his corrupt end and vain Conceit, the words he left out are these
viz. [Which leads all them that are faithful thereunto to be.]

Now Read what he has so often mentioned with these words to them as they were
in that paper. And its thus. Friends unity and fellowship stands in that Etemal
Spirit which leads all them that are faithful thereunto to be all of one mind
and to speak the same thing, and by the same Spirit a remnant, are Joined
together in the same mind and in the same Judgment among whom there is no
Division, and these with the one mind and mouth, glorify God, and serve him
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ with one mind and one accord etc. Pray
now where is John Feuds false Assertion, or grand falsehood. For J. F. never said
T. C. W. R. and J. W. etc. were of one mind, for J. S. and J. W. says, The
payment of Cythes as at this day is Antichristian: but T. C. says Its his
Principle to pay Tithes and Marry by a Priest, and has practiced accordingly,
in paying Tithes, etc. Now if J. F. had said these were of one mind and
Judgment and spoke the same thing, T. C. might well have termed it false or a
grand falsehood. Neither did J. F. say that those that are not faithful to the
Spirit of God were of one mind. And J. F. would not have T. C. say the Spirit
of God is not at unity with it self; nor that them that are led thereby not at
Unity one with another; least he thereby Contracts more guilt upon his Soul,
and affirms that which he may (as for his other unfruitful words and works of
darkness) have full sore Cause to Repent of.

So God who is large in his mercy and Infinite in his kindness (if it be his
will) give him a heart to Repent of these his evil works, before he goes hence
no more to be seen of man that they may not follow him and that these Sins (may
not in that dreadful day, wherein God will Judge the Secrets of all hearts by
Jesus Christ according to his Gospel, and reward every man according to his
deeds) be such a weight upon him, that will Sink him into the lake of endless
misery, and Horrible pit out of which there is no Redemption, for God who knows
how to deliver the Righteous out of Temptation, knows how to Reserve the wicked
to the day of Judgment.

Thomas Crisp. I am thy Friend who can and do (as I have learnt of Christ)
freely forgive thee all thy hard speeches and false sayings concerning me.

Lodnon, at the Bull and Mouth, the 22 of the 1st month 1681/2. John Field, Jun.

Postscript.
THere is one thing or two more that I before omitted and passed by as I have
many other malicious words and falsehoods of T. Crisp's for had I made a
Catologue of them all, I am persuaded they would have doubled if not trebled
his pretended, 12 falsehoods set down in his Postscript of the 4 part of Babels,
etc.

In his 16 and 17 page T. G. says, But one Reason wherefore I paid: (that
sooften mentioned) as Tithes, was as a Witness that I was not taught my fear by
the Precepts of G. F. etc. nor receive his traditions for Doctrines, and that I
had not Sacrificed all my faith Conscience and Judgment to his Orders, your
Idol to Worship, that as too many both small and great do. -- but as a
Testimony against your Impositions, etc.

Answera. Is not this an ungodly Insinuation as if all faithful Friends that
refuse to pay Tithes (being so persuaded of God in their Consciences, and not
from any outward Law or order) and therefore in the Lords will Suffer the
Spoil of their Goods and Imprisonment of their Bodies in Nasty Goals separate
from then render Wines Children and familys, where many have ended their days
in peace with God in their Christian Testimony against that great oppression of
Tithes, had Sacrificed all their faith, Conscience and Judgment (to that T. C.
scoffingly calls) G. F's orders, and that these are Friends Idol and they
Worship them, Oh! the Lord rebuke thee thou lying Spirit read 120 Psalm. 2.3, 4.
verse. And prove T. Crisp if thou can any, of the many both small and great
that so do, viz. Worship G. F. Orders which thou Ishmaelite like calls Friends
Idol, or other wise Repent of (and as publicly confess Acknowledge and Condemn
thy Envy falsehood and notoriously wicked Insinuation as thou have published it,
for we Absolutely deny and disown all Idols and worship to any Creature, or
Created thing or outward order what soever, and have and do teach and profess
all true and Spiritual Worship which is that we own, is due only unto, God and
Christ and performed in the holy Spirit. Yet we Answer the Apostle's
Exhortation, and honor all men in the Lord and know them that Labor among us,
and are over us in the Lord and admonish us, and do esteem them very highly in
Love for their Work sake. Accounting the Elders that Rule well, worthy of
double honor, especially they that Labor in the Word and Doctrine, and
against such shall not receive thy lying accusation, being Persuaded (though
they be accounted by thee and such as thee, as the Apostles were by some viz.
deceivers) yet they are true, and men that have hazarded their lives for the
Gospel and Testimony of Jesus and have been in wants, in fastings, in jeopardy,
and perils by false Brethren and many ways, whom God (blessed be his great
and glorious name and holy power) has hitherto preserved and will unto the
end, I firmly believe and Crown them with life and dominion and they shall (as
many do) shine in the firmament of his power for ever and evermore
notwithstanding the Rage and Enmity of T. C. and such as he, when (they if they
Repent not,) for pain shall know their tongues, for God will certainly Judge
thee for these wicked and hard speeches, as in Rev. 16.11.

But T. C's heart is so filled with Enmity against G. F. etc. that out of the
abundance thereof in his three sheer and half he has dotingly mentioned G.F's
name or the letters of it 134 times, and often speaks Scoffingly and
maliciously against G. F's Orders etc. (as he calls them) but gives no
Catalogue thereof, (though so highly offended at them) that others may Judge of
them; only in his 16 page T.C. faith when any does or denies any thing, not
from Inwand Conviction, but because, G. F. etc. so order, or it is the Custom
or practice of Friends: such I call your orders, and do know there be too many
such.

Answer But this is no proof to me, for thou that have belyed me and others, I
am persuaded follows the same trade or practice here, and I therefore Change it
upon chee among the rest as a designed and premeditated untouth, or lve,
tilthou proves it by showing who they are that so do, and what those orders are

And in the 12 page T. C. says I Judge not nor Condemn any person for their
Jugdment and practice, that differs from me, that is not breach, of the
Revealed will of God, and have often Certified as much.

Answ. well Thomas if this be thy Principle I desire thee to show and prove out
of that Revealed will of God, what I (or Friends) ever writ, published,
declared, or Exhorted to, that is a breach of that Revealed will of God, that
thou have so Judged me (and them) as a false Witness and an Assertor of grand
falsehood and an Inquisition Officer, etc. And till you so do, I Charge thee
with grand falsehood and an Assertor thereof, also with the breach of thy own
Doctrine which is grand Hypocrisy, and babilonish, Confusion. Also prove that
thy four Babels are according to the Revealed will of God.

T. C. page 12. says R. R. is as one that has nothing to do but pick reasons,
because I showed him G. F. etc. their 12 reasons for disowning Barbados Paper;
And though he says there is never a good one, yet he proves not the badness of
any one, but only affirms, they are so; as if his authority, solely might stand
for all reason (or rather withstand it and truth too) and all must pin their
faith on his sleeve, notwithstanding all reasons to the contrary being wiser in
his own foolish conceit than seven wise men with all the reasons they shall be
able to render. And what should one say to such an unreasonable conceited
furious Spirit (that seems to say, what have I to do with reason or Truth or
peace, or thou either) but get thee behind me. Yet to show the simple, whom he
says he would undeceive, how good they are, compared with his, First Part Title
Page.
because things are clearer by their opposites, and because he disproves not,
but only compares and says there is a clearer disowning than those reasons, so
to make a ly. I shall pick a few of his or rather top the best of his basket,
as he thinks belike, after the Example of such chears; to show the difference,
that the simple may see they are so bad that they cannot be eaten, like the
figgs the prophet saw; Jer. 24.
as the other are very good, as they are found to be to such as have not lost
their savor. And he shall be content with his sense, for brevityes sake, and
not ty us to his form in his many turnings windings and wriglings though he
unjustly grumbles at S. C. for it, Fourth Part, p. 1.
taking his sense not very words. For he is more exact for words than matter,
making them principles. Therefore T.C.'s reason that there is not one good one
in all G.F. etc. Their reasons are first, because T. C. affirms it. And to
prove that, he affirms that they are not good, because there might be a better,
not a clear disowning because there might be a clearer. He affirms it. And to
prove that, he affirms that an affirmation is clearer than all reasons, be they
neaver so many and cogent, to make his own preferred before reasons. And because
I say not so too, he calls me liar, and other disgraceful terms, as he would
make them seem, though elsewhere he consesses them an honor. And to confirm
that, he implies, for I take not his Very many words, but his matter and sense,
though he takes my words without my sense, and wrests them, as if he were
senseless, bewitched or foolish at best, and he seems to argue as if all the
Apostles reasons in that large letter were not a clear disowning their
following false Apostles and disowning him, because he called them Brethren and
Churches, etc. Would not such an Apostate, turn against the true Apostles, and
following the false, and holding up those that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, and
of the Nicolations or Libertins, have reasoned thus against the true Apostles
in that day. And would not the true Apostles be so reasoned against if they
were in this day? But if the Apostle Paul had been of his mind, principle, or
principles if he will have it, Gal. 6.12.
viz. against reasons; he would not have taken so much pains to have given so
many reasons in a large letter writ with his own hand. But he was neither
against good reasons, noragainst good orders; for he compares Churh-Government
to houshold-Government, or steward-ship. Pit 1.7.
And in that science it is a Maxim or rule. That evils detected and only
rejected, and only reproved, and not disproved do hurt. And they cannot be
disproved without reasons against them. And because T.C's have been not only
detected and rejected, but reproved and also disproved by reasons; therefore he
turns against reasons; and me as picking them, and turns to affirming it a
fresh with out reason against me, page 12 after he has denied he had done it to
S. C. page 1. only holding against me that a bare reproof is clearer disowning
than reasons, with his reason aforesaid, falsely so called, indeed fallacyes,
that is lies in plain English, dissering only in form from his other
confusions and contradictions and wrestings of my words. As like Papists, he
makes Papists, as if like were the same, Churches he makes a Church; and the
universal Spirit; the error of that one Church. That which is of god, he
confounds with the person that is turned from it, and that of the beast with
the person turned to it. Promise that is, of his party, he makes his own
promise, to make up a ly. My words [Any of our Meetings] he makes any that have
been in our Meetings (as himself and other such) so implicitly charging all, in
naming none, by his vagrant expressions and so wronging us in that which is of
more value, than many oxen viz. the reputation of truth, which he turns
against, evidently here joining with those he says we call heathens, against
our Meetings and ministers. This in short to show, how in his Babels he
confounds generals and particulars, same kind and seyerall kinds, one and
more to compound his lies, other whiles seperating things of the same kind to
make them several, to make other lies; as principle, he makes principles, and
several I could produce, but to make him make another lie, viz. that I haven
othing to do but pick lies But because he called on me for it to show him them,
I have taken some time to show him and the Reader a few of many his lies
reasons or fallacys, contradictions and Confusions (in his Bables) his
principles, if her will have it so; though they be of one kind unless he will
deny it, and say Nay, they are not all of one kind, for they are not all mine;
For Bacon is not swine that tramples all and turns and rends; and give that as
a principle among his next reasons. And then let him prove his reasons good
ones, before he call [Ishmael] again, that despised the promise seed, not that
despised Bable-builders and Baals-Priests and Pharisees, that deserved it, as
their due, and his, and that which he sooften calls for viz. fools and
bewitched, and let him as often take it, seeing he preferrs sharp reproof
before reasons and rest with it, if he will, and let me rest, as I desire and
resolve in the Lords strength, accounting it an honor, (as he confesses it to
be) to continue a servant for ever to the Lord and his Truth, and therein in
love to those that continue for ever the servants of the Lord and his truth out
of the Apostasy, and enmity to it and them, but opposite to its enemy the Prince
of Darkness, the destroying beast that Rages, now T. C. his present principle
he joins to, in his work, not to his or any man's person, but a Friend of that
and all that is of God R. R.

In taxing me with a ly, for making him as never finding that England groaned
under the Pope in Temporals, because he says the Pope never gained the point
Barbados paper did, he does but prove himself in the ly, or contradiction and
confusion, which is all one what ever he would make them. Or else he must say
that the Pope never gained the pointin Spirituals, which most know to be a ly,
and he and his abetters against their persuasion therein accuse G.F. etc.
falsely of Popery and also maliciously, for the Pope in Spirtual and Temporals
too gained what he sought, which they neither sought nor gained. For since the
writing hereof I have read a letter from Barbados the 14 of the 11 month 1681.
subscribed by Fifteen Friends there in behalf of the Meeting (which I have to
produce) and here insert an Abstract of an acount from the Quarterly Meeting at
Barbado's of what past there, and the Judgment of the paper excepted against
both before and after the Advice from Friends at London.

How that it was Judged with general consent the next quarterly Meeting after
called their yearly Meeting 1 st month 81. Several months before any notice
from any other place touching it. These in a different Letter are their
expressions, except they fo we, or their for our, etc used for abbreviation.
Before which time, of giving public notice of the same to have a good
understanding, that it might be rectifyed, some gained it or rather part of it,
and sent abroad privately with dislike, contrary to truth and its order with
them. But it was aften Judged, as aforesaid and ordered to be taken out of
their Quarterly Meeting Book. And they declere that eyes some Moderate men of
the World in that I stand were grieved that the Apostles advice was not harkend
to (1 Cor. 6.) by some. And that the Copy that went abroad was wrong and not
according to the sense of the meeting, That is, that they who are come to such
loss might yet hearken to Instruction in the faithful Servants, and Church of
Christ, and not go to Law one with another.
viz. whether you will give up to your own particulars only, that is, those
particular Judgments which have or were come unto a loss in themselves, or have
lost their beloved, Cant. 1.7, 8. as the Scriptures testify and was spoke to in
the Meeting. But was never in their hearts: to press their public Judgment
against any particular measure of the Spirit of God in any particular, but to
be helpful to the dimsighted, etc. and that they are so^y for their shortness
where in they have grieved any, and are satisfied there is no need of outward
tie, or subscription. And that the Judgment of any men, etc. cut of the
universal Spirit and measure of true light received from Christ, ought not to
rule and Govern, etc. but the Spinit and Wisdom of God alone, and the contrary
Judged by them.

Hereby appears to the unprejudiced Reader how unreasonable, and unseasonable,
the sharp reproof, foolish, bewitched, etc. that T.C. so furiously calls for,
had been; when as before the advice came to them they were sensible of their
snortness, though they had aimed at the best, to bring to the Apostles advice
those that were contentious about outward things even to the offense of the
world also. And how greedily that Spirit in T. C. and others here and there
also gapes to have that Church devoured, calling, so eagerly for sharp reproof,
withstanding to the face, calling fools, bewitched, etc. And judging that which
was already judged. Nay T. C. is so forward, and furious that he proceeds
aforehand, before having written or spoken to them to know the Truth, Josh.
22.15.
as Israel did to Judge with that which is to be Judged, and also to publish
and print contrary to the promise of his Abetter and after the Example of W. R.
who against and contrary to the evident Truth, leaves out that principle in
point of Judgment. And Part 4. page 31. cites (but quotes not the Book and
Part, for then his materal omissions might easily be found out) some of G. F's
words in the beginning of a letter to all Friends, in the end of a Book of his
titled, several Papers, etc. Printed 1671 viz.

W. R. [cites Judge not one another] But omits, [Judge not with that which must
be Judged] the substance matter and principle, And judge Pelf forced, and you
that see clear, speak to the other whose munds are gone fron: the Light.
Else If one have spoken to, admonished or Judged the evil in any one never so
often to their face, yet they must not speak of it on any occasion, though it
be to their own vindication, and clearing of the Truth, unless the party be
present, but must ly under it, till he procure the party to come to hear it,
though having heard it never so often before and withstood it. This would bar
telling the Church, unless and until he can get the other to come with him
there, if the words must be taken only in the strictest sense, restraming all
speaking in any case from any ground or principle against the absem, when self
is first judged down. Which T. C. would have stand, and be a Judge of
principles and practices and a sharp reprover (page 14) But would not have the
Beast, the Destroyer Abaddon and Apollyon, the Cursed Spirit satan discovered
and Judged where he had entered. But those that aiming at the best things, the
Apostles advice, though coming short in some thing and Judging it in themselves
before they are spoke to or Judged by others. Those are they that T. C. and
such as he, have spread the weakness of, and Judged behind their backs with
that which is to be Judged, and would have withstood to the face that do not
withstand; but with the Wisdom of God Judge the foolishness they were bewitched
into (if he will needs have it) upon the first discovery before they were writ
to, which we do not read the Galatians did, but going after the flesh and them
that sought to glory in it, from the Spirit and him that ministered it to them,
and the naditions it led into, which the Churches keept and good order of the
Gospel in their Churches, 2 These. 2.15. and 3.6.
as it does now, which you clancour against in general, because it seems, you
would have people believe they were other than they are, and therefore are
ashamed of producing a Catalogue of them in particular, so often called for,
but cry only in general G. Fox's Orders, Laws, etc. and tells not what they are.

R. Richardson.

THE END.

