A DEFENSE OF Dramatick Poetry: BEING A REVIEW OF Mr. COLLIER's View OF THE
Immorality and Profaneness of the STAGE.

LONDON: Printed for Eliz. Whitlock, near Stationer's Hall. School.

PREFACE.
THE Popular Reception of Mr. Collier's celebrated Piece, has built him no
small Reputation: But it had been an infinite higher Glory, both to the Book
and the Author, had the Argument been taken up in his Pulpit-Reign. Then he
would have convinced the World that he put Pen to Paper in the Spirit of Zeal
and Piety, and not left himself open to that untoward Suspicion, viz. That all
this Labored Pile of Stage-Reformation is only the Product of Idleness and
Abdication. He takes up the Whip for the Playhouse, as Dionysius the Tyrant
did the School-birch, when be had lost the Scepter.

It Is true, Wit and Learning (to do him all just Right) shine through the whole
Piece; but when the poorest Ingenii Largitor gives Birth to the Minerva, she
looks not quite so lovely, as when she has a more Honorable Parent. Besides,
there is another very strong Reason why an Invective against the Stage, was no
earlier Offspring of this Ingenious Author. Alas, 'twas no Subject for Mr.
Collier's smiling Days. The Theater was then too much the Minion of his old
Great Master and Mistress; and Mr. Collier, we all very well know, was more the
Courtier, under the Blessings of that warm Sun, then to rally either This or
any other Darling of Power.

But as much Ingenuity as this Treatise may boast, it has as much of the Gall
too: But where the Satyr falls heaviest, will be no improper Inquiry. 'I is
true, the Lash seems wholly designed against the Theaters: But if the
Sufferance be so fatally destructive to Morality, Virtue, nay Religion it self,
as that Treatise endeavors to render it, Mr. Collier has more satyriz'd the
Pulpit than the Stage: For whilst it is undeniably true, that Mr. Collier's is
the first, either Pulpit or Press-Sermon, upon that Text; this universal
Silence of the whole Clergy, must conclude either their Ignorance of such a
Fatality, when Mr. Collier is the first Discoverer, or what is worse, their
neglect of their Christian Duty, when Mr. Collier is the first Corrector, etc.

But if none of all this Capital Guilt-shall be proved upon the Playhouse; and
the Influences of the Stage shall have no such mortal Malignity, as this Author
threatens from it; then the Satyr lies nearer home, and only lashes himself.

From Lincoln's Inn, May 26, School.
THE Ingenious Mr. Collier in calling his Learned Treatise, A short View of the
Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage, etc. has not given it a Title
that fully reaches the Subject, and the great Design of that Laborious piece of
Oratory: For in his whole Discourse, which he divides into six Chapters; In the
First he confronts the present Stage, by setting forth the general Innocence
and Modesty of the Ancient Greek and Latin Dramatick Poetry; and in the Four
next Chapters de descends to a View of the English Theaters, where he Seats
himself down, and very Magisterially sits Censor and Judge upon several
particular Dramatick Offenders and Offenses, in some, and only some, of our
late Plays.

Hitherto, the Title Page seems to carry the Contents of the Book, as if his
present Work in hand were only a Christian Correction of Abuses and Corruption,
viz. Profaneness and Immorality crept into the Stage. But in his last Chapter,
he plainly tells us, his Design is not Reformation, but Eradication: For here
he throws by the Pruning Hook, and takes up the Axe.

In due prevention therefore against so dangerous a Weapon, in so angry a Hand,
we'll endeavor first to Guard the Root; and afterward we'll join with him,
and give him free leave to Lop off as many of the Luxurious Branches, as shall
not be found worth saving.

To begin therefore with some Examination of that Last Chapter, which he
Entitles, The Opinion of Paganism, of the Church, and State, concerning the
STAGE, here likewise we'll set out first from Home, viz. in the Opinion of the
English State, etc.

Here, says our Author, I shall come down to our own Constitution, and I find
by 39th of Eliz. chap. 4. and 1 Iac. chap. 7th.

That all Common Players of Interludes, counterfeit Egyptians, etc. shall be
taken adjudged and deemed Rogues, Uagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars, and shall
sustain all Pains and Punishments, as by this Act is in that behalf appointed.

The Penalties are Infamous to the last degree, and Capital too, unless they
give over. It Is true, the First Act, viz. 39th of Eliz. excepts those Players
which belong to a Baron or other Person of higher Degree, and are Authorized to
Play under the Hand and Seal of Arms of such Baron or Personage.

But in the latter Statute this Privilege of Licensing is taken away, and all
of them are expressly brought under the Penalty without distinction.

It Is true in this last Act, as he says, the Barons Privilege of Licensing
Players was taken away; but this Author, that reads no farther than what wright
or wrong serves his own Turn, and quotes Authority but by Halves, forgets that
that Act of the Is It. of Iac. was but a Temporary Act, to hold in force but that
Sessions of Parliament. But this small Trip we'll forgive him.

But for a little more Light into this 39th. of Eliz. by way of Context to
explain the Cause. The Clause against Players begins thus. Be it Enacted that
all Persons calling themselves Scholars, going about begging; all Seafaring
Men, pretending Losses of their Ships or Goods on the Sea, going about the
Country begging; All idle Persons going about in any Country, either begging or
using any subtle Craft, or unlawful Games or Plays, or feigning themselves to
have knowledge in Physiognomy, Palmistry, or other like Crafty Science, or such
like Fantastical Imaginations: All Persons that be, or utter themselves to be
Proctors, Procurors, Patentgatherers, Collectors for Goals, Prisons or
Hospitals, etc.

This Law, it is plain, is particularly Levelled against a sort of People that
have no settled Habitation, Rovers up and down the Country, and therefore
called Vagabonds. But what is all this to the Establishment of our Public
Theaters? Besides, why are all Offenders in this Act thus stigmatized and
punished as Rouges, but for the practicing Frauds and Cheats upon the People?

Nay, this Act chiefly strikes not at the Professions of the Offenders here
mentioned, but the Abuse or Corruption of them, as in the Scholar, Seaman,
Proctor, Procuror, Patent-gatherer or Collector, as well those as are really
so, as those that utter themselves such. The Mendicant Scholar, for Instance,
as a Scandal to Learning, the Universities, nay, perhaps the Church it self;
the Seaman as an Impostor, viz. with his pretended Losses; the Proctor as a
Fomentor of Litigious Suits among the People, etc. the Patent-gatherer under
the Mask of Public charity, Collecting the Money into his own Pocket, not only
to the Abuse of the Country, but to the very Scandal of the Government, when
the most Pious Royal Acts of Grace shall be thus fraudulently perverted, to the
carrying on so notorious a Cheat: And therefore the Patent-gatherer or
Collector Unlicens'd was thus branded, etc. And undobtedly 'twas much upon the
same scandalous Account, that the Unlicens'd Players of Interludes are here
herded among all those Rascally Companions: For why should not the Government,
with all Reason, surmize an equal Danger to the Public, from such Unqualify'd
Players, and accordingly provide against them, as being Persons who under no
Warrant of Authority, nor Honorable Patron to vouch for their Integrity, might
be as justly suspected of Roguery, Cheating or Pilfering, as any other of their
Brethren in Iniquity, mentioned in the Act? Nor can this particular Brand upon
the Offenders, here mentioned, bear any shadow of Construction to Asperse,
Taint or Scandalize, the Profession of Playing it self, and the Public
Theaters supported by Royal Patents, etc. any more than the same Brand upon the
Scholar, the Proctor, the Collector, etc. under the formentioned Corruption,
should be interpreted a Reflection upon Religion, Law, Learning or Charity. Nor
are His Majesty's Servants, the present Authorized Actors, any more concerned
at the Common mistaken Cry of Fools from starting this Statute against them;
than any honest Reader of the Ingenious Mr. Collier, with a Talent of Common
Sense, ought to be convinced, That this Opinion of the State concerning the
Stage, here Quoted, makes any thing for his Cause.

About the Year 1580. there was a Petition made to Queen Elizabeth for
suppressing of Play Houses. It Is somewhat remarkable, and therefore I shall
describe some part of the Relation.

Many Godly Citizens, and other well disposed Gentlemen of London, considering
that Playhouses, and Dicing-houses, were Traps for Young Gentlemen and others,
and perceiving the many Inconveniences and great Damage that would ensue upon
the long-suffering of the same, not only to particular Persons, but to the
whole City; and that it would be a great Disparagement to the Governors, and a
Dishonor to the Government of this Honorable City, if they should any longer
continue, acquainted some Pious Magistrates therewith, desiring them to take
some Course for the Suppression of Common Play Houses, Dicing-houses, etc.
within the City of London and Liberties thereof, who thereupon made humble Suit
to Queen Elizabeth, and her Privy Council, and obtained Leave of her Majesty to
thrust the Players out of the City, and to pull down all Play Houses and
Dicing-houses within their Liberties; which accordingly was effected. And the
Play Houses in Grace Church Street, etc. were quite put down and suppressed.
Rawlidge his Monster lately found out, etc. p. 2, 3, 4.

The Name of this Author that Mr. Collier has here Quoted, being utterly a
Stranger to all the great Scholars in Title Page Learning through St. Paul's
Churchyard or Little Britain, I am sorry I am so much in the Dark, that
neither Stow, Baker, Cambden, nor Holinshed, make any mention of this
Revolution in or about the Year 1580, viz. this Abdication of the Public
Play Houses by Queen Elizbeth; however not to dispute the Veracity of an
Affirmative in Verbo Sacerdotis, but take it as an Orthodox Record, I cannot
but stand a little amazed to think what wondrous State-opinion he has here
discovered.

First, it is here observable that the forementioned Grievances alleged against
Playhouses, were so far from a public Censur of the State, that they were only
a private Complaint of some Godly Citizens, etc. who therewith acquainted some
Magistrates, (the Magistrates themselves were not the first Complainants.) The
Foundation of, and Arguments against this Grievance, was only on the score of
Inconvenience and Damage, that their Continuance and Sufferance on that Account
would be a Dishonor to the Government of the City, not of the State nor
Church: For her were no Suggestions either of Immorality, Lewdness, Corruption
of Manners or Vanity, or any Religious charge against them, as Godly Men as the
Complainants are here presented; whilst on the contrary the whole Accusation
against them, and the whole Godly Fear was founded expressly on no other danger,
then the entrapping the Youth of the City, whether Gentle or Simple, whether
Gentlemen's Sons or Citizens Pretenses or Servants, undoubtedly to the
squandering away their Parents or Masters Money; and therefore, if too long
suffered, a public Inconvenience or Damage would ensue to the whole City.
Hereupon these Complainants Petitioned the Magistracy, and the Magistracy the
Queen; and her Gracious Royal Grant was this, That that Eyesore, a Playhouse
in Grace Church Street, in the Heart of the Metropolis, should be suppressed, and
the Players thrust out of the City of London, and possibly banished as far as
to Westminster. And what makes the whole Grievance (without Ralleay) very
remarkable, Here are Play Houses and Dicing-houses, both joined in one Sentence
of City Excommunication, the Dicing-houses of the two, so much the more
dangerous Inhabitants within the Walls, That the Youth of the City, viz. Sons,
Servants, Prentices or Cash-keepers, from so fatal a Temptation and Snare,
might be truly Trapt into the Loss of those Extravagant Sums, perhaps purloin'd
or embezell'd from Parents or Masters, to a very dangerous Consequene to the
whole City indeed; whilst on the other side, the small Figure, the Low-priz'd
Play Houses made in those Days, rendered them so little Threatners of any such
Capital Danger; that both Dicehouse and Playhouse are here Sentenced to
Banishment together, the one for Suspicion of Robbery, and the other of Petty
Larceny.

Now these two Authorities being all he says upon that Head, viz. The Opinion
of the State concerning the Stage, I have Quoted them verbatim at full length,
that the Reader may guess the strength of this Learned Argumentator, by this
first Sample we have given of him.

Ex pede Herculem. But to match him with an Opinion of the State concerning the
Stage, out of Stow's Chronicle, Anno 1583. not above three Years after the said
Abidication.

Stow 23d Eliz. Comedians and Stage Players of former Time, were very poor and
ignorant in respect of these in this Time; but being now grown very skilful and
exquisite Actors for all Matters, they were entertained into the Service of
diverse Great Lords, out of which Companies there were Twelve of the Best
chosen, at the request of Sir Francis Walsingham, they were Sworn the Queens
Servants, and were allowed Wages, and Livery's, as Grooms of the Chamber, and
until that Year 1583, the Queen had no Players. Amongst those Twelve Players
were Two rare Men, viz. Thomas Wilson for a quick, delicate, refined extemporal
Wit, and Richard Tareletion, for a wondrous plentiful, pleasant, extemporal
Wit. He was the wonder of his Time. He lies Buried in Shoreditch.

Now from this Authority of Mr. Stow, which we may venture to call Authentic,
it looks a little odly, that this Chronicle should take such particular notice
of the Exalted Court Favors, that smiled upon these Darling of the Stage, and
be so silent upon the Calamity of the other Excluded City Members of the same
Fraternity. Methinks the pulling down of Houses, and Banishing the whole
public City-diversion, but just three Years before, should have made as loud
an Alarm at this Court Preserment to their Younger Brothers, and certainly
deserved as large a Page in this History, at least for the Queen's Honor: For
it looks like a little piece of Injustice to that Glorious Memory, to let any
part of public Reformation, such as the suppression of Vice, as Dice-houses
and Play Houses, (and such our Author here designs it) performed by that
Illustrious Princess, lie untransmitted to Posterity. But when Play Houses and
Dice-houses are so suspiciously joined together by this unknown Author, what if
these Play Houses should prove but Gaming-houses at last? is looks very
shrewdly that way, all Circumstances considered. But this I only surmize;
besides, it looks like misdoubting the Ingenious Mr. Collier's Testimony, and
so I Will rather give him his Point.

However, as I am ready to do him Justice as to his Quotations, I hope he will
do the like by mine, and allow me at least this Triumph to the Stage, That the
Pious Queen had a better Opinion of Players than Mr. Collier's Godly Citizens,
when she did them the Honor of Entertaining them as her Menials in her Livery,
and under her own Roof. But perhaps that Princess designed to make a
Reformation in the Stage, as well as the Church; and therefore was resolved to
redeem the Stage Players from their Original State of Infamy and Slavery,
Quoted page 241. where he tells you, That the Romans refused the Jus Civitatis
to Players, seized their Freedom, and made them perfectly Foreign to the
Govenment, which St. Augustine was pleased to commend 'em for. And afterward
page 256. The whole Tribe of them was thrown out of all Honor and Privilege.
They were neither suffered to be Lords nor Gentlemen.

Now notwithstanding not only all these Pagan Blots in their Scutcheon, but
even the very Theodostan Code, that page 241. calls them Personae Inhonestae;
belike this Gracious Queen was pleased to give them that gentler Treatment,
under her English, them they had found either from the Civil or Heathen Laws;
and at least advanced them to tread very near the Heels of Gentlemen, under
such Royal Smiles, and the kind Court Reception she gave them.

But methinks this Ingenious Quoter of History need not have looked so far back
as to 1580. or Queen Elizabeth's 39. or Iac. 1st. for a National Opinion of the
Stage: Here was a Modern one of much fresher Memory, and more pat to his
purpose, when the Stage Plays lay under a more Universal Abdication, viz. in
the Reign of those later Powers at the Helm, who with no little Activity leaped
over the Block, and the whole White Hall Stage it stood upon, and yet stumbled
at the Straw. etc. A profane Comedy or Tragedy, were all Heathen and
Antichristian, but Pious Regicide and Rebellion, were Religion and Sanctity
with them. The Camel would go down, but the Gnat stuck in their Throats.

Now this Learned Gentleman ought by all means to have Quoted this National
Opinion of the Stage, as not only an Argument much more to his Cause, but a
Relation that in pure Gratitude to the Patrons of his Book, ought not to have
been omitted. For as this Author's View of the Stage is that more than Ordinary
Darling to the Gentlemen of that Kidney, he could in Honor and Justice do no
less than tickle 'em with their own Memoirs. Nay as the whole Society of the
Gentlemen of the Calves-head Feast, have made this Book their particular Bosom
Favorite, it would be prudent in the Author, (and perhaps the Book was
Composed and Calculated for that purpose) to harangue so considerable a Party;
for it is a hard World we live in, and the gaining of good Friends may be
serviceable.

From these, next let us see how the Stage stands discouraged by the Laws of
other Countries, as he has alrady showed you how it stands in our own.

To begin with the Athenians. These People Plutarch tells you, thought a Comedy
so unreputable a Performance, that they made a Law, that no Judge of the
Areopagus should write one.

This Learned Gentleman is resolved to make his Foreign State-Authority against
the Stage and his English one all of a piece. For methinks this Athenian Law,
that only prohibited the Gravity of a Judge from writing a Comedy, Recorded by
Mr. Collier in Monumental Black and White, as the Athenian State-opinion
against Plays, is certainly that most charming Argument, enough to set
Heraclitus himself a smiling.

The Lacedaemonians, who were remarkable for the Wisdom of their Laws, etc.
Their Government would not endure the Stage under any Regulation.

Well, here is one positive Bill of Exclusion.

To pass on to the Romans. Tully informs us, that their Predecessors counted
all Stage Plays uncreditable and scandalous. Insomuch that any Roman who turned
Actor, was not only to be Degraded, but likewise as it were Disincorporated,
and Unnaturaliz'd by the Order of the Censors.

This Roman State-opinion is almost as Doughty a Quotation as his Athenian one.
For here the Predecessors of the Romans counted Plays uncreditable, etc. But
their kinder Successors, belike were of a contrary State-Opinion. Their
Forefathers only past it as a Temporary Act, like the first of Iac. For the
uncreditable Player was afterward set rectus in Curia. And how did those
opinionated Predecessors (pray mark it) handle the Roman Offender that turned
Author? Why truly, as Cicero Cited by St. Augustine tells us, They
Disincorporated and Unnaturaliz'd him. And how did they do all this? Why truly,
as it were. Their Censors of the Stage did put their Order in Execution but
very gently. Well, to do this Author as much Justice, as he has done the Roman
Censors, I must own to the World, that he argues (as it were) most judiciously,
and, as it were, to the purpose.

We read in Livy, That the Young People kept their Fabulae Attellanae to
themselves. They would not suffer this Diversion to be blemished by the Stage.
For this Reason, as the Historian observes the Actors or the Fabulae Attellanae
were neither Expelled their Tribe, nor refused to serve in Arms, both which
Penalties it appears the Common Players lay under.

Here Livy gives us another Roman State-Account in Relation to the Stage, viz.
That some of their Dramatick Entertainments were thought worthy to be the
particular Performance of Gentlemen, who belike were either so pleased with it,
or so proud of it, as to Monopolize the Diversion to themselves, and all
without the least Stain to their Gentility. That Lash of the Roman Censors was
only, as it appears, or, as it were, for the poorer Hirelings Players; and for
this very good Reason, Et quod Turpe est cerdoni Volesos Brutosque decebit.

Playing in it self belike was no fault, taking Money for it was all.

His last State Opinion is, That in the Theodosian Code Players are called
Personae Dishonestae, etc. That is (to Translate it softly) Persons Maimd, and
blemished in their Reputation. Their Pictures might be seen at the Playhouse,
but were not permitted to hang in any creditable Place of the Town, the
Function of the Players being scandalous by the Civil Law.

As scandalous as the Civil Law had rendered Players, however these scandalous
Fellows were handled as softly as Mr. Collier Translates; Their scandal was so
little a public Nuisance, that the Christian Government, even in its primitive
Luster, always suffered them amongst them; and as Gondibert says, -- Is not
Powers Permission a Consent,
Which is in Kings the same as to Ordain;
And Ills ordained are free from punishment?


But of this Subject, I shall have occasion to be more at large.

These few State Memoris against the Stage, that Stage that Flourished in the
Greek and Roman Empires, above a Thousand Years together; in the Histories of
so many Ages, and through two such Spacious Empires, are all he can find us; I
dare not say, will not; for he is never sparing of Scandal if he knew where to
get it.

To all these State Authorities, he finishes that Head of his Discourse with a
long Pastoral Letter of the Lord Bishop of Arras in Flanders, published about
two Years ago against Plays; too long here to repeat.

But here I am afraid our Author mistakes himself. For one single Flandrian
Doctor, as I take it, is not a whole National Opinion; and therefore this
Pastoral Letter is but a very indifferent Authority upon that Head.

Now for another Head, which he calls the Testimony of the most celebrated
Heathen Philosophers, Orators and Historians, concerning the Stage.

To begin with Plato, this Philosopher tells us, That Plays raise the Passions,
and pervert the use of them, and by consequence are dangerous to Morality. For
this Reason he banishes these Diversions his Commonwealth.

Aristotle lays it down for a Rule, That the Law ought to forbid young People
the seeing of Comedies, such Permissions not being safe till Age and Discipline
had confirmed them in Sobriety, fortified their Virtue, and made 'em as it were
proof against Debauchery. That the force of Music and Action is very
affecting, it commands the Audience, and changes the Passions to a resemblance
of the Matter before them.

Here the Charge of Plato and Aristotle against Plays somewhat agrees, viz. in
Raising the Passions, which Aristotle Expounds the changing the Passions of the
Audience to a Resemblance of, or Sympathy with, the Matter before them; only
Plato sat a little the severer Judge upon them; for he Banished them his
Commonwealth: But Aristotle carries not Matters so high as to a total
Exclusion, but allows them as an innocent Diversion to Persons of mature Age
and Discretion.

But methinks Mr. Collier gives but a lame Account of Plato's Reason for
Banishing Plays from out his Commonwealth. For I can hardly believe that that
Learned Philosopher, whatever Motives he had for Excluding Plays from his
Government, would have talked so far out of his own natural Philosophy, as to
tell us that Raising a Passion perverts the use of it. For if, as Aristotle
explains the Case, the Raising the Passion is here meant, That the Passion
represented on the Stage imprints the same Passion into the Audience (a Point
which we shall hardly grant him, and which we shall have occasion to speak of
hereafter:) Yet all this while, if the worst Passion or Representation on the
Stage should have this wondrous Operation upon the frail Audience; For
instance, if a Man should see a Hercules Furens, and grow as mad, and pull up
Oaks as fast as he; or a Lustful Tarquin, and presently fall a Ravishing: Or a
Young Lady should see a lewd Thais, and immediately take Taint, and play the
Wanton like her; however here is no perverting the use of the worst of all these
Passions. It Is true, all these forementioned Passions are none of the best: But
the worst Passion in producing its own natural bad Effects, Plato would hardly
have called it, perverting the use of the Passion. But Mr. Collier in verbo
Sacerdotis assures us, he Translates faithfully, and therefore as wise a Man as
Plato was, we are bound to give it against him.

Tully cries out upon Licentious Plays and Poems, as the Bane of Sobriety and
Wife thinking. That Comedy subsists upon Lewdness, and that Pleasure is the
root of all Evil.

Plutarch, he tells us, was of the Opinion that Plays were dangerous to corrupt
Young People: (And here he joins with Aristotle.) And therefore Stage-Poetry,
when it grows too hardy and licentious, ought to be checked.

Here Plutarch concurs with Tully, viz. That Plays are to be checked only when
too Licentious, as the Bane of Sobriety, and an Excitation to Lewdness.

Livy reports the Original of Plays among the Romans, viz. That they were
brought in upon the score of Religion, to pacify the Gods, and remove a
Mortality. But then he adds, That the Motives are sometimes good, when the
Means are stark naught; that the Remedy in this Case was worse than the
Disease, and the Atonement more Infectious than the Plague.

Livy is an Author, that Mr. Collier has all the reason in the World to set a
value upon; for he is a Man of his own Gall. He owns that Plays were Originally
an Institution founded upon Religion, that by their Divine Power and Influence
they pacified the Anger of the Gods, and removed a Pestilence, or some other
general Mortality. (For he plainly confesses they did the Work, not the Cure
designed, but performed.) Yet with all these sovereign and pacifick Virtues,
and the whole Glory of a National Deliverance wrought by them, the Remedy was a
worse Plague than that it had cured. Could Mr. Collier himself have declaimed
more pathetically!

Valerius Maximus, Livy's Cotemporary, gives much the same account of the Rise
of Theaters at Rome. 'Twas Devotion that built them. And for the Performance of
those Places, which Mr. Dryden calls the Ornaments; this Author Censures as the
Blemishes of Peace: And which is more, he affirms, They were the occasions of
Civil Distractions, and that the State first blushed, and then bled for the
Entertainment. He concludes,, the Consequences of Plays were intolerable.

And very well he might conclude so, if he was of his own Cotemporaries
Opinion, viz. That they were a worse Plague than what they cured. But methinks
these two Roman Authors between them have given Plays an unaccountable Power;
for belike they could make Peace in Heaven, and raise Wars on Earth; they
pacified the Gods, but set the World at Dissension. And indeed had either the
Spirit of a Livy or Collier reigned amongst them, those Civil Distractions had
been not at all to be wondered at: For such angry Gentlemen would have found
Matter of Quarrel with Plays, though for their atoning of Heaven, and averting
of Judgments.

Seneca, the Philosopher, he tells us, was very angry at the Playhouse, and
for this Reason, That scarce any Body would apply themselves to the study of
Nature and Morality, unless when the Playhouse was shut, and the Weather foul.
That there was no Body to teach Philosophy, because there was no Body to learn
it. But that the Stage had Nurseries and Company enough.

This Quarrel of Seneca against the Stage, I confess was highly reasonable; for
undoubtedly that angry Gentleman of Learning was sensibly touched in the most
tender part, viz. Honor and Interest. Perhaps the Auditory had found as much
good Instruction to be gleaned up at a Playhouse Lecture, as at a Philosophy
one; and so because the Play-house-School got ground of the Philosophers, 'twas
high Time, to cry out, Great was his own Diana of Ephesus.

Tacitus relating how Nero hired decayed Gentlemen, for the Stage, complains of
the Mismanagement; and lets us know, 'twas the part of a Prince, to Relieve
their Necessity, and not to tempt it, etc. And that his Bounty should rather
have set them above an ill Practice, then put them upon it.

Though Nero's Conduct, was not always to be Vindicated, however, begging both
Tacitus and Mr. Collier's Pardon, I must give it on his side in this Case; and
say, he was here very much in the Right. For if that Prince thought it no
Degradation to his own Imperial Dignity, Personally to Act in Plays himself, I
know no Reason he had to think it either a Shame or a Condescension in a
Private Gentleman, and a Decayed one too, to come upon the Stage. If the
Sovereign could play the Histrio, sure the Subject was not above it.

Plays, in the Opinion of the Judicious Plutarch, are dangerous to corrupt
Young People; and therefore Stage-Poetry, when it grows too Hardy and
Licentious, ought to be checked.

Here Plutarch's Charge against the Playhouse, is not over severe; the Dangers
from the Stage only threatened the Younger sort of People. Wisdom and Gravity,
nay, possibly Mr. Collier himself, might enter a Playhouse Walls, and come off
unhurt. Nay, as Dangerous as it might be even to Youth it self; the Danger
belike lay not either in the Playhouse or the Play; but the Abuses and
Corruptions that crept into the Representations there: For he condemns the
Stage-Poetry, but only when it grows too Hardy and too Licentious. Plutarch's
Check does not reach Mr. Collier's, he brings only the pruning Hook.

I have here recited every Individual Authority quoted by Mr. Collier, of his
Heathen Philosophers, Historians, and Orators; I think they are somewhat short
of half a Score. And how far their several Authorities reach, I hope I have
indifferently well explained.

Well, to Sum up this Heathenish Evidence. This Learned Scholiast has made hard
shift to muster up a little above half a dozen Philosophers, Orators and
Historians, that have either entered their Pagan Protests, or preferred some
Arraignment against Plays.

Now the particular Opinions of not half a score of these Dissenting Ethnic
Doctors, out of at least half as many hundred of that Fraternity, especially
too at their rate of talking, or Mr. Collier for 'em, is no more a Conclusive
Argument, in my simple Judgment, against the Stage; Then a Diogenes in his Tub
and his Rags; or an Epimantus at his Roots and his Water, should persuade any
Rational Man from a clean Shirt upon his Back, and a good House over his Head;
or a good Dish of Meat and a Bottle of Wine for his Dinner, viz. if he is able
to purchase it.

And now as doughtily as these Orators have supported his Cause, upon this
Diminitive Foundation, what a Colossus has he raised.

For he concludes upon this Head, with telling us, This was the Opinion of
those Celebrated Authors, with respect to Theaters. They charge 'em with the
Corruption of Principles and Manners, and lay in all imaginable Caution against
them. And yet these Men had seldom any thing but this World in their Scheme;
and formed their Judgment only upon Natural Light, and common Experience. We
see then to what sort of Conduct we are obliged. The Case is plain: Unless we
are little enough to renounce our Reason, and fall short of Philosophy, and
live under the pitch of Heathenism.

Here I must confess this Insinuation is very artful. But all this while these
Philosophers that charge the Stage with this Corruption of Principle and
Manners, give us but their bare Word for it. Was it enough for the Great Plato
and Aristotle, the very Doctors of the Chair in the Old Heathen Divinity, (for
Religion was then but Philosophies Pupil); was it enough, I say, for those
Zealots in Morality, to see that Stage that had stood hundreds of Years, and to
look upon it, as such a Nursery of Corruption, and say no more against it? Does
it look like the Man that the World received him, for Plato, to tell us in a
Line and a Half, That Plays raise the Passions, and pervert the use of them,
and by consequence are dangerous to Morality; only to start such an
unintelligible Fragment, and not make a little Sermon-Work upon that Text?
Perhaps indeed, Sic Volo, sic Iubeo, might be enough to banish Plays from his
own Commonwealth; and even that short Sentence might be Supererrogation.
However, he owed that Justice both to the World around him, and Posterity after
him, to read a little longer Esculapian Lecture upon so Epidemick a Disease.

Undoubtedly had either Plato or Aristotle but half Mr. Collier's Pique against
the Play Houses, they would have spared their Ink as little as he has done; and
consequently have supplied him with more copious Satyr, and more sensible
Arguments upon that Subject.

But for once I Will join Issue with him, and to throw some Weight more into his
Scale, I Will suppose these half a dozen Philosophical Doctors with their Natural
Light, and as many Doctor Collier's with their Divine Light, had all past their
Negative Vote against the Stage; however they would hardly carry the Cause. For
truly I know no Reason why the Stage should be obliged to stand upon a stronger
Basis then the very Sanction of our Laws themselves. And I doubt not but a
Foundation may be very honest and innocent, though not established by a Nemine
Contradicente.

To these Testimonies of the Philosophers, etc. he tells you, He Will add a
couple of Poets, who both seem to be good Judges of the Affair in hand.

The first is Ovid, who in his Book, De Art Amandi, gives his Reader to
understand that the Playhouse was the most likely Place to forage in. Here
would be choice, nothing being more common than to see Beauty surprised, Women
Debauched, and Wenches picked up at those Diversions.

Ovid. Lib. 1.

Sed tu praecipue curvis venare Theatris,
Haec Loca sunt voto fertiliora tuo.
-- Ruit ad celebres cultissiama Foemina Ludos;
Copia judicium saepe mor at a meum est.
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae,
Iile Locus casti damna pudor is habet.
In this Authority of Ovid, our Learned Observator, quite forgets himself, and
runs off from his Theme. For Ovid has nothing to say against the Stage, or any
Reflection, or Objection against the Dramatick Presentations there. His present
Business, to speak in the modern Dialect, is only with the Pit, Box and
Galleries. This Quotation therefore is but very indifferently ranked under that
Head, viz. The Opinion of Paganism concerning the Stage. He tells us indeed,
the Young and the Fair are to be seen at the Theaters; That Beauty and High
Toppings, Faemina Cultissima, and undoubtedly Beauty and High Virtue too,
Faemina Castissima may be seen in a Playhouse; nay, and come thither too, to
see and be seen, without any offense to Modesty. And hither it is that Ovid
invites his Young Pupils in the Art of Love, to forage in (as he calls it.)

And here I Will give Mr. Collier the Point, viz. That a Debauchee may pick up a
Wench at those Diversions. Nor is it any great wonder in so Universal a
Concourse of the Young and the Fair, to find some smutty Corn in so large a
Field. Society and Crowds, upon a more sacred Ground than a Playhouse, are not
wholly composed of Honor and Innocence, but that a Carrion Crow may be caught
even in a flock of Doves.

And truly had not Mr. Collier been wilfully over-sighted, he would have
informed us, that Ovid was of the same Opinion. For in the very immediate
foregoing Verses to this Quotation, he advises his Young Libertine to forage
the Temples of the Gods; for he may find the same Game to fly at there too.

And here I am sorry I must join with Ovid; when much Diviner Altars are
subject to the same Profanation. It Is not all Religion and Piety that enters a
Church Door: Hypocrisy and Wantonness are too often too bold Intruders: And
not only to see and to be seen, is the height of the Devotion, but possibly the
Lecture and the Sermon may be sometimes made the screen to the Rover and the
Wanton.

But Mr. Collier, I hope, will not infer from hence, that the Church Doors
should be shut up, or Devotion barred entrance, for fear of Profanation or
Hypocrisy herding in along with them.

It Is true, there may be a Case, and a weighty one, for keeping us out from
Church, Prayers, Sacraments, and what not; as we find it recorded in a Learned
Discourse published by this Orthodox School-man, called, A Persuasive to
Consideration, tendered to the Royalists, particularly those of the Church of
England, Printed in the Year, 1695. being a Discourse upon this Text -- In the
Day of Adversity consider -- Where Page 35 we Read, as follows.

However, I am loath to leave my Church! (the Auditor thus Expostulating with
him) You say well. But can you expect to find the Church, where it is peculiar
Doctrines are disowned; where it is Authority is opposed, and betrayed to the
Secular Power? Does the Being of a Church consist in Brick and Stone? What
would you do if Jupiter was worshipped there? I hope the chiming of the Bells
would not draw you to the Service of the Idol. If it is urged, that we may be
so planted as to want the Advantage of an Orthodox Pastor; What is to be done
in such Circumstances? Must we pray alone, without the Assistance of Priest or
Congregation? To this Question, after what has been said, I think the Proverb a
sufficient Return; Better be alone than in ill Company. If it is farther
objected, That by this Principle we lose the Benefit of the Blessed Sacrament.
To this I answer,

1. That this Objection is oftentimes no more than Pretense: For if People
would take that Pains which the Regard to the Institution requires, it seldom
happens but they might receive it from proper Hands.

But 2. I answer, That breaking the Unity of the Church by Schismatical
Communion, and making our selves Partakers of other Men's Sins, (1 Timothy 5. 22.)
is a bad Preparation for the Sacrament. To break a moral Law for a positive
Ordinance, though never so valuable, looks like robbing in order to Sacrifice.

And therefore when the Case is truly put; a pious Desire of Receiving will be
Equivalent to the Thing. This being an allowed Rule in Instances of Necessity.
So that we cannot be said to lose the Benefit of the Blessed Sacrament, though
we are not so happy as to partake in the Administration.

Now by the same Strength of Reason he has here carried the Cause against the
whole Church of England, and Excluded his Royalists from all public Devotion;
undoubtedly he may shut up the Playhouse Doors, and exclude 'em from all
public Diversion too.

The other Poet he joins with Ovid, is the Author of the Plain-Dealer.

This Poet, in his Dedication to Lady B. some Eminent Procuress, pleads the
Merits of his Function, and insists upon being Billeted upon Free Quarter.
Madam, says he, I think a Poet ought to be as free of your Houses as of the
Play Houses, since he contributes to the Support of both, and is as necessary
to such as You, as the Ballad-Singer to the Pickpurse, in convening the Cullies
at the Theaters to be picked up and carried to a Supper, and Bed, at Your
Houses. This is frank Evidence, and never the less true for the Air of a Jest.

As frank as this Plain-Dealer's Evidence is, here is nothing but what, with a
very Grave face of Truth, and in as earnest a Jest, might have been said upon
any other Public places of Meeting, viz. the Dancing-Schools, the Mall, the
Parks, the Gardens; and where not? And unless this Man of Morals, would have a
Law made to suppress all Places of general Resort, and confine Mankind to Cells
and Caves, I know not well how he will prevent all these Enormities that the
Plain-Dealer has here rallied upon.

Nay, this I will positively averr, That both the Plain-Dealer and Mr.
Collier's Argument on this side, lies much stronger against any other public
Place of Resort than the Playhouse. For if Wantonness and Lewdness will creep
into all Public Societies, though of never so innocent a Foundation, the
Theaters lie least obnoxious to that Danger. For in all the other forementioned
Places of Resort, we make our own Diversion, have no Entertainment but what we
give our selves; and consequently, as Idleness is the Mother of Lust, and when
We have least to do, the Devil has most; we lie more open to Temptation and
Irregular Desires, than we can do in a Playhouse, where the Diversion is all
found to our Hands, and the Auditor has both his Eyes and his Ears so employed,
and is so much taken up with either the Pity and Concern for the Distresses of
Tragedy, or a Mirth and Delight from the Pleasantry of Comedy, that he has
hardly the Leisure to rove after any Imaginations of his own.

And therefore if our Platonic Author is for banishing of Plays, for this only
Grievance within the Walls of a Playhouse, he may as justly Vote for the
rooting up a Garden, for fear the Spider should suck Poison from the Flowers.

Next, to proceed to his Testimony of the Fathers, he begins with Theophilus
Bishop of Antioch, who lived in the second Century.

It Is not lawful (says this Father) for us to be present at the Prizes of the
Gladiators, least by this Means we should be accessory to the Murders there
committed. Neither dare we presume upon the Liberties of your other Shows,
least our Senses should be tinctured and disobliged with Indecency and
Profaneness. The Tragical Distractions of Tereus and Thyestes are Nonsense to
us. We are for seeing no Representations of Lewdness. The Stage Adulteries of
the Gods and Hero's are unwarrantble Entertainments; and so much the worse
because the Mercinary Players set them off with all the Charms and Advantages
of Speaking. God forbid that Christians, who are remarkable for Modesty and
Reservedness, who are obliged to Discipline, and trained up to Virtue; God
forbid, I say, that we should dishonor our Thoughts, much less our Practice,
with such Wickedness as this.

Tertullian, who lived in the latter End of this Century, thus Addresses the
Heathens upon this Subject.

We keep off from your Public Shows, because we cannot understand the Warrant
of their Original. There Is Superstition and Idolatry in the Case; and we
dislike the Entertainment, because we dislike the Reason of its Institution,
etc.

His Book, De Spectaculis, was wrote on purpose to diswade the Christians from
the public Diversions of the Heathens, of which the Playhouse was one, etc.

The Arguments of Tertullian which are too long here to recite, were chiefly
upon these two Heads, viz. That Pleasure was a bewitching Thing, and the Levity
of the Theaters for that Cause was not consistent with the severer Principles
of Christianity. His second Argument was the low Character of Players, from the
Magistracy it self, who, though they abetted the Stage, discountenanced the
Players, and crampt their Freedoms, etc.

To conclude, he insinuates the great danger of being present at those
Entertainments; and tells us one sad Example of a Demoniack Possession.

A certain Woman went to the Playhouse, and brought the Devil home with her.
And when the unclean Spirit was pressed in the Exorcism, and asked how he durst
attack a Christian? I have done nothing (says he) but what I can justify; for
I seized her upon my own Ground.

Before I enter upon any other Argument, I shall make some few Remarks upon
this Possession.

I shall not Dispute Tertullian's Veracity in this Relation; yet methinks, upon
a thorough Examination, neither Tertullian nor Mr. Collier have over-well
proved the Playhouse to be the Devils own Ground, when the Title's supported
by no more Authority than a bare single Affirmative, and that from no other
Mouth than the Father of Lies, the Devil himself. If the Playhouse were really
a Chattellany of Lucifer, a Fief of the Infernal Empire, some Doctors are of
Opinion, the Devil would be the last would tell us so: For as the subtilty of
that cunning Seducer strows all his Pit-falls with Flowers, he has neither that
Charity for Mankind, nor owes that Service to God, to play thus Booty against
himself in so frank a Declaration. However, if that restless Sworn Enemy of
Man, had any such generous Principle in him, the Dives in Flames had had no
occasion of supplicating a Monitory Messenger, to send to his Worldly Friends,
from Abraham: But might e'ne have begged the Civil Favor of that kind Errand
from one of his own Tormentors. This I must say, that this foolish Devils
imprudent Discovery was so Capital a piece of Treason against the Interest of
his own Infernal Kingdom, that really I am of Opinion, to set him Rectus in
Curia Diabolica, he wants Absolution.

Well, but perhaps you will say, This Discovery was no Blunder in his Politics,
but extorted by the Divine Force of the Exorcism. Really Sir, that may be.
However to give this Devil and his Vouchers their due, all this Confession
carries a very rank Face of a Sham still. For if it were substantial Verity,
that the Playhouse was truly and firmly the Devils own Ground, and every
Christian Rambler caught upon it his own Lawful, and, to use his own words,
Justifiable Seizure; at this rate, the Devil must be softened into a Spirit of
that unaccountable Mercy, so very unlike the Bible Picture we have of him, when
among so many Thousands and Ten Thousands, nay Millions and Millions of
Christians, that since that Day have been caught in a Playhouse Walls, so pat
for his Clutches; nevertheless this only single Seizure of that kind is all
that is Recorded against him.

I have several times heard this Demoniack Story warmly played, as not a little
formidable Battery against the Theaters, by some passionate Zealots, no very
good Friends either to our Church or our Stage; and to confirm this Diabolical
Authority, those Enthusiasts without question had read, that 'twas no new Thing
for the Cloven-foot to deliver Oracles, and therefore doubt not but this may be
one.

But in all these Declamations of the Fathers against Stage Plays, St. Cyprian,
Tertullian, and St. Augustine, and all of 'em confess 'twas the General Opinion
of the Christians that Plays were a Lawful Diversion; and therefore the whole
business of those Declamations, is the opening the Christians Eyes, and
refuting that too Epidemical Erroneous Opinion; and what occasioned that
spreading Error amongst them was, that the appearance of that general Innocence
in those Entertainments gave them that Reception amongst the Christians, that
they could not believe them Criminal without some express Divine Precept
against them; and accordingly St. Cyprian, the Author de Spectaculis, argues
against those, who thought the Playhouse no unlawful Diversion because 'twas
not condemned by express Scripture.

So Tertullian reproves the Christians, That their Faith is either too full of
Scruples, or too barren of Sense. Nothing (he says) will serve to settle them
but a plain Text of Scripture. They hover in uncertainty, because it is not said
as expressly, [Thou shall not go to the Playhouse,] as it is [Thou shall not
Kill, etc.]

And here, with all due Reverence to these Christian Fathers, the Scriptural
silence in that Case well furnish some more curious Speculations than they have
been pleased to make; and which I hope will be no unpardonable Inquiry to
prosecute a little farther then they have done.

First then, as our Blessed Savior was Born in the Days of Augustus, it is
known, by all Historians, that the shutting up of Ianus's Temple Doors in his
Reign, universally opened those of the Play Houses. Theatrick Representations
in all the Provinces of the Spacious Roman Empire, were the then Common Public
Diversion and Entertainment, and such they continued many Reigns after him.

Now it may raise a little Wonder why the Apostles, that went forth by a
special Command of the Almighty to Convert all Nations, Preaching Repentance,
and the Kingdom of Heaven; They that so exactly performed that great
Commission, as to Arraign or Censure Vice and Impiety from the highest to the
lowest, in all its several Branches; not only pronounced their louder Anathemas
against the more crying Sins, but read Divinity-Lectures even upon the Wardrobe
and Dressing-Box, correcting the very Indecencies of the Hair, the Apparel, and
each uncomely Gesture, etc. That these Missioners of Salvation should travel
through so many Heathen Nations (the Gentiles they were sent to call) and meet
at every turn the Theater and the Stage Players staring them in the very Face,
and not make one Reprimand against them, is a Matter of very serious Reflection.

Had the Playhouse been, as St. Cyprian calls it, the Seat of Infection; or as
Clemens Alexandrinus much to the same Sense calls it, the Chair of Pestilence;
and (to join the Authority of the Unclean Spirit along with them,) the Devils
own Ground; I am of Opinion in this Case, that those Divine Monitors, the
Apostles, that sets Bars to the Eye, the Ear, the Tongue, to every smallest
Avenue that might let in the Tempter; would hardly have left the Broad Gates to
the Playhouse so open, without one Warning to the unwary Christian in so
direct a Road to Perdition. Such a Discovery I believe would have been rather
the earlier Cautionary Favor of some of our kind Evangelical Guardians, then
the Extorted Confession of our greatest Infernal Enemy two hundred Years after.

It Is true, St. Cyprian gives a Reason for this Apostolical Silence, viz. That
some things are more strongly forbidden because unmention'd. The Divine Wisdom
would have had a low Opinion of Christians, had it descended to particulars in
this Case. Silence is sometimes the best Method for Authority. To forbid, often
puts People in mind of what they should not do; and thus the force of the
Precept is lost by naming the Crime, etc.

Here the World must pardon me, if I presume to say, That St. Cyprian plays
more the Orator than the Churchman. I hardly believe that there has been that
Crime too Black to lie upon Scripture Paper, when the very Sin that drew down
Fire upon Sodom and Gomorrah has been recorded there: Nor can I grant him his
Consequence, viz. That such Black Sins are the more strongly forbidden because
unmention'd. This I am certain, That the many, the loud, and the repeated
Fulminations of Vengeance from the Mouths of the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and
the Apostles, denounced against the most Tremendous Iniquities and
Abominations, does not very well prove the Scriptural Silence in such Cases.

Besides, St. Cyprian here, under the notion of a Reason for such Silence,
either flies wide from the Matter, or else contradicts himself. The Charge he
all along lays against Plays, is the Levities and Impertinences of the
Comedies, the Ranting Distractions of Tragedies, that Plays were originally the
Institution of Heathen Idolatry. That as they are Lewd Representations, they
are of this dangerous Consequence, viz. That by using to see such Things we
shall learn to do them, etc. And that therefore we must draw off our
Inclinations from these Vanities, etc.

All this is so far from a Blackness too deep for Paper, or a Monster too
hideous for the Modesty of Divine Revelation to expose to Light, that nothing
can be less. But granting this Christian Father the liberty of being sometimes
cooler, and sometimes warmer upon that Subject, and allowing these Levities and
Vanities to be so many Gorgons and Medusa's; granting the Playhouse to be that
Rock, that Quicksand, or any other more devouring Gulf; however, the Divine
Wisdom in that Case, instead of having a low Opinion of Christians, had it
descended to a particular Caution against it; especially when the hidden Rock
or Quicksand lay so unseen by the general Eye of Christians, that both by
Tertullian and St. Cyprian's Confession, the Danger appeared so little, that
'twas the public Christian Opinion, the Playhouse was a Lawful Diversion; on
the contrary, the Divine Wisdom, I say, had as much occasion of some seasonable
Admonition, to hang out as a Watch-Light or Sea-Mark, against those hidden
Rocks, as ever Aaron had to warn the Children of Israel from the Tents of
Coran, Dathan and Abiram, before the Earth opened to swallow them: And
undoubtedly had there been any such true Danger in a Playhouse, the Divine
Wisdom, without either a low Opinion of itself in descending to give such a
particular Caution, or the weak-sighted Christian to want it; amongst its other
many thousand particualar Monitory Favors and Mercies, would have added this
One more to that infinite Number. I wish this Divine Author has not himself a
much lower Opinion of Christians, when to crutch his Argument against the
Playhouse, he would insinuate, that even a Gospel-Precept may be sometimes
ensnaring, and the very Commands of God himself against a Sin, a Temptation to
draw us into it; and consequently that in some Cases it is much safer, and more
divine Prudence, to leave the Sinner to grope out his way to Salvation, than to
give him a Light to guide him thither.

Besides, these Fathers, instead of defending the Spiritual Silence against
Plays (the main Argument they drive at,) the Gospel Light being no ways wanted
to guard against them, but that even the very Light of Nature was sufficient in
that Case; On the contrary, as they have managed their Indictment against the
Stage, have put it so far out of the power of Nature, that they seem to enforce
the absolute necessity of a particular Revelation Pilot even to (...) Danger
that lay there.

For Instance, Tertullian.

Will you not avoid this Seat of Infection? The very Air suffers by their
Impurities, and they almost pronounce the Plague! What though the Performance may
be in some measure Pretty and Entertaining? What, though Innocence, yes, and
Virtue too, shines through some part of it? It Is not the Custom to prepare
Poison unpalatable, nor make up Rats-bane with Rhubarb and Sena. No, to have
the Mischief speed, they must oblige the Sense, and make the Dose pleasant.
Thus the Devil throws in a Cordial Drop to make the Draught go down; and steals
some few Ingredients from the Dispensatory of Heaven. In short, look upon all
the engaging Sentences of the Stage: Their Flights of Fortitude and Philosophy,
the Loftiness of their Style, the Music of the Cadence, and the fineness of
their Conduct; Look upon it only, I say, as Honey dropping from the Bowels of a
Toad, or the Bag of a Spider. Let your Health overruled your Pleasure, and
don't Die of a little Liquorishness.

Now if the Visible Beauties of the Stage were made up of all those attracting
Charms and Graces, viz. Engaging Sentences, Morality, Philosophy, Virtue and
Innocence, and all so shining; could Nature in this Case, as St. Cyprian says,
so govern, where Revelation does not reach, as to discover the Latent Poison in
the Pill, and all mixed up with so many Ingredients of Heaven, and under so
many Leaves of Gold? Could mere Natural Light supply the Holy Text, to warn us
against so lovely and fair a Face, set forth by Tertullian with all these
ensnaring Enchantments, without any want of a Spiritual Illumination, to tell
us, It Is the Siren that wears it?

Tertullian however endeavors to palliate this Scriptural Silence, and tells
us, Though Plays are not expressly forbidden in Scripture, we have the meaning
of the Prohibition, though not the Sound, in the First Psalm, Blessed is the
Man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stands in the way of
Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful.

I hope no Man will interpret my Amazement at the Application of this Text to
the Condemnation of Play Houses, to any want of Veneration to so celebrated a
Pillar of the Church as Tertullian; nay, and all this the substantial Meaning,
only the empty Sound wanting! -- And here I must declare, had the Demoniack
Woman had no plainer Christian Light to lead her to Heaven, than this to show
her the Snares of a Playhouse, I am very much afraid she had continued under
Possession still, and never got loose from the Infernal Talons that seized her
there.

And here again I must once more beg my Reader not to charge me with the
Ridiculing of Divine Writ, when I declare from my Soul I should as soon quote,
and with as reasonable a Construction, that Verse in the Psalm, Why does the
Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain Thing? for a twoedg'd Sword against
Seneca and Terence, the Ranting of Tragedy, and the Fiction of Comedy; and that
Hercules Furens, and the Comical Davus, were both hewed down together.

But to return to the Fathers.

If the Heathen Dramatick Poetry, in the Plays of their Times, were so
scandalous, so lewd, and infamous a Representation, that the very mention of
them in Divine Precept, though to set the Mark of Cain upon them, [Thou shall
not see a Play] by the Venerable Tertullian being even ranked with [Thou shall
not Kill], were too black a Record to foul the very Paper with: I am here very
much afraid, that this Learned Histriomastix, our Author, has thrown away a
great deal of Oil and Labor in washing the Ethiop; when in his First Chapter
of The Immodesty of the Stage, in his comparing the Ancient and Modern
Play-wrights, he clears almost the whole Body of the Greek and Latin Dramatick
Poets from every Thing so much as tending to Lewdness or Smut, or even a double
Entendre that way. In short, what with the Native Morals and Virtues of the
Poets themselves, and the Superior Care of the Public Inspectors and Censors
of the Theater, he sets forth, at large, that Modesty and Innocence of the
Heathen Stage, so far from encouraging Lewdness and Debaucheries, corrupting of
Manners, etc. or any of those hideous Phaenomena's through that long and
learned Harangue of the Fathers against them; that hardly any thing, scarce
North and South, can be more opposite, than the Sentiments of these Doctors of
the Primitive Church in his last Chapter, and of this sometimes Minister of the
English Church in the first Chapter.

For Instance, he begins with Plautus, an Author that, he tells us, Has left us
20 entire Comedies; out of which Volume of Antiquity, he quotes but five
censurable Passages, and those but moderate ones, viz. Lena and Bacchis the
Strumpet are airy and somewhat over-merry, but not obscene. Chalinus, in Woman's
Cloths, is the most remarkable. Pasicompa Charinus his Wench, talks too freely
to Lysimachus, and so does Sophroclidisca, Slave to Lemnoselene; and lastly,
Phronesiam, a Woman of the Town, uses a double Entendre to Stratophanes. This
Poet, he farther informs us, confesses Smut a scandalous Entertainment; that
such Liberties ought to fall under Neglect, to lie unmentioned, and be blotted
out of Memory. And that this was not a Copy of his Countenance, we may learn
from his Compositions. Nay, this very Plautus, who wrote in an Age not
perfectly refined, has regard to the Retirements of Modesty, and the Dignity of
Humane Nature; and though he often seems to design his Plays for a Vulgar
Capacity, he does not make Lewdness his Business.

Of Terence, who appeared when Breeding was more exact, and the Town better
polished, he says, That he managed accordingly, and has but one faulty
bordering Expression, which is that of Chremes to Clitopho. This single
Sentence apart, the rest of his Book is unfullied, and fit for the nicest
Conversation. Nay, his very Strumpets are modest, and converse not unbecoming
their Sex.

Then for Seneca, he assures us, He is clean throughout the whole Piece; and
stands generally off from the point of Love. In fine, to dispatch the Latins
together, he tells you, They had nothing smutty so much as in a Song, and kept
their Language under Discipline.

To do the same Right to the Greek Poets he tells us, How the Stage had both
its beginning and highest Improvement at Athens. -- Aeschylus was the first who
appeared with any Reputation: His Genius seems noble, and his Mind generous,
willing to transfuse it self into the Audience, and inspire them with a Spirit
of Bravery. His Materials were shining and solid, etc. This Tragedian had
always a nice Regard to good Manners, etc. and so governed his Expressions of
Love, that they carried a Face of Virtue along with them.

To Sophocles, that next succeeded him on the Stage, he gives this Character,
That he was in Earnest an extraordinary Person; and among his many eminent and
all virtuous Qualifications, when he concerns himself with Amors, nothing can
be more temperate or decent, etc. His Descriptions of Love are within the Terms
of Honor; the Tendernesses are solemn as well as soft; they move to Pity and
Concern, and go no farther. In fine, like his Predecessor, he lightly touches
upon an amorous Theme; and, to use our Author's ingenious Allusion, He glides
along like a Swallow upon the Water, and skims the Surface, without dipping a
Feather.

Next for Euripides, his Character agrees too with his Elder Brothers, even to
priding himself in Virtue and Modesty, delivering great Thoughts in common
Language, and being dressed more like a Gentleman than a Player. His Distinction
lies in the Perspicuity of his Style; in Maxims and Moral Reflection; in his
peculiar Happiness for touching the Passions, especially that of Pity; and
lastly, in exhausting the Cause, and arguing pro and con upon the stretch of
Reason. And for Modesty he is entirely in the Authors Favor, etc. He calls
Whoring Stupidness and playing the Fool; and to be Chaste and Regular is with
him, as well as with Aeschylus, (...). As much as to say, it is the consequence
of Sense and right Thinking, etc.

It Is true, he singles out one frail Brother of the Quill, Aristophanes, and
finds a very foul Blot in his Scutcheon, viz. Atheism; and hereupon very
passionately declaims upon that Topic, viz. upon his ridiculing the Gods, and
breaking in upon Religion, etc. for several whole Pages. But as heavy as the
Atheist lies upon him, still he wipes off the Imputation of Debauchery,
assuring us, That as to the business of Love, Aristophanes always declined it.
He never patches up a Play with Courtship and Whining, though he wrote nothing
but Comedy, etc. It Is true, as to the Atheism of Aristophanes, though it may
appear somewhat a Sin against the Athenian Light of Theology: It happened to be
a Fault on the better side, (at least in the Christian Scale) when only against
the Libertine Household of Heathen Gods, where neither Infidelity nor Apostasy
were altogether so Capital.

Now, as such were the Characters of the Ancient Poets, and those the very
Founders of the Feast in the Theatrical Entertainments in St. Cyprian and
Tertullian's Days, and some Ages after them, I cannot but once more repeat my
Amazement at their over-passionate Exclamations against the Stage, especially
upon the mistaken Topic of Lewdness and Debauchery.

After all this honest and faithful Review of the Ancient Stage, taken even by
our kind Author himself, I fancy he has given us some more substantial Reasons
for the Scriptural Silence against Plays, than all these Fathers have done. For
if such, by his own generous Acknowledgment, was the Stage Primitive State of
Innocence; (a Confession which we highly stand obliged to him for, though like
one of Sir Martin Marral's Discoveries, considering how little it makes for his
Cause,) I fear we shall thank him for a Favor he never intended us.

If therefore, as I was saying, or rather our Author has said for me, such was
not only the Innocence of the Heathen Stage, under all the Restrictions of
Chastity, Modesty and Decency, not only from the native principles of the
Authors, but also from the Regulation of Public Authority; but even such was
the Merit (so I may call it) of those Theatrick Representations so little
tending to the Corruption of Manners, That several of them were written with a
Genius, to speak in his own Language, enough to transfuse and inspire a Spirit
of Bravery, so far from a Check, as to be rather an Excitation to Virtue. Here,
upon all these Concessions even from our Author himself, (provided still that
as Stage Plays are only Humane Institutions, and Worldly Diversions, and that
that Objection shall be found no Bar to this Plea of Innocence, as that I hope
we shall make out;) this then being the Stage, and these the Plays that faced
the whole Travels of the Apostles; here is a very substantial Argument for the
Evangelical Silence, in not one word against them; for the Mouths of those
Divine Oracles opened only to the Correction of Vice.

Nor will it raise any part of an Objection against this Argument for their
Silence, etc. That the Original innocent Constitution of Plays was sometimes
Corrupted, their Modesty Debauched, and Abuses crept in amongst them, as this
Author often observes against them; For as the very Heathens themselves had
their Censors and Inspectors appointed to correct and punish those Abuses, and
to keep the Stage in the bounds of Modesty, I hope the Christians needed no
particular Scriptural Precept in that Case: The Divine Wisdom must then have
most truly had a low Opinion of Christians, to think they wanted any particular
Evangelical Light to follow, even where the Ignorant Heathen had led before
them. And as to the more horrid Representations of the Amphitheater, so
frequent in the Neronian Reign, in which St. Paul died; here indeed there
wanted no Evangelick Command, to warn the Christian from those Execrable Bloody
Walls, where Murder upon Murder even in cold Blooded Sport was made a Public
Entertainment; The Divine Wisdom, as St. Cyprian says, had had a low Opinion
indeed to think the Christian could want a Heavenly Caution of entering those
Shambles of Humane Butchery.

Besides, to show how little the Dramatick Poetry lay under the Gospel Censure,
our Author, (though upon another occasion,) is pleased to quote that Text of St.
Paul, Evil Communications corrupt Good Manners, as the Expression first of the
Comic Poet Menander, 290 Years before Christ, and afterward of St. Paul the
Apostle. Here I would ask whether St. Paul the most Learned of the Apostles, in
delivering the Divine Oracles of God, would have incorporated the saying of a
Heathen Poet, that possibly had been spoke a hundred times over on the Public
Stage, by a Hireling Player, into the Gospel of Truth, notwithstanding the
Morality and Innocence of the Expression it self; had Stage Plays in
themselves, and that in their worst capacity of Comedies, justly lain under St.
Cyprian's Character of them, viz. That were they not otherwise highly Criminal,
the Foolery of them is egregious and unbecoming the Gravity of Believers?

For some other Instances of St. Paul's Respect for the Poets.

In Acts 17. 28. In him we live and move and have our Being; as certain of your
own Poets have said, for we are also his Offspring.

In his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 1. ver. 14, 15. speaking of the People of
Crete, he says in the words of Epimenides the Poet.

(...). One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are
always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies: This Witness is true, etc.

Here the Apostle has not disdained to quote a Heathen Poet, nay, and honor
him with the Title of Prophet.

Now therefore as the Spirit of God spoke by the inspired Apostles, we may
venture to boast, it gives some Reputation to the Poet, and sure a little
Vindication of the Innocence of the Profession, that the Holy Ghost himself has
spoke in the words of a Menander, and an Epimenides.

But to make a little farther Examination into the Reason of this over-violent
Zeal and Vehemence of the Primitive Fathers against the Stage. We are to
consider the forementioned Authority, viz. Theophilus, Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Minutius Foelix, and St. Cyprian, so faithfully translated by Mr.
Collier, lived all in the second or third Century, in the Mourning Minority of
the Church of God, under the Heathen Persecutions. For Constantine, the first
Christian Emperor, began his Reign but in the beginning of the fourth Century.
Had not then those Primitive Fathers, with Stakes, Gibbets, Cauldrons,
Gridirons, Racks, etc. all before their Eyes, a just cause of Complaint against
the Christian Inclination for Plays, Delight and Pleasure at that time of Day?
Does the Son from his Fathers Deathbed go to the Musick-House? or the Widow
from her Husbands Funeral to the Dancing-School? Was the Playhouse a
seasonable Christian Diversion, possibly to come from a Laurences Gridiron to a
Thyestes Feast? I may here join with Tertullian. In Earnest, Christian, our
Time for Entertainment is not yet; ye are too craving and ill managed, if you
are so violent for Delight, page 258.

Besides, was it not a yet greater aggravation to the ill timed Christian
Fondness for Plays, to herd, consort and mix with their Tyrants, Persecutors
and Murderers the Heathens, in their Entertainments and Diversions? And
therefore is it to be doubted, but that this unseasonable Inclination of the
Christians for Plays went a great way in the Fathers Passionate Declamations
against them; and undoubtedly to check the Christian Fondness in that Case,
pushed 'em upon the necessity of enlarging upon that stronger Argument, viz.
The Unlawfulness of Plays, where the weaker one, the Indecency of seeing them,
would not prevail?

Nay, as Clemens Alexandrinus joins the Circus and the Theater together, when
he says, They may not improperly be called the Chair of Pestilence. Does not
therefore the bloody Gladiator, the profession of the Murder at the Prize, as
Minutius Foelix calls it, the Secular Games, and the Pantomimi, and all the
rest of the more Licentious and Barbarous Heathen Entertainments, go a great
way in the Condemnation of the more Innocent Plays, whilst the Stage suffers
with the Ill Company it keeps; all those horrid Diversions, being at the same
time supported by the Tyrant Pagan Emperors? Nay, does not the very Christian
Horror of those Heathen Tyrants, the Patrons of those Plays, go a great way
with these Fathers to the Condemnation of the Feast for the Founders sake? And
therefore is all this Vehemence, though to a stretch of Argument, and the
Racking of Reasons against them, any thing to be wondered at?

Suppose we could parallel the same Modern Case; were there, for Instance, any
such Diversion as Plays amongst the Turks, would not the Grecian Patriarchs be
as tender of the Christians mixing in that Diversion, more especially if our
Mahometans were like their Heathens, a Spirit of Persecution? Why then are all
these Primitive Champions brought down to Battle our Theaters, when their whole
Ground of Quarrel and Foundation of Complaint, is so Foreign to the present
State of the English Stage?

Next, we'll examine the short Account he pretends to give us of the Councils
of the Primitive Church concerning the Stage.

The Council of Illiberis or Collioure, Decreed, That it shall not be lawful
for any Woman, who is either in full Communion, or a Probationer for Baptism,
to Marry or entertain any Comedians or Actors; who takes this Liberty shall be
Excommunicated, Anno 305. Can. 67.

The first Council of Arles, Excommunicates Players as long as they continue to
Act, Anno 314. Can. 5.

The second Council of Arles made their 20th Canon to the same purpose, and
almost in the same words, Anno 452.

The third Council of Carthage, of which St. Augustine was a Member, Ordains,
That the Sons of Bishops or other Clergymen should not be permitted to furnish
out public Shows, or Plays, or be present at them. Such sort of Pagan
Entertainments being forbidden the Laity, it being always unlawful for all
Christians to come among Blasphemers.

By the 35th Canon of this Council it is Decreed, That Actors or others
belonging to the Stage, who are either Converts or Penitents, etc. shall not be
denied Admission in the Church, which our Author remarks, was a Proof that
Players as long as they kept to their Employment were barred Communion.

Another African Council declares,

That the Testimony of People of ill Reputation, of Players, and others of such
scandalous Employments, shall not be admitted against any Person. Anno 424.
Can. 96.

The second Council of Chaalon sets forth,

That Clergymen ought to abstain from all over-engaging Entertainments in
Music, or Show (Oculorum auriumque illecebris); and as for the smutty and
licentious Insolence of Players, and Buffoons, let 'em not only decline the
hearing it themselves, but likewise conclude the Laity obliged to the same
Conduct. Anno 813. Can. 9.

I have here recited his Authority of the Councils of the Church at this full
length, as affording Matter for several serious Reflections and weighty
Considerations. First, then it appears by the express words of the Council of
Carthage, that the Comedies then Acted, were Pagan Entertainments, and
generally performed by Pagans, viz. Blasphemers, and for certain were the
Composition of the Heathen Poets; for we have no Record or mention of any
Christian Poet that compiled or wrote any Theatrical Representations; For had
there been any such Christian Author, his Name at least, if not some of his
Works would in all likelihood have been transmitted to Posterity, as well as so
many of the Dramatick Labors of the Heathen Poets: Besides, had there been any
such Dramatick Christian Writers, undoubtedly the several Councils that
prohibited the Performance of Plays, and expressly forbid the furnishing or
dressing out of Shows or Plays, would have much more particularly reprimanded
the more Capital Offender, viz. the Compiler and Composer of such
Entertainments, it being their equal Duty and Caution to crush the Egg as the
Cocatrice.

Nevertheless, though Playing then stood upon that Heathenish bottom, however
the Christians were apt not only to entertain Comedians and Actors, but
Personally themselves to be Actors, nay, and in those very Heathen Compositions.

Now here was occasion of just Complaint in those Divine Assemblies, the
Councils of the Church, against this Practice of the Christians, were the
matter of Playing it self never so innocent. For much the same Reproach (though
not the same Apology) lay against them, as the Jews threw upon our Savior,
viz. for consorting with Publicans and Sinners.

Christianity in those Days was in its Morning: The Sun of Righteousness had
not fully dispelled the Heathen Darkness and Ignorance. The Christians had the
Unconverted Heathen every where round them. And as the great Work of calling in
the fullness of the Gentiles was not yet perfected; it might reasonably give
Offense to the Fathers of the Church, and raise some shadow of fear, that the
Christian Condescension to intermix in the Pagan Diversions and Vanities, viz.
their Plays, and those originally too of an Idolatrous Foundation, might give
that Reputation or at least that Countenance to Infidelity, as possibly might
in some measure retard the great Work of Universal Conversion.

Now as all these Councils commenced from the beginning of the Fourth Century,
at, or after the Administration of the Roman Empire was lodged in the Hands of
Christian Princes, those Primitive Royal Sons of the Church, those Champions of
the Faith that would never be wanting in their utmost Zeal and Industry to
propagate the Gospel of Truth: Here, I say, it will afford a Matter of the
nicest Speculation, viz. How Players and Playing should lie under this public
Censure of the Church, and yet Acting it self continued unsilenced and
unsuppressed by so many successive Christian Emperors.

That it kept all this while so unsuppress'd, is plain and evident; otherwise,
why so many repeated Decrees of Councils against them, if the occasion of
Offense, viz. Playing it self, had not continued? Nor can it be supposed, had
Playing been very much offensive, or had but half the black Colors Mr. Collier
has laid upon it, but that some Ghostly Counselors would have advised those
Emperors to such a Suppression of the Stage; and undoubtedly they had listened
to such Advice. Their Power of putting such Advice in Execution was
indisputable, and had the Argument been powerful enough to persuade 'em,
without question the Will would not have been wanting; and consequently the
Christian Roman Empire would never have fallen short of the Heathen Plato in his
Commonwealth, in banishing the Playhouse, upon a full Conviction of their
Christian Duty to oblige them to such a Reformation: At least, had the Lenity
of those Christian Emperors, who propagated the Faith, not by Rods of Iron, but
Beams of Mercy, indulged their Pagan Subjects to continue their Heathen Plays
and Vanities; nevertheless, it is highly to be supposed, they had either used
their own Imperial, or commissioned their Ecclesiastical Authority to forbid
that Liberty to their Christian Subjects.

But as nothing of all this was done, but the open and public Stage continued
unshaken, in defiance of all this Holy Breath against it; what can we in all
Reason conclude, but that these Christian Princes looked back to the
forementioned Father louder Thunder against the Stage, as only a temporary
Blast; the greatest Cloud that raised all that Storm, the main Ecclesiastical
Matter of Complaint, was dispelled; for the late Mourning, now Smiling Church,
had thrown off her Cypress, her Wounds were all healed, and her Tears wiped
away; and thus that great Stage-Stumbling-Block, viz. the unseasonableness of
Mirth and Diversion, was removed. The Christians too now joining in the Heathen
Diversion, met their Friends, not their Persecutors there. And for the bloodier
Gladiators, and all the other lewder and more barbarous Theatrick
Entertainments, they fell in course with the Tyrants that supported them. Thus
all these highest Provocations of the Primitive Christian Quarrel against the
Theaters composed and ended, and nothing but the Innocent Dramatick Stage left
standing; and that to liable to all the Inspection and Regulation of Censors
and Supervisors, upon any Abuse or Corruption: How then must these Christian
Emperors look upon these Decrees of the Councils, but as an over-warmth of
Zeal, a sort of a Iury-Presentation, past at their Vacat Exiguis, not weighty
enough to found a State- Indictment upon? Nay, their Sentence perhaps not
worthy the Execution, as pronounced by not altogether the proper Judges of the
Fact: A true Inquisition into the Stage being more the States, than the
Churches Province. Those Reverend Divine Doctors of their Councils, pass their
Judgment at too far distance; their Gravities come least, or perhaps never into
a Playhouse Walls; and therefore the full Cognizance of the Matter, and the
true Merits of the Cause, lay not so much in their Reach.

For these therefore, and whatever other Reasons the Primitive Christian
Government was induced to continue the Stage; Is not here one of the most
convincing Arguments for the present Establishment of the Theaters, especially
comparing the different Circumstances between them? Our Plays are no Heathen
Compositions; our Authors and Auditors profess one Faith; our Stage lies under
no Ecclesiastical Reprimand from the Fathers of our Church: In short, we have
so many more favorable Aspects, and all that Weight on our side, in balance
between 'em, enough to silence even Calumny it self.

And thus, as our Stage has so leading an Example as the Primitive Christian
Indulgence to warrant its Foundation; as it has received the Protection of
Crowned Heads, it has sometimes had the Honor of their Royal Presence at its
Diversions too; and what is yet greater, even Princes of the most exalted Piety
have been the Royal Guests within those public Walls.

In a Sermon upon the Death of the late QUEEN, preached by William Pain, D. D.
Rector of St. Mary Whitechappel, Chaplain to His MAJESTY, Page 19 and 20.
dilating upon that copious Theme, the shining Piety of that truly Christian
Princess, we read as follows:

She gave Patterns of Virtue not uncouth or fantastic, affected or unnatural,
such as we meet in the Legends, but what are agreeable to Civil Life, and to
all the Stations of this World, what Christianity and the plain Law of God
require of us; and those Things which they had not forbidden, She did not think
necessary to forbid her Self. The undue Rigours and Severities of some
Indiscreet Persons have done great Harm to Religion and Virtue, by condemning
those Things as absolutely sinful, which are so only by Accident, but in
themselves innocent; such as Dancing, Playing at Cards, going to Plays, and the
like. Our Admirable QUEEN could distinguish here between Duty and Prudence,
between Unlawful and Inexpedient. She would not refuse those Common Diversions,
nor use them too much: She would not wholly keep from seeing of Plays, as if
they were utterly unlawful, etc.

Here are two Christian Authorities, one from the Theater and the other the
Pulpit, of a contrary Opinion to Mr. Collier, viz. That Plays in themselves are
an Innocent Diversion.

And here I must look back to one Argument of the Fathers against the Theaters.
St. Chrysostom, to oppose the Worldly Diversion of the Stage, tells us how St.
Paul exhorts us to rejoice in the Lord. He said, In the Lord, not in the Devil.
And St. Jerome on the same Subject says, Some are Delighted with the
Satisfactions of this World, some with the Circus, and some with the Theater.
But the Psalmist Commands every good Man to delight himself in the Lord.

These Precepts of the Psalmist, and the Apostle, are indeed the highest Duty
of Christianity. But as we are but Men, it is a Duty too weighty to lie upon
Humane Weakness, without any Intervals of some lighter Alleviations of the
Cares and Labors of Life. Were Life to be entirely divided between the
Prayer Book, the Psalter and the Plough, Rejoicing in God is that Exercise of
Piety, requiring so Intent and Exalted a Meditation, that the weakness of
Humane Nature would hardly be able to keep up the Soul on so sublime a flight,
without flagging her Wing, and Devotion so severely tied to the Altar, I fear,
would make but a very lean Sacrifice.

But both the Psalmist and the Apostle did not extend this Command to Rejoice
only in the Lord; no, their Commission reached not so far, they neither did,
nor could deliver such a Precept, because their Lord and Master, our Blessed
Savior himself, would have refuted them.

For to give us an Instance, that Temporal and Worldly Mirth and Rejoicing has
received a Warrant of Authority even from Christ himself; we need but read how
Christ and his Mother were called to the Marriage in Cana of Galiiee, where his
Beginning of Miracles was turning Water into Wine.

Here we may Innocently and Modestly presume to suppose, at this Marriage
Festival, when their Wine, as the Text expresses, was drank out, that
Cheerefulness and Mirth went round with the Glass, not Spiritual Mirth, for
that wants not the Juice of the Grape. And here undoubtedly our Savior would
neither have been himself a Guest at the Feast, or heightened the Mirth at the
Price of a Miracle, had either a Cheerful Glass, a Sociable Rejoicing, or the
Innocent Delights of Life been Sinful and Unlawful. Nor can the End of this
Miracle, expressed in the Text, viz. The manifesting forth his Glory, and making
his Disciples believe on him, be any Argument to weaken my Assertion. For
'twere even Impiety to suggest, That our Savior could want Occasion or
Opportunities of Exerting the God, to need a poor Choice for the Ground of a
Miracle.

Next, let us examine one of the most Capital Offenses of Dramatick Poetry
arraigned both by the Philosophers, Fathers of the Church, and the Son of the
Church, Mr. Collier, viz. The Raising the Passions, etc.

Here we'll begin with Tragedy. Tragedy indeed does raise the Passions; and its
chief work is to raise Compassion: For the great Entertainment of Tragedy, is
the moving that tenderest and noblest Humane Passion, Pity. And what is it we
pity there, but the Distresses, Calamities and Ruins of Honor, Loyalty,
Fidelity or Love, etc. represented in some True or Fictitious, Historick or
Romantic Subject of the Play? Thus Virtue, like Religion by its Martyrdom, is
rendered more shining by its Sufferings, and the Impression we receive from
Tragedy, is only making us in Love with Virtue, (for Pity is a little Kin to
Love) and out of Love with Vice; for at the same time we pity the suffering
Virtue, it raises our Aversions and Hate to the Treachery or Tyranny in the
Tragedy, from whence and by whom that Virtue suffers. How often is the good
Actor (as for Instance, the Iago in the Moor of Venice, or the Countess of
Notingham in the Earl of Essex) little less than Cursed for Acting an Ill Part?
Such a Natural Affection and Commiseration of Innocence does Tragedy raise, and
such an Abhorrence of Villainy.

And that this is truly the Entertainment of Tragedy, we come on purpose to see
Virtue made Lovely, and Vice made Odious. That Expectation brings us to the
Play; and if we find not that very Expectation answered, instead of any
satisfactory Delight we receive, or any Applause we return, we Explode and Hiss
our Entertainment; the Play sinks, and the Performance is lost, and we come
away with this Disrelish as to think both our Money and Time ill spent.

It Is true a Character that has not all the Perfections of true Honor or
Innocence, nay a Vicious one sometimes may move Compassion. But then it is not
the Vice or Blemishes in the Character that moves that Pity. For Instance in
the Orphan, we pity the Vicious and Libertine Polydore that lies with his
Brother's Wife. But when do we pity him? When he is touched with that sense and
horror of his Guilt, that he gives up his Life, (pick's a feigned Quarrel with
the Injured Castalio, and runs upon his Sword) to Expiate. It Is not the
Criminal but the Penitent, the Virtue not Vice in the Character moves the
Compassion.

Thus we pity Timon of Athens, not as the Libertine nor Prodigal, but the
Misanthropos: When his Manly and Generous Indignation against the Universal
Ingratitude of Manking makes him leave the World and fly the Society of Man;
when his opened Eyes and recollected Virtue can stand the Temptation of a
Treasure he found in the Woods, enough to purchase his own Estate again: When
all this glittering Mine of of Gold has not Charm to bribe him back into a
hated World, to the Society of Villains, Hypocrites and Flatterers. We pity the
Evandra too, his Mistress, not for the Vice and Frailty in her Character, but
for that Generous Gratitude to the Founder of her Fortunes, that she sells all
she has in the World, and brings it all in Jewels to relieve the Distresses of
Timon; and what heightens our Pity, is, that she follows him, not for a
Criminal or wanton Conversation with him: Nay, what is yet greater, she can quit
all the Vanities and Temptations of Life, and with an equal Contempt of Jewels
and Gold, can embrace his voluntary Poverty, eat Roots, drink Water, and dye
with him.

However, if the pitying Part is not the main Offense, there is another more
dreadful Danger from Tragedy. For as his Minutius Foelix, upon that Subject,
tells us, Sometimes a Luscious Actor shall whine you into Love, and give the
Disease that he Counterfeits.

Mr. Collier himself is more at large upon this Playhouse Danger: For he
concludes his Book with this last Argument to prove the Unlawfulness of Plays,
viz. Were the Stage in a condition to wipe off all her other Imputations, there
are two Things behind which would stick upon them, and have an ill Effect upon
the Audience. The first is their dilating so much upon the Argument of Love.
The Subject is Treated Home, and in the most tender and passionate manner
imaginable etc. These Love Representations, oftentimes call up the Spirits and
set them at Work. The Play is Acted over again in the sense of Fancy, and the
first Imitation becomes a Model. Love has generally a Party within; and when
the Wax is prepared the Impression is easily made. Thus the Disease of the
Stage grows catching. It throws its Amors among the Company; and forms these
Passions, when it does not find them, etc.

I don't say the Stage Fells All before them, and disables the whole Audience:
It Is a hard Battle where none escapes. However their Triumphs and their
Trophies are unspeakable. Neither need we much wonder at the matter. They are
dangerously prepared for Conquest, and Empire. There Is Nature, and Passion, and
Life, in all the Circumstances of their Action. Their Declamation, their Mein,
their Gestures and their Equipage, are moving and significant. Now when the
Subject is agreeable, a lively Representation, and a passionate way of
Expression, make wild work, and have a strong Force upon the Blood and Temper.

I cannot well understand what Mr. Collier means (and I-fear, he don't
over-well understand himself,) in all this last Paragraph. But perhaps he
designed it more for Rapsody than Reason; and so it is no great matter whether
it be Intelligible or not. For all this Nature, Passion, Life and Action;
Declamation, Mien, Gesture, and Equipage are purely the Actors, and by making
such wild work in the Blood and Temper, and felling so many of the Audience
before them, plainly tells us, That these unspeakable Triumphs and Trophies,
Conquest and Empire are all the Actors and Actresses and the Cupids Darts come
all from their own Eyes and Charms, and consequently the Audiences captivated
Hearts are all their own; the Enamored Gentlemen in the Pit, and the Gay
Ladies in the Boxes, are these Victorious Players most passionate humble
Servants.

This unspeakable Playhouse Victory, I am afraid is a piece of News that wants
Confirmation. For as to the Men-Players, I dare swear for 'em, that all the
Feminine Trophies our Triumphant Young Fellows of both Play Houses can boast,
is not enough to buy them Sword-knots and Crevatestrings. And for the Ladies of
the Stage, with all the advantage of Paint, Plume, and Candlelight; I do not
hear they are so very over-stockt with Idolaters, or make any such general
Slaughter-work amongst the Audience before them.

But for once, we'll wave this Interpretation of Mr. Collier, and screw his
forementioned Rapsody to the Sense of his Minutius, viz. That the Charms of the
Counterfeit whining Love, separate from the Charms of the whining Lover, shall
infuse a True Lovesick Disease into the Audience.

Now it is worth one's Pains to inquire by what wonderful Operation, and by what
unaccountable Conveyance, this Counterfeit Disease must infuse the true Disease
into the Audience. First, here is Pygmalion's Fable infinitely outdone; for the
Pygmalion here does not animate the Image, but the Image the Pygmalion. But let
that pass.

How then must this Love-disease be contracted! why, thus. Here Is a Young
Beautiful Actress on the Stage, we'll suppose, by Virtue of the Attracting
Graces of Carriage, Movement, Address, Tenderness, Languishment, and what not,
shall make a Man fall in Love. In Love! With whom? not the Mistress of all
these Attracting Graces; No, that is the natural Way of falling in Love, and
that is none of the Operation here. Those Graces that in any other Woman but an
Actress shall win Hearts for her self, shall here have a quite contrary Effect.
You shall go off as cold as a Chaste Joseph to all these visible Charms and
Charmer that gave you the Fire, and be all in a flame for some Body else. These
are indeed unspeakable Stage-Triumphs and Trophies! Thus the Charms of one
Woman wins a Heart for another. I have heard indeed of Celadon's kissing his
Mistress upon another Woman's Lips, but that was nothing to this; He kissed his
Mistress only in Imagination, but here the Lover is Captivated in true Earnest.

Really the Ladies in our Boxes stand highly obliged to the Women in the
Playhouse, and are in all Honor bound to support the Stage. For instead of
exercising any Dint of Charms of their own to get Lovers, they keep their
Deputies on the Stage to do the Drudgery of Conquest, and carry off the Prize
themselves.

One thing I would willingly advise Mr. Collier, viz. to sit Chairman himself
at a Natural Philosophy Lecture, and read a little Learnedly upon this
unspeakable way of catching the Disease of Love: Otherwise I am afraid it is
such a weak-faith'd Age we live in, that all his Metaphysical Divinity will
hardly convince 'em of this Superlative Operation of Love.

Besides, if his Minutius, and all the other Primitive Doctors much of the same
Opinion, could plead Infallibility, and their Argument were Unquestionable:
Nevertheless they would hardly carry Mr. Collier's Cause. For if whining Love
is this unspeakable Conqueror, and Love never whines but in our Tragedies,
where the Virtuous Distressed Love is the Darling in the Play; Consequently if
a Man should catch the Disease from a Iaffeir and Belvidira, or a Marius and
Lavinia, or any such Character, such an Infection would rather recommend then
condemn the Stage, not corrupt but reform the Audience, by refining that Noble
Passion, so depraved in this Age, from Coldness and Libertinism, to Fidelity
and Virtue.

Well, if the Infection from Tragedy strikes not altogether so mortal, let us
examine the more pestilential Air of Comedy, and search if possible, which way
the more fatal Poison enters there.

First, then for the subject of Comedy, it is the Representation of Humane Life
in a lower class of Conversation; we visit the Palace for Tragedy, and range
the Town for Comedy, viz. for the Follies, the Vices, the Vanities and the
Passions of Mankind, which we meet with every Day. In short, the Comedian, may
join with the Satyrist, Quicquid agunt Homines, Votum, Timor, Ira, Voluptas,
Gaudia, Discursus, nostri est farrago libelli.


But to confine our selves into as narrow a compass as we can, under these
three Heads, viz. Folly, Knavery, and Love, we may not improperly Rank the
whole Characters in Comedy.

The Fools we may divide into three Classes, viz. the Cudden, the Cully and the
Fop. The Cudden a Fool of God Almighties making; the Cully, of Man's making;
and the Fop, of his own making.

For the first of these Fools the Cudden, the Sr. Martin Marral, or the Sr.
Arthur Addle, etc. I hope the Audience is in no danger of taking Taint from
these Characters in Comedy; the made Fool may be a catching Disease, but not
the born one.

For the second, one of the made Fools, the Cully. Here Is the least danger of a
Contagion that way; for that Disease is rather cured than caught from the
Stage. The Country 'Squire or the Knight, the Prodigal or the Bubble, etc.
either Cozened by Sharpers, Spungers, Dicers and Bullies; or Jilted by Jades,
or snared into any other Ruinous Folly of this Kind; In exposing these
Characters, the Stage does the Work of a Philosophy School, it carries the
whole Force of Precept and Instruction to warn unwary Youth from the Snares and
Quicksands of Debauchery. It points him out the several Harpies that devour
him, and instead of taking Taint from the Stage, the very sight of the
Plague-spots not gives, but expels the Contagion.

For the third Fool, the Fop; this indeed of all Fools is the most
incorrigible. For the Cudden wants no good Will to be wiser, and would learn
Wit if he were capable of it. The Cully indeed is capable of being taught Wit,
but seldom learns it, till he has too well paid for his Learning; sometimes
perhaps at no less Price than his Ruin, when he buys the Knowledge of finding
himself a Chouse, by the same Experimental Wisdom as Sir Philip Sydney's
Painter learnt to draw Battle-work from Musidorus, viz. when his Hands were cut
off. But of all Fools the Fop is the blindest; his Faults are his Perfections,
whilst he looks upon himself as the compleatest of Courtiers and Gentlemen; and
by that means perhaps, though never to be cured of the Fondness he has for his
own tawdry Picture; however, in all Places in the World he will never play the
Narcissus at the Theaters, nor fall much in Love with his own painted Face, in
a Sir Courtly's or a Lord Foppington's Lookingglass. This I will positively
say, He that does not bring the Fop to the Playhouse, shall never carry it
from thence. And in all the Stage Fop-pictures, the Playhouse bids so fair for
mending that Fool too, that if the good Will fails, the Fault's not in the
Mirror, the Hand that holds it, or the Light it is sets at, but the perverse and
depraved Optics that cannot see themselves there.

As to the second Class, etc. the Villain, the Usurer, the Cheat, the Pandar,
the Bully, the Flatterer, and all the rest of their Brethren in Iniquity;
there is so little Danger from all their Stage-Pictures, that there is here no
fear of playing the Narcissus in the Glass; and therefore we'll pass to the
lewd Love-Distempers in Comedy; and see what Mortality the more dangerous
Contagion and Malignity from these Counterfeit Diseases may produce.

First then, to show how very little Influence the Stage-Characters and
Representations of Whoredom and Debauchery carry to the Temptation of the
Audience, or the Corruption of Manners; or to make Lewdness look lovely even to
the very Practisers of it: Let us consider, that, he that loves Whoredom, loves
the Harlot purely as the Harlot, the Sin when it comes singly, in puris
naturalibus, with as little a Train at the heels of it as possible. For no Man
loves the Levity and Fickleness of the Harlot, the falseness of her Oaths and
Tears, the profusness of her Vanity, the insults of her Pride, or the
mercynariness of her Lust. Every Man, nay, the greatest Libertine himself would
have a Mistress, (if such a Creature of that kind can be found in the World)
that brings Love for Love. The Man that loves the Wanton, loves not the
Traitress nor the Hypocrite; The Siren may be lovely, and her Music pleasing;
but we are not over-fond of her Enchantments, her Rocks nor her Quicksands.

The same Argument holds on the other side: The Dalilah her self loves a
Character of Honor and Fidelity in her Paramour, not the looseness of the
Rover and the Libertine: The finest Gentlemen, one of them in all our Comedies;
a Dorimant himself is no very tempting Character for a Young Lady to fall in
Love with. The veriest Wanton of that Sex is as much for Monopoly as the other;
they care not for half Hearts, a Gallant divided between a Lovet, a Bellinda,
and a Harriot. It Is true, we may see a mad Florimel upon a Stage in Love with a
wild Celadon, for wildness sake; but that Rara avis in Terris, is hardly to be
found off of the Stage.

Now as the Lovers, I mean the vicious Characters of Love, in our Comedies are
generally (I might venture to say, all of 'em) set forth with some of these
forementioned Corruptions, viz. Levity, Hypocrisy, Infidelity, etc. we meet
the Jilt, the Rover, the Libertine, false Vows, false Oaths, Love for Money,
Treason for Love, or some other there accumulated Sin, more than the bare
Wanton, in all of them: All these therefore are so far from ensnaring or
seducing the unwary Auditor, those inviting Charmers off of the Stage by what
he sees presented upon it; that they are rather the Objects of his Aversion.

The Objects of his Aversion! Have a care what you say: no, no, says Dr.
Collier at my Elbow, don't mistake your self Lactantius his Testimony in his
Divine Institutions, Dedicated to Constantine the Great, shall confute that
Argument.

The Debauching of Virgins, and the Amors of Strumpets are the Subject of
Comedy. And here the Rule is, the more. Rhetoric the more Mischief, and the
best Poets are the worst Common-wealths-men. For the Harmony and Ornament of
the Composition, serves only to recommend the Argument, to fortify the Charm,
and engage the Memory. Let us avoid therefore these Diversions least somewhat
of the Malignity seize us.

Well, to answer both the Primitive Dr. and the Modern one together, I fancy
some very good and substantial Reasons, and Proof may be produced, That the
Ornament and Composition, the Poet and Rhetoric may make these Amors of
Strumpets, Debauchery, etc. a delectable Entertainment to the Auditor that
hears them upon the Stage; and yet neither recommend the Argument, nor leave
any Charm to corrupt him, or Malignity to seize him; but rather the quite
Contrary.

First then, why is the Jilt, the Strumpet, or the Adultress, an Entertaining
Character in Comedy? Why! Because those very Characters afford the most ample
Matter in the Conduct of the Play, to gain one of the great Ends of Comedy, and
that which chiefly attracts the Audience thither, viz. Mirth. It gives
Occasion, Matter, and Subject to create the Laughter of the Audience.

The Jilt for Instance, with her Windings and Turnings, her Wheedles to draw in
her Cully, and her Artifices to Secure and Manage him; The false Wife with her
Faunings and Flattery, to lull the Husbands Jealousy. Her Starts and her Fears
at every Danger and Alarm, her whole Arts to cover the Hypocrite; and her
Surprise and Confusion at her Detection and Discovery (for Comedy it self does
that Dramatick Justice to bring her to shame, if no other punishment) as they
afford plot design, and contrivance, etc. are the highest Jest of Comedy. And
it is for that, and that only Charm that these Characters find so general a
Reception on the Stage. And that this is truly the only Charm, is manifest
from the success of those Comedies. It Is not the Lewdness it self in a Vicious
Character, that recommends it to the Audience, but the witty Turns, Adventures
and Surprises in those Characters that give it Reception. For without this, the
Play drops and dies.

And to show you, that a Vicious Character, Quatenus as Vicious, is no Darling
of the Audience; but that the Mirth only that it raises, is the Delight of
Comedy; let an Ingenious Author raise the same Mirth upon a Virtuous
Foundation, and that Comedy shall be as hugged a Favorite as the other. For
Instance in a Sr. Solmon Single and several other Comedies, where the Love is
all Virtuous. In fine, it is the Wit of the Composure, not the Vice in the
Composure, gives Life to the Comedy. A dull Representation of Vice or Virtue,
shall be equally Hist off the Stage. And though even Vice and Debauchery in a
Theatrick Representation may find Applause, it is never the more a Closet
Darling for being a Stage one. Nay rather one the contrary, much less the
Darling of the Closet. For the public exposure of Debauchery, with all her
Treacheries, Wills, Delusions, Impostures and Snares, has more of the Antidote
than the Poison.

There Is a great deal of difference betwixt likeing the Picture and the
Substance. A Man may be very well pleased with a Forest work piece of Tapestry,
with the Lions, the Bears, and the Wolves, etc. but not over fond of their
Company in Flesh and Blood; and confequently the very worst Jilt may be the
Minion upon the Stage, and, as I said before, our Aversion off it.

Nay, I dare be so bold, as to tell this angry Gentleman, as highly as he
Resents the Cuckolding of Aldermen and Quality in our Comedies, that I could
find him Matter of very good Instruction, from a Character of this kind, in a
very Ingenious Author, though not much in Mr. Colliers Favor. For Example, If
the Reverend Gentlemen of the Fur would be but half as kind to a Playhouse as
a Pin-makers-Hall, and step for Edification, but so far toward Westminster, as
to see the Old Bachelor; I doubt not but an Isaac Fondlewife would be a very
seasonable Monitor to Reverend City Sixty, to warn against the Marrying to
Sixteen. Nor can I think it such a scandalous part of the Dramatick Poet; but
rather a true Poetic Justice, to expose the unreasonableness of such
Superannuated Dotage, that can blindly think or hope, that a bare Chain of Gold
has Magic enough in the Circle to bind the Fidelity of so unequal a Match, a
Match so contrary to the Holy Ordinance of Matrimony; and an Itch at those
Years that deserves the severest Lash of the Stage. And if an Author would pick
out such a Character for a little Stage Satyr, where can he meet with it but
amongst the City or Court Quality? Such Inequality of Marriages are rarely to
be found, but under the Roofs of Honor; for so Antiquated a Lover, (the least
he can do) must bring a Coach and Six, to carry off such a Young Bride.

One thing mightily offends this Divine Author, viz. That our Modern Plays make
our Libertines of both Sexes, Persons of Figure and Quality, Fine Gentlemen and
Ladies of Fashion, a fault utterly unpracticed by the Ancient Poets: For
Terence and Plautus his Strumpets are little People.

Now this is so far from a fault in our Comedies, that there is a necessity of
those Characters, and a Virtue in that Choice. For as the greatest and best
part of our Audience are Quality, if we would make our Comedies Instructive in
the exposing of Vice, we must not lash the Vices at Wapping to mend the Faults
at Westminster.

And as the Instructive Design of the Play must look as well to the Cautioning
of Virtue from the ensnaring Conversation of Vice, as the lashing of Vice it
self. Thus the Court Libertine must be a Person of Wit and Honor, and have all
the accomplishments of a Fine Gentleman. (The Court Ladies receive no Visits
from Ruffians.) Besides there needs no cautioning against a Don John; every
Fool would run from a Devil with a visible Cloven-foot. That Devil therefore
must have all the Face and Charms of Honor, when it would seduce Honor; and
therefore it is those very Pictures the Stage must present.

The Plain-dealer speaks very significantly to this purpose, and very much
justifies this Choice of Characters for Plays. Who betrays you, Over-reaches or
Cheats you, but your Friend? Your Enemy is not trusted with your Affairs. Who
violates the Honor of your Wife, but your Friend? Your Enemy is not admitted
into your Family.

Who therefore are those Dangerous Friends of Quality, but their Bosom
Conversation? and who that Conversation but their Equality; and therefore for
an Instructive Draught for Comedy, who so proper to sit to her Pencil as
Quality?

Besides, Comedy opens a wrong Door to let in a Taint of Lust. Lust is the
product Thought and Meditation; not the Child of Laughter. The Auditor must
have a much more serious Face than he wears at a Light Comedy, to take so deep
and so fatal an Impression.

Nay, if we could suppose that the Jest of a Comedy shall open his Laughing
Mouth so wide as to let down a Lust like a Witches Ball of Pinns; or rather
that a speaking Image in a Comedy shall have the same conceptionary Force upon
us, as the European Picture at the Mauritanean Princesses Bedsfeet, that made
her bring forth a White Child; Yet still the Picture in Comedy, like that in
the Ladies Bedchamber, does not hang long enough for any such Conceptionary
Impression: For besides twenty other equally diverting Objects in the same
Comical Lantscape; here is the whole Stage new furnished every Day; and a new
Collection of Painting for the next Entertainment. The Venus yesterday is the
Diana to day, the Juno to morrow, all a quite contrary set of Imagery. And if
the Movement, the Gesture, the Equipage, have any such dangerous Force, here is
not one Movement one Day but what is quite altered the next; and so Change upon
Change, etc. so that in the infinite Variety of the Stage, here is no dwelling
upon one darling Object to run any such Danger of Infection: For the whole
Stage-Mercury is too volatile to fix.

But if the Stage had any such Magical Power, (for no Natural one will reach
it) over poor weak Mortality to Enchant, Corrupt, Confound, or what else Mr.
Collier pleases; we'll try the Experiment but in one Play: For Instance, we'll
take one of the loosest, and to answer the Temptation, one of the loveliest of
those Libertine Pictures, Mr. Dorimant, we named before; and granting the
Ladies Love Proof against such a Libertine Character; we'll suppose some Young
mad Spark as much Charmed with this lovely Dorimant, as this Divine Speculator
can fancy him, and consequently shall catch the true Disease from this amiable
Counterfeit; pray which of all the Ignes fatui, in Mr. Dorimant's Character
shall be the misleading Fire? For here in one Play, in the Presentation of poor
three Hours, we have, First, Mr. Dorimant's Cooling Intriegu, all his
retreating Steps from the tiresome Embraces of an old Mistress, Madam Lovet;
next his start of Love, an Amor, en passant, into the Arms of Belinda; and to
conclude the Character, his last honorable Passion for the Virtuous Mistress
Harriot. Now I say, to which of all these three, shall this mad Sparks
Tarantula dance? (For to all three together is a little too mad a Gallop:) If
to the first: And consequently (to Copy from the Original) he goes home weaned
from an old Darling Sin, and turns off some Bosom Dalilah; if our Spark catches
Fire from this part of the wild Dorimant, I hope, our Ecclesiastical Censor
will sind no Sin in so harmless an Infection. If to the second: If he takes
Fire from Dotrimant's Frailty with Belinda; there indeed he may want some
Church-Buckets to quench him; it is high time for all Hands for his Conversion.
But if he sums up the Character, and Copies the whole reforming Rover, quits,
like Dorimant, his old sour Grapes and forbidden Fruit, for the Charming Sweets
of a Chaste Harriot, and finishes the Picture in the Comedy, in an honorable
Wedlock Passion; then I hope this Reverend Corrigidore of unruly Love, will
remit the Lash, and hold his whip Hand.

Thus you see what Boutefeu does Mr. Collier make of a poor Player, that with
the Intoxication of a three Hours Tale of Love, shall put a Man not only into a
whole Nights pain of it, but possibly to a total Corruption of his whole Mass
of Blood, and the very enflaming of an unquencheable Feavor. What Quixot
Wind-mills can an Enthusiast raise, and then Battle the Giant of his own
Creation!

The second of the two Things he has to object against the Stage, is, Their
Encouraging Revenge. What is more common then Duells and Quarrelling in their
Characters of Figure? Those Practices which are infamous in Reason, Capital in
Law, and damnable in Religion, are the Credit of the Stage, etc. But this
Subject he tells you he had discoursed of before, -- viz. p. 67. Our Savior
(he says) tells us we must forgive until seventy times Seven. That is, we must
never be tired out of Clemency and good Nature. He has taught us to pray for
the Forgiveness of our own Sins, only upon the condition of forgiving others:
Here is no Exception upon the Repetition of the Fault or the Quality of the
Provocation.

I shall not dispute upon Our Saviors Precepts of Forgiveness, but acknowledge
it possibly, the highest Characteristick of Christianity, and a Perfection that
comes nearest to the Great Original of Mercy, that delivered it. But to let my
Reader see upon what stress, Mr. Collier enforces his Scriptural Arguments,
we'll Examine, what Consequence must follow the Universal Stretch of a Divine
Precept.

By these Divine Commands of our Savior to the Literal Extent of the Precept:
In the first place I must neither Sue in Law nor Equity for the Recovery of a
Just Right, or the Reparation of any wrong whatever. For the Prosecution of Law
is directly opposite to this Forgiving Doctrine.

So here is Westminster Hall shut up immediately. Nay, if the precept of God
obliges me to the same Resignation of my Coat to the Thief that has Robbed me of
my Cloak, I am so far from Licensed or Authorized to take that Christian
Revenge against the Offender, viz. the Prosecution of public Justice upon him;
that the very Christian Judge, instead of Arraigning the Robber, the Cheat or
the Felon at the Bar, for the Breach of our Humane Law; should rather stand
obliged to Arraign the Prosecutor for the Breach of a Divine one. So here is the
Old-Bayly shut up too. Nay here is the very Law it self Arraigned, as little
less then Antichristian for punishing that Injury, which the express Law of
God, even seventy seven times over, obliges us to forgive. I believe this
Author as bold a Sermonist, and as hardy a Hero of the Rockost, as his
Persuasive to Consideration has proved him; Nevertheless has hardly Courage
enough to Preach this Doctrine to the Gentlemen of St. Stephens Chapel.

Nay, by this forgiving unrevenging Doctrine pushed home, here is Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance set up with a Vengeance, not only in submission to
Sovereign Tyranny to Lord it over us, but even to every little Diminitive
Arbitrary Thief and Ruffain, the Lord and Master of my Purse, my House, my
Coat, etc. for at this rate of Forgiveness, here is a General Jail-delivery,
Newgate Doors set open, Oppression, Injustice, Theft, Rapine and Villainy let
loose, and the Homo Homini Lupus at free Discretion to Spoil, Ravage, and
Overrun the whole World, whilst the meek, humble, resigning, forgiving
Christian is the tame bleating Sheep before him.

The Gentleman Thief at this rate will be as great as an Almanzor himself, and
may Plume in his Vanity.

I am as free as Nature first made Man,
Before the servitude of Laws began;
When wild in Woods the Noble Savage ran.
In short, how can any Man of Sense extort such rigorous Constructions of the
Divine Commands; as if the God of Concord and Peace could set up a Doctrine of
Christianity utterly destructive, not only to all Civil Government, but even to
Human Society it self.

Mr. Collier is almost as angry at the Vanity, as at the greater Sins of the
Stage; and passes his Vote for their Exclusion, even for that Offense alone.
But if he will make a fair distributive Justice to all other Vanities, I am
afraid he will set up another Doctrine almost as pernicious to Government as the
first. For if the Vanity-shop the Playhouse must go down; pray let the
Vanityshops the Embroiderer, the Laceman, the Featherman, the Ribband-Weaver,
cum multis aliis come in for a snack; for there is not one of all those
Professions but is utterly useless to the real wants of Life, and perhaps deals
in the more dangerous Vanities; for the Stage Vanities may only raise an
Innocent Tear or a Laugh or so; but these other there Vanities are very often
the unhappy Nurses of Pride, a more capital Fault.

I confess, a good stretch of this Argument for the General Retrenchment of
Vanities would make a terrible City slaughter, and almost as many Beggars as
the stretch of the other would Thieves: However, it is but Dr. Collier's
Preaching them another healing Text, being a second Persuasive, to Poverty,
like his First, to Consideration, to alleviate their sorrows, and soften their
losses, by assuring them, That the Poor shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Remarks upon King Arthur and Amphitryon Examined.
TO come now to his particular Remarks upon the Modern Plays, I shall begin by
Seniority, viz. with Mr. Dryden, and examine his Offenses in that most capital
Sin of Profaneness and Blasphemy.

He tells you in King Arthur, Mr. Dryden makes a strange jumble and hodg podg
of Matters, Angels, Cupids, Sirens, and Devils, etc. the Hell of Heathenism,
and the Hell of Revelation, etc. And why are Truth and Fiction, Heathenism and
Christianity, the most Serious and the most Trifling Things blended together,
and thrown into one form of Diversion? Why is all this done unless it be to
ridicule the whole, and make one as incredible as the other?

Not at all; Learned Sir but because his betters have done it before him; and
Mr. Dryden thinks it no scorn to follow his elder Brother Gamaliel Mr. Milton
in his Paradise Lost.

Four Infernal Rivers that disgorge

Into the Burning Lake their Baleful Streams;

Abhorred Styx, the Flood of deadly Hate,

Sad Acheron, of sorrow black and deep;

Cocytus named of Lamentation loud,

Heard in the woeful Stream, fierce Phlegeton,

Whose Waves of Torrent Fire inflame the Rage, etc. Parad. Lost, B. 2.

Is not here the Fictitious Rivers of Acheron, Cocytus, Styx, and Phlelgeton,
running as directly into the Revelation Lake of Brimstone, as Mr. Collier is
running out of Sense, Reason, and Good Nature, to charge such an innocent
Poetica Licentia with so barbarous a design, as to ridicule the Revelation, and
render Christianity, and all that is Serious and Sacred, incredible.

But to proceed with our Remarker, Mr. Dryden's Airy and Earthy Spirits
Discourse of the first state of Devils, of the chief of their Revolt, their
Punishment and Impostures. This, Mr. Dryden, (he says) very Religiously calls a
Fairy way of Writing, which depends wholly on the force of Imagination. Epist.
Ded. What then, is the Fall of Angels a Romance? Has it no Basis of Truth,
nothing to support it but strength of Fancy, and Poetic Invention! After he
had mentioned Hell, Devils, etc. and given us a sort of Bible Description of
those formidable Things, etc. I am surprised to hear him call it a Fairy kind
of Writing. Is the History of Tophet no better proved than that of Styx; Is the
Lake of Brimstone, and that of Phlegeton alike dreadful; and have we as much
reason to believe the Torments of Titius and Prometheus, as those of the Devils
and Damned? These are lamentable Consequences! And yet I cannot see how the
Poet can avoid them.

[Not see? no, it is impossible he should, who so blind as -- ]

But setting aside the Dedication, the Representation it self is scandalously
irreligious, etc. To see Hell thus played with is a mighty Refreshment to a
lewd Conscience, and a biased Understanding; it heartens the young Libertine,
and confirms the well-wishers to Atheism, and makes Vice bold and enterprizing;
such Diversions serve to dispel the gloom, and gild the horrors of the Shades
below, and are a sort of ensurance against Damnation. One would think these
Poets went upon a certainty, and could demonstrate a Scheme of Infidelity.

Thus he runs on for almost Forty Lines more, all upon this Head. I would not
have made so long a Quotation, only to show my Reader what a Iehu Champion of
Religion he is, and how fast and how far he can drive at a breath. To give him
his due, he has a mighty Copiousness of Words; and to do him right, in the use
he makes of 'em, he is always as liberal as he is rich. I remember an Author
that tells us, Words are the Wise Man's Counters, and the Fool's ready Money.
Now, if this Learned Master of Arts and Language, shall be mistaken in his
Charge against Mr. Dryden's Epistle Dedicatory, and Mr. Dryden's Fairy Writing,
upon full Examination, instead of so frightful a Goblin, should prove but an
innocent harmless Spright, and consequently all this effusion of Rhetoric
should be prodigally thrown away in waste; However, this plain dealing Author
gives him that comfort, viz. that his Silver Eloquence is all current Sterling,
and not gilt Brass.

Well then, to give Mr. Dryden's Fairys a little Examination.

Because Mr. Dryden allusively, and very emphatically so, calls his description
of Hell, and discourse of Devils, etc. a Fairy way of Writing, and as such, it
depends upon the force of Imagination, that therefore he says, (or means it)
that the Subject is Fairy Land he writes upon; that Hell is but Phantom; the
Fall of Angels, Romance; and Damnation but Chimera; for a Fairy way of writing,
our Author tells you, can be nothing but a History of Fiction, a Subject of
Imaginary Beings, such as never had any Existence in Time or Nature. Good
Heaven! How perversely does this angry Gentleman Scribble! If the Infernal
Powers are invisible, the Devils incorporeal Spirits, nay, the very locality of
Hell it self, and the materiality of the avenging Flames, are Things disputable
amongst the most Learned Theologists. And if a discourse of Hell or Devils,
with this Gentleman's leave, is a Subject that a Poet may presume to handle,
(his leave, indeed, we ought to beg in this case; for if treating a Mahomet or
Mufti too boldly, by this Author's Innuendo's is a Profanation of the true
Divinity, who knows but an intrusion into the Affairs of Hell, by the same rate
of Presumption, may be peeping into a Sanctum Sanctorum) his leave therefore
first begged, if Mr. Dryden may presume to speak a word or two of Hell, etc. (as
there is scarce a Poet, either Divine or Profane that has not presumed upon the
same subject;) pray let me ask this Theological Critic, if a Poetical Draught
or Imagery of Hell and Devils, though drawn as near the Life as the whole Bible
Light can set them, and done by the ablest Master skill of Man, can be any
thing but a piece of Fairy pencil Work, all the Colors, the Features, all by
the force of imagination. For how can incorporeal and immaterial Beings be set
forth to the Eye of Human Apprehension without an Array of form and shape; The
Ghost must walk with a Body, the Fiend with a cloven Foot, or something of that
kind; or the Apparition's lost: And what is all these but a Fairy Creation of
Fancy in the very propperest Name he could give it?

Nay, in much the same kind of Language does not the Scripture it self all
along speak of Almighty God? What is the Eye, the Ear, the Hand, or the Face of
God, the common Scripture Phrase, any thing more than mere Notion; that
Infinity and Omnipotence whom the Skys cannot contain, thus humbly drawn into
that human like Figure in Miniature, purposely adapted to those short-sighted
Optics, the narrow capacity of Man.

But to return to our King Arthur, after above 20 lines of the serious
Consideration of Eternal punishment, and the frightful State of the Damned,
etc. Let us see, says he, how Mr. Dryden represents those unhappy Spirits, and
their place of abode! Why very entertainingly! Those that have a true taste for
Atheism were never better Regaled. One would think by this Play, that the
Devils were mere Mormoes and Bugbears, fit only to fright Children and Fools.
They rally upon Hell and Damnation, with a great deal of Air and Pleasantry;
and appear like Robin Good Fellow, only to make the Company laugh. Philidel. is
called a Puling Sprite, and why so? For this Pious Reason, because, He trembles
at the yawning Gulf of Hell,
Nor dares approach the Flames, least he should singe
His gaudy silken Wings.
He sighs when he should plunge a Soul in Sulphur,
As with compassion touched of foolish Man.


The Answer is, What a half Devil's he? you see how admirably it runs all upon
the Christian Scheme? Sometimes they are half Devils, and sometimes hopeful
Devils, and what you please to make sport with. Grimbald is afraid of being
whoop'd through Hell at his return, for miscarrying in his business. It seems
there is great leisure for Diversion! There Is Whooping in Hell, instead of
Weeping and Wailing.

Our Author, you may observe, almost every where, lashes the Poets with a twig
of their own Birch; his Arguments are every where all high flights of Rapture,
only his Poetical Field of Fancy is a little too much overrun with the Savine
and Wormwood; the rankness of the Soil is most Fruitful in those bitterer sort
of Vegetives.

But in his last Remark, his Divine Pegasus, as high as he generally flies, is
a little jaded. And perhaps his Railery in this place has more of the Robin
Goodfellow then Mr. Dryden's; and I am certain has more reason to set us a
Laughing. For I dare to Swear, he is that particular Dissenter from the General
Opinion of every reasonable Judge, upon this Quotation from Mr. Dryden; that
neither the Character of Philidel, though but Mr. Dryden's own Fairy Creation,
or those Pious Reasons, as he calls 'em, the before quoted Lines, have any
thing of that extraordinary Air of Pleasantry, to set either the Atheist agog,
or the Company a tittering. And here I must desire him once again to read
Milton, and tell us if his Paradise Lost has not charactered the whole Body of
the Apostate Angels, animating each other into an Obstinacy and Emulation in
Wickedness, glorying in the very cause of their Fall, their Rebellion against
God, though in the midst of their Torments they suffer for it Better to Rule in
Hell than Serve in Heaven. reproaching every Infernal faintness, daring each
other in every new and hardier insult against God, and priding and pluming in
every success in their Machinations against Hated Man.

Nay, does not Cowley, in his Divine Poem of Davideis make his Infernal Envy (a
copy from the Original) speak in the same Dialect.

-- Dares none
Attempt what becomes Furies: Are ye grown
Benumbed with Fear or Virtues sprightless Cold,
You who were once, I Am sure so brave and bold!
Oh my ill changed Condition, oh my Fate!
Did I lose Heaven for this!
At thy dread Anger the fixed World shall shake,
And frighted Nature her own Laws forsake.
Do thou but threat, loud Storms shall make reply,
And Thunder eccho't to the trembling Sky.
Heaven's gilded Troops shall flutter here and there,
Leaving their boasted Songs tuned to a Sphere;
Nay, their GOD too -- for fear he did, when we
Took noble Arms against his Tyranny;
So noble Arms, and in a Cause so great,
That Triumphs we deserve for our defeat.
There was a Day, oh might I see it again,
Tho he had fiercer Flames to thrust us in.
Now with what egregious partiality does he tell us, that what has stood the
test of an Age in both these shining Authors, has met an universal Reception
and Applause, even in Divine Poetry, yet should now start up for such an
impardonable Impiety, such a Titillation to Atheism, and what not.

Nobis non licet esse tam disertis. Dramatick Poetry must not dare to handle so
dangerous a Noli me tangere.

Hitherto Mr. Collier has only picqueer'd, skirmisht with a few straggling
Blasphemies, but he makes a pitched Battle against the whole Play of Amphitryon.

And what does he infer from all this; but that Mr. Dryden is Blaspheming, even
God himself. To what purpose does Jupiter appear, but in the shape of Jehovah!
Why are the incomnunicable Attributes burlesqued, and Omnipotence applied to
Acts of Infamy! To what end can such horrible stuff as this serve, unless to
expose the Notion, and extinguish the Belief of a Deity. The Perfections of God
are himself; to ridicule his Attributes and Being, are but two Words for the
same thing. These Attributes are bestowed upon Jupiter with great Prodigality,
and afterward execrably outraged. The case being thus, the cover of an Idol is
too thin a pretense to screen the Blasphemy.

Now to wash off this stain, for it is a a black one, however it is but laid in
Water Colors, Mr. Collier falsely charges Mr. Dryden with dressing his Iuipiter
in the shape of Jehovah, for he gives him not one Trapping, Plume, or Feather,
that the Heathens had not given him before.

But to call over his whole Black List of Blasphemy and Debauchery together,
through that whole Play, Jupiter says in one place, Fate is, what I
By Virtue of Omnipotence have made it:
And Power Omnipotent can do no Wrong.
I swear, that were I Jupiter this Night,
I would renounce my Heaven to be Amphitryon.
I would not lose this Night to be Master of the Universe,
A whole Eternity were well emploid
To love thy each perfection as I ought.
I would owe nothing to a Name so dull,
As Husband is, but to a lover all.
That Name of Wife and Marriage
Is Poison, to the dearest Ioys of Love.
Whom more then Heaven and all the World I love.
Mercury, he calls him -- King of the Gods.


In what Form will your Almighty-ship be pleased to transform your self to
Night.

You have need of all your Omnipotence, and all your Godship.

The Devil take Jupiter for inventing that hard hearted merciless Knobbby Wood,
a Crab-tree-Cudgel.

Here indeed, Mr. Dryden has furnished him (out of his own old Heathen Heraldry)
with Omnipotence and Arbiter of Fate. But as to the Creator of Nature, all the
Functions of Providence in his hand, and his being described with the Majesty
of the true God, I can find nothing of that; But no great matter, Mr. Collier
draws up his Plea like a Bill in Chancery, it is not given upon Oath nor Honor,
and half Truth, half Falsehood, is Secundum artem.

Now any man that reads this Almightyship and Godship, that Mr. Dryden from the
Mouth of his familiar Mercury gives this Jupiter, would swear that the Majesty
of the True God, was the least thought of in this Amphytrion, a God-ship that
his own Pimp can wish at the Devil. Nay, though an Omnipotent power has been
ascribed to Jupiter by the Heathen Theology, yet Mr. Dryden is so tender of
offending any over curious Christian, that he purposely Burlesqnes his titular
Attribute to this Almightyship, to take off all shadow of such Offense.

Besides, does not the Scripture over and over give the style of Gods to all
the Heathen Idols, though but Stocks and Stones; not that the Divine
Inspiration in so expressing it in Holy Writ, could be supposed to give it as
their due, any more then Mr. Dryden can be supposed to give Jupiter his
God-ship as his due. And if from Mr. Colliers own Authority, the Perfections of
God are himself, the same liberty that may give him his Titular Godhead, may
give him his Titular Perfections too.

However, as Mr. Collier sets up for a Playhouse Scavinger, he is resolved to
sweep cleanest where there is least Dirt. The Reader is to understand, that Mr.
Collier is not so much angry at Mr. Dryden's choice of his Subject, as his
Mismanagement of it: And upon that Quarrel, he spends his Artillery against him
in four long Pages together; and to mend all Mr. Dryden's Capital Faults in his
Jupiter. He tells us, That Plautus was the only bold Heathen that brought
Jupiter upon the Stage, he wrote upon the same unaccountable design (his
Adultery with Alcmena;) but Plautus his methods of persuite are very different;
his Jupiter does not solicit in scandalous Language, nor flourish upon his
Lewdness, nor endeavors to set it up for the Fashion. Plautus had some Regard
to the height of Jupiter's Character, and the Opinion of his Country, and the
Restraints of Modesty, etc. As for the Greek Tragediens, they mention Jupiter
in terms of Magnificence and Repect, and make his Actions and his Nature all of
a piece, etc. Virgil's Jupiter is always Great and Solemn, and keeps up the
port of the Deity. It Is true, Homer does not Guard the Idea with that
Exactness, but with all, never sinks the Character into Obscenity.

Well, and for not following these Elder Sons of Apollo, in his Treatment of
Jupiter, Mr. Dryden stands irreparably Condemned: And to have fenced against
all Vengeances hanging over his Head, he should have modelled his Play by Mr.
Collier's Plan, viz. He should have had Plautus his regard to the height of
Jupiter's Character, that is to say, given him every individual Attribute, and
twice as many more as he has given him already; according to the Opinion of
Plautus his Country, viz. with all the Adoration of the Heathens that
Worshipped him for their true supreme God. In all the terms of Magnificence and
Respect, with a Homage as great as if we were the true God of Heaven in
earnest, keeping up his whole port of a Deity, etc. pluming him with every
Feather of his whole Godhead.

This Jupiter thus Glorified, should set out to Court Amphytrion's Wise, viz.
for a Nights Lodging, in no scandalous Language, in all the Softest Modestest
Divine Courtship, no sinking his Character into Obscenity, all wrapped up so
clean, his Actions and his Nature, the Adulterer and the God, all of a piece.

Good gracious Heaven, has not this Enthusiast the whole Zeal of an Oliver's
Porter, and bids as fair to succeed him in his Moor-field Palace? This is the
Innocent, and Mr. Drydens the Blasphemous Amphytrion.

How ingeniously Mr. Collier can out-blow the Satyr in the Fable! Mr. Dryden's
Amphytrion is all a piece of Blasphemy for giving too much of the God to
Jupiter, and has no way to mend that fault but by giving him more of it.

This Blasphemy of Amphytrion, nothing but Mr. Dryden's Absolon and Achitophel
can out-doe, etc. Here we have Blasphemy on the top of the Letter without any
trouble of Inference or Construction. This Poem runs upon all Scripture Names,
upon suppositions of the true Religion, and object of Worship. Here are no
Pagan Divinities in the Scheme; so that all the Athestick Rallery must point
upon the true God. Absalom was David's natural Son; so that there is a Blot in
his Scutcheon, and a Blemish upon his Birth. The Poet will make admirable use
of this Remark presently. This Absalom, it seems, was very extraordinary in his
Person and performances; Mr. Dryden does not certainly know how this came
about, and therefore inquires of himself in the first place.

Whither inspired by a Divinier Lust,
His Father got him with a greater Gust.
This is downright Defiance of the living God! here you have the very Essence
and Spirit of Blasphemy, and the Holy Ghost brought in upon the most hideous
occasion. I question whether the Torments and Despair of the Damned dare
venture at such Flights as these; they are bejond Description. I pray God they
may not be bejond Pardon too.

Now are here only two unhappy Words, that blow the Bellows to all this Fire,
viz. [Inspir'd] and [Diviner.] Inspire, especially in the Verb, is so far from
being only appropriated to God, that scarce that Human Passion, Love, Joy, or
what not, nay, a mere start of Fancy, a sudden lucky thought, but shall be said
to inspire a Man.

Is this Gentleman, as sworn an Enemy to all Poetry, as to the Dramatick, that
he wilfully forgets, how the Poets upon all occasions invoked their Muses to
inspire them. Nay, to go a little further, what if the Devil himself has had
his Inspirations too, for as I take it, the old Heathen Oracles were of his
Inspiring. The Spirit of False-shood, as well as Truth, has had the Inspiring
power, without intrenching upon the Prerogative of God. And though [Diviner] is
here made the Epithet to Lust, it makes not all to his purpose; it is true the
Expression favors a little too much of the Libertine; yet I defy all the
Sophistry of Malice it self to mount it up to Blasphemy, or to make it bear any
tendency to that tremendous signification he has given it. For does not this
Man of Letters know, that [Diviner,] though in the Comparative Degree, is here
infinitely less then the positive [Diviner] only comparatively to the common
Raptures of Lust. Had it been Written [ Inspired with a Divine Lust] it might
have given an overcurious Cynick some Umbrage for so profane a Construction,
and yet even then too it would not have fully reached the point, unless [ A
Divine] had been changed to the more emphatick [The Divine.]

But here as Mr. Dryden has worded it, and upon the subject he speaks it, if
any thing of a Deity was either meant or thought of in this Inspiration, 'twas
that of Venus: And indeed, what can the Genuine Sense of this poor Couplet
honestly and fairly construed mean, than that his Father Inspired, or Animated
with a Diviner or sublimer Lust, got him with that more then ordinary pleasure
and transports, that possibly (for it is not affirmatively said) to that
sprightlier Vivacity to the Generation of his Absalom, that young Heir (to
continue his supposition) might owe all those Personal Graces and Beauties, and
all that innate Bravery, and the rest of the uncommon Accomplishments the Poet
has occasion afterward to give him.

Here I must beg my Reader's Pardon, that my honest Defense of Truth has forced
me upon this unseemly Explanation; I confess again, this Distick carries but a
lewd Idea along with it, but so far from a Blasphemy against the Great God,
and so unpardonable, as he fancies it, that I doubt not but a profane Oath in
his Name, is, of the two, the greater Crimen laesae Majestatis Dei, and that
upon a fair Trial in a Court of Justice, the Mulct of two good Shillings, or as
many Hours in the Stocks would be as much as our Law could well give against
him.

Well, this Authot has the least reason of Quarrelling with Mr. Dryden's Fairy
way of Writing; his way of Commenting is so far beyond it, that all his own
Fairys are Giants, whilst Mr. Dryden in this very Distict, is no less then
leading up the old Host of Lucifer, and charging at the Throne of God himself.
At this rate of Remarking, I dare not say, whither this Author be inspired by a
Puny or a full grown Sprite; But this I must say, to come up to all the Heights
of that Christian Champion, he professes himself, undoubtedly he must have a
double Portion of Faith and Hope, to make up for his Diminitive Talent of
Charity.

FINIS.

