A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST and SECOND EPISTLES OF PAUL TO THE
THESSALONIANS.

By the Reverend and Learned Mr. James Fergusson, Late Minister of the Gospel
at Kilwinning.

Joh. 5. 33. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life,
and they are they which testify of me.

London, Printed by R. W. for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the Bible in the
Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1674.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
When the design of giving the Sense and Use of the Scriptures so briefly as
might be, was set on foot by some who looked upon it as very useful for the
present and succeeding Generations, the Reverend Author of this piece was
prevailed with to take a share in that undertaking; from whom much service of
that kind (considering his abilities and indefatigableness in his studies)
might have been expected, if (as himself elsewhere intimates) his papers upon
some Books of Scripture had not been destroyed by a sad accident, in the times
of our calamity and trouble. Notwithstanding which discouragement, he fell to
work again, and did go through the Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, and Colossians, his Expositions upon which were published in his
own lifetime; and left this Exposition upon both the Epistles to the
Thessalonians ready to be transcribed for the Press, some time before his Death.

I shall not here insist to give any full character of this Reverend person,
who having served his own Generation by the Will of God, is now fallen asleep
and does rest from his labors, and who being dead, yet speaks, by the savory
effects of his Faith, Love, and Patience, expressed in his personal walk and
Ministerial administrations, besides what his public writings do declare
concerning him. His Piety, Learning, Prudence and moderation (and that in very
contentious and distracting times) were not only well known and much esteemed
an the Congregation where he served, and the Province wherein he lived, but did
render him very famous throughout this national Church. Such as conversed with
him in ordinary, and were acquainted with his studies, did discern more of his
spirit and abilities than himself was willing to make show of; and were
convinced that (beside his abilities for explicating and applying of the
Scriptures in this more plain and compendious way, and for enlarging and
pressing of Scripture truths, with solidity and seriousness in his ordinary
Preaching) he was a man of a deep reach, and well fitted for giving of advice
in perplexed and intricate cases, whereof not a few did occur in his time; and
(withal) well furnished for discussing of Controversies, and stopping of the
mouths of gainsayers; whereof he gave an ample proof, when in public
Preaching, he did solidly and perspicuously examine and refute those errors
which of late did infest this Church and Island. But (forbearing to write
Elogies of him whose true worth did set him far above the commendation of such
a one as I am) all that I need to say at this time, is, That as (I doubt not)
thy acquaintance with what of his is already published, will sufficiently
commend unto thee what further of that kind has flowed from his Pen; So I dare
assure thee; upon unquestionable evidence, that this piece is genuine, and the
work of Mr. Fergusson: The Copy made use of at the Press being transcribed from
the Original written with his own hand, and revised by two of his Brethren in
these parts; from one of whom I received it, that I might also read it over
before it went to the Press. And though I be otherwise crowded with abundance
of work in my present service; yet I have taken some time to peruse it, to my
own very great satisfaction.

It remains therefore (Christian Reader) that thou study how to improve this
advantage which (among others) is, by the good providence of God, put into thy
hand; lest in a time wherein many means of knowledge do abound, the increase of
ignorance, Atheism, and Popery prove a sad plague and snare, and the abuse of
Light provoke God to send darkness wherein no man can walk. From which that
thou may be delivered, is the Prayer of,

Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel, George Hutcheson.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST EPISTLE of PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
The ARGUMENT.
PAul having planted a Church at Thessalonica, the chief City of all Macedonia,
Acts 17. 1, etc. he was driven from thence as far as Athens, by the violence of
the unbelieving Jews, Acts 17. ver. 5, to 15. And having heard what sad things
this Church did suffer from those unbelieving Jews, and also from Pagans, Chap.
2. verse. 15. he sent Timotheus to them, to establish and comfort them, Chap. 3.
2. upon whose return, together with the glad tidings brought by him of their
constancy in the doctrine of Christ, Paul does write this Epistle unto them,
Chap. 3. 6, 7. His scope wherein is, partly, by a relation of their Conversion
to and constancy in the Faith of his own ministerial carriage when he was among
them, and of the solicitous care he yet had of them, notwithstanding of his
absence from them, to engage them yet further to constancy and perseverance in
the doctrine received for the time to come: Which he labors to effectuate in
the first principal part of this Epistle, Chap. 1. 2, 3. And partly to incite
them unto several duties of an holy life, which he does endeavor in the second
part of this Epistle, Chap. 4. and to verse. 23. of Chap. 5. having at the close
of Chap. 4. from Verse. 14. occasionally intermixed a doctrinal truth,
concerning the state of believers after Death, and Christ's coming to Judgment.
And lastly, he concludes the Epistle by praying for them, and commending some
things unto their care, from Verse. 23. of Chap. 5. to the end.

CHAP. I.
THE first part of this Chapter contains the inscription of the Epistle, Ver.
1. In the second part he propounds and prosecutes a strong motive to
perseverance and constancy, to wit, the esteem he had of their gracious receipts
from God, to Ver. 8. and the general fame thereof in all the Churches, to the
end. And more particularly he does first make entry to this purpose, by giving
thanks to God for them, Ver. 2. And next he prosecutes it by giving reasons for
his thanksgiving; (1.) The cardinal graces of Faith, Love, and Hope, which he
observed in them, Ver. 3. (2.) The knowledge he had of their Election, Ver. 4.
(3.) That the Gospel was Preached by him and his associates, in Life and power
among them, Ver. 5. (4.) The excellent fruits of the Gospel Preached, in
malling them conform to Christ and his servants, Ver. 6. which he amplifieth;
first, from this that they became ensamples for imitation unto their nearest
neighbors, Ver. 7, 8 -- Next, from the general report and fame of their
graces, which had spread it self far and near, Ver. 8. which he makes appear
from this, that foreign Churches did give him an account, both how God did
countenance his Ministry among them, Ver. 9. and of the saving fruits thereof
toward them, to wit, the work of their Conversion, and the sincer it (...)
that work, evidencing it self in a twofold fruit of their Conversion, 1. Their
doing service to God, Ver. 9. 2. Their hopeful expectation of Christ's second
coming; Ver. 10.

Ver. 1. PAul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace
be unto you, and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. IN this
Verse is the Inscription, declaring, first, who was the immediate Penman of
the Holy Ghost in writing this Epistle, to wit, Paul: together with the joint
asserters, and approvers of the truths contained in it, to wit, two of his
associates in the work of the Ministry, while he was at Thessalonica; Silvanus,
the same as it seems with Silas, Acts 17. 4. and Timotheus an Evangelist (2 Timothy 4. 5.) and of great reputation in this Church, Chap. 3. 2, 6. Secondly, to
whom the Epistle was directed, who are described from their spiritual state,
they were a Church called from the World and Idols, to serve the true and
living-God, Ver. 9. from the place of their habitation at Thessalonica, and
their relation to God the Father, and to Christ the Son; in whom they are said
to be, because of their worshipping of, and union with God in Christ, whereby
the true Church is distinguished from Heathens, and Jews; an union, I say,
either external in all visible Church members, or internal also in real
believers: See upon Phil. 1. 1. doct. 6. Thirdly, The Apostles usual salutation
or comprecation, whereby he prays for Grace and Peace unto them. See these
words explained upon the former Epistle.

Besides what has been observed already upon the inscriptions of the former
Epistles, Learn, 1. It is the duty of Christ's Ministers not only to endeavor
seriously, that a people turn from Idols to God, and that a Church of Christ be
set up among them; but also to take notice how the work of God does afterward
thrive with them, what obstructions are in the way of their progress, and how
they may be useful for removing these obstructions, and promoving the work of
Grace among them, and to lay out themselves to the utmost accordingly: and this
whether they be present with them, or absent from them; for Paul having, by the
help of Silvanus, and Timotheus, planted a Church among the Thessalonians, did
perform the prenamed duties afterward, even when he was absent from them, as
appears by the inscription of this Epistle, Paul -- unto the Church of the
Thessalonians. 2. A Minister of Christ is not always, or ordinarily, to
inculcate his own Ministerial dignity and authority upon the people, except
when it is evident that his so doing may contribute to advance his masters
work, lest otherwise his hearers judge him a man vainglorious and arrogant, as
seeming to be much delighted in reiterating that often, which tends to set
forth his own praise, 2 Cor. 3. 1. For, because (as it seems) this Church did
not question Paul's Apostolical authority, therefore he does not assert it, nor
design himself by it, as he did to other Churches, Paul unto the Church, etc.
3. The Spirit of the Lord in Christ's Ministers makes them of such an humble
condescending temper, in order to their gaining ground upon the Lords people,
as they will not stand to stoop somewhat below what they are, and to make use
of all lawful means and helps which may serve to procure respect unto their
message among the people, even of such as are below themselves, and whereof
they have no need, except in order to that end: For, though Paul's Apostolic
authority was sufficient in it self to commend the following truths unto the
Church of God, Gal. 5. 2. yet because his two Associates had great weight among
the Thessalonians, he does join them to himself, though far inferior to
himself, that by all means he might procure the more respect unto his doctrine:
Paul and Silvanus, and Timotheus unto the Church. 4. It is but small advantage
unto a people or society that they bear the name of a Church, except they have
the marks and characters of a true Church, whereof this is one, that they
worship the unity of the Godhead in plurality of persons, and acknowledge
Jesus Christ the second person in his mediatory office, and that by our union
with him we come to be one with the Father: For, all this is employed, while
they are said to be in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ; whereby he
does distinguish them from all false Churches, whether of Pagans, who are not
in God, but in Idols; or of Jews, who worship not a Trinity, nor God in Christ:
Which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. 5. Even these who
have obtained grace and favor from God, have yet need of more grace, for
preserving them in that state of Grace wherein they are, Romans 14. 4. for
increasing the sense and manifestation of it, Psalm. 51. 8, 12. for pardoning
and subduing these evils, which otherwise might provoke the Lord to withdraw
it, 1 John 2. 1. and for enabling them to grow in the graces of his Spirit,
that they may in some measure walk suitable to his grace and favor, Joh. 15.
2. 8. For, Paul wishes for grace even to these Thessalonians, a great part of
whom were in a state of grace and favor already: Grace be unt you. 6. The
Lords Ministers, in the entrance of their labors toward a people, would
endeavor to have their own hearts really affected with enlarged desires after
the peoples good, both spiritual and temporal, that all their pains taken among
them flowing from this fountain, and not from base, carnal and selfish motives,
1 Pet. 5. 2. may be the more acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 5. 4. pleasant and easy
to themselves, as flowing from an inward principle, 2 Cor. 12. 15. more blessed
of God for gaining ground upon the people, Chap. 2. ver. 7, 8, with 13. and the
more heartily entertained and accepted of by them; especially, when these
enlarged desires of Ministers toward their good are made known unto them, Gal.
4. 13, 14, 15. For, therefore does our Apostle not only labor to get his heart
so affected, but ordinarily in the entry of his Epistles makes so much known
unto those to whom he writes: Grace be unto you, and Peace, etc.

Ver. 2. We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers. The Apostles scope being to excite those Thessalonians unto
constancy in the Faith and Doctrine of the Gospel, he does for this end make
known the good esteem which he and his associates had of them, in so far, as
they did always, that is, in all their immediate addresses to God, make
conscience, 1. Of thanksgiving to God for them all, to wit, because of the
graces of Gods Spirit after mentioned, which they in charity, and from some
speaking evidences, as it seems, did judge (for what they knew) were bestowed
upon them all. 2. Of praying to God on their behalf, to wit, for constancy and
growth in the knowledge of the Gospel, and practice of true piety: So Chap. 3.
12, 13. Hence learn, 1. A begun work of grace in us is then improved aright,
when we do not draw an argument for fostering laziness and sloth from it; but
are thereby incited to hold fast what is already received, and to seek after
more: For, Paul's scope is to incite them unto constancy, and further progress,
by making them know what thoughts he had of Gods grace already in them, in this
and the following Verses: We give thanks, etc. 2. We would endeavor so to
speak* unto others of these saving graces which are in them, as thereby they be
not puffed up with conceit; but made in all their richest receipts to see matter
of humiliation in themselves, and of thanksgiving unto God: For, therefore Paul
being to let them know how much he esteemed of their graces, makes entry to
his purpose; not by setting forth their praises, but by giving thanks to God on
their behalf, teaching them to do the like. 3. It is the duty of the Lords
people, in their immediate addresses to God, to present the case one of another
before the Lord, and to be suitably affected with it; both with their
enjoyments, to thank the Lord for them; and with their wants, to pray to God
that he would supply them: and especially, a Minister ought to be affected thus
to the people of his charge, for so was Paul and his associates; We give thanks
-- making mention of you in our Prayers. 4. Then do we discharge this duty
which we owe one to another, faithfully, when we do it constantly, and always
when occasion is offered to approach unto God for our selves; otherways our
seldom discharging of this duty, does speak it is not minded seriously, or
affectionately. For, Paul gives thanks to God always for them. 5. Concerning
the extent of Paul's charity toward them all, so as to take matter of
thanksgiving to God from all and every one of them; see upon Phil. 1. 7. doct.
3. doct. 6. As the duties of Prayer and Praise go well together, and do
mutually contribute for the help one of another: So we would make such a
discovery unto others of the good that is in them, to make them thankful, and
set them upon the duty of Praise, as to make them also know there is much good
yet wanting, to keep them humble, and to set them upon the duty of Prayer: For,
Paul does both these, while he shows them he not only gives thanks for the
good they already had, but also prays for that which was yet lacking: Making
mention of you in our Prayers.

Ver. 3. Remembering without ceasing, your work of Faith, and labor of Love,
and patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our
Father. The Apostle prosecutes the forementioned scope, by giving reasons of
his often thanksgiving to God for them: And first, in this Verse he shows
that those graces, which he, with his associates, saw kything in them, had left
such an impression upon them, that they could not but without ceasing, or when
ever occasion offered, make mention of them both to God and men: Of which
graces he reckons three, in the exercise whereof all Religion does consist, 1
Cor. 13. 13. First, Faith, whereby we assent in our understandings to the truth
of all Gods Word, Act. 24. 14. because of his authority who has revealed it,
Joh. 4. 42. and are acted in our will and affections suitable to what whose
truths do hold out, Heb. 11. 13. But do especially rest on Christ for
Salvation, that good thing offered in the Promise, Act. 16. 31. 2. Love,
whereby we wish well to (Ps. 40. 16. Matthew. 5. 44.) and desire to be one with
(2 Cor. 5. 8. Gal. 5. 12, with 15.) and do acquiesce and rest satisfied with
what goodness and perfection we find in (Ps. 18. 1, 2. Prove. 16. 13.) both God
and man (especially his Saints) each in their own order, Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39.
3. Hope, whereby we do firmly expect (Romans 8. 25. Phil. 1. 20.) those good
things which God has promised, and are not yet performed, Romans 8. 24. Next, he
amplifies first each of those graces from their effects: To Faith he ascribes
a work, not only because it is the work of Gods Spirit in us, Col. 2. 12. but
also because it actually works by Love, Gal. 5. 16. purifieth the Heart, Act.
15. 9. and is an active principle of all good offices which we perform toward
God or man, Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6. To Love he ascribes Labor. The Word
signifies such labor as wastes and wearieth the Spirit, 2 Cor. 11. 27. --
whereby he intimates their unwearied industry, wrestling through much
discouragement and difficulty, for the furthering the good of Gods Church and
distressed members thereof. And to Hope he ascribes Patience, it being Hope in
the Lord Jesus Christ, or a well grounded expectation of Eternal Life wrought
by Christ, and relying on Christ, which makes the person who has it
Christianly patient, and courageously resolute to endure all hardships he can
meet with, until the good thing promised be at last perfomed, 2. Cor. 4. 16.
with 18. Secondly, he does amplify them all jointly, by their sincerity and
soundness, employed in this, that they were studious of those virtues as in the
sight of God; see Genesis 17. 1. And by the great encouragement they had to that
study, from their common and joynt-interest in God as their Father. Doct. 1. It
is a Christian duty incumbent to all, and especially to Ministers through
virtue of their office, to be much taken and affected with the good we perceive
in others, so as length of time, distance of place, or multiplicity of other
business make us not forget it; and that while we remember it, we do not
suppress it, or the deserved commendation of those in whom it is, that so we
may thereby prevail both with our selves and others to follow and imitate it,
Romans 11. 14. and especially to bless the Lord for it: For Paul, though now at a
distance, and much involved in other affairs, both of his own and of public
concernment, does yet a long time after, always when occasion offered, call to
mind and commemorate the graces of God bestowed upon these Thessalonians; as a
ground of thanksgiving to God, both by himself and others: Remembering without
ceasing. 2. Then do we rightly remember the graces of God, parts and abilities
of others, when the remembrance of them does not produce discouragement, carnal
emulation and envy in our selves, Numb. 11. 29. or flattering applause unto
those who hate them, Prove. 24. 5. but matter of thankfulness to God who gave
them: For, as appears from the connection, Paul's remembrance of their graces
produces this effect in him: We give thanks ^ remembering without ^^asing. 3. A
real believer may look upon the gracious receipts of others as matter of his
thanksgiving unto God, in so far as their receipts do not only commend the
giver, Ephesians. 1. 3. but are profitable unto us, as a Copy to imitate, see verse.
7. as a ground of encouragement, to expect the like from God to our selves, 1 Timothy 1. 16. and several other ways: For, Paul gives thanks to God for their
receipts, Remembering without ceasing. 4. The life of a Christian is not a li^e
of idleness, not a life of ease, nor yet a life outwardly prosp^r^us and free
from the cross, his Faith must have work, his Love must have labor, and his
Hope must ^e attended with patience, under the Cross: See more in the
Exposition, 5. As inward grace in the heart, where it is lively, cannot be hid,
but must of necessity kyth in its effects and fruits without; so it is not
grace in the naked habit, but grace in exercise, which can yield comfort or
encouragement unto the man himself, or matter of thankfulness unto God from
others: For, it was the work of Faith, the labor of Love, and patience of
Hope, for which Paul gives thanks to God, and from which he does both
encourage and incite them to constancy. 6. Though only God and a man's own
conscience can pass a certain and infallible judgment upon his inward
sincerity of heart, in the exercise of Christian virtues, Romans 14. 4. yet so
much of a man's sincerity may kyth to gracious discerners in his outward
conversation and carriage, as will afford sufficient ground to pass a
charitable judgment upon him, as one who discharges his duty sincerely, and
in the sight of God: For, though Paul knew not their hearts, yet he does
charitably judge they were sincere in what they did, while he says, your work
of Faith, labor of Love -- in the sight of God. 7. Then may we charitably
judge that a man's external actions are done in sincerity, and flow from an
inward root of grace in the heart, when for any thing appears, he does labor
to make conscience of all those external duties, wherein the exercise of any
Christian grace does consist, and neglects none when God does call him to it:
For, Paul from their performing not only the work of Faith, but also the labor
of Love, and the patience of H^pe, does judge in charity they had the inward
habits of those graces, and did what they did sincerely, and in the sight of
God. 8. The Believers laying claim unto, and maintaining of an interest in God
as his by Covenant, gives much enlargement of heart unto him to exercise his
graces, and to carry himself sincerely, and as in Gods sight in all his
actions: It is our distance from God, our way-giving unto misbelief, first to
question and then to deny an interest in God as ours, which mar the exercise
of grace, the word of Faith, etc. and in progress of time does make us not only
do less, but also more unsound and less straight in what we do: For, he makes
their work of Faith -- in the sight of God, to be accompanied with and carried
on by this, that God was looked upon as their Father: In the sight of God and
our Father.

Ver. 4. Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. Here is a second
reason of their thanksgiving to God, which he does usher in by two sweet styles
he gives unto them, to wit, of Brethren to him, and beloved of God, as the
words may well be read: see 2 These. 2. 13. And the reason is, the knowledge
which Paul, with his Associates, had of their Election to grace and glory from
all eternity by God, as Election is taken, Ephesians. 1. 4. where see in the
Exposition, and Doct. 1, 2, 3. and it seems Election must be taken in that
sense here, as appears from a parallel place, 2 These. 2. 13. and not for their
effectual calling, though the word be so taken elsewhere, Joh. 15. 19. Now Paul
is said to know their Election, if, we mean the Election of this or that man in
particular, not according to an infallible judgment of certainty, for so none
without special revelation can know the Election of others, no more than he can
infallibly know the secret motions of their heart, which alone do infallibly
discriminate the hypocrite from the man who is truly regenerate, 1 John 3. 14.
and consequently are the only infallible evidences of a man's Election, and
therefore he knew their Election according to that judgment, which is
overruled with charity and grounded upon such evidences as are most probable,
though not infallible; such are the external acts of Piety, further than which
no man can infallibly see into another, seeing only God searches the heart,
Rev. 2. 23. Although, if we conceive, as it safely may be conceived, that the
Apostle does mean here of the election not of this or that man in particular,
but of the whole Church indefinitely and in common, then the knowledge he had
of their Election was most infallible and certain, to wit, that not only he
knew nothing, as it seems, in the contrary to the Election of any of them in
particular, and had positive probable evidences, that many of them were
elected; but also though he could not take upon him infallibly to condescend
upon particular persons, yet he did know assuredly that some among them were
elected, seeing God sends his Word in power (as he had sent it to those
Thessalonians, ver. 5.) unto no people, no not to the worst, but where some do
appertain to his Election of grace, Isa. 6. 13. with 9. and from those some,
being the better part, Paul (as usually elsewhere, Romans 1. 7.) does denominate
the whole. Doct. 1. The work of saving grace in the heart, manifesting it self
in a man's external actions, is an undoubted mark of his eternal Election; so
that according to the evidence, whether infallible or conjectural only, that we
have of the former, we may and ought to be the more or less persuaded of the
latter. Thus, Paul because he had promising evidence, that those saving graces
of Faith, Love, and Hope were in them, Ver. 3. he does in this Verse, from
charity, judge that they were elected: Knowing your Election. 2. Then is the
Faith and knowledge of our Election solid, and of the right stamp, when it does
not make us secure, lazy, or to loose the reins to profanity and vice, but
stirs us ^p to greater diligence in keeping the ground we have already gained,
and in advancing forward for gaining more: For, the Apostle's scope in the
telling them of their Election, is thereby to excite them unto constancy in the
doctrine received. 3. The Faith and knowledge of our Election, and that God
has singled us out from others to bestow upon us Eternal Life, may sweeten the
saddest of outward dispensations, and make us raise a song of praise to God for
that, at least, what ever be his dealing with us otherways: For, though this
people did labor under sad afflictions, Chap. 2. 14. yet Paul does look upon
their Election as a ground of thanksgiving to God from him, and much more from
themselves: We give thanks, ver. 3. Knowing your Election. 4. A gracious heart
does judge it a piece of his highest credit to reckon spiritual kindred unto
all who are born of God, and will love them dearly, and carry himself
affectionately and affably toward such as are beloved by him: For, because
they were beloved by God, they were brethren to him, the latter compellation
containing in it the cause of the former.

Ver. 5. For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and
in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were
among you for your sake. -- Follows a third reason of their thanksgiving to
God, which serves also for an evidence that there was an Elect people among
them: which reason is first propounded, to wit, the lively manner after which
he and his associates had Preached the Gospel among them; called their Gospel,
because they were entrusted to Preach it, 2 Cor. 5 -- 19. and the manner of
their Preaching is set down, 1. Negatively, it was not in words only, that is,
as he explains himself, 1 Cor. 2. 4. not with the enticing words of men's
wisdom, or varnished over with some fair sophistical flourishes of eloquent
language, tending more to amuse the hearers, tickle the ears, and commend the
Preacher, than to edify the judgment, to work upon the affection, and to
commend Christ to peoples hearts. Next positively, it was, 1. in power, that
is, accompanied with such boldness, liberty, Gospel simplicity, plainness of
language, seriousness and fervent edge of affection in the Preachers, as did
render the word so spoken, in some measure, apt to work powerfully upon the
hearers: For, so does Paul himself seem to explain what is meaned by Preaching
in power, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 13. and 4. 19, 20. Secondly, Their Preaching was in the
Holy Ghost, that is, it was confirmed by Signs and Miracles wrought among them
by the Apostle and his Associates, as they were extraordinarily assisted
thereunto by the Holy Ghost: See the Holy Ghost so taken, Acts 19. 2. 3. It was
in much assurance, whereby is meaned that full persuasion above all doubt,
which was in Paul and the other Preachers, of the truth of what they Preached;
so that they spoke not of these truths doubtingly, but confidently, and as of
things which they had heard and seen, 1 John 1. 1. Now that all these three
expressions do set forth somewhat in the Preachers, according to the sense
given, rather than the effect of their Preaching upon the hearers, spoken of,
ver. 6. appears from the last clause of this Verse, where he appeals to the
consciences of the Thessalonians, if they the Preachers had not in all things
carried themselves among them answerable to what he presently spoke; and withal
shows that all that they did of that sort, and that God did by them, was for
their sake and good, which does make the present purpose subservient to the
Apostles scope, to wit, that therefore even upon the account presently
mentioned, there was ground of thanksgiving to God for them, and that they were
bound to persevere in that doctrine, which God had made to be Preached among
them in such a lively manner for their good. Hence learn, 1. That God has sent
the Gospel in life and power unto a people, and given them a lively and
powerful Ministry, though but for a season, to sow the seeds of grace and
saving knowledge among them. It is no small matter of thanksgiving unto God,
both from themselves and others on their behalf, even though their faithful
Pastors afterward should by force of persecution be for a time removed from
them: The good and fruit of such a Ministry, is not always removed with them,
but lasts after they are gone, Joh. 4. 37, 38. For, Paul does thank the Lord
upon behalf of this Church, that he and his Associates had Preached the Gospel
in life and power among them, though they were for the present driven from
them: We give thanks, etc. Ver. 2. For our Gospel came unto you -- in power. 2.
The Lords usual way is not to send a lively and powerful Ministry unto a place,
but where he has some of his Elect to be converted and saved by that means:
For, Paul having affirmed, ver. 4. that he knew there was an Elect people among
them, he gives this as one evidence upon which that knowledge was grounded,
even because God had sent such a Ministry unto them: For, our Gospel came unto
you -- in power. 3. That a people or person may prove constant in Faith and
Piety, they would often remember the Love of their first espousals to Christ,
with what fervency and seriousness he did bear himself in upon them, how sweet,
how lively, how ravishing the glad tidings and report of him in the mouth of
his servants were once unto them, and how much they were then convinced of a
beauty in truth, and in the feet and carriage of those who did carry the
message of truth and peace unto them: The remembrance whereof may stir up some
longing desires to find that in Christ, in Truth, and in a sent Ministry, which
once they found, at least may render them ashamed to make defection from them:
For, the Apostles remote scope, as we show, in calling them to mind of the
lively manner, wherein the Word was first Preached among them, and how they
themselves were witnesses to it, and convinced of it, is hereby to excite them
unto constancy and perseverance: For, our Gospel came unto you -- in power. 4.
As there does usually but little fruit accompany a Ministry, when Ministers do
study words more than purpose, and to busle their purpose in such a dress of
words as may set out themselves rather than commend Christ, and tickle the ear
rather than edify the hearer: So where a Minister does make it his study to
get Christ formed in, and ground gained upon the hearts of hearers, and to fall
upon such purpose, such words and such strains of utterance and delivery of his
purpose from affection, plainness, and holy boldness, as may conduce most for
that end; the pains of such a Ministry are usually seconded most by the Holy
Ghost, and does afford much matter of thanksgiving to the Lord; for by the
former the Gospel comes in word only, and by the latter it comes in power
also; and Paul shows that not the former but the latter was accompanied with
the Holy Ghost, and looks upon it as a reason of his thanksgiving to God; For,
our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but in pow^^ also and in the Holy
Ghost. 5. That the truths of the Gospel were once confirmed by such signs and
wonders, as none could work but they who were extraordinarily gifted by the
Holy Ghost for that end, may abundantly fix us in the Faith of those truths, it
being impossible that the God of truth should ever have set his Seal unto a
Lie, Romans 3. 4. For, Paul would have them confirmed and constant in the Faith
of these truths Preached by him, because they were confirmed with such signs
and wonders, and in the Holy Ghost. 6. The more a Minister be persuaded, and
above all doubt, of the truth of what he Preaches, the more he believes and
does therefore speak, and the more he speaks as one who believes, and has
ventured his soul upon the truth which he Preaches, his Preaching will prove
the more powerful, and apt to work effectually upon the hearts of hearers: and
the more he doubts, the less he believes and is persuaded of these truths which
he Preaches, his Preaching will prove the more warsh, lifeless, and coldryf;
For, we may look on the third expression, as one ground and cause of what is
held forth in the first, their Gospel came in power, because it came in much
assurance, or the Preachers did assuredly believe the truths which they
Preached; see 1 Cor. 3. 12. Psalm. 16. 10. 7. The Lord has endued his Church,
and eespecially believers in his Church, with a gift of discerning, whereby
they may be enabled, in some measure, to put difference betwixt a lively
powerful Ministry, and that which is coldryf, dead, and lifeless; betwixt the
man who speaks because he believes, and him who though he speak, yet believes
not: In the exercise of which gift, they would not be rash in passing an
immediate sentence upon the hearts of Ministers, Col. 2. 23. except in so far
as their inward temper does kyth in their external actions, Matthew. 7. 16. They
would not be peremptory in passing certain judgment, especially to the worst,
upon a doubtful evidence, 1 Cor. 13. 7. Nor yet too open minded, to vent what
they judge, Jam. 1. 19. especially, when they can gain nothing by so doing, but
the raising of prejudices against a Minister in the minds of others, and
consequently the marring of that good, which they were reaping by him. However,
that they are endued with this gift is clear from this, that Paul appeals to
the Thessalonians, as witnesses of that power, and much assurance in which he
Preached, while he says, As ye know what manner of men we were among you. 8.
It is a Ministers wisdom, and a piece of Christian modesty, in speaking to his
own commendation, to hold himself most by that for the truth whereof he may
appeal to the ears, eyes, and chiefly to the consciences of his hearers; For,
so does Paul appeal to their consciences for the truth of what he spoke: As ye
know what manner of men we were among you. 9. These excellent gifts and graces,
and other ministerial qualifications, which Christ bestows upon godly and
able Ministers, are not bestowed upon them for their own sake, or particular
satisfaction and advantage only, or so much as for the behoof of the Church,
and especially of the Elect in it; he deals the more liberally with Ministers
for the sake of those, and therefore they should improve and make use of all
their receipts for the good of ^uch: For, Paul shows that he was enabled to
Preach in power, in the Holy Ghost and in much assurance -- for their sake.

Ver. 6. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the
Word in much affliction, with ^^y of the Holy Ghost. Here is a fourth reason of
their thanksgiving to God, which serves also as an evidence moving Paul in
Charity to judge all these to be elected of God unto Eternal Life, in whom he
had ground to conceive that this here spoken of was verified: And this reason
of thanksgiving, or evidence of election is taken from the saving effects of
the Gospel Preached upon them; which are first generally proponed, to wit, that
in their life and practice they had been followers of, or conformed themselves
to that excellent pattern and example held forth unto them by their Preachers,
and the Lord Christ. 2. Illustrated, 1. from the necessary antecedent, or
moving cause of their so doing, which was their receiving the Word Preached, to
wit, in their judgments, by understanding the sense, Act. 8. 30. and assenting
to the truth of it, Heb. 4. 2. and in their heart and affections, by embracing
the good things offered by it, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and subjecting themselves in all
things to be ruled by the prescript of it, Matthew. 7. 24. 2. From an instance of
some things wherein they did imitate such excellent patterns, to wit, that as
Christ and his Servants had readily Preached the Gospel with much spiritual
joy, Joh. 4. 34. notwithstanding many hard pressures and afflictions both from
men and Devils, Acts 5. 41, 42. So they had cheerfully embraced the Gospel, and
adhered to it in the midst of much affliction and persecution, unto which they
were so far from a base ceding, that they did courageously sustain the dint of
it with joy, and a joy not carnal and natural but spiritual, and such whereof
the Holy Ghost is Author. Doct. 1. Though charity believes all things, 1 Cor.
13. 7. and makes a man easy to be persuaded of any good thing in another; yet
a Christian ought not to be foolishly credulous, so as to believe things
without, far less against, evidence: But his charity in judging ought to be
ruled by prudence, so as he believe nothing but upon some probability and
appearance: For, Paul did not judge them Elect, but upon some evidence, even
this, that they were followers of him and of the Lord. 2. The way approved of
God for attaining the Faith of our own Election, or a charitable persuasion of
the Election of others, is not to dive in immediately and at the first step
upon the secrets of Gods decree, as if we had stood in his counsel, Jer. 23.
18. But by way of discourse and reasoning to collect and conclude, that God
has elected us or others, from the work of saving grace, and the effects of
that work kything in us or them: For, the Apostles scope here, as I show, is
not only to give an additional reason of his thanksgiving, but also an
evidence, from which he did conclude their Election, from the fruits and
effects of saving grace in them: Ye became followers of us and of the Lord,
says he. 3. It is the duty of Christians, and such as being made conscience
of, does strongly savor of a gracious change in them, to propound unto
themselves for imitation, not the example of a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.
2. but of those in whom they observe the most eminent evidences of a work of
saving grace: For, the Apostle does mention this as a matter of their
commendation, a reason of thanksgiving to God on their behalf, and as an
evidence of their Election that they did imitate him, and his Associates: And
ye became followers of us, says he. 4. As there would be something worthy of
imitation in the life of a Minister, besides his plain, painful and elaborate
Preaching, otherwise his naughty life may destroy more than his Preaching can
save, seeing all men are more addicted naturally to be guided with example than
with precept, Genesis 42. 16. and with an ill example rather than a good, Gal. 2.
13. So it is the duty of people not only to lend an ear to their Ministers
doctrine, but an eye to his pious life and conversation, that the same
instructions being inculcate, both upon the ear by his doctrine, and their eye
by his example, they may work upon their hear^s and lives the more effectually
For, both these are employed while Paul commends them from this that they did
imitate their Pastors: And ye became followers of us. 5. The most gracious of
Christians, whether they be private professors, or public Ministers, are not
to be followed absolutely, and in all things, but in so far as they are
followers of Christ, whose example is the rule and measure of all examples, and
is to be followed absolutely, and without reservation in all his moral actions,
wherein he intended to cast us a Copy, Matthew. 11. 29. For, Paul mentions
their following of the Lord in the last place, as that which did bound and set
the just limits unto their following of men: Ye became followers of us, and of
the Lord. 6. Such power is there in the Word of God when it is received, that
is, understood, assented unto and embraced, and especially when the word of
promise is by Faith received, and improved both for pardon of sin, and subduing
of it, Act. 15. 9. that it works a mighty change in the receivers of it, makes
them quit their wonted guides, the course of this world, the Prince of the
power o^ the air, and the lusts of their flesh, Ephesians. 2. 2. and give themselves
up to follow the examples of men most eminent in gracious practice, in so far
as they are followers of Christ. Neither can any gracious change of this kind
be expected in them, until the word be thus received by them: For, Paul makes
their receiving of the Word a necessary antecedent of their following of him
and Christ: Ye became followers of us and of the Lord, having received the
Word. 7. As persecution and affliction from men, incited by the Devil, Rev. 2.
10. that inveterate enemy of man's Salvation, is the common lot of those that
embrace the truth; so it is not sufficient to prove a man Elected of God, or
that a real work of grace is wrought in him by God, that he embrace the truth
under a fair Sunshine of prosperity attending the professors of it, except
besides other evidences, he be at least content and ready to undergo the utmost
of affliction and persecution he may meet with for his profession; nor yet that
he imitate Christ and his Servants in pleasant, profitable, and creditable
duties, except he also imitate them in promptness of mind to carry a cross for
truth, and to undergo other duties which are more expensive, unpleasant to the
flesh, and liable to shame and disgrace before the world: For, Paul does
evidence their Election not from their following of him and Christ in any duty,
or from receiving of the Word simply, but from their receiving of it in much
affliction. 8. Neither yet is it a sufficient proof of a gracious work in the
heart, that a man do embrace some piece of a suffering lot for Christ; an
hypocrite may endure somewhat before he change his way, Gal. 3. 4. There must
be at least a readiness of mind to undergo much affliction, yea the utmost
that Satan's malice and power can reach unto: for Paul does instance their
praiseworthy imitation of Christ and his followers in this, They received the
word in much affliction. 9. Neither is it yet sufficient that a man endure much
affliction and variety of crosses for the Gospels sake, if so he do it
droopingly, and because necessity drives him to it, an hypocrite may suffer
much on that account, 1 Cor. 13. 3. There must be also a cheerful frame of
spirit under suffering; for, says he, ye received the word in much affliction,
with joy. 10. Neither is it yet sufficient that a man endure affliction with
joy, except it be a joy of the right stamp, and whereof the Spirit of God is
the author, a joy arising from spiritual grounds, such as, that the least grain
weight of the bitter gall and wormwood in our cup is measured out by the hand
of Providence, Luke 12. 6, 7. which turns all things about for good, Romans 8.
28. that by much affliction we are made like our master, Phil. 3. 10. that by
our sufferings the Church of God is edified, truth is confirmed, Phil. 1. 7.
and aliens made to enquire after it, Phil. 1. 13. and that if we suffer with
him, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. A real hypocrite may attain to
a carnal, natural joy in suffering, arising from natural grounds, such as a
mis-application of rich promises made unto sufferers, as if they did not
suppose the grace of faith in him who suffers, Phil. 1. 29. and an ambitious
desire to leave behind him the name of constancy, and of being a martyr and
sufferer for a truth; it is not this latter, but the former joy which makes a
lively frame of spirit under the cross: for, says he, in much affliction, with
joy of the holy Ghost.

Ver. 7. So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
The Apostle does enlarge what he presently said, of their courage, patience,
and cheerfulness in receiving the truth, and adhering to it, in the midst of
many pressures and afflictions; first, from this, that not only their whole
Church in general, but almost all the members thereof in particular, were so
many ensamples and lively patterns, to wit, for their patience, cheerfulness,
courage, constancy (which he employed to have been eminently in them, v. 6.) and
for their other Christian virtues, unto all believers, which were either in
Macedonia, their own Nation, Act. 27. 2. or in the bordering Nation of Achaia,
Act. 19. 21. Doct. 1. Then are Christians praiseworthy for the grace of God in
them, and their graces a speaking mark of their election, both unto themselves
and others, when they do not rest upon the smallest measures, but by growing in
grace do, from a principle of holy emulation, labor to outstrip others, even
those who were in Christ before them: for, Paul by way of thanksgiving, v. 2.
(whereof the purpose of this verse may be looked upon as an additional reason)
commends the grace of God bestowed upon the Thessalonians, as a speaking mark
of their election, v. 4. from this, that through reason of their growth in
grace, they were ensamples unto all who believed in Macedonia and Achaia. 2.
Such may be the conceitedness of old professors, of their measure of grace
already received, Luke 15. 28, 29. such may be their undervaluing of others,
Act. 21. 28, 29. provoking the Lord to withdraw his influence in a good measure
from them, Luke 18. 14. and such may be the edge of zeal in new beginners, Gal.
5. 7. and the fresh sense of mercy newly received by them, Gal. 4. 15.
occasioning the Lords dispensing more of his special influence to them, Jer. 2.
2, 3. that the former may be far out-stripped, as to growth in grace, by the
latter, and those who were last may become first: for, though some of them, at
least, in Macedonia (namely the Church at Philippi, Act. 16. 12. with 17.) were
converted to Christ before the Thessalonians, yet in a short space the
Thessalonians became ensamples unto all who believed in Macedonia and Achaia.
3. Though there should be an holy emulation and strife among Christians, who
can advance in the way of piety, with greatest diligence, Heb. 10. 24. yet
those who are outstriped, would not, yea need not, be carnally emulous or
envious at those who are before them, seeing the progress of one is the benefit
and advantage of another, in so far as the outstripped Christian has a new
incitement and encouragement to duty, from the example of those who are further
advanced than he is: for, those Thessalonians, having outstripped all who
believed in Macedonia and Achaia, became ensamples to them. 4. It adds the more
matter of commendation unto a Church, when not only their external Church
state, being exactly framed according to the prescript of Gods word, becomes
an imitable pattern for other Churches besides, but when also particular Church
members do so walk in the practice of all Christian virtues and duties suitable
unto that state, as that each of them, for the work of saving grace shining
forth in them, becomes a laudable pattern for others to follow: for, Paul
commends the Thessalonians not so much from this, that their whole Church in
general was an ensample, but almost all the members thereof were so many
ensamples, and lively patterns to be followed by others: So that ye were, not
an ensample, but ensamples. 5. As the merciful Lord, besides the word of truth
pointing out the way of our duty, has thought it necessary to furnish us with
the examples of others, who have trod in the path of duty before us, that so we
may know our duty to be feazible, seeing men subject to the like infirmities,
have already practiced it, James 5. 17. and the neglect of duty to be the more
hazardous, seeing all who have walked in the way of duty before us will be made
use of as witnesses against us, Heb. 11. 7. and 12. 1. So the same Lord has
thought it fit to provide us with variety of such examples, whereof some are
more some less eminent, that they who are discouraged to follow eminent
examples, as despairing ever to come near their copy, may take unto them
courage and heart to imitate those whose examples were of lesser note and
magnitude: for, not only Christ and the Apostles were patterns to be imitated
by those of Macedonia and Achaia as well as by those of Thessalonica, v. 6. but
the Thessalonians also are held forth for ensamples to them: ye were ensamples
to all that believe, etc.

Ver. 8. For from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia
and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward is spread abroad, so
that we need not to speak any thing. In this Verse he does first clear what he
spoke, v. 7. by showing how they became such imitable patterns to their nearest
Neighbors, to wit, because the Gospel, here called the word of the Lord, as
being revealed by him, and having the Lord Christ for the main subject whereof
it treats, 1 Cor. 2. 2. because, I say, the Gospel was propagated by them and
sounded out from them as with the noise of a Trumpet (for the word in the
original bears so much) toward those Regions: which must not be understood
of the first publishing of the Gospel in those places, it being clear that the
Gospel was Preached, at least in Philippi by Paul himself, before that time,
Act. 16. 12. but of a reiterated report of it, which made the Gospel in a
manner fresh and new unto them, because of these excellent effects wrought upon
the Thessalonians by it, and reported of jointly with it: which report as it
seems was carried by those of Thessalonica, who did usually traffic and keep
commerce in those Regions. Next he does further amplify what he mentioned of
the fruits of the Gospel among them, v. 6. from that general fame of their
eminency in grace, and especially in the grace of faith in God, which was
spread abroad beyond the confines of their nearest, neighbors, in Regions
where they themselves had no commerce, yea in every place, to wit, where Paul
did travel, as the last clause of the verse does clear, where he shows the
fame of their graces was such in all these places, that there was no necessity
for him to speak any thing, as to the giving of information; they were already
made so notorious unto all. Doct. 1. It is the duty of all who live where the
Gospel is preached, to carry a good report of Christ and the Gospel, both by
their word and work, into all places where they do resort, if so they may
thereby allure others with whom they converse to think well of Christ, and
embrace the Gospel, which makes an offer of him: for, the publishing of the
Gospel in Macedonia and Achaia, here spoken of, was chiefly by means of such
Thessalonians as did tr^ffick in those places: for, from you sounded out the
Word of the Lord. 2. There is not any one thing which makes the Gospel sound
louder, the sound of it to be heard better, and its offer embraced more
readily, than when a sound profession is beautified, adorned, and seconded by
sober, sincere, painful and conscientious practice: for, it was such a
profession seconded with such a practice in these of Thessalonica, which made
the Gospel sound from them in Macedonia and Achaia: The word signifies to sound
shrill, and far, as with the noise of a Trumpet, or voice of a Lyon-herauld. 3.
It tends much for giving credit to the Gospel far and near, that great Cities
and honorable personages do once receive it; for, Thessalonica was the chief
City in all Macedonia, where were many women of credit and note, Act. 17. 4.
and therefore upon their receiving the Gospel, the word of the Lord did sound
out in all Macedonia and Achaia. 4. There is nothing more ordinary for God,
than to out-wit the Devil and his most witty instruments, in so far as what is
intended by them as the most probable mean to destroy the Gospel, the Lord does
make it tend to the further spreading of it: for, therefore doubtless did Satan
and his instruments raise so hot a persecution against the Gospel in
Thessalonica, chap. 2. 14. because they thought the noise of that ill usage
which the Gospel did meet with in that prime City, spreading far and near,
would scare others from embracing it, and yet the Lord makes the very same
thing, to wit, the spreading report of the cruelty of persecutors, together
with the report of constancy in believers, a mean of spreading the Gospel far
and near. In every place, says he, your faith to Godward is spread abroad. 5.
Though the grace of faith be rooted in the heart, and cannot be immediately
seen, yet wherever it is, it cannot long be hid, but needs must discover it
self by the external fruits, which follow upon it, and flow from it: for, the
fame of their faith did spread abroad by manifesting it self in its fruits. 6.
The Lord does give a name for faith and piety, beyond others, unto some in
mercy, that thereby they may be the more engaged unto perseverance and
constancy, and so to walk answerably unto their name, as knowing that the more
famous they are, the more will be expected from them: for, he mentions this
of the general fame that was spread of their graces in all the Churches, as a
strong motive unto constancy, which, as I show, is the scope of all his purpose
in the first part of the Epistle. 7. It is a piece of a Ministers duty, in
relation to his flock, as to press conscience making of duty upon them, 1 Timothy
6. 17. rebuke them sometimes sharply, Tit. 1. 13. yea and to complain of them,
both to God and man for palpable neglect of duty, Isa. 49. 4. So to commend
them also unto others, even to strangers, for the good that is in them, that
thereby they themselves may be the more encouraged in their duty, Chap. 4. 9,
10. and others provoked to follow them in that which is so praiseworthy, 2
Cor. 9. 2. And that God (the Author of all good, James 1. 17.) may hereby get
glory, 2 Cor. 8. 16, etc. for, while Paul shows he had not need to speak any
thing to the commendation of the Thessalonians, their fame was spread so
generally among the Churches, he implies, it was his usual way wherever he
came, to commend the graces of God in such, among whom his Ministry had been
effectual.

Ver. 9. For they themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had unto
you, and how ye turned from God to Idols, to serve the living and true God.
Paul does here make the truth of what he presently spoke appear, That the fame
and report of their graces was so generally spread in all places, that he
needed not speak any thing to their commendation: And he makes it appear from
this, that they themselves, that is the foreign Churches among whom he
conversed, were able to give him a perfect account of the Gospels progress
among the Thessalonians, and more particularly they did give him an account of
two things; The first relates to Paul himself and his associates; to wit, what
manner of entrance they had to Thessalonica, whereby he does not mean, that
either they had entered that City, or were received by it, in any great pomp or
worldly state, The History Act. 17. 1, etc. shows the contrary; But he
thereby expresses their own ministerial carriage, and the Lords countenancing
of their Ministry among that people, spoken of briefly, v. 5. and more largely,
Chap. 2. v. 1. to 13. The second thing whereof those foreign Churches did give
Paul an account, relates to the Thessalonians, and the fruit of Paul's Ministry
among them, to wit, 1. Of the work of their conversion, and turning unto God
from their Idols, or false Gods, whom they did formerly worship; which work of
turning to God consists in the exercise of faith and repentance, as appears
from Isa. 55. 2. with 7. where coming to God, forsaking of sinful ways,
turning to the Lord, are spoken of as expressing pieces and parts of one and
the same thing. 2. Of the sincerity of this work, evidencing it self in a
twofold end or fruit of their conversion, the first whereof is in this verse,
to wit, their doing service to God set forth by two epithets, to distinguish
him from Idols. 1. He is the living God, who has life in himself, Joh. 1. 4.
and is the author and preserver of life unto others, Act. 17. 28. in opposition
to their dumb and lifeless Idols, as Sun, Moon and Stars, which the Gentiles
worshipped, Psalm. 135. 13, etc. Next he is the true God, The word in the
Original does not so much express his fidelity and that truth, which he shows
in performing what he speaks, (In which respect he is also the true God, Mat.
5. 18.) as the truth of his being and nature; he is really and truly God, in
opposition to another sort of Heathen Idols, which though they were not
lifeless as the former, but possible men or spirits, yet they were not true, or
really Gods, but by nature no Gods, Gal. 4. 8. Doct. 1. It is the duty of
Christians to inform themselves, so far as possibly and conveniently they may,
how the work of God does thrive in foreign Churches, as being members of the
same body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. and that thereby they may have matter of rejoicing in
God, Chap. 3. 6, 7. and imitation for themselves, 2 Cor. 9. 2. when things go
well, and of fellow-feeling with Christ's afflicted members, Heb. 13. 3. and
wrestling with God on their behalf, Heb. 13. 18, 19. when it is otherwise: for
believers far and near, had informed themselves so well of the state of the
Church at Thessalonica, that they were able to give Paul an account of it: for,
they themselves show of us, says he. 2. It is the duty of Christians, not
enviously to suppress, but cheerfully to publish the deserved commendation of
others, and the praise of Gods glorious grace manifested to them beyond their
neighbors, even though we should thereby seem to darken our own reputation
being compared with theirs: for, so did these other Churches cheerfully publish
the deserved praises of the Thessalonians: They themselves show of us: The word
signifies to declare a thing boldly, freely, and with good will, as
Ambassadors do return their answer from foreign States. 3. Whatever
praiseworthy grace is among the Lords people, it is ordinarily conveyed unto
them from the Lord by means of a public Ministry, so that a people cannot well
be commended, except the Minister whom God has made instrumental for their
good, be in some respect commended also; And therefore for a people to boast of
their graces received, and to trample underfoot the reputation of a faithful
Ministry, by whose means they were bestowed, is most absurd, and in point of
reason inconsistent: for, those believers being to set forth the praises of the
Church at Thessalonica, begin with the commendation of Paul and his associates,
who were their Ministers and by whose means they were converted. They show what
manner of entering in we had unto you, and how, to wit, by that mean ye turned
to God. 4. As all men are by nature averse from God, with their backs upon him,
and full of enmity in all the faculties of their soul, Romans 8. 7. and members
of their body, against him, Romans 6 -- 19. So there is always somewhat which
every man naturally is turned unto, and does set up to himself in Gods stead,
by giving unto it the chief and choice of his affections, which are Gods due:
for, while it is said they turned to God from Idols, it implies that they were
turned away from God, and addicted to their Idols. 5. Where ever the Gospel is
powerfully accompanied with the Lords blessing, to bring about a work of saving
grace in a sinner, there will be a turning from, and abandoning of whatsoever
did keep that place in the heart which is due to God, whether Idols properly so
called, when Divine Worship is purposely given to any thing, under any respect,
besides the true God, Exodus 32. 5, 6. with 1 Cor. 10. 7. or improperly, when,
though not the outward worship, yet the inward respect and honor, such as the
measure of love, joy, confidence, or fear, due to God, is given to the
Creature, whether it be a man's belly, Phil. 3. 19. or his wealth, Ephesians. 5. 5.
for, it was mentioned of these Thessalonians, that they had turned from Idols,
as a fruit of the Gospel powerfully preached among them. 6. It will not prove a
powerful and gracious work of the Gospel upon a man's heart that he forsake his
Idols, except he also turn to God, and bestow upon him that inward respect,
external worship, pains and diligence, which he did formerly give unto them;
Otherwise, if he only turn from a greater degree of Idolatry to a lesser, or
from all Idolatry to practical Atheism, or if he quit a false Religion, and
turn wholly irreligious and a mere Nullifidian, he does only change his service
but not his master, he serves Satan and some one or other of his own lusts
still: for, it is mentioned of them as an evidence of a gracious work among
them, they had turned from Idols to God. 7. Though the Lord alone, without any
actual concurrence of our free will, does at first regenerate us, by creating
gracious habits and principles of a new life in us, Ezekiel. 36. 26. (who then are
dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. and consequently can contribute nothing
toward our own quickening) yet in the after progress of the work of grace, we
are not wholly patients, but from a principle of Grace in us, 2 Timothy 1. 6. we
do also work, being first acted and wrought upon by God, Cant. 4. 16. for,
says he, ye had turned to God. The word is of an active signification. 8. Then
does a sinner turn sincerely from sin to God, when he devotes himself wholly to
God as his Lord and sovereign, to do him worship and service according to the
prescript of his word, Matthew. 5. 9. Idle sluggards have not sincerely turned to
God: for, as a mark of their sincerity in turning, it is mentioned, they turned
to God to serve the true and living God. 9. In our doing service to God, we
should carefully labor to take him up in those his Divine properties and
glorious attributes, by which he has made himself known to us in his word,
that so the known worth of him whom we do serve, may make his service lovely,
and our service given unto him to be acceped of by him, as being performed to
that God whom Scripture reveals to be God, and not a to misshapen deity or
fancy of our own brains: for, it is mentioned of them in their giving service
to God, they took him up as the living and true God, to hearten them in his
service, and to distinguish him from dead Idols and false Gods: To serve the
living and true God.

Ver. 10. And to wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead,
even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come. Here is a second thing
wherein the sincerity of their conversion did make it self evident, which is
first propounded, to wit, their patient waiting for, and hopeful expectation
of, the eternal Son of the eternal Father, his second coming from Heaven to
Judgment. 2. The grounds of this their hope and expectation are unfolded, in a
description of Christ; first, From his Resurrection from the dead, by the power
of the Father, so that though he was once dead, he is now alive; And therefore
their waiting for his second coming was not without ground. 2. From his Office,
whereby, as in the mean time he does deliver in part, so at his second coming
he shall completely deliver us, says Paul, that is, all sincere believers (as
he was) from the wrath to come, that is, the punishment, woe and vengeance due
to all mankind for sin, Ephesians. 2 -- 3. and which he shall fully execute at the
last day upon all unbelievers, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. and therefore they, to wit,
believers, had good ground to expect his second coming, and good by his coming.
Hence learn, first, several marks of sound conversion, or of a sincere convert.
1. He does so turn to God and give him service, as he looks upon God with an
eye to Christ, whom he serves equally with the Father, and through whom he
approaches to the Father, Joh. 14. 6. as to a God reconciled, whose Justice is
satisfied and his wrath appeased through him, Matthew. 3. 17. for, it is
mentioned as a mark of the sincerity of their conversion, that as they turned
to serve God the Father, v. 9. so they also gave divine honor to his Son, by
hoping in him, waiting for him, and looking to him as an interposer betwixt
them and the dint of Gods deserved wrath: They turned to wait for his Son --
which delivered us from the wrath to come. 2. A sincere convert does turn to
God to give him service not for a start, and season only, with a purpose to
return to his Idols, when he pleases, but to continue constant in his service
so long as he lives, and ever while Christ come to loose him from it: for, the
word rendered to wait, signifies to remain constant, and so does point at their
patient continuance in the service of God. 3. A sincere convert can never rest
satisfied with his present receipts, or with any thing he can enjoy upon earth,
his expectation and hopes do carry him beyond time, to look for Heaven, for
Glory, a life of light, and joy to be bestowed upon him by Christ, when he
comes to judge the world: for, waiting for Christ's second coming is mentioned
as a fruit and consequence of their sincere conversion: And to wait for his
Son. 4. A sincere convert is one to whom (especially when in a right temper)
Christ's second coming (although it be abhorred by wicked Atheists, Act. 24. 25.
yet) is not terrible, but a thing hoped for, and much longed after: for, they
turned to wait for his Son. 5. A sincere convert will not (when in a right
temper) quarrel with God, because his promises want a fixed date, or, their
performance is delayed, but makes it his work to keep himself constantly in a
suitable frame, as if they were to be performed presently, and yet to wait upon
Gods leisure with contentment until his time come to perform what he has
promised; for, their waiting on Christ's second coming implies both these, a
keeping of themselves in a posture ready for it, and a patient on-waiting on
Gods leisure so long as it is delayed: And to wait for his Son.

Secondly, We may learn hence, diverse doctrinal truths concerning Christ
wherein the Apostle had doubtless instructed the Thessalonians at greater
length, but does now propound them in most wonderful brevity, As, 1. That Jesus
Christ is true God: for, he calls him the Son of the Father, and therefore of
the same substance with him, even God himself: To wait for the Son of God. 2.
He is also man: for, it is employed he was once dead, and therefore he behoved
to be also man, whom he raised from the dead. 3. Though he have two Natures,
yet he is but one person: for, he speaks of the Son of God and him who was
dead, not as of two, but as of one and the same: for his Son whom he raised
from the dead. 4. Jesus Christ at his Fathers appointment, Psalm. 40. has
undertaken to be a Savior, Redeemer, and Deliverer of the Elect from that
wrath which is due to them for sin: for, therefore is he called Jesus, which
signifies a Savior, Matthew. 1. 21. and is said to deliver us from the wrath to
come. 5. Jesus Christ the Lord of life did give himself to death, thereby to
satisfy provoked justice for the sins of the Elect: for, it is employed he was
dead, while it is said, whom he raised from the dead. 6. Jesus Christ having
satisfied the Fathers justice by his death, was loosed out of prison, raised up
from death, and absolved by the Father, as having performed all he undertook:
for, he raised him from the dead. 7. Jesus Christ after his Resurrection did
ascend to Heaven, to take possession of it in name of the Elect, Ephesians. 2. and to
make application unto the elect of all these good things which he had purchased
by his death, Act. 5. 31. for, that they looked for him from Heaven, says he
is there, and consequently that he ascended thither. 8. Jesus Christ in his
bodily presence does now reside in Heaven, and not upon earth; for, there he
resides whence he is expected to come: And to wait for his Son from Heaven. 9.
As Jesus Christ did deliver the elect from the wrath to come, by paying of a
sufficient ransom to provoked Justice in his death: So he is carrying on,
while he is now in Heaven, the work of their delivery toward perfection, by
making application of the redemption purchased, both to pardon sin in its
guilt, and to subdue sin in its strength, Act. 5. 31. for, the word delivered
in the Original, may be read in the present time, as well as the preterit, who
delivers us. 10. Jesus Christ shall again return from Heaven, and come to
Earth at the last day, to judge the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1. for, his
coming is waited for by believers, and therefore it must be: to wait for his
coming. 11. Then, and at that time, shall Jesus Christ complete the work of the
Elects delivery, from that wrath to come, by acquitting them openly, and
pronouncing, as their Judge, that blessed sentence, come ye blessed of my
Father, Matthew. 25. for, so much is employed, while his delivering of us from the
wrath to come is annexed to his second coming: Look for his Son -- who
delivered, or delivers us from the wrath to come. 12. Jesus Christ the Judge
shall not then acquit or deliver all from that wrath, but only such who here
have lived by faith, and fled to him for a refuge, and laid hold upon the
ransom paid by him: for, says he, who delivers us, to wit Paul with the
believing Thessalonians, and such believers as they were, leaving all others to
drink the dregs of that most bitter Cup of Gods unmixed wrath for ever and
ever, Joh. 3. 36.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle does further incite them to
constancy and perseverance, by a relation of his Ministerial carriage to ver.
13. and of the success of his Ministry among them to ver. 17. which he does
summarily propone, viz. that his entrance unto them was not in vain, ver. 1.
which he proves: 1. From his holy boldness, to Preach among them
notwithstanding great apparent hazard, ver. 2. Secondly, from the sincerity,
both of his doctrine and of his own heart, in preaching it, ver. 3. which
latter he does further clear, first, from his great aim to please God, ver. 4.
Secondly, by clearing himself of three vices opposite to sincerity, to wit,
flattery, and covetousness, ver. 5. and affectation even of that glory which
was otherwise due unto him, ver. 6. And thirdly, by showing he was of a meek
and amiable deportment among them, as of a nurse to her children, ver. 7. which
he proves, first, from that ardent desire, he had to do and suffer the utmost
for their spiritual nourishment, and this only from love to them, v. 8.
Secondly, from his laboring unto weariness, to prevent their burden and
expense, ver. 9. Thirdly, from his Christian example which did shine before
them, ver. 10. chiefly in the duties of his particular calling, ver. 11, 12.
After this, he relates the great success his Ministry had among them, ver. 13.
evidenced by their constancy in suffering, ver. 14. and hence, does take
occasion to set forth the Jews, their Godless persecutions in their vilest
colors, ver. 15, 16. In the second part of the Chapter he does further pursue
his main scope, by convincing them of his intimate affection to them, while he
excuses his long absence from them, first, from his earnest desire and purpose
he had to see them, ver. 17. Secondly, from his reiterated enterprise to fulfill
his purpose, wherein Satan had hindered him, ver. 18. The reason of which his
desire and enterprise was that high esteem he had of them, and accession of
glory he looked for at the great day, as a fair reward of his pains among them,
ver. 19, 20.

Ver. 1. FOr your selves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was
not in vain. The Apostle being, in order to the further incitement of these
Thessalonians unto constancy in the doctrine received, to put them in mind of
the dignity of his Ministry, and of his own sincerity in the discharge of it
among them, does here propone a brief sum of all he has to say to that
purpose, to wit, that his entrance in unto them, that is, his undertaking of
that employment to Preach the Gospel among them, and his carriage in that
employment, was not in vain, That is, was not, 1. rashly undertaken, without a
call from God, nor 2. discharged by him perfunctoriously, or in a vain show,
but in sincerity: Nor yet 3. was it without fruit among them; for the following
purpose, which serves as a commentary to this verse, does show that the vanity
which he removes from his entrance to them must be extended to all those:
Besides the force of the word will bear so much, that being a vain thing, or
done vainly, which is done rashly or without a warrant from God, which is done
with more of vain show than of real solidity and sincerity, and which being
done has no effect or fruit. And for the truth of this assertion he appeals to
their own conscience and knowledge, and thereby does also confirm the truth of
that report, which he showed Chap. 1. 9. was spread among the foreign Churches
concerning his manner of entering in unto them, as appears from the causal
particle for. Hence Learn, 1. This may, and in reason should, commend the love
of truth unto a people, and make them constantly cleave unto it, that truth
has been preached unto them by Ministers sent from God for that very end,
whose life and practice have preached unto them as well as their doctrine, and
whose pains and travel has been blessed of God among them, to their own
discerning: for, the Apostles scope in this first part of the Chapter, by a
narration of his call from God to preach unto them, of his Ministerial carriage
among them, and of the fruits of his labors toward them, is to incite them to
constancy and perseverance in the doctrine received. 2. That others do report
well of us, and that our name, and fame, for the graces of God bestowed upon
us, be fragrant among many, is then a mercy when our own Consciences can bear
testimony that there is some ground and reason for it; otherwise to have a name
that we are living and yet be dead, increases our guilt, and proves a snare,
Rev. 3. 1. for, the Apostle, having shown chap. 1. v. 8. how well they were
reported of by foreign Churches, does here imply that they themselves knew
there was reason for it: for your selves know, etc. 3. It is not enough that a
Minister be well reported of among strangers for sincerity and diligence,
except he do approve himself to the Consciences of his hearers, so as he may
appeal to them for the truth of what strangers do report of him: for, Paul
appeals to the Thessalonians themselves about the truth of that which foreign
Churches reported of his entry unto them: for your selves know our entrance in
unto you. 4. Where a Minister is called of God, and carries himself sincerely
and faithfully in his calling, his Preaching and other pains do very rarely, if
ever, want fruit, either sooner or latter, Joh. 4. 37, 38. either manifest or
secret, Joh. 14. 42. for, Paul's entrance unto them was not in vain; that is, as
was exponed, not without a call from God, not in vain show, and without
sincerity and diligence, and therefore it was not in vain, without fruit.

Ver. 2. But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully
entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you
the Gospel of God with much contention. He does here prove his entrance was not
in vain, mainly as to the first thing (though not excluding the other two),
which I show was pointed at in that expression, to wit, that his undertaking of
that employment was not rashly, but at Gods appointment. One convincing
evidence whereof was that he ventured upon it over the belly of such
discouragements and disadvantages, as no wise man without a call from God would
ever have set his face against. And first, he mentions what sufferings in his
body, and disgraceful injuries against his reputation and credit, he had
sustained for Preaching the Gospel a little before he came to them, as they
themselves knew, in their neighboring City of Philippi, where he was most
injuriously and shamefully used: See Act. 16. 22, 23, 24. And next he shows
that all his sufferings of that sort were so far from making him shrink, that
notwithstanding them all, he took the boldness, being furnished thereunto by
Gods grace and assistance, (and therefore it is called a boldness in God) to
Preach the Gospel publicly, concealing no necessary truth, without all base
fear of flesh (as the word rendered we were bold does imply) and that in
Thessalonica, the prime City of all Macedonia, where were most Jews, enemies to
the Gospel, and therefore he might in all probability have expected to incur as
much hazard there as in any place else, which the event did verify, for as he
shows in the close of the verse, he Preached there with much contention, the
word signifies combating or fighting, to wit, both by disputing with, and
suffering from his malicious opposites, which contention, together with his
boldness here spoken of, is clearly held forth, Act. 17. from v. 1. to 10.
Doct. 1. Though a man's courageous venturing upon probable or certain sufferings
does not it self alone prove his doctrine to be truth, or his calling from God
to Preach that doctrine, Matthew. 23. 15. yet, when other more firm arguments are
not wanting, taken from the Doctrine it self, the man's Ministerial carriage,
the success of his pains among the Lords people, that other taken from his
constancy and courage in suffering, joined with them does not want its own
weight: for, Paul joyneth this of his courage in suffering with other arguments
which follow, to prove his entrance was not in vain, that is, his doctrine and
calling were from God: But even after that we had suffered before, we were
bold, etc. 2. That a Ministers pains may not be without fruit, and in that
respect vain among a people, he should make Conscience to deliver his message
with freedom and boldness, so as he omit no necessary truth for fear of flesh,
Act. 20. 20. and in an authoritative way make through application of general
truths (by rebuking, comforting, exhorting, reproving) to the several ranks of
hearers, 2 Timothy 4. 2. without which a man's Ministry does for the most part
prove but coldryf, dead and lifeless: for, the Apostle mentions this of his
boldness to speak, or freedom and boldness which he used in speaking; as a
reason why his entrance was not in vain or without success: But -- we were bold
in our God to speak. 3. As a suffering lot does usually attend sincere and
faithful Ministers; So it often falls out that they meet with most of trouble
and suffering at the close of some notable piece of service done to their
master Christ; Satan's malice is hereby more provoked, Act. 16. 18, 19. and God
gives way to his malice then, to teach his servants that their reward is not
to be expected here, Act. 14. 19. with 22. and to divert them, by this humbling
exercise, from being transported with lofty thoughts of themselves, arising
from their great success, 2 Cor. 12. 7. for, Paul did suffer much, and was
shamefully entreated at Philippi, immediately after he had erected a Throne and
Church for Christ in that place, Act. 16. 12. with 19. 4. Where Grace is lively
and vigorous, or where habitual grace is quickened by present influence from
God, and when duty is sweetened by the faith of an interest in God who does
enjoin it, afflictions, crosses and sufferings for well doing will be so far
from quenching zeal, that they will rather inflame it: for, though Paul had
suffered much before in Philippi, yet he was bold to Preach at Thessalonica;
being assisted by God, and having his interest in God as his own made clear,
which is pointed at in the expression, we were bold in our God. 5. A Minister
or any other should so commend himself, and the good that is in him or done by
him, when necessity puts him to it, 2 Cor. 12. 11. as that he make the result
of all to be his ascribing the praise and glory of all unto God: for, Paul does
so commend his own courage and boldness, as he gives God the praise of it: we
were bold in our God, or by the help and assistance of our God. 6. Trouble and
trial bypast does not exempt from trouble in time to come. Every new duty
almost is attended with some new trial and difficulty, (See the reasons upon
Doct. 3.) for, though Paul had suffered much a little before at Philippi, yet
he meets with new troubles here: to speak unto you the Gospel of God with much
contention.

Ver. 3. For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile. He adds a second argument to prove his entrance was not in vain, mainly,
as to the second thing I showed was pointed at by that expression, to wit, that
he did not discharge the employment of Preaching the Gospel among them
perfunctoriously, or in a vain show, as seeming to do much, but in effect doing
nothing. And that his entrance was not so in vain, he proves, both from the
sincerity of the doctrine preached, and of his own heart in Preaching it: where
first, he calls his Preaching of the Gospel his exhortation, not only because
his doctrine was consolatory to the afflicted (for the word signifies also
consolation) but also, and mainly, because all his Preaching did end in pithy
application by exhorting them earnestly, humbly, and affectionately (as the
word also does bear) to cleave and wal^ according to the truths, whether
doctrinal or practical, which were delivered by him^ Next he removes from his
Preaching three opposites of sincerity, the first two whereof point at the
sincerity and incorruptness of his doctrine. 1. It was not of deceit, or of
insnaring and seducing error, as the word signifies, that is, It was not
fitted to the corrupt opinions of men, as the Preaching of the false Apostles
was, who mingled the Law with the Gospel, to eschew the hatred of the Jews,
Gal. 5. 11. 2. It was not of uncleanness, that is, it was not fitted to
countenance men in their vice and filthy lusts, as the preaching of the false
Apostles was, Jude v. 10, etc. The third does point at the sincerity of his own
heart in Preaching, his exhortation was not in guile, that is, he did not
deceitfully seek his own worldly advantage from them, under a pretext of
seeking Gods glory in their salvation, as he more fully declares, v. 5, 6.
Doct. 1. It is sincerity and faithfulness in a Ministers carriage that breeds
him much trouble, strife and suffering from his carnal hearers, who cannot well
comport with Ministers, except they so preach as to please their humor: for,
the purpose of this verse, holding forth Paul's sincerity, may be looked upon as
the occasion of his trouble spoken of, v. 2. for our exhortation was not of
deceit. 2. The most effectual way to convince others of sin who are guilty, or
at least to render them inexcusable, is to make our carriage reprove them, by
holding forth in our life and practice a lively copy of such virtues as are
contrary to their vices: The voice of a man's work does pass further than of his
word: for, it may be very probably conceived that the Apostle in avowing his
sincerity, and purging himself of the vices mentioned here, and in the verses
following, has an eye to the false teachers, who were guilty of these evils,
and whom he does hereby reprove: for our exhortation was not of deceit. 3. It Is
inexcusable boldness, daring presumption, and such as argues him, who is guilty
of it, an unsincere, rotten-hearted hypocrite, when a man does purposely wrest
the word of truth, to give some seeming countenance unto the erroneous
opinions, or loose licentious practices of such whose hatred he would decline,
and whose favor he would gain: for, to prove that his entrance was not in
vain, or his carriage was not unsincere, he says, his exhortation was not of
deceit or of uncleanness, implying, if it had been so, he would have been a
gross hypocrite. 4. When a man does bend his wit to patronize error in
opinion, he will at last prove no great unfriend, but a secret favourer of
profanity and vice: for, so much is employed, that if his exhortation had been
of deceit, it would have been of uncleanness also. 5. It is not sufficient that
a Minister do not wrest truth, but Preach the sincere word without mixture,
except he also Preach it sincerely, with a single eye to Gods honor, and the
salvation of his people, without any allowed to-look toward base or by-ends:
for, Paul thinks it not enough to remove corruptness from his doctrine, except
he also purge himself of insincerity in the delivery of it, while he says, not
in guile.

Ver. 4. But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even
so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our hearts. The Apostle
having removed from himself the opposites of sincerity, v. 3. does here
positively affirm, that his behavior in his Ministry was sincere, whereof he
gives this one instance, That his design in Preaching, and in all the other
pieces of his Ministerial employment, was never to please the sinful humors of
men, but to approve himself unto God, and to be approved of him: And he gives
two reasons inducing him thereto. 1. The consideration of that rich favor, and
the conscience of that great trust put on him by God, who having allowed him,
or approved and judged him fit, as the word signifies, did entrust him with
the Gospel, or concredit the public dispensing of it unto him. 2. The
consideration of Gods omniscience, who knows the heart, Jer. 17. 10. makes
enquiry into the heart and passes sentence upon men according to their heart,
1 Samuel 16. 27. Doct. 1. The sin of man-pleasing cannot stand with sincerity and
pleasing of God in any man, and least of all in a Minister: (See in what
respects a Minister should and may please man without sin, and in what respects
not, upon Gal. 1. 10. doct. 6.) for, he gives that as an instance of his
sincerity, and study to please the Lord, he spoke not as pleasing men but God.
2. It is one of Satan's great designs, to possess the minds of people against
the most faithful of Christ's servants, with strong suspicions that though there
be nothing blameworthy in their external walk, they may yet be guilty of
inward abominations, as of pride, hypocrisy, covetousness, unstreightness, and
such like, because he knows that as nothing marreth the edification of people
more than rooted prejudices of that kind against their Ministers, So that
though honest Ministers may justly deny the charge, yet they cannot so easily
demonstrate to the prejudged party their own freedom from the guilt charged,
there being always somewhat in the best actions of most innocent men that may
by an uncharitable and prejudged on-looker be constructed to spring from some
of those bitter roots; and therefore the servant of Christ should labor not
only to keep himself free of those evils, but also from doing any thing which
may savor of them, or give unto people any just occasion to conceive that he
is tainted with them: for, Paul's clearing himself of those inward abominations,
here and in the preceding and following verses, implies that some did suspect
him guilty, and that he walked so as he might justly clear himself that he was
free of them, even so we speak, not as pleasing men. 3. Then do we walk
sincerely, when, as in every other thing, so especially, in the duties of our
particular calling we labor to please, and to approve our selves unto the
Lord, to wit, by doing not only what he commands, Romans 12. 2. but also in the
manner which he prescribes, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and especially, by seeking after and
resting satisfied with his approbation of what we do for matter and manner,
without stepping one hair breadth off the road way of duty, for catching
applause or approbation of man: for, Paul gives this as an instance of his
sincerity, that, in the duties of his particular calling as a Minister, he did
labor to please God, or approve himself unto him: even so we speak; not as
pleasing men but God. 4. As the ministerial calling is of any other the
greatest trust, there being no less concredited to the person employed in it
than the Gospel of Christ, and the souls of his people, Heb. 13. 17. so none
should be entrusted with that weighty charge, but such as after trial are found
in some tolerable measure fitted for it: for, Paul shows he was, when made a
Minister, put in trust with the Gospel, and this after he was allowed of God,
the word signifies proved and judged fit, which implies not that he had any
fitness of himself, but the Lord, of unfit, did make him fit, Gal. 1. 18. and
did then entrust him with the Gospel. 5. There is not any thing prevails more
strongly with an ingenuous and gracious heart to make him in all things please
the Lord, than the serious remembrance of his rich receipts from him, and how
much he stands a debtor to Gods free grace and favor on that account: for,
Paul makes the mercy manifested by God in making him a Minister, a reason why
he studied in all things to please him: But as we were allowed of God to be put
in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak. 6. It is a speaking evidence of a
Ministers call from God, when the conscience of his calling prevails with him
to order himself in all the pieces of his employment, both for matter and
manner, as that he may approve himself to God who has called him: for, the
conscience of Paul's calling prevailed so with him: as we were allowed to be put
in trust -- even so we speak not as pleasing men, but God. 7. As God who
knows the heart does chiefly judge of man's actions according to that frame of
heart wherewith he does discharge them; So then do we know and believe that it
is so, when our faith and knowledge of it does make us in all our actions take
such inspection of the heart, as that for our inward sincerity we may approve
our selves unto him who tries our hearts: for, the knowledge of this truth did
so work upon Paul, while he says, we speak as pleasing God, who tries the
hearts.

Ver. 5. For neither at anytime used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a
cloak of covetousness, God is witness. The Apostle does here remove from
himself and his Ministry two other vices, which are inconsistent with that
single hearted sincerity that ought to be in a Minister; and hereby does also
meet with the false Apostles, who were tainted with the vices following: first,
he used not flattering words, that is, speeches fitted to please the carnal
corrupt humors of men, for gaining of favor or some reward from them: The
word in the original is taken from another, which signifies meat, implying,
that flattery is a base belli-god vice, whereby the flatterer becomes a slave
to every bodies humor for a piece of bread: And for his freedom from this
vice, he appealeth to their own knowledge, who might easily judge of his words,
whether they were flattering or not. 2. He used not a cloak, or pretext, of
covetousness, that is, neither was he avowedly covetous, or inordinately
desirous of worldly gain, neither did he make a scug, pretext, or cloak of
piety, or of any laudable virtue to cover any such covetous desire, as the
false Apostles did, Romans 16. 18. And because men could not so well judge of his
freedom from this sin as from the former, seeing it is usually hid under some
specious pretext, therefore he appealeth unto God to judge, and bear witness,
whether he spoke truth or not. Doct. 1. The sin of flattery, at least when
given way to and allowed, cannot consist with the Grace of sincerity (as in no
man so much less) in a Minister: where a man inslaveth himself to please the
sinful humors of people, and upon any terms not to irritate them, he will not
spare to wrest the truth of God to make it subservient to his base design, by
strengthening the hands of the wicked and promising him life, Ezekiel. 13. 22. for,
Paul denies that he used flattering words, as inconsistent with that sincerity
formerly spoken of, which appears by the causal particle for: for, neither at
any time used we flattering words. 2. Though flatterers be deep dissemblers,
and bend their wit to make all men believe they respect and love them, when
they but seek to prey upon them, Prove. 29. 5. yet a man of understanding will
easily discern them: And it argues ^^ther great stupidity, or blind self-love
in the man* who when he is flattered to his face, knows i^ not, but takes
foulest flatteries for real praises: for, while he appealeth to themselves to
judge if he used flattering words, he implies they might easily have discerned
his flattery, if he had been guilty of it: for, neither used we flattering
words, as ye know. 3. There is not any sin more unbeseeming to, nor
inconsistent with sincerity in, a Minister, than the sin of covetousness. The
man who is enslaved to it will make his gain of all things, if it were by
making merchandise of Christ himself, Matthew. 26. 15. of truth, 1. Tim. 6. 10.
and of a good conscience, Micah 2. 2. for, Paul does clear himself of
covetousness, as inconsistent with that sincerity formerly spoken of: for
neither used I -- a cloak of covetousness. 4. The sins of flattery and
covetousness go often together, The covetous wretch is of such a servile temper,
as to make his tongue a Trumpet to sound out the praises of all by whom he may
have the least advantage, even though he know there be no real worth in the
person whom he so commends: for, Paul insinuates so much while he purges
himself from both these vices jointly: for neither at any time used we
flattering words, nor a cloak of Covetousness. 5. As ^oulest sins have of times
fair pretenc^* So there is not any sin that folk desire more to keep under a
cover than the sin of covetousness. It is so base a sin, that though it have
many savourers because of the advantage it brings with it, yet no man does
willingly seem to be guil^y of it, or is content to be upbraided with it: for,
he s^i^h no^, he used not covetousness, but a cloak of Covetousness, Because it
is often colored over with some Pretext. 6. Though fair pretenses may cover
foulest sins from the eyes of men, yet not from the eyes of God, in whose sight
all things are naked and uncovered; He not only perceives the sin which lies
hid from man under a specious pretext, but does so much the more detest it that
it dare disguise it self and appear in a pious dress: for, his appealing unto
God to judge if he used a cloak of covetousness, implies, that no cloak or
pretext could hide his sin from the eye of God: God is witness. 7. That
Christians under the New Testament may take an Oath: and upon what conditions,
see upon Gal. 1. 20. Doct. 3. for, God is witness, is the form of an Oath. See
the exposition of Gal. 1. 20.

Ver. 10. Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when
we might have been burdensome, as the Apostles of Christ. He does here remove
another vice from himself and his Ministry, to wit, his seeking of glory:
whereby is meant, 1. more generally his affecting even of that glory and
respect which was due unto him. And 2. more particularly, which agrees best
with the latter part of the verse, a rigid exacting of honorable maintenance,
which goes under the name of glory, because it was a just testimony of his
honor and dignity, and an acknowledgement of his superiority over the people,
Heb. 7. 4. And first, that he may purge himself both from ambition and
greediness, he denies that he was guilty of seeking glory, in either of those
respects, whether from them, or from any other, while he was with them; for
though he received maintenance from the Philippians, even while he was at
Thessalonica, yet he did not rigidly nor covetously urge it, Phil. 4. 16, 17.
Next, he amplifieth his freedom from those two vices by this, that as to the
point, especially, of his not pressing upon them for honorable maintenance, he
did thereby remit of his right, seeing as an Apostle of Christ, or, by virtue
of his Apostolic office, he might have been burdensome and chargeable unto
them, to wit, by exacting maintenance from them, for the same word is rendered
chargeable, and made use of in this sense, v. 9. Doct. 1. As we are not bound
to reject that lawful respect and reverence which is due to virtue, and to
those who are endued with it, where we have the offer of it; So for a man to
hunt after respect and esteem, as his main design, or to seek it eagerly, does
favor of vanity, and should be far, especially from a Minister, as he would
not be found in the least to seek himself more than Gods honor, and the good
of souls: for, he says not, he did not receive glory, only he did not seek it:
nor of men sought we glory. 2. The sin of covetousness consists not only in our
seeking more of things worldly than we have a right unto, but sometimes also in
a rigid exacting of that which is our right; and this especially in a Minister,
when his so doing may prove a stumbling block unto others, and one way or other
man the progress of the Gospel among a people: for, though Paul had a right, as
he here does show, unto honorable maintenance, yet he did not exact it, lest
it should have marred the Gospels progess, 1 Cor. 9. 12. and this he gives as
an evidence of his freedom from covetousness: nor of men sought we glory --
when we might have been burdensome. 3. That worldly maintenance is due from a
people unto Ministers, See upon Gal. 6. 6. Doct. 4. and here the Apostle does
assert it, while he says, when we might have been burdensome as the Apostles
of Christ. 4. It is not enough to know what lawfully may be done, except we
also consider what, in respect of circumstances, is convenient to be done:
Circumstances do alter much the nature of an action, and make that which is in
it self lawful to prove unlawful, at least inconvenient, and so sinful at such
a time: for, the Apostle knew it was lawful to exact his maintenance, yet
finding it was not convenient in that time and place, he does forbear: nor of
men sought we glory, when we might have been burdensome, etc.

Ver. 7. But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes her Children.
The Apostle having already commended his Ministerial carriage among them, by
avowing his freedom from such vices as are inconsistent with that single
hearted sincerity which ought to be in a Minister, he does now begin to commend
it further, by condescending upon some virtues, the exercise whereof was
eminent in him. And first, in general, he shows that he was gentle, that is,
of a me^k and amiable deportment, doing all duties toward them from a principle
of love and delight (as some derive the word in the original from another which
signifies delight) and drawing them on to do what he required, not so much by
rigid boasting and constraint, as by meek persuasion and word-speaking (for-the
word comes from another which signifies to speak) and he says he was gentle
among them, whereby he shows he carried himself not as a superior, but as an
equal, as one of them, and to all of them, and in the midst of them as the word
signifies. And in the latter part of the verse he illustrates this his
gentleness and meekness, from the tender affection and care, not of a mercenary
nurse, but a nursing mother, who dimits her self to the meanest and basest of
offices, for the more warm and tender education of her children. The grounds of
which similitude are in the following verses. Doct. 1. It is not enough that a
Minister of Christ abstain from such scandalous sins of flattery, greed and
ambition, as time-servers are guilty of; but he must also labor for the
exercise of such virtues as may commend his Ministry, and gain respect for him
in peoples consciences: for, Paul, besides his freedom from such vices, does
show that his conversation was adorned with the exercise of several
praiseworthy graces, in this and the following verses: But we were gentle
among you. 2. The Lords Ministers are not, under pretense of eschewing base
flattery, to carry themselves too austerely, retiredly, and much less
indiscreetly: As they should not flatter men in any known sin, so neither
censoriously carp at every small thing, wher^in is no ^ffence neither to God
nor man: Both of which extremities must be eschewed, and Gods way, which lies
betwixt the two, followed: They should so please all men to edification, Romans
15. 2. as to flatter no man in what is really sinful; They should so
discountenance known sin in any man, 1 Timothy 5. 20. as to be of an amiable
discreet and gaining carriage toward all men: for, Paul having cleared himself
of base flattery, v. 5. shows here that he was of a meek and amiable
deportment among them: But we were gentle among you. 3. So ticklish are people
to be wrought upon in order to their spiritual good, that a Minister who would
prevail with them must study their humors, and set himself to digest many
provocations, and to comply with their temper, yielding unto them all
contentment in all things, so far as he safely may with a good conscience; He
must even become all things to all men, that he may save some, 1 Cor. 9. 22.
for, Paul implies that he did all this, while he says, we were gentle among
you. 4. There is somewhat of tender affection, and of care and diligence
flowing from affection, in a nursing mother toward her own Children, which is
exemplary and cannot well be imitated by any other; And therefore mothers whom
God has made in all other respects fit to nurse their Children themselves,
should not, without some pressing necessity, deprive their little ones of their
motherly care, by putting the charge of them upon another: for, Paul implies
so much while, being to set forth the height of his affection toward these
Thessalonians, he does use the similitude, not of a mercenary nurse, but of a
nursing mother, as is clear from his calling the Children whom she cherishes
her own: Even as a nurse cherishes her children. 5. It is not so much to be
regarded what pieces of duty a Minister does discharge to a people, as with
what affection and heart they are discharged by him; and a Minister who would
have his pains facilitated unto himself, and blessed unto the Lords^people,
should labor to put on toward them bowels of compassion, and a kind of
natural tenderness of loving affection, such as is in a father or mother
toward their babes; Or if there be any affection more tender than another, he
should endeavor to put it on, and express it, in seeking after their spiritual
good: for, Paul's affection was such as is in a nursing mother toward her own
children.

Ver. 8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have
imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because
ye were dear unto us. The Apostle does give, in this and the following verses,
five grounds of the former similitude, all and every one of which does prove
his meek and amiable deportment among them, as being so many branches of it.
And 1. as the nursing mother, if she be ^ut for a little time absent from her
children, does most vehemently long to see them, that she may give them the
breasts and other food convenient for them: So Paul was affectionately desirous
of them; It implies a vehement desire after them, and speaks (as it seems)
the ardency of desire he had, while he was busied with his handy labor, v. 9.
and they with theirs, to have the Congregation again convened, that he might
preach unto them. 2. As the nursing mother when she comes to her children has
an unspeakable delight to feed them with food convenient, and with her own
blood now turned to milk: So, Paul was willing, or had such an inexpressible
delight and pleasure (for so the word signifies) not only to feed them
spiritually, and to impart the Gospel to them by his Preaching, but also, for
their through confirmation in the truths preached by him, to impart unto them,
or for them, his very soul, that is his life (so called usually, 1 Samuel 24. 11.
and 26. 21. because the presence of the soul in the body is the cause of life.)
Now this gradation here used, from his impar^ing the Gospel to the imparting of
his life, implies not, that the Gospel is of less value than a man's life, but
that it is more difficult, and speaks greater affection in any, to lay d^wn
^is life for others, than to impart the Gospel to them. 3. As the only reason
which moves the nursing mother to do all, is motherly affection to her
children, and no hope of gain: So was it with Paul even because they were dear
unto him, or beloved by him. The words To exponed hold ou^ several pieces of a
sweet frame of spirit, most necessary for a Minister: And first, he should be
so disposed, as to be ever in a readiness to close with any opportunity that
providence does offer for gaining of souls to God, yea and to thirst after
opportunities of that kind, when one way or other they are withheld: for, thus
was it with Paul, he did vehemently long to have the Lords people convened,
that he might Preach to them: So being affectionately desirous of you. 2.
Whatever he does in the several duties of his calling, he should do it not of
constraint, or with a kind of reluctance, for the simple exoneration of his
Conscience, and to stop the mouths of those whom he fears may otherwise
challenge him, 1 Pet. 5. 2. but from an inward principle of delight, and hearty
good liking to his work: for, Paul was acted from such a principle, we were
willing, or had an inexpressible delight and liking (as the word signifies) to
have imparted the Gospel to you. 3. The choice text wherein he should delight
most to discourse and preach of, should be the glad tidings of salvation, to
lost sinners, through Jesus Christ a Redeemer: for, so did Paul: we were
willing to have imparted to you the Gospel, or the glad tidings of salvation as
the word does signify. 4. He should be forecasting what the faithful discharge
of his message may cost him, what hazard, loss, or suffering he may be put to
for it; and resolving, come what may come, never to shrink from his duty: for,
Paul did forecast, it might cost him his life, and resolves to quit it: we
were willing to have imparted to you not the Gospel of God only, but also our
own souls. 5. He should be so disposed, as to be in a readiness to seal the
truth preached by him with his blood, and thereby to confirm and strengthen the
Lords people in the faith of it, Phil. 2. 17. if God shall call him to it: for,
so was Paul -- to have imparted unto you our own souls. 6. He should labor to
have the Lords people so much indeared to him and beloved by him, that whatever
he do unto them, or suffer for them, may flow from affection and love to them:
for, so was it with Paul: We were willing to have imparted to you -- because ye
were dear unto us.

Ver. 9. For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travel: for laboring night
and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto
you the Gospel of God. Here is a fourth ground of the similitude, to wit, that
as the mother, who is poor and destitute of her husbands help, does labor
night and day that she may have wherewith to sustain her self, and thereby
enable her for sustaining of her children: So does the Apostle speak of his own
diligence here, and thereby confirms what he spoke of his affection to them,
v. 8. as appears by the causal particle for, while he says they did remember,
or at least might remember first, more generally, his labor and travel: The
first word in the original expresses labor unto weariness, and the second
labor after weariness, so that when his body was wearied he did not give over,
but made to work again. And next more particularly, 1. His uncessant diligence
in his labor, he labored night and day, to wit, so much of that time as might
be spared from his necessary refreshments by meat and sleep. 2. The matter of
his labor, partly expressed in Preaching the Gospel, partly employed in his
handly-labour, by making tents to maintain himself, Act. 18. 3. 3. The end why
he did so labor, that he might not be chargeable nor burdensome, neither to
the whole community, nor yet to the private estates of any particular person
among them: and this, as it seems, because, for some reasons not mentioned, the
success of the Gospel would have been otherwise retarded among them, as it
would have been at Corinth if Paul had exacted stipend from them, 1 Cor. 9. 12.
though it was not so in other Churches where Paul exacted his right, 2 Cor. 11.
8. Phil. 4. 14. Doct. 1. Where there is entire and ardent love in the heart,
either to God or man, it makes any piece of service done unto them or for
them, though otherwise never so burdensome, to be but light and easy: for,
because they were dear to him, v. 8. therefore does he willingly undergo no
small labor and travel for them: for ye remember brethren our labor and
travel. 2. It is the duty of people to call to mind, and not to forget the
great pains and labor that Ministers have been at for bringing about their
spiritual good, that so they may not only be thankful to God, who has stirred
up any to lay their otherwise perishing condition so near to the^r heart, and
acknowledge their obligation to instruments who have willingly spent themselves
for their sake: but also may thereby learn to value the worth of any spiritual
good which they have received, labor to maintain and improve it, seeing their
enjoying of it has been the fruit of so much diligence and pains: for, Paul
implies it was their duty to remember, while he says, ye remember brethren,
our labor and travel. 3. It is the Lords allowance and command that men of
most eminent parts and greatest esteem should dimit themselves to the meanest
and most toilesome of employments, for purchasing a mean of livelihood and
subsistence, rather than that they should close with any sinful course, or use
unlawful means for that end: for, here Paul, a great Apostle, being straightened
for a livelihood, does labor night and day in that mean employment of making
^ents, Act. 18. 3. 4. Though Ministers are not to be entangled with the affairs
of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. and ought to give themselves wholly to the duties of
their calling, so as they be not turned aside from them by unnecessary
diversions, 1 Timothy 4. 15. yet in case of necessity and want of maintenance,
otherwise occasioned either by the extreme poverty or profane unthankfulness of
the people, he may use some handie labor to maintain himself and his family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. and yet not cease from preaching the Gospel: for, Paul a Minister of
the Gospel, in this case of necessity, did labor night and day, and preached
unto them the Gospel of God. 5. There is no ground here from Paul's practice to
establish Popish works of supererogation, or good works, (which as they say)
are not commanded, but done over and above duty: for, Paul's abstaining from
taking maintenance was no such work; It was his duty in the present case
(however he had sufficient right to it otherwise, v. 8.) seeing by taking of
maintenance he would have retarded the Gospel, and therewith the glory of God
and spiritual good of his neighbor, 1 Cor. 9. 12. for promoving whereof he was
bound by both tables of the Law (Matthew. 22. 37, 39.) to do whatever was in his
power; and therefore in this case it was not a work over and above duty.

Ver. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and
unblameably, we behaved our selves among you that believe. This verse may be
taken as a fifth ground of the similitude, to this purpose, That as the godly
nursing mother does not only nourish her children with milk and other meat, but
also endeavors to live among them Christianly, that their tender age be not
corrupted, but rather edified by her good example: So Paul did not only feed
the Thessalonians spiritually by preaching the Gospel, but also made his
Christian life and holy practice shine before them, while he behaved himself
holily as to God, in the duties of his worship, and justly as to men, and in
all his dealing with men, and (which follows upon the former) unblameably or
without complaint, so as (though God might justly tax him, 1 John 1. 8. yet)
man could show no reason for which to blame him: And he says, he behaved
himself thus among those that believe, the word may be rendered to those that
believe, implying, that in his leading an holy life, next to Gods glory, he had
respect to their good, that they might be edified by his good example. And for
the truth of all this, he appealeth both unto themselves and God as witnesses;
To them, as witnesses of his outward conversation, and to God, as witness of
his inward sincerity. Doct. 1. As it is the duty of all, and especially of
Ministers unto their flocks, to walk before them in the good example of an holy
life, otherwise they cannot choose but destroy more by their unministerial
walking than they can build up and edify by their most excellent and Orthodox
Preaching: So it is a singular mercy unto a people when God gives them such a
Minister, as even his very life and carriage does Preach unto them: for, Paul's
life was thus exemplary for piety before the Thessalonians, and he does speak
of it as a mercy from God unto believers among them: ye are witnesses says he,
how holily -- we behaved our selves among you, or to you that believe, implying
that his living so was much for their behoof: and he says, how holily -- to
show his carriage was singularly and eminently holy, and not according to the
ordinary strain only. 2. Then is the life of a Christian, and especially of a
Christian Minister, such as it ought, when he has respect to all the
Commandments, as well to those of the first Table by living holily to God, as
of the second by living justly toward men: for, so did Paul: how holily and
justly we behaved our selves. 3. It concerns all men, and chiefly Ministers,
to carry themselves unblameably, and so as neither men have just reason to
complain of them, nor they be too querulous and much in complaining of their
own lot measured out unto them by God, or of every unkindness they may receive
from the people of their charge; There being no rank of people which has the
eyes of more upon them, and whose escapes do more incapacitate them to do good
in their station, and whom the Lord does more earnestly call to the exercise of
patience, without all seeming to repine, than those of the Ministry: for the
word in the original rendered unblameable does signify without complaint, and
that both in an active and passive sense, that is, so that we do not much
complain of others, and that others have not reason to complain of us: how
unblameably we behaved our selves. 4. No man may need to expect he can so walk
as that none complain of him, or be displeased with him; It is sufficient for a
good man in order to his peace, that he do so behave himself as he give no
occasion of complaint unto any, and that those who are really gracious do
approve of him; But as for those who are yet in their unrenewed state, a man
may expect that the more Christianly he does walk, he shall be reproached the
more and spoken evil of by such, 1 Pet. 3. 16. for, taking ^he words as they
are here rendered among you that believe, Paul does thereby imply, he was not
free of blame from all, but only from believers among them. 5. That a man do
live a truly pious and Christian life, it is not sufficient that he discharge
all the external duties of the first and second table, with such exactness that
the sharpest sighted of men cannot justly tax him; but he must also make
Conscience of inward and spiritual duties, and that he do what he does in
single-hearted sincerity, from such motives, and for such ends, as God
approves, and whereof only God himself is witness, otherwise the more that a
man do in the external duty he is the more refined and self-deceiving
hypocrite: for, Paul made conscience both of external and internal duties, as
it appears from his taking men to witness of the former, and God to witness
of the latter: ye are witnesses and God also, etc.

Ver. 11. As ye know, how we exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of
you, (as a father does his children.) He does here prove that his life was such
among them as he presently spoke of, and thereby shows somewhat further of that
laudable and praiseworthy ministerial carriage which he had among them, for
the truth whereof he appealeth also to their own knowledge and conscience; how
that as a father (whose office is to instruct his children, being come to age,
Genesis 18. 19.) he made application of the doctrine delivered by him unto every
one of them in particular, by exhorting some to duty, duty, to wit, seriously
and with much entreaty, (as the word does signify) by comforting others under
their outward crosses or inward sad exercises, and in order hereto by peaking
lovingly and affectionately unto them, (as the word does signify) and by
charging or obtesting others, and that with most severe commination of terrible
judgments, as the word does usually imply. Doct. 1. The most exact touchstone
whereby to try the real soundness of any man's holiness, is to judge him by what
he is in the duties of his particular station; If so he not only discharge the
common duties which are incumbent to every Christian of whatsoever calling, but
also make conscience of those particular duties unto which he is in a peculiar
manner obliged, as a man set in such a station, whether as a Magistrate, or
Minister, or Master, or servant, etc. for, Paul does mention his diligence in
the several duties of his particular calling as a Minister, for an evidence
that his life was holy, just and unblameable, while he says immediately after
the former purpose, as you know how we exhorted, etc. 2. As a Christian, and
especially a Minister, may sometimes speak to the commendation of his own
carriage, and thereby do God good service, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, etc. So Christian
prudence should teach him to single out those things especially for the matter
of his own commendation, for which he knows he is already approved and
commended unto peoples own consciences: for, Paul does commend his own
Ministerial carriage from such things most, as appears by his reiterated
appeals to their own consciences, for bearing witness to the truth of what he
says, and here he appealeth again: As you know, says he. 3. As the chief
piece of a Ministers work is to make pertinent application of general truths
unto the particular cases of the Lords people: So because the case of all is
not one and the same, but diverse, therefore he must, chiefly in the
applicatory part of his work, cut and divide the word aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. not
by speaking unto all the same things, and alike, but assigning unto every man
his own convenient portion, by exhorting the more tractable, comforting the
afflicted, and by obtesting and charging under all highest pain such as are
more refractory and obstinate: for, so does Paul, ye know, says he, how: we
exhorted, and comforted, and charged. 4. It is not sufficient exoneration of a
Minister that he Preach in public, and there make as particular application of
general truths as in prudence he may; But because there are some things which
it is not expedient to mention in public, Ephesians. 5. 12. and some who cannot be
so well gained by taxing their sin in public, and others who shuffle by
themselves the closest application that a Minister in prudence can make in the
public, therefore he is also obliged to make application of and to dispense
the word to every one in private, severally, and apart, so far as he may
without appearance of evil, chap. 5. 22. or wasting the time which should of
necessity be spent in fitting him for, and discharging of the public duties of
his Ministry which he owes unto all: for Paul exhorted, comforted, and charged
every one of them. 5. The Minister of Christ should so behave himself with
meekness and gentleness, as that he do not by an excess of those weaken his
Ministerial gravity, authority and respect; A mixture of both is an excellent
composition, which if any other does most beseem a Minister: for, Paul having
shown that for gentleness he was a nursing mother, v. 7. etc. he declares
here, that for authority and gravity he was as a father: As a father does his
Children, etc.

Ver. 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and Glory. Here is, first, what he exhorted them to, even to walk
worthy of the Lord, not as if they could have demerited his favor, which is
free, Romans 11. 6. but that they might so walk, as to resemble him in what
concerned their duty, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. As a child is said to be worthy of such
a father, when he imitateth him; and so as their life might be accounted worthy
to be taken notice of by him, when they with all their actions should come to
stand and be judged in his sight. Next, there is a reason to enforce this walk,
in a description of God, from his gracious act of calling them to partake, not
only of his Kingdom of grace here, but also of glory hereafter. Doct. 1. As
Christians are not called to Idleness, or to stand still doing nothing, but to
walk and make progress; So the rule by which they ought to walk is not their
own corrupt wit, nor yet the approbation or example of men, but that excellent
pattern of divine properties and virtues, which Scripture ascribes to God, and
are held forth to be imitated by us, in so far as our duty is expressed by
them: for, Paul says they were called to walk worthy of the Lord. 2. Though
there is no walk attended with such real profit, credit or comfort, as our
walking worthy of the Lord, and laboring to resemble him; yet so backward are
we to the way, so apt to be discouraged in it, so resolute are men by nature
never to own it, that there must be no small work before we condescend to enter
it; yea, the Godly themselves do need a sharp spur to pouse them forward, to
keep them from fainting in it, or turning away from it: for, Paul saw it
needful to exhort, comfort and charge even those whom God had already called,
that they would walk worthy of God. 3. As none can walk worthy of God but those
who are effectually called, all others being dead and destitute of any
principle of spiritual life and motion: So then do we improve those excellent
privileges which follow upon effectual calling, aright, when we do not turn
grace unto wantonness, but look on all our gracious receipts as so many
engagements and incitements unto duty: for, he supposes they were called, and
draws an argument from their calling, and those gracious privileges which
follow on it, to make them walk worthy of God: walk worthy of God who has
called you, says he, to his Kingdom and glory. 4. As there is an inseparable
connection betwixt a man's being a kindly subject of Gods Kingdom of Grace here,
and his partaking of glory hereafter: So there is not any thing of greater
force, to make a man walk worthy of God, by leading an holy life, than his well
grounded faith and hope of glory to be enjoyed in Heaven: The man who looks
to be in Heaven for ever, cannot choose but have his conversation in Heaven,
and i^^ure himself somewhat to the custom and manners of that Country, where
he intends to live eternally: for, Paul makes the partaking of Gods glory to
follow necessarily upon reception to his Kingdom, and both an argument to make
them walk worthy of God: who has called you unto his Kingdom and glory.

Ver. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also
in you that believe. The Apostle having already set forth his own ministerial
carriage, does now (in further prosecution of his main scope, which is to
incite them unto constancy) put them in mind of the success of his Ministry
among them, and thereby confirms that his entrance unto them was not in vain,
as to the third thing which I showed on v. 1. was pointed at by that
expression. And, first, he expresses his success among them briefly, while he
shows, that uncessantly, or, at all times, when occasion offered and God
required, he made conscience of thanksgiving to God for the work of their
effectual calling by his Ministry, employed in the expression for this cause,
which relates to the close of v. 12. even because God had called them to his
Kingdom and glory. And next he proves they were effectually called, and thereby
does more fully express the success of his Ministry, by showing, 1. They had
heard the word of God preached by him attentively. 2. They received it being
heard, or did take it to their second consideration whether it was the word of
God, or not; for so the word, rendered received in the former part of the
verse, does imply, even to receive what is spoken in order to the trial of what
truth is in it. 3. After trial they found, and were persuaded that it was no
humane invention, but the truth of God: and here Paul inserts in a parenthesis,
that it is so indeed, and consequently, that they were not mistaken in their
persuasion. 4. They did receive and embrace it as such, for the word, rendered
received in the second place, differs in the original from the former, and
signifies so to receive, as with the heart and by faith to embrace what after
trial has been found to be truth. 5. The word being thus received did work
effectually (in believers among them) a gracious and real change from sin to
holiness of life, as the fruit of the word is set forth, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The
word in the original signifies to work with a kind of irresistible efficacy.
Doct. 1. The Lord does usually bless with success the pains of those Ministers,
whose life and conversation does prove exemplary for piety unto the flock, and
an ornament unto the Gospel which they Preach: for, Paul's pains, whose life and
conversation was such (as is formerly held forth) were blessed with that
measure of success among the Thessalonians, as he sees reason to thank the
Lord for it: for this cause also thank we God. 2. As a Minister may sometimes
reflect with joy upon the fruit of his labors, among the Lords people: So he
should beware in so doing to sacrifice unto his own drag and net, 1 Cor. 15.
10. but ought to ascribe the praise of all his success unto God, who alone does
teach his people to profit, Isaiah 48. 17. for, Paul reflecteth upon his
success with thanksgiving to God: for this cause also thank we God. 3. Though
it be matter of thanksgiving to God from a Minister, that he himself has
obtained grace to discharge his duty faithfully, whatever be his success among
a people, seeing in that case he is always a sweet savor unto God, 2 Cor. 2.
15. yet a tender hearted servant of Christ does never find his heart so much
enlarged in this duty of thanksgiving, and all restraints so fully taken off
which might discourage him in it, as when the Lord is pleased to bless his
faithful diligence with fruit and success among the people of his charge: for,
Paul does then find himself enlarged most to this duty, when his assiduous
pains did get an answerable return of fruitfulness: for this cause also thank
we God. 4. It is a great encouragement, whether for Ministers or private
Christians, to bear burden by prayer and thanksgiving unto God with and for
others, of whom it may be in charity presumed that they are dealing earnestly
with God for themselves: for, he says, we also thank God. The particle also,
implies, they themselves were making Conscience of this duty and therefore he
and his associates did discharge it the more heartily. 5. Our hearts should be
disposed to, and kept in such a frame for duties of Gods immediate worship, and
especially for speaking to God in prayer or praise, that when ever occasion is
offered, and the Lord does call us to it we may be always in a readiness to
close with it: for, Paul did thank God without ceasing, that is, he was always
ready for it, and when occasion offered did go about it. 6. The Scripture in
hand does point at some steps, wherein people must walk, who would have the
Gospel blessed with success upon them. 1. As the word of God, and chiefly the
Gospel Preached by sent Ministers, is the ordinary means of converting sinners
to God: So they who would be converted by it must lend an attentive ear to hear
it, and carefully wait upon such occasions of hearing it as God does offer: for
Paul speaking of the means of their conversion and fruitfulness, says, The
word of God which ye heard of us. 2. They must seriously ponder and meditate
upon the word heard, and especially bring it to the proof, whether it be the
word of God or not, otherwise bare hearing cannot profit: for, says he, ye
received the word which ye heard of us. See the Exposition. 3. As the word of
God delivered by his sent Ministers does still remain Gods word; speak it who
will, Matthew. 23. 2, 3. or let men think of it what they will, Ezekiel. 2. 4, 5.
the nature of the word is nothing altered: So the man who would have the word
blessed with success unto him, must labor to settle himself in this
persuasion, that the word delivered from Scripture is the word of the eternal
God: And, indeed, after an accurate search, it will be found to be so, by the
consent of all its parts, though written at diverse times and several hands, by
the fulfilling of its prophesies, the majesty and simplicity of its style, the
and wonderful efficacy of it in changing men's hearts, the malice of Satan
against it in all ages, and yet the Lords wonderful preserving of it, etc. for,
Paul affirms it to be Gods word, and that they after search had found it to be
so: ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) as the word
of God. 4. When a man is thus persuaded, that the word delivered from Scripture
is no humane invention, but the word of God, he may receive and entertain it as
his word, trembling at threatenings, Isa. 66. 2. rejoicing at and embracing
promises, Heb. 11. 13. yielding obedience to precepts, Act. 4. 6. and
submitting with patience to sharpest reproofs, 1 Samuel 3. 18. for that is to
receive the word as Gods word, and such a receiving is the ordinary consequent
of the forementioned persuasion: for, they being persuaded it was Gods word,
did receive and by faith embrace it: ye received it, says he, not as the word
of man but as the word of God. 5. When a man has thus received and embraced
the word, he must labor to prove his so doing, by making it appear that the
word has wrought effectually, and over the belly of all impediments, a mighty
and gracious change in him from sin to holiness: and the word, so received by
faith, is always attended with such efficacy in those who receive it: It is
the power of misbelief in hearers, which makes so much Preaching to so little
purpose: for says he, which, to wit, the word so received, effectually works
also, not in all, but in you that believe.

Ver. 14. For ye, brethren, became followers of the Churches of God, which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of your own
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews. He proves what he spoke of the
success of his Ministry, and efficacy of the word among them, from their
constancy and patience under sharp sufferings for truth; which, for their
encouragement and comfort, he does set forth under a comparison of likes or
equals, to this sense, that they were followers or made conform to the
Christian Churches in Judea, here called the Churches in Judea which are in
Christ, who are thereby distinguished from the Jewish Synagogues, who held
themselves for Churches of God, but rejected Christ: The ground of which
conformity and likeness he shows did lie in this, that they, the Christian
Church at Thessalonica, had for the same truth endured and suffered the like
evils and hardships, and with the same constancy and courage, from their own
Countrymen and fellow Citizens, even as the Christian Jews had endured and
suffered from the obdured Jews at home in Judea, Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34. Doct. 1.
So effectual and powerful in working is the word of truth, that it makes the
imbracers of it endure the greatest hardships and sharpest sufferings for love
to it, rather than to deny it a testimony when God calls for it: for, he gives
this as an instance of the efficacy of the word, that they became followers of
the Churches of God in suffering for truth. 2. There is not a more convincing
evidence that the word of God is received as it ought, and of its supernatural
efficacy in those who do receive it, than that it works a conformity in them
with others in that which is good, and especially in bearing afflictions and
sufferings for truth with Christian courage and patience as they ought: for,
among all others, he pitcheth on this one evidence, that they had received the
word aright, and that it had wrought effectually in them, even that they became
followers of the Churches of God, in their courageous and Christian carriage,
under sufferings for truths sake. 3. As every error and imperfection in a
Church does not presently unchurch them, nor provoke the Lord to withdraw his
special and powerful influence, which is necessary for actuating the graces of
his Spirit in them, and for making them fruitful in good works: So we ought
diligently to distinguish the sinful failings and praiseworthy practices, both
of persons and Churches, that we neither imitate them in what is evil, nor yet
under a pretense of hatred to their evil, neglect to follow and imitate those
things in them which are truly good: for, though the Christian Churches in
Judea were in some things extremely tenacious of the Ceremonial Law now
abolished, Act. 21. yet they got the name of true Churches, and were honored
of God to be eminent sufferers for truth, and the Church at Thessalonica did
imitate them in their Christian suffering, though not in their sinful failings:
ye became followers of the Churches of God in Judea, for ye have suffered like
things. 4. It is no small encouragement and comfort to the Lords people under a
suffering lot that nothing does befall them but what is common to men, yea to
the best and choicest of Gods Saints and servants, and that the Lord does try
them with nothing but that wherein some of his eminent worthies have ridden the
ford before them: for, Paul comforts them under their sufferings from this,
that they had the Churches in Judea for their precedents, yea and, as it is v.
15. Christ himself, his Prophets and Apostles, ye became followers of the
Churches of God in Judea: for ye have suffered like things. 5. As it adds no
small weight unto a suffering lot, that those of our nearest relations are most
instrumental in it; So such is the fury of a persecuting spirit that when men
are judicially given up of God unto it, they break all natural and civil bonds,
and prove unnatural Beasts and Tigers toward those of their most near
relations, who dare not deny the truth which they do persecute: for, the
Churches both in Judea and Thessalonica were persecuted by their Countrymen,
which made their sufferings the more weighty: The word signifies men of one
Nation, Tribe, or Company.

Ver. 15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men. 16.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. The Apostle
having occasionally mentioned the persecution raised by the Jews, in all places
where they had power, against the Gospel, does see it necessary not only
further to comfort those suffering Thessalonians, by showing that Christ and
the Prophets had formerly suffered, and they the Apostles did presently suffer
no less than they: but also to prevent their stumbling at the Gospel upon this
ground, that the Jews who in former times were Gods only people did so much
oppose it. Which he does, first, by taking off their deceiving vizard, or mask,
of being Gods only people, under which they lurked and made themselves terrible
to all their opposites, and by making them appear in their own colors, while
he reckons out seven horrid crimes, whereof the body of that people, made up
of Parents and Children in several succeeding generations, were guilty: As 1.
they killed, with great barbarity and cruelty (as the word does signify) Jesus
Christ, who was the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and their Lord, to whom they
owed subjection and homage. 2. They killed with the same barbarity the holy
Prophets, called here their own, because they were of their own Nation, and
sent with a peculiar message to them. 3. They persecuted, banished and drove
away (as the word does signify) Paul and the rest of the Apostles. 4. They
pleased not God, they neither had his favor, nor cared much for it; Their
woeful way displeased him exceedingly. 5. They were contrary, and enemies unto
all men, to wit, in so far as they hindered the course of the Gospel, by which
alone salvation is brought to lost mankind, Tit. 2. 11. This is contained, v.
15. Their sixth crime was their violent hindering (as the word rendered
forbidding does signify) the Apostles to speak, or preach, to wit, the Gospel,
unto the Gentiles, and consequently obstructing, so far as in them lay, the
salvation almost of all the world. The last crime with which they are charged
is, That however they did not intend any such thing, yet by committing those
and many other such mischiefs, they did always, and without intermission fill
up their sins, that is, carry on their wickedness to such a measure and height,
as God had decreed to permit them to come at, without stop or hinderance,
before he did inflict deserved judgment. See the like phrase to this sense,
Genesis 15. 6. Matthew. 23. 32. and having thus reckoned out their crimes, he does
further prevent all stumbling at the Gospel, that might arise from their
opposition to it, by showing that as the wrath of God had already begun to
seize upon them, by hardening them judicially in sin (for he speaks in the
preterit time, to denote that this wrath was already begun:) So it should
pursue and surprise them suddenly and unexpectedly, (as the word rendered come
does imply,) and that to the uttermost, without all mitigation, or to the end
(as the word in the original does read,) which speaks the continuance of their
Judgment, until Jerusalem, wherein the great part of the Jews were at that
time providentially assembled, was taken, sacked and destroyed by the Romans;
after which the Jews have hitherto been no more a people, but scattered abroad
through the face of the earth. For confirming this sense of the words see Dan.
9. 26. with Matthew. 23. 38.

From v. 15. Learn 1. As it does much imbitter a suffering lot, when those who
are Satan's instruments in it do go disguised under a mask of piety and zeal for
truth: So it is no less comfort and encouragement to Christ's suffering
servants, when that deceiving mask is taken off their persecutors, and they are
made to appear in their blackest colors, and to be what they really are,
profane enemies to God, under a pretext of friendship to him: for, because it
was one of the most bitter ingredients in all their sufferings, that they had
their rise from the Jews, who were in reputation for Gods only people,
therefore does Paul discover them to be but profane Atheists: who both killed
the Lord Jesus, etc. 2. It is a choice and excellent cordial to keep a
Christian from fainting under his sharpest trials, to call to mind the sore
sufferings of the Lord Christ, who did willingly (John 10. 18.) endure much
more for us than we can endure for him, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. and by his sufferings
has not only cast us a Copy, 1 Pet. 2. 21. but also sanctified ours, and
taken the gall and wormwood of deserved wrath out of our cup before we be made
to drink it, Joh. 16. 33. for, Paul does put them in mind of Christ's
sufferings, thereby to hearten those Thessalonians under theirs: who both
killed the Lord Jesus. 3. That the wise and holy Lord has decreed to permit
sin, and that God does make man's sin turn about to his own glory and his
peoples good, does no ways excuse the sinner or make him guiltless, and that
because he sins willingly, and nor to fulfill the Lords decree, whereof he is
ignorant, Jer. 23. 18. or to promove that good intended by God, but to satisfy
some one or other of his own sinful lusts, and to vent his spleen and enmity
against the Lord, Isa. 10. 7, etc. for, though it was determined before by God
that Christ should dye, Act. 4. 28. and though lost sinners could not otherwise
be saved, Act. 4. 12. yet the actors and instruments in his death, are here
charged as horrid sinners in that act: who both killed the Lord Jesus. 4.
Accession to sin by counsel, procurement, or any other way, does make the
person who is so accessory guilty of the sin, as if he were an immediate actor
of it: for, though it was the Romans who were the immediate actors, both Judge
(Matthew. 27. 2, 26.) and executioners (Matthew. 27. 27.) in Christ's death, and not
the Jews, John 18. 31. yet because their malicious accusations, Luke 23. 10.
and importunate entreaties with Pilate, Luke 23. 18, 21. did procure it,
Therefore are they here charged as guilty of it: who both killed the Lord
Jesus. 5. There is no sin so old, which is not (if not repented of and
pardoned, Isa. 43. 25.) in recent memory with God: for, the Lord does here
remember that long ago bypast guiltiness in killing their own Prophets. 6.
The sins of Parents are imputed to Children, when Children continue to walk in
their Fathers steps, and that because they do in that case by their practice
approve what their Parents did, and in effect proclaim that if they had lived
in the days of their Fathers, they would have done the same, Matthew. 23. 29.
for, here, the present generation of the Jews are charged with the sin of their
Parents, who killed the Prophets, and that because they walked in their steps,
by killing the Lord Jesus and persecuting the Apostles: who killed -- their own
Prophets. 7. So ungrate is man, and such an enemy to his own mercies, that
being left unto himself he will not fail, not only to refuse an offer of
friendship and peace with God, but also to requite evil for good unto those who
labor with them to accept it: And as it has been the lot of Gods public
Ministers in all ages, to receive such a meeting from those to whom they are
sent; So they ought to resolve to meet with such a requital yet: for, though
Christ the Lord, the Prophets and Apostles did come to the Jews with that
offer, yet they both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, says Paul. 8. There are some sins, and especially enmity to God
and his work, which often run as it were in a blood from Parent to Child
through many generations, the Lord in justice so permitting and ordering, that
he may visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, Exodus 20. 5. and punish
Godless Parents in their more Godless posterity, Psalm. 109. 13. for, this sin
became hereditary, and in a kind transient from one generation to another among
the Jews. The former generations killed their own Prophets, and the present
has persecuted us, says Paul. 9. As God is highly displeased with opposers
and persecutors of a Godly Ministry. So a persecuting spirit, when men are
given up unto it, in progress of time does waste the Conscience, eat up all
tender respect to God and his service, and renders men in the end very
Atheists: for, this follows upon their persecuring a sent Ministry, They please
not God, that is, God was not pleased with them, neither did they care to
please him. 10. Where the fear of God is not, there cannot be due respect to
man, and accordingly as men do loose the reins unto impiety against the Lord,
so do they by little and little lose all sense of common humanity, until at
last, if the Lord restrain not, they prove wholly barbarous, very Ishmaels,
their hand against every man, and every man's hand against them: for, upon their
not caring to please God, they became contrary to all men.

From v. 16. Learn 1. As the Gospel finds all men in a condition lost by
nature, and is the only means appointed of God for bringing lost man unto a
state of salvation by Christ, the attaining whereof should be the great end
proposed by all who Preach it: So there can be no such evidence of an hostile
mind in any against all mankind, as to impede and forcibly forbid the Preaching
of this Gospel, and thereby to seek the destruction not only of the body, which
other enemies rest satisfied with, but also of the immortal soul: for, he gives
this as an evidence of their enmity to all men, they did forbid us, says he,
to speak to the Gentiles, and shows that the end of the doctrine of the Gospel,
and their aim in preaching it, was, that they might be saved. 2. When men do
wilfully reject the offer of salvation themselves, they do not usually rest
until they first envy and at last maliciously oppose the embracing of it by
others: If they do not enter themselves, neither will they suffer others: for,
the Jews who rejected Christ and the Gospel themselves did forbid the Apostles
to speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved. 3. When men do enter once
a course of sin, and advance some steps in it, they cannot well retire, but
(except the Lord restrain or work a gracious change) one sin will make way for
another, until the inslaved sinner be carried on to the greatest height of sin
and wickedness that his utmost power and ability can reach: for, the Jews being
once engaged in a course of persecution were never quiet, but sinned always,
that is, made daily progress in wickedness to fill up their sins always. 4. The
providence of God prescribes bounds, as unto all things, Ephesians. 1 -- 11. so unto
men's sins, There being a certain measure of sinning condescended upon by God,
for Nations, Families or Persons with whom God has a controversy, beyond
which they cannot pass, and to which they shall come, before the Lord take
course with them: for, the filling up of their sins, here spoken of, is to be
understood with respect had to that measure, condescended upon in Gods secret
decree and purpose: -- to fill up their sins always. 5. That the Lord gives way
unto Godless sinners to run on in wickedness without control or check, does
come from no respect, but hatred to them, The Lord permitting them so to do
that their measure of sinning being the sooner filled up, the more unexpected
wrath and destruction from the Lord may seize upon them: for, the Apostle shows
that Gods intention in giving way to all their former wickedness was to fill up
their sins always. 6. When the former sins of a Person, Family or Nation, have
justly provoked the Lord in his wrath to harden them, and give them up
judicially to satisfy their own hearts Lusts, and to follow, without control
from him, whatever their Godless profane heart shall suggest to them, In such a
case, they prove remediless, and cannot choose but add sin (...) sin, until the
Lord one way or other take some course with them: for, so was it with the Jews
being given over of God they filled up their sin always, until wrath did come
upon them to the uttermost. 7. The Lord does keep a kind of proportion betwixt
his wrath and the sins of an impenitent people, so that as they go on in
sinning and will not be impeded, until they come to that height and measure,
further than which they cannot go: So does the Lord give way to his wrath and
makes it pursue them, until it destroy, consume and make a full and final end
of them: for, thus was it with the Jews, they filled up their sin always, and
Gods wrath came upon them to the uttermost, or, to the end. 8. The more eminent
mercies and favors from God a people or person have lived under and enjoyed,
the more signal Judgments shall they be surprised with, in case of their
continued abuse of, and ingratitude for such excellent receipts: for, the Lord
in the point of mercy and favor dealt so with the Jews as he did not with any
people, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. and because of their ingratitude they are made
examples of Gods wrath and Judgment: -- the wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost.

Ver. 17. But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time, in presence,
not in heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with great
desire. In the second part of the Chapter, the Apostle, in further pursuance of
his ^ain scope, which is to make them cleave unto the doctrine Preached by him,
does relate unto them that solicitous care and most intimate affection, he yet
had of them and to them: and he falls upon and prosecutes this purpose, in a
kind of Apology for his absence from them, which he excuses, first, from his
earnest desire and purpose he had to see them before now. And 1. he expresses
the cause of his earnest desire, to wit, his sudden removal; being driven away
from them unexpectedly, or in the instant of an hour (as the words rendered, for
a short time, do well read, and is most agreeable to the history, Act. 17. 10.)
which his sudden removal occasioned him no less grief than that of a tender
father, when bereft of his orphan Children (as the word rendered taken from you
does imply) whence it came to pass that though his bodily presence was by force
and violence taken from them, yet he had left his heart and affection with
them. Next he expresses his desire and purpose it self to this sense, that the
greater his grief was for his removal from them, his endeavor or resolute
fervent purpose to see them (as the word implies) together with his continued
and active desire (as the word rendered desire does signify) were so much the
more vehement. Doct. 1. A tender walker will labor to approve himself (though
chiefly -- 2 Timothy 2. 15. yet) not only to God, by making conscience of every
duty; but also to man, so that he cannot willingly lie under the suspicion of a
neglected duty, but will labor as he can have access to clear himself of it:
for, Paul conceiving they might have suspected he had sinfully neglected his
duty in giving them a visit, when he ought and might, he does here clear
himself of that neglect: for we, brethren, being taken from you, etc. 2. The
society, presence, and mutual fellowship of the Lords people among themselves,
does prove most sweet and advantageous, and especially the presence and
fellowship of the flock is most acceptable unto a Pastor, whose pains the Lord
has blessed among them; for, Paul's labors were blessed unto the
Thessalonians, and therefore his absence from them was so grievous to him, and
their presence so much desired by him: But we being taken from you, etc. 3. It
is therefore no little piece of Satan's work and business to mar the comfort of
any such fellowship, not only by working strife, division and prejudice among
them while they are together, Act. 15. 39. but also by procuring one way or
other, their scattering into diverse places, so that they cannot enjoy that
mutual fellowship which gladly they would: for, says Paul, we were taken from
you for a short time; and this by Satan's procurement as the following verse
does show. 4. So great delight has a Godly Pastor to converse among his flock,
that even necessitated absence from them, occasioned by persecution or other
ways, will be grievous to him: So was it with Paul, whose necessitated removal
from the Thessalonians was no less grievous, than a Fathers removal from his
destitute Orphans, as the word implies, which is rendered being taken from you.
5. It is the duty and wisdom of the Lords people to make good use of the
company and pains of godly and faithful Ministers, seeing unexpectedly, in a
moment, and twinkling of an eye they may be deprived of them: for, Paul was
taken from them for a short time, or in a short time, the instant of an hour,
as the word does read. 6. It is no small comfort unto the Lords people under
their saddest dissipation and scattering, that however they cannot enjoy the
bodily presence one of another, yet they may be present one with another in
heart and affection, by minding one another case, 2 Cor. 7. 3. by being
suitably affected with it, Heb. 13. 3. and not only praying to God for, but
also by all lawful means procuring the good one of another, Col. 4. 12. for,
though Paul was taken from them in presence, yet not in heart. 7. Where desires
after good are fervent, and such as they ought, they will be accompanied with
fixed endeavors and purposes to get them accomplished: a desire that comes not
up the length of an endeavor and purpose, is not worthy the name of a
praiseworthy desire, but of the sluggards raw and coldryf with, Prove. 21. 25.
for, Paul's great desire to see them, had endeavors or fixed purposes joined
with it: we endeavored to see your face with great desire. 8. True grace and
gracious affections of love, desire, hope, hatred, etc. the more they are
opposed, they grow the more fervent, all contrary opposition being but as Oil,
or a little water cast upon a flame, which makes it burn the more: for, the
more that Paul was stopped from coming to them, he endeavored the more
abundantly to see their face with great desire.

Ver. 18. Wherefore we would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again,
but Satan hindered us. He excuses his absence secondly, and does further
acquaint them with his solicitous care of them, by showing, first, that he and
his associates, in whose name he does write all along, but it seems especially
he himself not only desired and purposed to give them a visit, but also did
once and again, that is, diverse times enterprise to fulfill his purpose: (for,
the word rendered we would must be taken for such an enterprise, and not for a
naked desire, seeing he had such a desire always, and not only once and again)
and secondly by showing that Satan had hindered him to fulfill his enterprise,
either by stirring up some to lay snares for him in the way, as Act. 23. 12,
etc. or by raising new troubles in other Churches, which required Paul's
presence. Doct. 1. It does not sufficiently assoile a man of neglect of duty
that he has had some desire after it, and purposes to set about it, except
those desires and purposes have been seconded by active and resolute
enterprises, to get them fulfilled and performed: for, Paul's desires and
purposes were followed with such enterprises: wherefore we would have come unto
you. 2. Neither will it yet assoile him that he has once set about his duty,
and upon the first discovery of an impediment and hinderance presently retired,
and cast by all further care of it; But where there is a fervent and honest
desire after duty, there should be a renewing of enterprises and endeavors
even after many disappointments, until either their desire be fulfilled, or at
least it be made to appear that the Lord has otherwise determined, 1 Samuel 16.
1. compared with 4. for, Paul thinks it not sufficient to excuse his not
coming, from this only that he had a fervent desire, and accordingly had
enterprized once to come, but adds, we would have come to you once and again,
that is, often. 3. The Lord, for good and wise reasons, may suffer his people
so far to engage in a business, as once and again to enterprise it, having
cleared their way for doing so much, and yet having tried their obedience in
that far, afterward cast in, or suffer to be cast in, some invincible stop or
let to mar them from throughing it; In which case he accepts the will for the
deed, and a serious enterprise for full performance, 1 King. 8. 18, 19. for,
the Lord did clear Paul's way to attempt a Voyage to Thessalonica often, and yet
permitted Satan to lay in a stop: we would have come once and again, but Satan
hindered us. 4. It is the duty of Saints to surcease from that which otherwise
were a duty, when God does call them to surcease from it, and consequently for
the time does make it no duty, either by giving them other more necessary work,
or by making some inevitable hazard to their own life appear in that work,
without any advantage but with much prejudice to Religion and the work of God:
for, Paul upon Satan his casting in, through Gods permission, some one or both
of those impediments, he delays his Voyage to Thessalonica, which otherwise
was a duty: we would have come once and again, but Satan hindered us. 5. As the
Child of God can no sooner enterprise that which is really good, but usually he
does as soon meet with some impediment; So whoever be the means or instruments
for impeding us in the way of duty, the Devil himself through Gods permission
is the prime Author of that woeful work, and all others do but fight under his
Banner: for, though other means were doubtless accessory to Paul's stay, yet
Satan hindered us, says he. 6. When once the Godly are by Satan's craft or
malice disjoined, or separate, whether in place, affection or judgment, the
same Satan does bend his wit to hinder their re-uniting and meeting together
again in one: So great an enemy is he to that rich advantage, which may be
attained in and by the Communion of Saints: for, says Paul, we would have come
unto you, but Satan hindered us.

Ver. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? He does here give a
reason of his desire, purpose, and frequently reiterated attempt to come and
see them; and thereby does also show how highly he esteemed of them, while by
proponing a question (to show how pathetick he was in his affection to them)
and by answering it himself, he declares, 1. They were his hope, Christ is
indeed the only ground and foundation of our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. by whose merit
and intercession we expect to obtain the good thing hoped for, chap. 5. 9, 10.
but they were only a strengthening encouragement to his hope, in so far as their
conversion, by his Ministry, was a speaking evidence, among other things, of
his right to the promised reward of glory, Dan. 12. 3. And 2. in the same sense
he calls them his joy, because Gods goodness to them, and bestowed on them by
the means of his Ministry, did already in part, and was more fully afterward
in Heaven to furnish him with matter of joy in God. And 3. his Crown, or
Ornament, and a crown of rejoicing, or of glorious boasting, for which he had
matter of glorying in Christ, and eternal rejoicing and glory was to be freely
recompensed to him by God: See 2 Timothy 4. 8. And therefore in his answer to the
question, he shows they were to be all those unto him, not so much in this
life, as at Christ's second coming in the great day, whose sight and presence
then should make the Thessalonians to be that to Paul which he expected from
them. Doct. 1. As we ought to speak and think of Heaven and glory, not drily
and warshly, but with an open mouth and enlarged heart, thereby to testify
unto our selves or others, that we believe the reality of what Scripture
speaks to that purpose: So the more we think and speak of that subject as we
ought, our faith and sense thereof will grow, and rise by degrees unto a
greater height: for, Paul speaking of that Heavenly glory, speaks
affectionately of it, and his speech concerning it does rise by degrees, while
he mentions it first under the name of hope, next of joy, thirdly of a crown
of rejoicing: For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 2. A
faithful Minister does take an argument for his present or future rejoicing,
not so much from the worth or dignity of the office it self, as from the
blessing of God upon the faithful employing of his talents in that office: for,
Paul does promise unto himself matter of joy and rejoicing, not from this that
he was an Apostle, or Minister, but that they were gained to God by his
Ministry: for what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye?
3. Though unregenerate men be sometimes made use of by God as Ministers, for
converting of sinners, Mat. 7. 22. who already have their reward, because they
do all they do to be seen of men, Matthew. 6. 2. yet when a Minister has first
made sure his own right to Heaven through the blood of Christ, he may expect
that the more his labors have been blessed of God for converting souls, he
shall have the more of joy and glory at Christ's second coming: for, Paul
affirms that they, as being converted by his Ministry, should bring some
accession to his joy and rejoicing then, while he says, are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? 4. As a Minister may
sometimes lawfully commend the good he sees in people, so he should beware
lest he so commend them as to flatter them, or cry them up as singular and
above others, who are equally deserving: for, the Apostle in commending them as
those by whom he should have matter of joy, says, are not even ye? the word
may read are not also ye, to wit, as other Churches, so that he does not make
them singular. 5. It is the presence of Christ, a sight of him, and of interest
in him by faith or sense, which makes the presence of our graces, or of any
good done by us, to afford us matter of comfort, joy or boasting, seeing it is
he alone in whom the imperfection of our good are covered, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and by
whom that wrath and curse, which would have spoiled our mirth eternally, is
quite removed, Gal. 6. 13. for, he implies it would be Christ's presence which
should make them his joy and crown, while he says, are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his second coming. 6. Though the Lord
Christ does manifest himself in some measure unto his own, while they are here
on earth, Joh. 14. 23. yet the full and through discovery of him is reserved
until his second coming: we see him now but through a glass, but then face to
face, with such a sight as shall make us thoroughly like him, 1 John 3. 2. even
our vile bodies shall be transformed by him, and made like his own most
glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. for, he conjoyneth Christ's presence and his second
coming, because his presence shall shine most brightly then: are not even ye in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his second coming.

Ver. 20. For ye are our glory and joy. He repeats, with an asseveration, what
he presently showed they would serve for unto him at Christ's second coming, and
this to declare both the certainty of the thing in it self, and the persuasion
which he had of it, while he says, for, or truly (as the word is sometime
rendered) ye are our glory and joy. Hence, Learn, our faith and hope of interest
in glory when it is attained, and especially when it is accompanied with some
foretastings of the sweetness of it, should be not only once, but frequently
reacted and avowed, hereby to assure our hearts the more that our faith is real
and no delusion, and consequently to fit us for rejecting all contrary
tentations, when we shall be assaulted with them afterward: for, Paul does
again rejoycingly repeat the confidence he had of joy and glory at Christ
second coming, while he says, Truly ye are our glory and joy.

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter, he does further excuse his long absence,
from that signal evidence of his affection, v. 1. in sending Timotheus to
confirm and comfort them, v. 2. and having taken occasion hence to speak
somewhat for their establishment against fainting under affliction, because
affliction is the common lot of the Godly, v. 3. and he had forewarned them of
all, which had yet come, v. 4. he repeateth what he spoke of his sending
Timotheus to prevent their defection, v. 5.

In the second part of the Chapter he does further conyince them of his ardent
affection toward them, by showing what good tidings Timotheus had returned
from them, v. 6. and what effects they had produced in him, as comfort, v. 7,
8. great joy, v. 9. with assiduous and earnest prayer to God on their behalf,
v. 10.

In the third part of the Chapter he breaks forth in a fervent prayer to God
for them, seeking, 1. A successful journey toward them, v. 11. 2. Growth and
increase in the grace of love, v. 12. 3. Establishment in holiness, with the
pacifying of their hearts and consciences, v. 13.

Ver. 1. WHerefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be
left at Athens alone. The Apostle, being yet further to excuse his long absence
from them, and jointly therewith to express that solicitous care which he had
of them, by his sending Timotheus unto them, he does first in this verse
express the cause inwardly moving him to send him, to wit, his fervent
affection toward them, which was such that when he could not longer forbear,
or (as the word signifies) endure and suffer, to wit, the heavy weight of his
earnest desire to see them, and of his perplexing fear concerning them, he
thought good, or (as the word does signify) had an unexpressible affection
rather to be left alone in the midst of all his tribulations at Athens,
(whither he was driven out of Berea by the fury of the Jews, Act. 17. 15.) than
that they should be longer destitute of one to supply his absence among them in
their great need and hazard: whereby he did prefer their good in a manner to
his own. Doct. 1. Though the hypocritical desires of wicked men after good are
easily quenched, at the first appearance of real or apprehended difficulties,
Prove. 26. 13. yet the sincere desires of the Godly are not so; but the more
they are opposed they are the more inflamed, and prove the more vehement: for,
Paul's sincere desire to see the Thessalonians grew so vehement, that he could
not longer bear or endure the weight of it, and that because it was opposed
chap. 2. v. 18. as it appears by the illative particle wherefore: wherefore
when we could not longer forbear. 2. There can be no more pressing weight upon
an holy heart, than strong convictions of a duty necessary to be gone about by
him for the Churches good, and the Lords seeming to stand in his way and to
keep him up from the performance of it. This is such a weight that though the
tender Christian may stand under it for a time, yet what through fear of some
controversy which the Lord by crossing him may be pursuing against him, Numb.
20. 12. with Deuteronomy. 3. 25, 26. and what through grief for Gods dishonor and the
Churches hurt, by reason that the duty lies undone, 1 Cor. 4. 18, 19. it
proves almost insupportable at length: And where it is thus, it argues a
tender frame of heart: for, Paul being convinced it was his duty to visit this
Church, and being long impeded from it, does look upon his disappointment as an
unsupportable weight: when we could not longer forbear, or endure and bear this
weight. 3. Holy submission and patience under cross dispensations, by which the
Child of God is retarded in the way of duty, do no way abolish, but are well
consistent with a fervent desire and earnest endeavor, by all lawful means to
prosecute that duty wherein he is crossed: Submission indeed removes fretting
impatience, Act. 21. 14. but it quickneth holy desires and diligence: for,
Paul, who as he reverenced God in all cross dispensations, Phil. 4. 11. and so
doubtless also in this, does yet use his utmost diligence to compass the duty
wherein he was crossed, and for that end he thought good to be left at Athens
alone, by sending Timotheus to supply his absence. 4. Where there is love
unfeigned, and a sincere desire after the Churches good, it will make the man
endued with it postpone his own good and comfort unto theirs, to wit, his own
temporal good to their spiritual, 1 Cor. 8. 18. yea his own convenience to
their necessity, both in things temporal and spiritual, as here Paul's sincere
and ardent affection to their good, made him spoil himself of all good
company, and willing to be left at Athens alone. 5. As in all duties, so
especially in duties of kindness to Christ's afflicted members, it is not so
much to be attended what we do, as from what inward principle we are acted: And
particularly, the more of cheerfulness and hearty affection goes along with
our duty, it is the more praiseworthy and accepted both by God and man: and
where there is sincere love, what will it make a man not do, endure or
cheerfully suffer for the good of the party loved? for, Paul's love to them made
him cheerfully and willingly deprive himself of all good company for their
sake, and the worth and acceptableness of what he did for them lies in this,
that he did it willingly: we thought good says he, or had an eager affection
and good will to be left at Athens alone.

Ver. 2. And sent Timotheus our brother and minister of God, and our fellow
labourer in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you
concerning your faith. He does next show what his fervent affection had moved
him to do for them, and for what end he did it. He had sent Timotheus unto
them; and that he might show his respect to them in the worth of him whom he
had sent, he does commend Timotheus from three Epithetes, as being, first, a
brother, the usual epithete of Christians, Act. 11. 29. because they are born
of God, John 13. their one Father in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 6. 2. A minister of God,
because of his office to Preach the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4. 2. 3. Paul's
fellowlabourer, because he was his joynt-collegue in the Gospel, that is, in
Preaching the Gospel. And the end why he did then send him, was first, to
confirm or underprop them, (as the word signifies) to wit, lest they had been
either drawn from the truth by deceitful reasonings, Col. 2. 8. or driven from
it by force of persecution, Matthew. 10. 22. Secondly to comfort them, the word
signifies both to exhort and comfort, and he was sent for both, not only to
comfort them under their sad sufferings, but also to exhort them unto constancy
notwithstanding of them. Now the thing which he was mainly to confirm them in,
and by exhortation to press upon them, is their faith, that is, their firm
assent and adhering to the truths of the Gospel. Doct. 1. Holy desire and
fervent love to duty is most ingenious and witty to find out ways for
discharging the duty, even when all ordinary access to it does seem to be
obstructed: for, love and desire in Paul to confirm and comfort these
Thessalonians in their need, makes him find out a way to do that by another,
which he could no ways do himself: And sent Timotheus -- to establish you. 2.
Church-guides, or judicatories, who are charged with the oversight of several
Congregations, where they cannot in person officiate themselves are not
exonered by sending forth unto the Lords Vineyard any who may be had, except
they employ the fittest, and such of whom there are grounds of hope, that,
through the Lords help he may carry on the work for which he is sent: for, Paul
not being able to go himself, sends not every one, but a man every way fitted
for the work, even Timotheus a brother, etc. 3. As Ministers, especially they
who are of elder standing, and best known in the Church, are bound to give
their deserved testimony unto others of the Lords servants, for gaining them
respect and credit among the people of their charge: So then is a Minister
sufficiently qualified and worthy to be commended as a complete Minister, when
first he is a man in all appearance truly pious, for, Paul commends Timothy
from this, he was a brother. 2. When he is painful and laborious about his
masters work: Timotheus was a labourer. 3. When he is a lover of unity, and
entertaineth peace with others of his masters servants, striving to work with
them, Phil. 1. 27. and not against them, in a way of his own separate from
them: Timotheus was a fellowlabourer. And 4. When he is a lover of truth, as
well as of peace, and studyeth unity but in so far, as it thwareth not with
virtue: for, he is commended as a fellow laborer in the Gospel of Christ.
Doct. 4. The office of an Evangelist, among other things, (see upon Ephesians. 4.
11.) was to confirm and establish in the faith those Churches which the
Apostles had already planted: for, Timotheus an Evangelist (2 Timothy 4. 5.) was
sent by Paul to comfirm and establish this Church in the faith. 5. Such is
Satan's enmity against the grace of faith, and so many are his onsets, what by
one means, what by another to brangle it, Luke 22. 31, 32. as knowing therein
the believers great strength does lie, 1 John 5. 4. that even the strongest
faith has need of confirmation and establishment: And it is the Godly man's
wisdom and duty, in trying times, to have a special care to guard his faith, as
that grace which not only Satan striveth to shake most, but also upon the
stability whereof the safety, strength and vigor of his other graces depend
much: for, though Paul had praised their faith much, chap. 1. 8. yet he sends
here to confirm it, and it especially more than any other of their graces: to
establish you concerning your faith, says he. 6. A singular means for
strengthening faith under sad afflictions and trials is for Ministers to hold
out, and people to embrace those excellent comforts, which the word of truth
holds forth to the Lords people in suffering times: Our standing at a distance
from, and questioning our interest in those, do breed discouragement and
terror, and thereby make way for shameful fainting in duty, and foul defection
from truth, Heb. 12. 13. for, Timotheus was sent both to establish and comfort
them concerning their faith.

Ver. 3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves know
that we are appointed thereunto. He does here show, 1. The necessity at that
time of his sending Timotheus to establish them, to wit, the prevention of an
apparent hazard, lest any of them, because of Paul's or their own afflictions,
should have been drawn away by flattery, or shaken and moved from truth, like
the tail of a dog following upon his master (as the word signifies.) 2. And
because the same hazard did yet remain in part, he uses two arguments for
their present establishment against fainting, either under his or their
affliction. The first in this verse to this purpose, They themselves knew, or
were sufficiently instructed from the doctrine of the Gospel, that all Christ's
followers, Mark 8. 34. and chiefly the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 9. were appointed,
or (as the word is rendered, Luke 2. 34.) set as a mark, at which the arrows of
affliction and persecution are shot. Now they are thus appointed and set as a
mark for trouble by God, both in his eternal counsel, Romans 8. 29. and in his
actual separating them from the world by converting grace, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Doct.
1. A Ministers care should be extended toward all and every one of his charge,
not only the great, the rich, the strong in grace, and eminent, but even to the
poor, the outwardly base, contemptible, and to such as are but weak, even babes
in Christ, Heb. 5. 12, 13. and this, as at all times, so especially when they
are exercised with sharp trials and sore afflictions: for, Paul's care was thus
extended toward all at such a time, as is employed, while he says, That no man
should be moved. 2. The Lords faithful servants may be so much supported by
grace under their saddest sufferings, as that their fear and care will be more
exercised toward others of the Lords people, and about the possible sinful
consequences of their trouble upon others, than any thing that does concern
themselves: for, supponing the afflictions here spoken of to be Paul's own, as
certainly his own are not excluded, we find him more afraid of their stumbling,
than careful of himself: That no man, says he, should be moved at these
afflictions. 3. As Christians under afflictions for truth are in hazard to be
shaken, brangled and tossed to and fro with the wind of strong tentations,
which take their rise from thence: So the ordinary tentations wherewith the
Tempter does assault afflicted Christians have much of insinuating flattery in
them, while he seems to commiserate their present case, and promises much
contentment and ease if they step but a little aside from the way of duty for
attaining to an outgate: for, the word rendered to be moved signifies to be
shaken as a dogs tail, and drawn away by flattery: That no man should be moved
by these afflictions. 4. So much ought we to adore and reverence the Lords
supreme dominion and absolute providence, as presently without debate to stoop
and embrace whatsoever lot is measured out unto us by it: for, he persuades
them to endure affliction without fainting, from this, that they and others
were appointed thereunto by God. 5. The faith of this, that the Lord has
firmly decreed to bring his followers by the way of the cross to their crown,
and to make them first to suffer with Christ, before they reign with him, is an
excellent remedy to stay and settle the believer against fainting and wavering
under the sorest trouble: for, this is the remedy prescribed here by Paul: for
we are appointed thereunto, says he. 6. Scripture comforts under afflictions
cannot support a man except he know them, and be acquainted with them; and
ignorance is often the cause of our great impatience: for, he makes their
knowledge of Gods appointment necessary in order to their drawing comfort from
it: for, says he, your selves know that we are appointed thereunto.

Ver. 4. For verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we should
suffer tribulation, even as it came to pass, and ye know. He confirms here
what he said, of their knowing that Christians are appointed and called to
undergo a suffering lot, (as appears by the causal particle for) and withal
does add a second argument to preserve them from fainting, to this purpose,
They themselves knew, and could bear him witness, that when he was among them
at Thessalonica, Act. 17. 1, etc. he had foretold them that both he and they
were to meet with much tribulation from their oppressing persecutors: which
prediction was now made out and verified by the event, and therefore there was
no occasion from them to faint because of affliction, seeing they were so
timously forewarned of it. Doct. 1. It is the duty of Christ's Ministers to
give timous warning unto the Lords people of trials and hardships, which they
cannot choose but encounter in their Christian course, lest otherwise when they
are surprised with unexpected trouble, they repent their undertaking and
succumb, Mark 14. 17. for, Paul did timously, and when he was with them foretell
that they should suffer tribulation. 2. When the Lords servants have an open
door to Preach the Gospel unto a people, they ought to stir their time, and
instruct their hearers in all necessary truths, as not knowing how soon the
door may be shut, and the present opportunity of doing good removed, Prove. 27.
4. for, so did Paul, when he was with them, he told them of all necessary
truths, and of this in particular, that we should suffer tribulation, says he.
3. That the Lords people have had timous warning from the word of truth of
their troubles which will attend them in their Christian course, it ought in
reason to keep them from fainting and stumbling at a cross, when they meet with
one: for, this is the Apostles scope in this verse, to reason them up to a
courageous frame of spirit under tribulation, because he had told them before
of it. 4. As Ministers ought to be circumspect in their predictions,
foretelling nothing for certain but what the word of truth gives ground to
believe that it shall undoubtedly come to pass; lest otherwise, when the event
does not answer the prediction, their Ministry be brought unto contempt: So the
fulfilling of such predictions does strongly confirm the truth of the word, and
underprop the believer in the faith of it, notwithstanding of any sad
affliction or hardship he may be under for adhering to it: for, Paul foretold
nothing but what the event did verify, and from this that the event did answer
his prediction, he does persuade them not to faint, but to adhere to truth,
although they were under present trouble for it: We told you before, that we
should suffer tribulation, even as it came to pass.

Ver. 5. For this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your
faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in
vain. The Apostle repeateth what he spoke, v. 1. and 2. of his sending
Timotheus, and expresses a third end why he had sent him (for other two were
mentioned, v. 2.) and it was, that he might know their faith, or their
constancy in the faith: and he closes the verse by giving a reason why he
desired so much to know their faith, to wit, a twofold fear, 1. Lest Satan, who
is here called the tempter, (as being that eminent tempter) had taken occasion
from their present affliction for truth, to tempt them one way or other to make
defection from it, and 2. Lest they had yielded to the tempter, which is not
expressed, but employed in that, which would have followed upon their defection,
to wit, the loss of Paul's labor in Preaching the Gospel among them, which in
that case would have been in vain and useless as to them, though not to
himself, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Doct. 1. The care of an honest Minister toward the
people of his charge does extend it self not only to their first conversion,
and the drawing them out of nature to a state of grace; but also to their
perseverance in that state: for, Paul after he had been instrumental in
converting the Thessalonians, does yet remain solicitous about their
perseverance: And therefore I sent, says he, to know your faith. 2. A faithful
Minister does not think himself exonered when he has discharged his duty
before the people, but will remain in a Christian manner solicitous of the
success of his pains among the flock, when an hireling and time-server does not
much trouble himself about any such thing, Joh. 10. 12. for, Paul from this
solicitous care does send to know their faith, and the fruit of his labors
among them. 3. There is an holy jealousy in Christian love, whereby though it
believe the best, 1 Cor. 13. 7. yet it fears the worst, that all lawful means
may be made use of to prevent it: for Paul from love does fear, lest the
tempter had tempted them, and his labor be in vain. 4. As it is Satan's trade
to tempt, and to tempt all men, good and bad, Luke 22. 31. Ephesians. 2 -- 2. by all
means, 2 Cor. 11. 3. at all times, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and to all evil, 2 These. 2. 10.
So he omitteth no occasion of exercising this his woeful trade with advantage, 2
Cor. 2. 11. and more particularly he takes advantage of those cross
dispensations, by which the Lord does exercise his people, to make them cast at
truth and piety: for, Paul's* fear lest Satan had taken occasion from their
trouble to tempt them, implies, his usual way is to tempt on such an occasion:
Lest by some means the tempter have tempted you. 5. So much do the best of
Saints lie open to Satan's temptations, and so ready are they, if left to
themselves, to yield when tempted, that a faithful Minister will have reason to
fear, to watch, to take heed to himself and the flock, so long as there is a
tempter to tempt: for, Paul does fear lest the best among them h^d been tempted
and succumbed: lest by some means the tempter have tempted you. 6. Though the
pains and labor of a faithful Minister cannot be in vain as to God, who does
always gain his intent, Isa. 55. 10, 11. nor yet as to the Minister himself,
whose reward is with the Lord, Isa. 49. 4. yet as to the people who make not
use of his pains, or make apostasy from that seeming good which once they
attained by them, they are always in vain and to no good purpose, yea a snare,
Isa. 28. 13. and shall be for a testimony against them, Mark 6. 11. for, Paul
implies so much as that if they had yielded to the tempter and made apostasy
from the faith, his labor would have been in vain among them.

Ver. 6. But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us
always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you. In the second part
of the Chapter, the Apostle being, in order to their further establishment in
the truth, to express yet more of his fervent affection toward them, which was
drawn out by Timotheus his return from them, he does, first, in this verse show
what Timotheus did report of them, when he had returned to Paul being now at
Corinth, as it appears from Act. 18. 1. with 5. (though he was at Athens when
he sent him, v. 1.) and the sum of this report in general is called good
tidings, he brought us good tidings, It is the same word in the original which
signifies to Preach the Gospel, because the thing reported was the fruit and
effect of the Gospel Preached among them, the hearing whereof was as the
Preaching of it over again unto Paul. 2. Those good tidings in particular were
the report he made, 1. Of their faith, or, of their stedfastness in the faith,
2. Of their love, or sanctified practice according to both tables of the law
flowing from faith, for love is the fulfilling of the Law, Gal. 6. 2. 3. Of
their special love and respect to Paul, made evident, 1. By their good
remembrance of him, or that respective mention which they made of his labor,
diligence and his whole Ministerial carriage among them, and that always when
they had occasion to speak of him. 2. By their earnest desire to see him, The
word in the Original signifies such a desire as is, in a kind, impatient of
delays. And lest he had seemed hereby to have reflected upon himself, who had
so long delayed to satisfy their longing desire, he adds in the close, that
his desire was no less ardent to see them, though he was hindered without any
default of his, chap. 2. 18. Doct. 1. An Evangelist, one of the extraordinary
officers in the new Testament, did herein among other things differ from an
ordinary Minister, he was not tied unto any charge, but being sent out by the
Apostles to water such Churches as they had planted, (see v. 2.) he did there
remain, not constantly, but for a certain time, until the Apostles should have
further work for him elsewhere: for, Timotheus being sent to Thessalonica by
Paul did not reside there, but returned within a little to be disposed of by
Paul as he thought good: But now when Timotheus came from you unto us. 2. The
Lord does powerfully overrule and turn about the deepest designs of Satan
against his work to the furtherance of it, as if they had been purposely
contrived for that end: for, Satan by hindering Paul to go to Thessalonica,
chap. 2. 18. got no advantage but detriment, in so far as when Paul was
converting souls to God, first at Athens, next at Corinth, Timotheus was
confirming the Church at Thessalonica: when Timotheus came from you unto us,
which supponeth he had been with them, and Satan could not hinder that. 3. That
the work of Gods grace does thrive among a people is good tidings from them,
and such good tidings may be had even from persecuted Christians: for, those
were the tidings which Timotheus did report from this persecuted Church, and
they are called good tidings: he brought us good tidings of your faith, etc. 4.
The Lords way with his work and people does often soar so high above all
probable means, that it disappoints and abundantly refutes our anxious, and
sometimes misbelieving fears: So was it here v. 5. he feared they had yielded
to the tempter in his absence from them at a time of so great need, but now he
finds it was otherwise, the Lord having supplied the want of Paul by some other
way: He brought us good tidings of your faith and charity. 5. The best tidings
which can be reported of any, is that he is a believer in Jesus Christ, a
maintainer of charity and good works in his own practice, and one that
accounts highly of the faithful servants of Jesus Christ: And as all those
three are always conjoined, so nothing almost worth the hearing can be
reported of any, in whom all or any of those are wanting: for, the good tidings
which he reported were, of your faith and charity and that ye have good
remembrance of us, says Paul. 6. Though none who are truly Godly ought to be
excluded from our special love, yet some may justly challenge a choice room in
our affections above others, according to our special interest in them, and
stricter tie unto them by nature, 1 Timothy 5. 4. by cohabitation, 1 Timothy 5. 8. by
favors received from them, 1 Samuel 18. 1. by their greater usefulness in the
work of God, 2 Samuel 18. 3. and because of a greater measure of Gods grace
shining in them: for, they made evident their special love unto Paul beyond
others, by their good remembrance of him, and desire to see him. 7. Among all
those who may justly claim, and do most easily obtain a choice room in the
child of God his affections above others, a gracious Minister whom the Lord
has made instrumental for his conversion is with the first: for, Paul had been
an instrument of their conversion, and therefore he shareth most deeply in
their love: and that ye have good remembrance of us, says he. 8. As Christian
love does vent it self in speaking the best of the party loved; so it differs
much as to this effect, from popular applause, Christian love is a constant
friend, but popular applause is most uncertain, Matthew. 21. 9. with 27. 22, 23.
for, herein did they evidence their Christian affection to Paul that they had
good remembrance of him always. 9. Christian love, and especially that which is
betwixt a faithful Pastor and a gracious people of his charge, does earnestly
long to evidence it self in Christian fellowship for the mutual comfort and
spiritual advantage of both the parties, Romans 1. 11, 12. for, so did their love
to Paul, and his to them: desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you,
says he.

Ver. 7. Therefore, brethren, we are comforted over you in all our affliction
and distress, by your faith. The Apostle, in prosecution of the former scope,
does next show what effects these good tidings had wrought in him, they are in
number four, The first whereof is comfort, expressed here to this purpose, That
whereas his mind was otherwise oppressed and perplexed with fear, v. 5. he was
now comforted, or recreated over them, or by what he heard of them, and
especially by their faith, or by the testimony which he heard of it. Which
effect of comfort is heightened from this, that hereby the bitterness of all the
affliction and distress of any sort (for therefore is it expressed in two
words) whether bypast or present, which he had endured either with them, or
after his removal from them, was wonderfully sweetened. Doct. 1. Christian love
does make it self evident in a fellow feeling sympathy with the case of those
to whom it is extended, and the more there is of love, there will be the more
Christian sympathy: for, to evidence his ardent affection toward them he
shows how he sympathized with them; their affliction and apparent hazard of
defection did perplex him, v. 5. and good tidings from them did comfort him:
Therefore, brethren, we were comforted, says he. 2. The Lord does usually
reward a tender frame of spirit in bearing burden with the Church and people
of God in their hazard and afflicted case, by giving the person so disposed the
more of comfort and soul-ravishing joy arising from the Churches better case;
Those only who mourn with Zion are privileged to rejoice with her, Isa. 66.
10. for, Paul was much afflicted with their hazard, v. 5. and now he is much
comforted, having heard of Gods goodness to them under it: we were comforted,
and v. 8. now we live. 3. The Lord does usually exercise his dearest children
with vicissitude of contrary affections, such as sorrow and joy, fear and
freedom of mind; weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning,
Psalm. 30. 6. and this because, so impotent are we, that we cannot well carry a
full measure of any one of those, for any length of time, without miscarrying
one way or other, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. for, Paul was so exercised; before he was
perplexed, v. 5. but now he was comforted, before he was as dead, but now, we
live, says he, v. 8. Doct. 4. The believers joy and comfort do not depend upon
his freedom and actual deliverance from outward or inward trouble, but upon the
Lords comforting presence, who often takes occasion from his kind dealing with
others to pour in upon the believers spirit so full a measure of spiritual joy
and comfort, that in a manner the bitterness of all his own trouble is forgot
and swallowed up in the sweetness of it: for, thus was it with Paul: We were
comforted over you in all your affliction and distress. 5. From this, that he
expresses only their faith as the rise of his comfort, though Timotheus had
reported of their other graces, see upon v. 2. doct. 5. by your faith, says he.

Ver. 8. For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. He does here illustrate
and confirm what he spoke of his comfort, as appears by the causal particle
for, and withal express the second effect of those glad tidings to this
purpose, That if, or seeing (as the word may read) they stood fast, or were
courageously constant (as the word implies) in the faith, whereby they were
united to the Lord Christ, he was thereby made to live, that is, of a cheerful
spirit, all things went with him according to his wish, for men are said in a
sense to live when their concernments succeed according to their mind, and
somewhat beyond their expectation, to the disappointment of their fear, Genesis
45. 27. Doct. 1. To rob a man of his comfort, and thereby to dead his sp^^its,
and make his life bitter, is a kind of murder in Gods esteem, for it takes
away that which here the Apostle does call life, to wit, the cheerfulness of
his spirit, through the want whereof he did formerly look upon himself as dead;
as is employed, while he says, for now we live. 2. As the good of an honest
Minister his pains amongst the Lords people redounds to himself in some
respect, and is not wholly reserved for him until afterward, but is in part
bestowed upon him even in this life, in so far, as not only his inward, but
also his outward man is thereby bettered, his very natural spirits are thereby
cheered; and consequently his strength preserved, and in an ordinary way his
life prolonged: So his want of success, and growth of wickedness among the
people of his charge, in despite of all his endeavors to the contrary, is
sufficient to dead his spirits, to eat up his cheerfulness, and consequently
cut his days: for, the one of those does follow upon the other, and the former
is evidently employed, while Paul affirms that his life, or a cheerful frame of
spirit did flow from their constancy in the faith: now we live if ye stand fast
in the Lord.

Ver. 9. For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy
wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God. He does confirm and illustrate
what he spoke, of his cheerful frame of spirit, and withal expresses the
third effect of those good tidings, to this purpose: he did for their sake, or
by their means, reap so much spiritual and sincere joy (called here, joy before
God) as he could never in way of thankfulness to God express to the full, and
as the cause required, his present sense of Gods love, which had bestowed upon
him so rich a mercy: for such questions as this, what thanks can we render,
etc. do usually imply somewhat above expression, and cannot* well be answered,
Psalm. 84. 1. and 119. 97 -- Doct. 1. Gods ordinary way of dealing with
exercised Christians is, The lower they are brought under sad and weighty
exercise, to make their comfort and joy, accompanying their outgate, so much
the more to abound: See 2 Cor. 1. 5. for, Paul who was pressed down, and
brought so low with a twofold weight of desire and fear, that he could not
longer forbear, v. 5. is now as much exalted, that he cannot find words
sufficient to express the sweetness of his case: he was comforted, v. 7. he did
live, v. 8. and here, he had joy, and all joy: for all the joy, wherewith we
joy, says he. 2. As the Lord does sometimes furnish his people with more than
ordinary matter of joy, and such as they cannot contain, but must express their
sense thereof with cheerfulness and good will: So they ought, and in some
measure will have a watchful eye, that in all such expressions of joy, they
vent nothing that is carnal, sinful or unseemly, but what beseems such as are
always in Gods sight, and are especially then most narrowly marked, and taken
notice of by his all-seeing eye: for, Paul having such matter of joy, while he
is about to express it, does set himself in Gods sight* for all the joy, says
he, wherewith we joy before our God. 3. Whatever matter of joy a man may have,
he cannot improve it, nor attain to the actual exercise of solid and spiritual
joy, except his interest in God be in some measure cleared, whose reconciled
face does put such a ravishing luster upon all our other mercies, as they draw
out the heart actually to rejoice in them, or rather in God for them: See Psalm.
4. 6. for, though Paul had matter of joy from the former good tidings, yet he
does not actually rejoice, until he close with God as his through Christ, as is
employed, while he says, for all the joy, wherewith we joy before our God. 4.
Christian love, to those who are Gods, does give the person who loves, an
interest in all the good things bestowed by God upon those whom he loves, and
a large share of all the joy and comfort, which are occasioned by them: for,
Paul to make evident his ardent affection to these Thessalonians, does show,
that their merciful receipts did give him matter of all joy: for all the joy,
says he, wherewith we joyed for your sakes, that is, for Gods mercies toward
them, mentioned, v. 6. Doct. 5. Whoever are, or may be, the occasion of joy, by
furnishing matter for it, yet a Godly heart will not rest upon them, but look
to the Lord above all, ascribing praise and thanksgiving to him, who not only
gives the cause and occasion of joy, by making instruments to be that which
they are, matter of joy and not of grief, Psalm. 20. 9. but also does give us to
improve that matter of joy unto actual rejoicing, which otherwise we could not,
Eccles. 2. 24. for Paul, though he had the matter of his joy furnished from the
Thessalonians, yet he looks over them to God, and returns him thanksgiving for
it: what thanks can we render unto God, for all our joy, says he. 6. As giving
of thanks is all the rent, which either the Lord does crave, or we can return
unto him, for favors received: So no thanksgiving of ours can be looked upon as
an answerable return to the meanest of mercies; and especially a Godly heart
can never satisfy himself in the matter of his thankfulness to the Lord, he
prizeth the mercy received so high, and sees his thanks to be so feckless,
that he judges all he can do of no value, and no ways answerable to what so
rich mercy in God does call for; for, Paul sees that thanksgiving was his due,
but cannot satisfy himself, in any thing he could do of that kind, as is
employed, while he says, what thanks can we render to God for all the joy, etc.

Ver. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly, that we might see your face, and
might perfect that which i^ lacking in your faith? Here is the fourth effect,
of those glad tidings upon Paul, he was thereby put to his prayers, which were,
1. Assiduous, the phrase night and day implies such an assiduity, as admits of
no other, but necessary intermissions, Luke 2. 37. next, it was fervent and
serious, so much is employed in his praying exceedingly, or as it is in the
original, excessively, intimating fervency of affection. 3. The thing prayed
for, was 1. To see them, or to be present with them. 2. That being with them,
he might have occasion by his Preaching to them, and conversing with them, to
perfect, supply and make up (as an instrument under God, 1 Cor. 3. 5.) what was
lacking and wanting in their faith, whether in their understanding, as to their
knowledge of, or assent unto truths revealed; or in their will and affections,
as to their embracing of, and adherence unto that good thing, held forth by
those truths. Doct. 1. There can be no such cause of thanksgiving in this life,
but there will be also matter for prayer, and an incumbent necessity to go
about that duty, there being always somewhat wanting to the best, and necessary
to be had* Phil. 3. 12. And prayer being a prime mean appointed of God for
obtaining of what we want, Ezekiel. 36. 37. for, though Paul had at this time such
matter of thanksgiving, that he could not well express it, v^ 9. yet he is
assiduous in prayer: night and day praying exceedingly. 2. Our prayers to God
should be both assiduous and serious, the former without the latter being but
vain babbling, condemned Matthew. 6. 7. and the latter without the former but a
violent, evanishing flash, to no purpose, condemned Isa. 26. 16. for, his
prayers had those two properties: night and day praying exceedingly, says he.
3. There is a singular efficacy and aptness in a Ministers presence and
preaching, through the Lords blessing, to beget, confirm, or carry on the work
of grace in hearers, beyond what there is in his writings, while he is absent:
There is not only a more express promise of a blessing unto Preaching, Romans 10.
17. but also there is nothing almost in a man, whom God has sent to gain
souls, whether carriage, gesture, or countenance, which the Lord does not make
subservient unto edification one way or other, 1 Cor. 9. 22. for, therefore is
it that Paul, not content with writing to them, does so much desire to see
their face, that he might perfect that which was lacking in their faith. 4. As
the faith of the best has its own inlaicks, and most eminent believers have
need to pray, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. so faith is preserved and
increased in the use of those means, by which it was begotten at first: It is
begotten by ordinances, and especially by the word Preached, and it is
preserved and receives increase by ordinances and the public Preaching of the
word: for, though Paul did highly commend their faith, chap. 1. 3. yet somewhat
was lacking to it, and he prays he may see them, that by Preaching to them he
might perfect that which was lacking in their faith.

Ver. 11. Now God himself and our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our
way unto you. The Apostle having but made mention (v. 10.) of his usual
practice in praying, does here, in the third part of the Chapter, break out in
a most fervent and devout prayer, and thereby makes way for the second
principal part of this Epistle, which begins chap. 4. In which prayer, there
is first, the party to whom he prays, God himself, taken here personally, for
the first person, therefore is it added Our Father, and he is
contradistinguished to Christ Jesus our Lord, the second person, to whom also
the Apostle prays. 2. There is the matter prayed for, 1. Th^^ all Obstacles
and impediments being removed, he might get a successful journey, and be
directed by providence, as in a right line, toward them, as the word in the
original does signify. Doct. 1. So necessary, and of so universal use, is this
duty of prayer, that our heart should be constantly kept in such a readiness to
it, that when ever the least opportunity is offered, we may set about it: yea
and where a man is fervent in prayer, he will l^y hold upon every occasion to
break out in it: for, Paul having but made mention of Prayer, v. 10. and seeing
some necessity of praying presently, cannot contain himself, but sets about it:
now God himself and our father, etc. 2. That Jesus Christ is God equal with the
Father, appears hence, that not only divine worship, but also divine
properties, in overruling by his providence the affairs of men, are ascribed
to him: for, Paul does pray unto him, and seeks a successful journey from
him: Our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way. 3. Though the object of divine
worship be but one and the same glorious God, Matthew. 4. 10. and there is but
one kind of divine worship, to wit, that which is supreme, and becomes this
one infinite majesty of God, and therefore whatever person of the Godhead be
expressly named in our prayers, the rest are not excluded, but included in that
one, they being all three one only God, the same in essence, 1. Joh. 5. 7. yet
it is not only lawful, but also sometimes convenient, (though not always
necessary) to name expressly in our prayers the distinct persons, and especially
Jesus Christ the second person with the Father, thereby to strengthen our
confidence for acceptance and an answer, seeing there is no access to the
Father but by him* Joh. 14. 6. for, Paul here does expressly direct his prayer
both to the Father and the Son: Now God himself and the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ. 4. The Lords most powerful providence, does overruled the most
malicious designs of Satan against his work and people, so that he could easily
mar the prosecution of them, when at their greatest height, if he did not
sometimes judge the contrary more convenient, for his own glory and his peoples
good, Psalm. 76. 10. for, Paul could not otherwise pray in faith unto God, for a
successful journey, when he knew Satan did ply his utmost to hinder it, Chap.
2. 18. now God himself direct our way unto you, says he, (...) Seeing it is
not in man to direct his own way, Jer. 10. 23. therefore he ought to wait and
depend on Gods direction, for all his undertakings: and this both for light,
that he may know what, when, and how he should do, Psalm. 27. 11. and for
strength, to enable him for, and bear him through, against difficulties in the
performance, Ephesians. 3. 16. for, so does Paul^ now God himself -- direct our way
unto you.

Ver. 12. And the Lord make* you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you. A second thing he
prayed for, is, that whether he came unto them or not, the Lord himself might
supply his absence, by making them grow abundantly, and beyond all ordinary
measure (as the doubling of the word, increase and abound, does imply) in the
grace and duties of love, first, one to another, and among themselves who were
Christians: next, generally toward all men, even Heathens. And in the close of
the verse, he casts in one incitement to the exercise of this grace, from his
own example and practice toward them. Doct. 1. Though the Lord does usually
work by ordinary means; yet we may not ^ye him absolutely to them, but under
want of means ought to depend upon him, to supply their lack: for, Paul depends
on God, for making them grow in love, even though he himself should not come to
them: And the Lord make you to increase. 2. As not only the first beginnings,
but also the growth and progress of grace do come from God, and therefore are
to be sought from him by prayer: So we need not fear, while we plead with God
for spiritual mercies, lest we exceed and seek too much: for, Paul seeks that
he may make them grow abundantly, and beyond all ordinary measure --: and the
Lord make you increase and abound. 3. As it should be a believers aim to grow
in grace: so he should labor in this study after growth, both to extend
himself to the exercise of more graces, as is enjoined, 2 Pet. 1. 5. and to
better the exercise of one and the same grace, so as to grow more frequent,
copious, and spiritual in it, as is injoined, chap. 5. 16, 17. for, Paul's
praying for growth shows, we should endeavor it, and the two words he uses to
express this growth are made by some to differ thus, that the first may
signify to increase in number, the second in heap or bulk: now the Lord make
you to increase and abound in love. 4. As Christian love ought, and will be
mutual among real Christians: So it is not mercenary, nor does extend it self
unto those only from whom the Christian may expect a return of love again, but
to others also, from whom nothing of that kind can be had, even to all men; and
that because of Gods command, Matthew. 5. 44. and that there is somewhat
love-worthy in all, Romans 2. 15. though abused and defaced by the most, Romans 1.
21. for, he prays that they, being Christians, may abound in love, first,
toward one another, and next, toward all men. 5. A Minister's own example,
and sanctified practice, according to the truth he preaches, is one of the
strong inducements unto a people to give him obedience in what he prescribes:
and therefore though a profane man may preach ^o purpose, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. yet
his preaching is not usually so much accompanied with fruit and success, 1 Timothy
4. 16. for, Paul alleges his own practice, as an inducement: even as we do
toward you, says he.

Ver. 13. To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before
God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his
Saints. Here is a third thing prayed for, in order to which their growing in
love was presently sought, as it appears from the word of connection betwixt the
verses: and it is, that thereby, as by one mean, the Lord might first, confirm
and establish them in holiness, so as they should not be easily moved, or
driven from the solid practice of it. And next, that by both those, to wit,
their growth in love, and stability in holiness, their hearts or consciences
(so called, 1 John 3. 19, 20.) might be rendered blemeless, or without
complaint, (as it may be well taken in an active sense) his meaning is, that
their consciences may be pacified, yea and absolve, and pass sentence in their
favors, and this before the bar and tribunal of God their reconciled father,
the full accomplishment of which wish should be at Christ's second coming, when
he shall come accompanied with all his Saints, or (as the original may read)
his holy ones, that is, either his holy Angels, 2 These. 1. 7. or the holy souls
of the Saints departed, who shall come down with Christ, to be united and
glorified with their bodies. See the same effect of pacifying the conscience
ascribed to grown love, 1 John 3. 19. and 4. 18. and it is ascribed to love and
holiness, as to that which does evidence our interest in Christ's blood, John
13. 35. by the only merit and worth whereof we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1.
Doct. 1. Though Children, and those who are weak in grace, be tossed to and fro
with every tentation, Ephesians. 4. 14. yet grown, and growing Christians, are not
so easily shaken: Growth in Grace is accompanied with stability, both in truth
and holiness: for, Paul teaches so much, while having prayed, v. 12. for
growth in grace, he adds here, To the end he may stablish your hearts
unblameable in holiness. 2. It concerns a Christian much, by all means to
endeavor that his heart and conscience may be without complaint, speak peace
unto him and absolve him; seeing if a man's heart and conscience upon good
ground condemn him, much more will God, who is greater than the heart, and
whose deputy the conscience is, 1 John 3. 20. for, Paul prays here that their
hearts; or consciences, may be unblameable and without complaint. 3. As a man,
in making his heart and conscience pass sentence upon his state and way, should
sift himself in Gods sight, and endeavor that his conscience pass such a
sentence upon all, as he thinks God the Judge of all will pass: So in this
enquiry and process, he should look upon God as a fatherly Judge, who will pass
sentence as a Father* according to the Covenant of Grace, and not as a strict
sin-pursuing Judge, according to the Covenant of Works: for, he wishes that
their hearts may be unblameable or without complaint before God, that is, when
sifted as in his sight, and calls him our Father, to show in what relation he
should be taken up. 4. Though it be the alone blood of Christ apprehended by
faith that purifieth the conscience, and gives it ground to absolve and speak
peace; seeing by it alone provoked Justice is satisfied, and we are justified,
whereupon our peace with God does follow, Romans 5. 1. yet inherent holiness does
also quiet the conscience in its own order and way, to wit, though not
meritoriously, and by way of satisfaction to the claim of justice, for all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. yet by way of evidence, and as
a faithful witness of our undoubted interest in Christ, and right to his blood,
1 John 3. 14. for, Paul prays that their hearts or consciences may be
unblameable, without complaint, or pacified in holiness. 5. Though the meanest
measure of sincere holiness be a ^ufficient evidence in it self of an interest
in Christ, and consequently may quiet the conscience, Mat. 5. 6. yet that a man
may clearly discern this evidence, and get his conscience actually, and upon
good ground quiet by it, it is necessary that he grow in grace, and be
established in holiness, otherwise his peace is more liable to be questioned
and shaken by every new assault: for, Paul ascribes this effect of pacifying
the conscience to growth in grace, and stability in holiness, while having
prayed for their growing in grace, he adds, to the end he may stablish your
hearts unblameable in holiness. 6. However believers do enjoy much^sweet peace,
Romans 5. 1. and some clear evidences of a right to Christ in their begun
sanctification, even while they are here, Cant. 6. 3. yet the full
accomplishment of their begun happiness is reserved until Christ's second
coming: Many things are wanting now, even to those who have most, 2 Cor. 6. 6.
which shall be then made up: Our holiness shall then be perfected, and we
confirmed in it, our peace extended as a river, neither shall our consciences
afterward ever smite or accuse: for, he shows, the term, when we shall be
fully established in holiness, and our consciences thoroughly pacified, shall be
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints.

CHAP. IV.
THE Apostle being, in the second principal part of this Epistle, until v. 23.
of chap. 5. to press upon them the practice of an holy life, he does in the
first part of this Chapter propone several exhortations to that purpose. The
first is, to the study of holiness and sanctification in general, v. 1.
enforced, 1. From his manifold injunctions of this kind, he had given them
already, v. 2. 2. It was the will of God that they should so walk, v. 3. Next,
the following exhortations do press their exercise of some particular virtues,
and branches of that sanctification presently mentioned: As 1. the exercise of
chastity, v. 4. and abstinence from all uncleanness contrary to it, v. 3, 5. 2.
The exercise of Justice and equity, in abstinence from all sort of oppression.
And both these are enforced, because, 1. Otherwise God would plague them, v. 6.
Next from the end of their calling, to wit, their sanctification, v. 7. Thirdly
their disobedience would be a despising of God, v. 8. The third exhortation is
to the exercise of brotherly love, which he presses indirectly from their
progress herein already, v. 9, 10. And 4. he exhorts to quietness of spirit,
opposite to Idleness and curiosity, v. 11. Because 1. of public honesty; 2. Of
private utility, v. 12.

In the second part of the Chapter, he propones several considerations to allay
immoderate grief for the death of friends: As 1. their death is but a sleep, v.
13. 2. They shall undoubtedly arise, v. 14. 3. They shall be in no worse case
at Christ's second coming than the Godly, who shall be then found alive, v. 15.
yea they shall have the advantage of them, as being to be first raised, and
before those, others shall be changed, v. 16. 4. After their resurrection the
Godly of both sorts shall meet together, and both of them with Christ. 5. They
shall never part again, v. 17. And so he concludes, by pointing at the use
which they were to make of all those considerations, v. 18.

Ver. 1. FVrthermore, then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord
Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please God,
so ye would abound more and more. He does here, and to v. 3. propone and urge a
general exhortation, which is a comprehensive sum of all the rest, which he is
to press upon them afterward. And having made a transition from the preceding
doctrine, by the word furthermore (implying, as the original bears, there did
somewhat yet remain necessary to be added) he does in the name and authority of
the Lord Jesus, and for his sake exhort them, and that both lovingly (as the
word rendered, beseech, implies) and seriously, as his using two words to the
same purpose does import. And the thing unto which he exhorts them is, that
according to the doctrine* and injunctions they had formerly received of him,
while he was with them, pointing out both the necessity and manner of such a
walk and conversation, as might be acceptable unto and please the Lord; so they
would abound, more and more, that is, supposing they had already entered this
walk (as is expressly affirmed, chap. 1. v. 3.) he would have them now to make
continual progress, and in a manner to outstrip themselves by their future
diligence. Besides what I have observed already upon the cohesion of the
doctrinal and practical part of the Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 4. v. 1.
doct. 1, 2. which is applicable here: Learn 1. The endeavors of others, by
prayer or otherwise, to have us doing well, should not hinder, but rather
further our own diligence and pains: and particularly our own prayers, or the
prayers of others to God on our behalf, should be seconded by diligent use of
means on our part, for attaining the good thing prayed for, otherwise we tempt
the Lord by our prayers, as the sluggard, Prove. 21, 25. and make the prayers of
others wholly ineffectual, as to the bringing about of any good unto us, Psalm.
35. 13. for, Paul having prayed fervently, that the Lord would make them abound
in grace, chap. 3. 12. he does here press upon themselves to abound more and
more, and because he prayed for it, therefore he would have them to endeavor
it, as appears by the illative particle, then, or therefore: furthermore then.
2. When a Mi^ister has with greatest clearness, and fullness explicated, and
laid open the doctrinal part of Christian Religion, and the several articles of
faith, he has not yet absolved his task, until he press upon peoples
consciences the practice of piety and of the several duties of an holy life:
And whatever a man be for knowledge, yet there is one thing, and the main thing
lacking, so long as he knows not, or cares not, how to bring his knowledge into
practice; his knowledge in that case is to no purpose, as not having attained
the end for which it is given, Act. 2. 11, 12. for, Paul having already
instructed them in the doctrinal part of Religion, and exhorted them to
constancy in it, he looks upon somewhat yet wanting and necessary to be added,
even the following directions to lead an holy life: furthermore then, or, as to
that which yet rests, we beseech you. 3. A Minister, especially in pressing the
practice of holy duties upon the people of his charge, should labor to be both
affectionate and serious, so that neither his affection and respect unto them
may mar his vehemence and fervor, in pressing home the point upon their
conscience, nor yet his zeal and fervor make him omit any thing, whereby
sanctified prudence might teach him to evidence his affection to them and
respect of them, lest otherwise by exasperating their corruption he drive them
further from their duty, instead of bringing them nearer to it: for Paul, while
he presses duty, does not command imperiously, but entreats them meekly and
affectionately, as the word rendered beseech implies, and yet most seriously
and fervently, he both beseeches and exhorts. 4. A Ministers meekness and
lenity ought to be seasoned with some mixture of authority and due severity,
lest otherwise his meekness be despised, and his Ministry want an edge: for, as
Paul beseeches them in lenity, so he obtests them by the Lord Jesus, that is,
in his name and authority, and for his sake. 5. Though good works, and an holy
walk, be not necessary antecedents of Justification, Romans 4. 5. yet they are of
necessity required in the person now justified, to wit, for making his calling
and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. for making evident the reality of his faith
and interest in Christ, Jam. 2. 18. for glorifying God, Joh. 15. 8. for gaining
of others, Matthew. 5. 16. for attaining the actual possession of life eternal,
as the way to it, Heb. 12. 14. though not as a price to merit or buy it, Romans
6. 23. for, the word in the original, rendered how ye ought to walk, does
signify how ye must of necessity walk. 6. That a man may walk as a Christian,
and so as to please the Lord, he must take the revealed will of God, delivered
by his Prophets and Apostles, and committed by them to sacred writ, for his
guide, both in the matter and manner of his walk: for, Paul teaches so much,
while he says, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to
please God, so ye should abound, now what they had received of him, to this
purpose, by his Preaching, he does here commit the sum of it to writing. 7.
Whatever be a man's walk and conversation for matter, or otherwise for manner;
yet he walks not as a Christian, nor so as he can have any real or solid
comfort in his walk, except he sincerely endeavor to please the Lord, by doing
what he does as service to him, Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. for, Paul makes their endeavor
to please God, a nenecessary ingredient in a Christian walk, while he says,
how ye ought to walk, and to please God. 8. There is not a rest, or stand,
allowed of God to any in the way of grace, but when much is attained, we ought
still (forgetting those things which are behind, Phil. 3. 13.) enlarge our
desires, and bend our endeavor after more, and yet after more, seeing there is
still more to be had, Phil. 3. 13. and the Lord allows our desires after
grace to be insatiable and boundless, Joh. 16. 23, 24. though as to our other
enjoyments, he would have them bounded by his allowance, Heb. 13. 5. for, Paul
supposing they had already grace, and a great measure of it, does nevertheless
exhort them to abound more and more.

Ver. 2. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. Here is a
reason to enforce the exhortation. 1. The thing required by him now, was
nothing else, but what he had enjoined them formerly. 2. Those directions he
gave them were not his own, but the Lord Christ's, in whose name and authority,
he as Christ's Lyon-herauld had proclaimed them; for the Greek word signifies
such a commandment, as is published by one in the name and authority of
another, and so much also is expressed, while he says by the Lord Jesus, or in
his name. Lastly, they did know, and were sufficiently convinced, both that he
had given those commandments, and that they were not his, but Christ's. Doct. 1.
As Ministers ought not to forbear the frequent repetition of one and the same
truths, until they obtain from people their due acceptance, though still with
some delectable variety, in some circumstances of their delivery, lest
otherwise they become loathed of the hearers: So the more that a duty is
inculcate, we are the more obliged to take notice of it, and will have the more
of guilt if we neglect and slight it: for, Paul presses obedience to the
former exhortation, from this, that he had frequently pressed it before as well
as now: for ye know what commandments we gave you. 2. As the Lords Ministers
ought to deliver nothing for a rule of faith or manners unto their hearers, but
what they have a warrant for from Christ, for they are but Ministers of Christ,
and publishers of his will to his people, and not Lords of their faith, 2 Cor.
1. 24. So the Lords people should receive nothing of their hand, but that for
which they can produce such a warrant: for, the injunctions which Paul gave
them, and they were to receive from him, were only such, the commandments which
he gave them by the Lord Jesus. 3. The more we know our duty, and are convinced
of a tie laid on by God himself to walk in it, the greater should be our care
to make conscience of it; otherwise our knowledge will be our condemnation,
Joh. 3. 19. and we see sin without all cloak or excuse, Joh. 15. 22. for the
strength of this present argument lies in their knowledge: for ye know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.

Ver. 3. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should
abstain from fornication. In this verse, he does first declare, what that is
wherein he did exhort them to abound, v. 1. to wit, sanctification, which being
taken as it is our duty, is a serious and constant endeavor after a full and
through conformity, of the whole man, both outward and inward, Jam. 4. 8. to
what the Lord requires in his word. And he adds also a new argument, to
enforce the exhortation so explained, to wit, It is Gods will, or the thing
which he requires, as well-pleasing unto him. Next being to press upon them
some particular branches of sanctification, he begins with chastity: In
pressing whereof, he first exhorts them to abstain from the contrary vice, to
wit, fornication; which is to be taken here generally, as extended to all
filthiness and uncleanness contrary to chastity, and thus it comprehends
adultery, Matthew. 5. 32. yea and incest, 1 Cor. 5. 1. Doct. 1. This may
sufficiently commend a duty, and set us upon the practice of it, that it is
willed and commanded of God, what ever otherwise be the reluctance, and vain
debatings of flesh and blood against it, Gal. 1. 16. It holds good in his
commands alone, they are not to be disputed, but obeyed, and his will to be
simply followed, without further enquiry in the grounds and reasons of it,
except where those are held forth unto us by the Lord himself: for, he holds
out the Lords will as a sufficient reason to press the present exhortation: for
this is the will of God, says he. 2. The duties of sanctification are no less
willed, and enjoined by God to believers, than the exercise of faith it self:
faith in Christ does not loose the tie of the command, and will of God binding
us to duty: for, writing to believers, he says, This is the will of God even
your sanctification. 3. A Ministers wisdom should lead him, in pressing
holiness, not to rest upon generals, but to condescend upon such particulars of
sin and duty, (by dissuading from the one, and inciting to the other) the
omission or commission whereof is most common among the people of his charge:
for so does Paul, having pressed sanctification in the general, he descends
unto some particular duties, and such doubtless, as the present condition of
that people did give him the occasion to pitch upon beyond others: That ye
abstain from fornication, says he. 4. As sanctification includes not only the
practice of duty, but also the mortification of, and abstinence from sin: so
there are no sins that an holy heart will scare more at, and strive to
mortify, than those to which his fleshly appetite would enslave him; such sins
being not only insnaring when given way to (Eccles. 7. 26.) because most
delightsome, but also most inconsistent with, at least most destructive of, the
work of grace in the heart, 1 Pet. 2. 11. for, the Apostle does press
abstinence from fornication, as a main branch of sanctification: That ye
abstain from fornication, says he.

Ver. 4. That everyone of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor. In pressing chastity, he does next prescribe a
remedy against the forementioned sin, and thereby enjoyneth the exercise of the
contrary virtue, to wit, That every one of them, without exception, should not
only abstain from fornication, but also know, and acquaint themselves, how they
might by an holy kind of skill and artifice, possess, or make use of their
body, here called their vessel, or an instrument of any sort (as the word is
generally taken) because the body is the instrument of the soul, by which it
acts; a vessel or receptacle wherein for the time it is preserved. And the
manner how they were to possess it, and make right use of it, is in two words,
none whereof do exclude the lawful use of the marriage bed, Heb. 13. 4. but it
is, 1. In Sanctification, that is, not only in freedom from fleshly pollutions,
but also in making all the members of the body subservient to the soul, in all
those offices for which they are appointed, and chiefly in the practice of holy
duties, Romans 6. 19. 2. In honor, that is, not so much, or only by taking
lawful and necessary care, to provide all things needful for the body (though
that be not excluded, see upon Col. 2. 23.) but also and mainly, by preserving
it in that measure of purity and freedom, from every kind of sinful defilement,
which is suitable to that honor put on it by God, of being made a temple to
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 15. he seems to allude to that more than ordinary
cleanness and purity, wherein these Vessels were kept, which were dedicate to
the service of God in the sanctuary, Exodus 40. 9, 10. Doct. 1. The Lord
requires not only inward sanctity, in the understanding, will and affections,
but also outward in the body and all its members: And therefore it is not
sufficient for us to know our duty, and have some inward good liking of it, the
outward man in the mean time being left at liberty, and as it were without a
rule, to do or not do as may make most for the man's safety from hazard, for his
pleasure, credit or advantage: for, Paul seems to obviate the error of some,
who thought otherwise, while he requires every man to possess his vessel or
body in sanctification. 2. The Mor^l Law, and more particularly the Law
enjoining chastity, and keeping the soul and body free from fleshly lusts, does
oblige all and every one, without exception of any, to obedience; so that
neither great, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. nor small, Deuteronomy. 23. 17. man nor woman, Jam. 4. 4.
young nor old, 1 Cor. 7. may plead exemption: for, the command is given to
every one, That every one should know, how to possess his vessel. 3. There is a
kind of Divine art of chastity, and no small skill required, to keep a man's
soul and body free from fleshly uncleanness: Some rules of which Heavenly art,
are briefly these. The outward senses must be kept from enticeing objects, Job
31. 1. loose and wanton company eschewed, Prove. 5. 8. meat, drink, and sleep
soberly used, Ezekiel. 16. 49. our ordinary callings diligently plied, Ezekiel. 16.
49. the first motions and stirrings within of fleshly lust quickly suppressed,
Exodus 20. 17. Prayer to God, for strength to ressit tentations, frequently
used, Matthew. 26. 41. and if none of those prevail, marriage, the means
appointed of God for eschewing fornication, must be entered, 1 Cor. 7. 2. for,
Paul implies that there is skill and knowledge required for this thing, while
he says, That every one of you should know how to possess. 4. As every man
ought to possess his own body; or be master of it, and not be possessed by it,
or enslaved to it, by spending his precious time in an excessive pampering of
it, with meat, drink, sleep, Ezekiel. 16. 49. or gorgeous raiment, Isa. 3. 18,
etc. So does he possess it as he ought, when not only he does not yield his
members servants unto uncleanness, or to iniquity of any sort, Romans 6. 19. but
also does subject it to God, and keep it subservient, as an instrument of the
renewed soul, in giving obedience to the revealed will of God: for, this is it
that Paul teaches, while he bids every man possess, or make use of his
body, as a vessel, or instrument of the soul, and in sanctification and honor.

Ver. 5. Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not
God. He does thirdly, in pressing chastity, show how far that abstinence from
fornication, mentioned v. 3. does reach, even to a restraining not only the
external act, but also the inward lust of concupiscence, or as the word
signifies the fevorish fit, or violent passion of burning desire, which
boyleth within, through all the members of the body, 1 Cor. 7. 9. disturbing
the judgment, as with a high fit of a Fevor, and provoking both body and mind
to the outward act of filthiness. And fourthly, he gives a reason enforcing the
disswasive, lest otherwise they should be like the profane gentiles, who were
for the most part given over of God to the base slavery of their filthy lusts:
and that because they knew not God, to wit, savingly, and as he is revealed in
his word; neither did they rightly improve that natural knowledge, which they
had of him, and therefore God gave them up to uncleanness, Romans 1. 21. with 24.
Doct. 1. As concupiscence, and the first inordinate motions to lust, when not
timeously curbed, do become passionate, inflaming the body, and restraining the
judgment from solid thoughts of any other thing, but of what may tend to
fulfill them: So such violent passions, and fevorish fits of fleshly
concupiscence, do put both the body and mind out of frame, for discharging any
duty of holiness in a way honorable to God: for, he shows that concupiscence
grows to lust, or to a violent passion, and a kind of frenzy, as the word
implies, and that the prevalency of this passion and lust, as opposite to that
possessing the body in sanctification and honor, mentioned v. 4. not in the
lust of concupiscence, says he. 2. As there is need of the former Divine art,
mentioned v. 4. doct. 3. to allay and root out those Fevorish fits of burning
lust: So except they be one way or other allayed, a man cannot possess his
body, as master of it, but is in daily hazard to be trailed as a slave, to
fulfill the utmost of those fleshly lusts, which are burning in it: for, while
he requires every one to know, how to possess his body not in the lust of
concupiscence, he implies, that otherwise he is not a full possessor of it,
and that there is skill and knowledge required unto a man, for keeping his body
free of those boiling passions. 3. As there are several degrees of one and the
same sin, the former whereof makes way to the latter: So then do we set
against a sin to purpose, when we not only lop the utmost branches, or set our
selves to refrain from the outward act, but also to restrain the inward motions
and desires of the heart after it: for, he will have them to set against the
inward lust, or passion, of concupiscence, as the most ready mean of abstinence
from the breaking out of concupiscence in the outward act of fornication spoken
of v. 3. Doct. 4. The sight of sins prevalency in others, should not allure us
to it, but much rather scare us from it, there being thereby occasion offered
to get a more full and clear sight of the tyranny and loathsome filthiness of
sin given way to, than can be attained by the hearing of the ear, and
word-speaking: for, therefore does he set before them the prevalency of this
sin among the Pagan-Gentiles, to scare them from it: even as the Gentiles,
says he. 5. As that is only worthy to be called the knowledge of God, which is
operative upon the heart and affections: So ignorance of God is a woeful root,
from whence many other sins do spring up; The Lord sometimes judicially giving
the ignorant person over to those other sins, as a just punishment for his
affected ignorance; Besides, that the knowledge of God which we ought to have,
includes the knowledge of our duty, wherein we honor him being so known, and
therefore they who know not God cannot but sin, as not knowing whereat they
stumble: for although the Pagan-Gentiles had some knowledge of God, yet because
their knowledge was not operative and effectual, he affirms simply they knew
him not, and makes their ignorance the cause of their uncleanness: even as the
Gentiles which know not God. 6. Though the child of God is not bound to abstain
from every thing which unrenewed men practice, for even they may do some things
which are in themselves, and materially good, Romans 2. 14. yet as they should
eschew every sinful practice of others, so especially such practices, as are
speaking evidences of their living in their unrenewed state: for, Paul
d^sswades them from living in the lust of uncleanness, because this was the
practice of the unrenewed Gentiles, and such a practice as did demonstrate they
knew nothing of God savingly, and as they ought: even as the Gentiles, says
he, which know not God.

Ver. 6. That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and
testified. He does here press a second branch of that sanctification, spoken of
v. 1. The exhortation is first proponed, to this sense; That in no matter, or
in no business of common commerce, they should wrong their brother, either by
open violence (as the word rendered go beyond implies, it signifies to go
above, or trample upon one as despicable, and so expresses to the life the
nature and way of proud and insolent oppressors) nor yet by secret fraud and
deceit (as the other word is expressly rendered, see also 2 Cor. 7. 2.) and the
party whom they are discharged to oppress or deceive, is their brother, that
is, one of the same Religion with them, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. whereby he means not as
if it were lawful to oppress others (see the contrary, Exodus 22. 21.) but
because the most of their traffic and commerce being probably with Christians
and among themselves, the consideration of their interest in the person injured
by them would add no small weight to their sin, 1 Cor. 6. 6. Next he adds a
reason to enforce not only this disswasive, but the former v. 5. and it is taken
from one dreadful effect of all such sins, they lay open the person guilty to
Gods dreadful vengeance: and he confirms the truth hereof from this, that he
had often told them so much before when he was with them, and not only simply
told, but seriously testified, and earnestly obtested them to believe the truth
of what he had deponed, as it were upon oath unto them, for so much does the
word imply. Doct. 1. The wise Lord has judged it fitting so to dispense of
things worldly unto mankind, not giving all things needful unto any one, as
that men cannot live without mutual commerce, and exchange of commodities from
one hand to another: for, he suppones the necessity of mutual commerce while he
forbids oppression and deceit in it: that no man go beyond his brother in
any matter, or in any business of common commerce. 2. So covetous is man by
nature of that which is his neighbors, and so little willing to reverence the
Lord in the measure of things worldly dispensed unto him, Isa. 5. 8. that he is
easily tempted to catch advantage of his Neighbor in the matter of commerce,
and to make up his own worldly estate by impairing the estate of others: for
Paul, while he forbids this evil, supponeth that men are prone to fall in
it: That no man go beyond or defraud his brother. 3. So enslaving an evil is
covetousness, that where it reigns it makes the covetous wretch employ the
utmost, both of his power and skill to give it satisfaction: for Paul, while he
forbids both going beyond, or oppressing by power, and defrauding by skill,
implies that both power and skill is usually employed for carrying on this
sin: That no man go beyond or defraud. 4. So subtle a fisher and hunter after
souls is Satan (Ephesians. 6. 11.) as that he has several sorts of tentations
according to the several tempers and abilities of people to ensnare them with,
in one and the same sin; So that when any are effrontedly shameless in
wickedness, and love to be known and feared as such, and have power to bear
them out to act their villainies, he then tempts them to oppress avowedly; and
with strong hand: and for others who either have not power or good will to
carry on their wickedness in open view, those he tempts to defraud or deceive,
teaching them a way* how to sin, and not to be so easily discovered in their
sin* for, Paul suppones there were tentations of both those kinds, while he
forbids to yield to either: That no man go beyond or defraud his brother. 5.
Whatever pretexts a man may find out to render one sin, and especially his own
sin, more plausible and excusable than another; yet no pretext of that kind can
licentiate a man to live in any sin* neither the open oppressor who pretends
plain even down dealing, and kything himself to be wha^ he is, nor yet the
subtle deceiver who pretends law and fair bargain, are excuseable; but both of
them are alike guilty before the Lord: for both are here condemned: That no man
go beyond or defraud his brother. 6. As impunity from men does harden the
wicked much in sin: So the Lord does always supply the defects of man's
justice; by taking vengeance here or hereafter, especially upon those sins
whereof Judges among men do take less notice: for, such are the sins here
forbidden, fleshly uncleanness, oppression by the great, and subtle cheating
under pretext of Law by the politic and worldly wise, are not much punished by
men, hence are they so common: and therefore says Paul, The Lord is the
^venger of all such. 7. So strong is the interest of sin in fallen man, and
chiefly of such sins as bring worldly profit and pleasure with them, that there
is need of word upon word, and reason upon reason, to scare him from them; and
there must be not only love to the commander to constrain, but also the terror
of God to persuade: for, having given one argument v. 3. to dissuade from those
pleasant and profitable sins, from the signification of Gods will; he sees it
yet needful to add another here, from Gods vengeance and terror, being to add
more afterward: Because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, says he* 8.
As where sin is, there Gods vengeance does follow either upon the sinner
himself, or a cautioner in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 21. So the Lord does allow a
gracious soul, neither is it inconsistent with grace in the soul, to abstain
from sin, as from other more prime, so from this inferior motive, the fear of
Gods vengeance to ensue and follow: for, he shows God does avenge such sins,
and disswades even believers from them, because he is the avenger of all such.
9. A Minister must not think, that his once denouncing the terror of divine
vengeance against the sinner for his sin will scare him from it: neither must
he give over the matter as hopeless, when his former dreadful certifications
have had little or no effect, but he must yet again renew his zeal, reiterate
former threatenings and other arguments, as not knowing when the Lord shall be
pleased to give the wished for success, 2 Timothy 2. 25. for Paul reiterates this
dreadful certification, though he had often told it before, and as it appears,
without any success as to some: As we also have (...) you, says he. 10. So
stupid are men for the most part, and so slow to believe the truth of divine
threatenings, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. that if Ministers when they threaten be not the more
serious and fervent, the most terrible threatening will but little affect the
most part of hearers; Some one shift or other will be found out to put them by
to break their dint, and to make them of no effect: for, therefore Paul, in
denouncing this terrible threatening, did seriously testify, and fervently
obtest them to take warning from it: As we also have forewarned you and
testified.

Ver. 7. For God has not called us unto uncleanness but unto holiness. In this
Verse there is a second argument; for enforcing all the former exhortations,
both general and particular, positive and negative: And it is taken from the
end intended by God, when he did first effectually call them, that is, draw
them out of nature to the state of grace, Col. 1. 13. which is expressed, first
negatively, It was not that they might thence take liberty to defile themselves
with sin of any kind; for the word, uncleanness, must be taken here in that
general sense, as being opposed to sanctification, and containing under it all
the sins formerly forbidden, not only fornication, which is uncleanness,
strictly taken, but also oppression and fraud. Next positively, he had called
them to sanctification, or that they might be sanctified, and live in the
constant exercise of all the sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit. Doct. 1. As God
is a dreadful avenger of all sin, So chiefly of such sins of professors of the
Gospel as do reflect upon their Christian calling, either as hardly consistent
with it, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. or as opening the mouths of profane Atheists to reproach
it, 2 Samuel 12. 14. for, he here gives this reason why God is the avenger of all
such sins, God had called them to abstinence from them, and consequently their
lying in them would reflect upon their calling: for God has not called us unto
uncleanness, says he. 2. It is the duty of called Christians, in all their
actions and employments, to examine all by the rule of their Christian calling,
and to do or not do accordingly, being always loath to do any thing which may
in the least measure reflect upon it, though it should otherwise bring them
never so much pleasure or advantage: for, he will have them to abstain from the
flesh-pleasing sin of uncleanness, and the profitable sin of covetousness,
fraud and oppression, upon this account, they were not according to the rule of
their Christian calling: for God has not called us unto uncleanness, says he.
3. So averse are all men by nature from the duties of holiness, Romans 8. 7. so
impotent to go about them, as being dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1.
that the Lord must first draw us out of nature to the state of grace, and
create in us a new heart and abilities to do good (Ezekiel. 36. 26.) when he
effectually calls us, before we mind holiness in earnest: for, he has called
us -- unto holiness, says he. 4. Though some do abuse grace unto wantonness,
and pretend they may sin without fear, (when, as they suppone, they are
effectually called) because the root of the matter is in them, and grace once
received cannot be lost, Romans 6. 15. yet, as such corrupt reasonings receive no
encouragement, neither from the author of grace, the Holy God, nor from the end
of bestowing grace, which is our sanctification and holiness: So if any
externally called by the Ministry of the Gospel do live loosely or profanely,
it should not in reason reflect upon this holy calling, but upon the persons
themselves, who do not walk worthy of it and suitable unto it, (as is enjoined,
Ephesians. 4. 1.) and thereby evidence the external call of the Gospel has never
received inward entertainment in their heart: for, Paul supponing some might
have such perverse reasonings as those, does here refute them as having no
ground from our Christian calling, seeing it is God who calls, and calls
not to uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Ver. 8. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has also
given unto us his holy Spirit. Follows a third argument to press the same
thing, and it is taken from the heinousness of their sin, if they should
despise, reject, or set at naught (as the word signifies) those wholesome
Apostolical counsels and commands. They should hereby despise or reject, not
man, to wit, only, or chiefly, but God, speaking in him and by him; which he
proves from this, that God had given his holy Spirit, by whose guidance and
assistance he had given to them the forementioned commands, v. 2^* See the like
expression for asserting the divine authority of what he wrote, 1 Cor. 7. 40.
Doct. 1. When Ministers have done their utmost^in holding forth the beauty of
holiness, and pressing by the strongest of reasons the practice of it upon
peoples Consciences, there will be always some so far from yielding obedience,
that the more they are pressed to duty, they will be the more averse from it;
and in the end prove profane mockers and despisers of all which can be said to
that purpose: for, Paul after all his exhortations and reasons, supponeth there
would be some such despisers, while he sets himself against them: he therefore
that despises. 2. Though such profane despisers of exhortations to duty, and
of threatenings denounced in case of neglect of duty, do please themselves with
vain thoughts that the Minister, a despicable man, is only their party, whose
pleasure they do not regard, whose displeasure they do not fear, Jer. 18. 18.
yet herein they are hugely mistaken, the great God is their party, he it is
whom they despise, and who will reckon with them as setters at naught of him:
for, so says Paul, he therefore that despises, despises not man, but God. 3.
So much are faithful Ministers owned of God in the discharge of their trust,
that what respect or disrespect is put upon them, or the message which they
carry, it is reckoned by him as put upon himself; and that because they are
Ambassadors in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. he that despises, despises not man,
but God, says he. 4. The great reason for which a peoples carriage toward the
message, and person of their faithful Ministers, reflecteth upon God himself
is, that they in discharge of their trust do represent him, and all their
regular actings are owned by him as his own: for, from what he spoke, v. 7.
that the act of sent Ministers, in calling sinners by the Ministry of the
Gospel, (2 Cor. 11. 2.) is owned by God himself as his deed, he infers here,
that therefore he that despises, despises not man but God. 5. Though faithful
Ministers are men, and therefore both may and must be affected with injuries
and affronts, put upon them by profane Atheists, while they set at naught their
person and reject their message, Jer. 20. 2. 18. yet the dishonor done thereby
to God does bear so much bulk in their minds, as if any disgrace put upon
themselves, being compared with that, were not to be regarded, and not so much
as once to be named; for though profane mockers despise the Ministers, yet so
little is that comparatively valued by Paul, that he says, he that despises,
despises not man but God. 6. Though the contempt and disgrace cast even upon
ordinary Ministers by slighting their message redoundeth to God, for the
reasons given, doct. 3, 4. yet this did hold chiefly in the Apostles, and other
penmen of holy Scripture, who were infallibly assisted in what they wrote, 2
Pet. 1. 21. and in ordinary Ministers, but in so far as they follow their
steps, and deliver nothing to the Lords people for truth but what they have
warrant for in the written Word of God: for the reason here given is peculiar
to the Apostles and other extraordinary office-bearer^, who only had the holy
Spirit to guide them infallibly: who has also given unto us his holy Spirit,
says he.

Ver. 9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you: for
ye your selves are taught of God to love one another.10. And indeed ye do it
toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you,
brethren, that ye increase more and more. He does here press a third branch of
sanctification, called brotherly love, which is that singular, and as it were
native (and therefore called brotherly) love and affection, testified by
action, which ought to be and in some measure is, (1 John 5. 1.) in Gods
Children mutually, and one to another, for the reality or appearance of Gods
grace in them, Psalm. 119. 63. And he presses the exercise of this grace first,
by commending them for their progress herein already, which was such that they
had not so great need to have it pressed upon them as others; for that the
words must be understood not simply and absolutely (as they sound) but
comparatively (as other Scriptural expressions of the like kind, Joh. 9. 41. 1
Cor. 1. 17.) appears from his pressing this same duty on them, v. -- 10. which
he would not have done if there had been no need at all for it. Secondly, By
giving a reason why it was not needful for him to write much to this purpose,
because they were taught of God to love one another, that is, their hearts were
powerfully inclined to the actual exercise of this grace by the efficacious
working of Gods Spirit, not without, but accompanying the outward Ministry of
the word, Act. 16. 14. for so is Gods teaching explained in opposition to man's,
Jer. 31. 33. This is contained, v. 9. Thirdly, by further commending them,
while he proves they were so taught of God, from the effect of his teaching,
their real practice, and exercise of this grace toward all the Christians
(here called brethren) in the Region of Macedonia, wherein Thessalonica was the
chief City. And fourthly by exhorting them expressly, (notwithstanding their
former progress) not only to persevere, but also to abound more and more in the
exercise of that grace.

From v. 9. Learn 1. where sanctifying grace is wrought in the heart by God,
there will not only be an abstaining from wrong, hurt and injury to our
Neighbor, but there must and will be also, an inward propension, seconded with
real endeavors to do him good, and help him forward both in his bodily, Lev.
35. 25. and spiritual estate, 1 These. 5. 11. for, the Apostle having pressed
abstinence from doing wrong to our neighbor, v. 6. as one branch of that
sanctification mentioned, v. 3. he does here enjoin the exercise of brotherly
love, as another branch of the same grace: But as touching brotherly love, etc.
2. It is a singular piece of Ministerial prudence seasonably to commend what
good they observe in the Lords people, and so to commend it as that thereby
they be not rendered proud or secure, but strongly incited to make further
progress in that good which they already have: and people ought to improve what
countenance or commendation they receive from their faithful Pastors for the
same end, otherwise it becomes their snare, Matthew. 16. 17. compared with 22.
for, Paul does here commend the progress they had already made in the exercise
of brotherly love, of purpose to incite them to further progress: As touching
brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you, says he. 3. So apt are the
best to be discouraged in good, Heb. 12. 12. and so much does the known good
opinion concerning some in the minds of others (especially of their faithful
Pastors, 2 Cor. 8. 24.) prevail with them for their incitement to do better,
Act. 26. 27, 28. that as Ministers ought not to flatter any in an evil, 1 These.
2. 5. so they should not rashly pass an hard sentence upon any, 2 Timothy 2. --
24. or reject the meanest appearance of good in them as counterfeit and naught,
Zech. 4. 10. but should cherish the day of small things in the people of their
charge, not only in charity believing, 1 Cor. 13. 7. but also alleging the
best upon them, that hereby they may be incited, and in a^manner constrained to
do better: for, so does Paul here: As touching brotherly love ye need not that
I write unto you. 4. The Lords Ministers must not expect that all within their
charge shall be alike docile, tractable and easy to be wrought upon, by
powerful exhortations to holy duties, or all alike backward, dull and
unteachable: There are usually some of both kinds, So that though some must
have word upon word, and line upon line, and all to little purpose, Isa. 28.
13. yet there are others with whom less than that will prevail: for, such were
those Thessalonians, so tractable, that Paul needed not take so much pains upon
them, as upon others, ye need not that I write unto you, says he. 5. That any
are thus more docile and easy to be wrought upon than others, does not proceed
from any natural difference of a better or worse disposition; for all are by
nature alike averse, and indisposed unto any thing which is spiritually good,
Romans 8. 7. but from the Lords effectual blessing upon the means of instruction
toward some more than others: for, Paul gives this as a reason of their
proficiency beyond others: for ye your selves are taught of God, says he. 6.
Though the Spirit of God, the inward teacher of his people, does not teach
immediately by enthusiasmes, dreams or raptures, without, and much less,
contrary to the word, Isa. 8. 20. but in and by the use of second means, and
especially by a sent Ministry, Romans 10. 15. whose labors he does effectually
bless to the elect, and so does inwardly teach them, 1 Cor. 15. 10. yet where
the Spirit of God does thus effectually and inwardly teach, there is the less
need of outward means, though there be always some, even to the best, until
their graces be made perfect in Heaven, Ephesians. 4. 13. only a little of outward
means will do more good to such, than ten times more can do to others: In a
word, those are easily taught whom God does teach; and therefore though eminent
abilities are much to be wished for in Ministers, Tit. 1. 9. yet we ought not
to be so anxious about the weakness or eminency of gifts in them, as fervently
desirous to have Gods teaching to come along with theirs: for, Paul shows that
God by his teaching those Thessalonians had made them stand the less in need of
being taught by him, while he says, ye need not that I write unto you, for ye
your selves are taught of God.

From v. 10. Learn 1. All those whom God does teach do profit under his hand,
he does so teach as the wills of those who are taught by him are powerfully
bowed, and actually inclined to practice and obey what he teaches: and herein
his teaching does differ from man's, who can only inform the judgment, by
clearing up things to the understanding, but cannot effectually determine the
will to obey, 1 Cor. 3. 6. for, Paul shows that the effect of Gods teaching
them was their real practice: And indeed ye do it, says he. 2. As Christian
brotherly-love excludes none, but is extended unto all who have real grace, or
promising evidences thereof: So the great and main motive which draws out
this brotherly love to the party loved, is the reality or appearance of a
gracious work in him, and not other by respects only, or mainly, as of kindred,
friendship, or favors bestowed by them, Matthew. 5. 46. for, he shows that
they exercised their love to others under the notion of, or because they were,
brethren; and did extend it to all of that sort which were in all Macedonia. 3.
Though the exercise of brotherly-love be a duty incumbent unto all equally, as
to that which is inward of it, in the heart and affection, 1 Pet. 1. 22. yet as
to what is external, and especially as to its fruit or beneficence, in
supplying the outward straits of the people of God, there is more or less
required from several persons, according to the capacity in which the Lord has
put them to discharge it: for, Thessalonica being the chief City in that whole
Region, and so most able to exercise beneficence, did extend their brotherly
love, even as to this act of it doubtless, to all the brethren in all
Macedonia. 4. It is a duty in a special manner incumbent unto those who are any
way eminent in riches, power, or credit, whether they be Cities, Societies, or
particular persons, to employ their eminency as a shelter, help and
encouragement to piety and those who are pious, in those places especially
where they are, and as far as their power may reach: for so did those of this
eminent City, Thessalonica, extend their brotherly love in the fruits of in
toward all the brethren, in all Macedonia. 5. Even the most praiseworthy
graces of most eminent Saints have their own defects, and fall exceedingly
short of that perfection which is required, and should be aimed at, 1 Cor. 13.
9. for, though he had commended them much for their brotherly love, yet he
implies there was some lack in it, while he beseeches them to increase more
and more. But 6. and more particularly, This grace of brotherly love can never
be at such an height in any, but it is capable of increase, either by intending
it more, while it grows more fervent, and consequently farther out of hazard
of being quenched by those provocations which might otherwise cool it, 2 Cor.
12. 15. or by extending it more, especially in its fruits of beneficence
toward more and more objects, Eccles. 11. 1, 2. or by spi^^tualizing it more,
while there is a greater abstractedness in its exercise from self ends and
motives, Rom* 12. 9. for, Paul insinuates their brotherly love, so much
commended, was capable, of increase, while he bids them increase more and more.
7. See a further note v. 1. doct. 8. grounded upon this injunction, increase
more and more.

Ver. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to
work with your own hands (as we commanded you.) He does here press a fourth
branch of sanctification, to wit, that they would study (or as the word
signifies, contend with such eagerness as ambitious men do for honor) to be
of a quiet spirit, without creating trouble either to themselves or others, by
their imporunate intruding upon other men's business, with neglect of their own
concernments, and by seeking to live upon the labors of others. And that this
is intended by the quietness here enjoined, appears in part by the means
prescribed for attaining to it; which are first, that every man do his own
business, that is, meddle with those things* and those only, which come within
the compass of his duty: So that he condemns not a charitable minding of the
affairs of others, when we are called to it, Phil. 2. 4. but only a restless
intermedling with such things as concern us not. 2. That he work with his own
hands, whereby he enjoyneth industry and painfulness in our callings; and what
he speaks of the hands, must be taken figuratively, for any member of the
body or faculty of the mind which men make chief use of in any lawful calling;
which last piece of the duty chiefly is enforced first, from his own Apostolic
authority who had so enjoined when he was with them. See 2 These. 3. 16. Doct.
1. There is not any one thing more inconsistent with the grace of brotherly
love, and with the exercise of that grace, than a turbulent spirit who must
have some meddling hand in every thing, wherein he is concerned least, and does
sinfully neglect those other things, wherein by virtue of his station he is
concerned most; for so much is employed while the Apostle presses the exercise
of a quiet spirit, in opposition to that turbulent meddling humor, immediately
after brotherly love, as an help unto it: And that ye study to be quiet, says
he. 2. As a man's greatest honor does stand in the exercise of Christian
virtues, and more especially in a Christian, peaceable and sober deportment,
flowing from a meek and quiet spirit, which is a choice piece of that ornament
wherewith Christians should be adorned, 1 Pet. 3. 4. So this calm and peaceable
frame of a quiet spirit will be found not easily, nor without the ut-most of
our serious endeavors attainable, if we consider not only how great an enemy
Satan i^ to this, as to all other graces, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. but also how
corruptly all men are by nature principled to think this truly Christian honor
but their shame, and a living and dying in obscurity and disgrace, Judge. 9. 1,
2. and that those are only honorable, who by winding themselves into all
businesses are admired, or feared, or depended upon by all, 1 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. for, as it was said in the exposition, the word rendered study, signifies
to contend with such eagerness as ambitious men do for honor, which implies
both that this quiet frame of spirit should be looked upon as our honor, and
not attainable if not eagerly sought after: And that ye study to be quiet,
says he. 3. This Christian frame of a meek and quiet spirit, with a calm and
peaceable deportment flowing from it, is a far other thing than a love to live
in sluggish ease, and to eschew even the necessary trouble which God does
sometimes call us to encounter in the way of duty; for such a base desire of
sluggish ease is here opposed to it, while he prescribes, as an help for
attaining this quiet frame of spirit, that we do our own business, and work
with our own hands. 4. As those polypragmatick spirits and busybodies, who do
importunately ingyre themselves upon the affairs of others, and can suffer
nothing, neither of public or private concernment, to pass them, except they
intermeddle with it, either as umpires or parties, or as some one way or other
concerned in it, As those I say do create much trouble and strife both to
themselves and others: So a choice preservative of peace and quietness in
public societies, and in men's own spirits, is that every man being content
with the station wherein he is set (1 Cor. 7. 20, 21.) do busy himself with
those things only to which he is called by God, as knowing that the best things
done with best intention, if without a calling to them, are displeasing to the
Lord, 2 Samuel 6. 7. for, Paul does teach both those, while he enjoyneth, as a
help for attaining this quiet and peaceable frame of spirit, that every man
meddle with those things, and those only which come within the compass of his
duty: And to do your own business, says he. 5. As most busy medlers with the
affairs of others are usually greatest neglectets of their own: So lazy
idleness and sloth in those things of a man's own concernment, do usually drive
him to straits, and from that to employ his wits how he may one way or other
prey upon other men's estates for his own subsistence, and thereby disturb both
his own peace and the peace of others; for, while he enjoyneth diligence and
industry in a man's own calling, as an help to attain this quiet and peaceable
frame of spirit, he implies that contrary sloth does usually drive men to
busy meddling, and to disturb both themselves and others: And to work with your
own hands* says he. 6. As the Lord allows none to live idle, but will have
all to employ the wit and strength which he has given them in some one lawful
calling or other, wherein they may promote the good either of Church, Family or
Commonwealth, Ephesians. 4. 28. So painfulness and industry in our own callings is a
singular help to stop our ears from being taken with the alluring sound of many
enchanting tentations, and of those in particular which would allure us to
meddle with the affairs of others to their prejudice, and to employ our wit in
raising stirs and divisions among Societies for our own advantage; we should
find so much of work, what from one thing what from another, at home, as should
make us loath to go abroad, except when we are called and pressed to it: for,
as an help to attain a quiet and peaceable fame of spirit, he enjoyneth every
one to work with their own hands. 7. It is the duty of Ministers to press upon
people not only the practice of Religious duties, but also diligence and
painfulness in the duties of every man's particular calling; And so to press the
former, as under a pretext of zeal and diligence in those, he do not make way
for, or connive at negligence in the latter: for Paul does so, not only here,
but also shows he had done it formerly: Work with your own hands, (as we
commanded you) says he. 8. The word Preached does not presently evanish when
spoken by Ministers, but stands as a constant rule for all time coming, though
never so long after, binding the consciences of those who heard it to walk by
it, as they would not be judged for their disobedience to it; And therefore the
word when Preached should be carefully laid up in the hearts of hearers for
that end: for, Paul shows that the word which he had preached to them when he
was with them, was binding to them yet: As I commanded you, says he.

Ver. 12. That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye
may have lack of nothing. Here are other two arguments for pressing industry
and painfulness in their calling; first, hereby they should walk honestly, and
in a seemly decency, in the eyes of those who were without, or of unconverted
Pagans (so called, 1 Cor. 5. 12. as being without the pale of Christ's visible
Church) and otherwise both they themselves and Christian Religion should be
reproached by those Heathens. 2. Hereby, and by Gods blessing upon their
diligence (Prove. 10. 22.) they should attain to such a tolerable competency in
things worldly as to have lack of nothing, to wit, which the Lord did see fit
and convenient for them to have, Psalm. 84. 11. Doct. 1. Such is our love to
sloth and ease, Prove. 6. 9, 10. and so prone are people to abuse the doctrine
of Christian liberty, as a pretense for shaking off the yoke of all necessary
and painful duty, Gal. 5. 13. that the most of people, especially those who can
by their wits find out a sinful shift, covered over with some handsome pretext,
to subsist otherwise, can hardly be kept from giving themselves over to
idleness, or stirred up to look upon diligence in particular callings as a
matter of conscience: for, therefore is it that Paul sees it necessary to use
so many arguments, to enforce upon witty medlers in other men's affairs,
diligence in their own: That ye may walk honestly. 2. As diligence and industry
in the duties of a man's particular calling, is a piece of seemly decency and
honesty: so there is nothing more unseemly and base than a lazy sluggard who
being neither profitable to himself nor others, does live as if he were only
born to eat, drink and sleep, and do nothing else: and though such idle
sluggards be neither whoremongers nor thieves, yet they may and should be
justly branded with dishonesty, and esteemed to lead no honest life: for, so
much does Paul teach, while he calls painful industry a walking honestly:
That ye may walk honestly, says he. 3. It is the duty of Christians, as in the
first place to approve themselves to God, Matthew. 8. 4. and next unto good men,
Psalm. 52. 9. So also in the third place to those who are without, even naughty
wicked and profane men, in so far at least as that we do not scare them from
Christ, and give them occasion to speak evil of Religion, 1 Timothy 5. 14. for, so
does Paul enjoin: That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without. 4.
there is not any thing that makes both Religion, and those who prosess the
same, more unseemly and unsavory to profane men, than when those who pretend
much to Religion do under any pretense, whatsoever, live lazy sluggards in
their particular callings, exposing themselves and theirs to be a burden to
others, and to live upon the sweat of other men's faces; They are so much
convinced from natures light of the unseemliness of this sin, that as they
burden Religion with all the blemishes of those who profess it, So they cannot
think that such a Religion ^ath God for its Author, which gives people liberty
to live in the practice of such an evil: for, while Paul affirms that their
painful diligence in a particular calling would be a walking honestly toward
them that are without, he insinuates that they would reproach them and Religion
both with dishonesty, if they lived idly. 5. It is no small mercy for a man to
have competency of things worldly, so as he neither know the power and strength
of those tentations which arise from pinching scarcity and want, Prove. 31. 9.
nor yet be necessitated to depend for a livelihood upon the coldryff, and
ofttimes merciless, charity of others, James 2. 15, 16. for, Paul teaches them
so much, while he persuades them to painful diligence, by a promise of
desirable competency: and that ye may have lack of nothing, says he. 6. See a
further note from the strength of this Argument to enforce industry and
painfulness in our lawful callings, upon Ephesians. 4. 28. doct. 6. That ye may have
lack of nothing.

Ver. 13. But I would not have you to be ignorant brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. In the
second part of the Chapter, The Apostle, while he p^esseth a fifth branch of
sanctification, to wit, moderation of sorrow for their friends who died in
Christ, many whereof were doubtless martyrs for the truth in those days of
persecution, chap. 2. 14. and while he gives them many sweet grounds of
consolation against immoderate grief, he falls out in a digression concerning
the state of believers after death, and Christ's second coming. And in this
verse he first proposes his scope in all, which is, first, to remove all
ignorance, uncertainty, or want of full persuasion of the truth of those things
which he is afterward to deliver, and especially of the state of believers
after death. Next, that hereby they might learn to moderate their sorrow and
grief for their deceased friends, and not to mourn excessively or desperately
as ot^ers, to wit, the Pagan Gentiles, did who had no hope of life, or of a
resurrection following. And while he calls the dead (after the usual manner
of Scripture, Act. 7. 60. 1 Cor. 15. 20. Joh. 11. 11.) by the name of those who
sleep, he sets down the first head of doctrine concerning the state of
believers after death, which also serves for an argument to moderate the
excessive sorrow of living friends for them, even this, that their death is but
a sleep, not a sleeping of the soul, which goes immediately after death to
glory, Luke 23. 43. but of their bodies which rest in the grave free from
trouble and care, as a man does in his bed, and it shall be raised up from the
grave in the morning of the Resurrection, Psalm. 17. 15. by the voice of Christ,
with as little difficulty as one will awake his sleeping friend, Joh. 5. 25.
and shall arise refreshed, re^reated and in full vigor, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. to
go about their endless work of praises to God and the Lamb, through the long
lasting day of never ending eternity, (see v. 17.) as a man after sleep arises
refreshed for his work. Doct. 1. As the children of God are often pressed down
with more than ordinary sorrow and grief arising from cross dispensations: So
sometimes there is not so much cause of sorrow in the dispensation it self, as
in their own ignorance, which mis-represents the Lords way of dealing, and
makes it look with a more terrible aspect than really it does: for, those
Thessalonians were excessively grieved for the death of their friends, arising
mainly from their ignorance of their happy estate after death, as Paul does
here imply: for I would not have you to be ignorant concerning them which are
asleep. 2. As there is oft-times even in Gods children some dangerous ignorance
of most necessary truths, if not as to the substance yet as to the
circumstances of them, or at least a great inadvertence to, and want of serious
perpending of these truths in time of greatest need, which is all one with
ignorance of them as to any present good to be reaped by them, Matthew. 16. 9. So
it is a considerable part of a Ministers duty, not only to labor upon the
affections of people for making them choose and embrace that which is good,
though he ought to do that mainly, 2 Timothy 4. 2. but also to inform their
judgment by clearing their dangerous mistakes, that they may be able to
discern truth from error, and that, as for other reasons, so, because of the
great influence which a darkened judgment has in misguiding the affections:
for, it is like they were not totally ignorant of the resurrection, yet of some
comfortable circumstances of it, or at least did not seriously perpend them,
which occasioned their excessive grief, and therefore Paul does set himself to
inform them: I would not have you ignorant, that ye sorrow not. 3. It is not
granted to the most near of Christian friends to enjoy the comfortable society
of one another always, but however they may eschew all those other sad
accidents, which either do locally separate chief friends before their death,
Psalm. 88. 18. or make their society one way or other useless, Job 13. 4, 5. yet
death will inevitably make a separation at last; and therefore Christians in
wisdom ought to improve to the best advantage their mutual society while they
enjoy it: for, Paul supponeth that death had removed some eminent Christians at
Thessalonica, which was cause of immoderate sorrow to such as were left behind,
while he says, concerning them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not. 4. Though
believers in Jesus Christ be freed from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. and
consequently from death it self, as it is a piece of that curse, Genesis 2. 17.
yet death does seize even upon them, and die they must, the Lord having so
appointed, Heb. 9. 27. that through the strait and terrible passage of death
they may have an entry unto life, Rev. 14. 13. So that death has changed its
nature and use as to them, and of a prison to detain them as Malefactors, it is
made a passage for them to walk safely through to the possession of their
Kingdom as victorious Conquerours; In which respect, among others, Christ by
his death has removed the sting of death unto all his followers, 1 Cor. 15.
55, etc. for, Paul shows that even believers among them did dye: concerning
them that are asleep, says he. 5. There is a moderate sorrow and grief which
the Lord allows for the death of Christian friends, though not because of any
hurt or damage of theirs, who are thereby freed from all sin and misery, and
rendered eternally happy, Rev. 14. 13. yet for the loss which either we or the
Church of God sustain in their removal, 2 King. 2. 12. and because the death of
such is often a forerunner of sad days to come, Isa. 57. 1. for, Paul by
forbidding only immoderate grief does tacitly allow that which is moderate:
That ye sorrow not, says he, even as others who have no hope. But 6. there is
an immoderate and excessive sorrow, either for time or measure, which as even
the Godly through infirmity are apt to entertain, so the Lord does disallow,
and from which he wills Christians to refrain, as savouring much either of
want of charity to our deceased friends, contrary to Isa. 57. 2. or of
Atheistical doubtings concerning the immortality of the soul, and a blessed
Resurrection of the body, contrary to 1 Cor. 15. or at least of too great
diffidence of Gods care and providence to supply what loss we our selves or the
Church of God do sustain by their removal, contrary to Matthew. 9. last: for,
Paul discharges this immoderate sorrow, and upon those grounds, while he
says, sorrow not even as others, who have no hope. 7. The serious
consideration of death, and how its nature and use is changed to believers,
might be of it self sufficient to stop the current of immoderate and excessive
grief for their removal; for his expressing their death by a sleep does serve
for an argument to allay their immoderate grief, the force whereof is expressed
in the exposition: concerning them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not. 8. As
Heathens, who live and die without the knowledge of Christ, are, as to
salvation, in a case wholly hopeless and desperate: So that our bodies, being
turned to ashes in the grave, and after that worms have consumed our flesh (Job
19. 26.) shall again be raised the same for substance, and united to our souls,
is a truth which natures light, not being enlightened by the written word,
could never comprehend, Act. 17. 32. for, the Gentiles are said here to have
been without hope, to wit, both of salvation, and chiefly of the Resurrection,
as he afterward explains, Now if they could have known a Resurrection, they
might h^ve had hope of it: even as others, says he, who have no hope.

Ver. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Here is a second head of the
forementioned doctrine, and a second ground of consolation, to wit, that in
Gods due time there shall be a Resurrection unto a glorious life after death; I
say, unto a glorious life, for the whole strain of the text does show that he
speaks only of the Resurrection of the Godly, and not of the wicked unto
condemnation, mentioned Joh. 5. 29. Because that would have served nothing to
his present scope, which is not to terrify, but to comfort them against the
death of their beloved friends. See v. 18. and he proves that there shall be
such a glorious Resurrection, first, by laying down an undoubted truth, which
he supponeth all did believe and take for granted, to wit, that Jesus Christ
the head had dyed, and after death arose again. 2. By inferring from this
ground, that therefore the power of God shall raise and bring from the grave to
life and immortality, 1 Cor. 15. those which sleep in Jesus, that is, who are
dead in Christ, and shall continue in the faith whereby they are ingrafted in
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. to the last gasp. And he shall bring them with Christ, that
is, through virtue of their union with him as members with their head: where he
shortly hints at the force of the inference from Christ's Resurrection to ours,
to wit, because we are so nearly united to him; to which add, that Christ's
death and resurrection are an infallible forerunner and necessary cause of our
resurrection, seeing by his death he destroyed death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. and arose
that he might quicken us from death, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. Doct. 1. As there shall
be a blessed resurrection of believers unto life after death: So the faith of
this truth is a singular cordial for comfort against the terror of death, in
so far, as though death get us once at under, yet we shall not be detained by
it; and dearest friends who at death do part with grief, shall then meet with
joy: for, the Apostles scope is to comfort them against death from the faith of
the resurrection: for if we believe, etc. 2. Concerning Christ's death and
resurrection, see upon Gal. 1. 1. doct. 7. Jesus dyed and rose again. 3. Though
thus says the Lord, and divine revelation, be a ground sufficient in it self
whereupon to build our faith, Psalm. 60. 6. yet such is our unwillingness to
believe, especially when the thing spoken has no ground in reason, Genesis 18.
12. and so great is Gods condescendence to help and supply our weakness, Joh.
20. 27. that he allows us to make use of any other lawful mean whereby we may
strengthen our faith, and as it were reason our selves up to a belief of that
which the Lord says: for, so the Apostle does teach us, to take help from
Christ's death and resurrection to strengthen us in the faith of our own
resurrection: for if we believe, says he, that Jesus dyed and rose again, even
so, etc. 4. Among other things helpful to bring us to the solid and fixed
belief of revealed truths this is one, to single out some truths which are more
easily believed than others, as having, besides the authority of God
interposing for the truth of them, some further confirmation from humane
testimony, or their powerful effects upon our own hearts or the hearts of
others, that so being once fixed and settled in the faith of those, we may be
thereby in some measure helped to give credit unto all such other truths as
have dependence upon them: for Paul, to bring them to the faith of their own
resurrection, would have them improving the faith they had of Christ's death and
resurrection, which was confirmed by so many witnesses, Luke 1. 1, 2. and
accompanied with wonderful effects upon the hearts of many: If we believe that
Jesus dyed and rose again, even so, etc. 5. As those, and those only, shall
attain to the blessed resurrection of the just unto life, who continue in the
faith, whereby they are ingrafted in Christ, to their last breath, Heb. 3. 14.
So the union betwixt Christ and believers, once made by faith is so sure and
firm, that death it self cannot dissolve it; yea not only their souls, but also
their bodies being separate from their souls, and in a manner from it self when
dissolved in the grave to ashes, do yet remain united to Christ: For, those
whom God shall raise to a glorious life are designed to be such as sleep in
Jesus, and living, dying, and dead are still in him, yea and their bodies which
only do properly sleep are also in him: Even so also them which sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him. 6. The great prop for our faith to rest upon, as to
the truth of the resurrection, is the power of God, whereby he is able to do
what he will, Psalm. 135. 6. and to make us of new out of our own ashes, as once
at the first he made all things of nothing, Heb. 11. 3. for, he leads them to
Gods power for grounding of their confidence, while he says, Them -- will God
bring with him. 7. Through virtue of that union betwixt believers and Christ,
it comes to pass that whatever has befallen Christ, as he is the head of
believers, shall in Gods due time be verified in believers themselves, that due
proportion and distance being always kept which is betwixt head and members:
for, he infers that we shall be raised because he arose, because of our
union with him: them -- will God bring with him.

Ver. 15. For, this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
a^leep. Follows a third head of the forementioned doctrine, expressing the
order wherein the dead shall arise, which serves also for a third ground of
consolation against immoderate sorrow. And first, in this verse, that he may
conciliate authority to the following doctrine, which transcends the reach of
humane reason to know and understand without special revelation, he does, after
the manner of the Prophets, Zech. 4. -- 6. premit a preface, asserting that
what he was to say was by, or in the word of the Lord, that is, in his name and
by virtue of express commission from him. 2. He sets down the order wherein the
dead were to rise, first negatively, to this purpose, They which shall be then
alive and remain on earth until Christ's second coming, as a small remnant of
all that numerous company of believers who had formerly lived, but ere then
will be removed by death, that small remnant, I say, shall not prevent or have
the start of those who are asleep or dead, to wit, neither as to their meeting
with Christ in the air, nor their actual possession of glory, spoken of v. 17.
and Paul puts himself among those who shall be then alive, while he speaks in
the first person, we, not as if he had been to continue until then, but because
he divides all believers at Christ's coming in two ranks, the living and the
dead, he does as it were for an example of the purpose in hand, place himself
among the living as he then was when he wrote: or that he may thereby teach
believers in all times to make ready for that day, as if it were to come in
their own time, because the peremptory time when it shall come is uncertain,
Matthew. 24. 42. Doct. 1. So violent is the current of impetuous affections when
once given way to, Psalm. 77. 3. so hardly are we convinced of the evil that is
in the excess of any thing in it self lawful, and in particular in the excess
of immoderate grief, Joh. 4. 4, 9. that a word in the by will not allay it:
there must be word upon word, and reason upon reason, to demonstrate not only
the sinfulness of it, but also that there is no reason for it: for, Paul having
given two reasons already to allay their immoderate sorrow, he does here, give
a third taken from the order wherein the dead shall rise: for this we say unto
you, etc. 2. As Ministers should bring forth nothing for truth, but that to
which they may premit, Thus says the Lord: So whatever truths they deliver,
though never so far above the reach of natures light, if once it be made known
that the mouth of the Lord has spoken them, we ought without further enquiry
to stop our ears unto all that carnal or corrupt reason can suggest against the
truth of them: for, being to deliver some mysterious truths above the reach of
natural understanding, he premitteth this, that they had divine authority for
them, and therefore should have credit: for this we say unto you by the word of
the Lord, says he. 3. The Lord Christ shall never want a Church of believers
upon earth, which in despite of Satan's malice to the contrary shall still have
a being, either more conspicuously, Isa. 2. 2. or more hidly, Rev. 12. 6. in
some one place or other, until Christ's second coming: for, Paul shows there
will be some believers alive, and remaining until the coming of the Lord. 4.
The Lord Christ who is now absent in his humane nature and bodily presence in
Heaven from us, Act. ^. 21. shall again return and at the last day be present
with us, and this not only in his power and virtue, as he is present with
believers always, Matthew. 28. 20. but as God and man in both his natures: His
very humane nature shall be brought down from Heaven with him, and every eye
shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. for, the word rendered coming, does signify a
presence in his being and essence, and not his power only: unto the coming of
the Lord. 5. The great advantage which our godly friends who dye in the Lord
shall receive themselves by death* should allay our excessive sorrow for their
removal notwithstanding any loss which does thereby redound unto us; otherwise
our grief is but selfish, and carries in it but a small regard to their
happiness: for, Paul in this and the following verse, does labor to allay
their immoderate grief, because their deceased friends received no prejudice,
but great advantage by their death: we which are alive shall not prevent them
which are asleep.

Ver. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first. This verse does, first, hold forth the glorious and terrible
manner, wherein Christ himself in his bodily presence (see v. 15. doct. 4.)
shall descend from Heaven to Judge the world: He shall come with great Majesty,
as Kings do enter their Royal Cities, with such solemnity, as great Judges do
set themselves upon the Bench, or with such terror as Generals of Armies do
join Battle with the Enemy: for the several things attributed to his coming in
this verse have in them allusions to all those. But more particularly he shall
come with a shout, The most probable meaning is, that he himself shall give the
word of Command both to dead and quick to compear at his Bar; which command of
his shall be proclaimed by an Archangel, that is, some one or other chief
Angel, whose proclamation shall be confirmed by sound of Trumpet, or with some
formidable martial-like voice as of a Trumpet; called the last Trumpet, 1 Cor.
15. 52. because none shall sound after it; and the Trumpet of God here, because
it shall ratify the command come forth from God, and shall sound so loud as it
will be heard far and near, even by those who are in the graves, Joh. 5. 28.
and depths of the Seas, Rev. 20. 13. for, the excellency of a thing uses to be
set forth by this epithete, as the trees of God, Psalm. 104. 16. Next, the order
wherein the dead in Christ, that is, in the faith of Christ, shall rise, is set
down positively, they shall rise first, that is, before those who are alive
shall partake of that glorious change mentioned, 1 Cor. 15. 51. which shall be
to them in place of the Resurrection. Doct. 1. The will of God is the supreme
cause of every thing which falls out, wherein, being once known, we ought to
acquiesce without farther enquiry: for, Paul giving a reason, as it appears by
the causal particle for, why the living shall not prevent them which sleep, he
rests on Gods will, voice and command, enjoining the dead to rise first: for
the Lord himself, says he, shall descend, etc. 2. The Lord Christ in his
bodily presence is now contained in Heaven, and not upon earth; for if he were
already upon earth, as the ubiquitaries, and maintainers of Christ's bodily
presence in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper do affirm, he could not be said
properly to descend to it when he comes to judgment, but so says the Apostle
here: The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven. 3. Christ's second coming at
the last day to judge the quick and dead, (2 Timothy 4. 1.) shall be attended with
so great state and Royal Majesty, for the terror of reprobates, 2 These. 1. 7,
8. and comfort and glory of the Elect, 2 These. 1. 10. that all the terror,
majesty and dreadful reverence, which has been ever seen upon earth are but
poor empty shadows of it, and come far short of the thing it self: He shall
come accompanied with a thousand times ten thousand of his glorious Angels,
Jude 14. by his mighty power shaking Heaven and earth, Matthew. 24. 29. and by
the power of his Trumpet raising the dead out of their graves, Matthew. 24. 31.
and presenting them all at his seat of Judgment, Rev. 20. 12. for, though it
be safest to decline all such high-flown, scholastic speculations, and
peremptory determinations, about the nature of this shout, voice and trumpet
here spoken of, as are usually tossed among the Schoolmen, yet this much may
be safely affirmed, that those expressions do shadow forth the dreadfulness,
terror, and majesty of Christ's second coming, by allusions to the most
dreadful and majestic spectacles that ever were, are, or shall be seen upon
earth: He shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trumpet of God. 4. As there is probable ground from Scripture to
affirm, that there are some orders and degrees of dignity among the blessed
Angels, some being superior, and some being inferior: So all of them, even
the chiefest not excepted, are not thought too good, neither by the Lord
Christ, nor yet themselves, to be employed one way or other for the honor of
Christ, God-man, Mediator, in helping forward the salvation of believers: for,
he mentions here an Archangel, or chief Angel, distinct from Christ, and
shows that he, with many thousands of others, (Jude 14. Matthew. 24. 31.) shall
be employed at the last day, about the work of gathering the elect out of their
graves, to meet with the Lord Christ: He shall descend -- with the voice of the
Archangel, says he. 5. It is the Lords ordinary way of dealing with his
Children, to recompense their disadvantages wherein they seem to be cast behind
others, with some one or other advantage or privilege, wherein they outstrip
those, who in other things did seem to have the advantage of them; that so
there may be an equality in his way, even where it seems most unequal, 2 Cor.
8. 14. for it might seem some prerogative unto those who will be found alive at
Christ's coming, that they shall not taste of death, 1 Cor. 15. 51. above the
lot of others who must dye and their bodies be turned in ashes ere then. But
behold those others shall be recompensed in this their seeming disadvantage, by
being first glorified in their bodies before the then living shall be changed,
though it be most probable there shall be no considerable difference of time, 1
Cor. 15. 52. The dead in Christ shall rise first, says he.

Ver. 17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. Here are a fourth and fifth head of the above mentioned doctrine,
concerning what shall befall the Godly after death, being now raised: which
serve also for two further grounds of consolation. The first of those is that
then, to wit, after the^ dead in Christ shall rise, the godly then alive and
remaining upon earth, being first changed and their bodies in a moment of time
made conformable unto Christ's glorious body, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Phil. 3. 21.
they shall then together with those who have arisen be caught up, and that in
the twinkling of an eye (as the word implies, and other Scriptures express, 1
Cor. 15. 52.) and caught up in the clouds, which shall serve as Chariots in
which the Saints shall be carried up into the air, as is said of Elias, 2 King
2. 11. and of Christ, Act. 1. 9. and the end of their being caught up there is
to meet the Lord, upon his way descending from Heaven to judge the world, and
to serve unto him, as his glorious train, Jude 14. and for his assessors in the
act of passing judgment, 1 Cor. 6. 2. The second of those heads is the great
glory which all believers of both sorts shall enjoy with Christ after that,
They shall be with him so, to wit, in that glorious manner both in soul and
body, and this for ever, without any change unto all eternity. Doct. 1.
Whatever may be the circumstantial privileges of some believers beyond others,
at and after Christ's second coming; yet none of them shall come short in any
thing which is required to the essence and being of complete and
soul-satisfying happiness: for having said, The dead in Christ shall arise
first, v. 16. he shows here, that both quick and dead together shall meet the
Lord, and be for ever with him. 2. Though death does make a sad separation
among the Godly, depriving some of the many sweet and rare advantages which
they enjoyed by the society of others; yet herein lies a choice cordial for
comfort against all excessive sorrow arising thence, that ere it be long there
shall be a joyful and comfortable meeting, not only one of them with another,
but all of them with Christ at his second coming: for, the Apostles scope is to
comfort them against immoderate sorrow, from that consideration: Then we which
are alive shall be caught up together with them, to meet the Lord, says he. 3.
There shall be a glorious change wrought at Christ's second coming in the bodies
of the elect from what they now are, though not in their substance and
proportion of members, Job 19. 26, 27. yet in their qualities; and
particularly, as in other things, (see Phil. 3. 20. doct. 11.) so in this,
whereas our bodies are now earthy, lumpish and heavy, tending downwards, they
shall then be in a kind spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 44. active and nimble, so that
they shall be easily and without all hurt caught up on a sudden, or made to
mount up as birds, to meet the Lord Christ in the air, as is here affirmed. 4.
However the Godly, while here upon earth, do frequently, through error of
judgment, Act. 15. 37, 38. love to self-interest, Phil. 2. 2. with 4. and
prevalency of some one corruption or other, 1 Cor. 3. 3. run contrary courses,
rent asunder, and strive to counter-work one another: yet when they meet with
Christ at his second coming, all such alienation and distance shall be removed:
They shall then be perfectly one, as the father and Christ are one, Joh. 17.
21, 22. Their different judgments, exasperated passions, their contrary
designs, shall no more be to divide them, or keep them asunder: for then, says
Paul, We shall all be caught up together to meet the Lord. 5. Though it will be
doubtless no small comfort unto the Godly, at Christ's second coming, to have a
comfortable meeting of their old acquaintance, with whom they prayed and wept
and suffered, and of all the eminent ancient believers that ever were, Matthew.
8. 11. and to have perfect union in judgment, in heart, in affection, in one
and the same song of praise with all those, Revel. 14. 1, 2, 3. yet the height
of their happiness shall not consist in this, but in their blessed meeting
with, and enjoying the presence of the Lord Christ, whose glorious face and
fellowship will beautify all that famous general assembly of the first born,
and make them lovely, 1 John 3. 2. and without whom even the fellowship of
glorified Saints, or Heaven it self could not be satisfactory: for, he makes
their happiness to consist not so much in this that they are caught up
together, as that they are caugh up to meet the Lord, and so shall ever be with
him. 6. As there is an unspeakable fullness of satisfaction in the enjoyment of
Christ's presence: so that enjoyment of it which the Saints shall have in Heaven
is a far other thing, than any thing of that kind we can attain to here; Our
presence with him and nearness to him now, is but only in our spirits, and with
his Godhead, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7. It is but mediate and through the glass of
Ordinances, 1 Cor. 13. 12. It Is but frequently used, Psalm. 30. 7. and no ways
full, 1 Cor. 13. 12. but then shall it be both in soul and body, Job 19. 26,
27. both with his divine and humane nature, 1 Cor. 13. 12. it shall be
immediate, 1 Cor. 13. 12. constant, Matthew. 25. 46. and so full that they who
enjoy the meanest degree will find no lack, Psalm. 17. 15. for, while he says,
they shall be ever with the Lord so, he implies we will be with him in another
manner than we are now. 7. Though even the best while here on earth are so
inconstant, fickle and changeable, that the long continuance of any one thing
proves wearisome, yea and hardly can they bear much of the Lords presence for
any space of time together, and not abuse it to pride, security or carnal
lightness, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. yet so great a change shall be wrought in glorified
Saints, that the long continuance of Christ's blessed presence without any
interruption shall neither breed satiety and loathing, nor yet be abused by
them; but the longer they do enjoy it the more they shall be ravished with it
and delighted in it, without all fainting or remitting of their happiness unto
all eternity: for he says, we shall be ever with the Lord.

Ver. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. He does here apply
the forementioned doctrine, by expressing one main use which he would have them
to improve it for, which is, that not only each of them should thence draw
matter of comfort unto themselves, but also administrate comfort by these
words, that is, the preceding doctrine, unto others, especially to such as were
under affliction and grief for the death of near and Godly friends. Doct. 1. As
there is no religious truth so merely doctrinal, but it may be improved for
some good practical use: So then do Ministers preach, and people learn aright,
those doctrinal truths about the nature of God his attributes, about Christ his
person, natures and offices, about the resurrection, Christ's second coming and
life eternal, when their great and furthest design, is not to inform the
judgment only in the knowledge of those truths, but also to rectify the
affections by pressing some practical use, and the performance of some one duty
or other upon them: for Paul does handle some of these truths, which are as
doctrinal and fall as little under our practice as any other, by pressing upon
them thence a practical duty, even to draw comfort from these truths for
allaying excessive sorrow: wherefore comfort one another, says he, with these
words. 2. As we are not to look upon the afflictions of others as of no
concernment to us, seeing we are yet in the body, Heb. 13. 3. and may suffer
what others now feel, but as upon a call from God to several duties and to more
work than we formerly had: So this is one special piece of work to which we are
hereby called, even to prove comfortable unto those whom the Lord has wounded,
that being one end why the Lord does Minister comfort unto our selves, 2 Cor.
1. 4. for, Paul shows that the afflictions of others did call them to this
duty, and therefore he enjoins them, comfort one another. 3. As this duty of
ministering comfort unto those whom the Lord has wounded is incumbent not only
unto public Ministers, but also unto private Christians in a private way: So
it ought to be mutual; and therefore as a man would have matter of comfort and
not affliction added unto his grief from others, he should labor to be
comfortable unto others himself, for, he enjoyneth this duty to be gone about
by all, and mutually: Wherefore comfort one another, says he. 4. The best and
choicest of comforts, for supporting the spirits of men under afflictions of
any sort, are those which are laid up in Scripture, and pertinently drawn from
thence with a prudent application of them to the case in hand; there being no
afflicted case to which a comfortable, full and (through Gods blessing) an
effectual cure is not to be found in Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. and all
other comforts not drawn from thence, being either vain and naught, Isa. 55. 2.
or a salve much narrower than the sore, Prove. 18. 14. for, he bids comfort one
another with these words, to wit, those Scriptural comforts which he had
presently written.

CHAP. V.
THe Apostle, in the first part of this Chapter, does persist in the former
digression, about Christ's second coming, showing the time appointed for it
could not be known, v. 1. which he confirms first, from their own knowledge
of its unexpectedness, v. 2. and secondly, from the terrible and unexpected
judgment, which shall then come upon secure reprobates, v. 3. against the
terrors whereof he does confirm the Godly, v. 4, 5.

In the second part of the Chapter he presses the exercise of several virtues:
As, 1. Of Watchfulness and sobriety, v. 6. because the contrary vices are works
of darkness and ignorance, v. 7. from which they were mercifully delivered, v.
8. -- Secondly, of faith, love, and hope, v. -- 8. to the last whereof
especially, he does encourage them from the certainty of salvation hoped for,
because of Gods decree, v. 9. and the Mediators purchase, v. 10. Thirdly, he
exhorts all to the duties of mutual edification, v. 11. and fourthly, the
people to acknowledge and respect their Ministers, v. 12, 13 -- and all to live
peaceably, v. 13. and sixthly, to administer with patience a suitable remedy to
three several sorts of spiritual diseases, v. 14. seventhly, to abstain from
private revenge, v. 15. eighthly, to entertain a cheerful frame of sprit under
all dispensations, v. 16. ninthly, to be much in the duty of prayer, v. 17. and
tenthly, of thanksgiving, as being well pleasing to God, v. 18. eleventhly, not
to quench, but to cherish the gifts and motions of Gods spirit, v. 19. and
twelf^hly, in order hereto not to despise, but highly esteem the public
Preaching of Gods Word, v. 20. and thirteenthly, to try what doctrines they
hear, and after trial, to hold what is sound, v. 21. and lastly, to eschew
whatsoever has any rational appearance of sin, v. 22.

In the last part of the Chapter he concludes the Epistle: first, by a prayer,
for their growth and perseverance in sanctification, v. 23. secondly, by a
promise, assuring them that God would answer his prayer, v. 24. Thirdly, by
recommending unto them, 1. To pray for him, v. 25. 2. To salute all their
Church Members in his name, v. 26. 3. To communicate this Epistle unto them
all, v. 27. And fourthly, he concludes with his ordinary farewel-wish, v. 28.

Ver. 1. But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I
write unto you. The Apostle, foreseeing that some curious heads might happily,
from what he had presently written of the Resurrection and Christ's coming to
Judgment, take occasion to enquire when should those things be? he does divert
them from all such enquiries, by showing that as to the times, that is, the
year, month, or day of Christ's coming, or as to the determinate seasons of
those times, whether he should come in Summer or Winter, by day or by night, at
morning, evening or midnight (see Mark 13. 32, 35.) it was not needful for him
to write unto them any thing to that purpose, where more is understood than
expressed, to wit, that it was impossible to know either the time or season of
his coming (as the reason used v. 2. does prove) and therefore it was but vain
curiosity for any to enquire concerning it. Hence Learn 1. The written word of
God is so contrived, that as nothing necessary to be known for our incitement
to duty and direction in the way to salvation is therein omitted, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
So our vain curiosity to know other things, the knowledge whereof is not so
necessary, but would rather prove unprofitable and hurtful, is not in the least
measure thereby satisfied; for it is written, chap. 4. 16. That Christ shall
come, and the manner and effects of his coming, the knowledge of all which is
necessary, but as to the peremptory time when he should come, the Apostle
declineth to write of it, and that because the knowledge of it was not needful:
But, says he, of the times and seasons ye have no need that I write. 2. It
has pleased the Lord, in his deep wisdom and mercy, to conceal and keep secret
the definite time of Christ's second coming to Judgment, that hereby the Lords
people may be taught to watch, and to keep their hearts always ready and
prepared for it, Matthew. 24. 42. for, the expression, ye have no need that I
write of the times, implies they could not be known or written of. 3. So
presumptuously bold is the wit of man, when not sanctified and better employed,
as to dare to pry into the most profound of Gods secrets; and more
particularly, to search out and determine the peremptory time, longer or
shorter, of Christ's second coming, the knowledge whereof God only wise has
reserved to himself alone, Matthew. 24. 36. for, Paul supponeth there would be
such curious enquiries, both in that and in the following ages, and therefore
labors to divert the Godly from them, while he says, of the times and
seasons ye have no need that I write. 4. The servants of Christ are wisely to
divert the Lords people from all such curious enquiries, as being a result of
Satan's policy, thereby to withdraw them from the knowledge and study of
necessary and revealed truths, 1 Timothy 6. 4. and more especially, they ought to
divert from those enquiries which are about the peremptory time of Christ's
second coming, seeing the knowledge thereof not only is impossible, but also
would prove unprofitable and hurtful, as tending to make the world in all ages
preceding that wherein he should come more secure and careless: for, so does
Paul here suppress all such curious enquiries, while he says, But of the times
and seasons ye need not that I write unto you.

Ver. 2. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so comes as a
thief in the night. He gives a reason to prove the impossibility of knowing
when Christ shall come (whereof, v. 1.) Because they themselves know perfectly
and exactly, as having it plainly revealed by Christ himself while here on
earth, Matthew. 24. 42. that the day of the Lord, that is, the day of Christ's
second coming, so called, because he shall then come as Lord, to judge the
quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1. they knew, I say, that this day comes, in the
present time, that is, hasteneth to come, Rev. 22. 20. and shall come as a
thief in the night, that is, suddenly and unexpectedly, whether by night or by
day, as the thief who gives not warning before he come to steal. See the same
similitude used to show that Christ shall come unawares and unexpectedly,
Matthew. 24. 43, 44. Rev. 3. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 10. whence he leaves unto them to
gather that it is not possible to know the time and season of his coming. Doct.
1. However in points of truth not clearly revealed, and those which are not of
such absolute necessity to salvation, the Lords people may live in suspense
without determining themselves peremptorily either to the one hand or the
other, Act. 1. 7. yet it is their duty, and will be in some measure aimed at by
them, to have the exact knowledge of necessary truths, and of such as are most
clearly revealed: for this truth, about the unexpectedness of Christ's second
coming, was necessary and clearly revealed, and therefore they knew it
perfectly or exactly. 2. So ready are we to forget, even those truths which we
perfectly know, under a violent fit of some tentation, and when we need to
remember them most, Heb. 12. 5. that the Lords Ministers must not think it
wholly unnecessary, but sometimes profitable, to inculate of new upon the Lords
people, and put them in remembrance of those truths, which they already know:
for, though they knew perfectly, that the day of the Lord comes as a thief in
the night, yet he does here tell them of it, and inculcates it, v. 3. Doct. 3.
It is but a groundless dream, and antiscriptural opinion, maintained by some of
the ancients, and now by the Papists, that the Antichrist mentioned in
Scripture shall be an individual person, who shall have his rise in the world
precisely three years and an half before Christ's second coming; for if so, then
at that time the very month and day of Christ's coming to Judgment should be
exactly known, the contrary whereof is here affirmed, to wit, that the day of
the Lord comes unexpectedly and as a thief in the night. 4. So great should be
our desire to profit in knowledge and sanctified practice, and our skill and
dexterity to improve all occurrences for that end should be such, as to bring
meat out of the eater, and from the worst of sinful examples to learn somewhat
tending, either by way of resemblance or otherwise, to clear or confirm
spiritual truths to the understanding, and to enforce the practice of some
spiritual duty upon the will and affections, Luke 18. 1, etc. for the Apostle
takes occasion to clear this necessary truth, and to enforce the duty of
watchfulness following upon it, v. 6. from the sinful practice of a thief, who
comes unexpectedly in the night to his prey.

Ver. 3. For when they shall say, peace and safety; then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not
escape. He does here, first, both clear what was meant by the former
similitude, to wit, the unexpectedness of Christ's second coming; and also prove
that it shall be unexpected, from the terrible effects thereof, to wit, sudden
and unexpected destruction, and that both of soul and body (as the word is
usually taken, see 2 These. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 9.) which destruction shall come,
or, as the word signifies, at unawares surprise the wicked (for of those only
he means, as v. 4. does clear) who at that time shall be arrived at such an
height of carnal security as to say, that is, not only secretly promise unto
themselves in their heart, Psalm. 14. 1. but also openly declare, if not by
their mouth, yet by their deeds (for men do speak also by these, Tit. 1. 16.)
that they have no fear of approaching judgment, and do look for nothing but
continued peace and safety, that is, full immunity (as his using two words to
one sense does imply) from any trouble of that sort in their sinful course.
Next, he gives some properties of this destruction, first, in a similitude of
the pains and travel of a woman with child, which, besides the unexpectedness
and suddenty of it, as to the hour and moment of time wherein it shall come,
whereof already, holds forth the horrible pain and torment of it, the pains of
a woman in childbirth being most sharp, exquisite, and for the time almost not
supportable. Secondly, in plain and proper terms, he shows it shall be
inevitable, They shall not escape. In the Original the negation is doubled,
which according to the property of that language denies most strongly, as if
he had said, there shall be no imaginary possiblity to get it shifted, so that
their destruction shall be 1. sudden, 2. painful, and 3. inevitable. Doct. 1.
As sin continued in begeteth carnal security, and draws the sinner at length
to misbelieve and despise whatever the word of the Lord does threaten against
him for it, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. So an height of security, and atheistical contempt of
divine threatenings, is an infallible mark of a wicked, godless and unrenewed
heart: for, so much does he teach while he speaks not of the wicked expressly,
but only describes them from their height of security, which long continuance
in sin should at length drive them to, as from an infallible evidence of a
wicked man: for when they shall say peace and safety. 2. There is not any one
more speaking evidence of approaching judgment of one kind or other, than
carnal security in sin, and wickedness arrived to such an height, as to make
men wholly fearless of Gods judgment and atheistical mockers at all
threatenings which forewarn them of it: for, says he, when they shall say peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes. 3. What ever grounds of confidence,
or undoubted persuasion flowing from those grounds, a wicked man may have to
escape a threatened judgment; yet all shall serve t^ little purpose, when God
begins in earnest to reckon with him; his strongest fancy, with all its
grounds, will prove but a weak bulwark to bear off the overflowing waves of
Divine wrath, when the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
waters shall overflow the hiding place, Isa. 28. 17. for, the word rendered
safety implies they should have a certain persuasion of safety as if they were
above all doubt, and this doubtless upon some grounds satisfactory to
themselves, and yet for all that, even then sudden destruction shall come upon
them, and at unawares surprise them: 4. As a lingering death has in it much of
mercy even to wicked men, who have thereby time and leisure given them to
repent, and to plead with God for mercy, Rev. 2. 21. -- So of all deaths or
ways of calling sinners to an account, those which are sudden and make quick
dispatch are to a wicked liver most dangerous, as hardly leaving any place
either for Gods patience or man's repentance, but making an end of the person
stricken before he can solidly think upon his end: for, he places a great part
of the terror of the destruction threatened, in that it should be sudden and
unexpected: Then sudden destruction comes upon them. 5. Though none can know
the peremptory day, month or year of Christ's second coming (see v. 1. doct. 2.)
yet there are certain signs from which, when they shall fall out, a man may
certainly know that the day of the Lord is near approaching, such as these, a
general height of carnal security, Matthew. 24. 38, 39. the conversion of the
Jews, Romans 11. 15. and total destruction of the Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8. for,
besides other things, so much may be employed in this similitude, whereby
Christ's second coming and the destruction of the wicked which does accompany it
are compared to travail upon a woman with child, who though she know not the
very day and hour when her pains shall take her, yet she has certain signs
whereby to know that her time approaches. 6. The pain and horror which the
day of the Lord shall bring on Godless reprobates is such, that no tongue can
utter, nor can it be expressed in proper terms so as we might conceive it, yea
and such, as the greatest of all earthly torments are but weak shadows and
slender representations of it, and too little to express it: for, therefore
does the spirit of God, always while speaking of this destruction, make use of
borrowed similitudes from the most terrible of earthly and bodily torments, as
of those occasioned by fire, Mark 9 -- 45. by fire of brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. by
an eating worm never dying, Mark 9. 46. and here the pains and torment of a
woman in travail; all which doubtless come far short of expressing to the full
that pain and torment which is incomparable, incomprehensible, and cannot be
expressed, but by such shadows and representations. 7. Even damned souls and
the most profane and lawless of Godless reprobates are not only overruled by
and under the dominion of a divine providence, but shall also know so much by
sad experience when in the great day, nill they will they, they shall appear
before their dreadful Judge and receive their sad and woeful sentence from his
blessed mouth, and be presently made without all delay or shifting to undergo
it: for, says Paul, they shall not escape.

Ver. 4. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake
you as a thief. Lest the Godly should be terrified, and shaken with the
apprehension and fear of that sudden destruction presently mentioned, he does
here cast in a seasonable word of comfort for all such, against the terror of
it, as appears from his entrance made to the present purpose, with an
adversative particle But. And first, he propounds the ground of the following
comfort, namely, that they, to wit, as many of them to whom he writes as were
sincere believers in Jesus Christ (for so must this indefinite compellation,
and that note of universality also, v. 5. be understood according to the use of
Scripture elsewhere, 1 Cor. 15. 22.) none such I say, were in darkness, that
is, they were not living in their gross and natural ignorance of God, nor yet
in carnal security or Godless profanity; for the word darkness does point at
both those here, as elsewhere in Scripture, Romans 2. 19. 1 John 1 -- 6 -- Next,
he expresses the comfort it self flowing from this ground, to this purpose,
that however the precise day and time of Christ's second coming could not be
known by them, no more than by the wicked, Matthew. 24. 36. yet it should not
overtake them, or (as the word implies) violently apprehend them to their hurt
and prejudice, as a thief and robber does apprehend the person and goods of
those whom he spoils and destroys. Now the force of the inference, whereby
he draws the present consolation from the forementioned ground, does lie in
the similitude; take it thus, that as a thief can only do hurt to those who are
sleeping securely in the dark night, and not to others: So this terrible day
could do no hurt to them, because it should not find them lying secure in the
dark night of ignorance or impiety. Doct. 1. The truly Godly, and they to whom
the terrible threatenings of eternal judgment do least belong, are of such a
tender frame and temper of heart (Isa. 66. 2.) that usually they are most
affected, sadded and discouraged by them, when Godless livers, to whom they
properly appertain, are so little moved with them that they rather mock them, 2
Pet. 3. 4. for, Paul did foresee so much, while presently after he had
denounced sudden destruction to come upon secure reprobates, he sees a
necessity to guard the Godly against the terror of it: But ye, brethren, are
not in darkness, says he, 2. It concerns therefore the wise and faithful
servant of Christ so to denounce the terrible threatenings of everlasting wrath
against the wicked, as that he presently caution them for the comfort of the
Godly; lest otherwise they, for whom they are not intended, be dejected, shaken
and discouraged by them: for, so does Paul here guard the former threatening
with a But ye, brethren. 3. A prudent Minister should labor so to guard
against the terror and dejection of the Godly by denounced threatenings, as the
contrary comfort be not proposed absolutely unto any, but suspended upon such
conditions as are required in the promise, that so the party who would have
comfort may not be deceived, but put himself to a fair trial by those marks, if
he be one of those to whom the intended comfort does belong; for, Paul being to
comfort the Godly against that terrible destruction threatened, v. 3. he
mentions the condition upon which they might escape it, to wit, if they were
not in darkness, which he affirms of them all, or of a great many of them, at
least in the judgment of charity, and thereby leaves it unto themselves to
search if they were so in reality: But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that
that day should overtake you. 4. As the truly Godly and real believers in Jesus
Christ are freed, at least, from the gross darkness of their natural ignorance
and Godless profanity: and as to be lying under either of those does argue a
man to be yet in his unrenewed state: So the best security which a man can
promise to himself against the terror of sudden and unexpected strokes, does
lie in his saving knowledge of God in Christ, and in the testimony of a good
conscience arising from the shining light of an honest and holy life: for, Paul
affirms it universally of all real believers, they are not in darkness, either
of gross ignorance or Godless profanity, and makes that their ground of
comfort to secure them, that the day of the Lord should not overtake them as a
thief.

Ver. 5. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are
not of the night, nor of darkness. He insists upon the former ground of
comfort, first by proving the truth of it, that they were not in darkness,
because they were children of light, that is (according to an usual Hebraism,
Matthew. 11. 19.) they were not only endued with saving knowledge and holiness
(both which in Scripture go under the name of light, Joh. 3. 19. Matthew. 5. 16.)
but also were regenerate and born of God, 1 John 2. 29. (who is that light
inaccessible, 1 Timothy 6. 16.) by the Preaching of the Word, Jam. 1. 18. which
also has the name of light, Psalm. 119. 105. And they are called children of
the light and of the day, to show that the light of knowledge and holiness,
wherewith they were endued, was not a dark glimmering light, as of a candle or
twilight, but most clear, as the light of the full and perfect day; and this as
it seems, in opposition to that lesser measure of light which was enjoyed under
the old Testament; See upon Gal. 4. 3. doct. 2. and v. 5. doct. 3. Secondly, by
illustration of the proof, while he removes from them the contrary, not only
gross ignorance and profanity under the name of night, but also a comparative
measure of those, under the name of darkness. Doct. 1. As souls affrighted with
the terror of God, are often most averse from receiving the comforts allowed
to them of God: So the Lords Ministers may not grow weary of taking pains to
clear their doubts, and work them up to the embracing of them: for, Paul
supponing the Godly might possibly not have closed with the propounded comfort
at the first hearing, does here insist upon it: ye are all the children of
light. 2. As the doubts of discouraged and afflicted Christians are not so much
about the re^lity of the comfort it self held forth by the word, for a suitable
cure to their disconsolate case, as about their own interest in that comfort
and right to lay hold upon it: So a Minister in dealing with such would not so
much, or only insist in propounding and urging a suitable comfort, as in
clearing up unto them and pressing upon them to make sure work of their
interest in it, and right to lay hold upon it: for, Paul supponing that their
doubt would lie about their not being in darkness, which he held forth as the
ground and evidence of their interest in the comfort, does insist mainly in the
clearing of that, while he says, ye are all the children of light, etc. 3. The
Kingdoms of light and darkness, of saving knowledge and dark ignorance, of
grace and profanity, of Christ and Belial, of God and the Devil, are so much
inconsistent that they cannot co-incide in one and the same person; neither can
any man be a subject of both Kingdoms at one and the same time: for, the
Apostle makes the denial of the one to follow upon the affirmation of the
other: we are all the children of light, says he, we are not of the night or
of darkness. 4. The Minister of Christ ought so to deliver suitable truths unto
the Lords people for their incitement to duty, for their comfort against
discouragements, for their reproof or conviction, as that he takes his own
allowed share and portion of those truths unto himself, as if he were an
ordinary hearer; otherwise he cannot both save himself and them who hear him,
according to the promise, 1 Timothy 4. 16. for, Paul does change the person, in
the close of the verse, and takes a share of what he distributes to others unto
himself, both here and in the following verses: we are not of the night and of
darkness, says he.

Ver. 6. Therefore let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch, and be
sober. The Apostle, having now put a close to his digression, about the state
of believers after death and Christ's second coming, which he entered upon, chap.
4. v. 15. does again return to press upon them some other branches of that
sanctification required by God, and spoken of chap. 4. v. 3 -- And first, from
what he has presently said of the unexpectedness of Christ's second coming, he
exhorts to the exercise of two virtues, tending much to keep them in a
readiness for that day, to wit, watchfulness and sobriety. And he presses
them, first, by forbidding them the contrary vices, under the name of sleeping
as others, to wit, as ungodly men, children of darkness: where by sleeping is
not meant sleep properly taken, and of the body, binding the outward senses, so
that for the time they cease to do their office, for this sleep being
moderately taken is allowed by God, and given by him as a blessing, Psalm. 127.
2. and some who, it is like, will be found sleeping thus at the last day shall
be saved, Luke 17. 34. although excess even of bodily sleep be a sin, Prove. 24.
33. and may be here in the second place looked at, either as a cause,
concomitant, or effect of that spiritual sleep here forbidden, which is no
other than that deep sleep of carnal security, whereby all the spiritual senses
of a man, who is taken with it, are bound up, Matthew. 13. 15. so that he regards
not his duty, Matthew. 25. 3, 5. is wholly fearless of threatened judgments,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. and besorteth himself with such contentments and pleasures as he
can find in this pre^ent life, Luke 12. 16, 17, 18. In which sense this word is
used, Mark 13. 36. Ephesians. 5. 14. And he presses them next, by enjoining the
exercise of the virtues themselves: and first, that they should watch, whereby
he does not so much mean watchfulness of the body, though that be also
sometimes very necessary, and therefore required by Christ, Matthew. 26. 4. as
spiritual watchfuln^ss, and of the mind, whereby the man endued with it has
all his inward and spiritual senses free and exercised, Matthew. 13. 16. so that
he does not only know and discern the voice of God in his word and
dispensations calling him to every duty, Hab. 2. 1. but also is intent upon it,
Psalm. 119. 32. careful to take up, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. and guard against such
tentations as would divert him from it, Matthew. 16. 23. or ensnare him in the
contrary sin, Mat. 26. 41. and is always making ready how to meet comfortably
with God in any future dispensation of mercy or terror, Job 3. 25, 26.
Secondly, that they should be sober, whereby he enjoyneth not only sobriety and
temperance (strictly taken) in the moderate and sober use of meat and drink,
Eccles. 10. 17. but more largely also, as it moderates, and boundeth our
affections in the pursuit and use of all things earthly, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.
for not only excess of wine, but the cares of this world, and the prevalency of
any other lust, have an inebriating virtue, disturbing the reason and
oppressing the senses, see Luke 21. 34. Doct. 1. Ministers should so press the
faith of privileges, and use-making of allowed comforts upon the Lords people,
and people should so improve their privileges; and comforts, as that neither
of them be abused for a sleeping pillow to foster negligence, but both of them
improved as incitements to duty: and comforts should be so mind^d as duty be
not neglected; otherwis^ the most comfortable promises will prove but dry
breasts, seeing the Lords ordinary way is to enliven comforts unto his people,
when they are most diligent in the way of their duty, Dan. 9. ^0, 21. For, Paul
having asserted their privilege of being freed from darkness, and inferred
thence their comfort that the terror of that day should not overtake them, v.
4, 5. he draws an argument from both, to incite them to their duty,
Therefore, says he, let us not sleep. 2. The undoubted certainty of divine
promises, made to believers for their preservation from judgment and wrath, do
no ways of themselves tend to cherish neglect of duty, but rather to excite
them to greater diligence* as that which is a mean appointed of God for
furthering the promise to an accomplishment, Ezekiel. 36. 37. For, Paul having
given to believers among them a most undoubted promise that the terror of that
day should not apprehend them to their hurt, v. -- 5. he infers thence,
therefore let not us sleep. 3. A possibility to meet with a sudden stroke and
unexpected trial, has in it a call and voice unto the Lords people to shake
off security and laziness, and be upon their guard lest they be suddenly taken
and surprised by it: for, from what he spoke also, v. 23. of that sudden
unexpected coming of the day of the Lord, he infers here, Therefore let not
us sleep. 4. Then do we make a good use of bad examples, when we so look on
them, as not to imitate them, but to scare us from the like, while we hate,
abhor and detest them: for he propones the example of other secure sinners as a
reason to dissuade them from the like, Let not us sleep as do others. 5. The
wise Lord does sometimes exercise his people by propounding to them a possible
hazard of meeting with an unexpected trial with which he does not intend ever
to assay them; and this in mercy to them, that the apprehension of an uncertain
hazard, may put them upon the exercise of some piece of necessary duty, which
otherwise would possibly have been neglected: for Christ's unexpected coming,
mentioned v. 2, 3. was not to fall out in their time, and yet it is held out
unto them as a thing possible, the good whereof is here expressed, even, that
thereby they might be excited to the exercise of sobriety and watchfulness.
Therefore -- let us watch and be sober. 6. As a man who would make conscience
to exercise any grace and virtue, must set himself to abandon the contrary
vice; So the work of through and full mortification of any sin is then carried
on to purpose, when we do not rest upon a bare surceasing from it, but set
about the practice of the contrary duty; for, in pressing the exercise of those
virtues he forbids the contrary vices, and while he forbids security he
exhorts them to exercise the contrary virtues: let us not sleep, but let us
watch and be sober. 7. The exercise of these two graces, watchfulness and
sobriety, do best together, and hardly can be separate the one from the other;
in so far, as an unsober heart overcharged with surfeiting, drunkenness and the
cares of this life cannot discharge the duties of watchfulness mentioned in the
exposition, and an unwatchful heart that is not intent upon duty, and guarding
against tentations contrary to it, cannot choose but be ensnared by the subtle
and alluring tentations of worldly pleasures and advantage, Mal. 2. 15, 16. and
to exceed the bounds of moderation in the pursuit and use of things earthly,
Luke 21. 34. and consequently prove unsober: for, therefore does the spirit of
God, not only here but elsewhere, enjoin the exercise of those two virtues. Let
us watch and be sober.

Ver. 7. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are
drunken in the night. 8. But let us who are of the day, be sober, -- Here is a
reason to enforce the former exhortation, to wit, because sleep and drunkenness
are the works of darkness, for going about whereof men do usually (if they be
not all the more sluggish and enslaved to their lusts, Jer. 6. 15.) choose the
night season. The truth of which reason does hold whether we take the words to
mean of sleep, drunkenness, and night, properly so called, or if we take them
improperly as they were formerly exponed, v. 4. 5, 6. for hardly will any other
than they who are in the night of their natural darkness and unrenewed state
give themselves to the deep sleep of carnal security and to spiritual
drunkenness or an over-burthening and besotting themselves with the cares and
pleasures of this present life, 1 These. 4. 5. This is v. 7. Whence he inferrs
that seeing they were of the day, that is, delivered from the dark night of
their natural ignorance, born of God, and endued with the most clear light of
saving knowledge and holiness, as was affirmed v. 5. that therefore in very
common honesty they behoved to shun those works of darkness, and live in the
exercise of Christian sobriety, and consequently of watchfulness also, the one
of which graces cannot be separate in exercise from the other; see v. 6. doct.
7. This is v. 8. -- Doct. 1. Things lawful and allowed should be gone about in
their convenient season which God and nature has allotted for them* and the
wrong timeing of a thing in it self allowed, may make it be imputed unto us for
sin: for, taking the words in their proper sense, he shows that the time in
which men do usually take their sleep, as most convenient for it, is the night
and not the day: for, they that sleep, sleep in the night. 2. As the Lord has
left some common principles of conscience, modesty, and common honesty,
imprinted by nature upon the hearts of men, to serve for a restraint unto them
from arriving at the utmost height of sin and wickedness at the first, and
while through custom of sinning they be either weakened or extinguished; So
when men do openly avow their sin and profanity, and transgress all bounds of
modesty, and common honesty, it speaks them arrived at a greater height of sin
and wickedness than was usual to be found among the grossest of Pagans: for
they were not so shameless as to avow their drunkenness, but being restrained
somewhat by modesty and respect to common honesty were only drunken in the
night. 3. As an unrenewed man is a very prey to the most shameless of
tentations, which Satan is pleased to assault him with, or to enslave him by;
So the sin of gross ignorance of God, and the way to Heaven, is that which
exposes the unrenewed man most to be preyed upon without resistance by any
other sin: for, taking the words improperly, he makes the man unrenewed who is
in the night, to be enslaved to carnal security, intemperance, and a kind of
spiritual besottedness with things of a present life, and does not obscurely
hint at his dark ignorance, for which mainly his unrenewed state is compared to
the night, as the great cause of all his slavery: they that sleep, sleep in the
night; they that are drunken, are drunken in the night. 4. A gracious state
must, and will be attended with gracious actions and an holy conversation
suitable unto that state; and therefore a man ought not so much to look to what
others do, as to what the state of grace, unto which he pretends, does call
upon himself to do: for, he enforces the exercise of sobriety upon them, from
this, that they were of the day, in a gracious state of saving knowledge,
without regarding what others who were not in that state did. But let us, says
he, who are of the day be sober. 5. Though there be such a necessary connection
betwixt a gracious state, and an holy conversation, yet such is our natural
averseness from holiness, Romans 8. 7. so strong an interest has sin in the
best, Romans 7. 23. and so many are the tentations and difficulties we have to
wrestle through in the way of our duty, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. that even the renewed
man has need of reiterated and serious exhortations enforced by most cogent
reasons to press him to it: for, though he shows that their present gracious
state did engage them to the exercise of sobriety, yet he exhorts them to it,
and backs his exhortation by a strong reason. But let us says he, who are of
the day be sober.

Ver. 8. -- putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and for an helmet,
the hope of salvation. He does here press another branch of sanctification, to
wit, that they would arm themselves for a spiritual battle, which has also an
argument employed in it to force the exercise of watchfulness and sobriety,
because it was now a time of fighting, and therefore not of sleeping or
immoderate drinking, and the pieces of armor which he bids put on are two,
first, the breast plate; what this piece did serve for in the bodily armor,
see upon Ephesians. 6. 14. and answerable to it in the Christian armor he makes the
graces of fait and love; what those are, see upon chap. 1. v. 3. only the
ground of the present similitude is this, That as the breast plate did secure
the breast and vital parts of the body therein contained: so these two graces
do secure the vital parts of the soul, and that wherein the life of a Christian
does most consist, to wit, our justification and interest in God, Romans 5. 1.
together with our knowledge of it, 1 John 5. 4. and a plyableness of spirit to
all the duties of an holy life flowing from our interest, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Secondly the helmet, answerable to which in the Christian armor he makes the
hope of salvation. See what this helmet, the grace of hope is, and the grounds
of resemblance betwixt the two upon Ephesians. 6. 17. Now although he do only reckon
two pieces of the spiritual armor here, and not so many as he does, Ephesians. 6.
14. yet he omits nothing requisite to defend the Christian soldier in this
spiritual conflict; for where faith, love and hope are, there is no grace
wanting. Neither does he any thing superfluous, Ephesians. 6. 14. in showing the
necessity distinctly, and the right way of improving of several other graces of
Gods Spirit, in this spiritual warfare, seeing he does there speak of it at
greater length, and holds forth the terror of our spiritual adversaries, and
the several distinct tentations, either more expressly or implicitly, whereby
they assault us in this battle. Besides what is already observed from Ephesians. 6.
14, etc. upon the several pieces of the spiritual armor and those of them in
particular which are here mentioned, and the nature of that spiritual conflict
and battle which they do suppone, Learn further, 1. The great cause why men
pretending for Heaven and happiness, do so much besot themselves with things
earthly, and are so little intent upon their duty, and watchful against
tentations, is, their great mistake and ignorance, as if the way to Heaven were
easy, beset with no difficulties, and men might go to Heaven with ease and
sleeping; and therefore a chief incitement to sobriety and watchfulness, and to
shake off security and laziness is to set before us often all those insuperable
difficulties and terrible opposition which we are of necessity to meet with in
our way to Heaven and happiness; for, to make them watch and be sober, he minds
them of the spiritual battle which they behoved to fight. Putting on the
breast plate of faith, etc. 2. As in bodily wars, drunkards, and sleepy
sluggards can never be good soldiers: so secure souls that cannot watch, and
unsober spirits oppressed and entangled with an excessive weight of worldly
cares or love to any other lust, will prove but cowards, and never strike a
fair stroke, so long as they are such, in this spiritual conflict: for, so much
is employed while he joyneth the exercise of watchfulness and sobriety with the
right use-making of the Christian armor in this spiritual combat, let us --
be sober, putting on the breast plate of faith, says he. 3. As the malice of
Satan, our great adversary in this spiritual conflict (Ephesians. 6. 12.) does bend
it self most to strike at, and destroy those things wherein the life and being
of a Christian, as a Christian, does most consist, such as his interest in
Christ, right to Heaven, his knowledge of those, pliable inclination to duty,
his spiritual sense and motion: So the care of a Christian should run most to
provide a sufficient guard for those, even the constant exercise of those three
graces mentioned in the text: for he alludes to soldiers, whose great care is
to guard their breast, where the heart the first fountain of life is, with a
breast plate, and their head, the original ^f sense and motion, with an helmet,
putting on the breast plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of
salvation. 4. The grace of ^aith is a most necessary piece of the spiritual
armor, and almost of universal use to defend the Christian soldier in this
spiritual conflict; for, therefore does Paul make it answer to two parts of the
bodily armor, the shield, Ephesians. 6. 16. and the breast plate here, putting on
the breast plate of faith. 5. The exercise of love to God and our neighbor
must needs be joined with faith, otherwise faith does prove but an useless
breast plate, and of no force to secure the vital parts of a Christian in this
spiritual conflict: for Paul conjoynes them to make up the breast plate,
putting on the breast plate of faith and love, says he. 6. The believing
soldier will not always meet with present performance of the good things
promised upon his closing with the promise by faith, but often the Lord for
wise reasons does exercise him with long delays, Heb. 11. 13. and sometimes
with contrary appearances to sense, Genesis 15. 4, 5. with 18. 1. which Satan does
improve as subtle Engines to batter down and pierce his breast plate of faith
as a thing irrational, groundless, contrary to sense, and which will never
attain the promised blessings, Genesis 18. 11, 12. for if it were not thus, there
should be no need of the helmet of hope as an additional part of this spiritual
armor to strengthen the breast plate of faith under delayed performance. And
for an helmet the hope of salvation, says he.

Ver. 9. For God has not appointed us to wrath: but to obtain salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ. He does here both more gen^rally enforce the preceding
exhortation to the exercise of watchfulness and sobriety, and to arm
themselves with the forementioned graces for a spiritual combat, from Gods
decree of bringing the elect to eternal life, not without, but in the practice
of holy duties, 2 These. 2. 13. and also he seems more particularly to give
them some encouragements to exercise their hope of salvation mentioned, v. --
8. from the certainty of salvation hoped for; whereof he gives two grounds,
first, Gods eternal decree whereby he had appointed or ordained and
predestined them (as the word is rendered, Act. 13. 47. 1 Pet. 2. 8.) not to
eternal wrath and destruction, but to obtain salvation. The word rendered,
obtain, signifies to purchase, or, to do much about a thing to obtain it,
which purchasing is here ascribed not to themselves, Tit. 3. 5. but to Jesus
Christ, Act. 20. 28. and this is here given as the second prop of a Christians
hope, upon which the certainty of the elects salvation depends, even that
salvation, which was ordained for them in the decree, is purchased and obtained
by Christ. Doct. 1. The certainty of salvation, either in it self or to us, is
so far from being in its own nature a pillow to foster security or carnal ease,
that it is a strong incitement to duty, and to charge through all difficulties
with courage, which we may be assaulted with in our Christian course, yea
nothing weakeneth the hands of a Christian Soldier more than diffidence and
distrust of success: for he holds forth the certainty of their salvation as an
incitement to the forementioned duties (and more especially to kyth themselves
valorous soldiers in this spiritual conflict:) for God has not appointed us
to wrath, says he. 2. As the elect may attain to know assuredly that they are
elected (see upon Ephesians. 1. 4. doct. 2.) So neither the decree of election nor
their most certain persuasion of the same do of their own nature render them
secure or remiss in duty, but rather does strongly incline and incite them to
the exercise of sobriety and watchfulness and of all other graces, seeing this
is the way resolved upon by God for bringing the eternal decree of election to
an accomplishment, 2 These. 2. 13. for he mentions the decree of his and their
election, as both certain in it self, and also known to him and some among
them, as a strong incitement to the exercise of all the forementioned virtues:
for God has not appointed us to wrath. 3. So great and insuperable are those
difficulties which stand in the way of the salvation even of believers, Act.
14. 22. so strong, so numerous and so terrible are their spiritual adversaries,
Ephesians. 6. 12. so little is there of strength in themselves to oppose the meanest
of them, 2 Cor. 3. 5. and so improbable is it by reason of all those, that ever
such as they shall be saved, That they must look above themselves and draw the
ground of their hope for salvation from God and from Christ, otherwise there
can be no sure foundation for their hope to rest on; for, the Apostle here,
while he intends to give grounds for their hope of salvation, mentioned v. --
8. does mention only Gods decree and the mediators purchase: for God has
appointed us -- to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. 4. As God has not
slightly proposed, but peremptorily decreed, foreordained and appointed from
all eternity (Ephesians. 1. 4.) the salvation of the elect, and condescended in that
his eternal decree upon the very particular persons whom he intended to save,
Phil. 4 -- 3. So there are others whom he intended not to save, but to condemn
and adjudge to undergo his everlasting wrath: See this latter decree further
cleared upon Ephesians. 1. 4. doct. 4. for he says, God has appointed them to
salvation, and not to wrath, implying, that he had appointed others to wrath,
though not them. 5. Though the decree of election to salvation be peremptory
and absolute, so as to exclude all possibility of its not obtaining the end
proposed, Matthew. 24. 24. yet not so as to exclude all means on Christ's part for
obtaining, or on our part for attaining (Heb. 12. 14.) that salvation to which
the elect are ordained, seeing he has in that same decree appointed to bring
about their salvation by such and such means, 2 These. 2. 13. for God has
appointed us to obtain salvation, says he, not without means, but by Jesus
Christ. 6. Though the merits of Christ were not a cause moving God to love or
elect any to salvation, for his electing love did move him to give Christ for
sinners, Joh. 3. 16. yet they are the procuring meritorious cause for the worth
whereof salvation is actually bestowed upon any, They are the cause, though not
of the decree, yet, of bestowing the salvation decreed: for, the Apostle
affirms the obtaining or purchasing of salvation was by our Lord Jesus Christ.
7. As salvation could not be actually bestowed upon the elect before it was
purchased, and an equivalent price paid to divine justice in satisfaction for
those sins by which they had lost and fore-faulted it, Heb. 9. 15. So neither
they themselves, nor any mere creature, was able to make this purchase or lay
down the price: The redemption of the soul is precious and cease for ever, to
wit, among mere creatures, Psalm. 49. 8. It was Christ alone, the second person
in the blessed Trinity, who made this purchase of lost salvation, and was
designed in the same decree of election for that end. Hence Ephesians. 1. 4. God is
said to have chosen us in Christ, which is more plainly expressed here, He has
appointed us to obtain, or to the obtaining or purchasing of salvation, by
Jesus Christ, implying, that the salvation for which the elect were appointed,
behoved to be purchased, and the purchase of it by the same appointment was put
over upon him, there being no other able for it.

Ver. 10. Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him. He illustrates the last ground of hope by showing, first,
the means by which Christ did purchase salvation to the elect, and what this
purchase stood him, to wit, no less than his blessed life: he died, and that
for us, that is, in our stead, Gal. 3. 13. and next, the end proposed by him in
his death, and which is undoubtedly obtained thereby, to wit, that we, or all
the elect, of whom v. 9. should live the spiritual life of grace here, and
eternal life of glory hereafter, and this whether they wake or sleep: which
words may not be taken as v. 6. for they who sleep securely in sin, do not live
with Christ, but either properly for bodily sleeping, or watching, or rather
improperly, for our living, and dying this natural life or death, as 1 These. 4.
13. So the sense is, That no change which can befall the believer in this life,
no nor death it self, shall hinder him to live this life, and to live together
with him, that is, by virtue of his union with Christ and of that influence for
life which flows from his blessed face and presence. Doct. 1. The salvation
of the eiect, through reason of their sin, was so deeply mortgaged, and they so
far from any ground of claim unto it, that no less ransom was necessary to
purchase salvation for them, than the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ;
for, Paul condescending on the way how Christ did purchase salvation for the
elect, says, he died for us, that we should live. 2. The great end and cause
of Christ's death was, that, having thereby paid a sufficient ransom to
provoked justice for the guilty elect, he might purchase for them that life and
salvation which was formerly fore-faulted and lost; and therefore, though by
his sufferings and death he did confirm the truth of the Gospel, and leave us
an example of patience to follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. yet those were not
the principal, much less the only, but the secondary ends of his death: for,
Paul shows that he died for this end mainly to obtain and purchase salvation,
and that they should live together with him. 3. Then do we rightly apply the
fruit of Christ's death as to the purchase of salvation unto our selves, when we
jointly therewith draw an argument from it to resist sin which stood our Lord
so dear, and to lead an holy life, in exercising sobriety, watchfulness and all
other saving graces, as that which he so aimed at in his death: for, this of
Christ's dying for them may be looked upon as a further incitement to the
exercise of all the forementioned virtues, who died for us, says he. 4. The
salvation purchased by Christ for the elect is nothing other but a reviving of
them from their spiritual death, Ephesians. 2. 1. to that new and spiritual life
which is begun here in regeneration, Joh. 3. 3. carried on in the exercise of
grace, Gal. 2. 21. and shall be afterward completed in glory, Col. 3. 4. so
that saving grace is begun salvation, and grace is no less purchased by Christ
than glory it self: for, in stead of saying he died that he might purchase
salvation, according to his present scope, as appears from v. 9. he says, as
the equivalent of it, he died that we should live together with him. 5. This
life of grace, begun here and perfected in glory, is the most excellent of any
other life, It carries the name of life from any other besides, which being
compared with it, are nothing but a death: for, therefore does he give it the
name of life here absolutely, and without any addition, to show what kind of
life he means, as if there were no other life but it only: who dyed, says
he, that we should live with him. 6. Though this life of grace does not exempt
the elect from natural death; yet so excellent is it that it makes the man who
has it outlive death. Death it self, the King of terrors, shall not bereave
him of it: for, he supp^^es that the elect will dye their natural death, here
expressed by the name of sleep, and yet that they shall not be bereaved of this
excellent life, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live, says he. 7. It
is the presence of Christ, and o^r union with him by faith here, Ephesians. 3. 17.
and sense hereafter, 1 John 3. -- 2. (an union tha^ death it self cannot
dissolve) which makes us live this blessed and excellent life. It is as the
soul to the body, the very life of our life, and that whereby we formally live.
So that though Christ by his death did purchase this life, yet the elect do not
actually enjoy it until they be united to him: for, so much does he teach,
while he says, that we should live together with him.

Ver. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together and edify one another even as
also ye do. He does here press a third branch of sanctification, the necessity
whereof in its subserviency to the former duties is pointed at in the illative
particle wherefore; and the sum of it is, that they would, first, not only
comfort themselves together, as Gods dealing with any did call for comfort, but
also mutually exhort and incite one another to the exercise, as of all other
virtues, so especially, of those presently mentioned: for the word rendered
comfort, signifies also to exhort. And next, edify one another, or (as
skilful and diligent Masons, from whom the word is borrowed) endeavor to
advance the work of grace in others, not only by exhortation and consolation
but by all other lawful means of admonition, instruction, rebuke, reproof, or
good example: And that he may excite them to further progress in the practice
of those duties and not seem by his present exhortation to tax them of former
negligence, he does commend their present diligence in them. Doct. 1. As all
Christians of all ranks do stand in need of exhortation, consolation and to be
edified and furthered in the way of grace by all lawful means; So both P^stors
and people ought to make conscience of discharging all those duties; to wit,
Pastors, not only privately, but also publicly in the Congregation, 1 Timothy 5.
20. and by virtue of their particular calling, office and authority so to do;
Tit. ^. 15. private Christians, again, in private in their families, Ephesians. 6. 4.
among their friends and neighbors, Act. 18. 26. and by virtue of a tie of
Christian charity toward all the members of the same body, 1 Cor. 12. 25. For,
he shows that every one stands in need to be exhorted, comforted, etc. and
that it is the duty of all to do so, while he says, comfort, or exhort and
edify one another. 2. As the conscience-making of the forementioned duties
among Christians is a singular mean to keep people in a lively watchful frame
and temper of spirit; So negligence in them does of necessity bring along with
it great deadness, security and decay of life and vigor in the exercise of any
saving grace, and performance of commanded duties: for, the illative particle
therefore, shows that this duty is enjoined as a subservient help to the
exercise of sobriety, watchfulness, faith, love and hope, formerly pressed;
wherefore comfort your selves together, says he. 3. So many are the
discouragements which people must encounter in the way of duty, what from their
small progress in it, the averseness of their own spirit from it, Romans 7. 18.
the great opposition from outward and inward tentations to it, 1 John 2. 16.
that they often need as much of consolation and encouragement, as exhortation
and admonition, for making them advance in it; for, he bids them, in order to
this, comfort themselves together. 4. There is none so far advanced, or so
diligent in the exercise of any grace, but they need the spur of exhortation,
at least to make them persevere; seeing the best are ready to faint, Jonah 2.
7. Gal. 6. 9. if not also to make them do better, seeing the best come far
short of what they ought, Phil. 3 -- 13. For, he exhorts them to the present
duty, though he does commend their present diligence in it: edify one another,
says he, as also ye do. 5. A prudent Minister should so excite the Lords
people unto their duties, as not to neglect their good beginning or progress
already made, but let them know he takes notice of them as such, which may
prove a forcible encouragement to some to quicken their pace, and a sovereign
remedy against discouragement in others, than which nothing does prove a
greater enemy to diligence in duty: for so does Paul here, edify one another
as also ye do, says he.

Ver. 12. And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. Lest by binding the duty of
mutual edification upon all Christians, v. 11. he had seemed to make a public
Ministry useless, therefore he does lovingly and affectionately (as the
compellation brethren and the word rendered beseech imply) press a fourth branch
of sanctification containing a short sum of peoples duty toward their
Ministers and Church guides who are here described to be, first, those who
labored among them even to weariness (as the word signifies) which seems to
relate chiefly unto Ministers or Preaching Presbyters, the specialty of whose
office is to labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5 -- 17. next, they were
over them, the word signifies to excel and bear rule, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 12. and thus
it expresses that part of their office, whether they be preaching or ruling
Presbyters, which consists in ruling and governing the flock, 1 Timothy 5. 17. --
only he adds in the Lord, to distinguish Church Government from the Civil. It
is spiritual, in things relating immediately to God, and to be exercised not in
their own name, but in the name and authority of the Lord Christ, Matthew. 18.
20. They are over the flock, not as Lords, 1 Pet. 5. 3. but as stewards, 1 Cor.
4. 1. 3. They did admonish them, whereby he expresses one main thing wherein
they were to labor, and to exercise their authority and rule, to wit, their
endeavoring by all competent means, and particularly, both by doctrine and
more gentle censures, to put a right impression of duty upon the minds of the
Lords people. The word in the Original signifies to put a right mind in one.
Next, he presses the duties of people toward their Ministers, which are first
to acknowledge them, as the word may be rendered here, for, the naked knowledge
of their persons and gifts may be in such as otherwise contemn them, but the
knowledge of them, here required, is an acknowledging them for such as they are
by reason of their calling, and ought to be accounted. See 1 Cor. 16 -- 18.
Doct. 1. So great an enemy is Satan to the Ordinance of a public Ministry, 1
These. 2. 18. so necessary is it that people do countenance that ordinance, and
encourage those who are entrusted with it even for their own good, Heb. 13. 17.
so ignorant, unmindful and neglective are they of those duties which they ought
to perform for that end, 2 Cor. 12. 11. that the servants of Christ should,
with much seriousness and affectionate insinuation, press upon the Lords people
all such duties of respect, reverence, love, obedience, submission, Heb. 13.
17. and gratitude, Gal. 6. 6. as they owe unto their Ministers and those who
are over them in the Lord; So far should they be from a total neglect of
pressing any such duties under a pretense of self-denial, or from preposterous
modesty: for, Paul does here most seriously and affectionately press duties of
that kind, And we beseech you, brethren, to know, etc. 2. The duties of private
edification should be so gone about and entertained by private Christians, as
the office of a public Ministry be not hereby rendered useless and despicable,
or the proper duties thereof incroached upon, by those who are not called to
that function, Heb. 5. 4. for, therefore he subjoynes this precept, which
presses upon people respect to the public Ministry, to that other about
mutual edification, immediately preceding, And we beseech you, brethren, to
know, etc. 3. The duties which people discharge to their Ministers should flow
from their knowledge and inward conviction, that the place and station wherein
their Ministers are set does call for such duties at their hands, and not from
mere custom, force of civil laws, regard to their own credit, or for gaining
of their Ministers favor, or any thing of that kind; otherwise, neither will
their duty be pleasantly done, nor acceptable to God when it is done: for,
therefore does he enjoin it as the first piece of peoples duty to their
Ministers, and the foundation of all the rest, to know and acknowledge them for
such to whom they ought in conscience discharge those duties, And we beseech
you, brethren, to know them which labor among you. 4. One great and main cause
of peoples backwardness to do duty unto their Ministers, and of disrespect both
to their persons and function, is, their ignorance and not serious perpending
the weight and wearisome toil of their labor, the dignity of their office,
together with the usefulness and necessity of their work among them; for,
therefore does Paul describe the Ministry from the dignity of their office, the
toilsomness of their labor, and the usefulness of their work to the people, as
so many motives unto people to discharge that duty which they owe them. Which
labor among you, and are over you and admonish you, and v. 13. for their works
sake. 5. The wisdom of God has so contrived Scripture, that frequently in one
word and sentence it does comprize a variety of distinct purposes; for here,
with one breath he teaches both people their duty, and Ministers their duty,
and makes the latter an argument to enforce the former. Know them, says he,
which labor among you, and are over you, etc. 6. The Lord Christ has
appointed the Ordinance of Church Government in his house distinct from, and in
things proper to it, independent upon the Civil Magistrate, to be managed by
Church-guides, Ministers and Elders in their Ecclesiastic Courts and
Judicatories, 1 Cor. 5. 4. for, the word rendered over you, does properly and
usually signify a power of Jurisdiction and Government, and the expression in
the Lord does distinguish this Government from the Civil; and are over you in
the Lord, says he. 7. The power of Church Government and the exercise of it is
not, by any appointment of Christ's, ast^icted to any one Minister or person
whomsoever, having power of authority and Jurisdiction above the rest, neither
does it belong to the body and community of Church Members, but to all the
Ministers and Church-guides in common; for, he speaks here of them all, and
only of them, they are over you in the Lord. 8. The Lords Ministers ought so to
go about one part of their Ministerial function as not to neglect another. They
must so Preach, as not to neglect the exercise of discipline, and so exercise
discipline as not to neglect to labor in the word and doctrine; for, says he,
they labor among you, and are over you in the Lord. 9. So necessary and useful
is the exercise of discipline by Church-guides to the Church of Christ, for
keeping the ordinances pure, Rev. 2. 2. and the Lords people free from the
infection of contagious sins, 1 Cor. 5. 6. for reclaiming and gaining of
scandalous offenders to repentance, 1 Timothy 1. 20. and for ordering all the
affairs of Christ's house, 1 Cor. 14. 48. (none of which ends can be attained so
well and effectually as by the mean appointed thereto by Christ himself) that
the Lords people should be so far from reluctance to lay their necks under this
piece of Christ's easy yo^k, that they ought to acknowledge, respect, love and
discharge all other duties unto their Ministers and Church-guides upon this
very account of their exercising discipline, as well as of their laboring in
the word and doctrine; for, to incite people to their duty to Ministers, he
describes them not only from this that they labored among them, but also were
over them in the Lord. 10. Whatever other thing is requisite in a Minister, yet
this one thing is necessary and may not be wanting, some measure of skill and
dexterity to admonish the Lords people of their duty, by clearing up to their
minds the equity of it, and producing some pertinent motives for bringing them
to a good liking with it: for, his expressing only this one particular piece of
their work does imply that it is a chief one, and that some competency of
abilities for it must not be wanting: and admonish you, says he.

Ver. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be
at peace among your selves. The Apostle in this verse does, first, press a
second head of duty flowing from the former which people owe to their
Ministers, to wit, that they should esteem them very highly or superaboundantly
(as the word does signify) whereby he points at that inward reverence and
respect to their persons and office due to them, to be testified in their
speech, Matthew. 12. 34. and other behavior, P^il. 2. 29. which he shows should
be accompanied with love to them, a love, without doubt, which ought to kyth in
its effects, Gal. 4. 15. Secondly, he gives a reason or motive unto all the
forementioned duties, to wit, for the work of their Pastoral function, that
Ministers might be encouraged in it, Heb. 13. 17. and because it is an
excellent work in it self, 1 Timothy 3. 1. and most necessary and advantageous to
the Lords people, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Thirdly, he presses another branch of
sanctification relating unto all, to wit, the study of keeping Christian peace
and concord among themselves, and especially with their Ministers; lest by any
means Satan might stir up strife and prejudice among them, to make the labors
of their Ministers unprofitable. Doct. 1. The great thing which Ministers
should press in relation to themselves upon people, and which people should
endeavor toward their Ministers, is to have their hearts possessed with an
affectionate and good esteem of their persons and office, as that which will
bring with it the hearty and willing performance of all other duties which they
owe unto them; for, he thinks it sufficient to press this esteem flowing from
love, as knowing, that this being attained, all the rest would follow. And to
esteem them very highly in love. 2. This high esteem which is due from people
unto their Minister, as it must flow from love to his person for his works
sake; So it must manifest it self in kindness and beneficence, in a seemly
behavior toward him in hoping the best of him, in bearing with his humane
frailties, in not publishing of them, in not receiving misreports or taking up
groundless jealousies against him, and in such other fruits of love and charity
as are mentioned, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. For, he says, esteem them very highly
in love. 3. As it is not sufficient we do what is right and commanded, except
it flow from right and allowed motives; So whatever a Minister be otherwise,
for birth, for personage, for riches, for other natural endowments, it ought to
be a sufficient motive and inducement to gain him esteem and respect, that the
Lord has employed him in such a worthy excellent work, as the proclaiming of
peace to rebels in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. the espousing of a bride to
him, 2 Cor. 11. 2. and the gaining of souls to God, 1 Cor. 9. 22. and whatever
esteem is given him from any other motive, whether the dignity of his place,
eminency of his parts, the affableness of his disposition, or his easiness to
receive satisfaction in the matter of his maintenance, if it be not also and
mainly upon the account of his work, that esteem is not given which is due to a
Minister of the Gospel: for, he will have them to esteem them for their works
sake. 4. As Christian peace and concord among societies is a nursing mother
unto all other duties, 1 Timothy 2. 2. so it tends, in a special manner, to make
the work of the Ministry successful among a people, while Ministers have
thereby not only access, but delight to be doing good among the people, and
people also to edify one another; and nothing marreth the good of a Ministry
more, than a Spirit of discord, dissension and strife let loose, either betwixt
Pastor and people, or betwixt people and people among themselves: for,
therefore, it seems, immediately after he has spoken of the duties both of
Pastor and people, he subjoyneth, And be at peace among your selves.

Ver. 14. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. He does here press
four duties which are so many further branches of sanctification, and all of
them belong both to people and Ministers, to each in their own way. See in
doct. 1. The first three are astricted to three sorts of persons for their
object, as first the unruly, that is, who as disorderly soldiers (from which
the word in the original is borrowed) do transgress the order, bounds and
limits of their particular calling and station assigned them by God, and
especially such as neglect their own business, and intrude themselves upon the
affairs of others, as the Apostle explains himself, 2 These. 3. 11. and those
are to be admonished, that is, minded of their duty, yea and sharply rebuked
for the neglect of it, for that the admonition here required does include so
much is clear from 2 These. 2. 10, etc. A second sort are the feeble-minded,
that is, as appears from the remedy prescribed, those who are so much dejected
in mind with the sense of sin, or with the feeling or fear of afflictions that
they are ready to faint in the way of their duty, Prove. 24. 10. and such are to
be comforted, or animated against their discouragements from ^uch grounds as
the word of truth does afford. A third sort are the weak or infirm, and this
either in their Judgment through want of capacity, or information, Romans 15. 1.
or in practice, who being otherwise tender in their walk are carried aside in
some one particular or other by a more than ordinary violence of some
tentation, Matthew. 26. 69. And those are to be supported, The word signifies to
underprop them, as a beam does the house, to wit, by bearing, though not with
their sins, Gal. 2. 11. yet with their persons, Ephesians. 4. 2. by tender yielding
to them in the practice of things indifferent, 1 Cor. 9. 20. by wise commending
what appearance of good is in them, Mat. 12. 20. and by clearing of their
mistakes with calmness and diligence, Act. 18. 25, 26. The ^ourth duty is not
astricted unto any one sort, but extended unto all indifferently who are
diseased either in body or mind, and especially such as are troubled with any
spiritual malady; to wit, the exercise of patience; whereby it seems
according to the present scope, he enjoyneth continuance in the forementioned
duties, and others of the like nature, without wearying much less hopeless
surceasing, 2 Timothy 2. 25. notwithstanding that success for a time be wanting.
Doct. 1. The visible Church of Christ, is constitute not of Angels or Saints
made perfect, but men of sinful infirmities, and those of several sorts in
several persons: and therefore the Church may be well compared to an Hospital
full of sickly persons, laboring under a great variety of spiritual diseases,
some under one sort, some under another, and consequently all of them fit
objects upon which Jesus Christ, the great Physician of souls, may exercise
some one or other of his spiritual cures; for, Paul represents this Church as
such, wherein some were unruly, some feeble-minded, and a third sort weak. 2.
The Lords Ministers and people may not on this prentence rent and separate from
the society and fellowship of visible Churches, but are to employ their skill
and experience in things spiritual, under Christ the great Physician, every one
in his own place and station, in administrating some suitable cure and remedy
to the diseased members of Christ's visible body, as they may have access and
opportunity: ^or, so does Paul here enjoin them, not to separate from, but to
warn the unruly, etc. 3. As there is a great variety of spiritual distempers
incident to several diseased patients, and the disease of one is not the
disease of all, but almost every patient does labor under his own distemper,
which is, at least in some circumstances, different from the disease of others;
So it concerns those who would prove successful Physi^ians in curing the
spiritual distempers of diseased Christians, to be well acquainted with the
temper of their Patient and the nature of his disease, that they may the better
know how to administer a suitable cure; for, he shows that there are some more
unruly, some feeble-minded, some weak, and implies that those who were to
administer the prescribed cures should know the disease before they meddle with
the cure: warn the unruly, etc. 4. As Christ the great Physician has provided
a great variety of spiritual cures and remedies, answerable to the several
distinct infirmities of his diseased people; So every cure is not fitted or to
be applied by Christ's servants unto all diseases, otherwise they prove
Physicians of no value, and by a wrong application do make the malady worse:
But every disease must have its own proper cure; for, he enjoins them to warn
the unruly, to comfort the feeble-minded, to support the weak. 5. Though every
spiritual patient almost, as said is, has his own distinct distemper; yet
there is one which is common almost unto all, to wit, a great unwillingness to
admit of a suitable cure, and no small difficulty to be wrought upon by it: and
this does call for one common remedy unto all, to wit patience, and
indesatigable diligence in Christians who are called to be Physicians one unto
another: be patient toward all men, says he.

Ver. 15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that
which is good, both among your selves, and to all men. The Apostle presses, in
this verse, another branch of sanctification: and because of our propenseness
to the sin forbidden, he premits the word, see, or take heed, and beware. The
duty enjoined belongs unto all without exception, to wit, that first, they
would abstain from recompensing evil for evil, or wrong for wrong unto any, he
means private revenge; for the public execution of justice by the Magistrate
in punishing those who do evil, is not here forbidden, Romans 13. 4. And next
that they follow, or, (as the word implies, with a sort of eagerness, as the
hunter does the prey) pursue that which is good, where, by good, must be meant
the exercise of pity and the good of beneficence toward, even their enemies,
as being here opposed to the act of private revenge, see Gal. 6. 10. and this
he will have to be pursued ever, that is, constantly without any interruption
by multiplication or heightning of injuries, and both among themselves, who
were Christians, and to all men even to the Heathens among whom they lived.
Doct. 1. The duty of abstaining from private revenge, and of recompensing good
to those who wrong us, is a duty from which, of any other, our corrupt nature
is most averse, as being most contrary to those wo^ul principles of pride,
self-love, impatience, and malice, which are imprinted upon the hearts of all
by nature: and therefore a lesson which neither ancient Philosophers, yea nor
Scribes or Pharisees, Matthew. 5. 43, etc. but only Christ himself has taught:
for our natural averseness to this duty is employed in the word see, take heed,
or beware, which is prefixed to it: See that none render evil for evil. But, 2.
It is a duty which the Lord Christ has most strictly enjoined, not by way of
counsel only, (as the Papists affirm of this and other duties, to wit, that
they are so commanded as that they may be omitted without sin, or hazard of
punishment) but by way of most peremptory precept binding all, and that under
the hazard of Divine displeasure, Prove. 24. 17, 18. for, he injoyns it here
with a peremptory see, and will have all obliged to it: See that none render
evil for evil. 3. A Christian man's care to resist sin should be exercised about
those sins most, to which he finds himself by nature most inclined, as those to
the committing whereof, Satan, who knows our natural propension well, will
set himself to tempt us most, Joh. 12. 6. with Matthew. 14. 11. for, therefore
does he enjoin them to watch against, and in a special manner resist, this sin
of private revenge: See that none render evil for evil. 4. This duty of
abstaining from private revenge is incumbent unto all toward all, so that the
gallantry, greatness, or power of none does give him exemption and liberty to
usurp upon Gods place, by avenging himself for real or apprehended injuries and
affronts, upon any, even though he were but his equal or underling, the Lord
having in this case provided his ordinance of public Magistracy, for repairing
of wrongs, Romans 13. 4. and having enjoined unto all the exercise of faith and
patience under those injuries whereof they can have no redress by that mean,
Psalm. 37. 7. for, he says, see that none render evil for evil unto any. 5. So
devilish are some men, that having done the injury themselves they cannot hear
of reconciliation with, or readmission unto the favor of him whom they have
injured, though he not only make an offer of it unto them, but also press them
and follow on upon them with the offer: and yet even in this case, the patient
man must not turn vindictive and impatient, but should lengthen his patience
and strengthen his resistance against all tentations and motions to private
revenge, so long as the malicious temper of his adversary remains, though it
were for ever; for, he bids them ever follow and pursue that which is good. The
word signifies to pursue a thing that flies away from us. 6. Though there be
some degrees and duties of love which ought to be astricted to some persons
more than to others, 1 Timothy 5. 8. yet there are others due unto all, even to
our enemies, as mainly this act of love specified in the text, the requital of
good for evil, there being somewhat in all men, even in the worst of men, to
draw forth the exercise of our love and affection in some of its acts and
effects toward him; as that he has some remainder of Gods image in him, Romans
1. 20. is of the same flesh, Isa. 58 -- 7. and blood with our selves, Act. 17.
26. possibly endued with some special gifts of valor, love to his country, 2 Samuel 10. 12. which ought to be loved and cherished by us; for, he bids follow
good both among your selves and to all men.

Ver. 16. Rejoice evermore. 17. Pray without ceasing. 18. In every thing give
thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. Three
further branches or duties of sanctification are pressed in these three verses.
As first that they would rejoice, that is, labor not only to keep their hearts
free from anxiety and discouragement arising from their manifold causes of
sorrow and grief, but also, with some measure of spiritual delight, to follow
upon and be taken up with the sense and sweetness which flows either from the
consideration of the excellency of Christ himself, Cant. 5. 10, etc. and of his
usefulness unto them, Psalm. 118. 1. together with their interest in him, Cant.
2. 16. or from the observation of his care and providence toward them, 1 Samuel
17. 32. from the testimony of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and from things
worldly in so far only as they are pledges of Gods favor, and furtherances of
a better life, Levit. 23. 40. This is the duty of rejoicing here pressed which
he wills to be gone about evermore under all cases, and at all times: Not as
if the case of the Lords people did not sometimes call them to mourning,
Eccles. 3. 4. but that even their sorrow and mourning for things grievous
should be so much conform to that the Lord calls for in such cases as it do
not mar, but rather further, their rejoicing in the Lord, and in the testimony
of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 6. 10. This is contained v. 16. Secondly, because
they did stand in continual need of Gods help, either for attaining of good
things necessary and wanting, Matthew. 6. 11. Phil. 3. 13. or for removing of
things evil and present, Job 14. 1. 1 John 1. 8, 10. therefore he excites them
to the exercise of prayer joined with attention and fervent seriousness of
mind, as having vows and undertaking joined with it (for so much does the word
in the original imply) and this without ceasing, (not as if they were to do
nothing else, 2 These. 3. 10. but they were not to cease upon their not
obtaining a present grant, Luke 18. 1, etc. they were to be frequent in prayer,
Psalm. 57. 17. and always when they had opportunity, to lift up their hearts
either in set and solemn prayer or heavenly ejaculations, which latter may be
practiced without interruption of our other lawful employments, Neh. 2. 4. This
is v. 17. Thirdly, he exhorts them to the duty of giving thanks, to wit, unto
God, Ephesians. 5. 20. which consists in a sensible acknowledgement of favors
received from him, 2 Samuel 7. 18* 19. and in expressing our sense of them,
either by words, Psalm. 104. 1. or works, (1 Cor. 10. 31.) to his praise: and
this he will have discharged in every thing, that is, in all estates, Jam. 1.
9, 10. and for his overruling every thing which befalls us with much mercy and
moderation, Ezra 9. 13. and for our good, Romans 8. 28. all which duties and
especially this of thanksgiving he urges from the authority of God injoyning
them unto all men, Romans 1. 21. but more especially unto Christians and real
believers. The reason whereof is hinted at in this, that not only his will
enjoining is made known, Psalm. 147. 19. but also constant matter and furniture
for obeying his will in all those things is conveyed unto them in and by Jesus
Christ, Phil. 4. 13. whatever be their case otherwise, Act. 5. 41. This is v.
18. Doct. 1. The duty of rejoicing in the Lord (as it is set forth in the
exposition) and constancy in it, is a sovereign antidote against impatience and
a spirit of revenge for injuries received, in so far as it sweetneth every
dispensation, and does elevate the heart of him, who is exercised with it above
all things earthly, whether prosperous or adverse; so as he will not willingly,
either^y imm^dera^e delight in the one, or bitter resentment of the ^ther, be
diverted from, or interrupted in, his sweet and excellent task of rejocing in
(...) insinuates so much while he (...) to the ^ormer (...), this other
precept, (...) believers, (...), Psalm. 42. 11. (...) most dejected and
heartless, Psalm. 88. 3, etc. when either, through untenderness, they have
provoked the Lord to hide his face, Psalm. 30. 6. or in their pet^ed
discouragement they refuse to be comforted, Psalm. 77. 3. Yet there are always
grounds for rejoicing unto such; though not to their sense, yet to their faith,
Psalm. 60. 6. though not in themselves, yet in the Lord, Phil. 4. 4. and in what
he has already done, Psalm. 71. 10, 11. or at least has promised to do unto
them, Phil. 1. 6. For, this precept to rejoice evermore, implies that there
will be ever grounds of rejoicing. 3. The joy of Gods people which is allowed
upon them by the Lord is not light and carnal, casting them loose and idle in
the practice of commanded duties, but spiritual and solid, carrying along with
it conscientious diligence and circumspectness in duty, Psalm. 2. 11. and
especially in the duty of prayer, as that without which this rejoicing frame of
heart can neither be attained, nor yet entertained and kept; Job 27. 10. For,
therefore does he, to the precept of rejoicing evermore, subjoyn immediately
this other, pray without ceasing, 4. Frequency in serious and attentive prayer
is of excellent use, as for other ends, Matthew. 7. 7, 8. so for this, to keep
the heart always in a rejoicing frame and temper, in so far as there is not a
more ready way to be eased of our discouraging weights, which keep our spirits
at under, that they cannot mount up in this heavenly duty of rejoicing, than to
cast the weight and trouble of all that grieves us over upon God by prayer,
Phil. 4. 5. For, therefore does he subjoyn, pray without ceasing. 5. Christians
should be so ordered by prudence that their intenseness upon, and diligence in
one duty do not make them neglective or careless of any other: For, he will
have them so to rejoice evermore as they also pray without ceasing, and so to
pray as that in every thing they give thanks. 6. That the duties of prayer and
thanksgiving do agree well together, See upon Ephesians. 1. v. 16. doct. 1. pray
without ceasing, in every thing give thanks. 7. As there can be no such ample
cause of thanksgiving in this life, but there will be still some constant need
and reason for prayer, ther^ being always somewhat wanting even when we enjoy
most, 2 Cor. 5. 6. So there can be no such urgent and multiplied necessities
for exciting to prayer, but upon narrow search there will be found some causes
for thanksgiving, if it were but this that our case is not so evil but the Lord
might justly have made it worse, Ezra 9. 13. and that we are kept from total
succumbing or sinking under it, Lam. 3. 21. For, while he enjoyneth both to
Pray without ceasing, and in every thing to give thanks, it is employed that
there will be always reasons for both. 8. One excellent mean for engaging our
hearts in the conscientious practice of the forementioned duties, of constant
rejoicing, assiduous prayer, and continued thanksgiving, is, seriously to
consider that our performance of them is not a matter indifferent, or left unto
us to do or not do as a piece of our liberty, and as we find our hearts in a
temper for them, but most strictly enjoined us by the sovereign will of God the
Lawgiver; so that our neglect of those does make us guilty, as the breach of
any other of the commands, whether by not sanctifying the Sabbath, or by taking
his name in vain: for, he infers the practice of them all from his will
enjoining, for this is the will of God, says he. 9. Precepts for duty from God
the Lawgiver are then rightly looked on by us, when considered as they are
revealed and enjoined to us in Christ, who has made the insupportable burden
of precepts (Gal. 3. 10.) an easy yoke unto his followers, Matthew. 11. 30.
while he pardons their failings, Micah 7. 18. renews their strength, makes
them mount up and not be weary, Isa. 40. 31. strengthens them to do whatever
he enjoyneth, Phil. 4. 13. so that his commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.
3. For, he propones Gods will unto them, to be considered by them as it was
revealed and enjoined to them in Christ, This is the will of God, says he, in
Christ Jesus concerning you.

Ver. 19. Quench not the spirit. 20. Despise not prophesyings. He does here
press two other branches of sanctification. The first is set down in a Metaphor
taken from fire or gross material light, which is properly said to be
extinguished or quenched, and that either by withholding combustible matter, or
by casting on the contrary element of water. And the word is here applied to
the spirit of God, who is as fire giving both the light of knowledge, Ephesians. 1.
17, 18. and heat of love and affection, Luke 24. 32. and by the spirit here is
not so much to be meant the spirit of God in his own person and nature, as in
his gifts and holy motions or incitements to duty, which are quenched, weakened,
lost or abolished, in our selves or others, either by our negligence in
improving them, Matthew. 25. 29. and by our slight and formal use of means
whereby they are entertained, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. or by too great diligence in
doing evil, Isa. 29. 13, 14. and especially by contemning or despising his
gifts in others which keeps them at under, 1 Cor. 12. 21. and by resisting his
motions and incitements to good in our selves, Jer. 6. 10. This is the sin here
forbidden, and by consequence the contrary duty commanded, to wit, that the
gifts and motions of the spirit of God, whether in our selves or others, be
carefully cherished, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and continually stirred up by the use of
prayer, hearing, and of all other means thereto appointed, 2 Timothy, 1. 6. This is
v. 19. The second branch here pressed is subservient to the former, despise not
prophecy, where prophecy is not taken in a strict sense for prediction or
foretelling of things to come, as Act. 21. 9. (for that was neither so common
in the Church, nor yet to continue) but for the explication, and application of
the word of God, either by extraordinary or ordinary Ministers, even that which
we call preaching, as Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 3. So the thing commanded is that
they would not despise, or set at naught, the public preaching of Gods word by
sent Ministers, but rather set an high price upon it; for the word rendered
despise by an usual flowr of speech does signify much more than is expressed.
This is v. 20 -- Doct. 1. So insufficient are even the regenerate of themselves
to discharge command^d duties in a spiritual manner, 2 Cor. 2. 5. and to
persevere in them for any space of time together* Exodus 17. 12. that there is
an absolute necessity of constantly renewed supplies of influence from the
spirit of God for their incitement to duty, (...). 4. 16. for their through^
bearing in duty, Joh. 15. 5. for the renewing of their strength, liveliness and
vigor of spirit, when it is much abated and blunted by their long continuance
at duty; Isa. 40. 31. For, therefore, as a necessary help for performing the
forementioned duties of rejoicing evermore, praying without ceasing, and of
giving thanks in every thing, he enjoyneth that they would carefully cherish
the gifts, motions and incitements of Gods spirit, quench not the spirit, says
he. 2. Though the saving gifts of the spirit of God, and such as accompany
salva^ion, cannot be utterly lost, 1 John 3. 9. yet their actings may for a
time be intermitted, Cant. 5. 2. yea themselves, as to some degrees, much
abated, Rev. 2. 4. and his common gifts of knowledge, memory, historical faith,
legal repentance and remorse for sin, totally lost, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and his
suggestions and incitements to holy duties, as they often are repelled by many,
Psalm. 81. 10, 11. so being frequently repelled, they do utterly cease in some
and are wholly extinguished, Ephesians. 4. 18. For, the disswasion from quenching the
spirit implies that the spirit, in his gifts and motions, may be quenched, to
wit, in the forementioned respects, as the Scriptures cited do clear. 3. The
gifts and motions of the spirit of God are of such a nature, that if they be
not entertained and cherished, they are thereby ipso facto quenched, weakened,
and in progress of time, utterly abolished: For, therefore he does not bid them
cherish, but only quench not the spirit, implying that they behoved to cherish
it, otherwise they could not but quench it. 4. There is not any so far advanced
in the way of grace and piety, but they stand in need of being help^ and
bettered by the public preaching of the Lords word by his sent Ministers; For,
he enjoyneth even those Th^ssalonians, whom he had formerly so much commended,
chap. 1. 4, etc. to attend the public Preaching of Gods word, despise not
proph^sie, says he. 5. Constant attendance upon the Word preached by sent
Ministers is a singular help to beget and entertain the gifts and motions of
the spirit of God to good in our hearts. And careless neglect, much more
contempt, of that ordinance, is the ready way to quench and extinguish any
motions to good, any checks or challenges for evil from the spirit of the Lord,
and consequently does end in gross profanity at last; For, unto that disswasive
from quenching the spirit, he immediately subjoyns, despise not prophecy, or
public preaching. 6. This ordinance of public preaching, as it is most useful
and necessary in it self: so it has been even in the time of the Apostles, and
yet is in hazard to be contemned, what through the insufficiency, Hos. 4. 6. or
unministerial conversation, Mal. 2. 8. or the proud and lofty dividing humor
of some who preach it, 1 Pet. 5. 3. and 3 John 9. and what through the pride
and self-conceit of some who should be hearers, as if they stood in no need of
it, Heb. 10. 25. and blindness of understanding in others, who not considering
the wisdom of God in appointing such an ordinance, 1 Cor. 1. 21. do see no
beauty or worth in it, for which they should respect it, 1 Cor. 1. 18. for,
Paul both did see and foresee such an hazard, and therefore enjoyneth, despise
not prophecy.

Ver. 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

In these two verses are the two last particular branches of sanctification
here enjoined. By the first he does guard the former whereof v. 20. for, lest
he had thereby seemed to have enjoined obedience unto every thing which
Ministers Preach, he does therefore first command them to prove and try
accurately by the written word, Act. 17. 11. as Goldsmiths do Gold by a
touchstone, (as the word implies) and the thing to be tried is all things, to
wit, all those things which are delivered in Preaching by them who are sent
Ministers, and not convict of heresy, for, if they be not sent, the Lords
people are not to hear them, Joh. 10. 5. nor yet if they be known heretics,
whose mouths should be stopped, Tit. 1. 11. Next, to hold fast (or, as the word
signifies, to hold forcibly and with both hands, against all who would
withhold) that which is good, or which after trial should be found good
doctrine firmly grounded upon the word, and consequently to abstain from that
which should be found evil or unsound. This is v. 21. The second branch here
pressed is that they would abstain from and eschew not only that which is
really and in it self evil and sinful, but also that which has any appearance,
show or representation of evil, that is, whatever (not being otherwise
commanded by God, Exodus 12. 35, 36.) may give just ground unto unprejudiced
beholders (who are not malicious, Gal. 2. 4, 5. even though they be otherwise
weak, 1 Cor. 10. 28.) to suspect the guilt of some real evil in him, who
practices it, such are dangerous phrases of speech in Preaching though not
plainly heretical, 1 Timothy 6. 3. sitting at meat in an Idols temple, 1 Cor. 10.
21. familiar and unnecessary conversing without a call with profane lewd
persons, Luke 22. 55. or in secret suspect places with persons of a different
Sex, chiefly if he or she be evil reported of. This is v. 22. Doct. 1. So
foolish and inconsiderate are most men naturally, that when they are exercised
in flying from the one sinful extreme, they are in no small hazard to be
carried unawares upon the other. Their great intentness upon the evil which
they fly from, and is always before, them, does make them not to ponder or
advert unto the snare which is behind them. Paul implies so much, while having
dissuaded from the one extreme of despising public preaching, v. 20. he
presently disswadeth them from the other, of giving blind obedience to their
Ministers, while he says, prove all things. 2. Though all private Christians
have not received an equal measure of gifts, Romans 14. 1. yet the Lord has
bestowed a spirit of discerning, in a greater or a lesser measure, upon all, by
which, if diligently and tenderly improved in the search of Scripture (Act. 17.
11.) accompanied with prayer (Psalm. 119. 19.) they may be enabled so to judge
of what they hear delivered in preaching, as to choose and embrace what is
sound and nourishing, and refuse and reject whatever is erroneous and hurtful:
for, if they had not such a spirit of discerning bestowed upon them by God, it
should have been in vain to enjoin them to prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good. 3. The spirit of discerning, bestowed by God on private
Christians, should be exercised in judging of their Ministers doctrine; not in
order to their passing a judicial sentence upon him; for they are not his
Judges, 1 Cor. 14. 32. nor yet to the venting of their carping censures against
him, making his Ministry in all things unsavory unto others, but in order to
the regulating of their own practice, in choosing what is right, and refusing
what is wrong of what they hear; for, he enjoyneth the exercise of their
judgment of discretion in relation to their own practice, even that they may
hold fast what is good. 4. As a fixed resolution to be constant in the
maintenance of any opinion should flow from rational conviction, after exact
search, that the opinion which we hold is true and sound, otherwise our
constancy and fixedness is but self-willed pertinacy, Jer. 44. 16. So when,
after exact enquiry, truth is found out, we ought to be so fixed and peremptory
in our resolution to maintain it, as that we may not waver or be tossed to and
fro with any wind of doctrine which is contrary unto it, Ephesians. 4. 14. for,
before they resolve, he bids them prove, and then hold fast without wav^ring
what after trial is found good. 5. A conscientious tender Christian must not,
yea will not only have a regard to the all-seeing eye of God, by abstaining
from what is ^vil in it self and in his sight for which his conscience might
smite him, but also to the eye of men, by abstaining from what has the
appearance of evil unto them, and for which his good name might be justly
smitten and wounded by others: he will study so to walk as that he may not only
stand himself, but that occasion of falling by his indiscreet use of Christian
liberty be not given unto others. He Will labor to be on his guard not only
against some tentations, but all, and not only at some times, but always: for,
this is enjoined in the last place, as the highest step of a tender walk, to
abstain from the appearance of evil, by which a man's name might justly suffer
or his neighbor be scandalized, and to abstain not only from some, but all
appearance of evil.

Ver. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your
whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. In the third part of the Chapter he concludes the whole
Epistle, and first, in this verse by prayer to God, that he would work those
graces and duties of sanctification in them which he has pressed upon them
from chap. 4. v. 3. The particulars in which prayer are, first, the style given
to God, he is the very God of peace, as being the author of all sanctified
peace among men, Psalm. 147. 14. and chiefly of their peace with God flowing
from justification, Romans 5. 1. which epithete, it seems, does here serve as a
ground for faith to rely on for obtaining the thing sought, to wit, that he
would sanctify them, because he was become a God of peace to them, having
justified them, Romans 8. 30. The second particular is the thing prayed for, that
he would, first, sanctify them, whereby must be meant the making them to grow
in sanctification, described chap. 4. v. 3. for they were already sanctified in
part. And, next, preserve them blameless, whereby is meant their preservation
by the power of God in the state of grace without apostasy or backsliding,
which sanctification, the progress and perseverance wherein is here prayed for,
is described from its universality in extending it self to the whole man; set
down, first, more generally in the word, wholly, next, in a particular
enumeration of the several parts of the whole man, three in number, 1. His
spirit, which, when contra-distinguished to the soul, as it is here, does
signify the understanding and knowing part of the man. 2. His soul, whereby,
being distinguished from the spirit, must be meant his will and affections. 3.
His body, that is, the outward man by which the soul does act. The third
particular in the prayer is a date or term-day condescended upon, to wit, the
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, which expresses not only the time how long he
desires that Gods care in preserving and making them to grow in sanctification
should last, but also the term-day when this petition shall be answered to the
full, and believers made wholly blameless in holiness, without all spot of
ignorance in their understanding, and disconformity to Gods will, or
perverseness in their will and affections, or of any sin whatsoever in their
body or outward members, all this shall be unto, or as the word may read in the
second coming of Christ the Lord to judge the world. Hence Learn 1. A Minister
is not to think himself exonered, when he has pressed the practice of all
necessary duties upon the people of his charge, but he must be tenderly
solicitous about the success of his pains among them: and more particularly, It
is a necessary piece of a Ministers duty to be frequent and fervent in prayer
with God for them, beseeching him earnestly to work that in them, which he has
pressed upon them; for, the Apostle having pressed upon them the several duties
of sanctification, from v. 3. of chap. 4. does betake himself to God by prayer
that he would sanctify them wholly. 2. Precepts and exhortations to duty which
are frequent in Scripture, do not infer any power in man's self, or in his
free will to give obedience unto what he is commanded. They only show it is our
duty to obey, Mic. 6. 8. and such a duty as do it we must if we would be saved,
Luke 13. 3. and are an outward mean by which the spirit of God does effectually
work that in his people which he requires from them, Cant. 5. 2. with 4. for
if they had sufficient strength in themselves, as of themselves, to obey, what
he has pressed upon them, to what end should he pray so fervently here unto
the God of peace to sanctify them. 5. As the grace of sanctification is not
perfected at one instant, but carried on by degrees until it be perfected at
death, 1 Cor. 13. 9. there being still some remainders of the body of death in
the best, Romans 7. 24. for keeping them humble, 2 Cor. 12. 7. for giving them
daily errands to the fountain of free grace for pardon, 1 John 2. 1. and
renewed strength, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9. and for making them long to be dissolved and
freed from sin root and branch, 2 Cor. 5. 4. So a mean degree of sanctification
even though it be undoubtedly sincere, should not be rested upon as
satisfactory, but daily growth and progress therein endeavored, without any
full satisfaction or quieting of our minds in any degree or measure, until
sanctifying grace be fully perfected in glory: for, seeing they were already
sanctified in part, it must be growth in sanctification for which he prays,
which implies that their sanctification was not perfected, and that they
themselves should much more endeavor to grow in it, and this until Christ's
second coming, if their death should not prevent it. And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly -- unto the coming, etc. 4. As God becomes a God of peace
and reconciled unto none but to those whom he sanctifies, and in whom he
works a gracious change; So he sanctifies none but those to whom he becomes
a God of peace first; and therefore that our endeavors after holiness may have
success, we should have a care to get our peace made with God in the first
place: for, he joyneth these two, peace with God, and sanctification from God,
and makes the latter to follow upon the former: and the very God of peace
sanctify you. 5. As the first beginnings of sanctifying grace, (Ezekiel. 36. 26.)
so our growth and progress in it is wholly from God. It is true, there are some
principles of a new life wrought in us at first conversion, which have their
own activity and concurrence for carrying on the work of grace in us afterward,
1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. but as they are created in us by God at the first, (Ezekiel. 36.
26.) so they must be excited to their work, Cant. 4. 16. upheld and strengthened
in their work, Luke 22. 32. and blessed by God with the success of growth in
grace following upon their work above any efficacy that is in themselves, Phil.
1. 6. and therefore our growth in grace, does yet remain entirely and wholly
Gods work, for he ascribes growth in grace to God as the author, while he
prays the very God of peace to sanctify them. 6. So many are those by-ways
of error, 2 Pet. 3. 17. profanity, Heb. 12. 16. formality, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 5.
to divert us from the way of holiness after we are engaged in it, so many
unexpected difficulties do meet us in the way, Act. 14. 22. and such is our
levity and readiness to repent our undertaking, Joh. 6. 66. our weakness to
resist tentations, Matthew. 26. 70. and easiness to be led aside unto those other
by-ways, Jer. 25. that there is no less need than of the power of God who did
at first engage us, to preserve us carefully, powerfully, and as it were with a
strong guard, in the way of holiness; otherwise we cannot long stand upright in
it, 1 Pet. 1. 5. for, he prays unto God to preserve them in holiness, The
word in the original signifies to preserve accurately, as he who watches at
the doors of a prison and is used Act. 4. 3. 5. 18. and 24. 23. 7. Even the
understanding and knowing part of the regenerate is but renewed in part and
stands in need to be more and more sanctified by reason of a great deal of
ignorance, 1 Cor. 13. 9. uncertainty, Mark 9. 24. curiosity, Joh. 21. 21, 22.
proneness to mistake the Lords way of dealing, Isa. 49. 14. and several other
infirmities which are in the understandings even of the best; for, therefore
does he pray that God would sanctify as well as preserve even the renewed
Thessalonians in their spirit. And I pray God your whole spirit, etc. 8. The
will and affections also of the ^^generate man are but renewed in part and
(...) in need to be more and more sanctified; there being a great deal not only
of peremptory unwillingness, sometimes, in the will to good, whereby it
sometimes refuses, John 4. 9. and frequently shifteth and delayeth the
practice of necessary duty, Hag. 1. 2. but also of an hankering inclination
unto evil, whereby it sometimes closes with sin against knowledge, 2 Samuel 11.
4. and sometimes excites the understanding to find out excuses and subterfuges
to make sin appear no sin, or but a little one, that it may well sin with less
reluctance, Cant. 5. 3. For, he prays also that their soul, that is, their
will and affections may be sanctified, that your whole spirit and soul, etc. 9.
As the Lord does not only require inward sancti^y, in the understanding, will
and affections, but also outward, in the body and all its members, (see chap.
4. v. 4. doct. 1.) So even the truly regenerate have not their very outward man
so well reformed, but there is need to have it more and more sanctified. Even
the body and its parts, especially the organs of sense and speech, and the
instruments of the loco-motive faculty, have in them some of that natural
stiffness and averseness from being exercised about good and profitable
objects, and proneness joined with agility to be employed in evil, which is
spoken of Romans 3. 10, etc. For, he prays that their body also may be more
sanctified. And I pray God your whole spirit soul and body, etc. 10. As there
is not any the least principal part and particle of the body, and the meanest
faculty of the soul and such as are only subservient to the most principal
faculties of it, but they are one way or other defiled with sin, and stand in
need of sanctifying grace; So there is not any, no not the meanest of those in
a renewed man's soul or body, to which the Lord does not extend his special
care, not only in changing and sanctifying it at the first, but also in making
that begun change to increase and grow, and in preserving the whole man and all
his parts, even to the meanest, in that gracious frame and plyableness to good
unto which he has brought it. Otherwise if the meanest member of the body or
faculty of the soul were left to their own keeping, they could not choose but
suddenly miscarry; for, he prays that their whole spirit, whole soul, and
whole body may be sanctified and preserved by God, and doubtless he prays for
nothing to them, but what the Lord does ordinarily to the renewed. 11. As all
belivers shall attain to their full stature in grace, even to a perfect man, at
Christ's second coming, and be freed from all necessity of any further growing
in grace after that; So though they will always and to all eternity stand in
need to be preserved by God in their glorious state, and accordingly shall be
preserved by him, Joh. 17. 24. yet because they are now, while in their present
militant state, obnoxious to more tentations, Ephesians. 6. 12. and not sufficiently
confirmed in good, 1 Cor. 10. 12. therefore they stand in more need of
preserving garce now than they will then, when there shall be no devil nor
wicked world to tempt them, Rev. 20. 10. and 21. v. 27. and nothing of a body
of death in themselves to comply with tentations, Heb. 12. -- 23. as there is
now: for, he makes Christ's second coming, the date how long he would have God
to continue in sanctifying and preserving them, which is to be understood in
the way expressed in the doctrine, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
says he.

Ver. 24. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. He concludes,
secondly, with a promise, wherein he assures them that God will do it, to wit,
what he presently prayed for, even sanctify them wholly, and preserve them
blameless; and that because God is faithful, that is, always the same, and
like himself, who will certainly perform whatever he has promised, and
therefore he would certainly preserve them, seeing he had promised so much in
effect unto them, when he did effectually call them, at least to as many of
them as he had so called. For effectual calling is the first breaking out and
open declaration of Gods secret and eternal purpose to preserve and save those
whom he calls, Romans 8. 30. Doct. 1. Our prayers put up to God, whether in
behalf of our selves or others, should be grounded upon some explicit or
implicit promise, and consequently flow from faith that God will grant what we
ask according to the absolute or conditional tenor of the promise; for, Paul's
prayers were grounded upon such a promise, and did flow from such confidence
even that he would do it, as he here expresses. 2. Most absolute and certain
promises may not weaken our diligence in prayer for obtaining the thing
promised, but rather incite us to it. Prayer being the mean appointed of God in
the conscientious practice whereof he uses to bestow the good things promised,
Ezekiel. 36. 37. for, Paul did pray for their preservation, v. 23. though he
certainly knew, and accordingly does promise unto them, that God would do it.
3. As the Lord does still continue to call those, whom he has once effectually
called by giving them renewed sights of their natural sin and misery, 1 Timothy 1.
13. and making them renew their gripes by faith on Jesus Christ the offered
remedy, 1 Timothy 1. 15. So effectual calling and the powerful drawing of a soul
from nature to grace, is a speaking pledge of Gods purpose to preserve the soul
so called in the state of grace, and to make him grow in grace until at last he
be without spot and blameless unto the end; for, the word calls is in the
present time, and notes a continued action, and is here given as a pledge of
Gods purpose to sanctify and preserve them, he that calls you, who also will
do it. 4. No man can know, and much less draw any comfort from the Lords
eternal purpose in election to save him and perfect the work of grace in him,
until he be once effectually called and become a real convert from sin to
holiness; yea, he makes effectual calling the first speaking evidence of
election, and that which gives access to look on the decree of election as a
ground of expectation that he will perform the thing decreed; and therefore the
promise here may be looked upon as conditional and suspended upon this
condition if so they were called, he that calls you will also do it. 5. There
is no less than Gods fidelity impledged to believers for the most certain
performance of all Gods gracious promises, so, that though they be unworthy to
whom he should perform what is promised, yet his impledged faithfulness and
truth of his nature is always of that much worth as his respect unto it will
put him upon the performance; for, Paul shows Gods faithfulness is laid in
pledge while he says, faithful is he who calls you who also will do it.

Ver. 25. Brethren pray for us. 26. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.
He concludes, thirdly, by recommending some particulars unto their care, as,
first, that they would give him and his colleagues the help of their prayers, v.
25. and, secondly, that they, to wit, the Midisters and Church-rulers, to whom
this and the following direction is given, would greet or salute all the
brethren or members of their Church in his name, in testimony of his hearty
affection to them, and take occasion hence to manifest and confirm their
affection one to another among themselves, by giving them a kiss, which in
those times and places was commonly used in civil salutations as the usual sign
and testimony of affection. And he gives this kiss the epithete of holy, to
show that it should be sincere and chaste, and neither unchaste nor
hypocritical, v. 26. Besides what is observed upon Ephesians. 6. v. 19. doct. 1, 2.
and Col. 4. v. 3. doct. 1, 3. Learn hence, 1. The Lord has so dispensed his
gifts and graces unto his people, that, though he gives not an equal measure
unto all; yet to every one somewhat, and to the meanest so much as they may be,
sometimes and in some respects, useful unto others who are most eminent* that
hereby mutual love may be kept among all, while none can say unto another, I
have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12. 21. for, Paul supponeth so much, and therefore
calls upon them all, even the meanest not excepted, to help him by their
prayers, brethren pray for us, says he. 2. It conduces much to make way for
success unto a Ministers pains among a people, that they know he loves them;
otherwise if they doubt of this, they are prone to suspect, if not to cast at
all that comes from him, 2 Cor. 7. 2, 3. for, therefore the Apostle does
usually close his Epistles by saluting those to whom he writes, in testimony
of his affection to them, that what he writes may have the more of weight with
them; all the brethren, says he. 3. A Minister should labor so to entertain
love betwixt him and the people, as that no expressions of his love, nor
insinuations of his for that end do tend, much less be intended, to divide the
Lords people among themselves, of purpose to make both or any of the
dissentient parties more devoted and strictly tied unto him; but must endeavor
that the same spirit of love which breaths in him, may breath in all the
Lords people toward one another: for, he does so express his affection unto
them that he wills them to express, as it were, the same affection toward
one another, while he says, Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. 4. As it
is not sufficient for Christians to carry inward good will and affection one to
another, but necessary, sometimes, that inward love be made evident by some
outward expressions and testimonies of the same; So the Lords people ought not
to scruple at, or upon groundless scruples to abstain from, any decent and
innocent expression of love and affection, which is ordinarily used in the
times and places where they live. Singularity in such things is not Religion,
neither is scrupulosity about them any point of tenderness: for, he bids them
express their affection by that which was the usual sign and testimony thereof
at those times. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. But, 5. Even those
external testimonies of love and respect may not be complemental, or used only
as a piece of a man's good breeding or civility, much less as an engine to
ensnare the party, toward whom they are used, unto a false belief that he is
affected and loved where he is not; Luke 22. 48. but they ought to be sincere
and free from any base and sinful ingredient of that kind: So that even in
external duties of common civility we are bound to exercise some one or other
Christian and holy virtue: for, therefore does he require that their affection
be made evident by an holy kiss, or a kiss sanctified and made holy by the
grace of sincere affection which is expressed by it, and from which it does
flow. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.

Ver. 27. I charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy
brethren. The third recommendation is chiefly pressed upon their Ministers and
Church-guides, to whom it seems this Epistle was sent immediately to be
communicate unto the rest. Those he charge by the Lord, or (as the word
implies and signifies (see 1 Samuel 14. 24. Matthew. 26. 63.) he adjureth them as
they would eschew the wrath and vengeance of the Lord Christ, so they would not
keep up this Epistle unto themselves, but cause it to come to, and be plainly
read in the hearing of all the brethren or Church Members whom he calls holy.
See upon Phil. 1. v. 1. doct. 5. Hence Learn 1. To debar and exclude the Lords
people from acquainting themselves with Scripture, either by reading it
themselves or hearing it read by others, is a most grievous sin, obliging the
person or persons guilty to undergo the stroke of Gods eternal wrath and
vengeance; And therefore not only should Scripture be translated unto the
native language of every Nation where Christ has a Church, that people may
read it, and hear it, and be acquainted with it; But also the Lords people
themselves ought diligently to improve what helps of that kind are afforded for
bringing them to intimate acquaintance with the mind of God revealed in
Scripture, and look upon their so doing as a duty of greatest importance and
weight; for, Paul does charge, or, adjure them with denunciation of Gods heavy
vengeance in case they should not cause read this Epistle to all the holy
brethren; adjurations of which sort are not to be used but when duties of
weight are charged. Now what Paul does charge here about this Epistle was
doubtless his mind in relation to other Scriptures; seeing there is nothing
peculiar to this Epistle, for which the Lords people should be made acquainted
with it, that may not be said of other Scriptures also; Besides, that the
Apostle does elsewhere express himself much to the same purpose, of some others
of his Epistles, Col. 4. 16. and of all Scripture indefinitely, Col. 3. 16.
Doct. 2. It concerns Ministers and Church-guides, especially, to see to it
carefully that the Lords people of their charge be acquainted with Scripture,
and, in order to this end, to incite them to read it in secret, Col. 3. 16. to
have it read in their families, Deuteronomy. 6. 9. as also to labor upon those who
have power, and whom it concerns, that Children and young ones of both Sexes
be trained up at Schools, at least so far as they may be able to read the Lords
word distinctly in their own native language: for, this charge is given to the
Church-guides, I charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren, says he. 3. That Scripture be publicly read to the Lords
people assembled together for his worship, even though it be not presently
exponed and applied by the Minister, is so far from being a part of wilworship,
that it should seem from this place to have some stamp of divine authority put
upon it, as upon an ordinance useful in its own place, as for several other
ends, so, especially, for acquainting the Lords people with the language of the
Holy Ghost speaking in Scripture, and with the History of the Bible, a great
part whereof otherwise some may possibly never so much as once hear with their
ears, though they live to many years: for, he charge them not only to incite
the Lords people to read this Epistle themselves and apart, but that it be read
unto all the holy brethren, to wit, (as it seems) being assembled together.

Ver. 28. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. He concludes
the Epistle, lastly, by his usual and confident farewel-wish for our Lord Jesus
Christ his grace, or, favor, as the fountain, and all good things, as streams
flowing from it, to be conveyed to them and continued with them. Besides what
is already observed upon the like farewel-wish in the close of the four former
Epistles. Hence Learn, So inexhaustible is the fountain of Gods free grace and
favor, and so copious are the streams of all spiritual blessings flowing from
it, that no such measure either of the one or the other can be attained by any,
but more may be had; more is allowed, and more and more is daily to be sought
and thirsted after: for, though real believers among them had received already
a great measure of Gods grace and favor, in its sense and in its effects, yet
he wishes unto them not only the continuance of what they had, but some further
degree to be added as more of it, while he says, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
The first Epistle unto the Thessalonians was written from Athens.

Seeing this Epistle is written in the name also of Timotheus and Silvanus as
appears from chap. 1. v. 1. Therefore it is most probable that it was not
written from Athens, as the Postscript affirms, but rather from Corinth,
because they two did not return, the one from Thessalonica, the other from
Berea, unto Paul, before he went from Athens unto Corinth, as appears from Act.
18. 5. and 1 These. 3. 1. where Paul affirms that when he had dismissed
Timotheus he was left alone at Athens, and therefore had not these his two
Colleagues with him there, and consequently could not write this Epistle in
their names from thence. Besides, as the learned observe, in several ancient
copies there is no mention made of the place from whence it was written. Hence
Learn, That the postscript of Paul's Epistles, or those words which are set
after the close of his Epistles, designing always the whence they were
written, and sometimes the person or persons by whom they were sent, are no
part of Canonical Scripture, not always firm, nor written by the Apostle
himself, but added afterward by some men, either unlearned or certainly
inconsiderate, according to their own opinion. And therefore though the
Postscripts affixed to the former four Epistles had nothing, for what can be
known, dissonant from truth as this has, yet I did not dare to draw any
observations from them, as if they had been of equal authority with the
Epistles themselves.

FINIS.
A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND EPISTLE Of PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
The ARGUMENT.
PAul having not long before this written the preceding Epistle to the Church
at Thessalonica, wherein he had shown his resolute purpose to come and see them
(1 These. 3. 10, 11.) and being yet as formerly, (1 These. 2. 18.) hindered, he
has been informed that not only their sad sufferings did yet continue, chap.
1. 4. but also that some, having taken occasion from what he wrote, 1 These. 4.
and 5. concerning Christ his second coming unexpectedly to judgment, did
spread a fond and fabulous opinion as if Christ had been to come in that
present age, chap. 2. 2. whereupon some among them did cast by all care of
their particular callings, and others, abusing the simplicity of those, and
having given themselves unto Idleness, did live upon their means, chap. 3. 11.
Therefore, and upon those occasions, he writes this second Epistle unto them;
His scope wherein, is, to confirm them in the doctrine of faith and practice of
piety against both persecutors and seducers, (which after the inscription,
chap. 1. v. 1.) he endeavors to effectuate, first, by comforting them under
their present sad sufferings, chap. 1. Secondly, by refuting the forementioned
error, from this, that there would be first a general apostasy under the
Antichrist, before Christ his second coming, chap. 2. Thirdly, by exhorting
them to several duties of a Christian conversation, and more especially to
abandon in their own practice, and suppress in others, the sin of Idleness, to
v. 16. of chap. 3. In which and the two following verses, he concludes the
Epistle.

CHAP. I.
THe first part of this Chapter contains the inscription of the Epistle, v.
1, 2.

In the second part he propounds four grounds of consolation to them under
their present sufferings; the first of which, is, his high estimation of them
made manifest by his giving thanks to God for them v. 3. and his holy boasting
of them, and of the graces of God in them, unto other Churches, v. 4. A second
ground of consolation is taken from this, that their present sufferings did
serve as a glass wherein they might foresee the day of judgment coming, and an
happy event of that day as to them, v. 5. which he proves from Gods righteous
nature, v. 6. 7 -- A third does lie in a description of that last day, first,
from the glorious manner of Christ's coming on it, v. -- 7, 8 -- Secondly, from
a twofold end of his coming, 1. To destroy eternally wicked reprobates, v. --
8, 9. 2. To glorify the Godly Elect, v. 10. The fourth ground of consolation
is taken from his prayers to God for them, that the Lord would make them meet
for Heaven, by fulfilling all things necessary to salvation in them, v. 11. The
result whereof should be glory both to Christ and them, v. 12.

Ver. 1. PAul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians, in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Grace unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

These verses contain the inscription of the Epistle in the same words which
are already handled, 1 These. 1. v. 1. It declares, first, who did write this
Epistle. Secondly, to whom it was written, v. 1. and thirdly the usual
salutation, v. 2. Besides what is formerly observed upon the place presently
cited, Hence Learn. 1. As the Lord in deep wisdom and rich mercy has appointed
several means of edification for his Church; So his sent servants are bound to
endeavor their edification by one mean when they are not in a capacity to
edify them by another; for, Paul being out of a capacity, for the time, to
edify this Church by public Preaching, does endeavor to edify them by his
writings. Paul -- unto the Church of the Thessalonians. 2. The written word of
God is so contrived that it did not only serve to edify those unto whom it was
first directed, but also does hold forth copious matter of edification unto all
others to whose knowledge it shall come, and should be improved by them
accordingly: for, this and the rest of Paul's Epistles, which were at first
directed to such and such particular Churches and persons, do stand in
Scripture as a rule and Canon of says and manners unto all Christian Churches
and persons to the worlds end, Paul -- unto the Church of the Thessalonians. 3.
The spirit of God which speaks in Scripture does not so much regard either
variety or elegancy of words and style, as the purpose expressed by those
words; and Ministers who would rather edify the Lords people, than beget a
good opinion of their own abilities among their hearers, should study to be
acted by the same spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. for, Paul uses the very same form of
plain words in the inscription of this Epistle, which he used in the former.
Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, etc. 4. Though the Lord has bound himself by
absolute promise to grant unto us whatever we ask in the name of Christ, Joh.
16. 23. and according to his will, 1 John 5. 14. yet the most fervent prayers
of gracious saints, accompanied with all conditions required in prayer, are not
always attended with an answer in the same very thing which is sought; and
therefore the forementioned promises must be understood with this alternative,
God will grant us, either what we pray for, or what he in wisdom seeeth more
expedient for us, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. for, Paul prayed fervently that he might see
their face, 1 These. 3. 10. which desire has not been granted, as appears by
his writing to them of new to supply the continued want of his presence. Paul
-- to the Church of the Thessalonians. 5. The Lords people, and especially his
public instruments, when marred and crossed in prosecuting some one or other
expedient projected by them as tending much advance the Lords work, ought not
to fret or sit down discouraged, but to consider wisely what other expedient
the Lord in providence does carve (...) to be followed by them instead of that,
and without anxiety are to apply themselves unto it; for, Paul, being hindered
from coming to them, without more ado does reverence the Lord in his
disappointment, and betaketh himself to writing. Paul -- unto the Church of the
Thessalonians.

Ver. 3. We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet,
because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of
you all toward each other abounds. The Apostles scope in this second part of
the Chapter being to comfort those persecuted Thessalonians under their present
sad sufferings, and thereby to confirm them the more in those truths for which
they did suffer, he propounds several grounds of consolation unto them. The
first whereof, is, the high esteem which he and his associates had of their
graces, which was testified in two things: first, his esteem of them, and of
Gods graces in them, was such that he did Judge himself bound because of the
meetness, congruity and equity of the duty in several respects, to make
conscience of giving thanks to God for them, and that always, in so far as
there was always a supply of new matter for this duty furnished unto him from
them, which he condescends upon in two particulars, first, their faith did grow
exceedingly, or overgrow, and grow over-bounds, to wit, not the bounds
prescribed by God, but beyond what it was before, yea, and, it may be, the
expectation which men had of them. (See how faith does grow upon Col. 2. v. 7.
doct. 5.) next, their charity, or, love toward each other did abound and also
grow, and this in every one of them all without exception, to wit, so far as he
in charity could judge, being now at a distance and informed of their estate
only by the favorable reports of others, or of some among themselves. (See how
charity does increase and grow, 1 These. 4. v. 10. doct. 6.) Learn further
hence, 1. As the Lord gives sometimes way unto the rage and fury of men and
Devils to trouble and persecute his dearest Saints for righteousness sake; So
it usually falls out that the more they rage, the less they gain their
intent, The more they stain the Churches outward beauty, the more does her
inward beauty, the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit and faith in Jesus Christ,
increase and grow: for, so was it with this persecuted and afflicted Church, as
the general scope of this part of the Chapter, which is to comfort them under
their sufferings, does imply, and the following verse does express; and yet
Paul affirms here, their faith did grow exceedingly, and their charity
abound. 2. However the Lord does usually make his peoples graces to thrive best
under a suffering lot, as said is, yet even then they do not want their own
discouragements and faintings, arising, partly, from the fear and feeling of
their own weakness, Job 6. 12. and partly, from the remainders of unmortified
corruption within them, which make them incline to be weary of lying so long
under such a sad and humbling exercise; and therefore, how thriving soever
their case be otherwise, they stand in no small need of consolation and
encouragement: for, Paul supponeth so much while he sets himself to comfort
this persecuted and thriving Church, we are bound to thank God always. 3. It
is a singular comfort and encouragement to a gracious soul, under his saddest
cross, to know that the work of grace in him is not only in a vigorous case,
but also taken notice of by others and improved as an occasion of thanksgiving
unto God from many, 2 Cor. 1. 11. and it is the duty of Christians, in order to
that end, so to take notice of, and improve the growing graces of honest
sufferers: for, Paul, in order to the comfort and encouragement of this Church,
makes them know he took notice of their growth in grace, and did improve it as
a ground of thanksgiving: we are bound to thank God always for you, brethren.
4. A gracious humble heart does for the most part so little please himself with
his way of discharging duty to God, and especially this sublime and Heavenly
duty of thanksgiving and praise, that he dare hardly say he does discharge it
as he ought, but only acknowledge his obligation to discharge it, with the
equity and convenience of it: And so much ought to be acknowledged and avowed,
when little further can be attained; for, Paul does not here say he did give
thanks, though doubtless he did so, but only we are bound to thank God always
for you as it is meet. 5. We ought so to comfort and encourage afflicted
Christians, by making them know how much we esteem what good is in them, as
that we do not thereby puff them up, and make them conceit of what they have as
if they had not received it from God; for, Paul does thus guard the present
consolation, while he gives God the praise of any good was in them and not
themselves. We are bound to thank God always for you, says he. 6. As God
deserves the thanks and praise of his peoples graces, and not themselves; and
as the gracious receipts of others do lay on a tie of thanksgiving to God upon
us; So we are not always to conceal our conscience-making of this duty from
the knowledge of others, but ought to make it sometimes known, though not to
gain applause to our selves, Matthew. 6. 5. yet, as for other ends, so, thereby
to encourage those whom it concerns, when their case does otherwise call for
it: for, that Paul may encourage this afflicted and persecuted Church, he does
make them know that he did always give thanks to God for them because their
faith grew exceedingly. 7. Where there is a growth of saving grace in any,
there is not wanting sufficient ground of thanksgiving to God for them, nor yet
of comfort and encouragement unto themselves, this alone being a sufficient
evidence that all things work together for good unto them according to the
promise, Romans 8. 28. for, though this Church was otherwise sore pressed with
persecution, yet Paul looks upon their growth in grace as matter of
thanksgiving to God, and of comfort to themselves; because that your faith
grows exceedingly, says he. 8. Then are Christians praiseworthy in
themselves, and for matter of praise to the Lord and of joy to his faithful
servants who labor among them, when, according to their time and standing, and
the precious means under which they live, their graces are upon the growing
hand: for, since Paul has written the former Epistle unto this Church they had
grown exceedingly, and gone far beyond what themselves then were, as appears
from 1 These. 1. 3. where he only mentions their graces simply, without any
commendation to them for their growth, but now he shows their faith had grown
exceedingly. And therefore is it that he gives thanks to God for them here, and
glories of them before the Churches v. 4. even because, says he, your faith
grows exceedingly and your charity abounds. 9. As the saving graces of
faith and love admit of degrees, and do not come to their height and perfection
at the first; So they increase and decrease, grow and fade together, in so far
as faith, being the cause of love, Gal. 5 -- 6. and love an evidence of faith,
1 John 3. 14. the vigor and decay of the one cannot choose but have some
answerable influence upon the other: for, Paul shows they both did grow
proportionably and together: your faith, says he, grows exceedingly and your
charity abounds. 10. It is a sweet ingredient for comfort and encouragement
to an afflicted suffering Church, when Satan prevails not to make a wedge of
their afflicted case, or of any other thing, to rent them asunder neither in
opinion, affection or practice: but the more they are heated and persecuted by
men, the more do they cleave in love and affection flowing from faith one to
another: And it must of necessity prove a most uncomfortable addition to all
their sufferings when it is otherwise; for, Paul does mention their abounding
in love toward each other, flowing from faith, as that which might and
doubtless did sweeten all their sufferings, and yield them matter of comfort
under them, because, says he, your faith and charity toward each other
abounds. 11. Our Judgment of the inward gracious estate of others ought to
be swayed and ruled with charity, which though it be not blind in passing
judgment contrary to seen and pregnant evidences, Titus 3. 16. yet it is not
too suspicious, where there is not clear ground, 1 Cor. 13 -- 5. and hops the
best in things which are uncertain, 1 Cor. 13 --.7 -- for, so did Paul, being
now at a distance from them, and being informed of their estate by the
favorable reports of those who came from them, he does without any further
anxious enquiry judge of them all and every one of them without exception of
any as truly gracious and abounding in charity toward all, which he could not
have done, except he had in charity construed some known escapes among them to
the better. The charity of every one of you all toward each other abounds,
says he.

Ver. 4. So that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God, for your
patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure.
Here is the second thing, whereby his high esteem of them was testified, which
followed upon their forementioned abundant growth. It weighed so with him that
he himself, a man of a sober discerning spirit, far from flattery, was
constrained to glory of them, that is, to speak with a kind of holy boasting
(as the word taken in a good sense does signify) to the recommendation of the
grace of God wrought in them by Gods blessing upon his Ministry, and to
propound them to those other Churches of God among whom he gloried of them, for
a pattern to be imitated by them. So that his gloriation and boasting was not
in the flesh, or in men, which is forbidden, Phil. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 21. but in
the Lord; for it was not for things carnal but spiritual, to wit, their faith
and patience, the praise whereof he has first ascribed unto God, v. 3. and
though some commendation did hereby accrease unto himself, as to the Lords
instrument for good to them, 1 Cor. 9. 1. yet his great design herein is not to
hunt after applause unto himself, Gal. 1. 10. but to commend the Lord who had
wrought by him, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and to excite others to the imitation of those
praiseworthy graces which were eminent in this Church, 2 Cor. 8. v. 1, 2, 3.
with 8. Now the matter of his boasting was, as he himself does next express,
first, their patience or praiseworthy perseverance under the yoke of duty with
the endurance of the cross, for the word in the original implies both
perseverance and endurance. Next, their faith, or the exercise of that grace in
all its branches under greatest difficulties, both which graces are commended
from the great opposition by which they were assaulted in their exercise, what
from multiplied persecutions, that is, afflictions from men for righteousness
sake, Matthew. 5. 10. and what from multiplied tribulations, that is, any
affliction whatsoever, whether immediately or mediately from God; all which
they did with patience and confidence endure, the word signifies willingly to
endure and suffer, Matthew. 17. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 12. Doct. 1. Though Christians
should not be proud of any applause or esteem they have, nor seek to have their
graces made known for gaining esteem to themselves, except it be in
subserviency to the praise of God; (see upon Gal. 6. v. 4. doct. 5.) yet they
ought to look upon it as an encouraging mercy, when their name is savoury for
good, and their graces made known among the Lords people, in so far as they
themselves are thereby engaged to walk answerably to their name, 2 Cor. 9. 2.
with 4. and are in better capacity to do good in their station unto those with
whom their name is precious, 2 Cor. 8. 18, 19. and God does thereby get the
more of praise for his goodness to them from many, 2 Cor. 1. 11. and others
also are incited to glorify God by their example, Matthew. 5. 16. For, in order
to their encouragement and comfort, he shows that their graces were made known
by him to other Churches, and they esteemed of for them accordingly, while he
says, So that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God. 2. Though we
ought to endeavor, so far as is possible, to have our names savoury for good
unto all, 1 Pet. 2. 12. yet those among men, unto whom we should study to
approve our selves most, and to carry a deserved commendation from, are the
sober and judicious Godly, who hate dissimulation and flattery. And whatever be
our esteem with, or commendation from fawning flatterers, or the weak, unsolid,
(though otherwise pious) discerners, it can afford but small encouragement and
comfort, if those others have bad thoughts of us, or stand by as neutrals: for,
the encouragement propounded to them does stand in this that Paul and his
associates, who were more eminently gracious, did think so well of them. So
that we our selves glory in you, says he. 3. A Ministers boasting and
gloriation as to his flock and charge should not be in their multitude, riches,
greatness or civilities toward himself, nor yet simply in their high esteem of
him for his abilities and graces, but in the success of his pains among them,
and in the saving graces of Gods spirit bestowed upon them by means of his
Ministry; Neither is it unlawful, but sometimes convenient, for a Minister so
to glory in his flock, providing his gloriation be qualified as Paul's was; (see
the exposition) for, Paul says, we our selves glory in you -- for your faith
and patience. 4. As it is the duty of the Lords people to speak to the
commendation of Gods grace in others; So they should be ruled by prudence in
the discharge of this duty, and not too lavish in their commendations, either
by commending men too much above their known worth, or by boasting of them,
although their worth deserve it, indifferently unto all, even to those who know
not the worth of grace, and to whom the boaster, party boasted of, and the
graces of Gods spirit for which he boasts, are alike unsavory. There should
be a distinct and prudent choice both of the party in whom, and of the party to
whom we boast: for, Paul's boasting is of men eminently gracious, as the
preceding verse does show, and not indifferently before all, but only in the
Churches of God. So that, says he, we our selves glory in you in the Churches
of God. 5. That persecutions, crosses and tribulations, especially from wicked
men, are the ordinary lot of Gods Church and people, and the reasons why it is
so, see upon Gal. 1. v. 13. doct. 6. In all your persecutions and tribulations
which ye endure, says he. 6. The greatest glory of Christians, and the richest
matter of gloriation in them, and of thankfulness to God which can be afforded
unto others from them, is not so much in their resisting by force, and breaking
the yoke and power of their persecuting enemies, as in their meek and patient
endurance of the utmost of their rage and fury, before they cede one hove in
the point of truth and duty; for Paul did glory in them for their patience in
all their tribulations. 7. As the grace of patience under sufferings
presupposes faith, and cannot be where faith is not, (whatever seeming
patience a natural man, destitute of faith in Jesus Christ, may have, it is not
a saving grace, but either brutish stupidity, Genesis 49. 15. or heartless
despair, Genesis 4. 13, 14. or, at the best, a moral virtue only, 1 Cor. 13. 3.
defective as to the intensive measure of patience, contrary to Col. 1. -- 11.
or as to the extent of patience to all crosses, contrary to Col. 1 -- 11 -- and
as to the spiritual grounds and motives from which it should flow, contrary to
Romans 5. 3. compared with 1.) So the more a man does grow in faith the more he
will be assisted and furnished with the grace of patience under cross
dispensations; and as faith is weakened, so our patience also will decay and
languish. For, he joyneth their patience with faith in all their tribulations.
8. As grace is then most praiseworthy, when, the more it is opposed, the more
it grows; So it argues an eminent degree of faith and patience, and such as
may indeed be boasted of, and propounded as a pattern for imitation unto
others, when variety of trials and cross dispensations from God, and of
persecutions from men, do not mar, but rather quicken the exercise of those
graces: for, their patience and faith, of which he gloried, was such as did
sustain them and make them endure all their persecutions and tribulations.

Ver. 5. Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye
may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
Follows a second ground of consolation under their present sad sufferings
taken from what their afflictions from wicked men and their patience under
them, spoken of v. 4. did signify. They were a manifest token, or an
infallible argument and demonstration proving convincingly that God shall judge
the world righteously at the last day, for by this righteous judgment must be
meant the last and general judgment, as the following verses make evident.
And, first, it is called righteous, because though God does always judge
righteously, when he judges, Psalm. 51. 4. yet then shall his righteousness in
judging be most evident, and all those things which do now obscure it (Jer. 12.
1.) fully removed, Matthew. 25. 32, etc. Next, their patient suffering is said to
be a convincing evidence that this righteous judgment shall come to pass,
because supponing that undeniable principle which is clear to the very light of
nature, Romans 1. 20. that God is an all-seeing omnipotent and righteous Judge,
it must of necessity follow that he sees what injuries are done unto his
people, has power to punish them, and seeing he does not punish them now, he
will be avenged on them hereafter. Which ground of consolation is further
enlarged from the end, or event, of that last judgment unto them, they should
be therein accounted, or judicially accepted and declared, worthy, or (as the
word is rendered, Act. 26. 20.) fit and meet to enjoy the Kingdom of God, that
is, Heaven and glory, called a Kingdom for reasons hinted upon Gal. 5. 21.
doct. 9. and, of God; See upon Ephesians. 5. v. 5. And shows that one piece or
evidence of their worthiness and meetness to enjoy this Kingdom consists in
their suffering for it, and for their walking in the way of faith and obedience
which leads to it; which is not to be so taken as if their sufferings could
make them worthy of Heaven by way of merit (see Romans 8. 18.) but only they did
presuppose says in Christ, Phil. 1. 29. and so did evidence their right to
Heaven, seeing faith does give a right unto it, Joh. 3. 16. As also sanctified
sufferings through Gods blessing do purge away sin and promove the work of
sanctification in those who suffer, Isa. 27. 9. and so do polish and make them
meet for Heaven, holiness being the way which leads to it, Heb. 12. 14.
Besides, the Lord has bound himself by promise that they who suffer with him
shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. and so their sufferings did make them
meet for Heaven as being a qualification of those to whom Heaven is promised.
Doct. 1. It is the Lords allowance unto believers to look upon the day of
general judgment and the approaching of it with cheerfulness and courage, and
so as to draw comfort under all their sufferings from the faith of it: yea, and
though the remembrance of this day be terrible to men unrenewed, Act. 24. 25.
yet it is most comfortable unto believers when they are in a good case and
temper: As knowing that then all their wrongs shall be righted, Psalm. 37. 6.
the atheistical suggestions of Satan in prejudice of Gods overruling providence
wholly refuted, Mal. 3. 18. the Bride, the Lambs wife, completely and in all
her members, glorified, Rev. 21. 2, 9. and they themselves fully freed from all
sin and misery, and made perfectly blessed in the full enjoying of God unto all
eternity, 1 These. 4. 17. For, he labors to persuade them that this day of
general judgment would come, that from the faith of it they might draw their
comfort, which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, says he.
2. The most grown and praiseworthy faith and patience are not so perfect, but
they are in hazard to be shaken and brangled by continued trouble and trial,
and stand in need to be supported by God and underpropped by such consolations
as the Lord has stored up in his word, that they faint not: for,
notwithstanding he has presently shown how much he had gloried in their faith
and patience, yet he sees it necessary, for their further support and comfort,
to show them that their patient suffering was a manifest token of the righteous
judgment of God. 3. As that excellent truth, concerning the day of Gods most
righteous judgment; does hardly, and with great difficulty, get credit, some
being wholly unwilling, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and others not able to believe it as
they gladly would; Mark 9. 24. So there is no truth or article of our faith
whereof more convincing proofs and infallible demonstrations may be had than of
this, for not only has the spirit of God frequently and plainly asserted it,
Joh. 5. 28, 29. but also every particular injury which the Lords people do
suffer from men, and is not righted in this life, is an infallible argument and
cogent proof that this day shall most undoubtedly come. So that there are
infinite proofs, because there are infinite wrongs of that sort; which, says
he, is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God. 4. The comforts of
the Lords people under their saddest sufferings from men, are near at hand, if
their eyes were not sometimes shut that they cannot see them, yea so nigh, that
every cross of that kind has an excellent cordial of sweetest comfort in its
bosom, and the greater their cross is, the sweeter is the comfort which is
brought along with it, and in it: for, he affirms that their unjust
sufferings, and their patience under them, are so many tokens of the righteous
judgment of God. 5. The day of general judgment, and the remembrance of it,
can prove comfortable only to such as may upon solid grounds expect a
favorable sentence on that day from Christ the Judge; for, the comfort
propounded does not lie wholly in this, that the righteous judgment of God
shall come, but also that the event of it shall be good as to them; even that
ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, says he. 6. As none shall
enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, but those whom God makes fit and meet for it,
though not by making them to merit Heaven (for it is the gift of God, Romans 6.
23.) yet by working in them all those gracious qualifications, which are
required in those, upon whom he has bound himself by gracious covenant and
promise to bestow eternal happiness: Col. 1. 12. with 13. 14. So the main
business of the day of Gods righteous judgment, at least that piece of it
wherein the comfort of believers does chiefly lie, shall be in the Lords
judicial accepting, and public declaring that the persecuted Godly (whom
wicked men did judge the scum and offscouring of the world, 1 Cor. 4. 13.) are
worthy, fit and meet to reign with him for ever. Which gracious acceptance of
his, though it be really past, Ephesians. 1. 6. and intimated to their own
consciences here on earth, 1 John 3. 19. yet the public manifestation of it,
in the view of Angels, devils and reprobates, is reserved until that day, and
shall be then performed; for, he shows that the end and event of the
righteous judgment of God, is, that they may be counted judicially accepted,
and declared worthy and meet for the Kingdom of God. Now he accounts and
declares none meet for it but those who are made meet. 7. As the Kingdom of
Heaven and glory is worthy to be suffered for, and will be so esteemed of by
all them who shall one day be counted worthy of it and meet for it; So such ill
will has Satan that any should enjoy that Kingdom which he himself has
irrecoverably lost, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and such is the hatred of wicked men, though
not to Heaven it self, yet, to the way of faith and obedience which leads to
it, that there is none who enters that way, who may not expect the utmost of
Satan's and wicked men's malice to pursue them in it, and that mainly because
they walk in that way, whatever be those other pretexts which their persecutors
may hold out, 2 Timothy 2. 9. For, he affirms they did suffer for the Kingdom of
God, and makes that an evidence that they shall be accounted meet for it: for
which ye also suffer, says he.

Ver. 6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you.

7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us --

He does here prove that their patient suffering of injuries from men was an
infallible proof of the righteous judgment of God, and that the event thereof
shall be such to Christian sufferers as he has presently affirmed; and that
because it is a righteous thing with God, or, a thing that his most righteous
nature did oblige him to, even to recompense and repay trouble unto all such as
did unjustly persecute and trouble them for righteousness sake, v. 6. and to
recompense and bestow rest from all trouble and labor to those who are put to
trouble and hardship by men for love to their duty; and that with us, to wit,
with the Apostles and others; whereby he does not only commend this excellent
rest unto them, as being a rest with such, but does also show them that he did
not now speak of a thing uncertain, but what he had the faith of as to his own
particular. And whereas he says that Gods righteous nature does no less bind
him to this than to the former, The meaning is not as if this blessed rest had
been merited by them, as trouble and torment was by their persecutors, Romans 6.
23. but because Christ had merited this rest for them, Romans 3. 26. and God of
free grace had obliged himself to bestow this rest upon them, Matthew. 5. 11, 12.
and therefore it is a righteous thing with God to recompense it to them, as
righteousness is taken elsewhere for his faithfulness in keeping promise, see
Psalm. 143. 1. 1 John 1. 9. From all which he does leave it unto them to gather,
that seeing this recompense was not given now, but all things were almost
contrary, there could be no surer demonstration of a day coming wherein the
Lord in righteousness shall give it to the full, which he does here intend to
prove. Doct. 1. Whatever is righteous with God, and judged so by him, shall
undoubtedly come to pass, and therefore though for the time truth may fall in
the streets, and equity cannot enter, Isa. 59. 14. yet either now or afterward
judgment shall return unto righteousness, and the cause which is accounted
righteous with God shall have the upper hand: for, his scope is to prove that
there shall be a day of Gods righteous judgment, because it is a righteous
thing with God that it should be so even to recompense trouble, etc. 2. It is
the ordinary lot of the Lords people, and a thing which the Lord would have
them undoubtedly to expect, to meet with an unjust measure, and unrighteous
sentence from the judgement-seats of men, who do usually, either through
blindness of judgment, Act. 3. 17. or perverseness of will, Zech. 7. 9. with
11. condemn the innocent and absolve the guilty; for, while he says that the
rendering unto every man his due is a righteous thing with God, he secretly
implies that the doing so much is not often judged righteous by men. 3. The
Lord allows his persecuted people to comfort themselves under their saddest
sufferings from the faith of this, that the Lord shall, either now or
afterward, one time or other, reckon in wrath and strictest justice with their
obstinate and Godless persecutors. And therefore the Lords people may and
should comfort themselves, and rejoice in the approaching ruin of their
enemies, though not as it is their misery, Job 31. 29. yet as the necessary
result of their ruin is Gods glory, Psalm. 59. 13. and as it shall be made
thereby evident that God has owned the righteous quarrel for which the Godly
suffer, Psalm. 58. 10, 11. and as their rest from trouble shall necessarily go
along with the ruin of their enemies; For, in order to their comfort under
persecution, he does mind them of that recompense of trouble which was to come
upon their godless persecutors. Seeing it is a righteous thing, says he, to
recompense trouble unto them who trouble you. 4. Though some, who for the
present are most godless persecutors may afterward turn to God and obtain
mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13. in which ca^e the stroke of divine justice, due to such,
has lighted upon Christ the surety, Isa. 53. 5. Yet as the most part of cruel
persecutors do persist impenitent, so the heaviest dint of divine vengeance
shall undoubtedly fall on such in the day of Gods most righteous judgment;
for, while he mentions only persecutors, here, as those upon whom God is
bound in righteousness to execute judgment, he implies that many of such
shall dye without mercy, and shall be most severely judged at the last day: to
recompense trouble unto them that trouble you, says he. 5. The righteous
judgment of God may be seen, not only in his causing wrath and vengeance to
follow where sin has gone before; but also, and mainly, in the nature and kind
of those judgments which he does inflict; in so far, that, in some respects,
they answer and are suitable unto the sin for which they are inflicted, so that
wicked men may in their sin foresee their stroke, and in their stroke may read
the sin for which they are stricken: Jude. 1. 7. For, he does make it a
righteous thing with God, not only to inflict judgment for sin upon the
wicked, but also such judgments as are most suitable to their sin, even to
recompense trouble unto them that trouble you, says he. 6. This present time
is a time of trouble, and not of rest, unto the people of God. Their trouble is
now, what from men, Mat. 10. 22. what from devils, Ephesians. 6. 12. what from a body
of sin within them, Romans 7. 24. what from their own consciences, which,
sometimes with ground, Psalm. 32. 3. and sometime without ground, Psalm. 88. 3.
do vex and trouble them, and what from God himself, Job. 6. 4. who does not see
a constant rest here to be sitting for them, Psalm. 55. 19. But their rest in
all these respects shall be afterward: For, while he says, It is a righteous
thing with God -- to give the Godly who are troubled rest in the day of his
righteous judgment, he does tacitly imply that they have not rest here. 7. The
wisdom of God has so contrived the way of the elects salvation, as not only
mercy in God, but also his provoked justice, is satisfied with it, yea and
engaged for it; So far will justice be from standing in opposition to it; For,
he says, It is a righteous thing with God to recompense -- rest unto you who
are troubled. 8. It adds much to the excellency of that rest which remains
unto the people of God, that it shall not be enjoyed by one alone, or some few
only, but all the Saints, from the most eminent unto the meanest, shall be
compartners in it, in so far as, though the glory of all shall be derived
immediately from God, 1 Cor. 15 -- 28. yet the presence of all the glorified
Saints shall make their glory the more desirable, and the joint concurrence of
them all in one and the same song of praise to God and the Lamb, Rev. 7. 9, 10.
shall doubtless, by reason of the concord and harmony flowing from it, make
their song the sweeter; for, he commends this excellent rest from this, that
the Apostles, Prophets, and such eminent Saints as they should share with them,
and they with those in that rest: and to you who are troubled rest with us,
says he.

Ver. -- 7. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels.

8. In flaming fire, --

The Apostle does here enter a second ground of consolation, or rather enlarge
and clear the former, while he condescendeth upon the day wherein the
forementioned retribution shall be made, to wit, the day appointed for the last
judgment; and thence does take occasion, for the greater comfort of the
persecuted Godly and terror of their Godless persecutors, to describe that
day, first, from the glorious manner of Christ's coming to judgment on it, set
forth in three expressions: first, he shall be revealed from Heaven, his
glorious humane nature, for the time contained and hid from us in the Heaven,
Act. 3. 21. shall then appear to our eyes and senses, Rev. 1. 7. and not only
appear, but also locally descend unto the air, 1 These. 4. 16. from the highest
Heavens to which he once ascended, Ephesians. 4. 10. Secondly, He shall come
accompanied with a glorious train and re^inue of a thousand times ten thousands
(Jude v. 14.) of the blessed Angels, here called mighty, to show that they
shall be fitted for their work wherein they will be then employed, and, more
particularly, to gather the elect, Matthew. 24. 31. and to execute his terrible
sentence against the reprobate, Matthew. 13. 41. This is contained v. -- 7.
Thirdly, he shall come in flaming fire, by which the Heavens and earth which
now are, shall be dissolved and burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 12. and damned
reprobates shall be tormented, Heb. 10. 27. Doct. 1. Though the souls of
believers are at death made perfect in holiness, Heb. 12. -- 23. yet their
happiness is not then complete, nor before the end of time in the day of Gods
righteous judgment; in so far as their bodies shall lie dissolved in the grave
until then, Job 19. 26, 27. and then being raised in glory they shall be united
unto their souls, Joh. 5. 28, 29. and the whole man perfectly and unchangeably
blessed, 1 These. 4. 17, 18. The Lord having so provided, that neither our
forerunners without us, nor we without our aftercomers, shall be completely
glorified; but the head-stone of glory being put upon all at once, the
glorifying of Christ in them, and of them in Christ, may be the more solemn and
glorious: for, he shows that the recompense of rest will be when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed, etc. and not until them. 2. It may contribute not a
little to the comfort and encouragement of Christian sufferers, and the terror
of their Godless Persecutors, to know not only that a day of general Judgment
shall be, but also that in that day the Lord Jesus shall be Judge; even he, for
whom the Godly suffered, Act. 5. 41. who gave himself to death that he might
save them, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. who is their head, Ephesians. 1. 22. their
husband, 2 Cor. 11. 2. their dearest friend, Cant. 5. 16. and therefore he
cannot choose but pass a favorable sentence on them; and it is he whom wicked
men despised, Isa. 53. 3. whose gracious offers they rejected, Matthew. 23. 37.
whose servants, friends and followers they set at naught and persecuted, Gal.
4. 29. and therefore there can be none whose terrible sentence they have more
reason to fear than his: for, in order to the main scope, which is to comfort
the persecuted Godly, and, as a mean subservient thereto, to terrify their
Godless Persecutors, he shows that Christ shall be the Judge. When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed, etc. says he. 3. Though there be much revealed,
preached and m^de known of Christ, 2 Timothy 4. 17. yet he remains obscure and
hid. The wicked do not know him at all, as not believing the truth of what they
hear concerning him, Isa. 53. 1. until they see it to their own unspeakable
sorrow and grief, Rev. 1. 7. yea and even the Godly do but know in part, 1 Cor.
13. 9. and cannot comprehend, by faith and at a distance, the hundredth part of
that excellency and beautiful glory which they shall find him adorned with when
they shall see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Besides that his bodily
presence is, for the time, kept up from their eyes, the curtain of the highest
Heavens being interposed betwixt them and that glorious sight. For, while he
says, the Lord Jesus shall be then revealed, it is employed that until then he
is in a manner hid. 4. It may also contribute much to the comfort of the Godly,
and terror of the wicked, that Jesus Christ, the Judge, shall come, not in a
state of humiliation, as he did at the first, when his divine glory was so much
covered over with the vail of humane (though sinless, Heb. 4. 15.) infirmities,
that a natural eye could see no beauty in him for which it should either desire
him or fear him; Isa. 53. 2. But he shall come as an exalted King, accompanied
with a glorious train of mighty Angels to execute what sentence shall be
passed; from whom as the Godly can expect nothing but favorable dealing, as
from their dearest friends, their fellow servants, Rev. 22. 9. and those who
are employed by Christ the Judge to bring about the good of the Elect, and, in
a manner, to serve them while they are here on earth, Heb. 1. 14. So the wicked
can expect nothing but the certain and summary execution of their dreadful
sentence from those blessed creatures, designed executioners for that very
thing, whom the damned reprobates cannot resist, they are so mighty and strong,
Psalm. 103. 20. nor flee from, they are so swift, Isa. 6. 2. nor move with
flattery and requests, they are so true unto their trust; Psalm. 103. 21. For,
in order to the comfort of the one and terror of the other, he shows how
Christ shall come accompanied with a glorious train of mighty Angels. 5. Even
those things which are in themselves most terrible, and shall be so to Godless
reprobates at Christ's second coming, have in them matter of comfort and
encouragement unto the Godly; and, in particular, those very flames which shall
put those Heavens and Earth, which now are, all in a blaze, and, consequently,
shall prove a most terrible and sadning sight unto the wicked, when all their
delightsome Idols are burnt up and destroyed before their eyes, and that flame
of fiery wrath then kindled shall devour themselves unto all eternity; even
those terrible flames shall be a comfortable sight unto the Godly, yea and the
fore-thoughts of them may and should yield comfort to them under their present
trouble, as knowing that the more terrible that judgment is, which does remain
for their adversaries, the more are they both in their persons and cause, owned
by the Lord, for clearing whereof he will give such evident proofs of his wrath
against all who will not favor them as he does; for, in order to their
comfort, he shows that Jesus the Lord shall be revealed in -- flaming fire.

Ver. -- 8. Taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. He describes the day of Judgment, secondly,
from a twofold end of Christ's coming on it, and jointly clears that twofold
retribution spoken of v. 6, 7 -- The first end relates to the wicked; he shall
come to take vengeance on them, that is, to proceed against them, as a wrathful
judge, with all extremity, and without any mixture of mercy, for vengeance
signifies a wrathful retribution of evil; and those upon whom he shall take
vengeance are of two sorts, 1. All those, whether Pagans or professed Christians,
who know not God, and are ignorant of what may, and is necessary in order to
salvation to be known of him. 2. All those among Christians, who though they
have some knowledge of Gospel Truths, yet, do not yield that subjection and
obedience thereunto, which is enjoined by it; The greatness of which sin of
disobedience to the Gospel is hinted at in this, that the Gospel is here called
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, a doctrine which he has
revealed, and which treats of him, and the way of acquiring a right unto him,
and to life eternal through him. So that to slight and disobey the Gospel is to
slight Jesus Christ, with all the good things purchased by him. Doct. 1. Men,
by living in their ignorance of God and disobedience to the Gospel, do not only
wrong themselves and are indeed greatest enemies to their own mercies, but do
also injure the Lord, and what in them lies do put an affront upon him, as if
the knowledge of God were not worth the pains, and as if Christ had put himself
to unnecessary travel for purchasing life and salvation to sinners, the offer
whereof they refused to accept and embrace; for, while he says, the Lord
Christ will take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel,
it is employed that there is a wrong and injury offered to God in their
ignorance and disobedience, for which he will avenge himself upon them. 2. As
Gods vindictive justice shall seize upon others besides bloody persecutors, in
the great day, even upon all who know not God and obey not the Gospel; So it
shall prove no comfort at all unto damned reprobates that an innumerable
multitude shall be damned with them, but rather augment their torment and
horror; for, he shows that the Lord will take vengeance, not only upon
avowed persecutors, of whom he spoke before, v. 6. but also upon all that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel, and this to increase terror to those cruel
persecutors, who shall much less escape. 3. Though there be a great difference
betwixt Law and Gospel, the former only commanding, the latter also holding
forth promised furniture and strength for enabling us to obey, the former
admitting of no less than perfect obedience, Gal. 3. 10. and personal
satisfaction for our disobedience, Genesis 2. 17. the latter accepting sincerity
instead of perfection, Mat. 25. 21. and satisfaction by a cautioner instead of
our own, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Yet there is no such difference betwixt them as if the
Law only did command and the Gospel only promise. No, The Gospel has its own
commands as well as the Law, yea commands the same things which the Law
commands, with respect had to the forementioned differences and others of
that kind; for, while he speaks of them that obey not the Gospel, it is
employed that the Gospel does command and enjoin. 4. The Lords will is not the
only cause of the reprobates condemnation, he condemns none but for their
sin, and those whose ignorance and disobedience have first procured their
condemnation; so that the very consciences of most Godless reprobates shall be
made to subscribe to their own condemnation as most equitable and just: for, he
points at their ignorance and disobedience as cause of their condemnation,
while he says, the Lord Christ will take vengeance on them who know not God
and obey not the Gospel. 5. Suppose a man might know very much, yea and obey
the Law unto the utmost of what his abilities can reach, yet if he do not obey
the Gospel, and, more especially, that great command of the Gospel to believe
and accept an offered Savior, 1 Job. 3. 23. he cannot be saved, The least sin
which ever he committed will be, in that case, of it self sufficient to condemn
him; for, so much is clear, while it is said, Christ will take vengeance on
them who obey not the Gospel, whatever be their knowledge, obedience or
disobedience otherwise.

Ver. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. He does here set forth the
terror of that vengeance which shall be then inflicted upon the ignorant and
disobedient, first, from the kind of it, it shall not be an ordinary loss, but
a destruction both of soul and body, from which there shall be no escaping, 1
T^es. 5. -- 3. and yet not an utter abolishing of their nature and being, as
the destruction of beasts is, but of their well-being and joy, as the
destruction of the fallen Angels was, Jude v. 6, 7. and therefore it is set
forth, next, from the continuance of it. It s^all be eternal. The word
signifies properly a thing always existing and never ending. They shall still
be dying an immortal death and yet never dead. 3. From the great loss which
they shall sustain by this destruction. They shall never behold the Lords
gracious presence but be banished from it unto all eternity: or rather the
efficient cause or mean of this destruction is hereby pointed at, The very
presence of Christ the Judge shall torment them, and his infinite glorious
power drive them away, as unworthy to stand in his sight, to the place of
torment prepared for them, and shall perpetuate their torment by upholding them
in their being under it. Doct. 1. Though there be degrees of torment among the
damned in Hell, Matthew. 11. 22. yet the pain and torment of all shall agree in
those; The total destruction of their well-being and joy, the eternity of that
destruction, and an utter estrangement from any mixture of comfort, and from
Gods presence the fountain from whence comfort does flow; for, he says, that,
not only avowed persecutors, but all the ignorant and disobedient, shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. 2. When
the ransom for sin paid by Christ is not embraced, there is no remedy but the
sinner himself must undergo the stroke of divine justice for those sins which
he has committed; for, those who obey not the Gospel by accepting an offered
ransom shall be punished with everlasting destruction. 3. As divine justice
will never cease to pursue the damned sinner until complete satisfaction be
given for all his sins; So the wrong done against an infinite God by sin is
such, that damned sinners, notwithstanding all the torture and torment both in
soul and body that they can endure, shall never be able unto all eternity to
satisfy for it: for, says he, they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, Their debt will never be paid, and they shall not come out of
prison until they pay the uttermost farthing, Matthew. 5. 26. Doct. 4. Though the
consciences of Godless reprobates are now, for the most part, dead and seared,
Ephesians. 4. 19. yet when Christ the Judge shall come to reckon with them, their
consciences shall be so vigorous, quick and lively, that being convicted and
condemned by their own consciences already, they shall not endure to behold the
presence of Christ the Judge; for, the very presence of Christ the Judge shall
torment them, which could not be, if their own consciences did not convince
them and powerfully check them for their many bypast injuries done to him.
They shall be punished from the presence of the Lord, says he. 5. Though the
sentence pronounced against wicked men by their own consciences now is not
presently executed, and so the less feared by them, Eccles. 8. 11. yet no
sooner shall they pass sentence in the great day, or rather second the sentence
which will be passed against them by Christ the Judge, but presently and
without delay the glorious power of their Judge, by the Ministry of his mighty
Angels, will cause the sentence quickly and without the least reprive be put in
execution; so that in all probability there shall be no long process, but a
quick and sudden dispatch: for, no sooner shall Christ's presence, meeting with
their self-condemning consciences, begin to torment them, but as soon his
glorious power shall be employed to accomplish and continue their torment. They
shall be punished -- from the presence of the Lord and from his glorious power,
to wit, jointly and without intermission.

Ver. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that
day. Here is the second end of Christ's coming, and it relates to the Godly,
called here, 1. Saints, strictly taken for those who are inherently holy, and
real students of, and proficients in that sanctification which is described
upon 1 These. 4. 3. next, believers, who are endued with the grace of saving
faith, described 1 These. 1. 3. and all such believers, and no doubt all such
Saints also, are to share in the end of Christ's coming here mentioned, which is
to be glorified in them, that is, to put such a glory upon them (both in soul,
Matthew. 22. 30. and body, Phil. 3. 21.) as he himself shall be thereby
glorified: not only shall the glorified Saints themselves give glory to him,
but the glory of his mercy, power, goodness and other attributes shall, in
their glory, be made manifest unto all the world, upon occasion whereof the
glorified Angels also shall glorify him. The Apostle adds that Christ the
Judge shall also be admired in them, that is, shall put such glory on them as
never was expected, neither by themselves or others, Isa. 64. 4. and therefore
it shall be admired by all beholders, and the mercy, power and grace of Christ,
the bestower, shall be admired and wondered at much more. Only the Apostle
having first, as it were at the by and in a parenthesis, applied this general
ground of consolation to them in particular, by giving a reason for his so
doing, to wit, because they had believed and given credit unto the doctrine of
the Gospel, to the truth whereof he and his associates had given testimony, he
does, in the end of the verse again repeat the time when this shall be, to wit,
in that day of Christ's second coming, and not until then, hereby to put a stop
to their precipitancy in hastening too much after it. Doct. 1. Jesus Christ the
Judge shall not be so much transported with rage and fury against the wicked,
in the day of general judgment, as to make him forget his tender mercies unto
the Godly; he knows how to make the same day the greatest for terror unto
his foes, and yet the greatest for Joy unto his friends; for, Paul shows that
he shall take vengeance upon the one, and be glorified in the other, both in
one day; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints. Yea, 2. The great
errand of Christ's coming to general Judgment is not so much to render
vengeance unto the wicked, as to glorify and save the Godly, the former being
in some respect but as a mean to set forth the glory and solemnity of the
latter, Romans 9. 22, 23. for looking narrowly to the Text, we find that Christ
does take vengeance as it were but in the by, when he shall come, as it were of
purpose, to put glory on his people. Taking vengeance on them that know not
God, says he, v. 8. when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints. 3. The
rest remaining to the now afflicted and troubled people of God is a glorious
rest, and therefore not a total cessation from all action and duty, as lifeless
stones, (that rest should have no glory in it,) but from the sin, infirmities
and misery with which they are encompassed and attended now in the way of duty,
and from all such duty as implies any want or imperfection in the performer;
otherwise their rest were not completely glorious; for, Paul exponing and
clearing the rest which was promised, v. 7. says, he shall come to be
glorified in his saints. 4. Though the glory of Christ the Judge will be ser
forth, to the admiration of all beholders, in the pouring forth of his wrath
and vengeance upon Godless reprobates, his proud and obstinate enemies; yet his
glory will be incomparably more and more admired in his putting glory upon the
Elect, in so far as the reprobate shall receive but what they deserve, but as
for the Elect, besides the wonderful change which shall be wrought in them, the
glory put upon them shall be without, yea and contrary to their deserving; for,
Paul says, he shall come to be glorified and admired in his saints, as if his
glory to be had in judging reprobates were no glory being compared with that.
5. There is such a necessary connection betwixt the glory of Christ, and the
glory wherewith the Elect shall be glorified in Heaven, that the former is the
result of the latter. Christ the head is glorified in that glory which he
himself has procured for, 2 Timothy 1. 10. and shall bestow upon his members, 2 Timothy 4. 8. and therefore we neither need nor should separate Gods glory from
our own salvation, but are to seek the latter jointly with, and in
subordination to the former; for, Paul shows that Christ shall be glorified
in their glory. When he shall come to be glorified in his saints. 6. Though
there be much foretold in Scripture of the glory which shall be put upon the
Lords people in the last day, 1 John 3. 2. yet that which is revealed to that
purpose is so little believed, Mark 9. 24. and comes so far short of that
height of glory wherewith they shall be then adorned and crowned, that Heaven
and happiness shall be a far other thing than ever entered in the heart, not
only of natural men, but also of the Godly themselves, to think upon: for,
therefore the first sight of it shall strike them with admiration, as at a
thing beyond their expectation and hope, he shall come to be admired, says he.
7. As Heaven and glory shall be enjoyed only by believers and Saints; So all
those are Saints who are believers, and all are believers who are saints; there
being an inseparable connection betwixt saving faith and inherent holiness, as
betwixt a necessary cause and the effect which flows from it: for, he puts
the saints and them that believe the one for the other, and shows that glory
is the portion of such only; to be glorified in his saints, and admired in all
them that believe. 8. Though there be degrees of glory in Heaven, Dan. 12. 3.
yet the meanest believer shall enjoy so much, as the most enlarged heart cannot
once imagine or comprehend while we are here; for, Paul says, he will be
admired in all them that believe, even the meanest believer not excepted. 9.
Our choicest comforts, while we are here on earth, consist in those things
which we have not in hand, but shall enjoy hereafter; and therefore the more we
exercise our faith and patience, our comforts will prove the more satisfying
and lively: for, he shows that the great and good things, which are here spoken
of in order to their comfort, shall not be performed before the last day, to be
admired, says he, in all them that believe -- in that day. 10. We are not
bound to believe any other doctrine, as necessary to salvation, but that
whereof it can be made out convincingly that the Apostles and other penmen of
holy Scripture, directed infallibly by the spirit, have given testimony unto;
for, says he, our testimony was believed among you. 11. As it is the duty of
Christ's Ministers to make application of general promises unto the particular
case of the Lords people to whom they are sent; So they should carefully guard
lest they apply those promises unto any, but such as are so qualified as the
promise does require; otherwise, they speak peace to whom the Lord does not
speak peace; for, the Apostle applies the general comfort unto them in
particular, having found them endued with faith, that necessary qualification
which is required in the person to whom the promise does belong, because our
testimony was believed among you, says he.

Ver. 11. Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you
worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of faith with power. In this and the following verse is contained a
fourth ground of consolation for them under their present sufferings, the sum
whereof is, that he and his associates did earnestly pray to God on their
behalf, where (besides the act of praying, and praying for them always, of
which, see upon 1 These. 5. 17.) there is, first, the occasion of their prayer
pointed at in the word wherefore, or, for this cause, which relates to the
foregoing purpose, to wit, because Christ was to come to be glorified in
believers, and because they in particular were believers, therefore he and his
associates did pray for them. Next, there are the things prayed for; first,
That God, whom he appropriates to himself as his God by Covenant, would count
them worthy, or, judge them fit and meet (see upon v. 5.) for this calling,
that is, to enjoy that glory unto which they are called; for they were called
already, and therefore calling here must not be taken for Gods act in calling
them, but for that unto which they were called, even the Kingdom of God, spoken
of v. 5. Next, That, in order to this, God would fulfill, or fully perform and
accomplish, his good pleasure concerning them, that is, his eternal purpose of
election, called usually by the name of good pleasure, Ephesians. 1. 5, 9. and all
his good pleasure, that is, all things which he had purposed in that decree to
bring about for them, even salvation and all things pre-required to it. And it
is called the good pleasure of his goodness, to show that nothing but his own
goodness, and propenseness to communicate good from himself to others, was the
cause and motive of that decree. See Ephesians. 1. v. 4. doct. 7. Thirdly, That the
Lord by his own omnipotent power would fulfill, and, by fulfilling, preserve,
actuate, increase, and fortify the work of faith in them, or, the grace of
saving faith with all its gracious effects, the saving graces of Gods Spirit.
Doct. 1. As it is our duty, in the constant course of our prayers to God, to
mind the case of others, and especially of those who suffer for truth, because
their tentations to fall are strong, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 10, 14, 15. and the glory of
God and edification of the Church are in a singular manner concerned in their
standing, 2 Timothy 2. 10. So it is a choice ground for comfort and encouragement
unto suffering Christians, to know they have the prayers and best wishes of
those who are dear to God, sent up to the throne of grace daily for them. The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; Jam. 5. -- 16. for,
Paul did pray always for those suffering Thessalonians, and does let them know
so much for their encouragement, wherefore also we pray always for you. 2. As
it is the duty of Pastors to pray to God for the Lords people, as well as it is
to preach unto them; So the more a people do thrive in grace by a Ministers
pains, and the more ground of confidence is afforded to him by their carriage
that it shall be eternally well with them, the more will his encouragement be,
and his engagements the deeper, to pray to God for them: A stubborn and
graceless people do prove a dead and heartless weight for a Minister to stand
under, and to lift at before the Lord: for, Paul did always pray for this
people, and was encouraged thereto from their growth in grace, formerly
mentioned, and more especially from the evidence he had of their eternal
well-being, in their believing his testimony mentioned v. -- 10. and related
unto here in the causal particle wherefore. Wherefore also we pray always for
you. 3. It is the duty of those who have gotten their interest in God made
clear, to improve their interest in him and familiarity with him for the
behove, not of themselves alone, but of others also. This being the only way to
recompense the tender bowels of others to them, who employed their power with
God for their behove, when possibly they themselves were strangers to him: for,
Paul improveth his interest in God for them, while, in praying to God on their
behalf, he calls him his God that our God, says he, would count you worthy.
4. As none are worthy, fit, or meet, for Heaven, but those whom the Lord has
drawn out of nature to the state of grace in their effectual calling, seeing no
unclean thing can enter there; Rev. 21. 27. So there is nothing in us, either
before or after our effectual calling, which makes us worthy of Heaven, or meet
for it by way of merit, but all our fitness and worth of that kind does come
from Gods gracious acceptance, his vouchsafing and accounting of us as such;
for if we were worthy of Heaven, by our own merit, to what end does he pray to
God that he would count them worthy of it? and he expresses Heaven by the name
of calling, to show that none but called ones are worthy of it, and fit for it.
5. As none shall be accounted and declared worthy in the last day to enter the
joys of Heaven, but those whom God by his eternal decree, and good pleasure
has appointed for it; So the Lord in that his eternal decree has not
appointed Heaven for any, but those whom he has appointed also in the same
decree to make meet for it: for, the connection of the two first petitions
teaches, both that Gods good pleasure and decree is anterior to their being
accounted worthy, and that Gods good pleasure is fulfilled and executed in Gods
counting them meet and worthy, and consequently in his making them so. And
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness. 6. As this eternal decree of
election is extended unto more things than one, even to the salvation of the
elect, and all the means tending to it; So it is in all respects fully free,
and had its rise not from any ^oreseen goodness in us, but from the mere good
will and goodness of God; for, therefore does he call it all the good pleasure
of his goodness. 7. As God does not accomplish all the good pleasure o^ his
goodness unto the elect at once, but by degrees and measures until it be fully
accomplished in glory; Matthew. 25. 34. So though no endeavors of ours could
have any influence on God for moving him to enact such a gracious decree in our
favors, Romans 9. 11. yet they may promove the execution of it; And, especially,
fervent prayer is a mean appointed by God for furthering this decree to its
full accomplishment: for, the Apostle, by praying unto God that he would fulfill
all the good pleasure of his goodness, does intimate the usefulness of prayer
in order to that end. 8. As it is the grace of faith, with all its gracious
effects, which in Gods account does fit a man for Heaven; So faith, and all the
graces of Gods spirit flowing from it, were resolved on by God in that eternal
decree of election to be bestowed upon the elect. And therefore foreseen faith
did no ways move the Lord to elect any, or one more than another; for, the
Apostle, condescending upon the mean how they may be accounted, and
consequently made, worthy by God, entreats him to fulfill the work of faith in
them, and makes this a piece of Gods good pleasure of his goodness toward
them. and fulfill -- the work of faith, says he. 9. As the grace of faith
admits of degrees, and every degree of faith is Gods work; So the carrying on
of the work of faith, especially in suffering times, from one degree to
another, is a task of such difficulty, and meets with such opposition from
men, from devils, from within a man's self, Luke 22. 31, 32. that it is not only
Gods work, but his wonderful work, a work which calls for omnipotent power,
to the working of it: for, he prays that God may fulfill, or carry on by
degrees toward perfection, the work of faith with power.

Ver. 12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and
ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Here
is a third thing in this prayer, the end proposed to be brought about by it, or
by the good things sought after in it, to wit, that Christ's name, or himself
with all his glorious attributes, might be glorified in them, that is,
acknowledged and set forth as praiseworthy and glorious by them, both in word
and work; and that not only in this life, but also, and mainly, in that which
is to come, see v. 10. and that they might be glorified in him, that is, the
glory put upon him by them might reflect upon themselves again, and so the more
they glorified him, they might the more be glorified by him. But lest they
might take matter of boasting hence, as if their glorifying of Christ did merit
glory from him to them, he ascribes all, even that glory of theirs, which had
its rise from their glorifying him, not to any merit of theirs, but to Gods
free grace and favor in Christ. Doct. 1. A Christians great design and chief
end, which he ought to propose unto himself in all his actions, is the glory of
God in Christ, and that his praiseworthy attributes of mercy, love, wisdom,
justice, etc. as they are glorious in themselves, so they may be acknowledged
for such by us, and by others also, so far as in us lies; for, the great end
of Paul's prayers, and that which he would have them propose to themselves in
all their actions, is, that the name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in
them. 2. As the more we set our selves to glorify Christ, the more of glory
will thereby accrease unto our selves; So we are neither to expect that Christ
will glorify us, but in and by our glorifying him, nor yet to account that any
true glory or credit to us, but what resulteth from our putting of glory one
way or other upon him: for, he makes Christ's glorifying us the result of our
glorifying him, That the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and ye
in him. 3. Grace is the only way to glory, and the glorifying of Christ in us,
and of us in him, is the necessary result of Christ's carrying on the work of
grace in us according to the good pleasure of his goodness toward perfection.
And whatever we be otherwise, if this be wanting, we are dishonorable to
Christ, and acquire nothing but shame and disgrace unto our selves; for, he
makes Gods fulfilling the good pleasure of his goodness in the work of faith,
the mean both of Christ's glory and theirs, That the name of the Lord Jesus may
be glorified, etc. 4. That any thing in us does glorify Christ, or that any
glory does accrease unto us by our glorifying him, is not to be imputed to the
worth or merit of our works, in the best whereof, if the Lord should straightly
mark iniquity, there would be found matter of dishonor unto God and of shame
unto our selves, Isa. 64. 6. but it flows wholly from Gods free grace and
favor, which covers the imperfection of our work, Ephesians. 4. -- 32. and
accepts of what is right in it as service to himself, Ephesians. 1. 6. For, so much
does he teach, while he says, according to the grace of our God. 5. That Jesus
Christ is true God appears from this, that not only the title of true God may
be looked upon here as ascribed unto him, see Joh. 5. 20. but also that from
his grace and favor all our glory here and hereafter does flow, and that he is
the absolute Lord and dispenser of it; according to the grace of our God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle does exhort them to guard
against a fabulous error, which did spread among them concerning Christ's
second coming, as if it had been to fall out in that present age: which
exhortation is, first, seriously and at large propounded, v. 1, 2. next,
briefly repeated, v. 3. --

In the second part, he does refute the forementioned error, and foretells a
general apostasy under the Antichrist. Which prophecy consists of six
branches. In the first he foretells that the Antichrist shall be revealed,
and bring this apostasy to an head, v -- 3 -- In the next, the Antichrist is
described, 1. From his nature, 2. From two of his titles, v. -- 3. Thirdly,
from two of his properties, his opposition to Christ, and arrogance, both in
relation to lawful Magistrates, and to God himself, and Fourthly, from the
greatness of his power, and the place where he shall exercise it, he shall sit
in the Temple of God, v. 4. which doctrine he shows was no new invention of
his own, v. 5. In the third branch of the Prophecy he shows that Antichrist
was not yet revealed, because of a stop and impediment in the way of his
rising, v. 6. which should keep him still at under until its removal, v. 7.
after which he would discover himself, v. 8. -- In the fourth branch he
foretells Antichrists ruin, v -- 8. In the fifth he mentions the means and
helps of his advancement, to wit, 1. Satan's assistance, 2. A faculty of working
lying Miracles, v. 9. and 3. Deceitful false doctrines, v. 10 -- In the sixth
he sets forth his success and describes his subjects, first, from their
eternal state, they perish, 2. From the cause of their perishing, to wit, their
rejecting of truth, v. 10. and their believing grossest untruths, the Lord
having given them up to the power of error, v. 11. Thirdly, from the judgment
following upon both the former sins, v. 12.

In the third part he confirms and comforts them against the power and terror
of this apostasy; first, from the certainty of their perseverance and
salvation grounded upon their election, v. 13. which he clears from their
effectual calling, v. 14. next, by exhorting them to constancy in the doctrine
received, v. 15. Lastly, by praying to God for them, that he would comfort and
establish them, v. 16, 17.

Ver. 1. NOw we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our gathering together unto him. The Apostle being to establish these
Thessalonians in the truths against a spreading error concerning the time of
Christ second coming (which is expressed v* -- 2.) does, first, in order to
that end, beseech them lovingly and meekly as brethren. 2. He enforces the
exhortation, or rather the disswasive, with a kind of religious adjuration by
Christ's second coming (about which the present error was) and by their
gathering together unto him, to wit, at the last day, when all the elect shall
be fully gathered from the four winds, Mat. 24. 31. and caught up to meet the
Lord in the air, 1 These. 4. 17. So that he does in effect obtest them, that as
they would have comfort at Christ's second coming, and partake of that glory,
which the elect being gathered together shall receive from him then, 1 These. 4*
-- 17. so they would obey the present exhortation, and keep themselves at a
distance from the following error. Doct. 1. The spirit of error is so far
from being banished and put to silence by the Churches afflictions and weighty
sufferings, that it sometimes takes occasion from those to rage the more among
a people, who being wearied with the cross, have often an open ear to receive
whatsoever it is, whether truth or error, which promises most of present
ease, and of a speedy delivery from their present strait: for, though this
Church was presently under a suffering lot, chap. 1. 4. yet this error, which
did maintain that Christ was presently to come and put an end to trouble at the
last day of judgment, did spread fast among them, hence Paul does seriously
exhort them to guard against it. Now we beseech you, brethren. 2. The Ministers
of Christ ought so to propound the sweet and ravishing consolations of the
Gospel to an afflicted people, as they do not omit to press such duties on them
as their afflicted state calls for, or to tax them for yielding in the least
to such tentations as Satan takes advantage from their affliction to assault
them with; and that because untenderness of this kind does hinder the most
sweet and powerful consolations of the Gospel to work and take effect, Jer. 42.
10, 11. with 44. 15, etc. for, Paul, having comforted this afflicted Church,
chap. 1. does now exhort them to duty, and indirectly tax them for their being
so soon taken with the present plausible error. Now we beseech you brethren.
3. The Minister of Christ, as he ought to entertain love betwixt him and the
people of his charge, and for that end to deal affectionately with them at all
times: So chiefly when he has to do with those who are either tainted, or in
hazard to be tainted, with error, especially so long as they are not
incorrigible in their error; and that because a spirit of pride does usually
accompany a spirit of error, so that the person tainted with it can hardly
endure to be contradicted, Gal. 4. 16. if he be not convinced that he who
contradicts his errors, does love his person, and deals affectionately with
him: for, therefore, while Paul is about to meddle with their error, he
deals most affectionately with them. Now we beseech you brethren. But 4. The
Lords Minister ought not (under pretense of tender and affectionate dealing
with those who are tainted with error) to speak against their errors
coldryfly, as if it were a thing indifferent whether they returned to a right
mind or not, but (as he would be faithful to God, Gal. 1. 10. and the souls of
people, 2 Cor. 11. 3.) he must deal seriously with them, set their hazard
before them, and earnestly obtest them, by that which is dearest to them, to
quit their error and embrace the contrary truth; for, thus does Paul beseech
and in a kind adjure them by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our
gathering together unto him. 5. Error about a truth, or any circumstance of it
does (in so far, at least) hinder or endanger the good and comfort, which might
be otherwise reaped by it: for, while Paul obtests them, that, as they looked
for comfort at Christ's second coming, so they would beware of that error which
did antedate the time of it, it is employed that their embracing of that error
would in some respect hinder, or at least hazard the comfort which they might
have by the faith of that day. We beseech you, says he, by the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 6. As Christ will certainly come to judge the world, and all
believers shall be gathered to him, as Eagles do resort unto the Carcass,
Matthew. 24. 28. so we ought to entertain thoughts of that day with a kind of
religious awe and reverence, to wit, so as we do not mock at it, 2 Pet. 3. 4.
but that (certainly believing it will be) we order all our deportment as we may
prepare and make ready for it, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. for, he adjures and obtests
them by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto
him, now we use not to obtest but by such things which are most certain, and to
which we owe a kind of religious respect and reverence. 7. Then is the day of
Christ's second coming desirable and precious to us, and thought upon as it
ought by us, when, having made acquaintance and friendship with Christ our
Judge, we have ground of confidence that he will not be terrible but friendly
to us in that day, otherwise a man can never think upon it with love, desire
and religious reverence, but will abhor the very thoughts of it; for, as this
obtestation implies this day to have been desirable unto them and reverently
thought upon by them, so Paul does show from what this did flow, even their
interest in Christ the Judge as theirs, and the hope of their being gathered
together among the rest of the elect unto him then, while he says, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him; he
calls Christ our Lord, and the gathering, our gathering.

Ver. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit,
nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.
The Apostle in this verse does, first, set forth, in general, that from which
he does dissuade them, to wit, 1. That they would not be soon shaken or suffer
themselves to be tossed to and fro like the waves of the Sea (as the word
signifies) by the winds of false doctrine in or from their mind, that is, from
their received opinion and judgment concerning the truth in hand (as the word
is rendered, 1 Cor. 2. 16. and 11. 10.) or from the right use of their wit and
reason, the loss of which he does hereby insinuate would be the sad fruit of
embracing the present error; and, 2. That they would not be troubled, or
suffer themselves to be perplexed, vexed and affrighted with the dreadful
representation of approaching judgment, by which, it is like, the promoters of
this error did uncessantly alarm and affright them, for the word is a metaphor
taken from soldiers affrighted with a sudden and dreadful alarm. Next, he
condescends upon a threefold deceit which the maintainers of this error did
make use of to seduce and unsettle them, which he exhorts them to vilipend as
being of no weight: first, they pretended to the spirit, whereby (as it is
contradistinguished to the other two) must be meant some immediate revelations
which they did falsely give out themselves to have had from the spirit of God,
Micah 2. 11. next, to some unwritten word which, as it seems, they did falsely
allege had been spoken by Paul or some other Apostle to that purpose, 3. To
some Epistle written by Paul himself, and this, either the former written to
this same Church which it seems they did wrest to countenance the present
error, as if he had taught 1 These. 4. 15. that Christ would come to judgment
in that present age, or some other Epistle forged by them and fathered upon the
Apostle, which has not been unusual even then, as appears from his great care
to subscribe every Epistle with his own hand for preventing such impostures,
chap. 3. 17. Lastly, he expresses the particular error from embracing whereof
he does so affectionately and seriously dissuade them, to wit, that the day of
Christ, or of Christ's second coming, was at hand. The word in the Original does
differ from that which is 1 Pet. 4. 7. and expresses so much, as if the day of
judgment had been instantly to fall out in that very age, which doubtless was
the opinion vented by those seducers and refuted here by Paul. But the word
used by Peter, expresses only that it was drawing near, and in what sense he
would be understood is explained by himself, 2 Pet. 3. 8, 9. to wit, in respect
of God, with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day. However Peter does not condescend upon any peremptory time, neither day,
year, nor the present age, as those seducers did. Doct. 1. The spirit of error
is usually most prevalent and taking with people, when it is first hatched and
publicly vented. The newness of the thing, the fair pretexts wherewith it is
colored, and peoples inadvertence to what it tends, make many without
deliberation engage in it, and being once engaged to stand to it: and therefore
if the first assault of error were once withstood, and time and leisure taken
to advise upon it, before we did indeliberately and suddenly close with it,
there should not be so much hazard, at least of being carried away with it;
for, he beseeches them that they be not soon shaken, not as if he did allow
them to be shaken, provided it were not soon, but because if they did endure
the first brunt, and were not soon shaken they would readily not be shaken at
all. 2. As a sudden rash and unadvised engaging in the way of error is usually
accompanied with a spiritual frenzy and madness, and transporteth men beyond
the bounds of right reason, both in the defense and propagation of their error
(however they may be abundantly rational in their other actings, 2 Cor. 9. 2.
with 11. 20.) So an unsound and unsettled judgment in the point of truth, is
usually accompanied with error and disturbance, of the conscience, through
fears and doubts. And it is the devilish method of Satan's instruments, in
seducing the Lords people, once to unsettle their minds, and preplex their
consciences thus: that they may hereby make them more pliable to embrace their
erroneous doctrine, if so it but seem to promise any ease of mind and peace;
for, while he disswades them from error, he forbids them to be soon shaken in
mind, or troubled, the latter as a consequence of the former, and both of them
intended by their seducers, as tending to make them more pliable to their
design. 3. The forementioned dreadful concomitants of error, to wit,
infatuation of mind, perplexedness of heart and affections, the rack and
horror of conscience, should scare the Lords people from meddling with, and
make them stand aloof from, any thing which tends toward it; for, the
general part of the disswasive has an implicit reason to enforce their
standing aback from the particular error, even because thereby they would be
shaken in mind and troubled. 4. As there is not any error vented the
maintainers whereof will not have somewhat to say in its defense; So the taking
force of all they say for that end consists not in the solidity and truth of
what they affirm, but in multitude of words, variety of seeming reasons, a fair
flourish of specious pretexts, and in impudent, bold and strong assertions,
thereby holding up their reputation among their devoted followers, Act. 8. 9,
10. and ensnaring the simple who hardly can put a difference betwixt pretext
and reality, confident assertions and solid proofs; Romans 16 -- 18. for, the
maintainers of this error did boldly allege no fewer than three heads of most
specious reasons, none whereof did prove the truth of their opinion, and
therefore he forbids them to be shaken or troubled with any of them, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us. 5. Perverse and obstinate
seducers do often prove in end blasphemous and very Atheists, in so far as
(against the light of conscience) to dare to father their groundless untruths
upon an immediate revelation from the God of truth; for, those seducers
pretended to immediate revelations from the spirit to confirm their error,
wherein they could not but know themselves to be liars. Neither by spirit,
says he. 6. As heretical spirits do usually prove most malapert and impudent
in opposing themselves to most convincing evidences, if it were to outface an
immediately inspired Apostle: So they are most untender of, and labor to
trample upon the reputation of all who do oppose them, though they be
deservedly eminent, for their graces, gifts and station; for, those seducers do
not only oppose themselves to Paul an Apostle, but also, because of his
opposition to them, labor to disgrace him, while they allege he did
contradict himself, and that they had a word spoken by him asserting that
opinion for truth, which he did now condemn, which is employed while he says,
be not troubled by word, as from us. 7. Heretical spirits and seducers do also
often prove most irreligious, as choosing to shake the foundation of all
religion, the authority of Scripture, by making one part thereof contradict
another, rather than they should have nothing to say for their own credit, and
to defend their error: for, it is employed that in this debate they opposed
letter to letter, and Scripture to Scripture. Nor by letter as from us, says
he. 8. Satan's malice and man's impudence* did come to that height, as to
endeavor the corrupting of Scripture by wresting some parts of it from its
genuine sense and meaning, and by forging false Scriptures, and giving them out
for true, even while the Apostles themselves were alive to contradict them.
Which serves to commend the watchful providence of God over Scripture, and his
mercy toward us, in so far as all the attempts of Satan for that end have been
hitherto frustrate, and the holy Scriptures transmitted pure and incorrupt from
hand to hand through all generations to this present age: for, the letter here
mentioned was either Paul's former Epistle wrested; or a new one forged* Nor by
letter as from us. 9. It often falls out that those errors do prove most
pestilent, and of dangerous consequence, which have the greatest show of piety,
and carry with them the least fear of hazard from them at the firs view; for,
this error, that the day of Christ was instantly to fall out, might seem not
only an harmless opinion, but also most useful for putting men to their duty in
order to their preparation for that day; yet the Apostle, by this most serious
disswasive from it, does imply that it was an error extremely hazardous; and
indeed so it was, for if this opinion had been once received, the truth of
Christian Religion, and chiefly of this particular, should have been exposed to
contempt and scorn in the following age, when the event would have fallen out
otherwise than this opinion held forth, which doubtless was Satan's great design
in fostering it so much. As that the day of Christ is at hand, says he. 10. So
subtle is Satan, that he can, and sometimes does, make one error spring out of
the ruins of another, yea and the latter error to resolve in end in the
re-establishing of the former, though in it self it be inconsistent with it;
And so simple is man, that, under pretense of eschewing one extremity of
error, he rusheth forward to the other, by the seen absurdity whereof, and by
Satan's subtlety, he is at last constrained to embrace of new his old error,
which he had formerly forsaken: for, Paul having labored in the former Epistle
to settle them in the says of the resurrection and of a day of Judgment, 1
These. 4. 14, etc. in opposition, doubtless, to some who did question those
truths, as at Corinth, 1 Cor. 15. 12. some did take occasion hence to run to
the other extremity and maintain that the day of Christ should come to pass in
that very age, wherein Satan's design doubtless was to drive them back again to
their former error, that there would be no such day at all, when the event
should prove their second opinion to be false. As that the day of Christ is at
hand.

Ver. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means: -- He does here repeat the former
disswasive from suffering themselves to be deceived, or (as the word
signifies) led aside from the way of truth in the present particular, by any
man, though he were never so learned and holy, or by any mean, neither those
three mentioned v. 2. nor by any other. Doct. 1. So prone are men by nature to
embrace error, when it is vented, as being the birth of corrupt natural light,
Eccles. 7. 29. and tending of it self to gratify some one or other of our
unmortified lusts, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that there is need of reiterated disswasives
from it, and of often inculcating the self same things by the Lords Ministers,
which may tend to guard his people against the power of it: for, he does here
repeat the former disswasive, Let no man deceive you. 2. As Satan labors to
engage men, of different ranks and dispositions, to be instrumental in carrying
on the self same error, and prompteth them with variety of ways and means for
throughing of their work, according to the various tempers of the Lords people
whom he intends to ensnare, whereof some are more easily wrought upon by one
instrument and mean, and some by another: So no consideration of the person
tempting, though he were never so insinuative, discreet, holy and able, or in
doctrine otherwise Orthodox, and no consideration of the means whereby he
tempts (though by pretexts most specious, reasons seemingly probable, authority
of men almost unquestionable) has in it sufficient ground of excuse unto any
for suffering himself to be seduced from truth to error; for, he implies that
there would be several men, and several means, and will have them to stand out
against them all, while he says, Let no man deceive you by any means.

Ver. 3. -- For that day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition. The Apostle in
the second part of the Chapter, refuteth the forementioned error from this,
That such things behoved to fall out before the day of the Lord, as could not
come to pass within the compass of that or many ages, whereof he mentions two,
first a falling away or (as it is in the original) an apostasy, and defection,
not from the Roman Empire, as some do expone it, but from Christ and the purity
of the Gospel. And therefore, in opposition to this apostasy, they are
exhorted to stand fast, not to the Roman Empire, but to the truth of the
Gospel, v. 13. Besides, it is the same word and the same purpose which is held
forth, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and the Antichrist by whom this apostasy was to be headed
is called a false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13. and therefore it must be an apostasy
from true doctrine, as the word does always signify in the New Testament.
Neither does he mean a particular defection of some particular persons or
Churches; for there were some such defections already, both of persons, 1 Timothy
1. 20. and Churches, Gal. 1. 6. but a general defection of the whole visible
Church, some few only excepted, Rev. 13. 8. For therefore is the word falling
away or apostasy set down indefinitely, and without any restriction. The
second thing which was to fall our antecedently to that day, is, the revealing
of the man of sin, the great head and patron of this apostasy, whom all accord
to be that great Antichrist spoken of, 1 John 2. 18. and 4. 3. and the beast
mentioned Rev. 13. 11, etc. and the epithetes given him here declare so much,
though he be not expressly named. Concerning whom the Apostle does first foretell
that he shall be revealed and made known, though not so, as that none should
have any doubt concerning him; for then how were it possible that all the world
should wonder after the beast, Rev. 13. 3. neither were such wisdom requisite
to find him out and know him as is required, Rev. 13. 18. yet so, as they to
whom the Lord has given eyes to see shall evidently discern him; Which
revealing and making of him known was to be effectuated, partly, by the
preaching of the Gospel which should discover him, (see v. 8.) but, chiefly, by
his coming to the height of his power, and his exercising of open tyranny over
the Church of God. Next, that the Lords people might the better know him when
he should discover himself, the spirit of God does here describe him, first,
from his nature, he shall be a man, and not a Devil, as some did falsely
imagine. Now that he is called a man in the singular number, with the article
prefixed in the Original, does not infer that he should be one single man, and
individual person without succession, as the Papists imagine, to defend their
Pope from being the Antichrist here described, but all in vain. For, 1. The
same word with the article prefixed does not always point at one individual
person, but sometimes must be extended to many men, or to any man indefinitely,
as Joh. 2. 25. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Secondly, That the Antichrist cannot be only one
individual person will be clear if we consider the many great things which
Scripture foretells shall be effectuated by him, whereof there is one here,
to wit, the carrying on of that woeful work of an universal apostasy from
Christ and truth through the whole Christian world, presently spoken of, unto
an height and head, which surely behoved to be a work of more ages than one,
otherwise the argument here used by Paul would have been but of small force to
prove that the day of judgment should not fall out in the present age, because
this falling away and apostasy behoved to be first; It would have been, I say,
of no force if that apostasy could have been brought about in the space of one
age. Besides, the spirit of Antichrist was already working, hidly and in a
Mystery, in Paul's time, (see upon v. 7.) and in John's time 1 John 4. 3. and
was to continue until the time of Christ's second coming, (see upon v. 8.) and
consequently he cannot be one only individual person. But therefore, thirdly,
By man, or, that man, here is meant a series and constant succession of men, of
whom one was to succeed another in their grandeur, power and wickedness against
Christ and his Church, as if they were all but one man acted by one and the
same spirit, even as the word High Priest in the singular number is taken, Heb.
9. 7, 25. and as Daniel, chap. 7. under every one of the four beasts does
comprize a number of Kings succeeeding one another in the Babylonian, Persian,
and Grecian Monarchies, yea, and as shall appear upon v. 7. the continued
series and succession of Roman Emperors is spoken of, as of one man
withholding the Antichrist from coming to the height of his power and
greatness. Secondly, the Antichrist in this verse is described from two of his
titles; first, he shall be a man of sin; It is an Hebraism, implying that he
shall be a notorious sinner himself, Rev. 13. 5, 6. and an Author of sin to
others, Rev. 13. 12, 14. Like Jeroboam who caused Israel to sin, 2 King. 11.
10. Next, a son of perdition, that is, one devoted to destruction, Rev. 17. 8.
as Judas was who therefore has the same title, Joh. 17. 12. and one who should
destroy others, and that both spiritually in their souls, Rev. 17. 2. and
corporally in their bodies, Rev. 17. 6. for which cause he is called Apollyon
or a destroyer, Rev. 9. 11. Hence Learn, first, as love to ease and desire of
freedom from trouble in the Lords people do make them antedate promised
deliveries, and dream of a triumph before they have entered the battle: So the
Lord in Scripture does frequently s^t himself to dispossess his people of this
lazy dangerous humor, by showing that they must first prepare for a long
lasting battle before they can expect a complete victory and full triumph: for,
while these Thessalonians did dream of nothing but of a present delivery from
all their trouble by Christ's second coming, the spirit of God does here
forewarn them to prepare for a long continuing battle with Antichrist and his
followers: for that day shall not come except there come a falling away first,
says he. 2. Not only particular Churches and persons, but even the Catholic
Church visible (the elect only being excepted, Matthew. 24. 24.) may fall away
from the purity of the Gospel to dangerous and soul-destroying errors; and
therefore the Church of Rome can have no ground to plead for the contrary
privilege, seeing not only her future apostasy is more than intimate, Romans
11. 20. but also it is here foretold that the Antichristian apostasy shall, as
a deluge, overflow the whole visible Church, yea and Rev. 17. 9. that
Antichrist shall erect his throne in the City of Rome it self; for, says he,
except there come a falling away first, to wit, a general apostasy, See the
Exposition. 3. Not only are the saddest events which can befall the Church
foreseen by God, and powerfully overruled by him, for his own glory, and the
good of his elect, Romans 8. 28. but he has also in mercy fore-acquainted his
Church with them, that when they come to pass, none should need to stumble at
them; for, therefore it is that the Lord does here forewarn his Church of this
general apostasy: except there come a falling away first. 4. Even Satan's
Kingdom, and his many instruments under him, are most united in their woeful
work, and in uniform means, and ways for carrying on their work of bearing
down the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; And therefore that union boasted of so much
by Papists can be no infallible mark that they are the true Church; for, though
Antichristianism shall be a Kingdom made up of diverse members, wherein shall be
many successive heads in several ages (see the exposition) yet, because of
their unity and uniformity in driving on one and the same design, they are all
called by the name of one man: and that man of sin be revealed. 5. One step of
apostasy from truth in the Church makes way for an higher. It begins at
l^ss^r truths, and from those it advances further; Satan does so d^sign it,
that he may gain his intent against truth by p^^ce-meale, which he cannot
attain by whole sale; And the Lord himself does so order it, that he may punish
begun apostasy by raining snares in his holy justice upon the guilty, whereby
they cannot but backslide more. See v. 11. for, he foretells that there shall
be first a falling away, and then the man of sin shall be revealed, or discover
himself in his own colors, and be generally received, and so the apostasy
should heighten. 6. The nature of man now fallen is a very sink of sin, and,
being given over of God and tempted by Satan, is ready to fall in any sin, yea
to many sins though never so gross and abominable: and therefore let him that
stands take heed lest he fall: for, the Antichrist is a man of sin, a man by
nature, and yet a sink of all sin, a son of perdition, an opposer of God and
Christ, etc. 7. As where sin goes before, perdition and destruction do follow
after: So the more eminent men are in their personal transgressions, and the
more active in driving on others to sin with them, they may expect the more
inevitable and dreadful destruction from the Lord, as their reward; for, if
Antichrist be a man of sin, a notorious sinner himself, an author of sin to
others first, he shall be a son of perdition next. 8. Though they who are
active in driving others on to sin shall smart most for it, as said is, yet
those who are seduced and drawn over by them shall not escape; for, as he is
the man of sin for his causing others to sin, so a son of perdition for
bringing spiritual perdition upon them also.

Ver. 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. The Apostle does describe the Antichrist, thirdly, from
two of his properties; first, he opposes himself, or (as it is in the
original,) he is a prime opposite or adversary, to wit unto Christ; for
therefore is he called Antichrist, 1 John 2. 18. now every heretic is in so
far at least an adversary and opposite to Christ, but he in a special manner:
for his opposition was, 1. To be most potent, as having a fixed orderly
Kingdom, whereof he is head, set up in opposition to Christ, 2. More universal,
as setting himself to undermine every Christian truth almost, 3. He was to
oppose Christ especially in those truths relating to Christ's offices to which
he was anointed as the name, Christ, and Antichrist, in the greek imply. Only
know that what is spoken here of Antichrists opposition to Christ, and
afterward of his showing himself that he is God, must not be understood as if
he would profess so much in words, which the Papists affirm; for, as follows
immediately, he shall sit in the Temple of God, and Antichristianism is called
a mystery, v. 7. besides he shall be a false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13. and have
the horns of the Lamb, Rev. 13. 11. and consequently, a famous hypocrite and
dissembler, (as some of the Papists are forced to confess) yea and shall be
adored by the world of professed Christians, Rev. 12. 13. which is not
imaginable, if he were a professed enemy to Christ and an avowed Atheist. And
therefore his opposition to Christ and God, here spoken of, is real and in
deeds, but under a mask and pretense of friendship. The Antichrists second
property is his intolerable pride and arrogance, first, in relation to men, and
the chief of men, He should exceedingly and above measure exalt himself (as the
word is rendered, 2 Cor. 12. 7.) and this, above all that is called God. I
conceive he means not the true God, for he is spoken of after, but earthly
Magistrates who are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. above whom he should exalt
himself, by usurping power over them to enthrone and dethrone them at pleasure,
Rev. 17. 12, 13. and this not only inferior Magistrates and Kings over
particular Kingdoms, but Emperors and mighty Monarchs over many realms,
expressed here in these words, or that which is worshipped. The word in the
Original does signify that which is holden in highest degree of reverence,
whether religious or civil, and with a little variation was an usual style
given to the Roman Emperors, which did difference them most from other
Magistrates, Act. 25. 21, 25. Next, his arrogance is set forth in relation to
the true God, which is brought in as an higher step following upon the former,
and jointly herewith he gives a fourth branch of his description, from the
greatness of his power, and the place where he shall exercise it. First, he
shall sit, the Apostle does not mean local or corporal sitting, but his supreme
and settled power, rule and government set forth often by sitting, Psalm. 9. 4.
Ezekiel. 28. 2. Next, the place wherein he shall sit or rule, is, the temple of
God, not the Temple at Jerusalem (as some Papists affirm, though others of them
are forced to acknowledge the truth) for that Temple is ruined many years
since, Matthew. 24. 1, 2. the re-edifying whereof ever since (when several times
attempted as Histories show) has been signally impeded from Heaven. And though
it should be built again by Antichrist to be worshipped therein, yet it could
not be called the Temple of God but rather of the Devil: and therefore hereby
must be meant the Church of God, not so much the material house of stones and
timber, where the Church does meet, as the Christian Church of visible
professors, in which the Antichrist shall set himself as head and chief, and
which he shall tyrannically oppress. See the Temple of God taken in this sense,
1 Cor. 3. 16. 6. 16. And here, as I formerly said, the Apostle intermixeth the
second branch of the Antichrists arrogance, to wit, in relation to God, whereby
1. He shall manage his rule and government in the Church as God, pretending to
have no less than divine authority even the same with God and Christ, Rev. 13
-- 11 -- he shall show himself that he is God not professing so much in words
(as is already proved) but, as the Greek word signifies, showing or attempting
to show by his actions that he is no less to be esteemed of than God, while he
either attributes unto himself, or suffers others to ascribe unto him and
discharge toward him, such things as belong only to God, as divine titles,
worship and properties, Rev. 13. 4. Doct. 1. The spirit of God does not judge
of men so much by what they say, as by what they do, not by fair pretenses, but
by the reality of their practices, and wills us to judge accordingly: for,
though the Antichrist sit in the Temple of God, pretending he does all things
for Christ and at his command, yet because he does really and in deeds oppose
Christ, therefore he is called an opposite to him: who opposes himself. 2. An
opposi^e and adversary to God and Christ does seldom prove a faithful friend to
man, whosoever does once break his trust to the former, he will not spare to
trample upon the latter, if it may conduce for his interest and does not exceed
the reach of his power: for, upon the Antichrist his opposing himself to God
and Christ, does follow his arrogance to man, in exalting himself above the
supreme Civil Magistrate, even all that is called God or is worshipped. See the
exposition. 3. A spirit of pride and arrogance is insatiable and indefatigable,
and extremely daring: It must be all and above all, otherwise it is nothing,
and where it is attended with success, it attempteth things almost impossible,
and remains indesatigable until the height aspired at be once attained: for,
Antichrist in his arrogance, though he be but a false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13.
aspireth above Kings, yea Emperors, and cease not until he work himself up
above them all: he exalts himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped. 4. One degree of sin does so much make way for a further, that
those things which at the first men do stick at, will, through the continued
custom of some lesser degrees of those same evils, be easily swallowed at last
and without reluctance; for, Antichrists arrogance against man makes way for
his arrogance against God and hardneth him in it, as the Apostle insinuates,
while he says, so that he as God sits, making this his pride against God
follow upon the former. 5. The Antichrist is not to be sought without the
visible Church, neither among the Turks, as some do imagine, nor yet among the
Jews, as the Papists do dream, that Antichrist shall be one individual person
without succession, by Nation a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan, born of an Whore in
Babylon, a professed enemy to the very name of Christian Religion, shall draw the
Jews after him, build the Temple at Jerusalem, cause himself to be worshipped
therein as the true and living God, and yet be a secret worshipper of the
Devil, that he shall bring all Kingdoms under him, Reign precisely three years
and an half, kill Enoch and Elias the forerunners of Christ, and at last
himself be killed by Christ or an Angel forty five days before the day of
Judgment, which fable as it is maintained by them to defend their Pope from
being Antichrist, so it appears abundantly to be but a fabulous invention by
the whole current of this Prophecy, and especially by that which is here
affirmed, He shall sit in the Temple of God, and therefore is to be found, not
without, but, within the visible Church, even a Bishop claiming universal
authority over the whole Church, accompanied with an army of Priests as one of
their own Popes did maintain a little before the Antichrist did come to his
height. He shall sit, says Paul, in the Temple of God. See the Exposition.

Ver. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? The Apostle closes the former description by giving them a gentle and
indirect reproof for their oblivion and ignorance of the truths presently
delivered, as that which had unsettled them in the present truth concerning the
time of Christ's second coming, and hereby adds a weight to what he had now
written about the Antichrist, while he shows that it was not a doctrine newly
invented, but that he had formerly told them fully of it, and instructed them
in all its particular branches while he was with them at Thessalonica, Act. 17.
1, 2. and therefore they ought to have remembered it. Doct. 1. As the Church
enjoys now and then some peaceable times, wherein the Gospel has free
passage without any considerable check or restraint either from error or
persecution: So it is the duty both of Pastors and people to improve so rich a
mercy to the best advantage: and especially then the Lords servants should give
frequent warnings of future evils, that the people of God may fore-arm
themselves against an approaching storm; for, while the Church at Thessalonica
enjoyed some little respite from trouble, Paul does stir his time among them,
and gives them warning that the Churches trials under Antichrist was coming.
When I was yet with you I told you these things. 2. As it is a blameworthy
fault, too frequently incident unto the Lords people, to forget what necessary
truths have been taught unto them by their faithful Pastors, and especially
those which tend to make them shake off security and ease, and prepare for
eminent trials: So forgetfulness of this kind does encourage Satan to sow among
them tares of error, which otherwise he would have but little heart to venture
on, as despairing his pains should meet with the desired success; for, Paul
insinuates they had forgot, and reproves them indirectly for it, as that which
had encouraged Satan to brangle them about the time of Christ's coming, which
they could not have imagined to come in the present age, if they had but
remembered what he had taught them about the Antichrist. Remember ye not (says
he) I told you these things?

Ver. 6. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his
time. Because the Apostle had shown v. 3. that the Antichrist must be revealed
antecedently to Christ's second coming, he does now, in the third branch of this
prophecy, speak something of the time when he should be revealed, and of the
lets and impediments, which for the time did hinder his discovery: And first,
he shows he was not yet revealed, and therefore they were not to expect the
day of Christ's second coming so soon as they did, while he mentions something
which did then withhold, or stay and hinder his revealing and public appearing
in the height of his power for a season, the Lords overruling providence so
ordering that he might be revealed, not before, but, in his time, that is, the
time prefixed by God for that thing. Now by this stop and obstacle in the way
of Antichrists rising greatness must be meant some man, person or persons, as
appears from v. 7. where he is spoken of as such, only he who now lets; and
the general current of Interpreters, both Popish and Protestant, and many
ancient Fathers also, do agree that hereby is understood the supreme authority
and respect of the ancient Emperors in the Roman Empire, who by their eminent
temporal power did hinder the arising of Antichrists spiritual power over the
Christian world, and upon whose ruins the Antichrist was to arise, and to
possess their Throne and seat in the City situate upon seven hills, Rev. 17.
9. even Rome that great City which did then Reign over the Kings of the Earth,
Rev. 17. 18. and though the Apostle had expressed so much to them while he was
with them (for therefore he says they knew what did withhold) yet he does not
judge it convenient to express it by letter, lest thereby he had provoked the
Emperors of Rome against the Christians, when they should hear that a
professed Christian would overthrow the present government of the Empire, and
rise upon their ruin. Doct. 1. The wise Lord in his eternal decree has not
only condescended, among other things, upon the sad calamities and sharp trials
which he has thought fit to exercise his people by, but also upon the meanest
circumstance of all their troubles, even the very point of time, most
seasonable for Gods glory and his peoples good, wherein they shall break ^orth,
is weighed in the scales of his eternal wisdom, and accordingly fixed upon by
him; for, here Paul speaks of a due time prefixed by God, wherein the
Antichrist was to be revealed for the Churches trial, that he might be revealed
in his time. The word signifies a fit and seasonable nick of time. 2. Such is
the malice of Satan and of devilish instruments against the Church of Christ,
that they gladly would, and accordingly do endeavor to antedate the time of
the Churches trial prefixed by God, and to hasten forward the height of her
calamity with such celerity, as that the Lords people should be overwhelmed
with it, before they be forewarned of it, or get any time to make ready for it;
for, Antichrist would have revealed himself sooner than his due time, if
somewhat had not withheld. And now ye know what withholdeth, says he. 3. It
pleases the Lord, in mercy unto his people, to sift the violent course of
devils and men, to carry their counsels headlong, so that their hands cannot
fulfill their woeful enterprise of bringing the Churches trouble unto an height,
before the time appointed by God, as most fitting for it, do fully come: And
this he does by casting in such lets and impediments as prove insuperable
either by devils or men; for, while Antichrist does haste to be revealed, God
casts in a let to withhold of purpose, that he might not be revealed before
his due time. 4. Such absolute sovereign power has God to incline the wills of
men whithersoever he pleases, Prove. 21. 1. that he often makes even them who
are enemies to him to bring about his counsel for good to his Church and
people, beyond their own intention and purpose; for, God did so order that the
Roman Emperors, even while Heathens, did withhold the Antichrist from coming
to the height of his power and Tyranny over the Church, until his due time. 5.
Some points of truth, the publishing whereof are not of such necessity as to
countervaile the damage, may safely be concealed in prudence, when the
untimeous publishing of them in all probability will hasten persecution, and
mar either the internal or external peace of the Church. Such serpentine wisdom
does well consist with the Doves simplicity and Christian zeal, Matthew. 10. 16.
for, Paul does not here express that the Roman Empire by name should withhold,
until it were taken out of the way, lest he had thereby hastened persecution.
And now ye know what withholdeth, says he.

Ver. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now
lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way. He does here, first, give
a reason for what he presently spoke, that the Roman Empire did impede, not the
being, but, the revealing and discovery of the Antichrist and Antichristianism,
because they already had entered the Church, though not avow^dly, yet secretly.
Antichristian Dominion and Doctrine were even then working and advancing by
little and little toward an height, in so far as justification by works, Gal.
2 16. the worshipping of Angels, Col. 2. 18. abstinence from certain kinds of
meats, Col. 2. 21. and from marriage, and such like Antichristian Doctrines,
were then Preached, and desire of rule and pre-eminence among Churchmen over
their brethren, and the flock of Christ had then possessed the aspiring spirits
of some, 3 John 9. Which Antichristian doctrines and tyranny he calls a
mystery, or, a thing hid and secret, chiefly with respect to the Apostles
time, and the time following until Antichrist should be revealed, because
Antichristianism then, together with those other Heresies which made way for
it, did secretly and under a show of devotion and piety (Col. 2. 23.) advance
and promove from evil to worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. until they might end in the
almost total overthrow of Christian Religion at the last. Besides that
Antichristian doctrine and tyranny were still to remain a Mystery, even after
that Antichrist should come to his height, so that a man, without eye salve
from God, shall hardly discern it, because of the fair pretenses of love to
Christ, to truth and to piety under which he was to lurk; for therefore is he
called a false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13. and said to have two horns like a Lamb,
Rev. 13. 11. pretending to do all in Christ the Lambs name, and to make use of
his horns and power as his substitute and Vicar. And it is called a mystery of
iniquity, as in opposition to the doctrine of Christ, called a mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. so because Antichrists doctrine and way (however most
fair and specious in pretext, yet) in reality and deed should be nothing else
but error, untruth, impiety against God, Rev. 13. 5. and unrighteousness
against man, Rev. 13. 17. for the word rendered, iniquity, does express the
general nature of sin, and as it were all sin whatsoever, 1 John 3. v. 4. Next,
he shows how long the authority of the Roman Emperors succeeding one another
(called here he who lets) should prove a stop in the way of Antichrists
growing greatness, even until he be taken out of the way, that is, until their
power be so broken, as that they should not be able any longer to withstand
this arising spiritual dominion, and especially until they should leave Rome,
the seat of the Empire, fully void and free, wherein the Antichrist was to
erect his Throne, Rev. 17. 9. Doct. 1. So great an enemy is Satan to man's
salvation, that no sooner did Christ erect a Kingdom in the world for saving
sinners, but as soon, at least within a little, the devil did counter-work, by
endeavoring to erect an Antichristian Kingdom, thereby to render the Kingdom
of Christ, so far as in him lay, wholly useless: and therefore antiquity, so
much boasted of by Papists, is no undoubted mark of the true Church, for
Antichristianism is but by few years of latter standing that the Kingdom of
Christ under the Gospel; for, the mystery of iniquity does already work, says
he. 2. So subtle an enemy also is Satan, and so full of foresight, as that he
has many designs on foot at once, for effectuating his woeful and malicious
purpose, that so when one falls by, and becomes useless, another may hold
and carry on his work, so as the field be never fully empty: for, though the
Roman Emp^re at this time was fully employed for carrying on the design of
Satan in bearing down the Kingdom of Christ, yet foreseeing, or at least
fearing, that it would be taken out of the way, he begins in time to provide
himself of the Antichristian state, to carry on this woeful work in their room,
the mystery of iniquity does already work. 3. So subtle an enemy also is
Satan, as that, when his power and interest is not so great, as that he may
safely work above ground, and carry on his work avowedly in open view of all,
he contents himself to remain undiscovered, and rather to advance with a slow
pace and undiscernably, than by too much precipitancy to discover his design
untimeously, and consequently to expose it to crushing; for, while the Roman
Empire was in strength and vigor, and so would have crushed that design of
setting up an Antichristian state in Rome, he wrought in a mystery, The
mystery of iniquity does already work. 4. Satan and his instruments,
especially heretical spirits, are not always idle, when they do not kyth, but
usually are most active in carrying on their woeful work as they find access,
when they appear least; for, when Antichristianism durst not kyth above board,
yet it did work, the mystery of iniquity does already work. 5. The evil of
error, especially of Antichristian errors, and the height at which they
aimed, neither does, nor did kyth at first; and therefore it is no wonder,
though men, otherwise gracious in the primitive times, who were kept busy in
maintaining truth against other avowed errors of those times, did unawares,
and through inadvercence, contribute somewhat to countenance the rising of that
Episcopal seat in some steps of its usurped dominion over the Church of Christ,
which, though improved moderately and for the terror of heretics at first,
yet, in the Ages following, after the removal of these reverend and gracious
fathers, it did end in avowed Antichristian tyranny; for, Antichristianism did
for a long time work in a mystery. 6. Greatest Empires and worldly Monarchies
which caused their terror in the Land of the living (Ezekiel. 32. 23, 24.) have
their own fatal period, determined and foreknown by God longer than which they
cannot stand. The Lord giving hereby anevident demonstration of his justice,
while he visibly avengeth all those wrongs and insolences, which they by their
power and terror have acted toward others, especially his Church, and putting
a difference betwixt all earthly powers, and the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus
Christ under the Gospel, which shall never be destroyed, nor left unto other
people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all those Kingdoms, and it
shall be for ever, Dan. 2. 44. for, he says even the Roman Empire shall be
taken out of the way. 7. When the time prefixed by God, for bringing about a
work either of judgment or mercy, is fully come, all impediments and
hindrances, even the greatest, though flourishing Kingdoms and mighty Empires
which formerly did let it, are easily and with little ado removed: for, it is
here foretold that when the due time of discovering the Antichrist should come,
he who then did let, to wit, the Roman Empire, would be taken out of the way.

Ver. 8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, -- The Apostle does now
show the time when the Antichrist should be revealed, or discover himself by
exercising his open and avowed tyrannies over the Church of Christ; to wit,
t^en, when he who did le^t should be taken out of the way, that is, as was
before exponed, when the power of the Roman Empire should be weakened and
rendered wholly unable to resist the growing greatness of the Antichrist.
Neither is it necessary to condescend here upon a peremptory point of time, but
as the one through a long tract of time should decrease, so the other should
increase; and he calls the Antichrist here, That wicked one, or (as it is in
the Original) that lawless one, who should hold himself to be bound by no Law,
neither Gods Law, or man's Law, but above all Law, so as he may dispense with
Law, and interpret Law according to his pleasure. Doct. 1. That the great
Antichrist here foretold is already come, and has discovered himself by
exercising his open and avowed tyranny, is clear from this, that the very point
of time prefixed by God for his public appearing, is, the taking of that out
of the way which formerly did let him, to wit, the Roman Empire. Now sure it
is, that though the name of an Emperor and Empire does still remain, yet his
Imperial Power and authority is fully removed in Asia, in Africa, yea in Rome
it self the ancient seat of the Empire, where he has now no command at all,
but left it fully void for Antichrist to erect his Throne; neither has he any
thing left him in Europe proper to him as Roman Emperor, except the bare title
and some ceremonies and complements, with a little power and authority in
Germany, but far below that which the Roman Emperors of old enjoyed, and even
this little he cannot have but at the Popes pleasure, who must approve the
Emperors election, otherwise it is null. Now it was not the name or shadow,
but the power, majesty and authority of the Empire, and especially the
Emperors interest in Rome the ancient Imperial seat, which did withhold the
Antichrists rising greatness. And therefore that being removed, the only thing
which impeded his revealing is taken away, and consequently, Antichrist must be
revealed already, and not yet to come as Papists affirm: for, says he, and
then (to wit when he who now lets shall be taken out of the way v. -- 7.)
shall that wicked one be revealed.

Ver. -- 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming. Lest the Lords people had been above
measure terrified by what remains of this dreadful prophecy, concerning
Antichrists wonderful power and success, therefore the Apostle, before he
proceed further, does, in this fourth branch of the Prophecy, for the comfort
of the Godly, foretell Antichrists destruction; whereof he mentions three
degrees: first, the Lord Christ, who is the principal author of this
destruction, shall consume him, not in a moment, but, as the word signifies,
by little and little, piece and piece, weaken his respect and power in the
Church of God: and this with the spirit, or breath, of his mouth, or, the
powerful preaching of the Gospel by his sent Ministers, Rev. 14. 6, 7. who are
as Christ's mouth, through whom he breaths out the word of his everlasting
Gospel. (See the Preaching of the Gospel called the rod of his mouth and breath
of his lips, Isa. 11. 4.) Secondly, he shall destroy him, that is, as the word
signifies, utterly abolish, enervate and make void, to wit, his power and
respect, and that with the brightness of his second coming; for, the word
rendered, brightness, is usually joined with his coming to judgment; see Titus
2. 13. only because the last blow to be given to the Antichrists person seems
to precede the last day, Rev. 19. 20. therefore we must look on this last step
of his destruction, as containing diverse particular strokes in it, as first a
stroke upon Rome the seat of the beast, Rev. 18. 2. next, upon the person of
the beast, or Antichrist himself, Rev. 19. 20. after which it is like the
Antichristian Kingdom will want an head. Thirdly, upon all the relicts of
Antichristianism, and all who shall after that adhere to their errors and
superstitions, of which sort it is probable there will be some even until the
last day. And accordingly it is safest to conceive of Christ's second coming
with some latitude, so as it may mean not only the very last day, but also the
foregoing signs and evidences of its approaching, of which those glorious
dispensations of his power in overturning the beast himself and his seat shall
not be the least. Doct. 1. So tender is God of his believing people, that,
though he see it sometimes necessary to acquaint them with such things as will
put them to grief, yet, he postponeth no time in hasting to them with a timeous
and seasonable comfort, when he sees their hazard of fainting through
excessive fear and discouragement calls for it: for, he breaks in upon the
midst of this dreadful prophecy with the comfortable tidings of Antichrists
future destruction, whom the Lord shall consume, says he. 2. Our Lords most
glorious conquests and victories, in which most of himself is seen, are those
which are obtained not so much by outward force, by might or by power, Zech. 4.
6. as by the plain and powerful preaching of his mighty word, which being the
rod of his strength, Psalm. 110. 2. he does thereby brui^e his enemies, and
break them asunder; while he discovers to open view their doings, errors and
deceits wherein their great strength does lie, Heb. 4. 12. while he subdueth
some of their followers unto himself, Act. 9. 1, etc. and does vex and gall
others as seeing their power and reputation daily weakened by such a
contemptible mean, Rev. 16. 10, 11. which nevertheless they cannot hinder: for,
our Lord shall consume Antichrist by the spirit of his mouth. 3. Whatever power
or efficacy the word Preached has for bringing about the forementioned
effects, it proceeds not from any power or virtue in the word it self, Heb.
4. 2. or in them who do dispense it, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. but from the powerful
influence of the Lord Christ, through whom alone the Word preached is mighty to
overthrow all strong holds and cast down vain imaginations, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
for, he shows it is the Lord Christ who shall consume Antichrist by the
spirit of his mouth. 4. The Antichrist spoken of in Scripture, cannot be he
which Papists present us with, to wit, one individual person, by Nation a Jew,
etc. who shall be killed at an instant, either immediately by Christ himself,
or by an Angel at his direction; for, the Antichrist shall not be destroyed at
once but by little and little, and first cast as it were into a bed of
languishing, his total overthrow being to follow after, whom the Lord shall
consume and destroy. See the exposition. 5. Though the Lord might destroy his
strongest enemies at an instant, Isa. 37. 36. and when he begins also make an
end, 1 Samuel 3. 12. yet his usual way is to advance toward their total ruin by
certain degrees and steps; that somewhat of his glory may be seen in every
step, Psalm. 59. 11. that such of them as are appointed for mercy may, in the
mean time, be drawn to repentance, Romans 2. 4. and others rendered inexcusable,
Romans 2. 5. and that his people may be kept in exercise betwixt hopes and fears,
thanksgiving for what is already done, Psalm. 56. 12, 13. earnest prayer and
dependence upon God for completing of what does yet remain; Psalm. 56. 13. for,
it is here foretold that this shall be his way with the Antichrist, whom the
Lord shall consume by little and little, as the word signifies. 6. As there are
but small grounds of hope from Scripture that the word preached shall convert
the Antichrist, or work a reformation among his devoted followers, it shall
consume him, but not convert him; So where the word preached in life and power
does not prevail to the conversion of those who hear it now, it is an undoubted
forerunner of eternal destruction to be inflicted upon them by Christ the
Lord, when he shall come in glory to judge the world hereafter; for, because
the spirit of Christ's mouth does only consume and not convert the Antichrist,
Therefore shall Christ destroy him with the brightness of his coming. 7. As the
seeds of Antichristianism were early sown in the Church (see v. 7. doct. 1.) so
they are to continue long, even until Christ's second coming to judge the world;
and therefore the Church is not to dream of having any time fully free from
trouble of all sorts until then, neither is that perpetuity and long
continuance of doctrine publicly professed through many succeeding ages,
whereof the Papists boast, an infallible mark of a true Church; for somewhat of
Antichrist and Antichristianism will be in the world so long as it last. Whom
the Lord shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

Ver. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders. The Apostle, in the first branch of this
Prophecy, returns to speak more fully of Antichrists coming, whereby is meant
not only his first advancement and raising to his power, but the tract of his
government in defending, ruling and enlarging of his Kingdom, which is
described from his auxiliary forces, helps, or means, by the assistance whereof
he should procure to himself a general respect and esteem in the Christian
world; and those are three, whereof two are in this verse, first, the working,
or, as the word signifies, the utmost efficacy and most powerful operation of
Satan, who should employ the height of his great power, piercing knowledge,
malicious wit, indefatigable diligence, and mavelous activity for supporting
and enlarging of Antichrists Kingdom. The second help is all power and signs,
etc. or power of signs, by an usual flower of speech expressing one thing by
two words, and the meaning is that Satan should assist him, and his officers
under him, with a power and fa^ulty of working signs and wonders for
confirmation of his tyranny and false doctrine, Rev. 13. 13, 14. and first he
calls this power all power, not as if either Satan or Antichrist were
omnipotent, or had power to do what they please, Job. 1. 12. Act. 4. 28. but
it is all created power, or the utmost of what created skill and understanding
can reach. 2. He calls them lying wonders, or, as it is in the Original,
wonders of lies or falsehood, which agrees both to signs and wonders, as indeed
they are usually taken for one and the same thing in different respects, Romans
15. 19. Mark. 13. 22. and they are false and lying, because some of them were
to be but counterfeit and feigned, mere juglings, deceiving the outward senses,
and others of them, (though truly done and breeding marvel and astonishment in
beholders, who know not the manner and way how they are done, yet) should not
be true miracles as being only effects of some secret natural causes, for only
God can produce true Miracles, or works exceeding the reach of all natural
causes, Psalm. 72. 18. 77. 13. Romans 4. 17. And lastly, all of them should be
wrought by Satan, and his instruments to confirm false and lying doctrines, and
therefore are justly called lying wonders. Doct. 1. Though Satan's power is not
illimited, Job 2. 6. neither can he infallibly determine the wills of men to
follow his suggestions, Job. 1. 12. with 22. yet as he has no small power upon
this sublunary world (see upon Ephesians. 2. v. 2. doct. 8.) yea and great influence
upon men's actions by presenting them with such tentations as are most agreeable
unto their temper, 2 Samuel 11. 2. and importuning them uncessantly with inward
suggestions and representations unto their fancy of* such things as may most
conduce for his purpose; Prove. 4. 16. So such is his enmity to Christ's Kingdom,
and malice to man's salvation, that he exercises the utmost of all his power
can reach to bear down the one and impede the other: and therefore it is no
wonder to see some of those who are engaged under him in that woeful work,
somewhat elevated above the sphere of ordinary activity, skill, and diligence;
for, he shows that Satan's working or utmost activity, shall be employed against
Christ for promoting Antichrists Kingdom. Whose coming is after the working of
Satan. 2. It is a piece of necessary wisdom in the Lords people, in forecasting
trials, not to extenuate what hazard is in them, but to look upon them as they
are clothed with all their terrifying circumstances, whereby they may prepare
for the uttermost before it come; Job 3. 25, 26. for, the spirit of God seeeth
it necessary to present this trial under Antichrist to the Church in its full
terror. Whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power, etc. 3.
Satan does set himself, in furthering the condemnation of sinners, to imitate
Christ in many of those things which are done by him in bringing about the
salvation of the elect; as Christ erects a Kingdom in the world whereof himself
is head, Psalm. 2. 6. So Satan has his Kingdom in opposition to Christ's,
whereof Antichrist is the visible head, Rev. 13. 11, 12. As Christ does impart
the influences of his spirit unto his servants, whereby they work effectually
in those who are saved, Col. 1. 29. So Satan to the utmost of his power does
act his instruments, whereby through Gods permission they work effectually in
those who perish, Rev. 18. 13, 14. As Christ did confirm his doctrine by
miracles, and exercise his power in his servants in working miracles mediately
by them for that end, Heb. 2. 3, 4. So does Satan confirm his erroneous
doctrine in Antichrists Kingdom, by working signs and wonders, and sometimes
lends his power to Antichrist and his Vassals to work the like: for, he shows
that Satan does help Antichrist to and in his Kingdom by his effectual working,
and by a power of signs and wonders. 4. However Satan set himself to imitate
Christ thus, for blinding the eyes of men, and making them believe that his
Kingdom, Ministers, and Doctrines and Miracles do differ nothing from Christ's,
yet he comes not so far up to his copy but the Lords people, who have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil, may find a difference betwixt
what is Satan's and what is Christ's; for his wonders are, and will be found to
be but lying wonders.

Ver. 10. And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. In
this Verse he, first, expresses the third mean and help which Antichrist was
to make use of for heightning his respect and credit in the Christian world,
all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, where by unrighteousness, it seems,
must be mainly meant his unrighteous false doctrine, because v. 12. it is
opposed to truth, as also 1 Cor. 13. 6. and it is so called, because it should
tend to make the receivers of it injurious to God, unjust to men, and cruel to
themselves. And by deceiveableness is meant all manner of deceits, tricks,
strong and cunning persuasions, which he should make use of to make the world
believe his unrighteous errors to be pure and innocent truths, such as
sophistical disputations, Col. 2. 8. pretexts to piety and devotion, Matthew. 23.
14. baits of riches, pleasures and preferments, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. boasts and
threatenings, Rev. 13. 17. and such like. Next, he enters the sixth branch of
this prophecy wherein he speaks to the Antichrists great success by the
former means and helps; and for the comfort of the Godly he astricts this
success unto a certain kind of men, who should be his subjects and sworn
vassals. And those he describes, first, from their everlasting state, they
shall perish eternally, to wit, they, who should join with him in all his
errors, even those who strike most at the foundation, and persist in them
obstinately and finally without repentance, Rev. 13. 18. and 18. 4. which holds
especially in them who would adhere to him after that the Lord should discover
his damnable doctrines and tyranny by the light of the Gospel, Rev. 14. 6, 7,
8, 9, etc. Next, from the cause of their destruction, to wit, when all of them
should have an offer of saving truth, some in one measure, some in another, yet
through want of love to it they would not receive it, that is, they would
reject it, for more is intended than is expressed by this word; whence he hints
at the conclusion which he intends to prove, to wit, that they could not be
saved, but behoved to perish, while he shows that receiving of the truth in
love is a necessary antecedent of salvation. Doct. 1. It is the nature and way
of such as are ringleaders of errors, to find out and prosecute all possible
means and ways, which may in any measure tend to make their tenets plausible,
and pass for truths; that what is wanting to their errors in the point of
divine authority, and sanctified reason, may be supplied, by their pretenses to
piety, antiquity, by their gratifying of men's lusts, sophistical disputations,
passionate persuasions, and all such other devices, which serve to blind the
eyes even of the wise, that they cannot so well discern betwixt the truth and
falsehood of what they hear; for, it is here foretold that Antichrist should
come with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, or all manner of deceits to
persuade the receiving of his unrighteous doctrine. 2. Ringleaders of error
are usually men of little conscience, in so far as they stand not much upon the
nature and kind of the means they use, whether they be right or wrong, if so
they can serve their present design: for, Antichrist does use all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness. 3. So tender is God of his peoples comfort,
that, for the most part, those Scriptures which terrify most are so contrived
as to carry with them an antidote of comfort against hopeless discouragement in
their bosom: for, this terrifying Scripture which speaks of Antichrists future
success, has in it a comfort, to wit, that his power and success is limited
only to reprobates, even them that perish. 4. Though even the Godly elect may
be seduced to error for a time, Phil. 3. 15. yet they cannot arrive at such an
height of malicious blindness, as against all means of their reclaiming to
remain obstinate in the bulk and most fundamental of Antichristian errors, and
to persist in their obstinacy unto death: for, it is here foretold he should so
prevail only in those who perish. 5. When foulest and most dangerous errors
are carried on with fair pretexts, subtle insinuations, pithy persuasions, they
will not want a multitude of blind followers: for, Antichristian untruths being
carried on by all deceiveableness, are received generally by those who perish.
6. Though the Lord has no regard to the future sin of reprobates, as the cause
of their reprobation, Romans 9. 11, 12. yet he actually condemns none of those,
no not the Antichrists most active followers, whose sin is not the cause of
their condemnation; and therefore none shall have reason to complain that they
do perish unjustly and without a cause: for, the cause why they perish is here
expressed, because they received not the love of the truth. 7. Among all the
sins of a people professing Christ, which deserve condemnation, and for which
reprobates shall actually be condemned, the contempt of the Gospel is the first
and chief; It is a sin against the remedy of sin, and which provokes the Lord
in his holy justice to give up the person guilty to the power and slavery of
several other sins; so that uncleanness, murders, perjuries, etc. are but
streams flowing from this woeful fountain; for, he mentions none of their
other sins as the cause of their destruction but this alone, because they
received not the love of the truth, says he. 8. If even the least report of
Gospel truths and of Christ be not received and made welcome, it is a sin
sufficient to provoke the Lord to plague the person guilty in such a manner as
he shall never recover, but undoubtedly perish; and therefore how much more
when Christ and the Gospel is fully and plainly taught, and yet the gracious
offers of mercy therein contained are abused and slighted? for, it is but a
small and passing report of truth and Christ, which many of Antichrists
followers do hear, being compared with what we now enjoy, and yet they perish
because they received not the truth in love. 9. It is not sufficient to receive
the truth, because the politic Laws of the Land enjoin so much, or upon any
other account, but from love to it; otherwise Satan, Antichrist, or some
suitable tentation from any other art, will easily prevail to make him who has
so received it slip from it; for, they perish, and are given over to
Antichrists delusions as appears from v. 11. because they received not the love
of the truth. 10. There is no middle betwixt Heaven and Hell, salvation and
condemnation: If a man attain not the former, he cannot by any means escape the
latter, and if he do not walk in the way to Heaven, he does ipso facto, and
without any further, post swiftly forward to hell and condemnation; for, he
proves they could not but perish and be condemned, because they refused to walk
in the way wherein they might be saved, even because they received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved.

Ver. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie. He does here further describe the v^ssals of Antichrists
Kingdom, thirdly, from an higher degree of their sin. They would not only
reject truth, but also believe a lie, that is, give a firm assent, without any
contrary doubt, to grossest untruths and errors, as to the very truths of God.
Which their sin is set forth from a necessary antecedent of it, the Lord his
sending them strong delusion, for this cause, to wit, for their not receiving
the love of the truth spoken of v. 10. where by strong delusion or (as the word
does signify) efficacy of error and seduction, is not meant error it self,
but the prevalency and pith of error, so that when tentations to error should
be propounded by Satan and his emissaries, they would undoubtedly prevail; and
this efficacy of error is attributed to Gods sending, not as if the Lord did
incite or persuade men to believe errors, for he forbids and condemns them, 2
Pet. 3. 17. but because he not only gives loose reins unto Satan to use his
power of seduction against them, 1 King. 22. 22. but also raineth snares upon
them, and actively brings about many things in his providence, which being in
themselves good, are yet stumbled on by them in their corruption, so, as they
are thereby furthered to close with the tentation, Job 21. 7, etc. with 14.
withholds his grace whereby they might resist tentations, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. yea,
and actually in his judgment withdraws, and after a sort extinguisheth that
strength and light which he had formerly given, and they abused, Matthew. 25. --
29. so that they cannot but succumb when they are tempted. Doct. 1. It is not
inconsistent with the Lords holiness, but most agreeable to his unspotted
justice, to punish sin with sin, by giving the sinner up, in the way mentioned
in the exposition, to the slavery and tyranny of that sin wherein he so much
delights; for, he says, for this cause, to wit, for their former sin, God
shall send them strong delusion. 2. As one degree of sin makes way for an
higher; So there cannot be a more terrible judgment inflicted upon any for
former sin, than that he be given up of God to the power of it in time to come;
a judgment so much the more dreadful, as the party smitten by it is not
sensible of it; Exodus 7. 22, 23. for, this is the terrible judgment here
denounced, for this ^ cause God shall send them strong delusion. 3. That an
error, when it is vented, becomes mightily prevalent, in making many to close
with it and embrace it, proceeds not from the power of Satan's tentations
only, who has not of himself an irresistible influence upon the minds of men,
Job 1. 12. with 22. but also and mainly from men's own corruption and blindness,
and the Lords judicial up-giving of them to it formerly mentioned, which
holds by parity of reason in Satan's tentations to any other sin; for, the
efficacy of error is here spoken of as a judgment sent by God, God shall send
them strong delusion. 4. Where Gospel truths are not received in love and made
use of as they ought, absurd and monstrous errors will be ere long received,
and believed for truths; for, because they received not the love of the truth,
they are given up of God to believe a lie. 5. When the Lord, in his holy
justice, gives loose reins unto Satan to tempt a sinner, and withdraws from
him his restraining grace, there is no sin so irrational or absurd to which the
man so plagued of God will not run, if it were even to receive most gross
absurdities for divine truths, and to believe them with a kind of firm assent
beyond all doubt or suspicion; for, their believing lies is here foretold as
the consequence of Gods sending them strong delusion, even that they should
believe a lie.

Ver. 12. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. He describes the Antichrists followers, fourthly,
from that judgment which follows upon their sin, and is intended to be
brought about by God as the end of his sending them strong delusion; for, the
context, showing the result of this purpose from the former, implies so much;
and the judgment is, they shall all be damned, to wit, all guilty, in the way
mentioned upon v. 10. of the former sins; which, for further clearing of Gods
justice, he does here again repeat, 1. That which is spoken of v. 10. their not
believing the truth, after they had heard it; to wit, the truth of the Gospel,
(see the Gospel so called, and for what reasons upon Ephesians. 1. 13. doct. 4.)
Next, that which is expressed v. 11. here called their taking pleasure in
unrighteousness, that is, false and unrighteous doctrine (see upon v. 10.) to
which they did not only give their assent and approbation, but also did find
much inward satisfaction, and had an inexpressible delight and pleasure in it
(as the word signifies) and in all the woeful consequences of unrighteousness
both to God and man, to which it tended; and therefore they should be without
excuse, and dying impenitent, be damned without remedy. Doct. 1. Though some
sins and errors be a necessary result of Gods judicial giving up a man to the
power of tentation and delusion, as said is; yet they cease not to be sin,
obliging the guilty party to undergo eternal wrath, no less than any other sin;
and that because their former sins have justly procured that they should be so
given up of God: and though God in his justice does punish sin with sin; yet
the sinner does always delight in sin, as being the matter of his voluntary
choice; for, he shows they shall be damned for believing a lie, though the Lord
being provoked, as said is, by their former sins, had sent them strong
delusion, and that because they took pleasure in unrighteousness. That they all
might be damned, says he. 2. It is a manifest untruth that every man shall be
saved in his own Religion, and that it is no hazard for a man to be of any
Religion, if so he follow his conscience, believing what he thinks to be truth,
and walk according to the principles of that Religion which he professes and
believes to be of God; for, here it is foretold that the devout followers of
Antichristian lies, though they did believe them to be truths, yet, should be
damned. That they all might be damned. 3. Multitudes of sinners concurring in
one and the same guilt does neither lessen the guilt nor make God either,
through fear abate, or from pity moderate the deserved punishment; for, here
it is foretold that they shall all be damned. 4. That a man do savingly believe
the Gospel, it is not sufficient that he assent to the truth of it in his
judgment, but he must also embrace and receive the good things offered by it
in his will and affections, and that from love to it; for, that which he called
the receiving of truth in love, v. 10. he calls believing the truth here. Who
believed not the truth. 5. As no men, no not the worst of men, become extremely
evil at first, but by certain steps ascend toward that height of sin at which
they do at last arrive; So when a man does not only commit sin, but takes
pleasure in it, makes his boast of it, it speaks him at the very height of
sin, and near a dreadful downfall in the pit of condemnation; if Gods mercy by
giving speedy repentance prevent it not; for, several steps are here employed,
their not receiving truth, their believing untruth, and the height of all, and
nearest cause of their being damned, is, their taking pleasure in
unrighteousness. 6. A man deluded with error may for a time find much seeming
peace of conscience, quietness of spirit, soul-satisfaction and delight flowing
from those erroneous doctrines which he believes for truth: and the more of
this kind a man does find in the way of error, he is the more deluded, and his
guilt the greater; for, their taking pleasure in unrighteousness, or in
unrighteous doctrine, is spoken of as the utmost effect of that strong delusion
sent them, v. 11. and the highest step of their sin.

A necessary Appendix containing the application of this Prophecy, and
discovering who this Antichrist is.
HAving thus explained this dark Prophecy, and made such doctrinal application
of it as every verse apart did offer; it now remains that for the more full
understanding of the present Scripture, a discovery be made, who is this man of
sin, that great Antichrist, whom the spirit of God does here so fully describe;
which the event, time, and experience, the surest commentaries for
understanding dark prophesies, have now made so fully clear, that those who
have eyes may see the truth of that assertion which has been maintained almost
in every age, and now by all the Reformed Divines. Whereby it is affirmed, That
the Pope of Rome, ever since he usurped that fullness of power in all causes
both humane and Divine which he has now for a long time enjoyed, has been,
and yet is that man of sin, that Child of perdition, the very Antichrist here
described; And that because all the characters of this man of sin, and every
passage of this prophecy is verified in the Pope, as shall be made appear by
taking a review of every verse.

And first, The third verse is verified in him; for, first, the Church of Rome,
whereof the Pope is head, has made defection from the doctrine of faith, and
purity of worship held forth in the Gospel, as appears from all the
controverted points betwixt us and them; which apostasy did spread it self
over the face of the whole visible Church, even as the apostasy here foretold
to be under the Antichrist, except there come a falling away. 2. The Pope did
not pretend to such power over the* Church of Christ, as he now exercises, in
Paul's time. Their own Historians grant he claimed not the title of universal
Bishop, nor power of both swords, and supreme authority over general counsels,
until some centuries of years were past. Even as the Antichrist of whom it is
here foretold, he had not then revealed himself by exercising open tyranny over
the Church of Christ* And that man of sin be revealed, says he. 3. The Pope is
a man, though not an individual person without succession, yet de jure always
but one at one and the same time, and a continued series and succession of men
in one and the same Chair, driving forward one and the same design, even in
that sense wherein I proved in the Exposition that the Antichrist is here
called a man in the singular number. 4. The Pope is a man of sin, first, in his
own person. It is almost incredible what monsters of men, for horrible crimes
of murder, adultery, simony, sorcery, incest, sodomy, even Popish Historians do
relate many of their own Popes to have been. 2. In causing others to sin, in so
far as he not only persuades and forces men to Idolatry and superstition,
under the name of commanded worship, as Jeroboam did, but also for money
dispenses in some cases with murder, fornication, incest, and sells pardons
for any sin unto those who have sufficient money wherewith to buy them. This is
not denied by themselves, even as the Antichrist who is here called the man of
sin. Fifthly, The Pope is the Son of perdition: First, one who is destinate to
destruction himself, as the Godless life and monstrous sins of many Popes have
declared them to be, whatever the Lord may do in mercy to some, and those but
very few particular Popes, whose lives have not been so grossly vicious as the
rest, if so he have given them repentance for their abominable errors. 2. One
who destroys others both in their souls by damnable doctrines, idolatries and
superstitions, and in their bodies in so far as his cruel persecutions, upon
men and women, for conscience have, for length of time, multitudes of those who
have suffered by him, and the cruel manner of his persecuting, by exquisite
tortures, bloody massacres, surpassed far all other persecutions, that ever
were; Even as the Antichrist, who is here called in those same respects the son
of perdition.

Secondly, whatever is affirmed of the Antichrist v. 4. is verified in the
Pope: For, first, under pretense and color of friendship, he is an eminent
opposite and adversary to Christ, as in many other things, so, chiefly, in his
threefold office. 1. In his Kingly office, while he destroys his subjects,
dispenses with his Laws, makes them of none effect by his traditions,
enacteth Laws of his own, to bind the conscience, of equal authority with, yea
and some of them point blank opposite unto, the laws of Christ, as in his
forbidding marriage to Churchmen, discharging the use of the Cup at the Lords
Supper. 2. In his Priestly office, while he makes himself an high Priest under
the new Testament, denies the fullness of Christ's satisfaction and
intercession, alleging that they must be supplied by the merits and
intercession of the Virgin Mary, Saints and Angels, and teaching people to give
them Religious worship for that end. 3. In his prophetical office, while he
teaches that the Scriptures are imperfect, and as a false Prophet does teach
contrary to what was taught by Christ, in the doctrine of merit, purgatory,
indulgences, work of supererogation, etc. so that he opposes Christ in all his
offices, and this for a greater length of time, with more universal success,
and more formidable force, than ever any heretic did before him; even as the
Antichrist, who is here said to oppose himself. Secondly, The Pope exalts
himself above all Kings and Emperors, while he teaches he has absolute power
to dispose of Kingdoms and Empires to whom he will, at least in order to the
Churches good, and actually has dethroned Kings and other Magistrates,
absolving their Subjects from their oath of allegiance; does make the Emperor
to hold his stirrup when he is to ride, and will have him to count it a favor
to have access to kiss his feet, yea and sometimes has trampled upon the
Emperors neck, being humbly prostrate before him to beg his favor and
reconciliation with him (all which are avowed and granted) Even as the
Antichrist, of whom it is here said, he exalts himself above all that is
called God, or is worshipped. See the Exposition. Thirdly, The Pope, in
managing his rule and government over the Church of God, pretends to no less
than divine authority, even the same with God and Christ, whose great
Vicegerent and Vicar General on earth he gives out himself to be. Besides, it
is expressly affirmed by Popish writers that the Pope sitting in and teaching
from his Chair, cannot err, and his determinations are of equal certainty with
the doctrine of Christ himself. Even as the Antichrist, of whom it is here
said, that he shall carry himself as God. Fourthly, The Pope does sit and
exercise an absolute fixed and illimited power of Government over a society of
men which once were Gods spiritual Temple and Church, and do yet bear that
name, and are so in effect, if we speak of that small remnant which in all ages
the Lord made to keep their garments clean from soul-ruining Antichristian
errors, or if we speak of the whole bulk and body of them, not absolutely,
but, as being compared with Turks* Jews and Heathens, in so far as they still
retain some relicts of a Church, as the written word, Sacraments, Ordination,
etc. though miserably corrupted by false glosses; a number of Superstitious,
Idolatrous, and Antichristian additions; In which respects the Church and See
of Rome may be called the Temple and Church of God, wherein the Pope does sit
and rule, even as it is here foretold of Antichrist, that he should sit in the
Temple of God. Fifthly, The Pope attempts to show that he is in nothing less to
be esteemed of than God, by taking and suffering to be ascribed unto himself,
1. Divine titles, as our Lord God the Pope, universal Pastor, chief
High Priest; Head of the Catholic Church. 2. Divine worship, as Prostration to
him, Adoration of him, upon opinion of some transcendent sanctity in him, and
that he has fullness of power to forgive sins, bestow Heaven, and damn to Hell.
3. Divine properties, as that he cannot err, is the Judge of all men, and
himself can be judged by no man, has power, as Christ's Vicar, to dispense with
all Law, can forgive not only sins past, but for a lease of years yet to come;
even as the Antichrist, of whom it is here foretold, he should show himself
that he is God.

Thirdly, Whatever is affirmed of the Antichrist, v. 6, 7. is verified also in
the Pope: for, first, It was the Popes power, the growth whereof in Rome and
Christendom was hindered by the Roman Empire, and which advanced by little and
little toward its full height, as the credit, power and authority of that
Empire did weaken and decay. The truth whereof is abundantly confirmed by
History, and acknowledged by Papists themselves. Even as it is here foretold
that the credit and authority of the Roman Empire did for a long time retard
the Antichrists growing greatness, and that the Antichrists power should rise
upon the ruins of that Empire. Ye know what withholdeth that he might be
revealed, and he will let until he be taken out of the way. See the
Exposition. Secondly, A great many of Popish errors were already hatched in
the Apostles time, as that men are not justified by faith only, but also by
works, Gal. 2. 16. that we must commend our selves to God by the Ministry of
Angels, and for that end give them religious worship, Col. 2. 18. that we must
abstain from certain kinds of meat, Col. 2. 21. and Churchmen from marriage;
that we ought to subject our selves to the wills of men in the use of things
indifferent, Col. 2. 20. and that superiority of power in one Churchman over
the rest is a thing convenient and desirable, 3 John 9. which, and such like
Popish errors, did then work secretly and under ground, toward that height of
credit and authority which they afterward attained. Even as it is here shown
that the mystery of Antichristian tyranny and doctrine did work already in
Paul's time. Thirdly, popish errors, though most gross in themselves, yet are
covered over with such fair pretenses, that hardly can the poison which lurketh
in them be at first discerned, unity is pleaded for, as the foundation of their
Hierarchy, a pretext is made of humility, for pressing the invocation of Saints
and Angels, and of sending our suits by their mediation to God, Their doctrine
of merit and justification by works, and not by faith only, is pressed as the
only mean of exciting to diligence in duty, and especially in the works of
charity, They press Pilgrimages, Penances, Abstinence from meats, voluntary
poverty, vows to lead a single life, under the plausible pretexts of attaining
thereby to more than ordinary sanctity, mortification of the flesh, and such
like; Even as the Antichristian doctrine and tyranny is here called a mystery,
The mystery of iniquity does already work: See the Exposition. And Fourthly,
Whatever Popish doctrine, as it is popish, pretend to, of more than ordinary
sanctity, yet the native issue and result of all in those who do receive it, is
nothing else but impiety and iniquity. Their vows of voluntary poverty do, in
the nature of the thing, drive them to idleness, beggary, and to live upon the
labors of others: vows of leading a single life are accompanied with
Fornications, Adulteries and all manner of uncleanness, in those who have not
the gift of continency. Their vows of blind and absolute obedience to their
superiors do drive them to murder Kings, and perpetrate other most desperate
villainies, and to think they merit Heaven by so doing, if their superiors do
enjoin them. Their strictest Penances, Pilgrimages and Fastings from certain
meats, on certain days; their auricular Confessions, do cast them loose to
live at a random in other things, as thinking they have already made
satisfaction to God by those things, and knowing how to make up with a little
pains whatever yet is lacking, even as the Antichristian doctrine is here
called a mystery of iniquity.

Fourthly, Whatever is affirmed of the Antichrist v. 8. is also verified in the
Pope: for, first, it is maintained by his flattering followers, that he is
above Law, takes Law from none, and gives Law unto all: that he may dispense
with Gods Law, and of wrong make right by correcting and changing the Law, Even
as the Antichrist who is here said to be that wicked, or lawless one. 2. The
Pope, after long wrestling in the dark, has at last, some hundreds of years
since, attained to an incredible height of power in the whole Christian world,
by his being possessed with the power of both swords, but chiefly in the City
and Territories of Rome, where he is absolute Lord and Master, ever since the
Roman Empire did lose all interest in Europe, as History does make clear: Even
as the Antichrist is said here to be revealed immediately after the weakening of
the Roman Empire. And then shall that wicked be revealed. To which add, that
seeing the Antichrist must be already come, as I proved in doct. 1. from this
verse, what power is there, or has been, to whom all his characters here and
elsewhere mentioned do agree so well as to the Pope? 3. Since the first
beginning of Reformation from Popery, the power and credit of the Pope has
been much wasted, and by little and little consumed by the powerful Preaching
of the Gospel, through which his Errors, Tyranny, Superstitions and Idolatry
have been discovered to the world and openly disavowed by the Reformed
Churches: even as it is here foretold that the Lord shall consume Antichrist by
the breath of his mouth. 4. However the power and credit of the Pope and of his
erroneous doctrine be much weakened, yet so many and strong are those Engines
which he employeth to defend his tottering Kingdom, and so small ground has
been gained upon him these sixty years last past, that there is little
appearance he shall meet with a full and final overthrow in haste, or before
the time of Christ's second coming; even as it is here foretold, there will be
somewhat what of Antichrist in the world until then, which Christ shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming.

Lastly, Whatever is affirmed of Antichrist, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. is also verified
in the Pope; for, first, Histories do testify a great many Popes have come to
the Popedom by Sorcery and express covenanting with the Devil for that end, by
Simony, by poisoning their Predecessors, or others who stood in their way, and
by such other devilish arts, wherein, as in several other things, besides
those, Satan has been extremely active to advance Popes and Popery; Even as it
is here affirmed of Antichrist, whose coming is after the working of Satan. 2.
A singular mean and help by which the Pope, and Popish doctrine, have come to
credit and respect in the Christian world, is, signs and wonders alleged to be
wrought by him, and his followers: this being their usual way, when other
proofs do fail, to fly to miracles to confirm their superstitions and
Idolatries, so that there is scarcely any famous Church, Image or statue, or
^ounder of any new Religious Order, or any Monastery or Religious place which
is not famous by some one or other miracle, and some of them for many reported
to be done by them, and in them, yea they make the glory of working Miracles a
mark of the true Church: Even as it is here foretold of Antichrist, that his
coming, credit and advancement, should be with all power signs, and wonders.
Thirdly, Popish Miracles are all but false and lying wonders, given out and
supposed only to be such, in so far as, 1. Some of them are but mere Juglings
and found to be such, as when they affirm their Images to have spoken, issued
drops of blood, and sweat, that poor souls have come creeping and crying out of
Purgatory, bemoaning their case, which have either been effectuated immediately
by Satan, or by subtle conveyance and sleight of hand, which has sometimes
been discovered, and the spirit taken, whipped and laid in the stocks for his
imposture. 2. Some of them have been truly done, but not true Miracles, as not
exceeding the power of all natural causes, as when they affirm that some
diseases have been cured by the touch of their superstitious Relicts; now how
easy is it for Satan to take off and cure a disease, which, through Gods
permission, he has laid on? especially seeing many such like seemingly
miraculous cures have been effectuated by devilish art among the Heathens. And
3. All of them are made use of to confirm their erroneous doctrines (...)
superstitious practices, as their worshipping of Relicts, prayer for the dead,
invocation of Saints, Purgatory, etc. and consequently all of them but false
and seeming Miracles; even as it is here foretold of Antichrist, that his
coming should be -- with signs and lying wonders. Fourthly, The Popish
doctrine, wherein it differs from the doctrine of the Reformed Churches, is
nothing but an heap of untruths, driving the maintainers of it to impiety
against God, in Idolatry, superstition, breach of vows, and perjuries, and to
unrighteousness against man in unnaturality, disobedience to Parents, and
lawful superiors, under religious pretexts, in preferring Fornication and
Uncleanness to the bed undefiled in Marriage, in justifying Jesuitical
equivocations, and speaking, yea and swearing untruths, and such like, which
has been abundantly made out by the Reformed Divines in their writings to that
purpose: even as the doctrine of the Antichrist is here called unrighteousness,
or a doctrine of untruths tending to unrighteousness and sin of all sorts.
Fifthly, The Pope does not avow or profess himself an enemy to truth and
Christian Religion, but rather the prime pillar of it, even Christ's Vicar on
earth, the servant of the servants of Christ, by which and such like specious
pretexts he has undermined truth, and established error in its place: even as
it is here foretold of the Antichrist that he should not openly avow his
doctrine to be contrary to Gospel truth, but labor by deceitful tricks and
fair pretexts to make the world believe his doctrine to be truth, even by all
de^^^veableness of unrighteousness. Sixthly, Innumerable almost are those
subtle devices and deceiving juglings, which are made use of under Papacy to
persuade the world to embrace their erroneous and unrighteous doctrine, such
as, strong and false alledgances of their unity among themselves under one
head, of the antiquity of their doctrine, the consent of Fathers to it, the
universality of it, which is no more in effect but that all the world did once
wonder after the Beast, Rev. 13. 3. Besides that their doctrine and worship is
so framed, as to comply with men's corrupt Lusts, and to fit every humor. If
men be lazy idlers, they place them in Monasteries, if ambitious or covetous,
there are places of preferment and profit to catch them; if voluptuous and
licentious, they may for a little money have pardons and dispensations, if
quiet and cannot endure the worlds trouble, there is a solitary life in some
Hermitage prepared for them: If a man dislike his wife, let him enter Religious
Orders, and he is delivered from her; If of a pragmatick stirring disposition,
there are employments of compassing Sea and Land to gain a proselyte waiting
for him. There are flatteries, and taking allurements for men of spirit, who
will not be boasted, and boasts and threats of curses and excommunications for
men of a more folding temper: In a word, whatever a man's humor can fancy,
there is somewhat in Popery to satisfy it, and make men believe of themselves
that they are singularly devout, when they do but feed their carnal humors;
Even as it is here foretold of the Antichrist that he should come not with
some, but, all deceiveableness of unrighteousness. Seventhly, Though the power
of the Pope, for many ages, was most dreadful and absolute through all Europe,
yet it was not unlimited; there being always some in every age (as Papists
themselves do sometimes confess and History makes clear) who never yielded to
take on his yoke, but one way or other testified against his Tyrannical
Usurpation, and damnable soul-destroying doctrine: even as it is here foretold
that some should be exempted from the Antichrists defection, for he was only to
prevail in those who perish. Eighthly, The members of the Popish Church had in
all ages the truth of the Gospel tendered to them, at the first beginning of the
Popes apostasy and open tyranny more clearly, in following ages more darkly,
what, by somewhat they heard of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, etc.
expounded to them, according to the custom, at their great Festivals, and what
by the testimony or report of that testimony which dying Martyrs or other
Confessors gave to truth, whereof there were some almost in every age: and yet
they did not receive or believe the truth, especially those truths relating to
the authority, sufficiency, and perfection of Scripture, to the fullness of
Christ's satisfaction and merit, and the complete discharging of all his
offices, the justification of sinners by the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them and received by faith alone, and such other truths controverted betwixt
them and us: yea neither believe they any truth because of the authority of God
revealing it in Scripture, but because of the Popes Authority, which only makes
Scripture to be Scripture, and worthy of credit unto them, and therefore cannot
be said to believe any truth at all, seeing their faith is only humane,
grounded upon the authority of man; even as it is here foretold of Antichrists
followers, that they received not the truth in love, when it was offer^d to
them, and that they believed not the truth. Ninthly, Hugely gross errors and
superstitious fooleries are maintained by the Pope and his followers, for
necessary truths, and acceptable pieces of Divine Worship, as may be seen in
their Apish toys, foolish gestures used at Mass, in their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and indulgences; and such is their incorrigible obstinacy
in these, against clear evidence of Scripture, yea and of common sense and
reason, that it cannot be conceived rational men would be so infatuated and
stupid, except they were judicially plagued of God, by giving them over to the
power and prevalency of error and delusion, even as it is here affirmed of
Antichrists followers, that God shall send them strong delusion that they
should believe a lie. Tenthly, As Popish doctrine, wherein it differs from
us, is but a bundle of lies, which is abundantly proved by the Reformed
Divines; So this doctrine of lies is believed by the generality of the Popish
Church as the very truth of God, with a firm assent and without all contrary
doubt; so that some of them being given over to the power of delusion will
choose to dye for it, at least to suffer loss of goods before they recede from
it; Even as it is here foretold of Antichrists followers, that God shall send
them strong delusion that they should believe a lie. Eleventhly, Many of the
Popes deluded followers have their consciences so seared, that they rest their
souls upon the faith of Popish errors, draw a kind of comfort and satisfaction
from them, and have an infinite delight in the most ^ond and foolish of all
their superstitious performances, as thinking they thereby do God good service:
Even as it is here foretold of Antichrists followers that they should have
pleasure in unrighteousness, or erroneous and unrighteous doctrine.

And now to shut up this second part of the Chapter, I may confidently resume
the former assertion, as a clear conclusion from what is already said, that
seeing all the characters of the man of sin, here described, are verified in
the Pope of Rome, ever since he usurped the fullness of power in all causes both
humane and Divine, which he has now for a long^time exercised, therefore he
has been, and yet is that man of sin, that child of perdition, and the very
Antichrist, who is here described.



Ver. 13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren,
beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. The
Apostle, in the third part of the Chapter, does comfort and confirm those
believing Thessalonians, and in them all sincere believers through all Ages,
against the terror of the forementioned dreadful Prophecy; and this three
ways. The first, (which is propounded by way of thanksgiving to God, see chap.
1. 3.) is the certainty of their salvation, grounded upon Gods decree of their
election, whereby he had chosen them (passing by others as the word implies)
to the enjoying of salvation, or perfect blessedness in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 4.
which decree of election is described from several things, which do all of them
conduce to their confirmation and establishment. 1. From the cause moving God
to it, employed in the word beloved, It was nothing without himself (see upon
Ephesians. 1. 4. doct. 7.) but his love to them, which made him choose them. 2. From
its antiquity, It was from the beginning, or, from eternity, as he explains
himself, Ephesians. 1. 4. 3. From the means through which it is brought to execution,
first, sanctification wrought in them by the spirit of God, mentioned before
faith (though it be a fruit of faith, Act. 15. 9.) because it does first appear
to us. James 2 -- 18. (See what this sanctification is, upon 1 These. 4. 3 --)
2. Belief and faith (see what this grace is, 1 These. 1. v. 3.) called belief of
the truth, because it has respect unto, and relyeth upon the truth, chiefly of
the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. in which Christ is offered, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Doct. 1. As
the truly Godly, beloved of God, do most suspect their own strength, and are
most afraid of their own weakness, upon hearing of approaching trials, when the
unrenewed fool rages and is confident, Prove. 14. 16. So it is the duty of
Christ's Ministers to provide the Lords people with suitable and seasonable
grounds of consolation from the word of truth to underprop them, lest their
suspicions and fears do end in heartless fainting and discouragement; for, Paul
foreseeing that the Godly would be most afraid at the terror of the former
Prophecy, does set himself to comfort and confirm them. But we are bound, etc.
2. It is the duty of those who have obtained mercy from the Lord, so to look
upon the dreadful Judgments, Spiritual or Temporal, which are inflicted by God
upon others, as that they may therein read, and thankfully acknowledge their
own obligation unto the Lord who deals otherwise with them; for, Paul, being
to mention the preservation of those believing Thessalonians from the dreadful
judgments formerly spoken of, will not do it but by way of thanksgiving to
God, that therein they may see their own duty. But we are bound to give thanks
to God always for you. 3. The more of sanctifying grace, and of other
testimonies of Gods special love, is bestowed upon a people, the greater
obligation is thereby laid upon their faithful Pastors to bless the Lord on
their behalf; for, Paul sees himself bound to give thanks to God, because God
had chosen them, etc. See more upon this ground, chap. 1. 3. But, 4. The more a
man is beloved of God, he will be the more afraid of Antichrists apostasy, and
may the more confidently expect that he shall be preserved from it; for, they
were beloved, whom Paul suppones here to be most afraid, and whom he here
confirms, and partly from this that they were beloved of the Lord. 5. As the
elect are above the peril of total and final apostasy; So the ground and
reason of their preservation from it is not in themselves, in the strength or
firmness of their resolutions, but in the Lords unchangeable decree, whereby he
has chosen them to eternal life. This is that foundation of the Lord which
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and therefore they cannot so fall as to perish;
for, he confirms them against the fears of falling away, from their election.
Because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation. 6. It is the Lords
allowance that the Godly elect should study to make their election sure, and
attain to the assurance of it, as that which proves a powerful preservative,
as against other sins, 2 Pet. 1. 10. so, chiefly, against Antichristian
errors; for if they do not attain to the knowledge of their election, how can
they draw comfort and matter of confirmation from it, as the Lord allows them
to do here? because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation. 7. As
Gods decree of election before time, is accompanied with the fruits of saving
grace in the elect, begotten in them by the spirit of God in time; So it is
neither possible, nor yet needful, for attaining the knowledge of our election,
to dive into the depth of Gods eternal decree about us, at the first step, but
we are to search and try, if those fruits and effects of Gods electing love, be
yet wrought in us, and from these conclude that we are elected; for, the
Apostle speaks of faith and sanctification as the fruits of election, by which,
and by effectual calling mentioned v. 14. a man may gather he is elected: he
has chosen us through sanctification and belief. 8. As the Lord will
infallibly bestow salvation upon the elect, because he has chosen them to it,
and the counsel of the Lord must stand, Prove. 19. 21. So he bestows salvation
upon none who are destitute of faith and sanctification, the means appointed of
God for leading to it; he has chosen you to salvation, says he, through
sanctification and belief. 9. Whomsoever God has elected to salvation, he has
also, in that same decree, elected them to faith and sanctification, and
therefore the foresight of those was not a motive inducing God to elect one
more than another; they were good things decreed to be given unto us, and
consequently were not foreseen to be in us before he decreed them for us: for,
he has chosen you to salvation through sanctification and belief. 10. As faith
and sanctification go always together, the former being the fountain of the
latter, and the latter again an evidence of the former, Gal. 5 -- 6. So the
motions of Gods sanctifying spirit are always conform to Gods rev^aled truth,
and directed by truth as it is apprehended by faith, and all other motions
which are not such, are not of God, whatever they pretend to, Isa. 8. 20. for,
he joins sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth together.

Ver. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ. For their further comfort and confirmation from the
former ground, he does here give an evidence that God had chosen them to
salvation; even this that God had effectually called them, or having renewed
their wills (Ezekiel. 26. 27.) had by his omnipotent power, (Phil. 6. 44, 45.)
made them willingly apply themselves (Psalm. 110. 3.) to the attaining of those
things whereunto they were called, to wit, salvation, sanctification and faith
mentioned v. 13. to which the first word of this verse does relate. Which
effectual calling is set forth. 1. From the external mean, by which it had been
brought about, to wit, the Preaching of the Gospel called Paul's Gospel, because
he was entrusted with the dispensing of it to them, 1 These. 2. 4. next, from
the utmost end of their calling; to wit, their obtaining that glory in Heaven,
which the Lord Christ has purchased, and the same, in some respect, for kind,
though not for measure, with that which he himself enjoys, Phil. 3. 21* 1
Cor. 6. 2, 3. Doct. 1. A man can draw no comfort or confirmation from Gods
decree of electing him to salvation through sanctification and faith, except he
actually apply himself to walk in the way which leads to salvation; for, he
makes the strength of the former consolation and confirmation lie in this, that
they were effectually called to sanctification, and consequently had betaken
themselves to walk in that way, whereunto he called you. 2. It is not in the
power of fallen man to do so much of himself, though Heaven be offered and the
way chalked out, which leads to it, as to betake himself to walk in it,
except the Lord incline him powerfully so to do, and by his omnipotent arm draw
him that so he may run after him; Cant. 1. 4 -- for, he says it was the Lord,
who called them thereunto. 3. However this effectual excitation of sinners, and
engaging them to enter the way of salvation, be the work of God alone; yet he
makes use of the Gospel Preached by his sent Ministers, as an outward mean, at
or after the Preaching whereof he ordinarily does work powerfully in the hearts
of the elect: for, he says, whereunto he called you by our Gospel. 4. As the
state of salvation, to which the elect are chosen, is altogether glorious,
comprising what eye has not seen nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart
of man to think upon, 1 Cor. 2. 9. So the glory to be enjoyed in that state, is
the result, not of our endeavors or merit, but of Christ's purchase, and a
piece of that glory which Christ in his humane nature enjoys, who has gone
to Heaven for this very end, that where he is there we may be; Joh. 14. 3. for,
therefore is it called the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ to the obtaining
whereof we are called. 5. Though Heaven and glory be purchased by Christ and
designed for the elect in Gods eternal and unchangeable decree, (see v. 13.)
yet none attaineth to the actual possession of it, but such as are effectually
called and drawn out of nature to the state of grace, and all such shall at
last attain it, grace here being a most infallible forerunner of glory
hereafter: for, he says he has called you to the obtaining of glory.

Ver. 15. Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle. He confirms them, Secondly,
by exhorting them that therefore, to wit, because there was an apostasy to be
v. -- 3. and Gods electing love was made known unto them, v. 13, 14. that
therefore, I say, they would stand fast and constant in the truth without
yielding groun^ as stout soldiers, (from whom the word is borrowed) which he
further explaineth by exhorting them to hold, as it were by both hands, and
against all opposition, the traditions, or things delivered by him (as the word
signifies) to wit, the exhortations and doctrines both concerning faith and
manners, which they had received from him and were taught by him, whether by
word, when he was present with them and preached to them, or by this and the
former Epistle written by him, when he was absent from them. Doct. 1. The
doctrine of election, and assurance of salvation grounded upon election, does
not make exhortations to duty, reproofs and threatenings in case of neglect of
duty, of no effect and useless; In so far as those are means appointed by God
for making the elect persevere in the way which leads unto that salvation, to
which they are appointed: for, notwithstanding of what he wrote of election and
the infallible evidence of their election, v. 13, 14. he does here exhort them
to stand fast and hold the traditions. 2. As the dreadfulness of approaching
hazard should not makes us lose heart, and sit down discouraged; So the faith
of through-bearing, flowing from assurance of our election, is so far from
being, in its own nature, a pillow for carnal security, that, upon the
contrary, it does forcibly encourage and excite to duty in the face of danger,
as knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; for, from what he spoke
of the future apostasy, and the evidence they had of Gods electing love, he
exhorts them therefore brethren, stand fast, and hol^. 3. Even the elect
themselves have been and will be strongly assaulted by Antichrist, and in no
small hazard to be drawn away with his Antichristian errors, except they stand
fast as men of courage, and employ the uttermost of their wit and strength to
defend the truth of the Gospel against those dreadful terrors and subtle
snares, which Antichrist and his emissaries do make use of to drive them and
draw them from it: for, so much is employed, while, speaking to the elect with
relation to the assaults of Antichrist, he exhorts them to stand as stout
soldiers, and to hold the truth as it were with both hands against all
opposition, as the word signifies, therefore, brethren, stand fast and hold.
4. The apostasy of many from the truth, and the prevalency of error, is so
far from being, in reason, a motive to make us think the less of truth, and to
follow the drove, that it ought to make us love truth the better, cleave to it
more firmly, and become more rooted in the faith of it, that so the storm,
which blows others up by the roots, may not unsettle us; for, from what he
spoke of a general apostasy to come, he exhorts them that therefore they would
stand fast and hold the traditions. 5. There is no ground here to establish the
authority of Popish unwritten traditions, as a partial rule of faith and
manners, of equal authority with the written Word of God: for, though some of
those traditions here mentioned were not written by Paul in any of these two
Epistles; yet they, as all other truths necessary to salvation, were committed
either before or after this to sacred writ, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17. traditions which
ye have been taught whether by word or our Epistle.

Ver. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace. He confirms them thirdly, by praying to God for them that he would work
those things in them which he was pressing upon them; to wit, comfort and
constancy. In which prayer, he, first, lays down some arguments for
strengthening both his own, and their confidence in expectation of an answer.
The first is taken from that near relation wherein Christ and God, to whom he
prays, did stand toward them. Christ himself being their Lord Jesus Christ,
and God their Father. The second from Gods special love to them. The third from
the fruits of his love already enjoyed, 1. Consolation, that is ease of mind
from, and encouragement of spirit against all causes of sorrow; which is
actually attained by real believers at some times, Psalm. 27. 1, 2. and all such
have sufficient grounds and reason for it always, Heb. 3. 17, 18. and the
meanest measure of it enjoyed by any here is an earnest of that full and
perfect freedom and ease from all sorrows and weights of sin and misery which
they shall enjoy in Heaven for ever; Job. 4. 14. and therefore is it called
everlasting consolation. 2. Good hope, that is, both solid grounds of hope, and
the grace of hope it self whereby we make use of those grounds, by expecting
all the good things which God has promised, Romans 8. 25. which two fruits of
love are described from their common fountain, Gods grace and favor, not only
without, but contrary to our deserving, Isa. 64. 6. Doct. 1. That precepts and
exhortations to duty do not infer a power in man's free will to obey, fee upon
1 These. 5. 23. doct. 2. for, he here prays that God would work that in them
which he has presently pressed upon them. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
etc. 2. As it is the Lords blessing and powerful working of his spirit which
makes the word Preached, gain ground on hearts, 1 Cor. 3. 7. So it is the duty
of Ministers, and of people also, to deal with God in earnest by Prayer for his
promised spirit to accompany the Word Preached and make it lively, seeing the
Lord has undertaken to give his holy spirit unto those who ask him; Luke 11.
13. for, Paul, having pressed comfort and constancy, does pray to God that he
would comfort and establish them, and thereby teaches them to do the like. Now
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, etc. 3. That a man may stand fast, especially in
trying times, there is more required than conviction of duty, or a fixed
resolution to stand to his duty, Matthew. 26. 33, 35. There must be also a
continued influence from the Lord, of cheerfulness, comfort and courage,
otherwise all will be to little purpose; for, Paul sees this necessary, and
therefore prays for it, Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, etc. 4. That Jesus
Christ is true God equal with the Father appears from this, that not only he
is one who hears prayer, the author and bestower of all spiritual blessings
which are here sought from him, and said to be already bestowed by him, but
also he is named before the Father, which certainly had been blaspheamous if he
were not also true God. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God even our
Father, etc. 5. That Christ is a distinct person from the Father, though one in
substance with him, appears from this, that they are here distinguished by
Paul, Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father. 6. That God
the Father is usually named before the Son does not infer any inequality
betwixt them, but only the order of subsistence and working which is among the
persons of the blessed Trinity; for, here Christ the second person is named
first, to show there is not any such inequality. Now our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father. 7. That our prayers should be directed unto
God only, see upon Ephesians. 1. 17. doct. 3. for, so does Paul always direct his.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, etc. 8. Our prayers to God should not
consist of multiplied petitions only, but ought to be fraughted with such
arguments and motives for obtaining what we ask, as may strengthen our
confidence in expectation of an answer; for, such are the Apostles prayers. Now
our Lord -- which has loved us, and given us, etc. 9. In seeking things
needful from God, we should look upon him, not as standing disaffected to us,
and at a distance with us, but according to the nearest relations, which we can
reckon our selves to have unto him; for, Paul eyeth Christ and God as his and
their Christ and Father. Now our Lord, and God even (...) Father. 10. The Faith
of Gods special love does strongly underprop the heart with confidence of a
gracious answer in prayer, as knowing that love in God is communicative of any
thing in God that is good and needful for the party loved, Psalm. 84. 11. and
that seeing his love has given Christ, which is more, he will not withhold
that which is less; Romans 8. 32. for, Paul does strengthen his confidence from
this ground, while he says, which has loved us. 11. Our former receipts from
God should be improved as helps and props for strengthening confidence in
expectation of obtaining yet further from him, even whatever our necessities
call for, and his glory shall require at our hand: This being the Lords usual
way to do good because he has done good; and therefore prayer should not be
wholly stuffed with heartless complaints of what we want, there should be a
mixture of humble and thankful acknowledgement also of what we already have,
and an argument drawn from thence to plead for more; for, so does Paul here.
Who has given us everlasting consolation and good hope. 12. It is only
spiritual receipts the experience whereof does alone, and considered apart from
receipts of any other kind, furnish us thus with an argument where by to plead
with God for more, those only being given as an earnest of further, Ephesians. 1. 14.
which temporal favors are not, but sometimes given of God in displeasure, and
forerunners of his eternal wrath: Psalm. 17. 14. for, it is only spiritual
receipts from which Paul does draw an argument here. Who has given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope. 13. True and solid consolation against
any thing which causes grief is only that, which is accompanied with, and
flows from the well-grounded and good hope of eternal glory: and whatever
other comfort or joy a man enjoys, it is not lasting, much less everlasting,
but ends in greater grief; Eccles. 7. 6. for, he conjoyneth these two,
everlasting consolation and good hope. 14. Then does experience of bypast
receipts strengthen much our confidence of receiving more, when we take up Gods
free grace and favor without and contrary to our deserving as the cause of
what has been bestowed already; In so far as hereby we find an answer to all
those doubts, which do arise from our present unworthiness, and misdeservings,
even this, The same free grace which overcame our mis-deservings then, will
overcome them yet; for, Paul, while he makes bypast receipts plead for
obtaining further, does look on them as flowing from this fountain. Who has
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace.

Ver. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.
Next, in this prayer is set down what he prayed for; first, the continuance and
increase of the same comfort, which they had already received, v. 16. next,
establishment, and constancy; and this, first, in every good word, that is, in
the faith of good and sound doctrine, opposite to Antichristian error, 1 Timothy
4. 6. which agrees better with the preceding purpose of the whole Chapter,
than to expone it of their language and discourse. Next, in every good work, or
the practice of holiness in the whole course of their life. See what a good
work is upon Ephesians. 2. 10. doct. 4. Hence learn, 1. That a man may stand steadfast
in a trying time, he should by all means endeavor to keep his heart in a
cheerful frame, by laying hold, with some measure of confidence, upon such
grounds of consolation as the Gospel affords, 1 These. 4. 18. habitual
discouragement and dejectedness of mind being the usual forerunner of
defection, Heb. 12. 12, 13. for, the Apostles pra^ing that God would comfort
and establish them, shows that a heart cheered up with the consolations of the
Gospel is the usual companion of constancy. 2. Not only are the first
beginnings of grace from God, but also the daily increase and progress of grace
in every degree and step, from the lowest to the highest; for, having shown v.
16. that God had given them the beginnings of consolation, he here prays for
the increase of it: comfort your hearts, says he. 3. Stability in the faith of
true doctrine and in the practice of an holy life do mutually contribute, one
to another: and error in the point of truth is usually accompanied with some
deviation in practice from the rule of an holy life: and profanity of life does
of it self cast men loose to the embracing of such errors as may gratify
their unmortified lusts, 2 Timothy 4. 3. for, he prays that God would stablish
them in every good word and work, jointly.

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle does press upon them four
several exhortations to their duty. In the first whereof he exhorts them to
pray for himself, and other faithful Ministers, and that, first, for the
progress of the Gospel committed to them, v. 1. next, for the preservation of
their persons, v. 2. To which he subjoineth a seasonable comfort against their
fear, v. 3. In the second, he exhorts them unto obedience to his doctrine in
general, v. 4. in the third, to the love of God and patience in special, v. 5.
In the fourth, he charge them to censure disorderly walkers, or idle
loiterers, and to abstain from intimate fellowship with them; which charge is
propounded, first, more generally, v. 6. and accordingly prosecuted, to v. 11.
while he condemns their disorderly practice, first, because it was contrary to
his own example, v. 7. who labored hard among them besides his public
preaching, v. 8. that he might cast them a copy not to live idly, v. 9.
Secondly, It was contrary to his doctrine also, v. 10. Next, he prosecutes this
charge more particularly, to v. 16. while he, first, describes those disorderly
walkers from two of their properties, Idleness and turbulent curiosity, v. 11.
next, he does command them to quit both those vices, v. 12. and thirdly,
speaks to those who walked orderly, first, exhorting them not to grow remiss
in well-doing, notwithstanding of their many discouragements, v. 13. Next,
prescribing unto them how to censure delinquents by excommunication, v. 14. and
how to use moderation toward the party censured, v. 15.

In the second part of the Chapter he concludes the Epistle, first, by praying
for peace and Gods presence to them, v. 16. next, with his usual farewel-wish,
v. 18. Having first shown for what use he did always write that part of his
Epistles with his own hand, v. 17.

Ver. 1. FInally brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, and be glorified even as it is with you. The Apostle having made a
transition from the preceding doctrine by the word finally (implying as the
Original bears, there did somewhat yet remain necessary to be added) does
enter the first of his exhortations; wherein he beseeches them lovingly as
brethren to pray for him and his colleagues, and consequently for all other
faithful Ministers. Particulars to be prayed for are two: The first is in this
verse, and has respect unto the Gospel, here called the word of the Lord (See
upon Phil. 1. 14. doct. 1.) which is entrusted to Ministers, 1 These. 2. 4. and
concerning it, they were to pray, first, that it might have free course, or (as
it is in the Original) might run, that is, be speedily propagated far and near,
and all things removed out of the way which might hinder its course. Next, that
it might be glorified, even as it was with those Thessalonians, that is, not
only be mightily prevalent in converting many to God, whereby the glorious
power of God working by it should be seen and acknowledged, 1 Cor. 14. 25. but
also the profession of the Gospel might be adorned with the answerable fruits
of an holy life in those who hear it, which brings no small glory and credit to
the Gospel, Tit. 2. 10. as the profane life of professors does dishonor it, 2
Pet. 2. 2. Doct. 1. See a Doctrine from the word, finally, or furthermore, upon
1 These. 4. v. 1. doct. 4. finally, brethren. 2. Most eminent Christians for
gifts and graces are usually most sensible of their own wants, and so far from
undervaluing others, being compared with themselves, that they highly prize
what worth is in them, and can pleasantly stoop to receive some spiritual
benefit and advantage from them; for, though Paul did exceed them all in
spiritual induements, yet he most affectionately seeks the help of their
prayers. Finally, brethren, pray for us. 3. Ministers should so lay out and
employ what stock of gifts and graces they already have for the good of the
Lords people, as that they jointly endeavor by all means, of Reading,
Meditation, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15 -- and of prayer by themselves, 2 Cor. 7. 5. and
of others, to acquire a new supply of strength and furniture for enabling them
to their work; lest otherwise they run dry, and have little or nothing to say
unto any good ^urpose, 1 Timothy 4. 15. for, Paul having instructed them, and
prayed for them in the former part of this Epistle, does now beseech them to
deal with God for a new recruit of furniture for him. Pray for us. 4. As it is
the duty of Christian brethren mutually to pray for, and to require the
performance of this duty from one another: So the most effectual way for
engaging others to pray for us, is to make them know we pray for them, and that
we esteem of them as such whose prayers are somewhat worth; for, Paul being to
crave the help of their prayers, did show, chap. 2. v. 16. that he prayed for
them, and does here show he esteemed them as brethren, that hereby he may
engage them. Brethren pray for us. 5. The great care of a faithful Minister,
and that which lies nearest to his heart, and which of any other thing he
recommendeth most to the care of others, is, not so much his own personal
respect or preservation from hazard, as the success and thriving of the Gospel
by the blessing of God upon his pains, and the pains of others; for, this is it
he recommends unto them to be prayed for in the first place, and the care of
his own person but in the second. Pray for us, says he, that the word of the
Lord may have free course. 6. It is the duty of the Lords people and servants
not only to give the Gospel countenance and entertainment where it already is,
but also to have enlarged desires, seconded with the utmost of orderly
endeavors, for the spreading and propagation of the Gospel unto those places
where it is not; for, this is it that Paul would have them to pray for here,
even that the word of the Lord may have free course. 7. So great and many are
those obstructions cast in by the Devil and men in the way of the Gospels
progress, Act. 10 23. that no humane endeavors, nor any thing else except the
omnipotent power of God, can fully remove them; for, he sees a necessity of
prayer to God, that the word of the Lord may have free course. 8. It is the
duty of Ministers and people not only to endeavor that the Gospel may run
through the tongues and ears of many, and outward subjection be rendered to it,
but also that it be received in hearts, and that so much be testified by the
holy life and conversation of those who do receive it: Neither are they to rest
satisfied with the former without some promising evidences of the latter: for,
he will have them to pray not only that the Gospel may have free course, but
also that it may be glorified. See the Exposition. 9. That the word of the Lord
has prevailed mightily with our selves, and carried us captive to the
obedience of it, should serve us both as an incitement to deal with God in
behalf of others, that they may be gained in like manner, seeing grace is not
envious, 1 Cor. 13. -- 4 -- and for a ground of hope that our labor of that
sort shall not be in vain in the Lord: for, that he may incite them to pray for
others with confidence, he minds them how the Gospel had prevailed with
themselves, even as it is with you, says he.

Ver. 2. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all
men have not faith. Here is, first, the second particular to be prayed for, and
it respects the person of Paul, and of other faithful Ministers, concerning
whom they were to pray that they might be preserved and delivered (to wit, so
long as God had any work for them, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.) from the cruelty and
snares both of open and secret enemies, who are here called, first,
unreasonable, that is, men demented, whom no reason could satisfy, or (as the
greek word implies) men of no abode, possibly the vagrant Jews, or men
unworthy to have any place or respect among men. Next, wicked, that is, men of
a vicious life, or, more particularly (as the original also implies) men
desirous of trouble, and procuring trouble to others. Secondly, he gives a
reason why this petition for their delivery and preservation was necessary, and
also hints at the cause of men's absurdity and wickedness presently spoken of;
to wit, because many, even of those within the visible Church, had not the
grace of saving faith; and leaves it unto them to gather that no good was to
be expected from such to Christ's faithful Ministers. Doct. 1. Not only the
Gospel which Ministers do carry, but also the persons of Ministers for the
Gospels sake, should be respected and cared for, both by themselves, and by the
Lords people of their charge. Those earthen vessels should be regarded because
of the precious liquor contained in them; for, Paul having recommended unto
them to pray for the spreading of the Gospel in the first place, does now
enjoin them to pray for the preservation of his person and of other faithful
Ministers in the next. And that we may be delivered, says he. 2. As faithful
Ministers may always look to meet with opposition: So they who oppose them
most, and the work of God in their hands, are usually men of turbulent spirits,
unreasonable carriage, and for one bad property or other somewhat infamous,
even such as Paul's opposites here spoken of, that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men. 3. Wherever a spirit of opposition against the
public Ministry does enter, it turns malapert and shameless, so that no
eminency of parts, of place, or unblameableness of life in Christ's Ministers,
can prove a sufficient sanctuary to shelter them from it: for, Paul was eminent
for all those, and yet those absurd and shameless men did create trouble and
hazard to him, That we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. 4.
The visible Church has always in it a mixed multitude of good and bad, wh^a^
and tares, Matthew. 13. 24. neither have the labors of the most eminent
Ministers, been ever, for what appears, so far blessed of God, as to be the
means of conveying saving grace unto all who heard them; for, he shows that
even in that time when the Apostles were Preachers, all men had not faith, and
this must be understood of men in the visible Church, for they knew
sufficiently that all others who were without the Church had it not. 5. As the
grace of saving faith does powerfully restrain a man's turbulent, sensual and
irrational affections; So any other restraint, where this is wanting, will
prove but weak to keep them at under, if a suitable tentation be once
presented; for, he makes their want of faith the cause of their unreasonable,
turbulent and wicked carriage: for all men have not faith, says he. 6. As the
grace of faith is not bestowed by God upon all who hear the Gospel, but upon
some only, even the elect, Act. 13. -- 48. so it is a speaking evidence that
such have no faith who prove shameless, absurd and turbulent in their
opposition to faithful Ministers, and to the work of God in their hands: for,
he makes their opposition flow from their want of faith: for all men have not
faith, says he.

Ver. 3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil. The Apostle does here encourage them against their fear of falling from
truth, which he foresaw would readily arise from what he presently spoke, of
the many open and secret enemies to truth, and to the sincere Preachers and
professors thereof; as appears from the adversative particle But: and he
encourages them by assuring them that God would, first, stablish or confirm
them in good, so as they should not totally nor finally fall from it, 1 John 3.
9. 2. Most carefully keep them, as a prison is kept (as the word implies) from
evil, that is, from Satan that evil one, together with all his evil and
mischievous devices, even every evil work, 2 Timothy 4. 18. to wit, so as sin
should not have dominion over them, Romans 6. 14. The truth of all which is
confirmed from this that God is faithful, one who may be trusted, and will
perform whatever he has promised, where he supponeth that God has promised
never to leave them, who have once sincerely closed with him, according to Joh.
10. -- 28. and therefore his faithfulness must be engaged to establish and keep
them. Doct. 1. As the truly Godly, upon the apprehension of any pinching
hazard, are of all men aptest to be discouraged with thoughts of their own
weakness, 1 Samuel 27. 1. So it is the duty of every faithful Minister carefully
to foresee what may prove discouraging to any such, and tenderly guard against
it: yea such should be his tenderness in this, that their hazard should make
him in a manner forget his own: for, though the rage of enemies was mainly bent
against Paul's own person, yet he is more taken up how to guard against the
discouragement of the Lords people, which he foresaw would arise from it, than
to provide for his own safety. But the Lord is faithful, says he, w^o will
stablish you. 2. Then does a Minister wisely guard and underprop the Lords
people against discouragements arising from their own apprehended weakness,
when he does not labor to possess them with the contrary thoughts of their own
strength, which indeed is none, 2 Cor. 3. 5. but rather confirming whatever
thoughts they have of that kind, he does fasten them upon the power and
faithfulness of God for their support; for, so does Paul here, But the Lord is
faithful, says he, who will stablish you. 3. That Gods fidelity is impledged
for the performance of his promises, See upon 1 These. 5. v. 24. doct. 5. for
God is faithful. 4. The final perseverance of believers in good, and their
preservation from evil in the extent mentioned in the exposition, is absolutely
promised, and most undoubtedly shall be performed: for, the impledging of Gods
faithfulness for it, implies that it is a thing promised. But God is faithful
who shall stablish you, etc. 5. The infallible perseverance of the Saints in
good, and their preservation from evil, does not flow from the nature of grace
in it self, which is but a created quality, and may be crushed if there were
not some external help to underprop it, Rev. 3. 2. nor yet from any fixedness
of their own resolutions, which are in themselves but changeable, Jer. 20. 9.
but from the power of God who stands engaged to bear them through against all
opposition in the contrary. But God is faithful, says he, who will stablish
you.

Ver. 4. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and
will do the things which we command you. Here is his second exhortation wherein
he does most effectually, though indirectly, incite them to obey the doctrine
delivered by him in general, as the rule of their life and conversation, while
he professes his charitable confidence, ground upon the Lord and his grace, of
their present and future obedience to what he had commanded them in the name
and authority of Jesus Christ, as the word in the orignal does imply. See upon
1 These. 4. v. 2. Understand him here to speak, 1. Of the present obedience of
the most part, as to the main of his injunctions, though in some things they
were defective, as appears from v. 6, etc. and, 2. Of the fewer, though
better part, as to all his injunctions in general. And, 3. Of them all as to
their future obedience, whereof he was charitably confident, though for the
present, as said is, they were in some things blameworthy. Doct. 1. It is the
duty of Ministers toward the Lords people of their charge, and of all
Christians mutually toward one another, charitably to believe and hope the
best of their inward good condition and perseverance in it, where there are any
probable, though not infallible, evidence; for charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor.
13 -- 5. Thus Paul had confidence that they both did and would do, etc. 2. We
ought to ground our charitable confidence of peoples perseverance in
well-doing, not in themselves whatever be their present goodness (for all men
are weak, Mat. 26. 41. and liars, Romans 3. 4.) but in the Lord, who alone can
powerfully incline their hearts to good and preserve them in it; for, Paul had
confidence, not in them, but in the Lord concerning them. 3. It is a singular
piece of ministerial prudence for a Minister, in some cases, and when he has
to do with some people, especially those in whom he sees any appearance of
good, and yet an aptness not to be discouraged with the bad thoughts which
discerning gracious men may have concerning them, to point out to such their
duty, and to incite them to it, rather by showing his charitable thoughts of
their present and future obedience, than by a rigid pressing of their duty on
them, joined with an upbraiding of them for some present neglects, and his
professed diffidence of their amendment in time coming; for, Paul incites them
to obedience by professing the confidence he had of them. And we have
confidence that ye both do and will do. 4. It is the duty of people to improve
what place they have in the charity of faithful Ministers, or discerning
Christians, as a spur to incite them to further diligence, and to walk
answerable to that esteem which others have of them, and not to rest upon it,
as if having it they had enough; for, Paul does express his charitable
confidence of them, that they may be thereby incited to their duty. We have
confidence that ye both do, and will do. 5. As the life of a Christian is more
in practice and in doing, than in profession and word-speaking; So the rule of
their practice is not the example of others, Exodus 23. 2. nor yet the dictates
of their motherwit or natural reason, Romans 1. 21, 22. and much less, the sway
and inclination of their corrupt affections, Isa. 57. -- 17. but the word of
God and those injunctions of his sent Ministers which they as his Lyon-heraulds
do press upon them from him; for, he expresses the Christian man's exercise, by
doing what he commanded them in the name and authority of Jesus Christ. Ye both
do and will do the things which we command you, says he. 6. The practice and
obedience of Christians according to the forementioned rule, must be both
universal, extending it self to all that is commanded, and constant, so as not
only they begin well, but also continue unto their Journeys end; for, so was
their obedience. We are confident ye both do and will do the things which we
command.

Ver. 5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ. Follows his third exhortation, whereby, while he
prays the Lord to direct their hearts or make them straight, he does also
indirectly incite them to the exercise of two graces, which are chief parts of,
and have special influence upon the obedience formerly pressed. First, the love
of God, understand, that whereby we love God; under which is contained love to
our Neighbor, as a stream flowing from that fountain, Matthew. 22. 37, 39.
Although the sense and feeling of Gods love to us spoken of Romans 5. 5. needs
not to be excluded. Secondly, Patient waiting for Christ, or (as the word is in
the original) patience of Christ. It implies patience with expectation, even
such a patient enduring of hardships in the way of our duty for Christ's sake,
as is joined with, and flows from a well-grounded expectation of good things
to be received from Christ, especially at his second coming. Doct. 1. As the
hearts of men are in the hand of the Lord, who alone can powerfully incline,
direct and turn them wherever he will, Prove. 21. 1. So it concerns us highly
to see to the heart that it be rightly inclined, seeing wheresoever it goes,
it does powerfully draw the whole man with it; for, Paul does pray the Lord to
direct their hearts. 2. That Christians do continue constant in the course of
begun obedience, there is of necessity required a continual supply of influence
from God, together with some fervor of love to him, and patient expectation of
good things to be received from him, which may serve as cords to draw us
forward in the way of duty, against all tentations and discouragements which
will be otherwise prevalent to retard and draw us backward, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Psalm.
27. 13. for, as a mean of their continuing to do what he commanded them, he
prays the Lord to direct their hearts into the love of God and patient
waiting for Christ. 3. As the heart of man is by nature crooked and perverse;
So it is in a special manner averse from the love of God, whom, though he be
the chief good, yet, every man by nature does hate, though not as he is Creator
and preserver of the world, yet as he is a just Judge armed with vengeance
against evil doers, yea and there are dregs of this averseness even in the
truly Godly, who have a law in their members rebelling against the Law of God
written in their mind and renewed part, Romans 7. 23. for, this crookedness and
averseness from love to God is employed, while he prays the Lord to direct, or
make straight, their hearts into the love of God. 4. The hearts of men by
nature are also averse from undergoing a suffering lot for Christ, and from
taking that comfort under the cross which arises from the hope of a promised
out-gate and reward, as being unwilling to give any further trust to the
precious promises than they see of present performance, 2 Pet. 3. 4. yea, and
there are dregs of this averseness also in the truly regenerate (though not
allowed of by themselves, Psalm. 42. 9.) as appears from their desire to shift
a cleanly cross, Matthew. 16. 22. and therefore small courage ofttimes under it,
Heb. 12. 13. or hopes of an out-gate from it, 1 Samuel 27. 1 -- for averseness is
also employed while he prays the Lord to direct their hearts -- into the
patient waiting for Christ. 5. How averse soever the hearts of men in nature,
or of men renewed, are from the exercise of those or other graces; yet there is
omnipotency in God to make them straight when he will, and to incline them
powerfully to love where they hate, to take up a cross for Christ contentedly;
and to hope for what they see not, confidently; for, while the Apostle prays
that the Lord would direct them to love and patience, he does suppone that God
has power so to direct them. 6. The graces of love to God, of patience under a
suffering lot and of well-grounded hope, do well together, in so far as where
love to God is rooted in the heart, together with a firm expectation of all
those good things contained in the promise to be received from him, there can
be nothing too hard to be undergone and suffered for him, Romans 8. 35. 2 Cor. 4.
16. with 5. for, Paul does pray for all those jointly, even the love of God and
patient waiting for Christ: see the Exposition.

Ver. 6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the tradition which he received of us. Here begins his fourth
exhortation, upon which he insisteth most and deals more peremptorily in it,
than in any of the former, as that which is his great work in the first part of
this Chapter, and to which all the rest have been preparatory insinuations. And
first, being to handle this purpose more generally to v. 11. he straightly
commands them in the name and authority of Jesus Christ to withdraw from, or
have no familiar intimate fellowship with, any brother, or Christian in
external profession, who walks disorderly, or that, as a disorderly soldier
(from which the word in the original is borrowed) did any ways transgress the
order, bounds and limits of his particular calling and station assigned him by
God, and thereby proved offensive to the Church, and especially such as lived
idly neglecting their own business, and intruded themselves upon the affairs of
others (see v. 11.) even all those (as the Apostle does here further explain
himself) who walked contrary unto and not after that tradition, or doctrine,
delivered by him against idlers whereof, v. 10. and therefore were to be
discountenanced, and their company abandoned as is here commanded. Now though
every Christian is bound to abstain from all voluntary and unnecessary
fellowship with profane men, in so far as they do not seem to countenance or
encourage them in their sin, even though they be not excommunicate and cast out
by the Church, Psalm. 26. 4, 5. yet seeing it is clear the Apostle speaks of
excommunication, v. 14. and the disorderly walking here mentioned is a sin
continued in after public (1 These. 4. 11.) and private admonition (1 These. 5.
14.) Therefore the withdrawing from their fellowship here commanded seems to
be the consequent of the Churches public censure, in the enjoining whereof the
antecedent censure is enjoined also, to wit, that the Church-guides should
excommunicate the contumacious, and all Church Members should withdraw from the
party so censured. And seeing this purpose is handled here more generally and
to be insisted on more particularly, v. 11, etc. I shall only observe these
general doctrines from it. 1. Though Ministers ought in wisdom to deal with the
Lords people, for the most part, by meek entreaties and prudent insinuations
(see v. 4. doct. 3.) yet where their authority, or rather the authority of
Christ in them, has been contemned, their meekness abused, and when they have
to do with a prevalent growing evil, it is their duty to be more peremptory,
and with all authority to charge and command; for, so does Paul here in those
cases, now we command you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. But, 2. The
sharpness of their most peremptory commands should be in prudence allayed
somewhat, with a seasonable mixture of their affection and brotherly love to
those, whom they so command; lest otherwise their imperious way be looked upon
as a piece of insolency, and meet with contempt and disdain instead of
obedience; for, so does the Apostle here while he calls them brethren. Now we
command you brethren, etc. 3. A Minister should also see to it carefully that
his peremptory commands and threatenings be grounded upon the authority of
Christ, as being first enjoined and denounced by him, otherwise he cannot
expect that any thing spoken by him, though with never so much authority, zeal
and boldness, can have great weight in peoples consciences; for, such were
Paul's peremptory commands. We command you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
4. It has ever been the lot of the Church of Christ to have some professors
in it, whose way and carriage has been in no measure answerable unto that
which they did profess; for, even in this Church, so highly commended, chap. 1.
3, 4. there were some such, as is supponed while he bids them withdraw from
every brother, or Churchmember, who walks disorderly. 5. The way and
carriage of such is more to be detested and shunned, than if they were
professed enemies, in so far as they are a greater reproach to the Gospel, 2
Pet. 2. 13. and make the name of God which they profess to be blasphemed by
others; Romans 2. 23, 24. for, Paul bids withdraw, not so much from avowed
Heathens, as, from every brother that walks disorderly. 6. There is no
Churchmember whose quality, rank or station, does wholly exempt his disorderly
scandalous walking from the Ecclesiastical cognition of Christ's Ministers, or
can keep the Lords people free of hurt and damage from his evil example, if
they converse familiarly with him; for, he bids the people withdraw from every
brother, without exception, who walks disorderly, which supponeth that the
Church-guides should first censure them, as was shown in the Exposition. 7.
There is a difference to be made, both in the inflicting of Church-censurrs by
Church-guides, and in the withdrawing of familiar fellowship by private
Christians; betwixt those, who being surprised with some violent tentation, do
but once or twice step aside from the rule of their duty, and others whose
continued strain and course of life is still disorderly: for, he bids withdraw
only from those who walk disorderly, or whose continued way and course was
such, as the word walk imports. 8. So hardly are our hearts brought up to a
perfect hatred and detestation of sin; that though possibly we have some
abhorrence from committing it our selves, yet we take pleasure in them who do
it, and with great difficulty we are made to withdraw from them or
discountenance them in it; for, therefore he sees it needful to give them such
a peremptory charge, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from
them that walk disorderly, and the word rendered withdraw signifies to abstain
from that whither the sway and inclination of our mind does carry us. 9. As
once receiving and professed embracing of Divine truths for the rule of duty,
does make the rejecter thereof more guilty, than if he had not received them at
all: So those do live disorderly whose life and conversation is not ordered
according to the prescript of Gods word, how strictly soever they do conform
themselves to the Civil Laws of the Land wherein they live: for, he says that
brother did walk disorderly, who did not walk according to the tradition, or
doctrine delivered by him from God, and aggravate their sin from this that they
had once received that tradition. And not after the tradition which he received
of us, says he.

Ver. 7. For your selves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not our
selves disorderly among you. Here is a reason serving both to enforce the duty
of censuring, and withdrawing from those, who walked disorderly, and to
aggravate the sin of those who did so walk. It is taken from the Apostles
example propounded first here in general. He walked not disorderly, that is,
lived not idly, as he after explains. And for the force of this reason to
condemn the contrary practice, he appealeth to their own conscience, if they
did not know and were sufficiently convinced of their obligation to follow his
example; and to discountenance those who did otherwise, to wit, in so far as he
was a follower of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. as he was indeed in this particular,
and they did also know it. Doct. 1. As Christians ought to walk according to
their knowledge. So he is not worthy of the name of a Christian, who knows
not this, that a man is bound to follow the example of his Minister, in so far
as he does follow Christ; seeing Ministers are given to teach the Lords people
not by their doctrine only but by their example also, 1 Timothy 4. 12. for, Paul
supponeth they knew how they ought to follow him, and draws an argument from
thence for pressing this duty upon themselves, for ye your selves know how ye
ought to follow us. 2. As all who know their duty do not walk according to it,
but too too many do live in the practice of those evils, for which their heart,
their light, and conscience does condemn them: So sins done against knowledge
have in them a singular weight and aggravation beyond sins of ignorance. They
make the sinner more inexcusable, Romans 2. 1. and his punishment the greater,
Luk 12. 47. for, he aggravateth their sin from this that they knew they should
have followed his example, and yet did it not: for your selves know how ye
ought to follow us, says he. 3. It aggravateth also our neglect of duty not a
little, that we not only know our duty, but also have a cloud of witnesses and
shining examples going before us in the way of our duty, whereby all pretense
of impossibility to perform our duty is removed seeing men subject to the like
infirmities have already practiced it; for, he aggravateth their sin from this,
that he and his associates had given them an example in the contrary, we
behaved not our selves disorderly among you. 4. It concerns much the Lords
servants, who are sent to press the practice of duty upon others, so to walk,
as their life and carriage may hold out a copy of that obedience which they
require from the Lords people. Hereby their doctrine has the greater weight,
Matthew. 5. 15, 16. and otherwise they are a reproach to the Gospel, 1 Samuel 2.
17. and they themselves, at least, do reap no profi^ by it, 1 Cor. 9. 23. for,
Paul practiced himself what he pressed upon others. We behaved not our selves
disorderly among you.

Ver. 8. Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught; but wrought with labor
and travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you. He
applies what he spoke of his own example in general to the particular wherein
they were guilty, by showing he did not eat bread, or take his ordinary food in
meat and drink (as Genesis 3. 19.) from any man for naught, or without money, and
price paid for it. Where he speaks according to the common opinion of earthly
minded men, who think whatever maintenance is given to Ministers for their
Ministerial labors is bestowed upon them for naught, though it be not so, Mat.
10. 10. Now the Apostle shows that even in their sense he took nothing for
naught, but that he might be able to sustain himself, besides his public
preaching (which was his proper employment, 1 Cor. 1. 17.) he wrought in
tent-making, Act. 18. 3. even to weariness, and after he was wearied, as the
words, labor and travel, do imply, and that both night and day, (See upon 1
These. 2. 9.) and he mentions a twofold end proposed to himself why he did so
work; The first is in this verse, That he might not be chargeable, or
burdensome to any of them. He means not as if the maintenance of a Minister
should be accounted a burden by the flock, but that some miserable wretches
among them would have thought it so. Besides, it is not improbable that a great
part (though not all, Act. 17. 4.) of those who had first received the Gospel
in that City were of the poorer sort, whom he had no will indeed to burden.
Besides what is marked upon a parallel place, 1 These. 2. 9. doct. 3, 4, 5.
concerning 1. A necessity lying upon men of dimitting themselves to the meanest
of employments before they want a mean of livelihood. 2. The lawfulness of a
Ministers using some handy labor in some cases. 3. The groundlesness of the
Popish tenet about works of supererrogation; observe further hence 1.
Circumstances of time, place, company and such like, may make an action become
exceeding sinful; and abstinence from it a necessary duty at some times, the
practice whereof is in it self indifferent, lawful, yea and in some cases
necessary: for, all things being considered, it was a necessary duty for Paul
not to take bread of those Thessal^nians without price, though the thing in it
self be not simply unlawful. Otherwise, hospitality and giving of meat for
naught could not be commanded, Titus 1. 8. nor those ancient love feasts among
Christian friends could be commended, as we find they are; Jude 12. Neither did
we eat any man's bread for naught. 2. The Lord does sometimes call his servants
to spend and be spent among a people, from whom they do receive or can expect
but little of worldly encouragement, that thereby they may have an occasion to
make their sincerity in the work of the Lord appear both to their own heart and
^he consciences of others, who may evidently see their Ministers are not
seeking theirs but them, 2 Cor. 12. 14. for, Paul did not receive so much
encouragement worldly as bread to eat among those Thessalonians. Neither did we
eat any man's bread for naught. 3. It pleases the Lord in deepest wisdom,
sometimes, to measure out a very hard lot in things worldly to his dearest
servants, and to give but little of earth to those who glorify him most upon
earth, and upon whom he intends to bestow a more than ordinary measure of glory
in Heaven, that none may know by those things whether he be worthy of love or
hatred, Eccles. 9. -- 1. for, even Paul, that elect vessel of the Lord, is made
to work for a livelihood with labor and travel night and day. 4. Though
Ministers are not tied to follow this example of Paul's, here recorded, in all
particulars, because of the great inequality betwixt him and them, by reason of
his super-eminent gifts, and his extraordinay assistance, which made it less
necessary for him to spend so much of his time in reading and preparation for
public duties, as ordinary Ministers must do. Besides, that some reasons
peculiar to this Church and to that of Corinth, did oblige him so to walk
toward them, though he did not find himself so obliged toward others who had
not the like reasons. However, I say, that therefore other ordinary Ministers
are not tied to follow his example in all particulars; yet they are so far to
follow it, as to endeavor that the Gospel which they Preach may be as little
burdensome and chargeable to people as in them lies: for this was the thing
Paul aimed at, that we might not be chargeable unto any of you, says he. 5. It
is a duty incumbent unto the Lords people to maintain their Ministers in a way
creditable to the Gospel, even when, through reason of poverty, their so doing
would prove burdensome unto them; for, he says not, that they ought not to
have sustained him, because of their poverty, only he would not eat their bread
for naught, that he might not be burdensome unto them, and v. 9. he asserts
his own power and right to have exacted maintenance from them, and consequently
they were bound to give it.

Ver. 9. Not because we have not power, but to make our selves an ensample unto
you to follow us. Lest the Apostles example had been urged by covetous
wretches, for a law and rule to the prejudice of other Ministers, though not in
the same circumstantial case with Paul, he does therefore, first, assert his
power and right to take maintenance from them, so that his not exacting it was
not because he had not power to demand it. Next, he mentions the second end
why he labored so hard, and did not exact his right, to wit, that he might
thereby in his own practice held forth a lively example and copy to be followed
by them, both in what he had prescribed to them about diligence in some lawful
calling, seeing he did more than otherwise he needed for their example and
encouragement, as also in departing somewhat from their right as he had done,
rather than they should over-burthen their brethren. Doct. 1. Though there is
nothing more reasonable than that they which wait at the Altar be partakers of
the Altar, 1 Cor. 9. 3. -- and that a Minister who spends his time and strength
among a people should be maintained by them; yet the contrary opinion has been
early hatched and always held on foot by some, who look upon the Ministry as
an idle calling, and that nothing of right belongs to them who labor in it,
as due unto them, for their works sake, Satan hereby taking advantage of the
earthly-mindedness of some, and heart-enmity to the Gospel in others, to starve
the Gospel and public ordinances of Gods worship out of the world, when he
cannot prevail to drive them away by force; for, Paul foresaw there would be
some so disposed; and therefore asserts the right of Ministers to exact
maintenance, not because we have not power, says he. 2. It concerns
therefore the Ministers of Jesus Christ to assert their right, both by the Laws
of God and men, to a competency of worldly maintenance, and carefully to guard,
lest any deed of theirs do weaken their right, though not so much from respect
to themselves, who, at least many of them, have sufficient parts to employ in
any other calling for gaining their livelihood, as well as other men, but from
respect to the Gospel and the eternal well-being of peoples souls; for, Paul
foreseeing that his example would possibly be alleged by some covetous misers
to enervate the Divine right of Ministers to maintenance, he does here assert
it, Not because we have not power, says he. 3. Christian sobriety will teach a
man so to speak to the commendation of his own moderation, and not exacting the
rigor of his right in some cases, as that he do not reflect upon others who do
not exercise the same moderation, as not being called to it, because they are
not in the same case; for, Paul does not reflect upon the practice of other
Ministers, who not being in the like case with him, should exact maintenance,
while he asserteth both his own and their right to it. Not because we have not
power, says he. 4. Not only Ministers, but all and every one are bound to
remit somewhat of that, which, in strictest justice, they might exact, rather
than to over-burthen, and break their poor brethren, by exacting all their
right from them; for, he holds forth his example in remitting of his right to
be followed not only by Ministers, but the people also in the like case, but to
make our selves an ensample unto you to follow us, says he. 5. The Lords
Ministers should, as by all lawful means, so especially by the exercise of wise
and justifiable moderation in things relating to this present world, endeavor
to gain that love and respect among the people of their flock, whereby they may
be the more incited to follow their example in things honest and just;
especially seeing such is the humor of people, as not to trouble themselves
much in following their copy, except they affect and respect the hand that
wrote it; for, Paul did remit of that which was otherwise his just right, to
make himself an example unto them to follow him.

Ver. 10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any
man would not work, neither should he eat. Here is a second reason serving both
to dondemn the sin of idleness and their neglect of censuring that sin, because
their practice herein was not only contrary to his example, as is already
shown, but also to his doctrine, whereby he had commanded and by his Apostolic
authority enacted for a standing law, that whosoever having otherwise strength
and opportunity, will not work, that is, employ, either his body, or mind, or
both, in some honest labor, for promoting one way or other the good of
mankind, such a man should not eat, that is, should not be born with, sed, or
maintained among Christians, that so being redacted to straits, he may be
constrained to betake himself to some honest employment. Doct. 1. As the Lords
Ministers should press upon people, not only practice of religious duties, but
also painfulness and diligence in some particular calling: So it is the duty of
the Lords people, and of every one in their station, to promove obedience to
the lawful commands of Christ's Ministers, both in themselves and in others;
for, Paul does press upon all to work in some particular calling, and to
promove obedience to his direction herein, by discountenancing such as would
not obey, while he commands that if any would not work, neither should he
eat. 2. As it is the duty of Ministers to give timeous warning against a sin,
when it begins to spread, and before it come to a height among a people: So
the more temeous warning has been given of the evil that is in any sin, the
greater is their guilt, who notwithstanding contiue in it, or do not what they
might and should to suppress it; for, Paul had given order timeously, even
while he was with them, to suppress this sin of idleness, and does hence
aggravate their guilt in that they had not done so: for even when we were with
you, this we commanded you. 3. It concerns all men, and especially those who
are entrusted with the Churches common Charity, to employ it wisely, and so as,
to the best of their knowledge, they do not thereby furnish fuel to the lusts
of any, or fe^d them in their sinful idleness, or any other way misapply it to
such as are not due objects; for, the command is given to all men, chiefly to
the Church-guides, that they do not employ their own, or the Churches charity,
to maintain idle vagabonds and wilful loyterers. If any would not work, neither
should he eat. 4. It is the Lords allowance that those who do not work, not,
because they will not, but either they are not able to work, or though they be
able and gladly would, yet cannot get employment to work, I say, it is the
Lords allowance that such be, so far as is possible, maintained upon the
charity of others, especially if they have nothing of their own whereby to
maintain themselves; for, the command is not given about those who do not work,
through want of ability, or of opportunity, but only them who will not work,
that they should not eat.

Ver. 11. For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busybodies. The Apostle being to speak both to
idle loyterers, and to this Church which did tolerate them, more particularly
to v. 16. does first both give a reason of what he has said to this purpose
already from v. 6. as appears from the causal particle for, and also make way
for that which he is yet to speak more, while he shows he had spoken nothing
rashly or without ground, but had heard (doubtless by trust-worthy informers,
such as are mentioned 1 Cor. 1. 11.) that notwithstanding of his former
warning, 1 These. 4. 11. and 5. 14. there were some who walked disorderly among
them, and were not censured by them, whom he describes from two of their
properties, which seem repugnant, and yet do well agree, and usually go
together. They do nothing at all, to wit, in those things which they ought, and
^o which they have a calling. And yet are busybodies, and but too diligent,
to wit, about those things, which belong not to them. Doct. 1. It is not
contrary to charity and prudence for one Christian to report, delate, and make
relation of what miscarriages he does observe in others, providing he do not
thereby seek their disgrace and shame, but their amendment, and in order to
that end do report their faults, chiefly to those, who may by some means
contribute to help forward their repentance; for, some did certainly make
report of those miscarriages in this Church to Paul, who had power to take
order with them, otherwise he could not have heard them, for we hear that there
are some, etc. 2. As Ministers should not charge a Church or particular person
with the guilt of any sin, rashly, or without a ground; lest, otherwise, his
precipitant rashness do discover in him the want of prudence and charity: So it
is not rashness in a Minister to reprove and tax a man, of whose guilt in that
particular for which he does reprove him, he knows nothing but by report
only, providing he believe not every report, but what he has from trust-worthy
informers, 1 Cor. 1. 11. for, Paul, to clear himself that he had not taxed them
rashly, does show he heard that there were some among them who walked
disorderly. 3. It concerns a Minister prudently to enquire, and seek to know
what fruits the Gospel Preached by him does bring forth among the people of his
charge, what sins are most prevalent with them, and what virtues are exercised
by them; that thereby he may be the more enabled for speaking pertinently unto
them; for, in order to this end Paul did labor to inform himself, otherwise he
would not so readily have heard that there were some which walked among them
disorderly, working not at all. 4. It is the part of a wise reprover not to
charge the faults of a few upon all in common; lest instead of convincing those
who are guilty and making them better, he irritate those who are not guilty and
make them worse; Thus does Paul in wisdom astrict his charge to some among them
only. I hear that there are some which walk among you disordely. 5. There have
been always some in the Church, who having taken on a name for profession, and
possibly thereby come to some respect among the Godly, have, under a pretext of
giving themselves to more than ordinary devotion, cast by all care of any
particular calling, and lived hand-idle, to the hurt of others upon whom they
lived, and to the reproach of the Gospel; for, such were they in this Church,
some who walked disorderly, working nothing at all. 6. The mind of man cannot
be wholly idle, but must be employed in somewhat, if not in doing what is good
and profitable, then of necessity in what is evil, useless or hurtful: and
usually none are more busy in other men's matters, than they who wholly neglect
their own: for, those disorderly walkers did not work at all in their own
affairs, and yet were busy bodies in the affairs of others.

Ver. 12. Now them that are such, we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread. He does, next,
speak to those who were guilty of walking disorderly, and both peremptorily
commands them, and most affectionately exhorts them, in the name and authority
of Christ the Lord, first, to work, and so to quit idleness; 2. To work with
quietness, that is, containing themselves within the bounds of their calling,
without creating trouble, either to themselves or others; from which would
follow, 3. They should eat their own bread, gotten by their own labors, and
not given them in alms, or for naught. Doct. 1. So great a tyrant is custom
in any sin, and especially a custom of lazy ease and idleness, that when a
people are once habituate to it, they are very hardly driven from it; for, his
charging them so hard to quit their idleness, implies that it was great
difficulty to drive them from it, being now for a long time accustomed to it.
Now them that are such we command and exhort. 2. When sins do grow so common,
that either through the moral guilt which is in them, or the civil
inconvenience which follows upon them, or both, they do portend no less than
apparent ruin to the whole Church, then especially should the Lords Ministers
bend the utmost of their endeavors, what by themselves, what by others, to
suppress them, and to reclaim the Lords people from the practice of them; for,
this sin of idleness did threaten the dissipation of the Church, both morally,
considering the great guilt was in it, and civilly, considering how poor this
Church in all probability was; and therefore the Apostle is so fervent and
serious to suppress it, and to stir up the whole Church to take notice of it.
Now them that are such we command and exhort. 3. So merciful is God that he
does not wholly cease to deal with sinners as if they were desperate, after one
or more repulses, but gives them many renewed on-sets, whereby he intends to
gain some, Joh. 4. 7, 10, 13, 16, 21, 26. and to make others more inexcusable:
Matthew. 11. 21, 22. for, though those idlers had received several admonitions to
no purpose, yet Paul, in Christ's name and authority and by warrant from him,
does here again command and exhort them that with quietness they work. 4.
Though the sentence of excommunication, as we shall hear from v. 14. be in it
self lawful; yet so dreadful is it, that there should be a kind of lothness in
Christ's Ministers to pronounce it, if by any other means they may draw the
obstinate sinner to repentance, and so prevent it; for, notwithstanding of many
former admonitions, he does here give them one further, before he give order to
pronounce the sentence. Now them that are such we command and exhort. 5. Such
should be a Ministers way of dealing with most obstinate sinners, in order to
their gaining, as that he make known he does not look upon them as wholly void
of all sense of God and goodness, and secretly at least insinuate he has yet
some contrary thoughts of them; that thereby, if it be possible, he may quicken
any dying principle of conscience, any sense of Heaven or Hell, of right or
wrong, and any awe of God which yet may be lurking in them; for, therefore does
he exhort them by our Lord Jesus Christ, implying thereby he did not think they
had cast off all respect to him. 6. The more a man be busied with his own
employments, the less will his leisure be to meddle with the affairs of others:
and consequently, will create less trouble either to himself or to those who
live beside him; for, he joyneth those two together, a man's working his own
work, and his quiet abstinence from meddling with, or troubling others. That
with quietness they work. 7. That the Lord has established property and
dominion of goods, See upon Ephesians. 4. v. 28. doct. 2. which is also clear from
this, that he speaks of their own bread, that is, which they have a proper
right unto. 8. Beside those other ways of attaining right and property, by
inheritance, Genesis 15. 4. gift, 1 Samuel 9. 9. contract or bargain, Ruth 4. 9.
this is one, whatever a man does purchase by his lawful industry and p^ins is
properly his own, and may be employed by him for his own good and necessary use
with Gods allowance; for, he calls the bread, which they should purchase by
working with quietness, their own bread. 9. The Lord does ordinarily bless a
man's conscientious diligence in his lawful calling with such a measure of
success, as he may have wherewith to sustain himself, and be kept from being
burdensome to others; for, he shows, that, upon their working with
quietness, they should eat their own bread.

Ver. 13. But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing. He speaks, thirdly,
to those who walked orderly among them. And first, he does lovingly exhort
them, as brethren, not to weary or become worse (as the word signifies) that
is, remiss or slack in well-doing where, by well-doing may be understood
conscie^^^-making of their duty in general, and more particularly, 1. Painful
diligence in their lawful employments, wherein they were in hazard of being
rendered remiss by the loitering carriage of others. 2. Their charitable
beneficence toward necessitous objects, from which they were not to desist
under pretext of his forbidding them to maintain idle loyterers, v. 10. or of
the abounding of many unworthy objects, by relieving of whom formerly they had
misapplyed their charity. To this sense is the like phrase used Gal. 6. 10 --
Doct. 1. The Minister of Christ must so reprove the stubborn and disobedient,
as that he do not neglect to speak to the direction and encouragement of those
who are better inclined, more obedient and tractable: And as there are several
tempers, cases and conditions among a mixed multitude; so must the Minister set
himself to give every one their due, neglecting none; this is to cut and divide
the word of God aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. for, so does Paul; having spoken to the
disorderly, v. 12. he does now speak to those who walked orderly. But ye
brethren be not weary. 2. As it is not sufficient for men once to have entered
the course of well doing, but they must continue in it: So, considering the
many discouragements wherewith men do meet in this course, and those especially
which do arise from the bad examples of others, there is no small propenseness,
even in the best, to sit up in it; for, Paul perceiving a probability of their
turning remiss from the bad example of those who walked disorderly, he exhorts
them that they would not be weary in well-doing. 3. It is an incumbent duty to
the Lords people, and a duty which must be made conscience of, if so they would
prove themselves orderly walkers, not only to ply their lawful callings
diligently, that thereby they may have wherewith to sustain themselves, but
also to bestow some part of their gain, a measure at least proportioned to
their ability, for the help and supply of necessitous objects; for, Paul
enjoyneth to those who walked orderly, not only to work with quietness, but
also to make conscience of well-doing, under which is contained charitable
beneficence to due objects, be not weary in well-doing. 4. As many men are most
ingenious and witty to find out excuses and pretexts to color their neglect of
the forementioned duty, what from the unworthiness of many objects, by
bestowing their charity on whom they may misapply it and lose it, what from
texts of Scripture wrested to justify their avaritious and merciless
disposition: So no excuse of that kind will have weight before the Lord, but be
looked upon as mere pretexts and shifts to cover and cloak men's wretched
naughtiness and averseness from that which they are otherwise sufficiently
convinced to be a duty, if they had a mind to it; for, Paul foreseeing that
some would cover their averseness under those pretexts (see the Exposition)
does here exhort them not to be weary in well-doing.

Ver. 14. And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. He prescribes unto them,
next, what they should do for censuring the delinquents; and first, if any man,
whatever he was, did not obey, but remain contumaciously disobedient to the
Apostles word, or exhortation to orderly walking, after he was now again
admonished by this Epistle, they, to wit, the Church-guides, should note him,
or as the word does signify, make a sign or wonder of him, put a mark or brand
of infamy upon him, whereby he means no other, than that ignominious mark of
excommunication, as appears from the second thing here enjoined to the Lords
people in relation to the party so noted, they were to have no company with
him, where all intimate familiarity, to which they were not obliged by any
civil, or natural bond, is discharged them, which is the very consequent of
excommunication expressed by the same word in the original, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and
in the close of the verse he expresses one end of inflicting this censure,
that the party censured, being thus discountenanced by all, as a man unworthy
of their company, may be ashamed of his sin, and so ashamed of it, as to turn
from it to his duty, as the greek word implies, and so it is the same in
effect with that end of excommunication, which is expressed 1 Cor. 5. 5. Doct.
1. Even the most faithful, pious and painful Ministers, when they have done
their utmost to reclaim obstinate offenders, and waited upon them with all
patience and meekness, have ground in reason to forecast and suppone that their
pains and diligence will not be blessed unto all, but that some, the more they
are labored with, will prove the more obdured and perverse; The Lord so
overruling, hereby to teach his servants, that the utmost of their endeavors
can prevail nothing without his blessing, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. and that the glory of
their gaining ground upon any should be ascribed to God, and not to themselves,
1 Cor. 15. -- 20. for, even Paul, after his long patience and unwearied
diligence, supponeth so much, and if any man, says he, obey not our word by
this Epistle: 2. It is the will and command of Christ, the King and head of his
Church, that his public Ministers and Church-guides (Joh. 20. 23.) being
convened together (1 Cor. 5. 4.) do put a mark and brand of infamy upon those,
who with an high hand do persevere in their wickedness after foregoing
admonitions stubbornly despised or carelessly neglected, while in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 4. they excommunicate, cut off and cast out
all such from the society of the Church -- that the leaven of their sin spread
not further to infect others, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. and that the sin of some few,
tolerated and connived at by the Church, be not a matter of reproach and
disgrace to the whole, 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2. that others may be deterred from the
like obstinacy, by the severity of the censure, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and that the
party against whom the sentence is pronounced, may, by the Lords blessing upon
that mean, be brought to repentance: for, Paul bids note the contumacious man
with the ignominious brand of excommunication, that he may be ashamed, or
brought to repentance by that mean. 3. Even those sins which are not in their
own nature most heinous, when contumacy against foregoing admonitions is joined
with them, do make the person guilty liable to this severe censure, in so far
as they argue desperate obstinacy, and contempt of that authority wherewith
Christ has invested his courts and servants: for, Paul will have even the sin
of living idly, being joined with contumacy, to be censured thus. And if any
man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man. 4. The credit of a whole
Church, the salvation of a man's soul, his gaining to God by repentance, are
much to be preferred to the reputation and credit of any particular person, so
that the latter ought not to be spared, if there be not another probable mean,
for the preservation of, or attaining to the former: for, says Paul, if any
man obey not our word, note him, to wit, with a mark of infamy, that he may be
ashamed. 5. Church Censures, even the highest, are to be dispensed impartially,
so that where the sins deserving censure are the same, and the probability of
attaining the ends, for which the censure is inflicted, the same, the same
censure is to be inflicted upon all without respect of persons; for, he says,
if any man, without exception, obey not -- note that man. 6. Exhortations in
Scripture must be restricted according to the nature of the subject in hand, so
that when the Scripture it self, at least in that place, does not expressly
design those to whom the exhortation is directed, we must not think it is
always directed indefinitely to all, if so the duty exhorted unto, does,
according to other Scriptures, belong only to some; for, the two directions of
the text, note that man, and, keep not company with him, are not given to one
and the same persons, for all must abstain, even women, from the fellowship of
the party excommunicate, Matthew. 18. 17. but the inflicting of the censure,
expressed by noting, belongs not to all, certainly not to women, 1 Timothy 2. 12.
nor yet to any but the Church-guides, according to Heb. 13. 17. doct. 6. So
many ways advantageous is familiar conversing with the Lords people, Prove. 10.
21. and 13. 20. that it is no small punishment for any man to be debarred from
it; and therefore it cannot be but exceeding sinful for any to ^^un it
willingly, or not to improve it for his advantage when he does enjoy it: for
Paul enjoyneth Christians to have no company with the censured party, as a sore
and bitter ingredient in his punishment. 7. As nothing hardens a sinner more
in wickedness, than that, notwithstanding of it, he loses nothing of his
esteem among good men, for any thing he can discern from their countenance and
carriage: So there is nothing which proves by the Lords blessing a more
effectual mean to make the sinner ashamed of his sin, and because of shame to
turn from it; than when he sees himself discountenanced and his company
shunned as a very plague by all, because of it: for, Paul enjoins them to have
no company with him, for this very end, that he may be ashamed, and so, as to
turn from it to God.

Ver. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. The
third thing which he prescribes unto those who walked orderly, is moderation
in the execution of the forementioned censure, propounded, 1. Negatively, that
they should not count him as an enemy, that is, so as to forsake him wholly, as
men do their enemies, without any further care of reclaiming him, but, next,
positively, it was their duty to admonish him, that is, mind him of his duty
and hazard, to wit, if so there might be any hopes to regain him, Matthew. 7. 6.
and to admonish him as a sickly brother under cure, to wit, so as he might
understand he was not wholly cast out of their heart, hopes, and affection,
though cut off from all voluntary intimate fellowship with them, v. 14. Doct.
1. While the servants of Christ are laboring to draw the Lords people from the
one extreme of any sin, they have need to guard lest they run upon the other,
as for example, from too much leni^y and compliance with scandalous offenders,
to the other extremity of bitterness and too much rigidity; for, Paul, having
indirectly reproved them for the former, does here guard against the latter.
Yet count him not as an enemy, says he. 2. The censure of excommunication,
when inflicted for contumacy in some particular evils, whether of judgment or
practice, and not for total apostasy, does not exclude the party censured from
being a member of the visible Church, but only from the actual enjoyment of
Church Priviledges, and from the visible Communion of the Church: for, he bids
count the excommunicate man, not as an enemy, but, as a brother. 3. The
censure, even of excommunication it self, should so be used, as that love to
the salvation of him who is censured be still retained, and endeavors flowing
from love used to reclaim him, when occasion offers; for, so much is
enjoined, while he commands to admonish him as a brother. 4. Then do we ky^h
our brotherly love and affection aright, and as we ought toward an
excommunicate person, when we do not keep intimate and familiar fellowship with
him, as we might, kyth our affection to others who are not under that sentence,
1 These. 5. 26. and much less do flatter him in his sin and obstinacy, but when
we do admonish him of his sin and hazard, and make him thereby know we love
him, and in the mean time deny him any other testimony of our affection, except
what civil or natural bonds do bind us to discharge toward him: for, Paul
having forbidden to converse familiarly with him, will have them kyth their
brotherly love toward him only by admonishing him: but admonish him as a
brother.

Ver. 16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always, by all means.
The Lord be with you all. In the second part of the Chapter he concludes the
Epistle, which he does, first, in this verse, by a prayer to God consisting of
two petitions, first, because the censuring of the contumacious presently
enjoined might occasion some troubling of the Churches peace, he prays that
the Lord of peace himself, who alone creates and entertaineth peace in his
Churches borders, Psalm. 147. 14. might give them peace, that is both a
peaceable frame of spirit desireous of peace, Job 3. 15. and the blessing of
peace or harmonious walking together in Christian society, Psalm. 29. 11. and
this, always, that is, a lasting, solid and continuing peace, and by all
means, to wit, a peace, whereof though God be the only Author, yet they were to
seek after it, by all means lawful and the utmost of their ^ervent endeavors,
for by praying for it by all means he does indirectly point at their duty to
seek after it by all means. Secondly, He prays, that in order to this and to
other ends, God might be with them all, by his gracious presence and sweet
influences of his spirit for assisting them with strength, direction and
courage to go on in the way of their duty against all opposition, Romans 8. 31.
Doct. 1. A Minister, who would have his preaching blessed with success among a
people, must be much in prayer to God for his gracious presence and powerful
concurrence. He must begin with prayer, he must end with prayer, yea and all
along his work he must now and then dart up a fervent desire to God for that
end: for, Paul began this Epistle with prayer, chap. 1. 2. he prayed several
times in his passing through it, chap. 1. 11. and 2. 16. and 3. 5. and now he
does conclude it with prayer. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace
always. 2. We should labor to give such styles to God in prayer as are most
suitable to our present suit, and may furnish us with a ground of confidence
that we shall be heard in what we ask; for, while Paul suiteth for peace from
God, be calls him the Lord of peace. 3. As there are ofttimes ground of fear
lest alienation of minds, schisms, rents and heart-burnings may possibly
follow within a Church, upon their impartial exercise of discipline and
inflicting of the highest censure; So the Lords servants ought not to surcease
upon the mere possibility or appearance of such hazard, but are to do their
duty, and deal with God the more earnestly for preventing any feared
inconvenience of that kind: for, Paul projecting that the exercise of
discipline might breed some disturbance to the Churches peace, does not bid
them desist, but praye^h, now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always.
4. As peace and harmony among Christian societies is with great difficulty
attained and preserved, and is no less than a singular work of God, considering
our own averseness from it, Romans 3. 17. and Satan's enmity to it, Joh. 8. 44. So
that peace only is to be regarded whereof the Lord is the bestower and
approver: a peace that is not prejudicial to truth and holiness, Heb. 12. 14.
but only curbeth and restrains our sinful and turbulent humors, 2 Cor. 12.
20. for, he prays for such a peace, while he seeks peace from God, and
shows it cannot be had but from him, while he says, the Lord of peace
himself give you peace. 5. Though peace among Christians be a special work of
God (see doct. 4.) and therefore to be sought from him; yet our prayers of that
kind should be seconded by our own serious endeavors and all lawful means
assayed for that end, so, as that we not only carefully eschew whatever may on
our part give cause of renting, 1 Cor. 8. 13. but also be not easily provoked,
when cause of renting is given by others, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and that, when a rent
is made, we spare no pains, nor stand upon any thing, which is properly our
own, for having it removed, Genesis 13. 8, 9. and do not weary to follow after
peace, when it seems to fly from us, Heb. 12. 14. and all our endeavors have
but small appearance of present success, 2 Cor. 12. 15. for, while he seeks
peace from God by all means, he does indirectly incite them to seek after it by
all means. 6. The peace and concord which should be sought after among
Christians is not an outside agreement only, Psalm. 55. 21. nor a mere cessation
from debate and strife for a time, until either party see an offered advantage,
but a lasting, solid and continuing peace; and therefore an union in hearts*
and affections, Phil. 2. 2. which being once united, are not easily rent
asunder, 1 Samuel 18. 1. with 19. 2. an union in truth not in error, Isa. 8. 12.
so that neither party may have reason to repent their entering it; And an union
not in a carnal but a spiritual interest, even that they may strive together
for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. for, he prays the Lord to give them
peace always, that is, a lasting solid peace. 7. As the Lords gracious
presence with his people in any plentiful measure is annexed to their peaceable
frame of spirit, and serious endeavors after peace and concord among
themselves: and as their implacable renting humors do grieve the Lords spirit,
and provoke him to withdraw from them: So sound peace and concord among
societies does much depend upon the Lords gracious presence, which where it is,
does not a little quiet and put to silence our renting and dividing humors.
Neither can there be any sound or solid peace but among the people with whom
God is: for, the grant of those two petitions seem here presented as mutually
depending upon one another: The Lord give you peace always, and the Lord be
with you all.

Ver. 17. The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
every Epistle: so I write. Before he conclude with his usual farewell wish, v.
18. he does here premit a Preface to it, wherein, having called the following
wish his salutation, that is, an expression and testimony of his good will and
affection, he shows he did write it with his own hand and that it was his use
so to do at the close of every Epistle which did serve as a token, or certain
mark, whereby his own Epistles might be distinguished from all others forged
and feigned in his name, and he hints at the reason why it was such a differing
mark, to wit, because his way of writing was always uniform, and hardly could
be undiscernably counterfeited by any other, which is employed, while he says,
So I write. Doct. 1. The sending of salutations by word or writ, that we may
thereby testify our continuing affection to absent friends, is not a matter of
common courtesy and good manners only, but a duty to be performed for
conscience sake, as tending to entertain love and good will among Christians;
for, while Paul does never omit to send his salutation, it evidently appears
he did not look upon it as a matter of complement but of conscience. The
salutation of Paul. 2. Our salutation, whether of present or absent friends,
should express our wishes to God for things spiritual and the choicest mercies
to be bestowed on them, wherein we ought to be real, hearty and affectionate,
and not formal, or acted from the force of custom only: for, he calls his
farewell-wish, v. 18. to which he annexeth an hearty Amen, his salutation. The
salutation of Paul. 3. It has been an ancient slight of Satan, and of his
instruments to thrust upon the Church (so far as in them did lie) false and
forged writings, and give them out for Canonick Scripture, thereby to make the
truth and authority of all Scripture questionable; for, to prevent such
impostures, Paul did write his salutation with his own hand which is the token
in every Epistle, says he. 4. That God has sufficiently provided in his Word
against the forementioned evil: see upon Col. 4. v. 18. which is the token in
every Epistle, so I write.

Ver. 18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Rests the
very thing, which he did so write, with which he shuts up the Epistle, to wit,
his hearty with that the free and undeserved favor of God in Christ, with all
the fruits and tokens of it, might be conveyed unto them all without exception,
to which he affixeth his Amen, signifying Let it be so, and it shall be so, in
testimony both of his fervent desire and confidence. Doct. 1. Whatever be the
eminence of a person or persons, for their inherent graces and gracious
qualifications; yet it is only God free grace and undeserved favor, and not
their own merit, which must be relied on for closing their accounts, or for
obtaining any spiritual or temporal mercy at the hands of God: for, though he
commended them highly for their patience, faith, love, and other graces, chap.
1. 3, 4. yet he closes all by wishing Gods free grace and favor to them, as
the fountain-cause of all things they stood in need of or could expect. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 2. As there is an inexhaustible
fountain of free grace in God, which can water all, without exception of any,
and will extend it self to as many as he sees fit, Romans 9. 18. So the more of
it we wish unto, or, is according to our wish bestowed upon others, there does
not the less remain behind unto our selves: for Paul, who wishes grace and
favor to them all, had received a very large measure of it himself, and knew
that how large a measure soever was bestowed upon them, there would not be the
less for him. Therefore does he thus close, The grace, etc.

The Postscript.
The second Epistle to the Thessalonians, was written from Athens.

The truth of this Postscript is no less suspected than the former, and this
Epistle judged more probably to have been written also from Corinth, where Paul
continued a year and an half after he came from Athens, Act. 18. 1. with 11.
See upon the Postscript of the first Epistle.

FINIS.

