A SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE NATHANAEL FIENNES, (second Son to the right
Honorable the LORD SAY) in answer to the Third Speech of the LORD GEORGE
DIGBY.

Concerning BISHOPS and the City of Londons Petition, both which were made the
9th of Feb. 1640. in the honorable house of COMMONS.

In which is plainly cleared the several objections, that are made against
the Londoners Petition, and also the great and transcendent evils of Episcopal
Government, are demonstrated and plainly laid open.

Printed in the year. 1641.

A SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE NATHANAEL FIENNES, In the House of COMMONS the 9.
of February. 1640,
Mr. Speaker,
TWo things have fallen into debate this day.

The first, concerning the Londoners Petition, whether it should be committed
or no.

The other concerning the Government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. whether it should be countenanced or no?

For the first, I do not understand by any thing, that I have yet heard, why
the Londoners Petition should not be committed, or countenanced.

The exceptions that are taken against it, are from the irregularities of the
deliverie of it, and from the Subject matter contained in it.

For the first, it is alleged that the long tail of this blazing star, is
ominous, and that such a number of Petitioners, and such a number that brought
the Petition to the House, was irregular; hereunto I answer, that the fault
was either in the multitude of the Petitioners, or in their carriages, and
demeanors: if a multitud find themselves agreived, why it should be a fault in
them to express their grievances more then in one, or a few, I cannot see,
nay, to me it seems rather a reason that their Petitions should be
committed, and taken into serious consideration, for thereby they may receive
satisfaction, though all be not granted that they desire. But if we shall
throw their Petition behind the door, and refuse to consider it, that it may
seem an act of will in us. And whether an act of will in us, may not produce
an act of will in the people, I leave it to your consideration. Sure I am, acts
of will, are more dangerous there then here, because usually they are more
tumultuous. All laws are made, principally for the quiet and peace of a
Kingdom; and a law may be of such indifferent nature many times, that it is
a good reason to alter it, only, because a great number desires it, if there
were nothing else in it, and therefore I do not see that the number of
Petitioners is any good reason, why it should not be committed, but rather the
contrary.

Now for their carriage, there came indeed, three or four hundred of the
15000, some of the better sort of them, and there might be good reason for it.
I have heard that there was brought a Petition to some privy Counselors,
with a thousand hands to it, and being brought only with six men, they were
answered, that they six might write those thousand hands; if there were a
thousand that joined in the Petition, why did they not come too? And we heard
it objected but the other day, in this House against the Ministers Petition,
that there were indeed seven or eight hundred names to it, but two hands
only. Therefore it was not without cause, that a considerable number should
come, with a Petition signed by so many, but for any disorder in their
carriage, I saw none; for upon an intimation in one word from this House, they
forthwith retired to their dwellings. As for the subject matter of the
Petition, three exceptions are taken against it.

First, that diverse things are contemptible in it, as that about Ovide Amore,
set forth in English, and other such things.

Secondly, that in many things their discourse was altogether irrational,
for that they argue from personal faults of Bishops against the office it self
of Bishops, and in other things argue from effects that proceed from it by
accident, as if they did fly out of it.

And in the last place, that their prayer and conclusion is bold and
presumptuous, desiring so boldly an abolition of standing laws. To the first I
answer, that some things may seem contemptible in themselves, which are not so
in their causes, nor in their effects, as the suffering of such lascivious
Pamphlets to be printed, and published, when other profitable writings are
suppressed, does discover a principle, that looseness and profaneness, (which
will help to bring in superstition) is more suitable to their hierachy then the
contrary, which makes them connive at such things, as are apt to produce
looseness and lewdness, and this is no contemptible effect, nor does it
proceed from a contemptible cause.

In the next place, for that which seems irrational in the way of their
discovery, diverse things may seem to be personal faults, which indeed are
derived unto the persons from the office, or from the circumstances thereof, I
mean their revenues, and dignities, on the one side, and the Ceremonies on the
other side. For most of the things complained of, as silencing, and thrusting
out of godly and paineful Preachers, bringing in Innovations in doctrine, and
worship, and the like; although they may seem personal and accidental faults,
yet if we follow them to their last resort, we shall find, that their
worldly wealth and dignities stir them up to do this, that their sole and
arbitrarie power over the Clergy, and in matter Ecclesiastical, enable them
to effect it, and the Ceremonies both new and old, serve as instruments, and
means, whereby they effect it.

In the last place, that their prayer in the conclusion of their Petition, is
bold, or presumptuous, I do not see there is any reason so to esteem of it:
for if they had taken upon them to have altered any thing upon their own
authority, or had imperiously required the Parliament to do it, then it might
deserve such a style, but when they come as humble suppliants, by way of
Petition, desiring the altering of laws, that have been found burdensome unto
them, And that of the Parliament, where, and wherein, only old laws may be
repealed, and new laws may be made, they come in the right manner, to their
right and proper place, and therefore have done nothing, boldly, or
presumptuously, but orderly, and regularly, and therefore ought not to receive
any check or discouragement, in the way that they have taken.

Now Sir, concerning the Government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. which also has been spoken unto, whereas it is desired that the evils,
and inconveniences should be showed, which arise not from the persons, but
from the office it self of Bishops, I shall apply my discourse particularly to
that point. But first, I shall crave leave to say a word or two, in answer to
what has been alleged for the credit of the Government by Bishops. First,
that it is as ancient as Christian Religion, and that it has continued ever
since the time of Christ and his Apostles; as for this, I do not pretend to
have so much knowledge in antiquity, as to confute this out of the fathers and
ecclesiastical histories, (although there are that undertake that) only one
sentence I have often heard cited out of Saint Jerome, that in the primitive
times, Omnia communi Clericorum Concilio regebantur: and truly so far as the
Acts of the Apostles, and the new Tastament goes, which was the ancientest,
and most primitive time of Christianity; I could never find there any
distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter, but that they were one and the
very same thing. In the next place, that which is alleged for the credit of
episcopacy, is, that our reformers and martyrs were many of them Bishops, and
practiced many of those things now complained of, and that in other reformed
Churches where Bishops are not, they are desired. For the martyrs and reformers
of the Church that were Bishops. I do not understand that, that was any part
of their reformation, nor of their martyrdom; I have read that whereas Ridley
and Hooper had some difference between them in their life time about these
things, when they came both to their martyrdom, he that had formerly been the
patron of this Hierarchy and Ceremonies, told his Brother, that therein his
foolishness had contended with his wisdom. As for that which is said, that
other reformed Churches where they have not Bishops, yet they are desired, I
will not deny but some among them may desire Bishoprics, I mean the
Dignities and Revenues of bishops, but that they desire bishops, as thinking it
the fittest, and best Government of the Church, I cannot believe, for if they
would have Bishops, why do they not make themselves Bishops? I know not what
hinders, why they might not have Bishops when they would. In the last place,
for that which is alleged in relation to the Government of this Kingdom that
Bishops are so necessary, as that the King cannot well let them go with the
safety of Monarchy, and that if Bishops be taken away, assemblies, or
something must come in the room thereof. And if Kings should be subject
thereunto and should happen to be excommunicated thereby, that after they
would be little esteemed, or obeyed as Kings, for this if it shall be cleared,
as it is affirmed, that the removal of the Government by Bishops, or of any
thing therein do any thing strike at Monarchy, I shall never give my vote, nor
consent thereunto as long as I live. But to clear that this is not so, I offer
to your consideration, that by the law of this land, not only all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but also all superiority, and pre-eminence over
the ecclesiastical state, is annexed to the imperial Crown of this Realm, and
may be granted by Commission under the great seal, to such persons as his
Majesty shall think meet: now, if the King should grant it unto a certain
number of Commissioners, equal in authority, as he may do, this were an
abolition of Episcopacie, and yet not diminution of Monarchy; but the truth is,
Episcopacie is a kind of Monarchy under a Monarchy, and is therein
altogether unlike the civil Government under his Majesty: for the King being
a common head over the ecclesiastical state and the civil, we shall find
that in the exercise of civil jurisdiction, in all Courts under his Majesty,
it is Aristocraticall, and placed in many, and not in one, as appears in
this high Court of Parliament, in the inferior Courts of Westminster Hall, and
in the Sizes, and Sessions in the country, which are held by many
Commissioners, and not only by one, or his deputies, and Commissaries, as it
is in the exercise of ecclesiastical Gogoverment. As to the point of
excommunication, supposing that it did dissolve natural and civil bonds of
duty, as it does not, it might indeed be as terrible to Princes, as it is
represented. But I reason thus, either princes are subject to excommunication,
or they are not: if they be not, then they need as little to fear a
Presbytery, or an Assembly, as a Bishop in that respect; if they be, they
have as much to fear from Bishops, at leastwise from Bishops in their
Convocations, as from Presbyters in their assemblies, and so much the more,
because they have formerly felt the thunderbolts of those of that stamp, but
never from this latter sort. And now Sir, I proceed to represent unto you the
evils, and inconveniences that do proceed from the Government and Ceremonies
of the Church, and truly in my opinion the chief and principal cause of all
the evils which we have suffered, since the reformation in this Church and
State, has proceeded from that division which so unhappily has sprung up
amongst us, about Church Government, and the ceremonies of the Church, and from
which part in that division, I believe, it will appear in the particulars. I
know well there is a great division, and that upon greater matters, between us
and the Papists, and I am not ignorant that there have been great and sore
breaches, made upon our civil liberties, and the right of our proprieties.

But yet still I return to my former position, that the chief and most active
cause has proceeded from the Government and Ceremonies of the Church, and that
those other causes have either fallen into it, and so acted by it, or issued
out of it, and so acted from it. As for popery, I conceive that to have been
a cause that has fallen into this, and acted by it, for at the reformation, it
received such a deadly wound by so many sharp laws enacted against it, that
had it not been enlivened by this division amongst us, it could never have had
influence upon our Church and State to have troubled them, as this day we
feel: but finding that in this division amongst us, one party had need of
some of their principalls, to maintain their Hierarchy, together with their
worldly pomp and ceremonies, which are appurtenances thereunto, from hence
they first conceived a ground of hope, and afterward found means of success,
toward the introducing again of their superstition and idolatry into this
Realm: and they wrought so diligently upon this foundation, that they have
advanced their building very far, and how near they were to set up the
Roof, I leave it to your consideration. As for the evils which we have
suffered in our civil liberty, and the right of our proprieties, I conceive
they have proceeded out of this, and so acted from it, for if there had been
no breaches of Parliaments, there would have been no need to have had recourse
unto those broken cisternes that can hold no water; but there being a stoppage
of Parlamentary supplies, that was an occasion of letting in upon us, such an
inundation of monopolies, and other illegal taxes, and impositions,
accompanied with many other heavy and sore breaches of our liberties. Now there
needed not to have been any breaches of Parliaments, had there not been
something disliked in them, and what was that? it could not be any of these
civil matters that bred the first difference, for they have proceeded out of
it, therefore I conceive it was this. The Prelates with their adherents (the
Papists also concurring with them for their interest) did always look upon
Parliaments with an evil eye, as no friend to their offices and functions, at
leastwise to their benefices and dignities, and therefore (some of them having
always had the grace to be too near to the Princes ears) they have always
endeavored to breed a disaffection in Kings from Parliaments, as the press
and pulpit do abundantly witness, and ballads too, made by some of them,
upon the breaches of Parliaments. But we have a fresh and bleeding instance of
this, in the confirmation in his Majesty's name, which they procured to be
prefixed before their new book of Cannons, wherein they have endeavored to
make this impression upon his Majesty's royal mind, that the authors and
fomentors of the jealousies in respect of the new rites and ceremonies lately
introduced into the Church, which we call innovations, did strike at his
royal Person, as if he were perverted in his religion, and did worship God in
a superstitious way, and intended to bring in some innovation in matter of
Religion. Now Sir, who are the authors of those jealousies? did they not come
as complaints in the petitions from the bodies of several Countries the last
Parliament, and from more this present Parliament, and who were the fomentors
of those jealousies? did not the general sense of the last Parliament concur
in it, that they were innovations, and that they were suspicious, as
introductory to superstition? nay, I appeal to all those that hear me, which
are drawn from all parts of the Kingdom, whether this be not the general
sense of the greatest and most considerable part of the whole Kingdom? I
beseech you then to consider what kind offices these men have done between
the King and the Parliament, between the King and the Kingdom, I speak of the
greatest and most considerable part, as giving denomination to the whole. And
now Sir, as we have cast our eye backward, if we will look forwards, how do
the clouds thicken upon us, and what distractions, yea what dangers do they
threaten us withal? proceeding still from the same root of Church Government
and ceremonies: and truly as things now stand: I see but two ways, the one of
destruction, the other of satisfaction, destruction I mean of the opposite
party to the Bishops and the Ceremonies, and reducing of all to Cannonicall
obedience, by fair means or by foul; this way has been already tried, and
what effect it has brought forth in our neighbor Kingdom, we well know, and
it is like to produce no very good effect in this Kingdom, it men's scruples and
reasons in that behalf, shall be only answered with prisons, and pillories,
and hard censures, that I may speak most softly of them. I hold therefore,
that the other way of satisfaction is the safest, the easiest, and the only
way. And that is to take into consideration, the several heads of the evils,
which are causes of these complaints, and to find out, and apply the proper
remedies thereunto. For the furtherance whereof, I shall make bold with your
patience (which I am very unwilling to tire, but must tire my own conscience,
if I should not discharge it upon this occasion) to represent a brief model of
the several heads and springs, from whence the evils which are causes of these
complaints, do naturally or occasionally arise. The evils complained of, do
either arise from persons, or from things, those faults that are personal, are
besides the point that I intend to speak to, there is one only remedy for
them, that is, by punishment and removal of such persons, and the putting of
better in their room. As for those evils which proceed from things, they also
are remedied by a removal of such things as are evil, and the putting of better
in their room; the evils and inconveniences of this kind do principally flow,
either from the Clergies offices and functions, or from their benefices and
dignities; those that arise from their offices and functions, do arise
naturally either from the laws and constitutions, whereby, and according unto
which, they exercise their offices and functions, or from the Government it
self, wherein they exercise those functions. The faults that I note in the
ecclesiastical laws, are that they hold too much of the civil law, and too
much of the ceremonial law: of the civil law, in respect of all those titles
concerning wills, and legacies, tithes, marriages, adulteries, which all
belonging to the civil jurisdiction, and are no more of spiritual
consideration, then rapes, thefts, fellonies, or treasons may be. Sir it is
good that every bird should have his own feather, and I remember when one came
to our Savior Christ, to desire him that he would cause his Brother to divide
the inheritance with him, he asked him, who made him a judge of such things:
and may not we ask who made them, that take themselves to be successors of
Christ and his Apostles, Judges of such things? Many inconveniences arise from
hence, first, that the minds of Clergy men, are inured unto civil dominion,
and to meddle with civil matters. Secondly, the manner of their proceedings,
is turned from a spiritual way into the fashion of processes in temporal
Courts. And lastly, which is worst of all, by this means the spiritual sword
comes to be unsheathed about such things as do not at all fall under the
stroke thereof. Many are excommunicated for pigges, apples, and nuts, and such
like things; but the other fault which I noted in the ecclesiastical laws,
and constitutions, pincheth us more, which is, that they hold too much of the
ceremonial law. And here Mr. Speaker, give me leave to lament the condition
of this our Church of England, beyond that of all other reformed Churches. A
certain number of ceremonies in the judgment of some men unlawful and to be
rejected of all Churches, in the judgment of all other reformed Churches to be
rejected by them, and in the judgment of our own Churches but indifferent
ceremonies, and yet what difference, yea, what distractions have these
indifferent ceremonies raised amongst us? What has deprived us of so many
faithful, able, and godly ministers, since the Reformation, as able and as fit
in all other respects to discharge that function, as any age ever produced in
the Christian World since the time of the Apostles, I say what has deprived us
of them, but these indifferent ceremonies? what has deprived us of so many
thousand Christians which desired (and in all other respects deserved) to hold
communion with us, I say what has deprived us of them, and scattered them into
I know not what places and corners of the world, but these indifferent
ceremonies? What has caused so many hard censures, and harder executions, but
these indifferent ceremonies? What has occasioned those calamities, and
dangers, which we feel, and which we fear, but those indifferent ceremonies?
I shall say no more of them, but I pray God that now at length it may please his
Majesty with this his great Counsel of Parliament, to take a view of them, and
if there be a necessity to retain them, let them be retained; but if not,
then let us remove them, before they ruin us. As to the evils and
inconveniences that arise out of the Government it self, I should have noted
something amiss, as well in the legislative part, as in the executive part,
but in the former I am prevented, by what has been already voted concerning
the power of making Cannons: which votes if they be brought to perfection,
they will set us right in great part, in that respect, for surely, before the
power was neither in the hands of such as were representative of that which is
truly the Church of England, nor yet in the hands of those that were truly
representative of the Clergy of England, if they were the whole Church, as
indeed they are not. As to the executive part, which consists in the exercise
of ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, therein I note also two disorders, Confusion,
and Corruption, Confusion of the Spiritual sword, with the Temporal; laymen
strike with the Spiritual sword, and Spiritual men with the Temporal sword;
nay, out of the same mouth, and at the same time proceeds an excommunication,
and a fine, or commitment, ot both: I will not say positively, that it is
unlawful for Clergy men to exercise civil Jurisdiction, because I know it is
a question, but yet such a question as has been determined by diverse Canons
of general Counsels, and by some that were made in Synods of the Church of
England, that it is unlawful, and that upon grounds which are not contemptible.

As first, that it is contrary to the precept and practice of Christ and his
Apostles. And secondly, that it is not possible for one man to discharge two
functions, whereof either is sufficient to employ the whole man, especially
that of the ministry so great, that they ought not to entangle themselves with
the affairs of this world. A third ground not so well observed generally, as
in one part thereof, is this, that Ministers of the Gospel, being sent
especially to gain the souls of men, they are to gain as great interest as
possible may be, in their minds and affections: now we know that the nature
of all men is such, that they are apt to think hardly of those that are any
authors of their pain and punishment, although it be in a way of justice, and
therefore as it is well known, that Clergy men are not to be present in
judicio sanguinis, so the same reason extends it self to the administration of
all civil jurisdiction, and therefore we may observe that our Savior Christ,
as he always rejected all civil judicature, so on the other side, he went up
and down healing men's bodies, and otherwise doing good to their outward
estate, that his doctrine might have a freer, and fairer passage into their
souls. For the corruption that I spoke of in the exercise of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, I do not mean any personal corruption, but a deviation, or
aberration from the prescript of the divine rule, and though it be not easy
to find what that is in all particulars, yet it is not hard to say, what it is
not, and that I doubt may prove our case in diverse things. Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction we know, extends either to the Clergy only, and consists in
the Ordination, Admission, Suspension, and Deprivation of them, or else it
extends to the whole Church, and consists in excommunication and
absolution. As to the Ordination, Admission, Suspension, and Deprivation of
Ministers, we see how it is wholly at the pleasure of one man, and that of one
man proceeding in a manner arbitrarily, and that of one man whose interest is
concerned in it, that the door should be shut against able and painful
preaching Ministers, and a wide door set open to such as are unable, and unfit
for that function: many and great and dangerous evils arise from hence. As
first, that there is a constant far and fewd between the Ecclesiastical
State and the Civil, between Prelates, and Parliaments, between the Cannon
law, and the Common law, between the Clergy, and the Commonwealth, arising
from the disproportion, and dissimilitude which is between the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government, however it may seem to some to agree well enough,
but the truth is, if we consider his Majesty as the Common-head over the
Ecclesiastical State, as well as the Civil, we shall find that in the
exercise of all Civil jurisdiction, in all Courts under his Majesty, the power
is not in any one, or his Deputies and Commissaries, as it is in the
Ecclesiastical Government, in the several Diocesses throughout this Kingdom:
if we look first upon the highest and greatest Court, the high Court of
Parliament, we know that is a Counsel and a great Counsel too. In like manner
in the inferior Courts of Westminster Hall, there are many Judges in the point
of law, and more in matter of fact, wherein every man is judged by twelve of
equal condition unto him, I mean the juries, which are Judges of the fact,
both in causes Civil and Criminal: and if we look into the country, we
shall find the Sessions and Sizes, and other Courts held not by any one, but
by diverse Commissioners. And in short, in the Civil Government, every man from
the greatest to the least, has some share in the Government according to the
Proportion of his Interest in the Commonwealth, but in the Government of the
Church, all is in the hands of one man, in the several Diocesses, or of his
Chancellours, or Commissaries, and he exacts Canonical obedience, to his
Pontifical commands, with a total exclusion of those that notwithstanding
have as much share in the Church, and consequently as much Interest in the
government of it, as they have in that of the Commonwealth. (Sir) until the
Ecclesiastical government be framed something of another twist, and be more
assimilated unto that of the Commonwealth, I fear the Ecclesiastical
government will be no good neighbor unto the Civil, but will be still a
casting in of its leaven into it, to reduce that also to a sole, absolute, and
arbitrary way of proceeding: And herein (Sir) I do not believe, that I utter
Prophesies, but what we have already found, and felt.

A Second, and that a great evil, and of dangerous consequence, in this sole
and arbitrary power of Bishops over their Clergy is this, that they have by
that means a power, to place, and displace the whole Clergy of their Diocese
at their pleasure: and this is such a power, as for my part, I had rather they
had the like power over the Estate, and persons of all within their Diocese;
for if I hold the one, but at the will and pleasure of one man, (I mean the
Ministry, under which I must live) I can have but little, or at least no
certain joy nor comfort in the other. But this is not all, for if they have
such a power to mould the Clergy of their Diocesses, according to their
pleasure, we know what an Influence they may have by them upon the people, and
that in a short time they may bring them to such blindness, and so mould them
also to their own wills, as that they may bring in what Religion they please:
nay, having put out our eyes, as the Philistines did Sampsons, they may
afterward make us grind, and reduce us unto what slavery they please, either
unto themselves, as formerly they have done, or unto others, as some of them
lately have been forward enough to do. Now whether it be safe to walk upon
Stilts on the top of the pinacles of the Temple, upon so high precipices, as
are the matters of Religion, and conscience, (which may have also a dangerous
Influence upon our civil liberries) I leave it to your consideration: for my
part, I should not think it safe, that such a power should be in any one man,
though you suppose him to be a very good man.

A third evil, and that of dangerous consequence, is that the door is shut
against able and painful Preaching Ministers, and a wide door set open unto
those that are unable, and unfit for that function, and the Bishops interest is
concerned in it, that it should be so. Interest of honor, Interest of profit,
and Interest of power, Interest of credit; for they see that those painful
Preachers carry away all the credit from them, and they neither can nor will
do the like themselves: they cannot by reason they are so entangled with the
affairs of this world, and civil Jurisdiction; they will not, their great
Dignities and honors make them so stately, that they think it is not
Episcopal to Preach often; and on the other side, they are so far, and live so
much at their ease, that through idleness they cannot bring their minds unto
it, and so first arises envy against those that do take pains, and thence
after springs persecution. In the next place, their Interest is concerned in
matter of profit: for they suppose, that if the credit of their Diana fall to
the ground, their gain will after cease, and that the people will think much
that some men should take all the pains, and other go away with all the
Profit.

Lastly, their Interest is concerned in it, in point of power, for they find
that neither such Preaching Ministers, nor their auditors, are so pliable to
yield blind Canonical obedience, as others are: and so it concerns them in
point of power to stop their mouths. And now it must needs follow by the rule
of contraries, that it must be for their profit, honor, and power, to set open
a door to idle and unfit Ministers. But there are two particuculars which I
will note wherein it concerns them in their profits, to set the door very
wide open, where there is no suspicion of refractorinesse. First we know
Bishops have many times Livings in Commendum and pluralities: but there is
hardly any, but they have Impropriations, whereof they are to see the cure
discharged, and therefore it is for their profit, that there may be good store
of cheap Curates, which cannot be very fit and able men: and with such
ordinarily, they furnish the cures of such places, whereof they have the
Impropriations. (Sir) In the next place we know, that orders are not given, but
in a manner sold, for not only the Bishop, and his Register, but also his
Usher, his Chamberlain, his Butler, and Porter, and almost all his meniall
Servants must have their fees, before the poor Clarke with his Box full of
Orders, can pass the Porters Lodge. I hear much of the legal Simony, which
consists in the buying and selling of Benefices, but whether this does not
approach nearer to the Evangelicall Simony, which consists in the buying and
selling of the gifts of the holy Ghost; I offer it to your consideration. Now
(Sir) for Excommunication and Absolution, all seems to be out of point, for
Excommunication is neither in right hands, nor exercised upon right grounds and
matters, nor in a right form and manner, nor to right ends, and then it is no
marvel, if it have not right effects. (Sir) we know our Savior has lodged
it in the Church (for so runs the precept) dic ecclesiae: now (Sir) that one
man should be a Church, soundes strangely in my ears. In the next place (I
beseech you Sir) consider about what their Spiritual Sword is exercised, about
things no way lying under the stroke thereof? A man shall be Excommunicated for
a Pig, or for an Apple, and such like things? I heard once a Gentleman of the
civil Law, answer hereunto in this House, that the Excommunication was not
for the thing, but for the contempt, and the less the thing was, that was
commanded, the greater was the contempt: If this were so, sure the greater is
the cruelty, to lay command upon so small a matter, that draws after it so
deep a censure, as to cast a man down into Hell. Suppose a Magistrate should
command some trivial matter, some ceremony or other, under pain of Treason,
and should proceed against the Infringers of his command as Traitors, it were
much to be doubted whether the command did not partake more of cruelty, then
the disobedience of contempt; for when authority shall so far loose it self,
as to lay so great a weight upon so small a matter, it rendereth it self
contemptible, and then it is no marvel (I had almost said) it is no fault, if
it be contemned, having made it self contemptible. Then Sir, for the form of
proceeding, it is no whit spiritual, there is no fasting and prayer, no
seeking to reclaim the sinner, but rather it is after the fashion of a summary
Process in a civil Court, nay Sir, it is accompanied sometimes with an
intimation that no man shall buy, or sell, with the person excommunicated, nor
set him a work, nor do any civil or natural offices unto him. As we had a
complaint brought in this Parliament, of a Son that was excommunicated only
for repeating a Sermon to his father, being an excommunicate person. Now Sir,
for the ends for which this censure is executed, they are ordinarily to fetch
in fees, or at the best to bring men under Canonical obedience, which is the
Ordinaries will and pleasure, and I have sometimes seen a Minister pronounce an
excommunication, which he held in one hand, and presently after the
absolution, which he held in the other, so the end of the excommunication was
the absolution, and the end of that was fees: (Sir) for the honor of God, for
the honor of our national Church, and for the honor of the Christian
Religion, let the high and great censure of the Church no longer lackey after
fees, let not Christians any longer be cast to Satan, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the non-payment of a groat. And now Sir we may imagine what effects
are lik to follow upon such premises, the great and dreadful censure of
excommunication is thereby made contemptible, and were it not for the civil
restrains, and penalties that follow upon it, no man would purchase an
absolution, though he might have it for a half penny. And I have heard of some
that have thanked the Ordinaries for abating, or remitting the fees of the
Courts: but I never heard of any that thanked them, for reclayming their souls
to repentance, by their excommunications; (Sir) for absolution it is relative
to excommunication, and so labors of the same diseases: only one thing I
shall particularly note concerning absolution, (Sir) it is called commutation
of penance, but indeed it is a destruction of the ordinance, making it void and
of none effect, and surely God never set his Ministers to sell indulgences in
his Church. The oath that is to precede absolution, de parendo juri Ecclesiae
et stando, etc. has already been sufficiently spoken unto, in the debate about
the Canons, and therefore there will be no need of speaking more to that. Now
Sir, I am come to my last head, wherein I shall be very brief, and that is
concerning the evils that arise out of the benefices and dignities of the
Clergy, the common cause being from the inequality of the distribution of
them, much resembling a disease very ordinary at this time amongst children,
which they call the rickets, wherein the nourishment goes all to the upper
parts, which are over great and monstrous, and the lower parts pine away: and
so it is in the Clergy, some are so poor that they cannot attend their
ministry, but are feign to keep Schools, nay, Alehouses, some of them; and
some others are so stately, they will not attend their ministry: and so
between them the flock starves, but our evils have more especially
proceeded, from the excessive worldly wealth, and dignities of one part of the
Clergy, I mean, such as either are in possession, or in hopes of Bishoprics
for these great places of profit and honor, first have been the baits of
ambition, and then they became the apples of contention, and last of all the
seeds of superstition, the one being a step and degree unto the other, and all
of them leading in the end to the corruption, that I may not say subversion of
our Religion. Sir they are first the baits of ambition, and I know not by what
secret cause, but experience shows us, that when Clergy men have once tasted
the sweet of wordly wealth and honors, they are more eager, and ambitious
after them then any other sort of men, hereupon other godly Ministers, that
live more according to the simplicity of the Gospel, and the example of Christ
and his Apostles, cannot but bear witness against their worldly pomp and
dignities, and so the fires of contention breaks forth. And truly (Sir) the
state of the Clergy is very like to fire, which whilst it keeps in the
chimney, it is of excellent use to warm those that approach unto it, but if it
once break out into the house, and get upon the house top, it sets all on
fire. So whilst the Clergy keep themselves within the pulpit, they are of
great use to stir up the zeal and devotion of Christians, but if they once
fly out into the house, if they begin to meddle with Civil places and
jurisdictions, and especially if they once get up to the Counsell-table, it is
seldom seen, but that length they set all on fire, and what is it that makes
the fire to break out of the chimney, but too much fuel: if there be but a
moderate proportion of fuel, the fire keeps it self within it is bounds, but
if you heap faggot upon faggot, a whole cart-load together, then it breaks
out: (so Sir) if there be a competent maintenance for the ministry, they will
keep themselves within their bounds, but if living be heaped upon living, and
temporalities added to spiritualities, the flame will soon break out, and set
the house on fire. (Sir) I do not envy the wealth or greatness of the Clergy,
but I am very confident if those were less, they would be better, and do more
service to Christ and his Church, and I am very clear in mine own heart, that
the livings of the Clergy being more equally distributed, the service of God
would be so far from receiving any prejudice, that it would be much
advanced, and withal a good proportion of revenue might return again unto the
Crown, from whence it was first derived. (Sir) Bishoprics, Deanaries, and
Chapiters, are like to great wasters in a wood, they make no proof themselves,
they cumber the ground whereon they stand, and with their great arms and
boughs stretched forth on every side, partly by their shade, and partly by
their sour droppings they hinder all the young wood under them from growing
and thriving. To speak plain English, these Bishops, Deanes, and Chapiters,
do little good themselves by preaching, or otherwise, and if they were felled,
a great deal of good timber might be cut out of them, for the uses of the
Church and Kingdom at this time. A fresh stool of three or four able
Ministers might spring up in their stead, to very good purpose in those great
towns, which are ordinarily the seats of those Episcopal, and Collegiate
Churches, and the private congregations of diverse parochial Churches might
thrive and grow better, which now have the Sun of Gods word, I mean the clear
and spiritual preaching thereof kept from them, and live in the dangerous
shade of ignorance, by reason that all the means is taken from them, and
appropriated unto Bishops, or to Deanries, and Chapters, and other such like
Collegiate Churches. Besides such as do begin to grow and start up through the
voluntary pains of some amongst them, or by such preaching as they themselves
have procured by their voluntary contributions, should not still be dropped on
as they are, from the arms and appendances of those great wasters, and kept
down continually by their bitter persecutions. That which remains now, is to
show how these great revenues and dignities, become the seeds of superstition,
and that is thus. The Clergy in the maintenance of their greatness, which they
are neither willing to forgo, nor yet well able to maintain upon the
principles of the reformed Religion, finding that the popish principles,
whereon the Bishop of Rome built his greatness, to suite well unto their ends,
that makes them to side with that party, and that must needs bring in
superstition: and as ambition allureth on the one side, so the principles they
go by, draw them on farther, and farther, and happily at length farther then
they themselves at first intended. Whether a reconciliation with Rome, were
imagined or no by some, I leave it to every one to judge within himself: but
sure I am, if an accommodation could have been made in some fashion or other,
with the Church of Rome, the Clergy might again be capable of foreign
preferments, and Cardinals capps, and this is no small temptation. Now Sir, I
am at an end: only I shall draw out three conclusions, which I conceive may
clearly be collected out of what I have said: First that civil jurisdiction
in the persons of Clergy men, together with their great revenues, and high
places of dignity, is one great cause of the evils which we suffer in matter
of religion. Secondly, that the sole and arbitrary power of Bishops in the
ordaining and depriving of Ministers, and in excommunication, and absolution,
is another great cause of the evils we suffer in matter of Religion. Thirdly,
the strict urging of Subscription, and Conformity to the Ceremonies, and Canons
of the Church, is another great cause of Evil, which we suffer in matter of
Religion.

And now my humble motion is, that we should take a piece only of this subject
into our consideration, but the whole matter, and that not only that part of
the Ministers remonstrance, which has been read, should be referred unto the
Committee which you are about to name, but Londons petition also, and all other
petitions of the like nature, so soon as they shall be read in the house, and
that the Committee may collect out of them all, such heads as are fit for the
consideration of this house, and surely that is fit to be considered, that
happily will not be thought fit to be altered: consideration is one thing, and
alteration another: where there is a mixture of bad and good together, the
whole must be consired that we may know how to sever the good from the bad,
and so retain the one, and reject the other, which is all that I desire. And
if any thing have fallen from me more inconsiderate (as in so long a discourse
many things may have done) I humbly crave the pardon of the house, protesting
that I have spoken nothing but with a mind, which is ready to sacrifice the
body it dwells in, to the peace and safety of his Majesty's Kingdoms, and
the safety and honor of his Majesty in the Government of them.

FINIS.

