A few short ARGUMENTS Proving that it is every English-man's Interest as well
as Duty, AT ALL TIMES To endeavor the absolute and effectual Repeal of all the
Religious Penal Laws and Tests, now in force against Catholics or Dissenters,
so as they may never more be revived, and the rather because thereby Liberty
and Property may be better secured, than at present they are.
MOST of the Authors who have Written for the Repeal of the Penal Laws and
Tests, though they fall short of the end they aim at in convincing their
Adversaries, are yet too tedious for the generality to Read, and too difficult
to be understood by their perplexing and obscuring the matter with diverse
collateral Controversies little to the point in hand, which briefly and yet
plainly is comprehended in these two following Positions.

First, That it is every Man's Duty as a Man, and every Christians, though they
should suffer by it, to endeavor the Repealing of the said Penal Laws and
Tests, how good soever they may be esteemed in themselves, so long as any though
never so few, upon the account of Religion, are aggrieved by them and refuse to
take them.

Secondly, That if we please, no more Danger nor Damage, than we are at present
subject to, will ensue to either Person or Party whatsoever in England by the
said Repeal, in either Life, Liberty, Limb, Estate, or Privilege. If then it
appears by the following proofs that we ought to Repeal them, and that it may
be safely done without damage to any; It is hoped there is scarce a person so
ignorant, obstinate, or imprudent in England, whether Conformist, or
Nonconformist but will readily concur in such a work, though there were no other
advantage to themselves but only their compliance with His Majesty in a
settlement he so much desires; which may be the less doubted because the
necessary consequences are general Quiet, by every Man's security and Interest
to preserve it, the enlarging of Trade, the strengthening the King and Kingdom
against Foreign attempts: In short, Ease and Riches with Liberty of being as
Religious as we can or please.

To prove then the first Position, there may be instanced that Golden and
Everlasting Rule of God and Nature, To do as we would be done unto: If we fear
a future Imposition from others, let us not impose at present our Tests and
Penal Laws upon others, but so provide that none may impose or be imposed upon:
But further as Christians we are obliged to do no Evil that Good may come on
it, to Pray for our Enemies, and though formerly some may upon the score of
Religion have been by others evil treated, yet must we return good for Evil and
so heap Coals of Fire on the Head of our Adversaries, the only lawful Revenge
permitted Christians; and this is a Duty from which none can be exempted before
God or Man: To which may be further added, that the said Golden Rule is both a
higher Law and greater good than our Test and Penal Laws are, and that it is as
much a sin both against God and Nature to break the foresaid Natural and Gospel
Rules, by afflicting a few, as if we injured multitudes, for an Erroneous
Conscience or unbelief only.

But secondly, we may by new Laws be as well if not better secured, in every
particular circumstance, than we now are by the Penal Laws and Tests; so that
it is our interest as well as our duty, for which some Specimens follow, which
may without question by the Wisdom of Parliament be higher improved.

First, If His Majesty should please to consent to such Expedients as may be
propounded in Parliament, to prevent for the future all false returns of
Members to serve in Parliament, this would be a much better security than any
yet provided, the Penalties be the same or the like as those of the Test, both
for the Offending persons returning, returned, and assisting.

Secondly, If no person be suffered to Enter either Houses of Lords or Commons,
or any Civil or Military Employ, until he has renounced the principle of
Persecuting any for Religious Worship sake be it what it will, and likewise
subscribes to undergo the Penalties already prescribed by the Test, if ever he
moves or concerns in the repealing this new Magna Charta of Liberty: This is
still much better security for every Religious party than any now in being.

Thirdly, If all the Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments be by this new
Law firmly Established to Conformists only, which now are but very precariously
in the Possession of the Church of England, they will be thus much better than
now they are, because they keep the same Possessions and Profits by a stronger
Title, and are only deprived of a Power to do mischief.

Fourthly, If all this be consented to before the Old Laws against Catholics
and Dissenters are Repealed, or together with the same; what hazard do we run,
or how is it possible the Catholics can do us any more hurt than at present, or
obtain the whole or greatest share of the Government?

Fifthly, Nor would it be the least security to the Nation to have such an
Engine destroyed as the Penal Laws and Test are, which at some time or other
may by the subtilty of the Lawyers Innuendos and Explanations be converted by
the Government against any party whatsoever that displeases them, and the
safety and satisfaction we now have by the Repeal of the Statute de Heretico
comburendo may encourage us to Damn all of the like nature.

Lastly, If this settlement prevents such mischiefs to the Nation, as
desperation may inspire into a party not backward to preserve themselves, it
will be a further Collateral security to the whole.

POSTSCRIPT.
There are lately Published, for the Information of the Curious, who are
willing to be further satisfied, concerning the weakness of the Church of
England 's Legal Establishment, and the Illegallity of the Penal Laws and
Tests, according to our Common Law, and Magna Charta, Three small Treatises;
viz. A Reply to the Reasons of the Oxford Clergy, against Addressing, etc.
Remarks on the several Sanguinary and Penal Laws made in Parliament against
Roman Catholics. A Discourse for taking off the Tests and Penal Laws about
Religion, to which and diverse others lately Printed, I refer the Candid and
Judicious Reader for better satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.


