A LETTER, Writ by Mijn Here FAGEL, PENSIONER of HOLLAND, TO Mr. JAMES STEWART,
Advocate; Giving an Account of the PRINCE and PRINCESS of ORANGE's Thoughts
concerning the Repeal of the TEST, and the PENAL LAWS.
SIR,
I Am extreme sorry, that my ill health has so long hindered me from Answering
those Letters, in which you so earnestly desired to know of me, what Their
Highnesses thoughts are, concerning the Repeal of the Penal Laws, and more
particularly of that concerning the Test: I beg you to assure your self, that I
will deal very plainly with you in this matter, and without Reserve, since you
say that your Letters were writ by the King's knowledge and allowance. I must
then first of all assure you very positively, that Their Highnesses have often
declared, as They did it more particularly to the Marquis of Albeville, His
Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, that it is Their Opinion, that no
Christian ought to be persecuted for his Conscience, or be ill used because he
differs from the public and established Religion; And therefore, They can
consent, that the Papists in England, Scotland and Ireland be suffered to
continue in their Religion, with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the
States in these Provinces; in which it cannot be denied, that they enjoy a full
Liberty of Conscience. And as for the Dissenters, Their Highnesses do not only
consent, but do heartily approve of their having an entire Liberty, for the
full exercise of their Religion, without any trouble or hindrance; so that none
may be able to give them the least disturbance upon that account.

And Their Highnesses are very ready, in case His Majesty shall think fit to
desire it, to declare their willingness to concur in the settling and confirming
this Liberty, and as far as it lies in them, they will protect and defend it,
and according to the Language of Treaties, They will confirm it with their
Guaranty, of which you made mention in yours.

And it his Majesty shall think fit further to desire Their concurrence in the
Repealing of the Penal Laws, They are ready to give it; provided always that
those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the R. Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military: as likewise all those other Laws, which
confirm the Protestant Religion and which secures it against all the attempts
of the Roman Catholics.

But Their Highnesses cannot agree to the Repeal of the Test, or of those other
Penal Laws last mentioned, that tend to the security of the Protestant
Religion; since the R. Catholics recieve no other prejudice from these, then
the being excluded from Parliaments, or from public Employments. And that by
them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the Designs of the R.
Catholics against it, or against the public safety; And neither the Test nor
these other Laws can be said to carry in them any severity against the Roman
Catholics upon account of their Consciences: They are only Provisions
qualifying men to be Members of Parliament, or to be capable of bearing Office;
by which they must declare before God and men, that they are for the Protestant
Religion. So that indeed, all this amounts to no more than a securing the
Protestant Religion from any Prejudices that it may receive from the R.
Catholics.

Their Highnesses have thought and do still think, that more than this ought
not to be asked, or expected from Them: since by this means, the Roman
Catholics and their Posterity will be for ever secured from all trouble in
their Persons or Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion; and that the
Roman Catholics ought to be satisfied with this, and not to disquiet the
Kingdom because they cannot be admitted to sit in Parliament, or to be in
Employments; or because those Laws, in which the Security of the Protestant
Religion does chiefly consist, are not repealed, by which they may be put in a
condition to overturn it.

Their Highnesses do also believe, that the Dissenters will be fully satisfied
when they shall be for ever covered from all danger of being disturbed, or
punished for the free Exercise of their Religion, upon any sort of pretense
whatsoever.

Their Highnesses having declared themselves so positively in these matters, it
seems very plain to me, that They are far from being any hinderance to the
Freeing Dissenters from the Severity of the Penal Laws; since They are ready to
use their utmost endeavors for the establishing of it: nor do They at all
press the denying to the R. Catholics the exercise of their Religion, provided
it be managed modestly, and without Pomp or Ostentation. As for my own part, I
ever was and still am very much against all those, who would persecute any
Christian because he differs from the public and established Religion: And I
hope by the Grace of God to continue still in the same mind; for since that
Light, with which Religion illuminates our minds, is according to my sense of
things, purely an effect of the Mercy of God to us, we ought then, as I think,
to render to God all possible Thanks for his Goodness to us: and to have Pity
for those who are still shut up in Error, even as God has pitied us, and to put
up most earnest prayers to God, for bringing those into the way of Truth, who
stray from it, and to use all gentle and friendly methods for reducing them to
it.

But I confess, I could never comprehend how any that profess themselves
Christians, and that may enjoy their Religion freely and without any
disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to go about to disturb the Quiet of
any Kingdom or State, or to overturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may
be admitted to Employments, and that those Laws in which the Security and Quiet
of the established Religion consists, should be shaken.

It is plain, that the Reformed Religion is by the Grace of God and by the Laws
of the Land, enacted by both King and Parliament; the public and established
Riligion, both in England, Scotland and Ireland; and that it is provided by
those Laws, that none can be admitted either to a place in Parliament, or to
any public Employment except those that do openly declare, that they are of
the Protestant Religion, and not Roman Catholics; and it is also provided by
those Laws, that the Protestant Religion shall be in all time coming secured
from the Designs of the Roman Catholics against it: in all which I do not see,
that these Laws contain any Severity, either against the Persons or Estates of
those who cannot take those Tests, that are contrary to the Roman Catholic
Religion, all the inconveniences that can redound to them from thence, is that
their Persons, their Estates and even the Exercise of their Religion being
assured to them, only they can have no share in the Goverement, nor in Offices
of Trust, as long as their Consciences do not allow them to take these Tests:
and they are not suffered to do any thing that is to the prejudice of the
Reformed Religion.

Since, as I have already told you, Their Highnesses are ready to concur whith
his Majesty for the Repeal of those Penal Laws, by which Men are made liable to
fines or other Punishments.

So I see there Remains no difficulty concerning the Repealing the Penal Laws,
but only this, that some would have the Roman Catholics rendered capable of
all public Trusts and Employments, and that by consequence, all those should
be repealed that have secured the Protestant Religion against the designs of
the Roman Catholics, where others at the same time are not less earnest to
have those Laws maintained in their full and due vigor; and think, that the
chief Security of the established Religion consists in the preserving of them
Sacred and unshaken.

It is certain, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted
Body or Assembly whatsoever, in which there are not Laws made for the Safety
thereof; and that provide against all Attempts whatsoever, that disturb their
peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they judge necessary
for all that shall bear Employments in that Kingdom, State or Corporation: and
no man can pretend, that there is any Injury done him, that he is not admitted
to Employments when he does not satisfy the Conditions and Qualities required.

Nor can it be denied, that there is a great difference to be observed in the
conduct of those of the Reformed Religion; and of the Roman Catholics toward
one another: The Roman Catholics not being satisfied to exclude the Reformed
from all places of profit or of Trust, they do absolutely suppress the whole
Exercise of that Religion, and severely persecute all that profess it; and this
they do in all those places where it is safe and without danger, to carry on
that rigor. And I am sorry that we have at this present so many deplorable
Instances of this severity before our eyes, that is at the same time put in
practice in so many different places.

I would therefore gladly see one single good reason to move a Protestant that
fears God, and that is concerned for his Religion, to consent to the Repealing
of those Laws that have been enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament,
which have no other tendency but to the security of the Reformed Religion, and
to the restraining of the Roman Catholics from a capacity of overturning it;
these Laws inflict neither Fines nor Punishments, and do only exclude the R.
Catholics from a share in the Government who by being in Employments must
needs study to increase their Party, and to gain to it more Credit and Power,
which by what we see every day, we must conclude, will be extremely dangerous
to the Reformed Religion, and must turn to its great prejudice: since in all
places, those that are in public Employments, do naturally Favor that
Religion of which they are, either more or less. And who would go about to
persuade me or any man else to endeavor to move Their Highnesses, whom God
has honored so far as to make them the Protectors of his Church, to approve
of, or to consent to things so hurtful, both to the Reformed Religion, and to
the public Safety. Nor can I, Sir, with your good leave, in any way, grant
what you apprehend, That no prejudice will thereby redound to the Reformed
Religion.

I know it is commonly said, that the number of the Roman Catholics in England
and Scotland is very inconsiderable; and that they are possessed only of a very
small number of the places of Trust: tho even as to this, the case is quite
different in Ireland: yet this you must of necessity grant me, that if their
numbers are small, then it is not reasonable that the public Peace should be
disturbed on the account of so few persons, especially when so great a favor
may be offered to them; such as the free Exercise of their Religion would be:
and if their numbers are greater, then there is so much the more reason to be
afraid of them; I do indeed believe that Roman Catholics, as things at
present stand, will not be very desirous to be in public Offices and
Employments, nor that they will make any attempts upon the Reformed Religion,
both because this is contrary to Law, and because of the great Inconveniences
that this may bring at some other time both on their Persons, and their
Estates: yet if the Restraints of the Law were once taken off, you would see
them brought into the Government, and the chief Offices and Places of Trust
would be put in their hands; nor will it be easy to his Majesty to resist them
in this, how steadfast soever he may be; for they will certainly press him hard
in it, and they will represent this to the King, as a matter in which his
Conscience will be concerned; and when they are possessed of the Public
Offices, what will be left for the Protestants to do, who will find no more the
support of the Law, and can expect little Encouragement from such Magistrates?
and on the other hand, the Advantages that the Roman Catholics would find in
being thus set loose from all Restraints, are so plain, that it were a loss of
time to go about the proving it. I neither can nor will doubt of the sincerity
of his Majesty's intentions, and that he has no other design before him in this
matter, but that all his Subjects may enjoy in all things the same Rights and
Freedoms.

But plain Reason, as well as the Experience of all Ages, the present as well
as the past, shows, that it will be impossible for R. Catholics and
Protestants, when they are mixed together in places of Trust and public
Employments, to live together peaceably, or to maintain a good Correspondence
together. They will be certainly always jealous of one another; For the
Principles and the Maxims of both Religions are so opposite to one another,
that in my opinion I do not see how it will be in the power of any Prince or
King whatsoever, to keep down those Suspicions and Animosities, which will be
apt to arise upon all occasions.

As for that which you apprehend, that the Dissenters shall not be delivered
from the Penal Laws, that are made against them, unless at the same time the
Test be likewise repealed: This will be indeed a great unhappiness to them; but
the Roman Catholics are only to blame for it, who will rather be content that
they and their Posterity should lie still under the weight of the Penal Laws,
and exposed to the hatred of the whole Nation; than he still restrained from a
capacity of attempting any thing against the Peace and the Security of the
Protestant Religion. And be deprived of that small advantage (if it is at all
to be reckoned one) of having a share in the Government and public Enjoyments;
since in all places of the World this has been always the privilege of the
Religion that is established by Law; and indeed these Attempts of the Roman
Catholics ought to be so much the more suspected and guarded against by
Protestants, in that they see that Roman Catholics, even when liable to that
Severity of Penal Laws, do yet endeavor to persuade his Majesty, to make the
Protestants, whether they will or not, dissolve the Security which they have
for their Religion: and to clear a way for bringing in the Roman Catholics to
the Government, and to public Employments: in which case there would remain no
relief for them but what were to be expected from a Roman Catholic Government.

Such then will be very unjust to Their Highnesses, who shall blame them for
any Inconveniency that may arise from thence; since they have declared
themselves so freely on this Subject, and that so much to the advantage even of
the Roman Catholics. And since the Settlements of matters sticks at this
single point, that Their Highnesses cannot be brought to consent to things that
are so contrary to Laws already in being, and that are so dangerous and so
hurtful to the Protestant Religion, as the admitting of Roman Catholics to a
share in the Government, and to places of Trust, and the Repealing of those
Laws, that can have no other effect but the Securing of the Protestant Religion
from all the Attempts of the Roman Catholics against it would be.

You write, That the Roman Catholics in these Provinces are not shut out from
Employments and places of Trust; But in this you are much mistaken. For our
Laws are express, excluding them by name from all share in the Government, and
from all Employments either of the Policy or Justice of our Country. Is it
true, I do not know of any express Law, that shuts them out of Military
Employments; that had indeed been hard, since in the first Formation of our
State they joined with us in defending our public Liberty, and did us eminent
service during the Wars; therefore they were not shut out from those Military
Employments, for the public Safety was no way endangered by this, both because
their numbers that served in our Troops were not great, and because the States
could easily prevent any Inconvenience that might arise out of that; which
could not have been done so easily, if the Roman Catholics had been admitted
to a Share in the Government, and in the Policy or Justice of our State.

I am very certain of this, of which I could give very good proofs, that there
is nothing which Their Highnesses desire so much, as that his Majesty may Reign
happily, and in an entire Confidence with his Subjects, and that his Subjects
being persuaded of his Majesty's fatherly affection to them, may be ready to
make him all the returns of duty that are in their Power. But their Highnesses
are convinced in their Consciences, that both the Protestant Religion and the
Safety of the Nation, would be exposed to most certain Dangers, if either the
Tests, or those other Penal Laws, of which I have made frequent mention, should
be Repealed; Therefore they cannot consent to this, nor concur with his
Majesty's Will; for they believe they should have much to Answer for to God, if
the consideration of any present advantages should carry them to consent and
concur in things which they believe would be not only dangerous but mischievous
to the Protestant Religion.

Their Highnesses have ever paid a most profound duty to his Majesty, which
they will always continue to do; for they consider themselves bound to it, both
by the Laws of God and of Nature: But since the matter that is now in hand,
relates not to the making of new Laws, but to the (...) those already made both
by King and Parliament; they do not see how it can be expected of them, that
they should consent to such a Repeal, to which they have so just an aversion,
as being a thing that is contrary to the Laws and Customs of all Christian
States, whether Protestants, or Papists, who receive none to a share in the
Governments, or to public Employments, but those who profess the public and
established Religion, and that take care to secure it against all attempts
whatsoever.

I do not think it necessary to demonstrate to you how much their Highnesses
are devoted to his Majesty, of which they have given such real Evidences as are
beyond all verbal ones; and they are Resolved still to continue in the same
Duty, and Affection; or rather to increase it, if that is possible.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
Nov. 4. 1687.
London printed in the year 1688.


