A FEW WORDS AMONG MANY, About the touchy point of SUCCESSION, Humbly Proposed
to Timely Consideration against the Session of Parliament; whether it be now,
or hereafter.
THE Case to be put is this. A Nation is Protestant in the main Body of it: He
that is like to succeed in the Throne is a Roman Catholic. What shall be done
in such an Affair? The Case does belong to the Divines, and to the Lawyers,
though it be the Parliament alone must determine it: Nay, the matter indeed is
what everybody think themselves engaged in, and every body speak their minds
of. There is no Coffee-house, and few private houses, but their Table-talk is
of these things. I see no reason therefere why I may not speak my mind also, so
long as I do it of my self, and with this signification, that no others (how
much soever else concerned with me) have any hand in the publication of it. For
I am persuaded, that if the Parliament shall take the liberty (every one of
them, as Englishmen and Protestants) to speak the same things in the House, as
we do abroad, they would be less afraid of one another, and more secure in
their Counsels, (whatsoever they talk) in providing for the safety of the
Kingdom, and Religion.

It is decreed in the Council of Lateran, That all Princes shall Exterminate
the Heretics out of their Dominions, upon pain of Deposition, Excommunication,
and Damnation. The Papists believe the Doctrines of their Church to be
infallible, and what is decreed by a Pope and Universal Council is
unquestionably received as a Doctrine of their Church; and consequently if any
thing be decreed to be done by any man, upon pain of Damnation, they must do it
first or last, by such means as they can, if they intend to be saved. Where a
person then is a Roman Catholic, and true to his Religion, he cannot enter
upon the Throne of a Protestant Kingdom, but he must resolve to Exterminate his
Subjects. To enter so, is to enter Hostili animo, with the mind of an Enemy, as
Hostis and Hostis Publicus. But to be Hostis and Rex, a King and an Enemy; a
Shepherd and Father of his People, and one that comes to make havoc of them:
To destroy, and to rule or govern; are things utterly incompatible.

The resolution of this Case therefore in point of Reason and Conscience is
open. That such a person must on necessity either renounce that Religion, or
else he must relinquish the Government, and be content that the next rightful
Heirs or Successors do possess it.

Upon these terms now, if there be any person so pious and devout as not daring
to hazard the Salvation of his Soul, he does purpose if he be King (whatsoever
comes of it, seeing he must) to make his people turn Papists, or execute that
Decree of the Church upon them; and if he be also so generous and brave, as
that rather than do such a thing as to persecute his Country, and make the
Nation miserable, he will freely decline a Crown to avoid that intolerable
incumbent duty: What is there under the whole cope of Heaven so worthy to
canonize a man's name to posterity as such an action? And what can be said why
the Representative of a Nation might not make an humble and yet confident
Address to such a one, to offer him Reasons for his voluntary condescension to
such a Request made to him, when a forced deposition by an Act of Parliament,
before any such trial be attempted, may look exceeding hard, and also be ill
taken? Neither were it a thing less elegible, as it must certainly be more
happy, to remain a Duke and Father of the next Successor taking the Throne and
reigning in quiet, than to be himself a King, and reign only in Blood, and with
the Confusion of his Subjects.

And to render this matter yet more glorious and necessary to such a Royal
person, he shall moreover by doing thus provide security for the sacred life of
a Sovereign, and a Brother, which so long as a Papist is sure to succeed, must
be still exposed to Plots and Treason, Poison and Assassination: For there
cannot be wanting a Clement, a Ravilliack, or some such Villain, as is capable
to be persuaded, that by a feat so highly advantageous to their Religion, he
shall both expiate the sin, and merit life eternal.

As for the Case in point of Law I undertake not; Only it appears to me (I must
confess) from the Statute of the thirteenth of the Queen, that though this
Government be Hereditary, it is so Hereditary as the Laws or Statutes of
Parliament do bind the descent of the Crown. And if it be as it appears, I have
nothing else to say, but to desire of God to give to those who are now in
expectation to be Assembled, the moderation and understanding of the Heads of
the Children of Issachar, that they may know at such a time as this what Israel
has to do.

And if there be no Act passed by them concerning these matters, I must for the
discharge of my Conscience superad thus much further, that although on the part
of the Sovereign he that is a Papist cannot take the Throne where the Body of
the people are Protestant, according to right reason and Conscience, as might
be made to appear further, if what is said were not sufficient already; yet on
the part of the Subject, let the Crown fall to any person, whatsoever he be,
whether Papist or Protestant, if he have right to it according to the present
Law in force, and the Constitution of the Nation, there is no good Protestant,
or no Subject that fears God, can rise up in Arms against him upon the account
of Religion. Evangelium (say our first Reformers) non abolet politias.

We are taught this by the Primitive Christians all along during the Reign of
the Heathen; who, whatsoever their number was, in their Cities, Castles, Armies
(as some of the Fathers tell us) were ready to lay down their lives, and submit
to a Decimation upon a Decimation, rather than they would draw their Swords
upon the Emperor, or sin against Heaven. This we are taught more effectually
by the Apostle, and are therefore never to be untaught it. Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that
be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power resists the
Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. I
speak it (I must acknowledge) not only in regard to the prevention of Blood and
Mischief (if Providence should call us under such a Trial) but in regard to the
Parliament, that they may look the more about them, and consider, they have a
season. And more particularly that they may beware of running into this Error
(upon which two Parliaments have split already) the neglect of doing what may
be done through an overreaching haste toward what they would have done (I mean
in this point of Succession) and which will be better done (if it be at all
done) to be last done.

As for the Plot, I fear not likewise to say thus much, that whosoever he be
shall be found to have designed the Introduction of Popery by the Murder of the
King, or a Massacre of the People, I declare in the behalf of the public, he
ought to dye. Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's innocent Blood cries for Justice on
such men: But if any person has had any hand in this Plot, no farther than to
give his consent and assistance to the bringing in that Religion upon us by an
Universal Liberty of Conscience, and no otherwise; which is consequently by
Teaching and Argument in a gentle progress of Time, and Persuasion, not by
Violence and Blood, or any hurt to the Subject in their Lives and Estates, or
by conversion of the Civil Government from Regal to Despotical, as by many is
imagined; and, being now convinced of the detestable Villainy and Hellish
Devotion of others, who were precipitating the Design with Regicide and a
Common slaughter, shall be willing hereupon to make some remonstrance for the
purging himself and his Conscience, and the testifying his abhorrence of
proceeding further in such an Enterprise; I must declare with the like open
freedom, that such a one ought to be Heard. And who can tell what might be the
issue of such a piece of Ingenuity as this only? To say, Look you, Sirs, Thus
it has been, I confess it, and thus: These are the Consequents; I see the evil,
It shall be so no more.

In the name of God, let us but have a Gentlemanlike Repentance, that is right
English, without reserve, and here is the way to the first, and consequently
the best and most desirable reconcilement that can be in the Case; to the most
easy coming off from what is past, and for the giving the most Heroical
Satisfaction that can be given to the Land.

By this means shall such a person engage himself to the strongest retractation
of all that is ill, for recovery of his trust with the Nation; and the Plot be
so laid open, that the Parliament may proceed to the application of a perfect
Remedy. By this means shall the innocent be put into safety, and the guilty (so
far as any is guilty) into his right course of obtaining the forgiveness of his
Country. For such is the nature of the English spirit, that when it generously
prosecutes the obstinate Offender with vehemence and courage, as soon as he
does but relent or comes to suffer, it is presently apt to commiseration, and
to think the best of him.

I shall conclude with a Text of Scripture. If this great man shall neither
come off from his way (which were to be first wished,) nor to a Compromise and
Resignation (which were to be sought next); nor the Parliament to some Act for
Constraint; to make him choose the one or the other (which is to be last
attempted); or for Restraint, by ordering the Militia and other things so as it
shall be equivalent, or as politickly good for England, as if he did either; I
shall deliver my own Soul as a Watchman, and as an Englishman, protest before
God that I can see the appearance of nothing but evil, that is, Destruction,
Misery, and Trouble, coming upon the three Kingdoms. Now it came to pass after
this, that Amaziah brought the Gods of the Children of Seir, and set them up,
and bowed before them. Wherefore Gods Anger was kindled, and he sent to him a
Prophet; and it came to pass as the Prophet was talking with him, he said, Art
thou made of the Kings Council? Forbear, why should thou be smitten? Then the
Prophet forbore, and said, I know that God has determined to destroy thee,
because thou have done this, and have not hearkened to my Counsel.

FINIS.

