A few Lines in true love to such that frequent the Meetings of the People
called Quakers, and love to hear the sound of Truth, but are not yet come to
obey the Testimony of it, that they may also hear and learn to Read at Home.
With a Second Addition as a Confirmation of what the Lord requires at your
Hands.
FRiends,
hearing several Testimonies and Exhortations daily sounded in our Ears,
concerning our Accustoming, Habiting or Adorning our selves as becomes the
Truth that we make profession of, there is a little in my Heart in the love of
God to you that frequent the meetings of Friends, and daily hear the sound and
^endency of Truth, as it is by one and another of the Servants of the Lord
spoken amongst us, for this very end, that all may give diligent ^eed to the
faithful and true witness of God in them, that by the Word and Power of God in
them, the Word Preached may be so ^ffectually received, and mixed with Faith in
the appearance of the ^on of Gods love, that thereby it may take place in your
Hearts, so ^s to separate your Minds and Desires from those things that the
Truth is calling from, and also give you a sense of what the Truth ^s calling
to, or otherwise all your outward hearing, although it be ^he Servants of the
Lord who do speak in the power and demonstra^ion of the Spirit of God, will not
do that work for you that God has done for many of his Children and People,
except you will give di^igent heed to his faithful and true Witness in you,
which is always near to instruct you; and if you will retire, and listen to
hear when you are in Meetings, you will find what of the Testimony does belong
to your inward State, and whether or no you are of that number that does adorn
your selves in those things which the Testimony does condemn, or whether you
are justifiable in the sight of the Great God. Friends, suffer me to tell you,
there are some that frequently come amongst the People of the Lord, that have
not yet given diligent heed to the witness of God in them, nor to the many
Testimonies of the Servants of the Lord that comes amongst them, but do sit
carelessly as if they had no other concern but to Hear from one day to another,
and do not consider the good end of the Lord, and his Faithful Messengers to
them, which is that all should hearken, and so Hear and Obey, that thereby
their Souls may live to God in that Life that does adorn the Testimony of
Truth, which they so often come to Hear: And it is as a Lovely Song to many
that are not yet come to sing the Song of the Redeemed from the Corruptible
things, but do seem to content themselves with hearing that there is Bread
enough in our Fathers House, but do not Partake and Eat so worthily, as that
their Souls may live more and more to God, and less to the outgoings of that
Mind which we see is gone into many vain and ungodlike things: And may it not
be said to such, why do you love to Hear? Do you not desire to be of that
number that quakes and trembles at the Word of the Lord? If any should say yea,
then let me tell you, it was no less than the Word and Power of God that did
first take place amongst the People of the Lord, which made many to quake and
tremble, when it first struck at the lifeless Profession that many were in, in
a form of Godliness, without a sense of that invisible Life and Power of God
that raises and quickens the Soul, by which it comes to be made capable of
Worshipping and Serving the True and Living God aright in the newness of the
Spirit, and in the Truth, for which end he has given every one a Measure to
improve and profit withal. Therefore dear Friends, let none that are convinced
of the blessed Truth, and comes amongst the People of the Lord, set down as
unconcerned, or content with Hearing or Professing, without desiring to be made
Possessors of the virtue of that invisible Life and Power of God, by which you
may be made Partakers of those Glorious and Heavenly things that you so often
hear spoken of; which you can never do, except you Retire, Consider and Hearken
to the Voice of the Lord at Home in your selves, every one apart; for the
Promises are all, yea and Amen to the Seed Christ, and all that Hear and Obey
the Word of Life in themselves, their Souls shall live.

Then in obeying the Word of God, which is the promised Seed that is to bruise
the Head of the Serpent in you, you will find it will lead you contrary to that
ungodlike Life that too to many do live in, and some under a Profession of
Religion. But the pure Religion is the same as ever it was; and as you come to
be acquainted with it, it will keep you from the Spots of this ungodly World,
Vanities and Follies that are committed therein. Friends, are you not sometimes
touched with a Sense of the goodness of God to you; then what does it call for
from you? does it not call for Circumspection in adorning and demeaning your
selves in that Moderation that becomes your Christian Profession. Friends, my
tender desires are for you, and I am concerned for you, that you may see what
it is that has led out your Minds into many things that the Truth does daily
exhort you from; and by that means you will come clearly to see the one thing
needful, which is to set at the Feet of Jesus, where you may hear those
gracious Words that proceed from his Mouth, and hearken and hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches in this our Day; which is calling for Purity and
Holiness, that ye may be as Gods peculiar People.

Therefore every one to an inward hearkening, to hear that Voice that calls
behind you, saying, This is the way walk in it; which also calls us to be a
People of one Heart and Mind, in those things that will show forth our Love to
God, and his blessed Truth, and one to another, in which we shall feel the
Condescendings of his Heavenly Power, to draw all that are truly Religious
together, and will make them desire to appear as Children of our one Heavenly
Father, whose care is still over us, and his prolonged Mercies still held out
amongst us, for which I can do no less than bless the Lord in the renewed Sense
of the same, which I feel upon my Spirit at this time, desiring that I with
you, and you with me, may so in Faithfulness approve our Hearts to the Lord,
that not one amongst us may be found of that number that are drawing down the
Judgments of God, by a careless and disregardful Mind of the many Mercies that
we have and do yet enjoy: But rather let our approachings be in that, in which
we may stand in the Gap, and interceed with the Lord for this the Land of our
Nativity and Country in which we dwell; for which dear Friends, let us increase
the number of true Breathings, tender and fervent Supplications, such as may
find acceptance with the Great God who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and
ought to be the only Ruler in every one of our Hearts: To whom belongs all
Honor, Glory, Reverence and Godly Fear; and to him let it be given at this
time, and for ever, Amen.

A. F.

My Friends,
THese foregoing Lines were intended you some time since, but I was not willing
hastily to publish them, till now having good Confirmation by the Testimony of
the Spirit of God, that runs as in a Current or Stream of Life through many of
his faithful Servants; by which you and I may understand, that this is his
Will, and the present concern of many that are convinced of the blessed Truth,
and comes amongst us, that they may all walk in the Truth, and according to the
Righteous Testimony of it in their own Hearts, that still the Testimony of
Truth may be preserved in the purity and sweetness of it, by all you who do
profess it, and have believed in the Spiritual Appearance of Christ Jesus in
your Hearts, who said, I am come a Light into the World, he that believes in
me, shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. And blessed
be the Lord, many can testify; he that has promised, is faithful to perform:
By which we know the true Light has not only broken forth, but the Sun has
also risen, and in its clearness shined that Discoveres unto Man what is good,
and makes known the Exceptable Will of God, which is, that Man should do
Justly, love Mercy, and walk Humbly with God, whose all-seeing Eye beholds all
things, both the Evil and the Good: And therefore you that have believed in the
Light, take heed to the Light, that you may be the Children of the Light, and
of that blessed Day that many through the Divine Discovery of it, has and will
find themselves concerned to do good, and communicate of those Spiritual
Blessings that they do receive from the Hand of the Lord, who through the
Riches of his Love, does communicate to his Children and People that wait upon
him, such inward Comforts that does refresh them; by which they have been often
made to say, it is the Lord that opens the Depths, and causes the Brooks to run
by the way. And therefore in a living Sense thereof, let us all be of a ready
Mind as dear Children, to Communicate, and also to Receive one from another,
that which the Lord may see convenient by any Hand to distribute amongst us,
that may tend to Edification, Strength or Confirmation in that measure of the
samemost holy Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and which in some
degree has been delivered ^o us in this our Day, by which many can bear
witness to the truth of that Saying, As the Wind blows where it lists; even
so is every one born of the Spirit, into which Spirit the Lord has gathered
many; notwithstanding there are many Enemies to Truth through the subtle
working of the one Enemy of Man's Happiness and all Righteousness, who goes
about as he always did, seeking whom he may devour; having many subtle Devices,
by which he has drawn many from that true regard to the Lord their Maker, in
which their Preservation does consist; for which indeed, Dear Friends, we have
all cause to seek the Lord, not only for our selves, but also one for another,
that all those whom God has called, and given Faith to believe in the
dispensation of his Grace and Power in our Hearts, may be preserved under the
safe conducts of it, through this the Pilgrimage of our sojourning here toward
that everlasting Rest which many People are desirous to enter, and of which the
Lord has given some an Earnest in this our Day, by which they are encouraged
to go forward in that way which leads to Everlasting Life, which way is Christ
Jesus who appears in us, to us, and amongst us, for that very End that she
might restore Man and Woman into a state of Happiness and Felicity again, with
God their Maker, who made Man for a purpose of his own Glory, although Man has
sought out many Inventions with pretense to glorify God: But we may see that
Man's pretended ways have greatly tended to the Dishonor of the Righteous God
that made him, and has put his Spirit in him, for that very end, that Man
might be taught by it, to deny Ungodliness through his Subjection to it; or
otherwise, what is all Man's saying or doing, in pretense to honor God, while
they do live in Unrighteousness, and do unjustly one by another? which we do
too often see is insident to Man in his fallen Nature: And therefore in this
consists all Man's Happiness, in Believing and Receiving him whom God has
ordained a means for their Recovery, by which they may be brought into a state
of Union and Communion with him again. And therefore all you who have believed
in the blessed Appearance of Christ Jesus in your Hearts, let it be your
Business, and chiefest Business, to walk according to the Convictions of it,
that by the measure of the Spirit of God received, you may be able to resist
that Antichristian Spirit which is against God, and an Enemy to all
Righteousness; and as you come to be inward, and commune with your own Hearts
and be still, you will find what is most consistent with, and agreeable to the
nature of Godliness, and what is most against the nature of God, who is Love;
and they that dwell in Love, are found in that which is good, and most
agreeable to his Will, who is the Author of all good: And hear you will come to
find the plain path way, as you come to receive the Reproofs for that which is
against God, by which you will also find by good and sound Experience, that the
Reproofs of Instruction, is the way to Life; and this is the universal Love of
our God to all Mankind, that thereby they may come under the peaceable
government of his Son our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; to whom in true love
let me recommend you, that we may all be partakers of the blessed Benefits,
Death and Sufferings of our Lord, who gave himself a Ransom, that he might
Redeem Mankind from all Iniquity and Disobedience, by which he did violate his
Law, and incur his Displeasure; but through Christ in the Riches of his Love,
he has and does call all Men every where to Repentance, and that they may
Repent with that Repentance that can never be Repented of: And therefore all
you to whom the Call of the Lord has reached, and are in some measure made
sensible of his good Will therein, but have not yet so obeyed, as to know the
work of Sanctification, Salvation and Redemption, out of that state of
Alienation in which there is a Separation in all Mankind from God, and from the
comfortable Enjoyment of his pure Divine Presence, in which there is Life
administered to the Soul. Take you special Notice of the daily Call and
Invitation of the Spirit of God that is wonderfully extended to you, and
doubtless in you, for that very Reason that you may all be gathered near to the
Lord, to whom with many more that are sensible of his Love, and do daily
demonstrate the same by their faithful Service to and amongst you, with whom
according to that measure of the Grace and Spirit of God received, I do find my
Spirit drawn forth with, and in the uniting property of it, thus to demonstrate
that my true Desires with theirs, are for all Israel, that they may be Saved in
the Day of the Lord which is approaching; and it is nothing less my Friends,
than the Love of God that has enlarged my Heart to you, knowing that you will
find it no less than Meat and Drink, as you come to do the Will of God; whose
Will is Man's Sanctification. Wherefore it behooves all Men to seek the Lord, and
make their Peace with him, that therein they may be preserved, when the Lord
shall suffer Trouble to come upon the Wicked and Rebellious, for resisting the
Spiritual appearance of Christ Jesus in their Hearts, to whom I pray we may all
be gathered, in him settled, and on him established, who is the Rock of Ages,
and sure Foundation of all the Righteous Generations from Abel to this very
day; and blessed be the Lord, there are some in our day, through a measure of
true Experience, can give this Testimony that there is no other place of
safety, But as our hiding place is in the Lord, in all Storms and Tempests of
what kind soever; and not only so, but that we may also see the many dangers
that Man is liable to, in times of Fair Weather: And therefore Dear Friends,
let me tell you for you Encouragement, it is a blessed Benefit, and will be to
all, as they retire in Humility, and in the Love of God dwell, which is a place
of Safety, where you may daily drink of the Streams of that never-failing
Fountain which can never be drawn dry, but does and will run to refresh the
Inhabitants of the Rock; that being refreshed, we may all be still enabled to
walk in the way of Righteousness, which brings Peace, and gives an Assurance of
the Love of God for ever, in which Love you will feel his Power to be as a
strong Tower from the Assaults of the Enemy. Into which Love let every one
haste to be gathered, and then it will not only Edify, but build up all the
Lords People, to be as a strong House to retain his Glory in, which has and
shall shine through all Blackness and Darkness, till the Light thereof go forth
as as a Lamp that Burns, which being fed with Oil, never goes out; with
which Oil, I pray all our Lamps may be furnished, our Lights burning, that the
Glory of our God may still be shining in and over all the Assemblies of his
People hear and every where: For it is the possession of it, must weigh down
all the profession in the World without it. And therefore Friends, to God who
is the giver of every good and perfect gift, let me recommend you to ask in
Faith of him, that you may all receive from him, that thereby we may all be
filled as with the new Wine of the Kingdom, with which the Lord is filling the
new Bottles that are prepared to receive from his Bountiful Hand; by which he
has and will communicate from Vessel to Vessel, till all be filled, and every
thirsty Soul replenished by the virtuous incomes of it, through which they must
acknowledge it is the Lords doings, and it is, and will be marvelous in the
Eyes of all who are the Beholders of it with that invisible Eye that God has
opened to behold his Glory, far surpassing all the glory of this fading World.
Therefore dear Friends, be not satisfied with Hearing, but come now, and behold
him who is near you, and will tell you all that ever you have done, is not this
the Christ the Messiah, or Son of the Living God, or Savior of Mankind; yes
verily, this is he, believe in him, fall down and worship him, who will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: And all other Worships will be as vain
Oblations before him. And therefore all seek the Lord; retire to your Closets,
and wait upon him, and in your Spirits wherever you are, gather to him who is
always near you, even in you, and always present with you, which is a great
privilege you will find it so, as you come to be acquainted with him, as it is
left upon Record. Acquaint thy self with the Lord, and be at Peace; into which
Peace I pray the Lord to gather, and preserve all his Faithful Children
together, that as so many shocks of Corn, we may all be ready to be bundled up,
and gathered into the Lords Gardner, who has said, he will burn up the Chaff
with unquenchable Fire.

Written in true Love by your Friend and Sister, who desires your Prosperity in
the blessed Truth. A. Fisher.

London, Printed by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet, in Holy-well-Lane,
Shoreditch, 1694.


