Weighty Questions DISCUSSED: I. Whether Imposition of Hands in Separating a
Person to the Work of the Ministry be Necessary? II. Whether it be Essential to
the right Constitution of a particular Church, that the Teaching Elders and the
Members meet always in One Place?


Whereunto is added A Prediction of Mr. Daniel Rogers, Minister in Essex, long
before the Beheading King Charles I. and Archbishop Laud, foretelling that
they should not dye a Natural Death.

By GILES FIRMIN, Author of the Real Christian.

What thing soever I Command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 13.32. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1692.

To the READER.
THat Unity among Christian Brethren is a thing not only beautiful in it self,
but also a Duty greatly incumbent upon them who profess that blessed Name of
Christ, none that read the Holy Scripture can be ignorant of it; yea, a Duty so
greatly incumbent, that they who do not all they can to promote it [provided
the Authority of the Scriptures be preserved] taking care that they neither
profess nor practice any thing in the House of God, but what is according to
the Holy Scriptures, lest that Unity should be hindered, they neither show that
respect to the Command of Christ to us, nor to the Prayer he made to his Father
for this End, as become Christians.

I thought I might have said, At that Holy Table, where we being many are one
bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. I do admit Independents, Presbyterians and Anabaptists,
Members of the Church of England, that are, and walk as Christians, though we
differ in Opinion, and here Ecclesiastical Union is chiefly seen.
that both in former times, and in these days, I had been as desirous of this
Unity as some other Men. Glad I was when I heard some Brethren of the
Independent and Presbyterial Persuasion in London did attempt it; their Names
were very dear unto me, when I heard who they were that labored in it, though I
knew none of them; more glad I was, when about four Years since a Copy of the
Agreement was sent me, to which my Brethren in the Country and my self readily
consented: We expected the same should have been Published, but we find another
much different from it. In particular, in the former, Ordination was to be
performed with Imposition of Hands, but in this the Words are left out, and
these words put in, The Person that is Chosen, shall be Duly Ordained; not
expressing what that Due Ordination is: However, as it is worded, I Consent to
this; and whatever be the different Sentiments I have from others, in several
things mentioned [and more than are mentioned] in the Agreement, yet I have
willingly Subscribed to it, and Profess my self a United Brother with all that
are Duly Ordained.

In a small Treatise which some few Years since I published, I took Notice of
the Apostolical Churches how they were Constituted, I named Nine Churches, all
that I could find, in which were several Elders: I find not one Church in the
Gospel where was but One Pastor.

Since that, Dr. Owen has taken Notice of it, and has proved by several
Scriptures and Reasons, that there ought to be many Elders in every particular
Church. [There were three Teaching Elders, besides other Officers, in his
Church, this was like a Gospel Church.] To have but one Pastor to govern, is a
Novel Opinion, he says; and what he adds is true, It is difficult, if not
impossible, on supposition of one Elder only in a Church, to preserve the Rule
of the Church from being Prelatical or Popular.

As there ought to be many Elders in one Church, so I doubt not but the true
Primitive Church Government was by a President with the Presbytery. Not a
President over more Churches, but only one particular Church. Not a President
superior in Power over the Presbytery, but only Ordinis gratia, Revel. 2.18.
(...). The President.
24. (...), The President with the Presbytery.

So Beza, and Raynoldus Anglorum Eruditissimus, etc. says Didocla. Alta.
Damas. p. 131.


the light of Nature directs to this. I would willingly have but one Instance
given, where this Government was ever prejudicial to the Church. More I could
say: I only mention this, that though in these Points I may differ from my
Brethren, besides what are mentioned in the Agreement, yet it hinders not my
Union with them.

What this Due Ordination is, our Brethren, as I said, have not told us. Hence
the Discussing of this Question, falls not under that Prohibition, p. 3. that
we must not Dispute those different Sentiments: For our Sentiments do all agree
it must be Due Ordination; which if it be not declared what it is, we agree and
Subscribe to we know not what.

Before I Subscribed, I asked the Brethren whether the Subscribing to this
Agreement did debar us from an amicable discussing the Questions wherein we
differ? they All Answered, No. We were not hindered by it. We know the
different Sentiments, before we Subscribe the Agreement, and though we Dispute
them, yet our Union holds as well as if we did not dispute them.

The Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 1.10 and Phil. 2.2. that we be all of one Mind, of
one Judgment. If we must not labor after it, to what purpose is the
Exhortation? Is not the discussing Controverted Questions in a Christian
amicable way, seeking Light from God, and setting up his Ends, [not our own]
one way to come to be of one mind, which the Apostle exhorts to? I am sure it
is, and could give good proof of it from experience, in the Question now
disputed. If we may not do this, then it is as much as to say, There are
different Sentiments amongst us, and shall be so; for still, I say, the End of
the Agreement, which is Union, is preserved.

As to the Question of Ruling Elders, which have continued in the Virgin
Churches of the Vaudois from the Apostles days, and in the Churches of
Bohemia, The Apostle mentioning only Bishops and Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. troubles me.
where their Work is laid open with much more satisfaction to me, than in any
Book I have yet seen in England. I shall be thankful to any Brother who will
dispute the Question Pro or Con, it shall not hinder Union.

As to this Question about Ordination, it is to my Knowledge a great hinderance
of our Union: The thing is so clear in several Texts of Scripture, how it
should be performed, and the Practice of the best, if not all the Churches
since the Apostles times, have been accordingly with Imposition of Hands, that
I have wondered any Man should scruple it.

I heard of an Ordination in our County of an illiterate Person, and that
without Imposition of Hands; after it was past, hearing of another [who is a
Scholar] to be Ordained by the same Persons, I wrote to him, to desire the
Elders that were to Ordain him, to give me the Scriptures which did Warrant
them to Ordain without Imposition of Hands: One of them undertook it, a Person
whose Gifts and Graces I honor. For Scriptures he gave me none: Whether his
Reasons be Cogent, the sequel shall declare.

That Diminishing from the Word is as great a Sin as Addition to the Word, none
can deny; the Text is expressly against them both, Deuteronomy. 12.32. and chapter 4.2.
both offer an Affront to the Wisdom of the ^aw-giver: Addition charges him with
Defect: Diminishing charges him with superfluity, appointing things needless
and vain.

Grant it, that Imposition of Hands in Ordination be but a Ceremony, yet it is
God's Ceremony, appointed first by his express Command, Numb. 8.10, 14.
Not to conferr Gifts, as some would have it, but to Separate to Office. If you
then could deny Communion with the Church of England, because of their Addition
of Humane Doctrinal Ceremonies to the Worship of God [I doubt not but this was
one Cause among others,] may we not then question our Communion with you, in
your Administering of the Holy things, for throwing out God's Ceremony.

It is one thing to hold Communion with a Person as a Christian [which I can do
with all my Soul] another thing to hold Communion with the same Person as a
Minister, dispensing the Holy things of God: For when, as in Separation to
Office, God's Ceremony expressed in five or six Scriptures, is left out, have
you not given us just Cause, setting by the Authority of God in those
Scriptures, to question the lawfulness of your Ministry? O why do our Brethren
lay such Blocks in our way, to hinder that which the Lord has so Commanded,
and we so earnestly desire and seek after, Unity?

I have spoken with some Ordained thus, and they told me they would have been
Ordained with Imposition of Hands, and expected it, but they who did it,
refused it; the more trouble have they made in the Church.

They who come into the Gospel Ministry, must come in according to
Gospel Order. God stands upon his Order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. God made a Breach upon
us, for that we sought him not after Due Order. How severe was the Holy
Lawgiver then; but there was not Due Order, nor is here Due Ordination: God is
the same God still, the God of Order as well as then. The Scriptures are plain
in this Point; why are not we as plain? what need have we of other words them
what we find in the Scriptures?

If Imposition of Hands were but an indifferent thing, or but a circumstance of
the Action: I could Answer my self: But it will appear to be that in which
Separation to Office is principally made, and in which only it is seen.

That godly and learned Men may err as well by Diminishing from the Word, as
such have done in Adding to the Word, I know nothing against it, they are but
Men: But these Men who [as I judge] diminish from the Word, would not therefore
Unite, and hold Communion with them in Worship, where these Additions were,
because they were godly and learned Men. We have our Rule to look to, not Men,
further than they walk according to that Rule.

If the Reader meet with the Word Independent, I desire him not to be offended,
for this Discourse between my Brother and my self, was before the Agreement of
the United Brethren came forth; yet the word may be used sano sensu well
enough: For I doubt not a particular Church duly ^^ganized, walking regularly,
may Execute all the Power of the Keys within it self, without dependency upon
any other Churches.

As to the End of my publishing this Treatise, my Conscience bears me Witness
before the Lord, I aim but at these two things.

1. To remove that Block, if I could, which hinders our hearty Union: I know it
offends many of our Brethren; besides, it gives advantage to them who observe
our Practices to speak against us, and that justly.

2. To keep up the Authority of the Scriptures, which are so plain in this
Case, that if we will own Ordination without Imposition of Hands to be Due
Ordination, then the Authority of five or six Scriptures is set by.

I know no other ground of our Sufferings, but our maintaining of the Authority
of the Scriptures, while Men would be Imposing upon us such things in the House
and Worship of God, which if the Questions were truly stated [which they never
did] have no footing or ground in the Holy Scriptures, but were their Addition
to them, as if the Wisdom of God in the Scriptures were defective.

If we suffered then for the Authority of the Scriptures, while Men added to
them, we will not give away their Authority now while men diminish from them.
Where shall we End if this be the Practice?

As to the Second Question, I seek Light.

1. To have but one Pastor or Teaching Elder in a Church, agrees neither with
the Holy Scripture nor sound Reason. Good Mr. Faldo was troubled about it, I
understand by his Letter to me.

2. The Poverty of the Churches generally is such, that very few can maintain
One, then not more.

3. Complaints have been made by some Members of Churches, that their Pastors
have not proceeded rightly against them, and they had no help.

4. If then the Holy Scriptures have not declared that the Officers and Members
of a Church must meet always in One Place, then all Church-work may be carried
on, which as now we stand, cannot be. I beg of the Father of Lights to Guide
Us.

The Unworthiest of the United Brethren, GILES FIRMIN.

The Prediction of Mr. Daniel Rogers, Minister in Wethersfield in Essex,
concerning King Charles the first, and Archbishop Laud.
IF you ask me who this Mr. Daniel Rogers was? he was the Son of Mr. Richard
Rogers, a Man eminent in Holiness, whom God honored to make him his Instrument
in bringing home many Souls to Christ.

If you ask what he was for Grace himself? His Brother, Mr. Nathanael Ward, use
to say of him, My Brother Rogers has Grace enough for two men, but not half
enough for himself. His Natural Constitution was no Advantage to Grace.

If you ask what he was for a Divine? his Works Answer for him.

If you ask what he was for a Scholar? two things declared him to be a Scholar;
one was this: When Archbishop Land Visited, Mr. Rogers was Summoned to appear,
and did so; whether Mr. Rogers did grapple with the Archbishop, I cannot tell,
but one that lived in the Town where I now do, being then present at the Court,
heard the Archbishop say to him, Mr. Rogers, I acknowledge you to be a better
Scholar than my self, but I will make you know your place: And silenced him.

A second thing was this, which I had from a Kinsman of mine, who was of
Clare-Hall at the same time, if not the same Year with Mr. Rogers; the Man was
a very moderate Episcopal Man, he told me this.

The Archbishop sends down a Coryphaus [this was the Word he used] to the
University of Cambridge, to Challenge the Puritans, and gave his Question
accordingly: Great Expectation there was in the University; Mr. Rogers being
Fellow of Christs-Colledge, came up Opponent; the first Argument he used was so
strong, and he followed it so close, that he Crampt the Respondent, down fell
the Ceremonial Champion; the Under-graduates observing it, went to Mr. Rogers,
took him out of his Place, and carried him out of the Schools upon their
Shoulders; when he was in the Schools yard, a Fellow of St. John's comes behind
him, and gives him a Clap on the Back as he was on their Shoulders, with these
Words, Rogers, go home and Hang thy self, thou will never dye with more Honor.

This is the Man, with whom after he had Preached on his Lecture-day, I walked
to his House: As we were in the way, he asked me, where the King was? I told
him: He looks upon me, and said, If that King dies the ordinary Death of Men,
then God never spoke by me. I was amazed to hear such words come from so grave
and eminent a Divine: O Sir! said I to him, What do you mean to speak such
Words concerning the King; I beseech you give me your Reasons why you speak
thus: He fixed his Eyes upon me, and gave me only this Answer, Say you no more
to me, but do you observe what I say to you.

I was much troubled at these words. A few days after I met with two of his
intimate Acquaintance, excellent Christians, and told them I was much troubled
at what I heard Mr. Rogers speak concerning the King; they asked me what he
said! Note this.
I told them; they Answered me, That might very well be, for before the Wars
began, while the Kingdom was in Peace, he told us, If this King Charles and
this Prelate Laud dye the ordinary death of Men, then God never spoke by me.
[Bishop Laud's Head was off before I came into England.] I asked them if he
spoke of any more? they said, No, only those two. I thought though he were a very
heavenly Man, and one much with God in Prayer, yet I did not take him to be
immediately inspired by God, as the Prophets were, and so the Thoughts went off.

Afterward, when the High Court of Justice [as they called it] sat upon the
King, I did not mind his words, for I did not think they had any intention to
take away the King's Life: When I understood they were in earnest, I went to
Church on the Fast Day, with a purpose to stir up the People to Pray for the
King's Life; but before I came there, one overtakes me upon the Road, and told
me the King was dead. It was the Fast Day, on which Mr. Rogers always Preached
in the Forenoon: In the Afternoon [which he never did before but once, as I
remember] he comes to our Church, I suppose to observe how I resented the
King's Death: After I had done, Mr. Rogers goes home with me, and discoursing
about the King's Death, he recalled a Passage I had in my Prayer concerning it,
Thou said true, said he to me, and there this Old Prophet [I may call him so]
leaning upon my Table, bemoaned the Death of King Charles, being much affected
with it. Let others judge of this as they please, yet this I dare say, No
Prophet immediately inspired by God, did with more Confidence speak concerning
Thing or Person as he was inspired, than Mr. Rogers did confidently foretell
that King should not dye the ordinary Death of Men.

That he should have any hand in the King's Death, no rational Man that knew
him would think so. 1. For he never came among Parliament or Army Men, but an
old Man, lived retired at home. 2. So many Years as I lived by him, I do not
remember that ever I heard him speak against the King. 3. The Words were spoken
before the Wars began, to others, tho after they were begun, to me. 4. He
bemoaned the King's Death. 5. Tho he was a very gracious Man, yet he was
exercised too much with God's Hidings of himself from him, to have any Hand in
such Acts.

What Use to make of this, I leave to Wise Men.

A Weighty Question DISCUSSED.
Whether Imposition of Hands in the Separation of a Person to the Work of the
Ministry be necessary?
BEfore I come to the Question, give me leave to premise a few things.

First, Though Gifts are Essential to a Minister [they must be (...), 1 Timothy 2.2.
to whom Timothy must commit the things he had heard, etc.] Yet Gifts do not
make a Minister. I have known several Gentlemen [they were Scholars indeed] who
as to Gifts were as fit for the Ministry as most Ministers at this day in
England; yet these worthy Men did not invade the Office of the Ministry, as
many illiterate, inferior, and too many erroneous Mechanics do now, to the
disgrace of that Function: Had they been grave experienced Christians, as I
have known some called forth, tried and ordained by Learned Divines to Places
suitable, I should not have opposed, but encouraged and preferred before many
who are called Scholars, but irreligious and ignorant in Soul-Works.

Secondly, Persons may be instrumental to the Conversion of others, and yet not
fit for the Ministry. I have known such. That Parents, even Mothers, by their
godly Education of their Children, may be instrumental to the Conversion of
their Children: Who will deny it? A notable instance I could give of a dying
Mother, speaking to a wicked rebellious Son, [she had other Children godly] God
blessed her Words, that he became a gracious Man.

Thirdly, The Election of the People does not make a Minister. Dr. Owen has
spoken enough to this: Lib. 2. p. 83. 85. 139.
Unto Officers of the Church are required, says he, Election of the People,
submitting themselves unto them in the Lord, and the solemn setting them apart,
by Imposition of Hands: And after that he writes, that Church Order is
defective, that wants the Symbol of Authoritative Ordination, viz. Imposition
of Hands.

And in his Exposition of the Hebr. l. 3. p. 33. Imposition of Hands is a Right
of standing use in the Church, and that wherein Church Order is much concerned.

In his Second Book of the Church, mentioned before, p. 136. he proves there
ought to be many Elders in one particular Church. This he proves, 1st. from
Scripture; 2dly. by Reasons: one of which he fetches from Imposition of Hands.
Is, says he, there be but one Elder only in a Church, upon his Death or
Removal, this Imposition of Hands, must either be left unto the People, or be
supplied by the Elders of other Churches, or be wholly omitted, all which are
Irregular. He did acknowledge the Ordination he had without Imposition of
Hands, when he turned Independent, was defective.

Whether Dr. Owen had his hand in drawing up the Savoy Confession, I know not.
But we see, upon mature thoughts, when he is leaving the World, he gives his
Judgment according to the Holy Scriptures [which should be the only Guide and
Rule in the House of God] contrary to that Confession.

Why Imposition of Hands by Elders of other Churches should be Irregular? he
names no Scripture to prove it. But if it be omitted, that Ordination, says
he, is irregular, (this we are sure of from Scripture) that is enough for me. If
it be irregular, then it is not Due Ordination; for the Rule has not it is Due
given to it. If such Ordination can be valid, to what purpose is the Rule? We
shall have strange things follow if this be admitted, that in Religion, and in
the House of God, Acts may be valid which are not conformable to the Word of
God. The Word says thus, but these Acts answer it not.

Pious and Learned Mr. Faldo before his Death, wrote me word, That one of the
Brethren against Imposition of Hands was with him, and debated the Question
with him; and this especially he stuck at, He would not allow the Elders of one
particular Church to perform Office-Acts, to those that were not of that
Church. Mr. Faldo tells me, He gave him a formal Argument, to prove that it
might be, and in many cases it must be admitted. This he desired to write down,
and did so, and I believe it will be seen by others in this Town of his
Opinion: And if they will take occasion to ventilate that Difference Brotherly,
it will not be declined by some of your and my mind. Thus Mr. Faldo.

What that Argument was Mr. Faldo did not write: I wrote to that Brother,
desiring him to let me know it, but I cannot obtain it; he searched for it, but
could not find it.

But now, for Imposition of Hands in separating a Person to Office in the House
of God, this came in by an express Command of God, Numb. 8.10, 14.

Who are meant by the Sons of Israel in the 10th. verse, is the Question. Mr
Pool says, the Firstborn, or chief of the Tribes. The same Persons I presume,
might be both, and most probable it was so.

First, Chark^ni [as Mr. Ainsworth Quotes him, and agrees with him in it]
says, They were the Firstborn. In this case he may be credited as soon as any
Christian Writer.

Secondly, We read in the three next verses, 16, 17, 18 the Lord tells Moses
three times, that he had taken the Levites instead of the Firstborn: Hence
it is, most probable, the Firstborn were they who imposed Hands on the Levites.

Thirdly, By this Act, says Mr. Pool, they signified their transserring that
Right of Ministering to God, from the Firstborn, in whose hands it formerly
was. Very good: But who should, or who could give away the First-Borns-Right
but themselves? We read, Exodus 24.5. Moses sent the Young Men of the Sons of
Israel, and they offered burnt Offerings. Who were these Young Men? The Chaldee
says, (...) Primogeniti, the First born. These were the Priests or
Sacrificers, until the Levites had the Priesthood in their Tribe. So Numb.
3.12. It Is certain, the Firstborn had many Privileges [tho' Esau despise his
Eirth-right.] Then the Firstborn must impose hands, and give away their
Privileges; but shall they who have no right give away another Man's Right?

Fourthly, The Firstborn were separated, Exodus 13.2. Sanctify unto me every
Firstborn; in their Sanctification, there was a Separation. Now it is most
probable, that they who were separated did separate the Levites, and not
others. I insist upon this for a Reason I shall give hereafter; let our
Opposites give better Reasons to prove they were not the First born.

As this Practice came into the Church by God's Command, so it continued in the
Jewish Church. Dr. Lightfoot tells us, that some Men who gave themselves to the
study of the Law, became very Learned Men which they might, the Law being in
their own Tongue, and did teach, beside the Priests and the Levites: but none
without being first ordained, and that with imposition of hands, Dr. Owen
affirms the same; when the Gospel Church was to be erected, the Apostles, with
whom Christ had spoken of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3.
when a Deacon was to be set apart to his Office, they did it with Imposition of
hands, Acts 6.6. And so the Churches practiced ever afterward, Acts 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22. Heb. 6.2. Of which Text more anon.

This was the Practice of the Churches next the Apostles, and ever since
amongst the Fathers. Papists, and Protestants, both Lutherans, Calvinists,
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independents; I never saw in my time, Platfor. Chapter
Dise. Cap. 9. These. 4.5.
while I was there, nor ever heard since I came from New England [tho I have
enquired] that any one was ordained to any Office in the Church without
Imposition of hands.

Thus the Synod held there And approved by the Synod. held at Boston 1680.
1649. tells us, upon these Hypotheses, that the Fraternity is the (...), of
the Power of the Keys; and that Election gives the Essence. If there be no
Elders, Imposition of hands may be performed, by some of the Brethren, Numb.
8.10. But there is a Difference between the Firstborn there, and our private
Brethren; and good reason why they should impose Hands, and not our private
Men. It was not so in the Gospel Church: It is Irregular, says Dr. Owen. But
by this we see how Imposition of Hands must be, and was in Practice.

In the next Thesis: The Fifth, they tell us, In such Churches where there are
no Elders, and the Church desire it, we see not why Imposition of hands may not
be performed by the Elders of other Churches. 1 Timothy 4.14. Act. 13.3.
Ordinary Officers laid hands upon Officers of many Churches. The Presbytery at
Ephesus, laid hands upon Timothy an Evangelist. The Presbytery at Antioch, laid
hands upon Paul and Barnabas. These Men do not tell us this is their Judgment.
but they give us the Holy Scriptures for what they say. Whereas, the Savoy
Confession gives us not one word of Scripture; but only tells us, where the
Essence of a Pastor lies, without imposition of hands, which is denied. I must
say with Tertullian, Non recipio, quod extra Scripturam de tuo insers. Si
Apostolicus, cum Apostolis senti.

I find in the beginning of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, when
they came newly out of Popery, Imposition of Hands was not judged necessary;
An. 1560. page 26.
as I read in the History put out by Mr. Calderwood. That Man of God, Mr.
Robert Bruce [whose Name I honour] was not ordained thus, nor any other way,
that I can learn, as if there were something in him extraordinary; though I
honor the Man, yet we must stick to our Rule, and not Mr. Bruce. An. 1581.
page 105.
But afterward, they tell us, how Ordination is to be performed, viz. by
Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of the Hands of the Eldership.

After this, page 383. they make it Indifferent.

But at a general Assembly, An. 1597. page 408.
it was ordered, That there be an Uniform Order touching Ordination of
Ministers throughout the whole Realm, and that with Imposition of Hands; and
thus it holds to this day.

Mr. An. 1598. page 424.
Bruce having preached many Years, would admit of Imposition of bands for
Confirmation, but not for Ordination. Several denied him to be their lawful
Pastor for want of Imposition; but others owned him.

Mr. Bruce accepts of Imposition for Confirmation; and Mr. Pont imposes hands
upon him.

First, As for Imposition of Hands for Confirmation, as it is used in England,
after Baptism, I find not one word of it in all the History, nor did the Church
of Scotland own it, that I find there.

Secondly, All this while, there is not one Scripture brought by those who
opposed Imposition: Yet they had taken the Word of God for their only Rule,
which is so express for Imposition, etc. which makes me wonder at Mr. Bruce, so
holy a Man. But if they had no Scripture, had they no Reasons? Yes, they had
one, and but one, and that a pityful one too. Thus, It being laid as a ground,
page 425.
that none can receive Ordination to the Ministry, without Imposition of Hands,
and that the Ceremony is proper to Bishops, it behoved to follow, that none
could enter into the Ministry, without the Imposition of the Hands of Bishops.
This is all very strange that Mr. Bruce should admit of Imposition of Hands for
Confirmation, when the Bishops do appropriate that to themselves as well as in
Ordination.

How many things may be said to this, to show the weakness of this ground? Any
understanding man may easily see; but I forbear. The Representation of
Presbyterian Government, and put out the Year 1690. when Bishops are turned
out, tell us in the sixteenth Section, That Men come into the Ministry by
Election and Ordination, by laying on of the Hands of the Bresbytery, which is
a mean of Communicating Authority to him. Then it seems the Church of Scotland,
where this stir was, can impose Hands in Ordination without Bishops.

By reading this History, I find the Government of the Church of Scotland, from
the first beginning of Reformation, was Presbyterian; wherefore it was no small
injury to impose upon them Prelatical Bishops, unless they had been of Christ's
Institution, which we are sure they are not. And that, our first Reformers in
King Henry the Eights, and in King Edward the Sixth's, did declare, That
Episcopacy was no distinct Order from Bresbytery by Divine Right, but only a
prudent Constitution of the Civil Magistrate, for the better Government of the
Church.

SECT. II. The Definition of Ordination.
AS to the word Ordination, I think Greg, de Valen. speaks right; Tom. 4. Dis.
9. Q. 1. p. 1.
the word is taken from the Effect of that Ordinance, Quia per Ordinationem
aliquis in gradu quodam atque Ordine certo Ecclestasticae Dignitatis
Constituit^r. Some are Pastors, some are Teachers, some a^e Ruling Elders, some
are Deacons, they are set or placed, (...), 1 Cor. 1.28. in such an Order in
the House of God, by Ordination. Thus it has passed for Current many hundred
Years in the Church, till yesterday, Election gave the Essence, and Ordination
was but an Adjunct. I desire my Brethren but to give me that Adjunct, according
to the Word of God, and we shall unite, though we differ in our Logical Notions.

What should he done where Ordination cannot be had? Something I had to say to
it, but being none of our Question, I let it alone. It is more material to know
what Ordination is, and being it is Essential to our Discourse, I will give the
Definition of it. This being a sure Truth, That they who do not give the
Definition, they do but mock the Person to be ordained, and abuse the
Ordinance, for he is not ordained, Cui convenit Definitio eidem quoque Convenit
Definitum: and e Contra, etc.

Ordination then is, the Separation of a Person rightly qualified to the work
of the Ministry, by teaching Elders, with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of
Hands.

Something I had thought to have spoken about the Qualification [wherein I see
these men's Practices with no content, their way being to debase the Ministry]
but the stress lying most in the Ordiners and Impositions of Hands, I shall
speak to these two Heads.

That it belongs to Teaching Elders, Act. 13.3. Tim. 1.4.14. I prove it.

Here the People rise up, and claim a Right; by Virtue of their being the
(...), of the Power of the Keys: And I have seen it practiced. Two Private
Persons imposed their Hands upon an Ancient grave Divine, who was ordained, I
believe, near 40 Years before in England, etc. They gave him the Essence, in
giving him a Call, and so they gave him the Adjunct. And this being the Opinion
of these men here, I preser their Ordination, with Imposition of Hands, and
would own him for a Gospel Minister, before them whom you ordain [as you
suppose] without Imposition: And if Ordination be no more than Prayer and
Fasting, what need of you [according to the Principles of Independency] in
another Church. It is not Prayer, Preaching, and Fasting. Though I grant
Preaching is very comely at such an Ordinance; yet Preaching is not Ingredient
into the Ordination: The People can Fast and Pray as well as you. I observed,
while the hands of these private Persons were upon the Head of their Pastor,
one of them made such a Prayer as might become any Minister, it was so apposite
to the business in hand, that I could but wonder at it; and I believe it was
his own Composing.

Whether the Fraternity be the first Subject of the Power of the Keys; Mr.
Nath. Ward use to say, They were the first Subject of the Key-Clog, not the
Keys: So they have proved in many Churches, I am sure.
I have spoken to it several Years since in another Tract. I add but a few word
now.

In the Common Wealth, the People are before the Magistrate: In the Church, the
Ministry is before the People. Thus it began with the Apostles, they were
first, and after them by a continual Succession of the Ministry the Church is
continued. The Ministry is the Instrument in God's Hand, which he uses
commonly or chiefly, for the bringing in, and building up of his Church, 2 Cor.
6.1. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. The principal Cause and the Instrument work together, to
the producing of the Effect; that then the effect of a Power, should be the
first Subject of that Power of which it is an Effect, is new Logic to me.

Dr. Owen says, The Church is before Ordinary Ministers.

Answ. First, But is it before the Ministry? Else it is nothing.

Secondly, The Proposition is not true, (...); that faithful and laborious
Servant of Christ Mr. Eliot [whom I know and honour] Mr. Mahew. Mr. Leverick,
with great Labor and Industry, get the Indian Language, and preached to the
Indians; they were but ordinary Ministers. God blesses their Preaching: The
Indians some of them are converted, gathered into a Church: Were they a Church
before these Ministers? And were they the first Subjects of the Power of the
Keys, before these Ministers preached to them?

Let the Scriptures, in the Languages, that the Spirit of God inspired his
Penmen to write them, be sent to a People who never saw them, nor heard of
them. Let this People understand them, believe them, embrace them, give
themselves up to them without any Ministry, to translate, to interpret, and to
help them to understand and believe; I will allow this People to be the
Subjectum Primum, Secundum, Tertium, of all the Power of the Keys, but rot else.

Secondly, There are others who lay claim to this, and impropriate it to
themselves, as belonging to them only, i. e. Bishops, as being of a Superior
Order above Teaching Elders: Thus Bishop Gawden told me, it was out of
Courtesy, that the Bishop admitted Presbyters to impose Hands with them in
Ordination. Thanks to this Courteous Bishop. I thought they had followed the
fourth Council of Cartbage: But if Presbyters do impose Hands with the Bishop,
then the Superiority of the Bishop above the Presbyter, in Ordination, is gone:
For Imposition of Hands is the Principal thing in Ordination, as I will prove
anon, because one prays at the Imposition; that argues no Superiority of Power
in him.

All Bishops were not of this Bishop Gawden's mind; not that Bishop of
Peterborough, who when he ordained many at one time, but then take notice, That
he did ordain them as Presbyter. He spoke not without Reason; for no
Ministerial Acts in the Church are valid, but such Acts as are performed by
Ministers of Christ's, Institution. They who are Officers in the Church by
Civil or Ecclesiastical Constitution, all their Acts as such, signify nothing.
But his being a Bishop, and so superior to a Presbyter, was by no Institution
of Christ, had only jus Humanum to Warrant his Authority, and therefore he did
not ordain as such a Bishop, but as Presbyter. Two I know, Mr. Statham, (as I
heard) and Mr. Samuel Smith, who were then Ordained: Mr. Smith spoke of it
often, what the Bishop said to them, and ^^d them take notice of it: Had Mr.
Smith lived till now, he had been about 78 years of Age; suppose him to be
Ordained about 25 years of Age, some by this may guess what the Name of that
Bishop was about 58 years past. I have often thought of this; the meanest
Officers in the Commonwealth, be they Rum-bailiffs, Ale-Founders, yet they
must have Law for their Office to Warrant their Actings: But that in the House
of God there should be such as look upon themselves as the Chiefest Officers in
the Church, and yet can show no Law from the Lord of the House to Warrant their
Office; this is strange, what has jus Humanum to do in the House of God? Is
not the Wisdom of the Great God Sufficient to know what Officers to appoint in
his House, but sinful Man must set up Officers, and supreme Officers too,
without him? Thus Bishop Gawden told me; The Bishop is the Supreme Officer, [He
should have said the Arch-Bishop] in the Church; you Presbyters are but the
Pipe-staves, the Bishop is the Hoop that holds you together. An excellent
similitude; I desired him to tell me who should be the Cooper to knock on this
Hoop, I doubt (I told him) the Pope would swear by his Keys, that he must and
will be the Cooper. And Bellarmin will maintain it by his Argument a Simili,
etc. De Romano Pontif. mibi. 204. He told me moreover, you Presbyters are no
more able to manage the Government of the Church of England, than David was
able to wield' Readiness Armor.

The Government of the Church of England is a hard word, there needs an
Interpreter. We poor Presbyters look only to the Government of our particular
Flocks, whom we feed with the Word and Sacraments, over whom God has made us
Bishops, Acts 20.17, 28. If all the particular Congregations in England
(supposing them to be visible Saints) were so governed, then by an Induction of
particulars, it might be so called.

We do not indeed in our Government use Writs de Excommunicato Capiendo,
Prisons, Fines, Cutting off Ears, these are Readiness Armor, but none of Paul's
spiritual Weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4. with which we are content. If it be well
examined, it will be found that the Zeal of his Government has been carried
out against Conscientious Men, who for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, stick
close to the Word of God, without admitting any Humane Inventions to justle
with him; I say the Zeal has been carried out against those far more than
against Whore-mongers, Drunkards, profane Swearers, Dam'mees, etc.

I can but take notice of Dr. Lightfoot, 1 Vol. p. 787, 788.
that learned Man and Son of the Church of England, living in the times of our
Persecution, who denis Bishops to be Successors to the Apostles. And that it is
an improbable and unconstant Inference, that because there was Subordination
between the Apostles and Philip. (in Acts 8.) that therefore the like is to be
reputed betwixt Bishops and other Ministers.

I have done with this; I only aimed at this; Teaching Elders may Ordain, and
we have Divine Authority for it in the Texts before mentioned: These we are
sure are Officers in the Church by Christ's Institution; The Lutherans have
Bishops, yet they deny any inequality jure Divino, between Bishops and
Presbyters, quoad Potestatem Jurisdictionis. Therefore Gerrard answering
Bellarmin appropriating Ordination to Bishops says, De Minist. Eccles. p. 261.
there is not one tittle in all God's Book, that Ordination by Bishops should
be valid, but by Presbyters should be Null.

The next thing is, it must be performed with Imposition of Hands: I named five
Scriptures for this before.

What Dr. Owen says, Ordination of Ministers is one thing, Imposition of hands
is another, differing as the whole and the part. I yield it by this whole, he
must mean totum integrale, it cannot be totum universale, but we say in Logic,
suolata qualibet part tollitur perfectio Integri, sed sublata part principali
tollitur integrum. Then I say where there is not Imposition of hands, there is
no Ordination, for this Imposition is the principal part, and so tollitur
Integrum.

That it is the principal part I prove, and this shall be my first Argument.

1st. The Spirit in the Apostles, sets forth the whole Ordinance of Ordination,
only by Imposition of Hands, but never by Fasting and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.14. the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay Hands on no Man
suddenly. That in those Texts Ordination is meant, and not Confirmation, nor
reception of Penitents, nor the Sick. I have proved in another Tract, so that I
insist not upon them. Heb. 6.2. This my Brother with whom I now deal, denies to
be Ordination, but it is meant of Confirmation, and bids me see Dr. Owen so
interpreting it.

I honor the Doctor, and will consider him when I have first proved it is
meant of Ordination. If Men's Judgments be worth any thing then for learning and
Holiness, we have very eminent Men for it. Archbishop Usher, Mr. Cart-wright,
Dr. Lightfoot, Mr. Thomas Hooker, Gualter, Tossanus, Bullinger, Gillespy
Dicson, Johnson, Jacob, These understand it only of Ordination. Other Divines
of Confirmation and Ordination, and Because my Brother Charges me with my false
Quotation of Mr. Cart-wright, take his words on Heb. 6.2. By Imposition of
Hands the Apostle means no Sacrament, much less Confirmation after Baptism,
but by a Trope or borrowed Speech, the Ministry of the Church upon the which
Bands were laid, which appears in that whosoever believes not, there ought
to be a Ministry by order to Teach and Govern the Church, overthrows
Christianity.
Dr. Owen here does not exclude it.

1st. I lay the Foundation for my Proof, in these Words, (...). 1.5. not laying
again the Foundation. This then is a Fundamental point. Foundation must last as
long as the House lasts. Confirmation by extraordinary Gifts conveyed in the
Imposition of Hands, do not last so long as the Church lasts: the Church has
lost this above Fifteen hundred Years: But the Ministry intended in this place,
shall last to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. till the Body of Christ be
perfected, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Therefore this is the Foundation.

The other Heads of Catechism that are joined with it, must last to the end of
the World. And if Baptism, then the Ministry, that have the Command from
Christ, to Teach and Baptize, Mat. 28.20.

2dly. Let it be observed, that the extraordinary Gifts which were given
sometimes, by Imposition of Hands; were given first to the Jewish
Christian-Church, and then to the Gentiles, without Imposition of Hands, Acts
2.2, 3. with Acts 10.44, 45, 46. This is very material. Do you then show us two
Texts where the Apostles separated Men to the Ministry without imposition of
Hands; as extraordinary Gifts were given first, both to Jews and Gentiles,
without Imposition of Hands; and to Cornelius and his good Company before
Baptism. Acts 10.47.

3dly, We have other Scriptures, where Imposition, etc. is put for Ordination;
I named two. Do you name one more where Imposition of Hands, mentioned alone,
is put for Confirmation.

4thly. Imposition of Hands in Ordination to Office, was before Imposition of
Hands to the Collation of extraordinary gifts, and more frequently mentioned;
therefore the more reason why it should be so understood here, and not excluded.

The placing of Imposition, etc. in the Text-after Baptism, does not prove it
to be meant of Confirmatton, no more than the placing of Faith in God, after
Repentance will prove that Repentance goes before Faith in God; whereas if a
Man do not first believe God to be, and such a God as the Word declares him to
be; yea, if he do not believe the Resurrection and the last Judgment, he will
hardly Repent.

2dly. Cornelius and his Friends, the Gentiles, had those Gifts Conferred
before Baptism, Acts 10.45, 46, 47, 48.

3dly. Let them prove that all that were Baptized had these Gifts Conferred
after Baptism. This made Dr. O. so to expound it, because it follows Baptism in
the Text.

As for Dr. Owen's Reasons against Ordination I see no reason, says he, why
the Apostle should pass from the Doctrine of the first entrance of Christian
Religion, and proceed to the Ordination of Ministers, omitting the Lords Supper.

2dly. Nor why he should insert the observation of this Rite, or the Doctrine
concerning it, in the same Order, and under the same necessity with the other
great Fundamentals, etc.

Answ. 1st. And what necessity was there of his inserting extraordinary Gifts,
common to godly and ungodly, and which were to expire in a short time amongst
the Fundamentals.

2dly. Gospel Worship is a fundamental point, and it was Christ's pleasure to
have a Gospel Ministry to carry on that Worship to the Worlds End; and under
that Rite, the Ministry is meant, Ephesians. 4.11.12, 1 Cor. 12.28.

3dly. Under Baptism, the Lord's Supper might be comprehended, being the other
Sacrament So Dr. Gouge 's Baptism Synechdochice is put forboath Sacraments.
or being those were the Catechetical Heads, which the Novices learned before
they were Baptized and admitted into the Church (as Baptism and Repentance went
together in John's Baptism, Matthew 3.) so here Baptism and Repentance are
mentioned, but for the Lords Supper, they might be further instructed after
they were in the Church, before they were admitted to it.

4thly. There is not such a necessity of Baptism, as of Faith and Repentance;
yet Baptism is mentioned amongst those Heads.

The Prophets under the Old Testament Prophesied of these Gifts, that they
should be poured out says the Dr.

Answ. True, but the Prophets do not say, they should be conferred by
Imposition of Hands, and so be made a Chatachetical Head under the New
Testament.

2dly. So do several of the Prophets foretell, what Pastors the Lord will give
to his Church under the time of the Messah. But to make an end with Dr. Owen to
whom you refer me; He gives us four Cases in which this Imposition of Hands was
used. The Second he mentions was in healing of Diseases, Mark 16.18. etc. This
cannot be the meaning here, says he, for this gift was extraordinary,
occasional, Temporary, Proper to some.

Upon the same grounds, it cannot be meant of Confirmation. For the Gift was
Extraordinary, Temporary, Proper to the Apostles; Ananias had an immediate Call
to it, Acts 9.10, 11.17. Philip had no such power, or Gift in Acts 8. And after
the Apostles we read of none that could, or did confer Gifts extraordinary by
Imposition of Hands. What he means by occasional, I know not. I know no word of
Healing unless People were sick.

2dly. But I read in the Dr. p. 34. thus, we shall allow room also for that
other exposition of the Words which is more generally received, (I suppose he
means Ordination) because it complies with the Analogy of Faith: I dare not be
peremptory. Then the Dr. is not absolutely against me.

So much for my first Argument.

I go on,

2dly. Ordination is an Act of Authority, but Prayer and Fasting are no Acts of
Authority. These are the Duties belonging to all Christians. I would desire no
more Blessings than many good Women can pray for. Therefore Prayer and Fasting
do not make Ordination.

The Major only remains to be proved, Acts 6.3, 6. (...), whom we may appoint,
etc. Though the Persons were qualifyed, though elected by the Church, yet they were
not in that Order of Deacons, till the Apostles put them into it
Authoritatively, Imposing their Hands upon, them. And this is common with all
Presbyters, Tit. 1.5. (...). The same word we had before. This word I find
several times in the New Testament, belonging to a Person in Authority, giving
Authority to others, as Acts 7.10. and 27, and 35. Matthew. 24.45.47. Matthew.
^5.21.25, etc.

What Mr. Ainsworth says of the First born imposing their hands upon the
Levites, I think it is true: By this sign, they did put the charge and Service
of the Church upon them, and did Consecrate them to God in their Name. So I
think the Presbytery in their Imposing of hands do impose the charge, the
burden, the work of the Ministry upon the Persons ordained, giving them
Authority from the Lord, to go forth and Preach, and Administer all the Holy
things of God with Authority. As the Church of Scotland says, It is a mean of
Communicating Authority to the person Ordained. Well may the Apostle say, lay
hands upon no Man suddenly. See it in a civil Case, Numb. 27.18, 19, 20. Joshua
must stand before the High Priest and the whole Congregation: Moses must lay
his hand upon him, a sign of his calling, and Ordination to his Office. v. 23.
Moses did so, and gave him his Charge.

Thus if strangers hearing there is an Ordination come in among you, there they
may hear Preaching and Prayer; but who is the person to be ordained, they
cannot tell by Preaching and Prayer, but when a person is brought forth, and
the Presbytery Impose their Hands upon him and pray, now they may know who the
Person is.

3dly. If Prayer and Fasting be Ordination without Imposition of hands, then as
often as Ministers meet together, to keep days of Fasting and Prayer, and pray
for him who is the Pastor of that Church where they meet, for increase of
grace, gifts, blessing upon and success in his Work, so often the Man is
ordained; are not these the Heads you pray for, when you Ordain in your way?
What Heads have you more? Not only in the Sacraments; but in all
Church-Ordinances, there is something which visibly shows a difference between
that Ordinance and another. As the Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven in
Prayer, visibly show a difference between Prayer and Preaching, and so in
Preaching from Prayer; but according to you there is nothing whereby Ordination
differs from other Ordinances.

Fourthly, Acts 13.3. That here in Ordination, I meet with seventeen Divines
besides Dr. Owen, that acknowledge it, and the Definition of Ordination is here
seen. When God commanded them to separate, Paul and Barnabas, etc. He did not
tell them how they should separate, they knew that before, and accordingly did
it with Imposition of Hands; they had learnt that from Numb. 8.10.14. the
positive Command, where the word separate is used.

If ever Ordination might have been spared, then here; for what did this
signify to the poor ignorant Gentiles to whom they were sent, that knew
nothing of it? And if they had told them they were thus Ordained, what cared
they for it? They carried their Credentials with them, the power of Miracles,
to confirm their Doctrine. If the Church did Pray and Fast for success upon
their Ministry, but what need Imposition of Hands? Not to confer Gifts, they
were qualifyed before, Paul, Acts 9.17. Barnabas, Acts 11.24. and for Teachers
to Confer Gifts extraordinary, we read none. They were called to separate, by
an immediate Command or Call of God. So Paul was no Apostle of Men, Gal. 1.1.
Though Men did Ordain, yet what they did, being by the immediate Call and Command
of God, he may be said to be an Apostle not of Men, or by Men.

But this is observable: This Ordination is the first that ever was out of
Judea. Antioch then the chief City of Syria, the most powerful City of Asia,
where the Prefect of the East most where resided, called by some the Gentiles
Jerusalem. Here then in a City of the Gentiles, is the Apostle of the Gentiles,
set apart to the Work of an Apostle among the Gentiles. And I cannot tell what
use to make of it, since as I said, the Gentiles neither knew it, nor regarded
it, but it is of use to us, to show us that as the Apostle of the Gentiles was
separated to his Work, so all Ministers that are the Successors of the
Apostles, should be separated to their Work; that as they were thus separated
in the Jewish Church, so it should be in the Gentile-Christian Church.

Object. But Paul was an Apostle before.

Answ. 1. I deny its For, 1st. Then the Text would have called him so. The Text
tells us there were Prophets and Teachers, but he does not say there were
Apostles. Surely Paul should have had the Title of his Office, if he had been
an Apostle, as well as the Prophets had.

2dly. The Lord tells Anantas, Acts 9.15. Paul was a chosen Vessel, to carry
his name among the Gentiles. But this was not done till now.

3dly. Pa^l was never called an Apostle till after this, Acts 14.14.

Lastly, When the Apostle charge Timothy 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on
no Man; the Affirmative Is employed, he ought to lay hands, if he sound a Person
worthy; in mandato negativo Affirmativum continetur. Thus I have given you my
Definition, and proved by several Scriptures; now Brother, give me your
Definition, and prove it by Scripture; you indeed have not alleged that, Acts
14.23. but two others have brought that Text against me, ^o prove that Election
(from the word (...)) with Prayer and Fasting, without Inposition of hands,
makes a Minister.

1st. This Text I see by Lutherans and Calvinists, is brought to prove the
Peoples-right in Election; Dr. Owen has made great Use of it, so Dr. R^le, so
Gerhand, makes great use of it; but when they have done so, yet they all tell
us, a Man is not a Minister as yet, but Ordination must be, and that as I
defined it.

2dly. I think it is a good rule to help to understand the Scriptures, if one
Text be obscure, and there be clearer ^exts in the Scripture speaking to the
same thing: Carry the obscure Text to them, which are ^lear. We have several
clear Texts for Ordination with ^mpositio^ of Hands, but not one now that gives
the least shadow to prove such an Interpre^^tion as this. It falls out very
unhappily with some Men, says Dr. Owen in another Case, who think they see
some peculiar Opinion, in some singular Text of Scripture, and will not bring
their Interpretation of it to the Analogy of Faith, and see how contrary it is
to the Current of the word in other places.

3dly. Paul knew how Imposition of Hands in separation to Office, came into the
Jewish Church, by the positive Command of God, and how it continued in that
Church. Secondly, He know the Practices of the Apostles. Now, Thirdly, He knew
how he himself was separated. Fourthly, He can tell Timothy how he, i. e.
Timothy, was separated, and charge him that he take care how he laid Hands upon
others. Can any rational Man think, that Paul now would in these Churches,
separate Man to Office without Imposition of Hands? I think no Rational Man
will believe it. Why then is this Text abused?

For my part I am for the Peoples Election, provided it be carried on
regularly; and look upon this Imposing of Ministers by Patrons upon the People
against their Consent, as cursed Tyranny.

But for my own part (giving honor to these worthy Men, far more learned than
my self) I am not satisfied, that this (...) in this Text, whatever the
Etymology of the word was at first, must necessarily note the Act of the People
listing up their Hands in Election of their Officers. I rather consider how the
word is used, in that Age or Time when Men write. It Is well known that words in
time do vary in their signification from what they did at first. Among diverse
others, we have one in Scripture, Ethis. l. 4. Cap. 14.
(...), Ephis. 5.4. Aristotle tells us how the Word was first used, and who was
(...), a Man that was facetious, pleasant, Witty, but withal cleanly in his
Discourse: But afterward in his time, if a Man did seem to be Witty, though
Scurrilous and base, he now was (...). Diverse such words we have in the Latin,
and English Tongue. Philo and Paul were Contemporaries, Philo flourished in
Caligula 's Time, and wrote before Paul.
and how Philo uses the Word (...). Dr. Hammond, has given us an account out
of his Works. Likewise out of Lucian, and Maximus Tyrius. Where the word is
used of single persons, so that the word did not in those times signify the
suffrages of the People, and the Word in Holy Writ, Acts 10.41. (...) being
given to God: Plainly carry it, that the Word does not always intend or force
the Peoples Suffrage, whatever the Etymology of the Word signifles, upon which
Gerbard lays his stress. I have not seen that piece of Mr. Seldom, but Mr.
Ranew told me he had made it clear that (...) had lost that signification these
contend for, many years before Christ.

2dly. That Rule which Henry Stephens gives us, concerning (...); I take to be
very true; When this word governs an Accusative Case, then it signisies but to
create, Ordain. Thus he Now in this Text, Acts 14.23. it does so, (...). But in
Cor. 2.8.19. which these Men urge to confirm their Opinion, there is no
accusative Case, but (...). He was chosen of the Churches. Let me add to this,
the Syrryack Version: I doubt not but that Translator did understand the
Etymology of the word as well as any of us; now in this verse he renders the
word they ^id Constitute, or Ordain (...)
the very same Syriac word, which is used in Tit. 1.5. Ordain Elders. But in
the 2 Cor. 8.19. there he uses another word, to chase, (...)
and doubles the Verb, as the Hebrews do, which the Latin Translation gives
thus, deligendo delectus sit. So the vulgar Translation, Constituissent.

3dly, The Gramatical Construction is more to me than a Criticism: when Paul
and Barnabas returned to Antioch, v. 22. they returned, (...), Confirming the
Souls, etc. (...), E^horting them to continue, etc. These two were Paul and
Bar^abas's Acts, then (...), Paul and Barnabas lifted up their hands, if the
word must signify so from the Etymology of the word, this was as much their
Act as the ^ormer. Let any Schoolboy construe it, though the Boy can tell you
the Etymology of the word. Then we shall have a new ^a^hion of ordaining, by
Ministers fasting, praying, and listing up their hands. ^esides, for the word
(...), how will that agree with the Peoples listing up their hands, what ^air
sense shall we make of it? But if we take the word as we see it was used in
that time, and as H. Stephens says, if it governs an accusative case, as it
does in this place, th^n the Sense runs smooth, Paul and Barnabas did
Constitute or ordain them. (i. e. the Disciples in the sormer verse) Elders in
every Church, etc.

4thly. It is certain the Greek Fathers did use their word (...) for
Ordination: Surely they understood their own Mother tongue as well as we. I
have observed Chrysostem in all those Texts where Imposition of hands is
mentioned; he uses (...). Gerhard confesses that Chrysostom and other
Ecclesiastical Writers, do so use it. And tho he stick to the Etymology of the
word to maintain the Peoples right of Election, yet Ordination he says must be
with Imposition of hands, therefore he says in the next word (...) demum sit
mentio, in their praying, they Imposed hands. Thus he.

As to these Fathers who thus use the word (...), had they been against the
Election of the People, then I should have suspected their Integrity in their
use of the Word, but the People then had their Election of their Bishops and
Presbyters. And one thing I took notice of in the 5th. Century; I read of one
Syn^si^s, a Man of very good parts, who was to be Ordained Bishop of Syrene:
But when he should be Ordained, he did not believe the Res^rrection of the
Body, yet the People who had elected him, were so earnest to have him Ordained,
that Theophilus Alexand. did Ordain him, hoping he might believe it afterward;
as he did. When I read it, I thought what a difference there was between those
times and ours, they could Ordain a Bishop, who did not believe one of the
Articles of the Apostles Creed (as it is called) but the Church of England
could cast out about eighteen hundred Ministers, but for what? was it because
they did not assent to the Doctrine of the Church of England? I heard Mr.
Harmar should tell Bishop Reynolds, if you can maintain the Discipline of the
Church, the Dissenters must maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England) was
it because they were scandalous in their Conversation? was it because they were
Idle and lazy? was it because they did not worship God according to His Word?
Blessed be God, they could charge us with none of these things, for what then?
Let them answer that when they come to appear before their and our Judges. They
were Churchmen and Bishops that made that Act against us.

SECT. III.
NOw to your Reason, why you Ordain without Imposition of Hands, that which you
chie^^y insist upon is this.

There is neither Scripture, Precept, no^ President, for ordinary Officers, of
one. Church, to impose Hands in the Ordination of an Officer in another Church
Answ. First, What need of such Presidents, while Apostles and Evangelists were
living? Secondly, This Argument of yours plainly implies, that there is
Scripture Precept, and President, to ordain in another Church, so it be without
Imposition of Hands: It lies upon you to show, where that Precept or President
is. I know no such Texts; you acted, did you act in Faith; that you acted
according to God, and were well-pleasing to God, in your ordaining without
Imposition of Hands? Then show us that Divine Testimony upon which your Faith
for so acting, is grounded: You never gave me one as yet; and if you cannot do
it, your Faith in this Act is but vain. If there be any thing I do in the House
of God, for which I cannot give either Precept, President, necessary
Consequence, from Scripture or light of Nature, I will lay by that Act, I will
not trouble the Peace of the Church, nor hinder Union with my Brethren, by
keeping up such Practices.

Thirdly, The Apostles did not constitute Churches as you do, with one single
Pastor, etc. In Nine Churches we find several Teachers, but not one with a
single Teacher. In a Young Church at Antioch, Act. 13.2, 3. There were three
Teachers to separate Paul and Barnabas. There is an Error then in your
Constitution, and that does not justify your Error in Ordination.

Fourthly, Give me a President, where the Pastor of one Church did so much as
preach or pray in another Church; if you cannot, then we must not so much as
preach or pray in another Church: But you have called me and others to preach
in your Church.

To this you answered me, You could well do that, from Matthew. 28.19. go teach
all Nations; if so, then in other Churches.

Answ. First, Set by Presidents then, it seems you can find none.

Secondly, I may deny your Co^seq^ence, at ^^ast according to some Independent
Principles, unless I preach as a gifted Brother. To preach to the Nations who
were Heathens, and to preach in an Independ^nt Church, differ. I may preach to
Heathen as a Minister of Christ, but in an Independent Church, as a gi^ted
Brother. I wish we knew the first Author of this Distinction, that we might
scratch his Cranium, for so witty an Invention.

What your judgment is as to this distinction, Lib. 2. p. 101.
I cannot tell. But I am of Dr. Owens mind: If I did not think my self bo^nd,
says he, to Preach as a Minister, and as a Minister Authorized in all places,
and on all occasions, when I am called thereunto, I think I should never preach
much more in this world.

Fisthly, If that Text will warrant me to preach in another Church, it will
warrant me to Baptize in another Church, if there be need, and I am called to
it. They are joined together; and if I may put forth two Acts of Authority, I
may also put forth a third: If there wants a Pastor, and I am called to join
with others to separate him to his Office, we will do it according to the Word,
with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, without which it is not
Ordination: We do not give him the Deficition.

Sixthly, Since then we are come to consequence from Scripture; I gave you a
Scripture, 1 Cor. 12.12 The Body is one, and has many Members, etc. He does
not mean that particular Church of Corinth, is that one Body: he adds, so is
Christ, v. 13. Jews and Gentiles make up that one Body. v. 25. The Members of
this one Body, must have the same care one of another. Does the Apostle tie up
his Discourse to the Church of Corinth, that the Members of that Church should
have care one of another? and if one of their Members did ^^^^er, v. 26. all
the rest of the Members of Corinth suffer with them, but for other Churches
take no care of them: If they suffer, you need not suffer with them. Certainly,
this was not the Apostles meaning. I look upon all particular Churches to be
Members of that one Body: It is such a Church, in which Christ has set
Apostles, Prophets, etc. v. 28. It is such a Church, where some are as Eyes,
others as Ears; some as Feet, some as Hands, verses 15, 16. Therefore he speaks
of the Visible Church. If every particular Church were the Body of Christ, how
many Bodies should Christ have? But he has but one Body, as the 12th. verse,
and Ephesians. 4.4, 12. tell us. Since th^n all particular Churches are but Members
of that one Body, and the Lord has commanded the Members to have care one of
another. Surely, the Lord has not confined the Ministerial Power of a Pastor,
to his own particular Church; so that if a Neighbour-Church have no Pastor,
that the Pastors near to this Church may not help that Church to a Pastor, and
in that way which his Word has declared. Your Practice testifies it; for you
would make the Person to be ordained, and others believe, you ordain in another
Church; and this is an Act of Authority, but not as you perform it, nor
according to God's Word, and so it is no Ordination.

There is a difference between a Ministers helping another Church destitute of
an Officer, in seeding them with the Word and Sacraments, a joining with others
in the Ordination of a Pastor to them, and exercising Discipline in that
Church, in case of Scandal. The Church has some Power to help it self in this
Case, tho no Pastor.

For instance, a Pastor of a Church not far from us in the time of Persecution
leaves England, goes Beyond Sea many miles; this Church had none to seed them:
they desired help of their Neighbor Ministers, who accordingly did afford them
help; some preached, some baptized their Infants, and others Administered the
Lord's Supper to them. One of the Church fell very foully, being seduced by
another Professor; the Scandal very great, so that the Hearts of good People
very sad, but our Enemies rejoiced; it made such a noise in the Country, many
miles about us, that the like I believe have not been known in these Parts. I
was desired to preach there; when I had done my Sermon, a Writing was delivered
to me, wherein the Church desired me to declare to the Congregation [which was
then very great, being no Sermon in the public place] their ab^orrency of such
Acts, and withal desired me to inform them what was their Duty, what they ought
to do in such a Case as this. I gave them my thoughts thus: You are but a
Homogeneal Body, and so have no power to Excommunicate, that being an Act of
Authority; nor have I any power to call the person to an account, and
excommunicate: But yet this you may do, since the person was admitted into
Church Fellowship and Communion with your consent, she having fallen so foully,
dishonored God so greatly, and opened the mouths of Men against Godliness, you
should first meet together, and humble your Souls before God, that there should
be such Dishonor brought to his Name, by one of your Church. Then, First, You
have the Lord's Supper Administered sometimes amongst you; there you may deny
Communion with her. Secondly, You have times when your Church only meet
together, for Prayer, mutual Conference, etc. You may there deny her Communion
also; but when you meet publicly with others, there you should not deny, but
she may be present at Prayer, being it is natural Worship; tho she were
actually excommunicated, and rendered as a Heathen; I have seen the Indians
present with us, at Prayer, and Preaching, though as yet they had not embraced
Christianity. Thirdly, As for the Civil Familiarity you had with her before,
you ought to suspend that too, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. and verse 6. yet having a care of
her, being in a poor condition, that she do not perish. Fourthly, You may
choose three or sour of your chief Members, and send them to her, to make her
know, the Determination, of the Church, and that the Church does this, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus.

The Church did so, the effects of it was, the clamours of the People ceased;
the Mouths of them who before were opened against us, were silent, and now they
rather sound sault with me, that I was too sharp upon the Person offending, the
effect was a relenting, and humbling of her self before God in the public
Congregation, to the satisfaction of the Church, she is now dead, but the
Church having then their Pastor, absolved her before she died: and it was a
comfort to her: her Absolntion was without money.

By this I see, were this Ordinance of Church Discipline carried on according
to the word of God (which has been so fearfully abused) we should need no Writ
de Excommunicato capiendo: I did but add a sew words, what the case of such a
person was under this Sentence, and it struck an awe in the hearts of Carnal
People.

To return to my Brother. To what I have said from the one body in the Corinth.
12. That the Pastors of Churches may help other Churches, where there are none,
and they call to help them, you answer me.

This is all you have to say, and there is little in it.

Answ. No, not all, Brother; I gave you your own Text, whereby you proved that
Pastors of other Churches may join with you in days of Fasting and Prayer, and
preaching; and if so then in Ordaining.

2dly. I gave you the Texts of Scripture, whereby the Synod of N. England
proved, they might ordain in another Church, with Imposition of hands.

You tell me, you deny a Political-visible Catholic Church.

Answ. So do I. If I said but little, I am sure you say too much. How does it
follow? Because we may help neighbor Churches, when they call us to help them
with Pastors in a Gospel way. Therefore I must own a Political, visible,
Catholic Church. I gave you instance before, how Churches may help to purge
themselves from seandalous persons, tho they have no Officers. If there be a
Family by us where are several Children Parents both dead, and there is none
that takes care of them to help them to food: It is one thing for me to go to
the House, and help them with food, another thing to cast one of the Children
out of the House, if it be cross, refractory, and will not be reclaimed by
counsel. Thecase is the same here; twenty or forty Elders may meet to give
Counsel in a Case, leaving the Execution to the Church whence the Case depends.

You tell me, Ministers are not set over the whole Church, their Power may be
refused in other Congregations.

Answ. But they do not refuse their Power, when they Call for it, and desire to
help them in their want. I limit the Power of Elders to other Churches, to the
Call of those Churches, being in want. They are not therefore set over the
whole Church.

When you with the two other Ministers [they go for such] did separate that
illiterate Person to the Work of the Ministry, did you Act as Officers or as
private Brethren? If you acted as private Brethren, then I am sure he is no
Minister; the Brethren of the same Society had more right than you. If you
acted as Officers, then it seems you could not put forth Official Power in
another Church. To separate to an Office, is an Act of Authority. Whom we may
appaint, [not the People] Act. 6.3.

You tell me, the 13 Acts 3. is no Platform for us, unless we have an immediate
Command from God to Ordain Men.

Answ. The immediate Command was in the separating Paul and Barnabas to the
Work of their Apostleship. The Command was not to Teach them how they should
separate; the Lord says only, Separate, etc. they knew how they should
separate before. The Synod of New England and Dr. Owen were much mistaken, who
quote this Text for Ordination by Impostion of Hands: But to this Text I have
spoken before.

As to what you say, That Gifts were then Conserred with the Imposition of
Hands.

Answ. The end when the Lord first Commanded it, was not to Conferr Gi^ts, but
to separate, Numb. 8.10, 14. so Acts 13.3. Separate we Paul, etc.

2. The Savoy Consession is against you, if there be Elders in the same Church,
it calls for Imposition of Hands.

3. Paul and Barnabas were Gifted before, as I named the Texts.

4. The Deacons were Gifted before their Ordination, Acts 6.3.

5. Paul then needed not to have given that Caution to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2.
that they be (...), to whom he Committed the Gospel-Doctrine; for Timothy by
the Imposing Hands might Conferr Gifts, and make them able, or fit Men for the
Work.

6. As to what you gather from 1 Timothy 4.14. for your Proof, that Text you know
admits of Controversy: As whether Timothy was not first Ordained a Presbyter,
and asterwards an Evangelist? Whether Paul's Imposition and the Presbyters were
both at the same time? etc. but this is certain, laying the 1 Timothy 1.18. and 2 Timothy 1.6. together with this Text, there was something extraordinary as to
Timothy's Gifts, in which the Pres^^teries Imposition had no share; the
Propositions differ, it is (...), by the putting on of my Hands; See
Didoclavius Altar Damos. p. 161. Thus Gillospy Misc. p. 101.
but it is (...), with the la^ine o^ of the Hands of to^ Presbitery, after
Prophecy. So that when Paul and the Presbytery did both impose Hands, the Gift
was conveyed as Paul says, by my Hands. But as to ^^s Office to a Potestative,
Authoritative Mission, the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery did
conc^rr with Pa^^'s.

You tell me, I must own Succission, and those polluted Hands, etc.

Answ. Your Argument speaks thus, If you will have no Ordination without
Imposition of Hands, according to Scripture, then you must own Succession. So I
will: Was Imposition of Hands in Ordination, an Invention of Rome, or an
Institution of God? the Papists can prove their Act in this Point by Scripture,
so cannot you.

2. Mr. Robinson, Mr. Johnson, though rigid old Separates, yet worthy Men, made
light of this Argument, because it was God's own Appoinement

3. You had best throw away Baptism, because their polluted Hands do administer
it.

4. This concerns the first Reformers. We receive our Ordination from godly and
learned men, who hate and have cast off whatever is Romish, but not the Holy
S^ripture, because they pass through Rome to us.

As to the Text you quote, Phil 3.16. When eunto we have already attained, etc.
this is nothing to our Case, nor will it heal.

Several there were who did believe in Christ, and embraced the Gospel, but
were not so clear in the total Abolition of the Ceremonial ^aw, as Romans 14.
shows: But however since they had believed in Christ, and embraced the Gospel,
walk according to that Rule unto which you have attained, God will reveal more
in time: The Case is nothing like. You have attained to Fasting and Prayer in
Ordination, but not to Imposition of Hands. But Fasting and Prayer we use and
may use in twenty Cases, but these Cases do not make twenty distinct
Ordinances, though we Fast and Pray: It is but one Ordinance. But Separation to
the Work of the Ministry is a distinct Ordinance.

Secondly, They were to walk by the same Rule: But by what Rule do you walk?
for the Rule is with I^position of Hands, according to which you do not walk.

SECT. IV.
AFter I had done with this Brother, there came to my Hand a little Book, put
out by another Brother, who writes thus, All Church Officers are made by
Ordination, and Ordained alike; [is there no difference between Acts 6.6. and
Acts; 3.3?] and that Ordination is not Imposition of Hands; and if the most be
made of it, it is but a Ceremony annexed, which is now obsolete.

It Is But a Ceremony: Whose Ceremony is it? Did Man or God Institute it? If it
be God's, methinks it is not com^^y for a Creature to cast a slighting But upon
any of his Institutions. What was the whole Ceremonial Law? yea, What is Water
in Baptism, Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, setting by the Authority of him
who did Institute them? the Image of a King stamped upon a Farthing, though but a
Farthing, who dare refuse it?

Though it be but a Ceremony, yet being God's Institution and Command, there is,

1. Necessitas Praecepti anne^^ed to it, and it is Disobedience to his
Institution to Omit it. The Spirit is pleased three times to set forth the
whole Work of Ordination by this Ceremony [as you call it] alone.

2. There is ^^c^ssitas Medii, in this sense, viz To the sending forth of a
Person to Preach and Administer all Ordinances in God's House with Authority.
Dr. Owen rightly calls it, The Symbol of Auth^itati^^ O^^i^nation. Our
Bre^^hren of Scotland call it, a Medi^m, of Co^^^nicating Auth^^ity to the
Person Or^^ained. When the Presbytery Praying and Imposing Hands, do in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, the King of his Church, Separate a Man to the Work of
the Ministry, the Act carries Authority in it. By the Imposing their Hands,
they do Impose the Charge, the Burden, the Work of the Ministry upon the Person
in the Name of the Lord. Persons in Authority do in the Name of the Lord Convey
Authority.

The Apostle bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2. (...) Com^^^ the things etc. the Persons
must be first (...), fit to Teach other, (...) Men, before he Commits them,
this is plain. But then how does Terothy Commit the thines to them, when he
finds them such? [(...) (...) Commendatur depositum ^^^andum, and suo tempor^
red^e^^^^^, Ear^^us. So the Sitia^k, D^^suit in sidem alle^jus.] That it is an
Act of Authority, Luke 12.48. is plain. Timothy does not Commit them by
Election, that is the Act of the People you tell us; he could not do it by
Conserring Gifts, he had no such Power: Besides, he must see they be such
before he Commits them. He did not do it by Prayer for them, any might have so
Committed as well as T^mothy, and Prayer is no Act of Authority; but when
T^^^^^y Prays and Im^^ses Hands to separate them to the Work of the Ministry,
which Pa^^ charged him not to do it s^ddenly, 1 Timothy 5.22. Now he Commits them:
Now Separation to the Work is seen, and not before. So that when the Presbytery
do (...), they do (...).

After I had done, I met with Mr. Gillesp^^s upon the Text, Mis^tl. p. 52.
which he says is a considerable Text against the So^inians and Anabaptists,
What work these Gifted Brethren have made in Churches, we see to our shame.
[which this Practice of our Brethren, and crying up Oisted Brethrens
Preaching, have not a little strengthened, to the bringing in of Consusion and
Disorder into the Church, as we see at this day, to the shame of Reformation]
and he gives the sense of the Text as I have done, for Ordination, which in
another place he says must be with Imposition of Hands.

As to his saying that it is a Coremony now Obso^ete:

I thought the Word Obtolete did connote a thing out of Date, out of Use, worn
threadbare; but Imposition of Hands in Ordination, has been used in the Jewish
Church and the Christian Church in all Ages to this day, among all Churches; so
that if it be obsolete, it must be only among some few Independents of
yesterdays standing, and is this sufficient to make it obsolete?

One Word about Popular Election, because I see it is that which gives the
Essence to a Minister in some Men's Opinion.

I am for the Peoples Election, provided it be regularly carried on; but that
it makes a Minister, I cannot yield to that.

Mr. Eliot and those I mentioned before, Preach to the Indians, God works with
their Ministry, brings some to the Faith in Christ, they are formed into a
Church, they choose Mr. Eliot Suppose it had been so.
to be their Minister, so then their Election makes Mr. Eliot a Minister; is
not this pretty Logic, the Effect give the Essence to the Cause. If the People
be visible Saints, they are ordinarily the Effect of the Ministry [tho' not of
that particular Minister whom they choose it may be] as Ministers are said to
be (...), and (...), Workers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 6.1.
Instruments in his Hand.

2. If the Election of a Deacon do not give the Essence to a Deacon, then the
Election of a Minister do not give the Essence to a Minister, but the
Antecedent is true, Ergo.

Unto all Church Officers Election gives the Essence [as they say] and no
wonder if the People be the first Subject of the Power of the Keys, as it is in
these Men's Opinion; then if it does not give the Essence to a Deacon, then not
to another Officer, nay, much less to a Minister; for the People may be more
able to judge of an Officer to serve Tables, than they are able to judge of the
Abilities and Soundness of a Man to be chosen a Minister: But it did not to a
Deacon. Whom We may appoint over this B^sitess, Acts 6.3. say the Apostles. It
was not their Election that did Constitute them Deacons, but the Apostles
Authoritatively kppointing them over this Busin^^s. We appoint, not Y^^
appoint. As Pharaoh appointed Joseph Governor over Egypt, Acts 7.10. the same
Word, the Act of Authority.

3. A Man whom God has qualified, may be Ordained to the Work of the Ministry,
though there he no People to Elect him: As if one having gotten the Language of
some Heathens, he may go and Preach among them, and if God bless his Ministry
he may Baptize them, if there be lent one or two at one time, as Philip did the
Eunuch, and as the Aposles Paul and Bounabas, who were Ordained before they
were sent sorth to the Gentiles, [of which we see no need, as I said before,
they carrying their Credentials with them, the Power of Miracles] but that Man
cannot Baptize unless he be Ordained, he is not in Authority before he be
Ordained.

So that true Qualisication and Fitness for the Ministry, and Authoritative
Separation to the Ministry makes A Minister: Election of the People makes him
their Minister.

4. Though I deny Election to give the Essence, yet suppose Election to be an
Ingredient into it; where two things meet together to the Constitution of an
Officer, Subjection and Authority, certainly Authority gives the Essence more
than Sabmission; thus Dr. Owen, the People Electing Sabmit themselves; and Dr.
Ames Bellar. enera. to. 2. p. 87.
before him, answering Bellarmin, who made it strange, that Sheep should choose
their Shepherd: Yes, says Dr. Ames, rational Sheep may choose their Shepherd,
not by Jurisdiction, but by Sabjection.

5. The Scriptures which are for Ordination by Imposition of Hands are more in
number, and far more clear than those for Election; the first Text which they
bring for Election, Acts 1.15. this differs much from curs, for our Election is
with Subjection to him whom the People Elect: But this was not so. Did Peter
[the Pope will be angry if you tell him so] and the other Apostles sabject
themselves to him whom they Chose? 2ly. It was choosing one of their own Order,
not one above them, so does not Popular Election. 3ly. Though Peter did speak to
all present, yet it does not appear that all present did choose, but the
Apostles, for they could tell best, who had accompanied them all the time the
Lord Jesus went in and out among them, V. 21, 22. Surely all that were present
could not tell who those were as the Apostles. 4ly. They gave forth their
Lotts, V. 26. 5ly: They Prayed to the Lord, to show whether of these two Thou
have chosen, 24. Is this Text clear for Popular Election?

The 6 Acts 3. is the clearest for Election, but not of a Pastor. The 14 Acts
23. is much Controverted, and these are all I meet with for Popular Election.
But for the other, we have First, God's own Institution. Secondly, We have five
Scriptures more in the New Testament, which are plain for it, which makes me
wonder how it came about that any Men of Learning should put so much upon
Election, that it should give the Essence to a Minister.

6. The Peoples Election gives the Essence to a Minister: What, without his
Ac^^ptation? No sure. If ten Churches choose a Man, he may resuse them every
one, he may have Reasons for it; Where then is the Essence their Election
gives? my Acceptance is every whit as essential to my being a Minister, as
their Election; why then is the Causality given to their Election? To be a
Minister to them, that they may demand of me, and I be bound to administer all
Ordinances to them, by way of Office, I grant here their Election and my
Acceptance are essential: But to be A Minister, has other Causes, where
Popular Election has no Cansality.

That a People must subject themselves to a Minister, and persorm all the
Duties the Word of Go I require to a Minister, and yet not choose him, is
Tyranny fit for Rome, not for the Church of Christ.

This Notion of Popular Election giving the Essence to a Minister, is the
ground of that Witty Distinction of a Minister's Preaching; if he Preach to his
People that Chose him, then he Preaches as a Minisler, but if in another
Church, then as a Cisted Brother. And hence they must not Administer the
Sacraments in another Church, though there be need, and the Church desire; he
must not Act as a Minister beyond them who gave him the Essence of a Minister:
And this they would prove or illustrate from a Mayor of a Corporation, who out
of his Corporation has no Power.

Ans. 1. In a Kingdom or Corporation it is sufficient there be a People first,
of whom neither the King nor the Mayor are Causes in the least; in the Church
it is not sufficient there be a People, but such a People, viz. Visible Saints,
of whom God has Ordained the Ministry, to be in his Hand the Instrument to
make them such. So that the Ministry is first, and an Instrumental Cause to
make them a People as such.

2. The Work of a Mayor is to Govern only. A Minister has other Work, to feed
with Word and Sacraments, which they may do, when called to it, where they
cannot Govern, as I showed before.

3. The Catholic visible Church, made up of particular visible Churches, is
called (...), Ephesians. 4.4. 1 Cor. 12.12. and we are all Members of that one
Body, and the Members are bound to help one another, else it is contrary to the
Light of Nature, 1 Cor. 12.25. But where do you read that all Corporations and
Kingdoms make one Body of Christ.

4. I think Pastors and Teachers are Ministers; the Apostle calls himself and
others so, Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.5. The Apostles were Catholic Pastors to the
Catholic Church 2 Cor. 11.28. The Care of all the Churches.
Actu primo and secundo depended upon the Call of no Church to Act in that
Church al. Acts of Power, yet Ministers. Hence we say the Ministry 1 Timothy 1.12.
2 Timothy 4.5. Col. 4.17.
, not ^he Pastorship. I then a Man be a Pastor of such a Church, both Actu
primo and secundo, yet he is a Minister, and does habitually actu primo, bear a
respect to the Catholic Church, and may perform the Acts of a Minister to
another Church that is in want, and cannot at present help themselves, and call
upon him to help; for as he is a Minister, that Church which Called him was no
Cause of that.

What disserence is there between the Acts of a Pastor and a Minister? because
I read one saying. He may Preath as a Minister, [which is better than a Gisted
Brother] but not as a Pastor.

This giving the Keye to the Fraternity, as the first Subject of them, has
brought in that Sin which Mr. When [that Emitrent Servant of Christ, and my
former Pastor] calls Koraism. See M^. Quick's Sermo. a^ Mr. Faldo 's Fun^ral,
p. 22.
What Mr. Q^ick writes I am both an Eye and Ear-witness to: About fitty sour
Years since he Preached on Mar. 2.5. in Boston in New England, and did
think-the P^^^^-man had Faith, because Christ tells him, his Sins were
forgiven, but no Forgiveness without Faith; up rose one first, forsooth he was
not satisfied, then another after him, then Mr. Cotton our Teacher he took up
our Pastor's Case, and defended it, and ten, one after another, fell upon him:
Though the Text does not say, when Jesus saw his, but their Faith, it does not
follow but the Palsie-man might be included in the word their; and his Faith
put them on, both the Bearers and Palsie-man had Faith. This was too common in
that Church, though the most public, where Seamen and all Strangers came. Sir
Henry Vane was the Man that did embolden them, when Ministers had done
Preaching, he would find Questions to put to them, though they were Strangers.

Second Question.
AReverend Author out of a Book composed [as he tells us] by several Bishops
and great Doctors, and approved by Authority, in King Henry the Eighth's days,
has Collected these Propositions:

First, That a Parochial or Congregational-Church Government, is accordint to
the Church of England, jure Divino,

Secondly, That the Diocesan or National Government is jure Hamano.

Thirdly, That Protestants [except some obscure Writer] assert, Particular
Churches to be the (...) of Church Government.

Among whom, says he, there are these differences:

1. The Episcopal and Presbyterian differ from the Congregational about the
Extent of particular Churches, i. e. the Congregational concludes there must be
no more than are capable of Personal Communion: The former make a greater
extent, and give too great advantage to Papacy.

2. They differ concerning the Nature of Discipline; the Congregational being
esteemed an Espouser of a Democracy, the Presbyterian of an Aristocracy, the
Episcopal of Monarchy.

[But Maccovius Theol. Polem. p. 161.
, Keckerman Syst. Theol. p. 3.
mention another, Aristo Democratical, and Dr. Ames Medul. Theol. p. 1. c. 33.
these. 20.
seems to be of the same judgment]

Fourthly, All Protestants agree in afferting the Independency of particular
Churches.

Thus far my Author.

That we may understand one another clearly: Suppose we then that all the
Christians in England, that dwell in their several Parishes, were such as
deserved the Name of Visible Saints; these meet every Lord's Day in their
Parish Church [as they call it] to Worship God, where there is but one Pastor.
[Lecturers and Readers are but in few Parishes in the Country, nor have they
any Power in Church Government.]

1. Are these the particular Churches you mean, by the words Parochial and
Congregational? I suppose my Brother means so.

2. Is every such particular Church the (...) of the Power of the Keys?

3. Are all these Independert? my Brother has said it.

First, I desire my Brother would Name one such Church, which the Apostles did
Constitute but with one Teaching Elder or Paster.

Secondly, How you may persuade the Pastor to admit the People to be Rulers
with them, I cannot tell, but I doubt we should have a Monarclical-Government
set up in every Parish in England, which you say the Bishops espouse.

Mr. Norton, as acute and Learned Divine as New England had, being at a Meeting
of about forty Elders, one that was newly come into the Country was reading to
the Elders what his Judgment was about Church Government: He would have it to
be Democratical, quoting Morellus several times: What have we to do with
Mor^llus, said Mr. Norton to me; if I cannot prove the Government of the Church
to be Presbyterial, I will give up our Cause.

Thirdly, If all these particular Churches be Independent, I fear we should
have wild doings, Experience have proved it already. At this day we see woeful
effects of it.
If there be one or two Gentlemen, of Purse, Piety and Parts, that stick close
to the Minister, and awe the People, things may go on quietly; else if there be
but two Self-conceited, pragmatical Fellows, as I have known, you should soon
see what will become of your Parochial-government.

Fourthly, Suppose the Pastor be foully scandalized by some of his Church, one
or more, how shall the Government be carried on? shall he be Plaintiff and
Judge in his own Case? I have known a Case where a Pastor had great Offense
given, I propounded the Case to Dr. Owen And Mr. Faldo.
, whether that Pastor should proceed according to Matthew. 18.15, 16? he told me
by no means, when he heard my Reason. We shall meet with hard Cases if we come
to set to Government indeed.

Fifthly, Suppose the Pastor himself grow scandalous, how shall Government be
carried on now?

Sixthly, Good Men and Ministers are subject to Passions and Infirmities,
whence it is not fit the Government of the Church should be Committed to One
alone.

Seventhly, To Govern will is a Gist by it self; a Man may be a good Preacher,
but no good Governo^r.

Eighthly, When our Lord sent out the Apostles, and the Seventy, only to
Pre^^^, he sent them out by two and two, Mar. 6.7. L^k. 10.1. Now a single
Paster undertakes all.

Ninthly, The Jewish Synagogues bad several Elders to carry on the Government
in one of their Synagogues, and we but one, (...) vident O^^li, quam O^ul^s.

It is true, our Pastor with his People may truly be called a Church; as that
Woman who had no Arms, but held be Pen between her Toes, and so wrote, (...)
have seen of her Writing (...) may well be said to be Animal rationale, a
r^^io^^^ Creature; but had God made the W^^an so at first, the Woman had not
been a (...) to Man So here is a Company of V^^ible Stints, one Pa^^or, here is
Preaching, Prayer, Administration of Sacraments, and in some Cases Excresse of
Discipline, so that it is a true Church, but not such a Church as the Aposlles
sent by Christ did Con^^itute, (...) to answer all ends of a Church; it is
imperfect, defective, and our Duty is to write after that Copy the Apostles of
Christ have set us.

Dr. Owen has proved there ought to be many Elders in every Church, 2d. Part
of the Church, p. 138.
by Scriptures and Reasons, I think sufficiently.

Soon after the Apostles in the Primitive Churches, Mr. Clarkson in his
Discourse against Diocesan Churches [his first Book, p. 5.21.] has shown there
were more Presbyters in every Church than were necessary.

In those Virgin Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont, which were never desiled
with Popery, but kept pure from the Apostles days, [where I find Ordination
was with Imposition of Hands, contrary to our Men] I read in their low
Condition seven Elders made a Classis; they carried on their Government by
joint Councils; they had their Consistories, and 140 Pastors heretofore in a
Synod.

Whence, this one Teaching Elder, or a single Pastor in a Church, is a Nov^l
thing, different from the Apostles, and the Practices of the best Churches.

The last time I was with Dr. Owen, discoursing, with him about
Church Government, he was saying to me, I would sain know whether the
Government of the House of God be likely to be most prevalent, being carried on
by one single Pastor, or by many Elders met together, and Acting in the Name of
the Lord? I think the Question may be easily Answered, and in Order to it, I
state the Question:

Quest. Whether unto the right Constitution of a particular Gospel Church, it
be Necessary that all the Officers and Members of the Church do meet together
in one place at one time, to Celebrate all the Institutions of Christ? The
Learned Dr. Owen having changed his Opinion from what it was when he wrote his
Country Essay for the practice of Church Government; p. 5^.
when he would have the extreme of the Division not above eight or ten Miles,
so the Center not more than four or five Miles from any part of it, etc. He now
tells us, To manisest that Assemblies of the whole Church, at once and in one
place, for the Celebration of Divine Worship, is of the Essence of a Church,
without which it has no real Being, -- the Lord appointed the Males which were
the Circumcised Church, should appear in one place three times a Year, Exodus 23
14. Deuteronomy. 16.16.

I did not think that Place being but a Subject, and Time an Adjunct, should be
Essential to a Church; yea, so as no real Being without them.

Neither am I satisfied with this Proof: For their Meetings three times a Year,
were to perform three particular Services, proper to the Jews, and that but
once a Year, and that day the Law appointed, and no other, we have no such
Appointments under the Gospel: The Lord's Supper which answers the Paslover,
was Celebrated every Lord's Day in the Primitive Churches.

2ly. Only the Males appeared then: We think Women and Children as well as then
Children, are Members of the Church, and ought to appear with the Males, to
Worship God every Lord's Day.

3ly. When they were in Jerusalem, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, how did their
eating the Passover in a thousand, it may be two thousand several Houses,
answer our Partaking of the Lords Supper at one Table in one particular Church?
we should have so many Churches: The other Feasts were proper to them.

Nor could they meet in the Court all at one time to Worship God, there being
in David's time, 1 Chronicles. 21.5, 6.
one Million, five hundred and seventy thousand men [besides the Tribes of
Benjamin and L^^i] that drew Sword.

The Dr. tells us, 1st. Book, p. 87. and 353.
The Members of such a Church may and ought to meet occasionally in distinct
Assemblies, especialty in times of Persecution, for Prayer, Preading of the
Word, mutual Exhortation, etc. And in another place, The constant meeting in
one place is not best for Edisication.

Since he mentions Preaching of the Word, I suppose he means their Officers are
with them to Preach to them, and why not then as well to Administer the Lords
Supper as to Preach? one Scripture against it I would gladly see. To Baptize,
they do not question. There were three Teaching Elders in Dr. Owen's Church,
[the only Church that I know of in England, that came up to the Apostolical
Pattern] these three might meet together with their Members in times of
Persecution, especially in three distinct Assembles, consequently Places, to
Pray, to Preach, to Baptize, and to Administer the Lords Supper, for any thing
I know out of God's Word: Then may not we meet in distinct Assemblies to such
Ends, and yet be but one particular Church, as his was; but for other Ends we
may meet in one place.

So in the Country Villages we may have many Elders in one particular Church,
as he says there ought to be, else I know not how we shall do for Churches in
the Country.

But to come to the Question: If the whole Church meeting together in one
place, and at one time, be essential to a Church, and it has no real ^eing
without it, then it must be proved: 1. Either from Divine Precept. Or, 2. From
the Examples of the Churches planted by the Apostles. Or, 3. From forcing
Reasons drawn from the Ends of Worship.

For the first, I see none named, but Example is the Proof, and the words
(...), mentioned in the Acts and Corinthians, are the Cornerstone of this
Building; five times pious and learned Amts quotes these words: Vol. 2. p. 755.
Dr. Lightsoot has spoken very clearly to these words against it.

I grant, where there are many Elders and much People dwelling so that they can
meet conveniently in one place, to carry on all Church-work, as was the Case of
all the Churches we read of in the Gospel, being in Cities, there is a
particular Church without any question. So I yield to (...).

But I wish these Men who are so rigid for one place, had but the experience in
themselves which I have observed in others. Precious Christians, who had no
Coaches nor Horses to carry them, but crasie Bodies, yet longing for the
Ordinances, which they might have had, if my Notion might prevail, within two
Stones cast, but for this Notion of the One Place they must Travel two Miles;
they do so, but when they come home at Night, they are so spent and tired that
to Bed they must go, the next day came Complaining to me, they had lost the
Benefit of the Ordinances, they could mind nothing but their Pain. Many
Christians having infirm Bodies must nor enjoy the Ordinances at all, when they
might have them the next door: Has God no respect to the Bodies of his People?

As to the Examples he brings, the Question is, Whether there were no more
Christians in these Cities than could meet in one place? if not, then it is no
more than I have yielded before; for these had many Elders in them to carry on
all Church-work, which the Dr. faith ought to be, and is the thing I stand
upon, from the Apostolical Constitution of Churches.

But if his Argument from Examples be so Cogent, then he must bring us Examples
out of these Cities, where there were more Christians than could meet in one
place, at one time, and so were forced to meet in more places, and these made
more distinct Churches. If these Examples can be brought, then I yield the
Question from Examples.

But if no such Examples can be brought, [as I am sure there is not one in all
the Gospel] then the Argument from Examples falls, and is of no force.

Obj. If they did meet in distinct places, they were, and must be distinct
Churches?

Answ. But his Proof is all from Example, and that implies there were such
Churches de facto, else there could be no Example.

2. I deny the Consequence; for though a Number of Christians did swarm out of
the first Church, yet they might have but one Teaching Elder, and so could not
carry on all Church-work; and there ought to be many Elders in one Church,
says the Dr. be they six or seven Congregations, it comes to the same. I have
heard that in Lantashire there is one great Parish Church, and several Chapels
belong unto it, in which Ministers Preach and Administer the Lords Supper,
which do shadow out what I aim at.

As to the Examples which are brought, Mede and Fuller, Men of great Learning,
tell us, that in the first Century, Christians had a room Dedicated and
Appropriated to the Worship of God, [what their Design is I leave] yet they
tell us it was but a room in some private Disciples House: Nor in the second
Century had they public Places to meet in, say our Homilies against Idolatry,
lib. 2. p. 66.

The Lord tells Paul, Acts 18.10. I have much People in Corinth: How much? so
much as may meet in one place in a private Disciple's House, when their Tables
for their Love Feasts, etc. are set: This is much honor to the Text.

Several of the Fathers understand the word Church, in 1 Corinthians. 11.18. to be
meant the place where the Church met; Contin^ns pro Continento, and I think it
may be so well understood, (...), these were the Church of the believing
Corinthians, that met together (...), in the Church. The Church here is opposed
to their own Houses, v. 22. then I know nothing against it but (...), in the 14
chap. 34. may be so understood, Let your Women keep silence in the Churches;
not in the Church, as in the 18th. V. but Churches; so that they met in more
places than one, in Corinth, yet but one Church, 2 Cor. 2.1.

Our last Annotator Translate the words (...), in the 20th. V. for the same
thing, not the same place, and I think his Reason is good; and I have wondered
that Learned Men should render the words so in Acts 2.44. Dr. Lightfoot says
the words cannot be so rendered, and gives other significations of the words,
that they will not prove the Question.

As for the Church in Ephesus, which is another Example brought, Paul continued
there three Years, Acts 20.31. The reason of his stay, a great and essectual
door is opened, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. The Word of God grew mightily, Acts 19.20. It
grew so, that they dare venture to burn the Books that were of Value among the
Ephesians, before the face of the People, valued at eight hundred Pounds the
least, Acts 19.19. Both Jews and Gentiles came in, Acts 19.10, 17. And how many
Christians have we now in Ephesus? so many as may meet in one room in a private
Disciples House. Paul's great door, and his word mightily, had better been
spared, for this is but a disgrace to the Text.

As for what J^stin Martyr writes, that the Christians in the Towns and
Villages met on the Sunday. 1. How many were there in the Villages? 2. Had they
any Pastor in the Villages? 3. How far were these Villages from the Towns?
Justin Martyr says nothing to these Heads.

Come lower to the Year 252. when the Quarrel was between Cornelius and
Novatianus. Cornelius in his Epistle to Fabius faith of Novatian^s, He was
Ignorant there ought to be but one Bishop in that Church [of Rome] in which
were forty six Presbyters, seven Deacons, etc.

A little Digression. One Bishop in Rome. Was not Rome a Metropolis, where the
Seat of the Emperor was? but then it should have been Archbishop; but
Cornelius says one Bishop in that Church [of Rome.] And to this day we call
the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, not Archbishop of Rome. Simple Bishop can
content Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome, which two
Cities caused bloody Battles, which of them should be the Empress of the World.
How they then can be esteemed Men of Truth, we may easily judge, that dare
Preach and Print, the seven Angels of the seven Churches in Asia were seven
Archbishops, when one hundred and sixty Years after those Churches, there was
no Archbishop in those great Cities.

But to go on -- concerning the Church of Jerusalem, I Consent to what he
says, and let it stand for our Rule to Act by; of it Dr. Owen thus writes,
This Church of Jerusalem, thus called and collected out of the Church of the
Jews, was the Rule and Pattern of the Disposing of all the Disciples of Christ
into Church Societies, in Obidience to his Command throughout the World,
Catechis. p. 85. let this stand.

How many thousands of Disciples did belong to this Church of Jerusalem, we
cannot tell; but this we find, Acts 4.4. there were five thousand at that time;
and Acts 5.14. Multitudes of Men and Women now were added to those five
thousand: In the 6 Act. 7. we read the Number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly: I suppose no Man will say these were such as we read of 2
Act. 5.9. Strangers; if they were, yet it hurts not me, they were all of this
Church; and we know Members of Independent Churches in London lived forty Miles
distant from them: Here was Prayer, Preaching, Administration of both
Sacraments, Election and Ordination of Officers; Terrible Discipline, if I
might so call it, upon Ananias and Saphira. But was all this in one place? No
sure; when there were but the three thousand added, they Brake Bread, (...):
Act. 2.46.
Beza and Grotius speak fully to my purpose as to the distinct places; and that
by Breaking of Bread the Lords Supper is intended, as in the 42 v. the Salmur
Divines, A Lapide, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, and others whom I mention
not, do all agree. Nor do I think there is any Man will say they did all
partake of the Lords Supper in one House, at one time; much less then
afterward. Thus was their Preaching, Act. 5.42. (...).

It is certain then they met in several distinct places, both to Preach and
Administer the Sacrament, yet but one Church. How long it was between the day
of Pentecost and Stephen's Death, I know not; but so long thus was their
Practice, and had been longer, if that Persecution had not befallen them.

If then the meeting in one place had been so essential to a Church as the Dr.
makes it, we should have seen it here. Surely the Apostles, with whom our Lord
had been speaking concerning the things pertaining to his Kingdom, 1 Act. 3. so
lately, would not do any thing contra-essential to a Church. Yea, here was
matter ready prepared for several particular Churches, meeting in several
distinct places, for Divine Worship, had the Lord pleased to have declared that
it was his Will, that meeting in every such distinct place, should make a
particular Church, and so have given a Pattern, how all particular Churches
should be Constituted: Here wanted nothing, I say, but the Declaration of his
Will.

We have heard in the time of our Persecution, that several thousands of the
Scots met in one Field, to Administer and partake of the Lords Supper. Though it
was not a House, it was a Place, yet we do not read that ever the Apostles did
so much as once call all the Church together into one place, to Administer the
Lords Supper, that they might leave one Example at least, that in every Church
there must be but One Table, or one Altar as some call it; which they might
easily have done, had one place in their Judgment [men guided by the Spirit]
been so essential to a Church as some make it now.

Many thousands of particular Churches make up One Body of Christ: Why then so
many particular Congregations [where the Members of one Congregation are known
to the others] as there may be Elders sufficient to carry on all Church-work,
may not make one particular Church, I know not. It is certain, that where only
one Pastor, with a Parochial Congregation make a Church, all the Ends of
Churches cannot be attained; not only Reason, but Experience also has
sufficiently proved it.

Where a Congregation is so far remote from others, and so poor that it cannot
maintain one Pastor well, such a People must do as well as they can; but where
Congregations are nearer, though they be poor, [as I know sew that are not] yet
they may Coalesce into one Church, to attain all Church-Ends, so far as our
Performance of Duties to those Ends may conduce.

Suppose there were seven Teaching Elders in a particular Church, there is but
One of these that Pray, Preach, Administer the Sacraments, Order the Singing,
at one time, all the rest put forth no Official Act, but are Attendants, as the
Private Brethren. But if these seven were in seven Congregations, every one is
at work, performing these Acts. As for other Official Acts, as Exercise of
Discipline, Ordination, Election of Officers, etc. they may all meet together,
and Act jointly; and thus it was in our Mother Church in Jerusalem, which is
more to me than all that is said for One Place, One Altar, One Bishop. I cannot
call to mind any Church-End, but may be attained as well this way, as if they
met in one place always, and better.

FINIS.

