THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND. EXTENDING To the Conquest of so much
of Britain, as was Subjected by the Romans. With an Introductory Preface to the
whole. Written in the YEAR, 1666.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold by William Grantham in
Westminster Hall, Henry Brom at the Starr in Little Britain, Thomas Basset
under St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, Robert Horn at the Angel and Horn in
the first Court in Gresham College out of Bishopsgate-Street, 1668.

AN INTRODUCTION to the READER.
HAving had opportunity and leisure, for some time, during the late
Revolutions, to observe several remarkable passages and the consequences
thereof, which have been fatal amongst us here in England, such perhaps as the
World cannot overmatch, if equal, for variety and value: And taking notice
further, that the root from which they sprang was double pointed, the one part
whereof consisting in mistakes, the other in designs, I thought I might not do
an unacceptable Work to my Country, in endeavoring an Explanation of the one,
and to lay open the other; and in committing Errors hope to be the rather
pardoned, since what is here set down is not founded on any other bottom than
that of a sincere meaning.

Hereupon I thought it good to write of the Actions of men, and confine the
subject to those of this Nation: wherein notwithstanding having a large Field,
we might as we pass along take full liberty to observe and report what is
conducible to the second purpose; and in the beginning, by way of Introduction,
discuss certain Principles of great notice in the World, and not of different
nature with the chief subject which may tend to unfold some misapprehensions,
and also produce a general and beneficial Influence in our passage through the
larger Work.

The beginning must be low of some necessity, even upon the very first
rudiments of Nature, though it seem at present distant and foreign to the
purpose in hand. Neither can it well be otherwise than somewhat large; but
this is our confidence, though the proportion of the entrance to the following
Edifice is not very just and suitable, especially at this first impression,
when a very small part only discovers it self, yet they may hereafter, or it
will at least render the Fabrique more stable and capacious.

Some Philosophers hold that the Universe is an entire Mass, infinite in
respect of extent and divisibility, that is as much as to say, without
termination or bounds, and may be divided into parts always divisible, and but
of one nature or disposition: seeing then that there is motion in it,
consequentially it may follow, either that such moving is ab aeterno (for it is
a contradiction to say that some other thing moves it) or that the Universe has
power of it self to cause it is own motion; if the first were true, does it not
follow likewise that there is no God in the World, which is against the light
of reason, and the impressions in all mankind; and if the second, that he is of
the same nature with the other parts of the Mass, as Earth or Water; and so of
further consequence, that every chip of Wood or Stone is part of the Godhead,
which is absurd. It may seem also inferreable of like necessity, that the
faculties or powers of the Soul of Man, or other Animals, to know, to move, to
be in pain, or to be pleased, are but the effects of the frame of those bodies
wherein they are, and arise from the figure and composition of part of the
world, and unavoidably that Religion is but a craft whereby men are kept in
awe; all which, in some parts appear insensible, in others contrary to the
light of nature and of reason, to common sense, the universal apprehension of
sober and wise men in all Ages, and would bring in with it a train of
unspeakable mischiefs to a Commonwealth, and all Mankind, were it generally
believed and admitted; and thereupon, contrary even to the nature of Truth, the
fruits whereof are always good.

Other Philosophers think that the universe is compounded of a certain number
of beings indivisible in themselves, though in respect of their quantity they
may be Mathematically and Imaginarily divided, and that they are all of one
nature, that their motion is not from any power within them, but either ab
aeterno, or from the composition of some or all of them; the consequences are
much alike with those of the foregoing Doctrine, and for the reasons then
mentioned are to be rejected.

A third there are who suppose several of diverse nature, some whereof have a
power to resist penetration within the Sphere of their own beings, which is
also a cause of their capacity to be moved, and are or may be called simple
beings; others have withal further a faculty to know, to be in pain, to be
pleased, to move, etc. and are or may be named Souls; some whereof, and not
others, have also a power to reason, and are called rational Souls,
(risibilitie seems to flow from the faculty of reasoning, and not to be one in
it self) they are likewise of opinion there may be other beings, such as we
call Spirits or Angels, and some past stories make mention of their appearances
and actions; but of their nature, faculties, and business they presume that we
have scarce any knowledge, unless by revelation; but strongly conclude, their
employment is not to frighten and sport with Women and Children, and the weaker
sort of melancholic men; but rather that such kind of institutions were first
promoted by certain Silver-Smiths, who making Shrines for the Temple of Diana,
did thereby bring no small gain unto the Crafts-men. They doubt not of a fifth,
being different from the other four, who framed the World, and all things
therein, and does still govern it. Which Opinions are agreeable to those of
Wise men in all Ages, to the impressions in our Nature, the light of Reason,
the benefit universally of Mankind, and upon which, neither inconvenience, nor
absurdity appears to follow.

I forbear to make a more particular entry into the first principles, or use
other arguments to my intended purpose, because this part would too much
increase; and I choose rather for confirmation to any that shall doubt to refer
him to the searches of his own reason, and the body of this Introductory
Discourse, from the congruity whereof, to the light of Nature, and of Reason,
and the consent within it self, may some arguments perhaps flow.

2. Of those beings beforementioned in this place, we shall chiefly consider
Man, under which word is comprehended Male and Female, and either consist of
Soul and Body: The first is a single being, the second compound also, because
the one is not divisible, as we think, and the other may be actually divided.

Whether the parts of the Body, or the Soul it self, had not a being ab
aeterno, it may be is not penetrable by reason; and then we must have recourse
to revelation, and out of Holy Writ we are taught, that Almighty God created
both.

To proceed a little further, what is not constituted by some Agent, is so by
chance now, by the many thousand purpose that one may observe the parts of Man
made for, it may well be concluded, it was in such estate by contrivance, and
not casually. Further that there was a first man of every Family, because men
are born in time, and the Notions of time that are intelligible, have periods.
That there was only one at first, or Male and Female, seems not unreasonable,
in respect, that in all times the Actions generally of Men, much resemble one
another.

In a Body is considerable, the Appetite, which is a propensity arising from
the constitution of the consistent parts, and the quality of the fluid, without
which, Children, for want of Notions, and Fools and Madmen, from a defect in
the parts of the Body, not being able sufficiently to exercise the faculties of
their Souls, could not subsist. They are many, some whereof are these; a
propensity to eat and drink, which begins early, even from the birth, to live;
and when we come to a full growth, and so not far from the beginning of our
decay (which God designs also) to generate and propagate our species; and when
they are born to nourish and defend them, not being capable of securing
themselves, and many other; which are all common to man, with other animals,
From an exorbitant disposition therein, proceeds generally the violence of one
Animal upon another, and is in Man more extravagant usually than in others, but
in him is a rational Soul to correct and regulate it.

In the Soul is observable, a faculty to know; now knowledge seems to be an
impression on the mind, imprinted from without, by the conveyance of the
Senses: if it come through the Eye it is called a sight, through the Ear a
sound, the Palate a taste, the Nose a smell, and any other part of the Body a
touch. Hence it follows, that of Bodies, which are fit objects of our senses,
we discourse with some certainty; as of the learning, about quantities, called
Mathematical, and not considerably improved since the ancient time of Euclid;
and our minds not being infinite, but quantities limited, we have no
intelligible notions of infiniteness or aeternity. Hereupon further, that of
what makes no impression on the mind, we talk of but by guess, as we do of
Spirits or Angels, and have no knowledge of them, unless revealed; and of such
things which are at so great a distance as we cannot receive well distinguished
notions of them, we do but conjecture at too, as of those of Astronomy; and of
such as are so little, that they come not into the mind, but imperfectly, or
not at all, we likewise but guess at; as of the Elements of Nature in natural
Philosophy: yet in both these two last, greater knowledge has come into the
World by the improvement of the optic Science of late times, rendering, in
effect, some things nearer, and others more large than the World wherein
Aristotle lived, and many worthy Philosophers was acquainted with.

The rational faculty seems to be a power to compare the notions in the mind,
and that to be an Act of the Soul from within. If the comparison be rightly and
fully made, it is called right reasoning; if but in part, and as yet no
disagreement found, we say it is probable, because we find no difference, but
do not conclude, because we have not made a thorough observation. If there be a
disagreeing, we say it disagrees from reason. Again what we can well compare,
we can well reason of, as we may of the Notions of things large and near; what
we can compare but in part, we can make but a probable conjectare of, and what
not at all, we cannot reason of.

Reasoning seems thus to be done; First the Soul applies it self to, or
fancies, or calls to mind a notion of a thing we know well, and then makes
application to another notion of a thing not so well known, and after,
comparing them, observes how near they are alike in quantity, figure, color,
noise, smell, taste, action, etc. and if we would persuade another man to be of
our opinion, we usually go some such way as this to work: First we affirm
there is such a thing, which we think to him is very well known, and that there
are such particulars about it, then we say the thing we would prove is the same
with that in such a respect, upon comparing has such circumstances, and
therefore, in that consideration, is the same thing: which seems likewise the
foundation of Syllogismes and Logical Arguments. For example, by reasoning, we
find there is a Deity who orders and disposes all things in the world, for we
thus argue. Concerning all the notions we have of things, we observe the figure
and places of some, in a respect to others, have the marks of a Contriver, and
there are them which have none: the first we say cannot be without design, the
other come by chance, that is, without contrivance. Further, if we come to a
Town, and find several things of certain figures in places, to an intended
purpose, we conclude, and rightly, that they were contrived by the head, and
acted by the hands of men; because in comparing it with what we have heretofore
seen, we never yet did observe such things without contrivance, or made without
hands; but if we see a heap of rubbish, we resolve it might be in that shape by
chance, for so we have formerly taken notice such things have been. If we come
to look into the admirable composition and figure of man, wherein, to a vast
number of purposes, diverse things are placed, and compare it with what we have
seen and heard has been done by chance, or the power of men, or any other
animate thing we converse with, we shall presently conclude they came neither
by contingency, nor by the Art of any thing we have knowledge of, and therefore
by some thing which we do not know, and give it the name of a Deity.

We fetch another Argument, to this purpose, from the nature of motion, for we
say, every thing we converse with, has some cause to move it; and that nothing
moves originally, where there is not a Soul or Spirit to stir it, and thence
also, that the whole order of nature in motion proceeds from some Soul or
Spirit, which we call likewise a Deity. But whether this be a single person, or
there be more than one, we cannot find out by reason, because we have no
particular and distinguishing notion of it, and so can make no comparison to
this purpose, and thereupon must have recourse to revelation; and by Holy Writ
we find, that there are three persons, yet but one God; which does not disagree
from reason, for where is no defect in Judgment, nor violence of appetite,
there may be no disagreeing in will. For the like reason we cannot discover the
special place of residence, nor attributes of the Godhead; and therefore we do
well when we say, that we know better what he is not, than what he is, or when
less, and rest in admiration.

When the mind is moved from without to the Soul in any particular notion, if
we are awake, we say it comes into the mind, if asleep, we call it a dream, and
is without a motive force from the Soul, that is without our will, and with Man
and Beasts is alike; As to call to mind, or to reason, seems peculiar to the
rational Soul, and to be a motion from within. So little being known, is one
cause there are so many Scepticks, Atheists, and variety of Philosophers. There
may be a divine revelation different from the knowledge before mentioned; but
it seldom comes, and is difficultly discovered, the world being full of
Artifice and deceit; but as we are capable enough to receive it, so doubtless
God is powerful sufficiently to infuse it.

If it be asked what becomes of the Soul after dissolution of the body, we must
answer, we know not, that is, we can but conjecture probably; had we not a
Revelation from holy writ that it enters a place of joy or torment,
proportionably to the good or bad deeds acted in the time of its. conjunction
with the body: which neither does disagree from reason; for a being created may
be continued, and what is from aeternity may be to aeternity: now if the Soul
has a being when the body is dissolved, as it may, and probably has, it is then
somewhere, and being capable of pain and pleasure before, it may be so on the
dissolution.

Let us go a little further; we observe that some men who run an oblique course
to the rule of reason, whom we call wicked men, are punished in this world in
equal proportion to their offenses, and others not; and again, they that walk
regularly with great care and pains, are sometimes rewarded here below, but not
always (which has been a stone whereat many have frequently stumbled) Now if
there be not rewards and punishments after this life, and there be also a God,
he will then be unjust which is disagreeing to reason; for we see even men of
reason, if they are not overpowred by their appetites or passions, do just and
reasonable things, much more honorably ought we to think of the justice of
Almighty God: And if there be no Deity, it will be incongruous to the general
constitution of nature, and of the universal world which is regularly and
justly framed: and thereupon we may infer there is a Heaven and Hell: that is
as much as to say, that Souls after this life have pains and delights according
to their merit in this world, unless where the special mercy of God on
penitential applications does lighten if not extinguish the afflictions.

Further, not much differing from the same purpose, it may be observed, that
generally men of virtue, though for some time they may lie under scandals, and
misery, yet for the greatest part of their years they prosper and are happy;
but this is not always so. And on the contrary, the wicked leading their lives
according to their lusts, though they may have pleasing days, yet have they
many more miserable; but it is not thus constantly. From hence it may be
conjectured, that probably God Almighty has usually rewards for the virtuous
in this world, as we often phraise it, and punishments on vicious persons, to
encourage the one, and discountenance the other; but not always, to the intent
they might not expect to set up their rest here, but conclude upon a being
hereafter; and rewards and punishments according to the course of their lives.

What the mind is, which I call that part of man where the Notions are
treasured up, is difficult to discover. This is observable, that Notions will
decay, and wear out, as men of Age discover; and the mind it self seems to
perish in certain diseases: from which a conclusion might be drawn, that it is
of nature with the body, and little differing from that of other Animals, to
the preservation of whom it is necessary, but must say we think there may be a
faculty in the Soul to receive them.

3. FUrther, as to man in general, from the extent of his appetite, in the
particulars of his passions (that is to say) of lust to meat, drink, or venery,
of anger, and the like, and from the degree of his capacity to reason, proceeds
the different dispositions and tempers of mankind. These two roots are well
expressed in the Poet video meliora proboque, which was the result of reason;
deteriora sequor, which was the impulse from the passion of revenge prevailing
in Medea; the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak, says the Scripture;
and again there is a Law in our Members, warring against the Law of our minds.

These constitutious of men may be divided into many kinds with great
difference; but I shall only take notice of some few particulars which make
remarkable dispositions. If the appetite be violent, and the reason weak, it
renders that man giddy, inconsiderate and dangerous: I speak not here of Fools
or Madmen.

If a heady passion meet with an indifferent judgment, it makes those who are
the worst men of the world: they are always making Disturbances, heading of
Factions, laying of Plots; they have a smattering of knowledge, and so presume
more than the foregoing sort; and their outside is for sometime fair; but by
their Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, and other Violencies, destroy afterward all
that they with tolerable and formal reason did before discourse of. They study
the Infirmities of Princes, keep Factions alive to awe them with, and render
themselves considerable; and commit a thousand absurdities in making out their
Interests: If they are preferred to the employments of a Prince, by their
vitions lives, they stain, and bring an evil report upon the best causes, and
sometimes ruin a Commonwealth, their Sovereign, and many honest men that
adhere to his just Authority: if they are not advanced, they are the leading
malcontents of a Nation, and often thrusting themselves into the head and
disguise of wel-meaning men, lead such into errors before they are well aware
of what these are within their bosoms. Of this kind was Caesar Borgia
Machiavells Prince, who never staid at any Villainy in order to the execution of
his project, and in the end failed of all.

Those that have the most extended appetites, but strongest reason, undertake
great matters, and often perform them to admiration, but not without many
Violencies, and much Injustice, by the praedominancy of their passions: such
was Julius Caesar, and Alexander the great.

If the propensity be in the lowest extent, and meet with a judgment of the
like low degree of capacity, the men with whom it is so, are generally free
from offense, because of the weakness of their appetites, and foolish for want
of judgment, they are the Innocent soft men of the world. Of these it is meant
when it is commonly said probitas laudatur and alget, plain dealing is good,
but he that uses it shall die a Beggar. And for want of distinction,
Proverbial Sayings of this nature, are sometimes the occasion of staggering in
the progresses of virtue.

If the propensity be weak, and the rational faculty indifferent, such are the
honest and good men of the world, in a general report.

But if the provocations of nature are slow, and the judgment exceeding good,
which is very rare (for God Almighty for the most part puts a quick reason
where there are strong passions) then those are the best men, some whereof have
been called the Heroes of the World; and others, by the old Heathens Canonized
for Gods: And of this sort in later times was Epaminondas among the Thebans,
and Scipio Africanus among the Romans; before whom the World would not have
been able to stand, had they been Sovereign Princes of any considerable
Country: In adverse fortune and in prosperity they are of equal temper, content
and glory. The sorting of these people make diversities of factions and
Religions; of whom one which is the last, is only safe for any Government to
espouse.

But we must not conclude these observations without an exception, where
aeducation has been as it was in Alexander under Aristotle a great Philosopher,
which had great influence on him; for during the strength thereof, he lived
virtuously, and with great renown; but after that began to wear out, and the
force of Nature to return and prevail; the glory of his former life was shaded
by his looseness and debauchery. And the saying of another great Philosopher to
his Scholars, laughing at a Phisiognomer, who declared him by the outward view
a vicious person, is not to be forgotten; So I am, says he, by Nature, but I
have made a Conquest by Philosophy.

4. IN the next place place we will consider the actions of Men, now Law is the
rule by which such, or any other beings are governable.

The Law of Nations is what is generally practiced among Neighbor Countries,
and has chiefly concernment in War and Peace. If it be universally used, it is
said to be the Law of Nations through the whole world, as we often call it, and
ought not to vary from the Law of God, which is the Law of Reason: If they be
made by Man, we call them humane Laws, from the Author: If they concern the
constitution of the government of a Nation, they are called Fundamental,
otherways not. With us in England, those that relate to private Corporations,
or Places, or Persons in some particular considerations, are named Privileges,
because they are private Laws: such which have respect to all in general,
because they are common to all, are called the common Law; if they be made by
Act of Parliament, they may concern either Privileged men or Places in
particular, or the Community in general, having an extensive power over all,
and go by the name of Statutes.

The Laws of Nature, I take it, though some think otherwise, is that Rule
whereby all things in the World which have not reason, or want the use of it,
have their actions governed; and is solely managed by the Providence of God,
and may be said a necessity; so the motion of the Stars, the actions of Birds
and Beasts, and other Brute Animals are directed.

By the Law of Nature all Animals follow and observe their Appetites, and to
the preservation of themselves, eat what is proper food for them, where they
can get it, and take from, and feed on one another as Birds and Beasts of prey;
and this by necessity, for without that, many could not live, and God has
designed it for a good end; for other wise some kinds would increase to an
unfitting proportion for the Earth to sustain: and what is done by this Law, is
no sin, in respect of the necessity. Among the old, and some new Philosophers,
there are those, who being too intent hereon, have held a fate in all things,
and certain Christians a too strict praedestination.

Were it not indeed for the special Providence of God Almighty, that rational
Souls have some freedom of will, and that the whole World will not be found in
the same state it now is, at such time as the position of the Heavens will be
thus again hereafter; perhaps it might not be absurd to think of Platonic
years; but those things will alter the Scene.

By the special Providence of God, I understand his extraordinary works, which
are rare, and do therefore argue the excellency of the Artist, who has made a
noble Engine with so much various curiosity as the World is; and yet for many
thousands of years it needs no correction or amendment that we can discover.
But we cannot otherways suppose then that some men draw absurd consequences of
Atheism herefrom; supposing there is no Deity, because we have not converse
therewith in special manner.

The Law of Reason, which is sometimes called the Law Moral, I understand, that
by which animate things rational ought to be governed, and is also the Law of
God, because God directs it. We call it the Law of reason, because we find it
out by reasoning; and consists chiefly of two parts, in respect of a double
relation, the one toward God, the other Man. That Law likewise which is
revealed in Scripture, is called the Law of God, for the above mentioned cause,
and of the Law of reason, is rather an explanation, than any ways different,
and seems ill interpreted where it dissents.

The Will is an Inclination of the Soul to do a thing; It is sometimes disposed
by the body from it is passions, and at other times by the results of reason,
and very rarely is a Will without a Motion from the one, or an Inclination from
the other. As either predominates, so the Soul does generally Will, unless the
special direction of Almighty God, or a spontaneous Motion does vary it. Some
likewise will urge a fatal necessity, having their minds chiefly intent upon
the last result of reason, as others taking notice both of that, and the
impulse of nature; but the Will, though it is rarely known to act freely, yet
one would think it might by this Instance. Put the case the Appetite do dispose
a man to a vicious house, his Reasoning to more sober and convenient affairs:
yet it seems not improbable he may Will, and in some cases do an act distinct
from, and not moved by either. Many disputes concerning the freedom of the
Will, have been the subject of great controversy in Philosophy, and Professors
of Religion have brought it into question in Divinity, delighting rather in
such vain altercations, than to observe and promote the substance of Gods
worship, in which the world does generally agree.

Without reason it seems there could be no Sin, as there is not in irrational
Animals, nor likewise virtue, for they both proceed from the comparing or
reasoning faculty of the Soul of man. Hereupon it follows, that to be chaste by
a disposition of body, or to be temperate in Meat, Drink, or Venery, on the the
same cause is not a virtue. To be valiant upon the warmth of wine, or by the
natural heat of the brain, a wearisomeness of the world, upon greater skill in
a weapon than another, upon strength of body, a brutish nature, or an absurd
fear of being accounted Cowards if they refuse to put their lives upon the
chance of a Die, as many do with unmanly weapons, is not true Valor, nor often
accompanied with the courage of Nature, nor practiced in well governed
Commonwealths, or amongst the truly Valiant and Victorious sort of people; and
is at this day in greater esteem no where, than amongst the most effeminate Men
and Nations. Neither is it a virtue to be just and temperate, when the design
is to purposes of ambition; but then are men said to do an act of virtue, when
they have respect alone to the command of Almighty God, either revealed; or
found out by reason.

Hereupon likewise we do count Children, Fools, Madmen, and such as are of non
sane memory by Sickness or Age, exempt from the Law of God, which is of reason,
and generally through the whole world in humane Laws, they are not punished no
more than Beasts when they do mischief, because for the time they are deprived
of their reason, they are in like condition with other Animals.

If a man in a capacity to reason, do not reason aright, this seems no sin in
him, nor if he acts according to his reason; for no man can be expected but
that he should do according as he judges. But if a man shall reason aright, and
not do accordingly, to him it is sin, and again to reason aright, and act from
thence is a virtue, to reason wrong, and from thence do wrong, may be called a
good meaning, or to reason wrong, and do differently, may be said an ill
meaning; but enquire whether they be virtuous or sinful actions.

It follows further, that to punish men barely for their opinions, is unjust
and unreasonable; but if they endeavor to divulge them (though they are
conceited that so they ought to do) if that may prove mischievous to a
Commonwealth, they are to be restrained notwithstanding; as one ought to take a
sword out of a Madmans hand, or as he that is infected with the Plague, ought
not to be punished for having a Disease, yet if he will go abroad to endanger
others, the Laws of this Land do reasonably justify the punishing of him, even
in some cases to death, upon this ground chiefly to prevent danger in others;
and they that pretend an opinion, but are not thereof persuaded, designing
under that color to disturb a Nation, and raise advantages to themselves,
ought to have inflicted on them heavy penalties.

Furthermore, seeing by reason we find out that there is a God, by the like
reason we are taught we ought not to speak or act irreverently concerning him;
or to set up any seigned Godhead against, or equal with him; seeing he made the
world, and continues it in a wonderful order; in case of evil, or mischief
happened or impending, he is, we may conclude, most able to relieve us.
Hereupon it follows that we ought to desire help of him, reason tells us he
will succor us the rather, for so doing, and that we ought to be humbly
thankful for what mercies he shows, which is our duty toward God.

Come we then to what we owe toward Man. By the Law of Nature we do suppose
that every man may have a right to every thing, but by the Law of reason no
more than an equal right to all things: in the first case man may have what he
can get, which is the state common to other Animals; and in the second, there
ought to be an equal division in convenient proportions, which is peculiar to
rational creatures, and having been made, we ought to be content with our
parts, and not either by strong hand, or cunning circumventions, take from our
Neighbors their shares.

In some sort also we have a duty toward other Animate Creatures; for by the
Law of Nature we may make use of them, but to afflict them, especially when we
have no benefit thereby, as it is not agreeing with reason, but against it, so
is it abominable even to the nature of man.

5. ANother faculty of the Soul, is to be delighted, and pained, if they be not
diverse. The things which cause the first, are called good, and on the contrary,
those that occasion the other, evil, and in the abstract good and evil, and
according to their degrees are they said to be more or less so. Now if the
question be asked what is the chiefest good, before we answer, we must
distinguish and say, if it be meant of the Original cause, doubtless God
Almighty; if it be spoken to the means as to our own furtherance, we may reply,
a virtuous life; if to the thing it self, the greatest pleasure is that which
is largest in extent, duration, and freedom from evil, and is the center of
our designs, and end of our labors.

But let our endeavors be never so capacious, without a special providence of
Almighty God, Virtue can rarely, if at all, make a happy man in this world,
when fortune is wanting, which is the state of a thing without design: and of
all contingencies, that is most conducible, when one lives amongst a happy
people: for an unfortunate Nation, like the rapid motion of the eighth Sphere,
spoken of by some Philosophers, forces against their proper motion all
Inferior Orbs to a confusion of them, and a necessary yiedling to that first
great Circle. And a happy Country does much improve the Fruits of a virtuous
life, to all that live therein.

6. THat then in the concerns of a man's life, having so great a share, in the
next place let us enquire thereof. The strength and happiness of a Nation,
seems chiefly to consist in these things: that they have a good Government,
that the people be many in number, and that they be conveniently provided of
all necessaries.

The Graecians having their eye especially upon the chief men that governed the
several Commonwealths in their Country, which was divided into many; and
observing some were directed by one man principally, others by many of better
sort, (that is to say) by the richer; and some by the people generally; did
call the first kind a Monarchy, the second an Aristocrasie, the third a
Democrasie, for the reasons expressed particularly in the derivation of their
several names; and those denominations have been brought through the Roman
Conquests to us at this day. But this seeming to be too general, there are them
who do say, that there be also mixed Governments.

The way of division we will choose, shall be this; All Governments are either
of an absolute Monarchy, an absolute Republique, where the Authority is
divided, or mixed. By an absolute Monarchical Government, I mean, (and as I take
it, it is the general acception of the word) such as where the Legislative
power, and the Executive, is Capitally or Originally all in one person, without
assent of others; for if one man make Laws, and then Execute them; or Govern by
the dictate of his own Will, or without Law, it seems not different in nature;
and every Officer of inferior degree, in some sense, may be said to be a
Legislator. By an absolute Republique, where a major voice (which must be from
three at least, and may be to any number more) has the Legislative and
Executive power. By a divided Government, when the Legislative is in the one
entirely, and the Executive in the other. By a mixed, when part of either, or of
both, is in the one, and the rest in the other.

An absolute Monarchical Government, seems not so good for the Prince, nor the
people; because every one cannot well execute the Legislative power at the last
resort, in respect he may want Judgment or regular affections: if he be
himself, or leave his Successor of corrupt nature, it does not often fall out,
that his Kingdom or his Life is not taken from him; for if he be vicious, which
Sycophants will not only sooth him in, but promote: and men are generally
inclined to those most, who cover their infirmities: having such authority, he
will hardly refrain that which men account their properties; and the abused to
be revenged, and others, upon apprehensions, to secure themselves, will be apt
to join in conspiracy. If he want judgment, designing men of greater wit will
undermine and subvert him: All Ages are full of stories of this kind, and from
so great a Latitude of power in one person abused; the word Tyrant, which at
first did bear the honorable name of a King, grew at last to import an
Oppressor. Thales of Greece being asked on his return from certain Travails
which he had made, what was the strangest sight he had seen in them, made this
answer, A Tyrant that had lived long.

But it must not be denied when an absolute Monarch proves a wise Prince that
is judicious and moderate in his passions, he many times does admirable things,
and settles such Laws and Customs as continue some discents, which seems an
objection to what is before mentioned, and has been heretofore observed by
others; but for the former reasons, and that an excellent Prince may perform
more renowned actions in another kind of Government, it seems not to deserve
the preference.

Neither is an absolute Republique good, because it cannot well perform the
Executive part in the first of the source; for it must be done by one mind in
respect of contrivance, secrecy, resolution and expedition, in which they
generally have defect. It follows then in the third place, that if many men
manage the executive part, or one man without consent, the Legislative, or any
part of each, it cannot always so well be done, for the reasons before; but if
the Legislative be executed by one upon the assent of many, and the Executive
by one alone; that this is the best Government, and by experience I think it
has been found to have endured longer, and with more advantages than any other.
But we may say of Governments as is said of the Elements, that they are rarely
found unwoven with one another, and that they take their names from the most
predominate.

But because some have doubted of this, and we would willingly endeavor to
give a reason of the known Laws of England, let us enter more particularly into
the bosom of this subject. We are to remember that, as was said before, every
man by the Law of Reason has an equal right to every thing, (from which single
consideration in a sort of people with us lately in England, did proceed the
Levelling humor) But because some things are not possibly to be divided, in
respect of their nature amongst Mankind, as the Air we breath; and others
cannot be so well used in common, as Meat, Drink and Clothing; it follows that
in reason there ought to be a division of these, and that those remain entire;
for in all Societies where Community is pretended, as last they come to
property when the Meat and Drink and Clothing is distributed.

If it be asked in what proportion those things which may be divided, are to be
distributed, reason tells us according to every man's necessity. If by what Rule
or Law, for a Rule and Law is all one, doubtless by the Law of God, which is
found out by reason, and thereto agreeable.

If who shall declare what the Law of Reason is; one man alone may err, but
with assent of others, he is less liable: a multitude have in them more often the
voice of Nature, Vox Populi Vox Dei in many cases is the more true. Hereupon,
though one man alone may be good, yet with assent of a Parliament, as it is
constituted with us in England, of all sorts of people, from all places, is
surely generally better to such a purpose.

The last long Parliament one would think is an objection, sithence many
extravagant enormities sell out. Though they cannot possibly be excused, yet
this may be said for them; A Parliament may be in the wrong until better
consideration, and to them at sometimes it was the more excusable, sithence
they had many voluntary and necessary exclusions; and we cannot tell what they
would have done, when the heat which provoked them by the general noise of
grievances blown up by factious men beyond a just report, had been a little
slack't upon second thoughts, if there had been no purgations. I suspend my own
thoughts, and choose rather to report the opinion of our late most pious and
judicious Prince King Charles the First, and in his own words, which are these
to his Son our present Sovereign. Nor would I have you to entertain any
aversation or dislike of Parliaments, which in their right constitution with
freedom and honor will never injure or diminish your greatness, but will
rather be as interchangings of Love, Loyalty, and confidence between a Prince
and his People. Nor would the events of this black Parliament have been other
than such (however much biased by factious inelections) if it had been
preserved from the insolences of popular dictates, and tumultuary impressions,
the sad effects of which will no doubt make all Parliaments, after this, more
cautious to preserve that freedom and honor which belongs to such Assemblies
(when once they have shaken off this yoke of vulgar encroachment) since the
public interest consists in the mutual and common good both of Prince and
People. Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave and honorable
ways to contribute their counsels in common, enacting all things by public
consent, without Tyranny or Tumults, We must not starve our selves because some
men have surfeited on wholesome food.

The inconstancy of the Vulgar, noised in all Stories, is another objection. We
must here again distinguish: If the Vulgar, I mean the common voice of men take
upon them to judge of a person, they are often mistaken, for they do it by the
appearance only; and Men upon designs, affecting popularity, put on Masks and
Disguises, which is the ground of Vulgar error in these things; but if they
take upon them to judge of what is reasonable, the common voice has generally
less error than that of particular men. When a man appears virtuous, they
commend him; and when vicious, they decry him: so then the wavering proceeds
not from the people, who are constant always to the commendations of virtue,
but from the subject, who changes the course of his actions, and is himself
variable in this life, or at least has a different outward shape.

Now as a good Goveenment may justly challenge the pre-eminence of the three
necessaries before mentioned, so good Laws may bear the greatest reputation
therein. They will Execute themselves, and the Executive part is usually most
defective. Laws dispose men in their natures to good, or bad; are the causes of
faelicity or misery according as they are made, and alter the very form of men's
manners.

The Romans excelled herein, which I count was the principal foundation and
durance of their Victories and Prosperities. Suetonius takes notice that Caesar
did especially observe the strength of body in the choice of his Soldiers,
depending doubtless on the Roman Discipline (which was a branch of their Law)
to incline their minds to Valor, and conduct. Alexander, being in this
particular not altogether so happy, did chiefly insist upon a good election, in
respect of Judgment, regular Affections, and Experience.

Being upon the point of Laws, let it not be thought amiss to mention these few
observations. In a Commonwealth there ought not to be too many Laws, because
they cannot then be well remembered by them to whom they are a Rule, nor those
who are to Judge by them. The Penalties ought to be equal to the Offense; if
they be too little, it renders the Law frivolous, as are many of our Ancient
Paenal Statutes; by the rise of the value of money in these later Ages, by the
pleasure of our Kings; but more considerably by the fall of the value of
Silver, occasioned by the plenty of it from the Western World, not long since
discovered: and some made of late are rendered useless upon a like reason. They
are not to be too great, because of the Infirmities of Mankind; but an error of
this last nature is on the right hand.

A just Action, is what is done by a Rule or Law, and Justice by way of
excellency, is that which is done by the Rule or Law of Reason. Now the
determination of controversies, which is a doing of Justice, ought to be near
the residence of the parties, and with small, if any charge, to the concerned
persons, but what is voluntary; otherwise it will become a burden to the
greater number, and intolerable to the poorer sort, and in cases of a small
value, to all.

The common objection that the Law brought into the Country, would make it
differ in many places, is idle; sithence by experience in the Sessions of
Justices of the Peace, and Courts of Record, in Corporations through all
England we find the contrary.

To pass on when the Laws are made, who shall compare the actions of men with
these Rules or Laws, that is, shall be Judge of the breaches and observances of
them. Many cannot well perform this part in a common course, because there may
be wanting a resolution: one may be of opinion, by a certain fact, such a Law,
or a branch thereof, is transgressed, another not, a third may differ from
both; for the same fact may be thought Murder by one, Manslaughter by another,
and Se defendendo by a third: so to prevent a delay in Justice, it is generally
well committed to a single person, who may appoint substitutes with an appeal
to himself.

If the Laws are well made, and Judgment regularly given; yet without a
Coercive power Men will not obey them: the placing thereof ought not to be in a
major voice, because they may be of so many several minds; and consequently by
delay, and want of resolution, Justice may be imperfect: two have the same
unaptness; therefore it is well reposited in the hands of a single person. Thus
in England, the foundation of Judicature and power is in the King, and did
appear more perspicuously heretofore, when they sat usually on one of the
Benches, and are both well placed in the same person, seeing no one of either
can be so well executed alone; it is called with us the Executive power, as his
other with the praevious assent of the Lords and Commons the Legislative.

If inquiry be whether he ought to be elected, we answer no, for these reasons:
A major voice in the choosers may not be; because many men may be of various
minds, and think of several persons, and the common good thereby neglected, as
is often seen, for want of a Governor; if we say by Lot, the nominations may be
so large, and chance so great; to which may be added in both, corruptions by
Money, and other juggling devices, that men of worth are not like to be chosen,
as is of frequent experience; and when an election is made, the Elected's
natural affections to himself and Family will make a different Center to the
interest of the public.

The next question may be, whom, and out of what Family; that also must be
determined by the Law of God, which is of Reason, or of Nature. The first
cannot do it, because God Almighty having made all Families equal, no reason
can be given why one simply considered in it self, should be praefer'd before
another: which consideration taken alone has caused much mischief in the World:
But we must hasten off, and not stay here. Let us then have recourse to the
other branch of the Law of God, which is the Law of Nature; and there
possession gives a Title. So then, that Man or Family which has got possession
of the Crown, has a good title by the Law of God; and Reason tells us, the
elder possession is to be preferred before the younger, to prevent Contention,
which is the Nurse of War, and consequently a destruction to Mankind: and if
any should now set on foot a supposed elder than the now King of Englands; a
long and peaceable possession is to be praefer'd before a more ancient
pretense; sithence that is well known, and this can be but guessed at, time
having worn out a certain knowledge.

It follows one would think, that he which has possession of the Crown may
dispose it to whom he will; and so he might by the Law of Nature; but the Law
of Reason comes now in again, and tells us that Salus Populi is Suprema Lex:
therefore seeing the discovery of his mind in many cases, especially near his
death, when his reason and senses decay; some interpreting it one way, others
in a different manner, would be difficult to know which would destroy the
people by division, designing men being subject likewise to suborn witnesses;
and use other arts to deceive: Thereupon it follows, that such a one ought to
be his Successor, whom we may reasonably think Parents would generally mean,
and that is one of his own Children, which is also agreeable to nature, and of
them the eldest, as being at the greatest exercise of reason. The Love of a man
enclines generally most to himself, in a second degree to his Children, and
then to his Brothers and Sisters: so the Princes Children are to be praefer'd
before his other Relations. By this means the interest of the People is
incorporated with that of the Crown, as it is (God be blessed) with us in
England: and thereby the natural motions of a King, in favor to himself, his
Children and Family, tend of necessity to the good of his Subjects; and
Matrimony is a good determiner of which are his; being a public act.

The principal objections against an Haereditary Monarchy are these: The Prince
may be foolish, of non sane memory, a Child, he may dote, or be vicious: all
which may happen to any single person elected; though it be rare that a Child
is chosen: and often it falls out, that the worst men are in the best
difguises. But to answer, If there be good Laws made (which are an essential
part to the happiness of a Nation) he can commit no general and considerable
injury without Agents, who ought to be subject to the Law, the dread whereof
will terrify them: Good men will be advising him, his near Relations, for the
Love of him, and their Family will persuade much, Protectors or Guardians, may
be to them in some of the particular cases before mentioned.

This we may be sure of by experience, that in all Elections, men generally of
the best tempers are not chosen, they are usually but of the middle rank, and
so is always a race of Kings at worst; for as there may be one extremely bad,
there may be another in descent as greatly good, so that though at periods
there may be difference, yet take the line from first to last, it is of the
common nature of mankind, which we the rather ought to be content with, because
in a train of Elections this is the best was ever found, and but rarely too,
that they were of the general disposition of humane nature, and this the
disadvantage, that the consideration of his Family, which must after return to
a private life, will incline him to such corruptions as there was always, yet
found men to prompt them to, as also their Electors.

But to conclude this, God Almighty seems to have left somewhat desective
herein, as in many other cases, to the intent there may be an invitation and
necessity on humane nature to seek after him, and implore his special
providence for a virtuous Prince, and acknowledge it with humble gratitude,
when we are blessed with such a one. For this kind of Government, appears in the
Records of time, most practicable, durable, and of fewest deficiencies; whereas
other kinds, especially absolute Commonwealths, if there were any purely such,
have been so rarely fortunate, that they look like Anomola's of nature.

The Coercive power may be divided into two parts, arising from the two ways
by which a Nation is governed, by persuasion, or compulsion, and are called the
Ecclesiastical and Civil: both which are united in our Sovereign; and being
divided in some other Countries by their clashings, are often times of very fatal
consequence; the Churchmen persuading one way, and the Civil Magistrate
compelling another.

Neither of those two can be well managed without rewards, as well as
punishments: rewards are either in opinion as honors, of which the King with
us is the fountain, or such real good of the world, as men have need of, or
affect, and in abstract, answering all things, is money.

Because there will be a perpetual want, there ought to be a constant Revenue
sufficient for the common and usual defense of the people against Invadors, and
Rebels, and upon extraordinary occasions, a supplemental aid by consent in
Parliament; for it is truly reported that money is the Sinews of War, and I
may add also, of Peace.

Hereupon it follows, that such who abuse a Prince, in his Revenue, do weaken
his power according to the proportion of the wrong, and consequently the
security of the whole, and of all mischiefs that can be done to a King or his
Country; this is one of the greatest imaginable, because it destroys even the
foundation of his power; and for the same reason the Laws ought to be very
penal in this particular.

To keep the Subjects in obedience will require the assistance of many Civil
Officers, which in respect of command ought to be subordinate to one another,
according to such Rules as would be here taedious to mention.

What kind of men should be employed is easy to apprehend, No man doubts sure
but they ought to be of reason and regularity of life, the fate and consequence
of employing such as are of arrogant, but weak judgments; and especially of
violent and exorbitant passions, of lust, ambition, covetousness, cruelty, are
negligent and idle; have caused many tragical Issues to those Princes who have
made use of them: they generally study industriously the nature of their
Sovereign; and having well understood that, in order their designs, attempt
such things as will not abide the Touchstone of the Law, in presumption upon
his favor, then distrusting his affections may waver, they seek to secure
themselves on their own bottom: Now the foundation of power, as was before
mentioned, consists in money: Hereupon they endeavor to amass vast sums
together, whereby to fortify themselves; but this they conclude will not
suffice, unless they suppress the power even of the Prince himself, and all
meritorious persons: the ways they take to the first purpose are generally
these; they humor him in his vices if he have any that will raise an Odium,
and so loose him among the people; they weaken him in his Revenue, by
countenancing public frauds, wherein they have often times a share; in his
Authority, by fomenting factions in Church and State, and when they have come
to the utmost of their power, they dare even him to do any thing contrary to
their own humor; but on the other side, the truest Statesmen are those, who
study the interest of their King and Country, are Honest and Judicious, and of
profound Counsel in War and Peace.

The duty of Subjects is not well understood till it be well considered, so not
by Children and younger people, nor by them who have a desect in judgment,
that are taken up with the cares of the world, and other employments which
possess their minds: hereupon it is agreeable to reason, that some should be
set apart from other affairs, of the best judgments, to instruct the people in
their duties, and persuade them to it, and of good lise to lead them by
example, because it is of great pains and time to understand what is fitting to
be done, they ought to have no considerable other employment, to the intent
they may thoroughly mind that: but they may mistake, therefore it is convenient
they should have certain Articles of Doctrine, from which they may not vary in
their instructions, which ought to be honest, and according to reason; for such
which have other foundations, make it doubtful, and often times produce
dangerous consequences from credulous Churchmen. Because they are to be
sequestered from private trade and gains, it is fit they should be publicly
maintained; and to the end they might be free from teaching to please the
people, they ought to be independent on their Parish in their maintenance. If
it be thought Homilies may serve this turn, it ought to be considered, and may
be well replied, that they cannot be made so proper for every particular
Congregation, and occasion; nor are they so naturally and forcibly pronounced,
as the Words and Notions which are of a man's own conception, though those may
be good also in their kind.

For public mercies received, reason tells us it is fit there should be
public acknowledgement of gratitude, and to procure general blessings,
general applications, and that such men who best should know the value of them,
which are they before mentioned, are the most proper for these Sacrifices.
Further, they ought to be subordinate to the Prince, for the reasons before
mentioned, and to one another, for the more expeditious conveying of orders,
and inspecting the people and inferior Clergy, by a distribution of that
nature which is agreeable to right reason, and so to the Law of God, and of
consequence by Divine right; but (God knows) such is the unhappiness of
mankind, that if a man looks through the world in diverse Ages he may see too
many have been chosen by favor, some in respect of interest; by money because
they will serve for little, and others, because being of ill lives themselves,
they will the rather pass by reprehension of those persons who promote them:
and for this very reason, the personal vices of the Clergy, by men that do not
distinguish the office from the person, does endanger often times the very order
of Hierarchy; for such as these, wanting the substance of their calling, which
is good Preaching, and a Regular life, set up the formal and ceremonious part
of Religion, insinuating it for the substance, the better to blind and cover
their own vicious lives, and so create many Heretics, and Atheists; the first
hunting for Truth in some other or new Religion, because they find notorious
error in that they are taught; and the other suspecting all, because they
perceive deceipts in some part of it.

To conclude this, in memory to our Mother the Church of England; whose
constitution is agreeable to what is before mentioned of this nature; it may be
said she was a branch cut off from the body of the Roman Tree in the time of
Henry the 8th. and engrafted into the Royal Stock in the days of Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory, and has flourished therein ever since (a late
Chasme excepted) with this Immortal Glory; that whereas other Churches have
generally occasioned frequent disturbances to the Countries where they have
been nourished, and some bloody and dreadful: this (seeming to have the
peculiar mark of being Gods own) has never yet been the cause of any the least
disquietness to us, since the very first Reformation, and at this hour, none
appear to be proceeding from it, much less impending.

If the Prince ought to have a considerable power to compel and persuade the
Subjects, it follows then that they ought to have but little to resist him in
the one or other, let the pretenses be never so gaudy.

Further, the Laws must have a time wherein to be declared, and we see, after
many Ages, some are wanting still; so then a question may arise, by what Rule a
Prince is to Govern when there is a deficiency; we say by the Law of Conscience
and Reason, and necessarily it must be left to the declarations of his own
bosom, in cases that require expedition, and thus it is in England; for Equity
in it self, is the Law of God agreeing to reason, and that which is in
practice, is Gods, interpreted from the Princes breast, or from such whom he
does entrust with his Conscience: so our bills in Chancery do conclude that
they pray Equity, because the Law has not provided an apt remedy, or to that
purpose; and upon the same reason, the King in some cases suspends the Law it
self, as in Frauds, and Paenal Bonds, and Estates upon Condition forseited,
because the Law of England at present made, is herein defective, and comes not
up fully to the Law of God; and in all cases of evil, it is said the King
cannot license malum in se, but he may malum prohibitum, though he can pardon
either committed.

Again, the first possession of a man, is a good Title by the Law of Nature,
until an elder, or the Law of Reason (which with mankind is to have a
preference) otherwise disposes it, as is done in Taxes, and several other
things; and all this, with much more, which for brevities sake I purposely
omit, is either founded on the Law of Nature or Reason, as is said in our books
of Law the Law of England is.

Thus much of the Government.

7. COme we now to the number of men requisite in a happy Commonwealth. It is
necessary they should be many, and cannot be too great, if the proportion of
provisions be not too little; for though few men, well governed with
necessaries convenient, may do, and heretofore have acted miraculous things;
yet a greater number equally disciplined, and of like provision, shall do more
considerable and wonderful things in tract of time: perhaps upon a contingent
accident not well understood from whence it came; Fortune may now and then put
an Argument to the contrary.

To come to some Instances, which may serve as Arguments; Xenephon with a few
men made a Retreat that has been of great glory to him through all times, even
to this day, passing many vast Countries against a prodigious number of men;
but then there was this in it. First his Soldiers were provided with good
Pikes, a sort of Arms of the best use against Horse in a Champion Country, of
which the Enemy consisted chiefly, and in enclosures they could do no
considerable harm to Foot, which was an accident of Fortune. Then the General
of the Persians, in expectation of out-witting them by political contrivances,
trifled out the time of burning the Country in their march, till they were so
near the Confines, that they had sufficient maintenance for retreat out of
their Dominions; after which they met with no considerable Nations, and for the
most part, if not always, with tumultuary forces, these being generally
surprised.

Caesar with small forces, being well disciplined and provided, destroyed a
great number of Helvetians in his Wars of Gallia, who had no good Discipline or
Arms; but when he came to meet a greater number than his own forces, at least
equally furnished with necessaries, and almost as good Disciplined, he
sustained the loss at Dyrrachuum, where if it had been well followed, a period
had been set to his glories. But in the end, he overcame Pompey by the
advantage of his cunning, in mixing certain cohorts of Foot with his Horse, and
then meeting the confident precipitancy of the ungovernable Nobility of Rome,
against whom he fought. Caesar in Spain after, meeting with many Romans of
Discipline and Provision somewhat like his own Army, under Pompey's Sons, he
professed he then fought for his life, whereas heretofore he had contended for
honor.

Bajazett the Turkish Emperor, with a great Army, excellent Discipline, and
well provided, made considerable Conquests; but when Tamberlaine with an Army
greater, and Discipline and necessaries at least equal, he was not long before
he did encage him.

Scanderbegge did singular exploits with a few choice men; but it is observable
he found the inconvenience of a small Territory, as Epirus was, and in the
cloze of his years, made it his principal care to fortify himself with
alliances, by way of Supply to that deficiency.

We must not deny, that where the numbers are great, without good Discipline
and stores, it breeds confusion, and hastens destruction: as on the other hand,
an Army or Country never did exceed in number such a proportion as was beyond
the capacity of good Discipline; many great Monarchies of the World, and the
March of Tamberlaine in exact order, are manifest examples and arguments.

8. PRovisions are the next thing necessary to make a flourishing Nation; they
are such as these, plenty of Flesh, and Corn, Iron, Brass, Wood for Fuel,
Ship-sides and Masts, Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, the materials of Powder; if they are
not all produceable from the ground, that they be not far off, and that there
be convenience of Carriage for them, the chief whereof is Water. Hence it is,
that all great Governments have had their Capital Seats in Plentiful Countries
which are well stored with convenient Provisions, and for what they want, have
the benefit of water for quick and easy Carriage.

The Romans were seated on a rich Soil, and not far from the Mediterranean,
and the Neighboring Seas, places of the most convenient Navigation in this
part of the World, at those times, in respect of the extent thereof and
quietness, the Mariners Compass not being then invented. The Eastern Empire
upon the same; the Turkish at this day, before them the Egyptian and
Carthaginian, and few, if any, great Towns of note, are not upon or near good
Rivers, or the Sea it self. It is observable, the ground the Romans conquered,
was chiefly upon the skirts of those Seas through which they could the more
commodiously send and receive supplies, and the Emperors were forced to
withdraw first from the places most remote from the Seas.

Since the invention of the Mariners Needle, there are other more commodious
for Navigation, and a more proper seat than that is where the Winds and Tides
are more stirring, since Seamen by the benefit of the Compass, can guide
themselves in the day without the sight of the Sun or Landmarks, and in the
Night without benefit of Stars or Fire, unless at some special places and times.

9. IF the People have a good government, are many in number, and well
provided; yet (especially till there are good constitutions of Laws) if there
be not a good election among the Officers, those advantages for such time will
be rendered the less significant.

We shall find the same Nation sometime victorious, and the World trembling
under them; and one would think at first sight it proceeded from the nature of
the people, and in the turn of a hand, upon the alteration of a Prince, or his
affections, grow degenerate and effeminate, the Government, People and Stores
still the same, and e converso, a sluggish People, after a time victorious. Now
seeing Princes act chiefly by their Ministers and Officers, and that they have
to do generally with all their Neighbors, for otherwise it might arise from
the condition of some without, it cannot arise from any other more considerable
cause, than the want of good choice. In the one, Men of Virtue appear
uppermost, who give an universal reputation to their Country: in the other,
these by degrees are thrust down, and such show themselves, who in the
management of business, bring an ignominious report upon the whole Nation.
Edward the third, in his first time, and Henry the fifth of England, in his
last, opur Chronicles make honorable mention of, with great admiration of
their Valor and Conquests in France, and our happiness then at home; and with
as great sorrow and reflections on their other times, and on both their
Successors.

But if men of virtue are chosen, who are the spirit and life of a
Commonwealth, yet we see Fortune now and then will be showing her self; but not
often, and so we may the better bear her insolences. But against the
apprehensions of men, God Almighty will, and does those things often times by his
extraordinary providence, that seem to differ not only from the course of
nature, but of reason; who of his mercy by devout applications, may,
notwithstanding be appeased.

10. AT this day, in this part of the World, it may be there is not any Nation
so near complete, in many of the former particulars, as this of England. If we
compare it with the Low Countries, the Crown of England has more Men, more
Provisions of some sort of its Native production, and may have as many of any
other; better seated, the Country of a larger extent; add to this, that here
cannot easily be diversions by a Land Invasion.

As to their Government, sithence it has much of a republique, were it not that
they fix their thoughts without upon fear of danger, the caement of
republiques, it is likely they would divide, and settle on one another the
usual fate of such governments, as it fell out to Rome, in the days of Scylla,
Marius, Caesar, etc. for having overcome a great part of the World, and amongst
the rest the Carthaginians, a powerful Neighbor, they fell to Civil Wars, as
was foretold by a Senator, and thereupon were advised not utterly to destroy,
but to leave that Government as an awe upon their State, to prevent divisions
at home. War abroad, is the Interest of Republiques; the Low Countries, to the
wonder of Queen Elizabeth's days, thriving like Salamanders in the fire of
contention.

If we compare the King of England with the French, it is obvious; they have
neither so convenient Ports, nor are so well seated, we lying betwixt them and
the North, where the greatest stores are for Naval employments; add to this,
that the form of their government and nature of the people indisposes them to
business on the Seas; Take this out of Sir Walter Rawleigh, as Popaelynire well
observes: The Forces of Princes by Sea are marks of the greatness of an
Estate; for whosoever commands the Sea, commands the Trade; whosoever commands
the Trade of the World, commands the Riches of the World, and consequently the
World it self.

If with any other, this being an Island in the midst of Trade, betwixt the
North and South, East and West, a temperate Clime upon the great waters of the
World; especially since relief may be received and sent with more certainty
upon the invention of the Needle, has manifest advantage.

Some men in certain Nations it must be confessed, out of covetousness, have in
certain times abused the public Revenue, as did the Officers of the Greek
Emperor Constantine, when Mahomet besieged Constantinople: Others out of envy
to the glory of great and virtuous Commanders, have puzzled business, and
obstructed necessaries: as Hanno did to Hannibal in the course of his Victories
against the Romans in Italy: Others have been traitorous, as was Bessus to
Darius his Master, in the time that Alexander invaded him. And it did fall out
to that Hanno, the Ball was after tossed upon African ground, and consumed the
envious obstructer, his Family and Country: to the Emperor, who having tried,
below his Imperial Dignity, to ask money at the Doors of his Citizens, for the
necessary defense of him and them, through a perverse and obstinate discontent
at the former abuses, though they had plenty within them, that he was refused,
and so they perished together: And to Bessus, who depending on dealing with
Alexander, upon the ruin of his Prince, of whom he had the greatest
apprehensions, did perish in the design: And some heretofore out of arrogance
and want of skill, have endangered their Country:

But we must take great heed we be not too apt to think amiss of the actions of
a Prince or his Officers, which Men are too prone to complain of: First because
we cannot judge aright of them, sithence they are at distance to most, and
secret to all; the hearts of Kings are unsearchable. Secondly, We know not what
they drive at, for they row one way often times and look another, intending
still the public good: Moreover they are but men, and may have their
failings; and we ought to cover, and not divulge, much less expatiate on their
Infirmities, as we would not men should do so to us. They have their hands full
of business, so that it is almost impossible but that deficiencies must be:
Add to this, that male contents do always magnify the oversights of men in
authority, and vilify their good deeds beyond a due proportion, and by the
reports they spread up and down, do give a discoloring to their actions: So
that for this very reason we must always allow many grains; and if it were as
bad as it may be sometimes made, which without all dispute it is not, as all
men have their failings, so have they often their poculiar periods wherein they
commit them, sometimes gaining ground by such stumbles, and make the more wary
men, upon the benefit of their experience.

11. THe gradations, means and manner how the English Nation came to such a
greatness, is the subject of the History of England, of which the following
Book is the first part, and this the Sum.

At the discovery hereof by Julius Caesar it was divided into a multitude of
petty governments, exceeding weak for that reason, and more liable to the Roman
Conquests.

Under them it continued some hundreds of years, in that time designed in the
nature of a Treasury, out of which they might draw men and wealth for the
purposes of the Roman interests.

On their Exigencies in the Continent they left it weak, and subject to all
Invaders, being disabled by the policies and practices of their late Masters;
for what they had most apprehensions of, they did most carefully endeavor to
extinguish, which was the power and strength of them, whom having subdued they
had desire to keep under.

In this condition habituated also for several Ages to a Slavish temper of
mind, they were the more easily conquered by the Saxons, invited in to assist
them upon the fresh affliction of their Northern Neighbors. Under them it
continued a considerable time, divided into seven Nations, commonly called the
Saxon Heptarchy, being then in somewhat better plight to defend themselves than
formerly, because they were reduced to a fewer number of principalities, and
were in no subjection, the Danish inroads and the consequence thereof for some
too considerable time excepted.

After diverse contentions, and great fluctuations, it all resolved at last into
one Monarchy, under a West Saxon Prince, and then far more considerable. While
it remained thus, the Church of Rome, and sereral of the Nobility, who had
large possessions here, from the Roman policy, in granting large immunities to
some who yielded to them in their Conquests; and consequently great interest
did frequently perplex the Nation, with civil diffention, and by that very
means principally it became a prey to the Norman Conqueror.

The same causes remaining, the effects did not differ under the succeeding
Kings; in so much that those victorious Attempts and Conquests that were made in
several places, especially in France, were frequently distracted, and at last
utterly extinguished by our contentions at home.

In the time of Henry the 4th. The policy upon which great men kept and
increased their estates beyond a moderate and competent bulk, by advantage of a
Statute they had gained in the days of Edward the First, impowring them to
Entayle all was frustrated by an invention at Law, which could not be effected
before upon diverse designs in Parliament; the issue of this was a bane to great
possessions, and consequently to such powers and interests as did frequently
mate the Kings, and disturb the people of England,

Henry the 7th. followed the blow, acting several things levelled to the same
purpose, and with benefit to them that in those days did not generally think
so, for by this means they were taken off from inclinations to a common
mischief, to which they were provoked by their passions, and the urgings of
vain and necessitous men, and in the calamity whereof they themselves and their
Families had the most deplorable shares.

The Church of Rome, together with the Doctrine of Salvation, had impressed in
the minds of men an opinion, that what is once given to the Church is Sacrilege
to take away; by which means (it likewise having diverse other arts to increase)
they kept their estates, and became very formidable to the Kings of England;
but being undertook by Henry the 8th. he tore from them, with great severity,
those large possessions which rendered them dangerous to his interests.

Queen Elizabeth his Daughter, by a long and prudent reign, did fix her self,
and marvellously improve the Interest of this Nation, wrapped up inseparably with
the truest of the Crown, And now did begin to appear the fruits of the Mariners
Compass, not long before invented, the Trade and shiping of the world leaving
the calmer, and and settling in our more active Seas. In her Reign the Nation
was very potent, as may be observed by the notable enemies it withstood, when
the Princes round us were general in design of our ruin, and yet with eternal
honor were they all resisted, and some notably shattered.

Scotland was still out, and capable of being a mischievous diversion on all
occasions, which immediately upon the Queens death was united in King James.

And now one would have thought the Crown had been out of all danger at home,
when on a sudden did appear an interest in Scotland, which had its beginning in
the Queens days, that by the neglect and absence of King James, working it
self into the presence of powerful Noblemen there, and after into the hearts of
certain English here, from a cloud no bigger in show than a man's hand, became
in the days of King Charles the First, a most good and pious Prince, the
greatest storm, and of more terror than of many Ages had befallen, but is now
dissipated. And the Kingdom till of late by the absence of the lawful Prince,
was in perpetual danger of division and confusion; when it pleased God, at the
point of despair, by the hand of the then General Moncke, and now Duke of
Albemarle, a renowned and admirable Commander, to restore us one of excellent
endowments, our undoubted Prince, all his enemies being bound hand and foot,
and prostrate before him, and to stablish him on the Throne of his Ancestors,
in a far more considerable estate than any of his Predecessors; this
Parliament, to their immortal honor, having repaired those fortifications of a
Revenue, which some Princes heretofore in several Ages had suffered to decay,
the ancient fundamental maxim, That the Crown Lands could not be alienated,
being evaded, and those not now capable of being restored in specie, without
manifest and extraordinary injustice and danger.

So that if one look upon this Kingdom, as once Florus did that of Rome, in a
comparison to the life of Man, we may upon the prospect see it after many
vicissitudes and Ages, from a lesser to a more significant stature, to have at
last come to a complete strength and vigor, such as the last and this Summer,
under the auspicious Dominion of his Imperial Majesty, singly of his own force,
to a chase of their enemies the Dutch, after short disputes upon other equal
terms, notwithstanding the assistance from France, and alliance with the Dane;
a manifest argument of the apprehension of their own weakness, compared with the
strength of his Majesty; for I take the confederacies which have been many, to
import amongst other reasons, the opinion the world has of his power, seeing
experience tells us, the weaker Princes and States unite against the potent. It
is remarkable, that this last Victory was at a time the English were thought to
be very low, the Pestilence having swept away many, and a general decay of
Trade, with some other considerations of uncomfortable memory, as if God
Almighty would show us what great blessings he has bestowed on us, in enabling
our Sovereign to deal with the United strength of his Neighbors in a
distracted condition; to the intent we might have no reason to suspect or fear
when our fortunes are blooming.

I Have forborne to fill up this Praefatory discourse with the commendations of
History in general, though much might be reported on the singular advantages
which arise therefrom, to a Judicious Reader, especially if it be of a Country
where his concernments are great, and principally to persons of public
business; much less need it be done in an Age, and among people well acquainted
with good Learning, and their true valuations in diverse particulars.

Nor shall I blame the compilements of that concerning England, though some of
notable Judgment, and full Learning, have heretofore led the way; because I
would not seem to arrogate that to my self, which on my vainest thoughts, and
best successes, I think manifestly amiss. But what I presume to say, will be
this, that if in the concernments of any man's affairs, any thing of notice in
this part of the Story of England, a place of considerable regard, may have
slipped either observation or memory, being broken in time, and withal
voluminous, and may be found more concisely here, it is with good devotion
offered; but principally to those of the English Nation whom it more peculiarly
concerns.

But whether or no, and how far my labors of this kind will become any
improvement to the Interest of his Majesty, the Royal Family, or the People
subject to his Authority, whose direct Interests are inseperably entwined and
at all which I make my most special aim, must be recommended to the judgment
and experience of the present and succeeding times, if they may be worthy to
outlive a few days. However in this I set up my content, that my meaning is
not amiss; nor am I aware I have either fallen upon the extremes of servile
flattery, or an unbecomming meddling, where it ought not to be; and I hope in
this part to give a reason of our Religion and Laws, will be far from
offending the true lovers of the Church and their Country.

True it is, that he which takes upon him to discourse of Vice and Virtue, with
endeavors to suppress the first, and encourage the other; it will not be, but
that certain out of infirmity upon general discourses, will be jealous they
themselves are particularly pointed at, when the Vices they are subject to are
only intended: nor am I deceived if some such persons be found to make
reflections, or have an evil eye, sithence it is no more than common
expectation.

THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY OF England.
THat every Country had a time wherein it was first Planted, besides what may
be collected by Reason, seems true by Historical Observation also. A frequent
increase there is of new Inventions, and such as are of admirable use, and
extraordinary consequence. The Mariners Compass grounded on the Magnetic
virtue, is one, from which have proceeded more Alterations than can (without
long time) be thought on, in Religion, Navigation, Diseases, and other weighty
considerations: by the benefit thereof no less than a new World discovered in
the consequence, whereof has followed a little World of new things. Gunpowder
is likewise worthy of Notice, and has greatly altered the way of Military
affairs; Printing might be added, and many more. And from these things I would
infer, that if Inventions (which more properly, for the most part, ought to
have the name of Chances) are new every Age, and some of so valuable use, that
they are not like to be antiquated; it may seem, if the World had been ab
aeterno, they would certainly have been found out long before now. If it be
objected that several Arts are worn out of use; it may be answered, That he
which shall read Pancirollus, a diligent enquirer into things of this nature,
may observe that probably those which are thought to be lost, are either of
frivolous value, or it is uncertain whether they are not still in being, under
other Names, or somewhat varyed only, and at the most but worn out by more
excellent Inventions: an Argument of it self to the same purpose. Another is,
That Countries (especially in this considerable part of the World) have
Originals of their History, and those not far distant in their time from one
another. I am not ignorant what Stories are in some other parts of Chronicles,
containing a strange number of thousands of years; but I can find no reason
why they should be thought capable of continuing the Memory of things longer
there than we here. It may be they have reckoned by Lunar years, perhaps out of
affectation or mistake they did record erroneously, and it is not unlikely this
very story is fabulous, as to the extent they speak of, though the report of a
longer time may be truly more with them in some particulars than us. And till
Aristotle, when the Creation was somewhat slipped out of memory, and tradition
antiquated, the Philosophers of the World have been said to have held generally
a beginning of it. I could enlarge upon this, but what is said may suffice,
hapily, to the intent, we might be induced to believe that every Country had a
time when a People were first planted in it; But a Man may say of them, as is
usually spoken of some great Rivers, it is difficult to go up to their
Springhead, and more especially of the Britains, who trusted too much to their
memories in their first known Age to the Romans.

Of the first Planters in Britany.
THe Opinions of Learned Men concerning the British extraction, are various;
It may not be improbable that the Grecians, or a Greek Colony, or some
Neighbors who spoke the Greek Language, or a Dialect thereof, first Peopled
this Country, for these Reasons. It must be planted (in all likelihood) by
Navigators, because it is an Island. The Grecians, and those who lived not far
from them, about the first known time, were generally accounted of the best
sort. They settled diverse Colonies on the Seaside, quite through the
Mediterranean; and passing the Streights, might no doubt fix several on the
Coasts upon the Atlantic Ocea. The Greek Language, worn out of vulgar use
among the People, was preserved among the Druids, their Priests, upon the first
Discovery by Caesar; and it is not to be found out how they came by it, unless
by some Plantation among them; no other common intercourse having been heard of
before. And another presumption is, The continuing of the Language has
resemblance to the practice of the Roman Clergy, in keeping up the old Latin
Tongue at this day; amongst whom are, as with these were, some interests and
considerations of like nature. The Britains fought in Chariots, after the old
manner about Greece, when they were first heard of in the Roman Territories,
but a peculiar way then of the Britains, except in Gallia abutting; which
Caesar in his Commentaries tells as a Novelty, in a particular Description of
their way of Fight, to his Countrymen. If we come to the first Name of the
Island, we find it called Albion, or Alebion; it seems to me to denote a
derivation from Lybia, where Greek Colonies had set down. If we look upon the
Conjectures of Caesar, he declares his Opinion, that there were here in his
days two sorts of People, some whom he thought might come from Gallia, seated
on those Neighboring Coasts, upon some Conquests made; and a Nation within the
Land of a more ancient settlement. Tacitus has much the same Conjectures,
adding this, That he conceived a third sort came into the North from the
Germans, and founds his opinion on their Complexions. This does not disagree
with that of Cambden, who would have the Gauls to plant it; sor it is not
unlikely, some of them might come over into this Country, and yet another
People might be here long before. And though I do not believe the reports of
Brute in all points, concerning the Trojans, whom one may upon the matter call
Grecians, in respect of their Founder, Dardanus a Grecian, and their near
situation to that Country; yet I may reasonably suppose, that either it is
true, in some parts, as the story of King Arthur is; but so absurd, by the many
additions of fabulous and magnifying Writers, that the certainty thereof, is
not only extinguished, for a great share, but may be hereafter, as this of the
Grecians, with many learned men, utterly doubted. Or else, the Historian, who
first brought it to light, finding a great probability, that the British
Extraction was chiefly Greekish, or so little distant, that it had great
Relishes thereof; and withal, being taken with the same vanity, that some
Writers of those times, and long before, did affect, to derive their Original
from a Trojan-stock, did put this general truth into that particular shape,
which would not bear the observations of learned men. I could add the
consonancy of the Greek Language, to the words of vulgar use amongst us at this
day, seeming to be the Primitives; and some observations on the credible report
of an Altar, dedicated to Ulysses, the famous Grecian, as appeared by an
Inscription found in the North, with some things more; but this being none of
the most useful parts of an History, I will add with Cambden, That the Gauls
might be next in some places, and the Germans, with Tacitus, in others; and so
pass on to a Search, where they might first land; a question more hardly to be
resolved, and I doubt, at the best, can be but conjectured at.

The Places, in which it may be supposed the Planters first sat down: And of
the Fortunate Islands.
I Am moved to guess, that they who were in their Peregrination, might on their
Landing fix on the Isle of Man or Anglesey, or both: for these Reasons. The
Druids whose Name Druetes, a Grecian original, when this Island was first
discovered to the more known parts of the World, were seated principally in
these two, to Anglesey first, and not toward Scotland, a place of more
remoteness, and probably of more security (were that the only Reason of their
moving this way) as some have thought) the Southern Britains were still made, as
they gave way to the Conquerors, a thing frequent among Colonies, to retire to
their Original and Capital Seats, as being generally best fenced, and most
affected; and at this day the Welsh-men affirm themselves derived generally
from the ancient Britain Stock. The worthy Bishop of Saint Andrews in his
History of the Church of Scotland, tells us thus of the Isle of Man, and the
Northern Britains his Countrymen.

Cratilinth coming to the Crown, in the Year 277, made it one of his first
Works, to purge the Kingdom of Heathenish Superstition, and expulse the Druids,
a sort of Priests held in those days in great reputation. Their manner was to
Celebrate Sacrifices, and perform their other Rites in Groves, with Leaves and
Branches of Oak; and thence, says Pliny, they were called Druides, for (...)
in the Greek Language does signify an Oak. It is likewise testified of them;
that they were well learned in all natural Philosophy, Men of moral
Conversation; and for Religion not so grossly ignorant and superstitions, as
other Heathen Priests: for they taught, There was one only God, and that it was
not lawful to present Him in an Image. I suppose this must be meant of a
supreme God, for they held that the Souls of Men did not perish with the
Bodies; and that, after death, Men were rewarded according to the life they led
on Earth. They lived likewise in great respect with all sorts of People, and
ruled their affairs very politickly; for being governed by a President, who
kept his Residence in the Isle of Man (which then was under the Dominion of the
Scots) they did once every Year meet in that Place, to take Counsel together,
for the Ordering of Affairs: and carried matters with such Discretion, that
Cratilinth found it difficult enough to expulse them, because of the favor
they had among the People. In this Isle King Cratilinth (after their Expulsion)
Erected a stately Church to the Honor of our Savior, which he adorned with
all necessary Ornaments, and called Sodoreuse fanum, that is, the Temple of our
Savior; hence it is that the Bishops of the Isles are styled Sodoreuses
Episcopi: for so long as that Isle remained in the Possession of the Scots, the
Bishops of Isles made that Church their Cathedral.

So that I conclude, The Druids, who had superintendency over the Southern
Britains, resided metropolitically in Anglesey; and in the Isle of Man, those
who governed Scotland, upon some Division at first; or else (upon the blow
given those by the Romans, and their Jurisdiction confined to the North) they
removed their Seat to the Isle of Man, one of the Places of their Original
receipt being not Conquered. Caesar speaking of two kinds of People, here in
the Southern Parts, to him only Discovered, declares the more Novel to have
lived near the Gallique Coasts, and the more ancient upon the Western: Tacitus
to whom was more known of the North, and would have a third sort Landed from
the the Germans, as was said before, did in the two first much agree with
Caesar, and among his Conjectures, supposes that by the more swarthy
Complexions of the Silures, and their Curled Hairs, some might come thither
from Spain. There is to this day in those Parts a Tradition, Mon mam Cumri, Man
is the Mother of the Cumeri or Welshmen: this is interpreted by them, who
perhaps never thought of any other Reason, to the plenty of Corn or other
Provisions in the Island of Anglesey, in respect of other Parts of their
Country, but those that are acquainted with it, and the rest also know, the
assistance that comes to this purpose is not of so considerable notice. Now it
is of frequent Observation that the Cumeri were the most ancient Northern
People, that Inhabited about Britain and Gallia. The two fortunate Islands so
much talked of, and celebrated by the ancient Poets, have been for many Ages
last past, utterly lost, and not to be discovered. Among many supposals, let us
add some. They were two, and so are these of the Man's: they went both by one
general Name, so did these; the one was called the bigger, the other the lesser
Mona; one the nearer, the other the more remote. The ancient Philosophers and
Poets were great Celebraters of viertue, and thereupon for encouragement to
Men, did affirm there was a Place of Pleasure or Rest, whereto after life they
were carried, who had lived Regularly, and that Place was sometimes called the
Elizian-Fields, as at other the Fortunate Islands; they did further fancy, that
though there were other delights, yet above all the pleasure of converse with
the just, and a relaxation from care, was most valuable. They might therefore
conceit the better of these Islands above other Places, because of the strict
life of the Druids, a Religious People here dwelling, sequestered from the Cares
of the World, and doubtless of a great Name for Virtue, at their first sitting
down, especially (for besides what was observed by the bishop) Caesar tells us,
they became Judges of all Controversies in Britain and Gallia, over which at
last their Jurisdiction did extend. Their Name imports a Solitary Place, as
Monastical among the Religious has the like signification from the Greek
Language. The two fortunate Islands were, in the Judgment of the best Writers,
generally, by the Report of a noted N. C.
Mythologist, seated upon the Western Coast of Britain: they were in the
Atlantic Ocean by common consent, and these are there also; for in ancient
time that Tract of Sea lying beyond the Coast of Africa and Europe to the West,
was called from the Mountain Atlas, (probably enough) the Atlantic Seas, the
Streights, thereby being the outlet only to the Grecian and Roman Countries,
who successibely Lorded it over this part of the World. The Elizian-Fields or
Fortunate Islands, were said to be full of Shades: the Druids here nourished
many Woods, to perform their Superstitious Rites in. Anglesey was called Ynis
Dowill, a dark or shadowy Island, from the Wood there growing. The Greek and
Latin Poets anciently reckoned, the North their right hand, and the South
their left, from their way of looking to the West, toward the Elyzian Field.
More might be said to this intent, which I purposely omit: I will add in the
close, the Opinion of some few of Note. Homer thought they were on the Coasts
of Britain. Isacius Tzetzes, a Greek Author of account in Cambden's opinion,
reports they were with the Britains. And the Story of Plutarch, in the Life of
Sertorius I will repeat; which methinks is not distant to what we are speaking
of. Sertorius, upon his retreat out of Spain, was forced to take the Sea, and
being there in little quiet also, not allowed to land peaceably on the Spanish
or African Coasts, (being then in the Mediterranean;) at last he passes the
Streights of Gibraltar, turning on the right hand toward the Spanish Shore
again, whereto came diverse Sailers from the Fortunate Islands, seated not far
one from another, about 10000 Furlongs from the Coast of Africa. Sertorius
hearing hereof, was so taken with a Resolution of going to live there, retired
from the Care of the Wars, that, had not the Pirates of Gilicia forsaken him,
upon hearing these his Determinations, it is likely he had attempted to go. The
Islands of the Moni are much about the same distance. But if these be not they,
I will give over my enquiry with Heylin; who having searched diligently for
them, in all remarkable places of the World, seems at last to leave his hopes
in the plain Field, as out of Expectation to find out where they are: for I
think not of any such probable two, on our Coasts, where it was in ancient time
strongly reported they were.

Of the Government, Laws and Customs of the Britains.
SOmewhat shall be said of the Government, Laws, and Customs of the British
People. It is to be understood, they had a double subjection: the one to the
Druids, their Priests, which was Universal over the whole Island, and a great
part of Gallia; the other to the Civil Magistracy, which was divided into many
Nations; in Kent alone, being four petty Kingdoms: so that we may conclude,
those had the greatest Power and Interest. The Druids of the South, had each
over them a Primate, as also those of the North; if they had not all one at
first, they were chosen by Election, and sometimes diverse would stand in
Competition for the Place, and Wars would thereon ensue. Their Constitution,
as Caesar says, was reported to have had its Original in Britain, and not
unlikely, as we mentioned before in the Isles of Man, their ancient Seats. They
had in the greatest esteem the god Mercury, and much for this Reason, because
he was supposed to have had the care of Travelers, another Argument of their
Peregrination. After him, they had in reverence the other gods, with the same
conceits of their Power, as had the Grecian Nation. They wrote in Greek
Characters, and in the Grecian Language; but their writing was not much: for as
to their Doctrine, they taught the mysteries thereof to their own Order only,
and never committed it to any other Record, than that of their own memories.
The People, which we call the Laity, had general Notions taught them, of what
they were to believe: Such as were of most considerable note were these, That
the Souls of Men are immortal, and that rewards and punishments attend them
after Death, according as they observed the Druids, in their Tenants,
concerning Religion and Virtue. Sacrifices they had frequently, the common
great advantages of the ancient Priests, and to cover the Art from first sight,
it is not unlikely they therefore taught also, that the Sacrifice of Men was
pleasing to the gods: for seeing no other benefit might probably arise thereby
to themselves, they might seem to intimate, the gods were well pleased with the
very smell of an Oblation; and thereupon they did offer promiscuously, Enemies,
Malefactors, and innocent Natives, whereby they had advantage over the People
also, by a Power to determine who were the most fitting for such a purpose, and
consequently an Universal awe over them. They made especial use of Misseltoe
chiefly, that growing on an Oak, in their superstition cutting it down, with a
Golden Bill, in very devout manner. They had in great use the Art. Magic, a
peculiar attendant on the Doctrine of ignorance. A Hare, Hen, and Goose, they
forbad to eat, though for pleasure they had many. The common People were kept
in ignorance, which might serve to them as a Mother of Devotion. The Druids
were exempt from Taxes and the Wars, by which immunities, and other
advantages, many did covet to be of their Order. It is thought that the
Christian Religion, when first brought hither, was the easilier admitted, upon
the apparent congruity to some of their Principles. They did excommunicate
Offenders much in the same manner as it is done with us, excluding them the
benefit of Law, all Men shunning their Society, and they had several other ways
to punish Contemners of their Religion, and considerable rewards to the
obedient. The Laity being divided into a great number of petty Governments, had
thereupon, doubtless, various Laws and Customs, whereof we will mention a few,
but cannot sort them to the particular Nations. Some of their Money was in
Brass, other in Iron-Rings; one especial sort, had the Figure of a Shield
emboss't, and on that side a certain Image, the Device was within. It is said,
that in no other part of the World, but in some places belonging to Greece,
this last sort of Coin was used, another Argument of their Greekish extraction.
For War they had Chariots, or Wagons, or both; armed some with Iron, in the
fashion of Sithes at the Axle-Tree, to do the more mischief in their motion. In
some places the principal Person guided the Horse, in others they had a
Chariottier. In this last fashion the Person of Condition would alight as he
saw occasion, and fight on foot, retiring to the Chariot when he thought
convenient. They were made of that fashion, and the Horses so trained, that
they would run very speedily, stay, and turn dexterously, even upon the
declivity of a Hill. Some sought with small Shields, and short Pikes, with a
Bell at the end thereof, to make a noise, whereby the Enemy might be daunted.
They went for the most part naked, having a Sword girt to their Wastes by an
Iron Chain, and some had Collars with Links of Iron about their Necks for
Ornament. They did wear the Hair of their Heads and upper Lips long, and shaved
it off in all other parts. Some covered that which modesty does direct us,
others not. Their Bodies were painted with the shapes of Birds, and Beasts,
etc. They lived upon Flesh, Milk, and Roots, and some Corn; but of this last
they planted not much. Few Towns there were, and but ill built Houses: those
which they had were in places full of neighboring Trees, and fenced with Wood
cut down, and other materials in a gross manner, wherein they lodged Themselves
and their Cattle. These things one would think do denote a barbarous People,
and, as some have said, an ignorant Nation; and among our Historians, there are
such, who make formal Apologies for it. Though I cannot altogether excuse it,
yet, in my Opinion, such seeming Barbarisms were for the most part practiced on
choice, and for good Reasons. For it was with them then, as it is now with
others, and like enough, will be always (when the Condition of a Country, is,
or shall be, as theirs was) in no better nor civiller a plight, as they call
it, though it may be somewhat various. It is consented to, on all hands
generally, that at the same time the Druids, who then spread over the whole
Nation, were great Philosophers, learned and civil in their Conversation; and
no doubt, diverse of the Laity also, though not very many, the Druid-Interest
forbidding it. The Country being divided into many petty Nations, of
Consequence it must fall out, that they had frequent Wars, the Confines being
small: then to make common Plantations of Corn, and to expect to have a
principal maintenance out of it, unless at some special times and places,
would, in effect, be to subdue themselves, for thereby they would be subject to
the inroads of their Enemies, and, on a destruction thereof, to a Famine. As to
their going naked, necessity compelled many of them, for if they kept many
Sheep, out of which Men are usually clothed in cold Countries, especially of
our Clime, such kind of Cattle are neither capable to be sent readily out of
the way from forragers, not protected from Beasts of Prey, as Wolves, and Foxes
in great store, probably among the many Woods then in this Island. So then they
were driven to live on wild Beasts, and what might be had from Kine, and the
natural productions of the Earth, which were in less degree subject to such
Inconveniences, and the Hides were of great advantage for Coverings, and
several other purposes. As to their dwelling Places, how vain would it be for
any Man to spend a considerable part of his substance in building a House,
which would be immediately subject to prostitution, by irruptions of an Enemy,
and Wood is so far from being an Argument of a barbarous People, in the sense
it is usually received, that we may more truly say, it is a considerable and
judicious protection for Men and Cattle in a small Territory, a little Country,
being apt to be overrun and spoiled in few days, where all things generally
are uncovered, and with small defense: But to come to the History.

Caesar' s Design to invade Britany.
JVlius Caesar abounding in the thoughts of Conquest and Glory, after he had
made considerable achievements in Gallia and Germany, about fifty years before
the account used in England, fifty four some have said, takes upon him a
resolution to Invade the Britains: moved to it upon expectation of Riches, by
the plunder of a large and unexhausted Country (Money being necessary in great
Undertakings, and Caesar had then in his mind such as were of no small
dimension.) The Pearls of this Country were in great report in those days
amongst the Romans, whether by mistake, or that there are none here in the
latter Ages, equalling the former, is uncertain. But he gave out, that the
Britains, in the Wars of Gallia, had assisted the Galls, and made that the
pretense of his Invasion. The notice of Caesar's intentions, being come to the
Britains, several of their States sent Ambassadors to him, with tender of
submission to the Roman Authority, and offer Hostages for their security; to
whom Caesar was courteous, commending their resolutions, and exhorted them to
constancy therein, but would not desist his former designs, this
notwithstanding, but sent them away with one Comius, whom he had made Prince of
the Atrebatij, a Person of Judgment and Fidelity, with directions to him, to
manage an Interest amongst the States of Britain, according to certain
Instructions, he had received from Caesar. This did not please the Britains: so
when they came to Land, it was resolved to lay him in Irons, and effected
accordingly, with an unanimous resolution, contriving to defend themselves like
Men, against the power of those, whose greediness and ambition, by submitting,
they could not satisfy. Caesar could not get knowledge, to any satisfaction,
of the People, their ways of Fight, their Laws, Ports or Forces, only some
superficial Information he had, by certain Merchants; thereupon he sends Caius
Volusenus in a Vessel, to make some discovery, who returned, after five days
disquisition, and gave Caesar an account of what he had taken notice of; which
could not be considerable, sithence he did not dare to land, because of the
Enemy on the Coast prepared to receive him. What with Caesar's Wars on the
Continent that Summer, which he had but newly passed over, and what with his
preparing for an Invasion by Sea, which must the rather spend him the more
time, because it was out of his customary way of fighting, it fell out, that he
could not be ready to Ship his Men, till near Winter, for this very reason,
somewhat the more inconvenient to him, because he was to pass an Army of
Southern Men, into a more Northern Climate, as also, because of his return by
Sea, for so he must, in respect of Winter Provision, which was not to be had,
but in Gallia; the Seas being at the following Season, more rough and
unconstant, which an Army is less able to endure, because they are in danger of
being dispersed, the confusion of many Naval designs of this nature: but
notwithstanding, Caesar trusting to his wonted fortune, was resolved to
undertake it, and satisfies himself, with an apprehension, that, if he could
but make a discovery, it might recompense his journey, by the advantage he
might gain in his preparations, for another Summers expedition.

His Preparations, Voyage, and Landing.
THe Galls and Germans, being but newly quieted, and apt on all occasions,
especially the first, to express their distaste of that subjection, with which,
as yet they had not well been acquainted, he thereupon left a great party in
Gallia, where he had most suspicion, and in those places, whither he intended,
at his return to arrive, and strongly fortified the Port, called then Iccius,
not far from the now Callis, if not the same, from whence he did intend to
set sail, as he had designed likewise to come back to it. Two Legions of Foot,
which might each contain about 5000 (for they were somewhat uncertain in their
number) he resolved to transport, and certain Horse, which if they were the
proportion, that was usually with two Legions, might be about a 1000. The Foot
lay at the Port before mentioned, with whom Caesar was in Person, and eighty
Ships of burden to carry them over, 18 more he intended for the Horse, which
together, with that lesser Fleet, were some few Leagues distant, and by reason
of contrary winds, could not come up to him, before he was in his passage to
the Island, with the other part of the Navy. He had also with him several
Galleys, as we may call them, or Ships of War, to what number is not known.

During his expectation of the Horse, the Wind blowed fair, which opportunity,
not willing to lose, he thereupon ships his Foot, and weighing Anchor, sets
sail somewhat passed midnight, sending to the Horse commands to do the like,
and follow, and comes himself with the best Sailors, within view of the Island,
somewhat before Noon the next Day. The Coast where he arrived, was unfit to
Land his Men on, the Rocks hanging over the Sea, and consequently of more
advantage to the Defenders, than Assaylors, the rather, because the Britains
might make great use of their missive Weapons, so he casts Anchor, and stays
till the rest of his Fleet, which set sail with him, came up, which was two or
three hours after Noon; when they were near, he sends for his principal
Officers aboard him, and acquaints them with what Volusenus had discovered,
telling them further his Intentions to try for a more favorable Shore, and
gives them particular Instructions what they should do, inculcating to them
above all, the necessity of being exact in their duties on that unstable
Element of the Sea. The Wind and Tide serving Him, he weighs Anchor, and sets
Sail again, and within a small time, comes to a place not far distant, where
was a plain and open Shore, proper to land his Men on, about Deal in Kent, as
is supposed by several Circumstances.

The Britains, who attended Caesar at his Anchor, observing his motion, send
their Horse and Chariots, being Lighter of march, before hand, and follow with
their Infantry. Caesar had the usual difficulties to encounter with at his
landing, especially the disorder of his Men dispersed in several Ships, which
did draw much Water and so of greater inconvenience. At first he made his
attempt without any curious regard to the manner of doing it, not expecting any
considerable resistance from naked Men, but not long after finding it
otherways, and being of quick apprehension, he ordered diverse of those Ships,
which were not of burden to be manned with missive Weapons, and placed on the
Flanks of the Enemy, others that did draw less Water to pass up and down, and
relieve such, as at their Landing were oppressed; which contrivance was of
excellent benefit to him.

The Britains on the other side, notwithstanding this, maintained the Battle
with great courage and resolution, insomuch, that the Romans began to fail of
their usual forwardness. This was observed by Caesar Himself, who did that day
perform all the parts of an able General, making singular benefit of his small
shot, and was taken notice of also by many others, and particularly by a Roman
Ensign, who carried the Eagle of the tenth Legion, he seeing the report of
their peculiar Fame at stake, leaps out of his Ship, with the Eagle in his
hand, and first praying to the gods, that what he was undertaking, might prove
happy to the Legion, calls upon the daunted and lingering Soldiers to follow
him, unless they did intend to betray their Eagle to the Enemy; for his own
part, he was resolved to do his duty to his Country, and his General. Upon
this, the Legion provoked, upon the apprehensions of dishonor in the loss
thereof, began one after another to follow him, and the Fight being again
renewed, which was at a stay before; when the Romans came at last to firm
ground, it fell out, as might be feared, that the valiant, but unarmed
Britains, did retreat: their natural Skins (in a close Fight especially) being
an unfitting match to the Roman, heavy Corslets, at such time chiefly, as they
were to encounter the most choice and victorious Soldiers, under the most able
General, one of them, that ever the World had; I call it rather a Retreat, than
Flight, though there were great disorder in it, because no chase was made, for
want of Horse, who were delayed in their passage, by several accidents.

The Britains crave Peace; but on a Disaster to the Roman Fleet, take New
Councils.
UPon this apparent Discovery of the inequality in the match, betwixt the
Roman, and Britain Arms, and Discipline, these, with a general consent, resolve
to make their best terms, and submit, and to that purpose send back Comius of
Arras, before mentioned, with some of their own Country, as Ambassadors,
thinking by the one to moderate Caesar's anger, and by the other, in
consequence to procure a Peace. At their coming, they excuse their resisting
Him, imputing it chiefly to the humor of the multitude; and tender Hostages,
as a security of their Obedience for the future. Caesar having first
expostulated with them the breach of their promise, not to oppose him at his
Landing, accepts of their Propositions, and accordingly, their Forces sever,
many going home, to their own Countries. Pursuant thereunto also, several
Hostages from the Neighbor States, are brought into the Camp, the rest being
somewhat further off daily coming, and others expected, when on a sudden, an
accident fell out, which gave the Britains new and hopeful resolutions.

As it was observed before, the Horse, by reason of contrary Winds, could not
come up to Port Iccius, when Caesar loosed Anchor, being some miles of, and not
using a speedy course to Embarque, and take opportunity of the same Wind, that
he did, by delay, the Gale became weaker, and they had spent four days, before
they were within view of the Romans in Britain, and then on a sudden arose a
violent storm, which dispersed them; some being forced immediately to return to
the Gallique Coasts, others endeavoring to Anchor on the British, proving
very leaky, were compelled to weigh again, and endeavor in the Night, for the
Shore, from whence they came; a time very dangerous then, especially for
Navigation. It fell out likewise, that those Ships which were with Caesar, part
whereof were drawn on the Shore, were extremely broken with the Tempest, and
some made utterly unserviceable. These things were to the Romans an occasion of
sad thoughts, but to the Britains of comfortable expectation; for it was
apprehended on all hands, that if they should Winter in Gallia, the Ships were
wanting that should transport them, and if in Britain, the Corn was not to be
had, which might sufficiently maintain them, and the Horse, which would be very
convenient, and almost necessary, to the providing any considerable stores, was
absent. To this, the Britains had an opinion, that the Romans were fewer in
number, than in truth they were, collecting it from the smallness of their
Camp, which Caesar had contracted, for the ease of his Soldiers to less then
the usual bounds, because he had not so many Carriages, as Armies, did commonly
march with. The Roman General on the one hand, having these things in his mind,
and suspecting what the Britains might do upon this grand alteration,
especially from the delay, was made, in sending in the complete number of
Hostages, takes great care to provide against the danger, and thereupon causes
Corn to be daily brought in, from the Neighboring Fields, where some was
standing, and sends for materials out of Gallia, to repair his Ships, which (by
his great industry, and the laborious toil of his Soldiers, he brought to
this effect, that all, but twelve, were made able to abide the Sea. On the
other hand, the Britains resolve to renew the War upon this accident, but
judiciously determine not to sight the Romans in a set Battle, the experience
of which they had had before, but to piece the Foxes Tail to the Lions Skin,
and draw the War out till Winter, to disturb them as they did see occasion,
in their forraging, at some time or another, hoping to have a favorable
opportunity to ruin them, suppress't they thought almost to their hand, by the
want of necessaries, concluding, that if they could destroy these, it would be
a great discouragement to all others, to make any further such attempt upon
them for the future: and hereupon they that were in Caesar's Camp of the
Britains, withdrew themselves by degrees out of it.

Not long after, the Roman Foot having reapt all the Corn of a Field, (except a
small piece, close by certain Wood sides) the Britains guest they would come to
it the next day; Whereupon, in the dead of the night before, they convey a
great part of their Forces into the Covert, expecting the Enemy would appear
and forage, which accordingly fell out, as was imagined, for the seventh
Legion was sent to cut it, and carry it away, and when they came; laying down
their Arms, fell hard to their Harvest, suspecting not in the least the
Ambuscado. The Britains having fortune in their lap, arise, and fall with great
resolution on them, in this their disorder, and killing many, drove the rest
into a heap, whom (having snatched up their Weapons in have, and not had time
to place themselves regularly, but by chance) the Britains oppressed sorely
with their Chariots and Darts. Caesar had notice of this by accident, for those
Cohorts which were upon the Guard, before the Camp, taking notice of a great
dust arising that way, which the Legion had marched, gave intelligence thereof
to Caesar, who immediately apprehending the danger, commanded those to go along
with him, some to succeed them in the Guard, and other Forces to follow after.
Hastening to the Field, when he came, he found the Legion in great perplexity,
and sorely laid to, but by his presence and recruits, he did much revive them,
and stay the British fury, yet on the one hand, he thought good to stand still
for some time, without provoking the Enemy, supposing this not a proper season,
his Men having a terror on them, upon the late misfortune, and they would not
attempt on him, suspecting greater Forces in the rear: So at last both
withdrew, Caesar to his Camp, and the other up into the Country.

The Britains attempt Caesar before his Camp, with ill success, and Caesar' s
return.
THe Britains being somewhat discouraged in their late thoughts of protracting
the War, by the expedition and activeness of the Roman General, in the repair
of his Ships, and not much hoping for such another advantage, by the Division
of the Enemies Forces, they design, while their late success was fresh in
memory, to give one manly attempt more, for the recovery of their liberty,
notwithstanding the great disadvantage on them, of Arms, Discipline and Union,
in those they were to sight with. They had this other encouragement, that
Caesar could not follow his Chase far, for want of Horse, if they should loose
the day, and being Victors, as they spread it up and down they had been, in the
last Skirmish, besides the booty they might gain, and a fair expectation of
delivering their Country; at this time they were not without confidence of
frustrating future attempts, by the terror such a fortune would bring on the
Romans; to this may be added, that confederated Forces, are too apt to dissolve
on casual contingencies, which the late smiles of fortune had kept together and
increast. Some few days they were on both sides kept from action, by
tempestuous weather, but this being blown over, they draw down a considerable
force of Horse and foot toward the Roman Camp. Caesar receives them with his
Army, in good order before it, and without much time spent, puts them to
flight, chasing them with about thirty Horse, which Comins had brought thither,
upon his Embassy, before Caesar's landing; some slaughter was made, and in the
close, some Towns were fired that night by the Romans; after which they return
to their Camp again. This attempt succeeding so ill, the Britains again resolve
to make conditions, and to that purpose, send Ambassadors to treat of Peace;
the Terms are agreed on, and amongst the rest, that Hostages should be sent,
for the security thereof, after Caesar into Gallia, whether he had now thoughts
to return, but with no other intent in him, then to come back the next
seasonable time into the Island, into whose weakness, by this his first voyage,
he had too deep an insight, and of which, they were not long after sensible.

The Winter drawing on, for September was begun, Caesar makes haste back,
suspecting the danger of these Seas in such time, to his crazie and shattered
Fleet, and taking the opportunity of a fair Wind, weighs Anchor, and sets sail,
somewhat after midnight; arriving safely with all but eleven Ships of burden,
upon the Continent, these not keeping their course, landed somewhat lower at
another Port, and the Soldiers being few in number, the Morini, on whose
Coasts they happened to be, falling on them, would have cut them to pieces, but
they were rescued by Caesar; and this was the first attempt made upon the
British Coasts, of which we have any sufficient Authority to ground an History
on.

Caesar' s second Voyage.
CAEsar having made his return into Gallia, according to his customary way,
passes into Italy for Rome, there to spend the Winter, in the management of his
Roman Interests, leaving behind him, to his principal Officers, command to
repair those Vessels, in which he returned, and to fit them according to
particular directions he had left of building new ones. He ordered a very great
number to be built; that they should be flat bottomed, and lower, in the nature
of Galleys, to the intent, they might use them with Oars, be fitter for
shipping, and landing his Men, and wider to carry over the more Soldiers, and
Provisions for an Army. This was with great diligence and industry, effected
according to their instructions, by the Legates, and other Officers left
behind. What was wanting on the Coasts of Gallia, they caused according to
direction, to be brought from Spain, insomuch that at Caesar's return, he found
about six hundred Vessels sitted for this purpose. Observing this, he commended
those who were diligent in their care and trust, and settling some disorders
that were arising in Gallia, upon the apprehension of his intended absence; He
prepares himself for his second Voyage.

Three Legions, and about two thousand Horse he left behind him, near the Port
Iccius, with Instructions to provide necessaries of War, and to secure his
return; five Legions he designs to take with him, and two thousand Horse, and
to carry over a large number out of the best Families of the Galls, which might
be to him in the nature of Hostages, cutting off a Prince of the greatest
authority and interest amongst them, who had withdrawn himself privily, after
he could not be excused by Caesar, from going along with him, on several
pretenses of occasion to stay. Being ready, not long after, it blew a fair
gale, whereupon he ships his Men, setting sail at the going down of the Sun,
with a gentle Wind, standing for the Coasts of Britany, but it left him about
midnight following; so the Tide prevailing by spring of day, he could perceive
they had held a course, which brought them much upon the left hand of that part
of the Island, where Caesar had the last year landed his Men, and at what place
again for his former good success, and the knowledge of the ground, he did
desire to arrive. The Tide turning, and befriending them again; with the
benefit of their Oars also, they came by noon the same day to the Coast
intended, and landed without any disturbance. The Britains having made a
retreat, upon the apprehension of his Forces, which they concluded were very
great, from the number of the Ships above 800 in all, many being added to carry
Provisions and some Officers, having diverse for their private use. Caesar, the
first thing he did upon land, appointed out a place for a Camp, and causes it
to be fortified, wherein he left the baggage, and a party of ten Cohorts, to
secure both that and the Fleet, which was at Anchor hard by, and leaving Q.
Atrius to command, he begins his march, to find out the Britains, having been
informed by certain Prisoners, which way they had made their retreat. When he
had marched about twelve miles, he found the Britains, with their Horse and
Chariots, to have made a stand at a River side, on a piece of ground of
advantage, in respect of the height. Caesar charges them, and they receive him
valiantly, but being overmatcht, and their apprehensions pressing on them, they
make a further retreat into the Woods, to a fortification strong by nature and
Art, according to the fashion of their own Country, and diverse Trees being cut
down and laid across; (I suppose at distances without the Camp;) The Roman
Order thereby was much impeaded in their approaches. The Britains made frequent
sallies in small parties, and did some mischief to Caesar's Army, but the
Soldiers of the seventh Legion raising a Mount and a Testudo, entered their
Fortress, and the Britains were constrained again to dislodge and fly, not
much loss being suffered on either side, in respect, the rather the day being
spent, and the Country unknown to him, he was unwilling to continue the Chase
far, but did desire to employ his Men in the fortifying another Camp for the
lodging of his Soldiers that night; an excellent piece of Discipline, whereby
to secure and refresh a wearied Army, and of great practice amongst, and
conducement to the Romans in all their Conquests.

A Storm does mischief to Caesar' s Fleet.
THe next day after, Caesar sent out three Parties of Horse and Foot to find
out the Britains, and take some spoils of the Country; but presently upon it,
news came to him from the Fleet, by certain Horsemen from Q. Atrius, that the
night before, almost every Ship had some mischief; diverse were broken to
pieces, and made utterly incapable of service, and most cast upon the Shore, by
the violence of a Tempest which had been raging the night before the Anchors
coming home, and the industry of the Seamen little availing. Upon this news,
Caesar sends for the Soldiers back again that were on their march, and returns
to the Fleet, where he sets himself diligently to work to repair it. He sends
to Labienus, whom he had left Commander in chief of his Forces in Gallia to
send him shipwrights, and to build him as many new Vessels as possibly he
could; and out of his own Army, he causes diverse to be drawn, and employed in
the reparing of his Vessels. In which business he spent about ten Days, not
resting in the Night, and with admirable industry, brought it to this effect,
that not above forty were utterly unserviceable and lost. Suspecting the like
accident might again happen in his absence, he causes them to be haled on shore
by the Camp side, and enclosed both with one strong Fortification; and then
leaving the same party which was there before for a guard, he returns with the
Forces he brought back to the place where he had lately beaten the Britains.

Cassibelan Elected General, attempts Caesar' s Forces several times.
IN the mean while, at a common Consultation the Britains discourse their
Condition, and the inconveniences arising to them by the diversity of
Councels, and thereupon with one consent Elect Cassibelanus Prince of the
Trinobantes for their Generalissimo; a Person of excellent conduct and valor,
hoping by the management of their affairs in such a hand to succeed the better.
His Royal Seat was at Verulam about a mile from the now St. Albanes, and his
Country large, extending it self on the one side to the River of Thames;
Cassibelanus being placed in this trust, raises very great forces, and with his
Horse and Chariots, falls upon the Enemies cavalry in their march, and gave
them, as Caesar acknowledges, a sharp charge, but was not able to maintain the
Fight long, against his well-disciplin'd, and well-experienc't Veterans: Being
compelled to make to places of advantage, upon Hills, and among Woods, the
Enemies following after them, of whom many were cut off in the pursuit, going
too far from their Eagles, and being too eager in the Chase. Cassibelanus, upon
the Romans retiring to encamp, returns, and lying upon the edge of the Woods,
resolves to observe whether any advantage might be taken on them by accident,
with whom he thought he had no equal match in a plain Field. It fell out
according to his expectation, for the Army of Caesar was generally disordered
in fortifying their Camp, there being a party only, not very considerable, on
the guard before it. Upon these he charges with great resolution, and such a
fury, that had not Caesar sent speedily two Cohorts for their rescue, it is not
unlikely most had been cut off; for Q. Laberius Durus, a Tribune was that day
killed, with many others. These two Cohorts were some small distance from each
other, and it should seem, by the report of Caesar in his Commentaries, that
the Guard was surrounded, and thereupon being over-laid and terrified with an
unusual kind of fight, they broke through the Enemy, and either retreated, or
plainly fled into the distance betwixt those two Cohorts before mentioned for
their security, but several more fresh supplies coming in; the Britains retire
themselves, either satisfied with what they had done, or that probably upon the
Alarm, they could not do much more.

The manner of this Fight was thus on Cassibelan's side: When he charged the
Horse, it was done in small parties with great distances, (the rather it may
be, because of their Chariots, which must have compass to turn in) if any had
the worst, they retreated, and sometimes in Policy did it without any other
cause, whom if a few of the Romans followed, they would descend out of their
Chariots, and fight the Horse on foot, which Caesar declares was not an equal
match on the Roman side; and when they charged the Foot, if there were reason,
they would retire in good Order, and avoid the Chase of the heavy armed
Legionaries; if any of their own Parties were overlaid or wearied, through
these spaces they sent fresh men. Whether this was their customary way of
fighting, or designed by Cassibelan to match this kind of Enemy, is uncertain,
but doubtless it was advantageous to the Britains; and had they had as good
defensive Weapons as the Romans, it is like enough they might have given a good
account of that Days work.

Cassibelan the next day after kept the Hills far from the Camp, and appeared
but little in Parties, in respect of what he had done before, until Noon; at
what time Caesar sent out three Legions, and all the Horse to forage with C.
Trebonius, a Legate, whom (encouraged by his former success) he charges very
resolutely; but the Romans receiving him with a great force, and preventing the
British policy, by pressing so hard upon them, that they could neither rally
those that were routed, nor relieve such as were hard laid to, at last they
were forced to fly, many of his Men being killed in the Battle and pursuit.

Cassibelan' s second thoughts.
CAssibelan, upon this, concluding with himself, that nothing of advantage
could be had upon the Romans in a close fight on equal ground, comes in the
next place to a resolution of attending Caesar in his march, with a small
number of his choice Forces, which accordingly he does, and taking with him
about four thousand Wagons. By the advantage he had in the knowledge of the
Country, he thought to secure himself the better from being forced to fight,
and to keep the Romans from doing much spoil in plundering and firing it;
Withal, he conceived he might starve them out at last, by causing all the
Cattle to be driven into the Woods, where they apprehended the Romans would
take their march; this was accordingly put in execution, not without hopes
also, as occasion served, to cut some of them off who did straggle, if they
could not light upon an opportunity of advantage on the whole body of the Roman
Army; a Counsel of good contrivement and success, for it fell out after, that
diverse who were spread up and down upon hope of plunder were killed, which
occasioned the Romans to march close, putting them to some streights for
provision, and prevented thereby great mischief to the Towns. Caesar being in
his march for the Country of the Trinobantes, intending to pass over the River
Thames, at a place fordable, but one thereabouts being known (about Oatlands
supposed) by the Captives and Runagates, he understood that the Enemy lay with
a good force on the other side, and that the Foard was knocked full of Piles of
Wood, sharpened at the upper end, and were all under Water out of sight, to the
intent they might annoy, and disorder the Romans in passing the River, being
ignorant thereof, and so set upon them at landing in their confusion; which
being discovered, did prevent the hoped for success of Cassibilan's design; for
Caesar passed over with the greater care and expedition, readily provided to
receive the Britains, sending the Horse first, and directing the Legions to
follow close after them, in whom he had greater confidence against this Enemy,
then in the Cavalry, these being frequently in great danger, as Caesar
confesses in their marches, when they were far from the Legions upon any
occasion. The Roman Foot having marched through the Water, which was up to
their shoulders, and being come to the Bank-side, gave a charge upon the
Britains, who not being able to sustain it, gave way, after some contest, and
at last fled. Caesar from hence takes his march directly to Verulam, not far
from the now St. Albanes, intending to force it, having understood it was a
Town of some importance, the principal Seat of Cassibelan, and full of Cattle
driven in thither, upon apprehension of the Roman Army; this he assaults, and
possesses himself of it, the People hastening out, not being able to resist
him, many of whom were killed in the flight.

All this while Cassibelan waited on Caesar, and out of the Woods, by paths
unknown to the Romans, did skirmish with them now and then, as he contrived or
found advantage, especially with the Horse, and such parties as were abroad for
forage and plunder, which did occasion more safety to the Britains, and in a
great part render Caesar's design of a speedy conquest, and to enrich himself
and his Soldiers with the spoil of the Country, fruitless. Whereupon on the
other hand the Roman General casts about to save his honor, and to shift off a
War like to be tedious and unprofitable. There was a faction against
Cassibelan, among the Trinobantes, who had sent Commissioners at this time in
the name of that State to Caesar, desiring that Mandubratius the Son of
Immanuentius, who was formerly Prince of their Country, but deposed and killed
by Cassibelan, might be restored to them, and withal offer to submit
themselves to the Roman Commonwealth, and to give Hostages for security
thereof. This opportunity Caesar gladly takes hold on, and accepts the terms,
requiring forty Hostages, and certain Corn for his Army, which by the policy of
the British General would not long have been out of want, had they not received
these Provisions, or gained the like by some other means, which would not have
been so easy and secure. Pursuant hereunto, Caesar sends Mandubratius, who had
formerly fled to him out of Gallia, for the security of his life, to this
people, according to their request; and his Conditions on the other hand, they
punctually and speedily observe: Caesar, desirous to improve the fortune and
contrivance, commanding his Soldiers to offer no violence to the Trinobantes,
which was punctually obeyed; the consequence whereof brought in five petty
States more to Caesar's submission.

The Britains submit, and Caesar leaves the Country.
CAssibelanus, this while expecting the success of a design, he had laid, to
fall upon the Roman Camp, in their security, by his Allies, where the shipping
was in Kent, though he found a decay of his strength, did forbear as yet to
treat: but that failing also, by a Sally made out of the Camp, the Romans
beating them of Kent, who were to execute it, and one of their chief Nobility
taken Prisoner, he comes at last to a Resolution of submitting; having
performed to his eternal glory all the parts of an able General, with
inconsiderable Forces, compared to those of his Enemy, hoping for a better
conjuncture of affairs hereafter, which Caesar more willingly accepts,
expecting little other good to be done that Summer, and now studying to return
to affairs of better expectation.

Cassibelan was a Prince of admirable conduct and valor, and inferior to
Caesar only in the quality of his Forces, he commanded, as has appeared by the
prudent courses he took at all times in managing the War, and the resolute
attempts he made, his ground being won from him by the Inch, and not without
puzling the brains of Caesar himself.

It is manifest here was made but an inconsiderable progress by Caesar, yet in
his Commentaries he declares he put down what tribute the Britains should pay,
as if he had made a complete Conquest, when Tacitus and other Roman Authors
conclude generally, he did little more than show, than the Country. We will
receive it in a favorable sense, that he meant, he had made such terms with
some part of them. Caesar intending for the Continent, and being fuller of
baggage at his return than entry, (having many Prisoners also) because he had
lost some of his Ships in the tempest, contrives to carry over his Soldiers at
twice, which accordingly he did, after some delay, in exspecting the return of
certain of the first, that were dispersed by contrary Winds: and landed them
safe in Gallia, in a good passage thither.

These were the enterprises of Caesar in this Island: he was of an excellent
contrivance, and bold in execution, wary, subtle and circumspect, in all his
martial affairs, attended almost constantly with success; but was not without
violencies of lust and ambition in the prosecuting his designs, not showing at
all times that due reverence to the Power above, or respect to mankind, as
became a Person of his endowments, from nature. After great contendings amongst
his Countrymen, not without a large effusion of blood and slaughter, being
arrived at a high pitch of Power and fame, in the glory of the Roman state the
Senate House, in the close of all his labors and toiles, when he expected to
have received some fruits of his sweat and pains, he was murdered at the foot
of his Sonin-Law, Pompey's Image, whom not long before he had ruined, with
above twenty wounds, his near relation Brutus, whom once he intended a great
share of his estate, being a principal contriver; and that Brutus the Son of
Servilia, supposed to be his base Child, giving him a mortal stab in the
bottom of his belly.

The State of Britain, during the time of Augustus, Tiberius and Caligula.
UPon the return of Caesar, as was before mentioned, to the Continent, the
civil Wars of Rome happened, the principal of their Commonwealth falling out
about dividing the plunder and riches, which in several Ages their Countrymen
had been acquiring; during which time, the Britains had respite from their
Invasions.

Upon the death of Caesar, Augustus after he had contended with M. Anthony, and
became Superior, not only to him, but all of a contrary faction in Rome, did
affect a quiet and peaceable life, supposing it not convenient, as he gave out,
to enlarge the Roman Empire, big enough for management already, and thereupon
the Britains had still the greater security. But the tribute set down by Julius
Caesar, being neglected to be paid, twice or thrice he intended an Invasion,
disdaining to be baffled by a Country of little note in those days; but being
on his march in Person, was diverted by revolts on some other remote borders of
his Dominions, and withal pacified by some British Ambassadors, who renewed
their conditions.

Tiberius who succeeded him, had the same resolutions, but was on different
reasons moved to it, choosing rather to attend his lust and cruelties at home,
than look abroad into foreign Countries.

Him followed Caligula in the supreme Authority, a Prince dissolute, and
abounding in vain conceits, as do witness his solemn message to the Senate of
Rome of the Conquest of Britain, when neither he or any of his Officers ever
set foot thereon. The color was the receiving of Adminius, a fugitive Britain,
the Son of Cunobeline, a Prince in this Island, who fled from his Fathers
angel, and submitted himself to Caligula. In his Reign nothing fell out worthy
to be reported in the British History, unless one should remember his frivolous
attempt upon the Ocean, at such time as all Men did generally presume, he
intended to imbarque for Britain; the Story whereof take from Suetonius in his
own words, thus translated; Last of all, as if he were undertaking a War,
marching with his Army on the Sea shore, and placing his Engines of battery, no
Man knowing or imagining what he was about to do, on a sudden commands them to
fill their Helmets and their Laps with Shells, calling them the Spoils of the
Ocean, of right a due to the Capitol and Palace; and as a Trophy of his
Victory, erects a most high Tower, out of which, as from a Pharus, Fires might
every night shine, to direct the course of Seamen; and having declared a
donative of a hundred donaries to every Man, as if he had exceeded all examples
of liberality, bids them depart now joyful, depart with plenty.

Under Claudius, by the conduct of A. Plautius.
ALI this while it appears not to the contrary, but that the Britains, who paid
their tribute, enjoyed, as well as the rest of their Countrymen, their Laws,
Customs, and Liberties. During this long intermission from disturbance, being
divided into many petty Kingdoms and Nations, they were frequently among
themselves at War in one place or another; one Interest prevailing sometimes,
and at another a different, and upon Victory, many of the adverse party either
were banished or fled of themselves. And so it fell out, that Glaudius
succeeding Caligula, one Berieus being a British fugitive, instigated him to
make an attempt on the Island, which Glaudius did well like of, and thereupon
sent Orders to A. Plautius, to transport those Soldiers, which he then
commanded in Gallia, into this Country; the Soldiery were very unwilling to
go, and trifled away their time in a kind of mutiny, insomuch that Caesar
hearing thereof, sent Narcissus his freed man to hasten their imbarquing, which
he accordingly did, but not without disdain in them, and a contempt of him, in
respect of his former condition, having been once a Slave.

The Army was divided into three bodies, intending thereby, that if they were
obstructed in one place, by the difficulty thereof, or the strength of the
Enemy, they might some of them land in another. Having put to Sea, they met
with cross Winds, and foul weather, which was the cause of great disturbance,
but a light darting toward the Island, from the place whence they put to Sea,
certain who had good wishes for the journey, interpreted it as a direction from
some God, that favored their enterprise, and so encouraged the Fleet, which
struggling with the violence of the Tempest, they at last landed on the British
Coasts.

The Britains not suspecting their arrival, because of the disorder they heard
was among the Roman Army in Gallia, which was before mentioned, did not oppose
their landing; moreover their civil contentions being lately sharp they could
not suddenly make such a confederacy, as might probably encounter with a good
expectation, the force of the Romans at peace, and marvelously strong in all
parts: So they retired into places that were woody and full of bogs, expecting,
as Dion says, to weary out the Romans, as Cassibelan their former General had
done heretofore with Julius Caesar. Plautius bestows great labor in finding
out their scattered Forces, and meets with some, to wit with Cataratacus, and
Togodumnus, the two Sons of Cunobeline lately dead, whom he easily dissipates,
and withal practices to head some of their factions against the other,
following the example of Julius Caesar; a thing not difficult, in a Country
divided into such a multitude of Nations, as Britany then was: And he finds one
proper for his purpose amongst the Boduni, or Dobuni, seated about Oxford and
Gloucester shires, whom he receives into his protection, having been before
subject to the Catuellani, a Nation about Buckingham, and the Country of
Hartford.

Leaving a Garrison among them, he marches to a River, intending a passage
over, to find out certain other Britains, who lay in security beyond it,
suspecting likewise nothing, because they thought the Romans could not get to
the other side, being the Water was deep, and that there was no Bridge: but
Plautius having Germans with him, who were accustomed to Swim through Rivers in
Arms, he sent them over first, who falling upon the Britains unexpectedly, did
them much mischief, especially by wounding their Horses that drew their
Chariots, which in their encountrings they did chiefly aim at; Flavius
Vespasian, and Sabinus also followed and killed many, not apprehensive thereof
till it was too late. But this notwithstanding, they rallied together, and by
the benefit of the night got into some order, and gave them Battle the next
day with great courage; which was for some time doubtful: But the few and naked
Britains, by their divisions less able, did yield to the heavy Armed, united,
and well disciplined Romans; though like enough they were equal, if not
superior to them in personal resolutions. Upon their flight, they pass over
the River of Thames, being acquainted with it better than the Romans, at a
place not far from that, where it delivers it self into the Sea; The Romans
followed, and the Germans again take the Water; others go over at a Bridge
somewhat higher; and encompassing the Britains, give them a great slaughter;
which was yet in some measure repaid by the Britains, who having kept their
Courage, though they lost the Battle, destroyed many of their Enemies,
following the Chase too far among the Bogs; but Togodumnus was slain.

But this is said, rather to inflame, than abate the Britain resolutions, for
they now having got some time to consider of their affairs, put themselves, as
is reported, seriously to work, to defend their Liberties in a more formidable
manner, than heretofore they had done; whereupon Plautius, according to his
Instructions, if any thing of danger should happen, as Dion delivers it,
endeavors the security of what he had got, and sends to Claudius for his
direction, in the danger approaching: He upon this news, puts the affairs he
had at Rome in order, and comes partly by Land, and a considerable way by Sea,
where he was in great danger by Tempests, to his Army, expecting him at the
River of Thames. Soon after he was with them, he passes the River, gives the
Britains Battle, and vanquisheth them, takes the City Camalodunum, supposed to
be the now Maldon in Essex, the then regal Seat of Cunobeline, others upon
their submission, he receives to mercy, disarms many, and leaves Plautius to
subdue more with these doubts also behind him to after Ages, whether he came
thither upon a vanity, affecting a Triumph, and other memories of honor, or
that in truth Plautius was hard laid to, and withal no less disputable,
whether so much as any considerable Battle was fought the Britains, like
enough, yielding upon the extraordinary preparations of the Romans, and good
terms offered them; for the confiscation of their goods was remitted.

Caesar staid here about sixteen days; what was done after his return, by
Plautius, is not much taken notice of; but I should think the Conquest of the
West about Cornwall, Somersetshire, and Devonshire, was now perfected, sithence
mention is made of his Inroads there toward the Isle of Wight; and I remember
not any particular other discourse of their yielding. For the spoils and
acquisitions here taken, upon his return to Rome, Claudius did him public
honor. And now is the first time that the Romans may have been said to have
taken any possession of this Country, which was about the Year of Grace 44, or
5.

P. Ostorius succeeds Plautius.
OStorius was the next that succeeded A. Plautius, for ought we know of any
account in authentic History to the contrary. At his coming, he found those
Britains who had conspired with the Romans, to the destruction of their
Country, or had made any League or submission to them, overrun by such who
were faithful to their Native Soil, and had not submitted, and much waste made
in their Fields, not being apprehensive of the Roman Forces, the rather,
because their General was not acquainted as yet with his business, and in this
colder Climate (Winter being begun) they suspected not much action. Ostorius
observing this, takes with him certain Cohorts which were most expedite and
ready for his purpose, and sets upon the Britains unexpectedly, routing those
that resist, and chasing them that fly.

It should seem, that the Romans, from the former War, had confederacy with, or
possession of so much Land, as lay from the River Sabrine and Anton, with
bounds from the Ocean to the Sea. These two Rivers do almost meet, and within
their compass Southward, lies a very wealthy and rich part of the Island. Now
it appears Ostorius (intending to secure what was gained, rather than to
enlarge the Roman Conquests) designed to Fortify, and close them, as it were
with Garrisons: The words of Tacitus are, Cinctosque castris Antonam and
Sabrinam fluvids cohibere parat, etc. The Sabrine is well known to be the River
Severn, but this Anton is much doubted of. Mr. Cambden would have it be the
River Nen, and that in Tacitus it is transcribed amiss, and should be Aufonam,
the Avon, upon a supposition that the Britains call all Rivers Avon; and so
Northampton should stand on the North of the Avon; but I doubt thereof, because
it seems not much probable, if that River had been ever used to have been
called the Avon, as I find not: and at this day Men, I fear, think not of such
a name; the word Northampton seeming rather to infer, that it is a Town on the
North side of a Ham, or Hame; the word Ham signifying generally a hook, from
Hamus, and applicable frequently to hooks of Water; so this Town standing on
the North side of a hook of water, may have thence its name, as Southampton
from a hook of Water in the South of the Town. I take it, that by Anton is
meant the River Trent, because it is a more considerable River, and fit to bear
a name of note, without particular distinction, as did that of Severne: it is
accounted the third River of England, and proper to join hands with the other,
for a boundary to a Roman Province; as it was after upon the division betwixt
the North and South. Nor is the name now utterly lost; for there is a River to
this day flowing into the Head thereof, called Derwent; there is a House of
considerable regard, called Trentum, and several Towns upon it ending in Anton,
and of a sound little differing: now Dwr, or Dour, in British signifies Water;
and so by vulgar contraction it might be Dwrent or Trent; that is, the Water of
Ent for Anton. These are but conjectures, and we may have mistaken, because the
evidence is not perspicuous; and I should not have made so many words hereof,
but for the former, and some reasons following; and that it agrees better
likewise with the History it self of the transactions upon these parts. But I
will pursue this no further, it being not very much material which it was.

The Iceni being within this Line, did doubtless suspect they might be
subjected at last after the Romans were at leisure to conquer them, as well as
they had the rest, who were within that compass: To which purpose, those Rivers
and Fortifications might be of great disadvantage, by hindering succors that
might come from the North to their Aid, being all equally concerned at the
Bondage now putting on them. Upon this, they Arm, and oppose their Fortifying,
exciting several of their Neighbors to join with them, and choose a place to
Incamp in. Behind there was a rude defense, and a strait passage was before it:
But Ostorius, with those Cohorts only, the benefit of his Allies, and his
Horse, fell in on their fortified side, which being made in have, and without
good direction, they easily plucked down. Here the Britains also fought
valiantly, but with ill success; and this their loss confirmed such to the
Roman Peace, which before stood doubtful.

From these, he brings his Army to the Cangi; I guess they were a People that
lived within the Line, and like enough were the Inhabitants betwixt the Iceni
and the Humber; these he plunders and wastes their Fields: It is likely they had
been assisting to the Iceni, or had made former Inroads upon the Roman
Quarters, and their Allies. Meeting no considerable opposition from them, he
turns upon the back of the Severne toward the Silures, a People that Inhabited
about South Wales, with whom he would fain have had a Peace, using all gentle
and cruel means to that purpose: but they, partly trusting to the conduct of
Caractacus, a Prince grown famous for his skill in martial affairs, and partly
to their own courage, refused it. In his Marches, there appeared against him no
considerable opposition; sometimes in small Parties the Britains would charge
the Body, or some Wing of his Army; where loss was on both sides, but chiefly
to the Britains.

He had not passed far, but the Brigantes, a People about Lancashire, and the
North of Trent took Arms; upon which, suspecting what Inconvenience might be,
in leaving an Enemy behind him in Arms, to disturb him, or his new Conquests,
he turns, and before they could become considerable, some few that were up,
being slain, the rest (upon his willingness to remit the Commotion) laid down
their Arms, and went to their Homes. Whereupon he prosecutes again his Journey
to the Silures, sending in the mean time to the Colony at Camalodunum to come
to him; whom he planted amongst the lately Conquered, to the intent to restrain
the attempts of those, and of such as were confederated with him, whom he had
reason notwithstanding to suspect.

Caractacus finding himself weak in the number of his Forces, compared to those
of the Romans; and knowing he was in his own Country, bounded on many sides by
the Sea, and Severne, and so consequently less apt to be relieved, if he should
be straightened: while time served, takes his March into North Wales, called then
the Country of the Ordovices, a Place less subject to these Inconveniences, in
respect it had more spacious Room of retreat or flight in adverse fortune; and
more capacious, as the Roman Conquests then were, of joining his Arms with
thosE of his Confederates, which accordingly afterward he effected. Ostorius
follows him, and when he overtook him, found him resolved, and prepared for
Battle; having to that purpose chosen a spacious piece of Ground of advantage.

The site of the Place was a declining Hill; upon the Skirts thereof were
Rocks, and unpassable places, with some open; at the bottom a River cross't it:
within this he drew his Army up in Battalia, stopping the Avennes on the sides
with Stones, in the nature of a Rampart, and drawing a Line before it of the
same Materials, and in like fashion, suspecting the Foard of the River. Before
his main Battle, he places a Body of choice Men, in this Order expecting the
Enemy. In the mean time, the chief Commanders of the several Nations passed up
and down amongst their Forces, setting before them the advantages of a Victory,
the miseries of a Battle lost; lessening the causes of fear, and increasing
those of hopes, beyond a just measure, to the intent their minds might be
fortified against the apprehension of danger; and with other Arts, that
Generals in the like cases use. And Caractacus especially passing with quick
motion up and down the Army, did excellently perform that part of a General;
being brief, but very eloquent in his Language, and of undaunted resolutions.
This he told them was the day, and this the Battle that must either recover or
determine their Liberties; calling frequently upon the names of their noble
Progenitors, who had driven Caesar their Dictator out of their Country; thereby
delivering them in their Lives, their Estates, Wives and Children, from the
violence of the Roman servitude. With these Speeches the Army was much
encouraged, and to testify and increase their resolutions, they make solemn
Vows and Oaths not to yield to wounds or Darts.

On the other side, the Roman General, by the report of Tacitus, was somewhat
apprehensive of the Site of the place; to him of great disadvantage, but the
Soldiery and chief Officers knowing the difficulty, was greatest in coming to
the naked Britains, and that inconsiderable, despised their rude
fortifications, and a River fordable in many places; and thereupon quicking the
General, they pass the River by his Command, approaching to the fortification:
at which place the Britains had the advantage in the Fight at a distance, for
the Romans throwing heavy Piles up the Hill, and those lighter down, it might
follow, that these had the greater slaughter, though their Bodies were
exceeding well armed, especially such doubtless, who made the first assault.
But the Romans making a Testudo, which was a defense of Tarquets, hanging over
one another, like Tiles on a House toward the Enemy; under the protection
thereof, they approacht the works, and plucked down the ill-built Wall, and so
entered. And now the Britains coming to fight hand to hand, having neither
Helmet nor Arms on their Bodies, were forced to retire, which they did upwards
to the top of the Hill; but the Romans following, had also the better there;
several flying away, and others being taken: amongst which, was the Wife and
Daughter of Caractacus, and his Brethren also yielded themselves: but
Caractacus himself escaped, and fled to Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes,
who afterward betrayed him unworthily to the Romans, who frequently made use
of such treacherous dealings: and Tacitus himself, though in advantageous
language to the Roman glory, does acknowledge by this kind of means, and by
exasperating and provoking one Prince against another, they had no small
advantage of these Nations. Whereas if they had been unanimous in their
Councels, had chosen the right way of managing this War, under a prudent
General; which was that which the famous Cassibelan intended, on his experience
with a flying Army; to which their way of living on Cattle was advantageous,
they might have rendered the Roman Conquests vain: But it fell out other ways,
as it might reasonably be expected from distracted Counsels; for trusting to
the nature of the ground, and the weaker fortifications, their great strength,
and undaunted courage came to nothing. Caractacus, with his Wife, Daughters and
Brothers were sent to Rome, together with many more, and several of the spoils
taken. And to the intent Claudius might have the greater glory himself, being
the Author and Maintainer of this War, as he had also been the Actor in it some
time, they were publicly brought before him, sitting in great State, his Wife
Agripina being formally placed by him; and contrivement on all hands to
magnify the Victory to please the Emperor.

Caractacus at his presentment before the Tribunal, with an undaunted mind in
this his Adversity, spoke to this effect. If I had carried my self with a
moderation in my Prosperity, equal to the Quality of my Birth and Fortune, I
might rather now have come to this City as a Friend than Captive; neither would
You have thought unworthily of a Peace made with one descended of ancient and
Royal blood, and commanding many Nations. My present Condition is to Me
unhappy, to You glorious. I had Horses, Men, Arms, and Wealth; no wonder if I
was unwilling to lose them: If You will command all things, it follows that all
must obey. If I had presently submitted, neither My Fortune, nor Your Glory had
been so Remarkable, and My Afflictions had quickly been Forgotten: but if You
show Me Mercy, I shall live to the Eternal Memory of Thy Clemency. Caesar being
taken with his behavior, pardons him, his Wife and Brothers, and causes their
Irons to be taken off: upon which they reverence the Emperor and Empress, with
many praises and grateful acknowledgments; Men commending the show, and
comparing it to what was seen, when Scipio showed Syphax and L. Paulus Perses
to the Roman People, did declare it an equal Spectacle: and to P. Ostorins the
Ornaments of a Triumph were directed.

The success of this Battle had a various event, for it begat carelessness in
the Romans, and in the Britains, as it did closer Counsels, so also a more
eager mind of Revenge; to which was added a report bruited up and down, said to
be spoken by the Roman General, that as in times past, the Sugambri were
expelled their Country, and carried into Gallia; so the very name of the
Silures should be utterly extinguish't. But being at last well aware of the
inequality of their defensive Arms, they resolve to try no more the event of a
set Battle, but to take those advantages, which they had of the knowledge of
their Country, and with their active motion, to seize on such opportunities, as
offered themselves from the Roman carelessness.

The first that happened was this, the Camp-master (being left behind, with a
few Cohorts to fortify certain places in the Country of the Silures) they fall
upon, and enclose them; and had not succor come from the neighboring Towns
and Garrisons, they had been all utterly cut off. The Camp-master
notwithstanding, and eight Centurions, (of the quality of Captains now with us)
together with the most forward Soldiers were slain. Not long after this, they
set upon the forragers, and together with them, put certain Horsemen, sent to
their rescue, to flight. Ostorius sends before hand several of his Foot,
lightly armed, to stay the pursuit, whom the Britains also beat and chase,
until the more heavy Armed came up: upon that remarkable disadvantage, the
Britains first stay, and then retreat with small loss, the rather, because the
Day was almost spent. This way of fighting succeeding well, they continue it,
making frequent Sallies out of the Woods and Bogs, (in those Days here being
very many) as opportunity served. Encouraged with booty and success, and
inflamed with rage to see their Native Soil a Prey to greedy and unjust
Usurpers: doing much mischief to their Enemies, confirming their friends, and
gaining fresh; which they procured by Spoils and Captives, frequently sent as
Presents.

The third considerable blow they gave the Romans, was upon two Cohorts; they
were Auxiliaries, and intercepted; forraging too greedily and carelessly by the
avarice of their Commanders; but paid dear for it. These occurences, together
with the care of the War, if they did not break the heart of Ostorius, yet they
did at least the more speedily end his Days: at which the Britains did please
themselves, as being a Commander not to be contemned.

A. Didius succeeds.
DIdius was sent by Caesar to supply his place, a Man aged, and careful of his
reputation. When he came, he understood of another disaster befell a Roman
Legion in the late Interval which Maulius Valens commanded: This was magnified
by the Britains, to the intent they might encourage their Friends, and
discountenance their Enemies. And Didius did not endeavor to silence the
report, supposing that which way so ever the chance fell, it might be to him of
advantage: If he conquered, the honor was the greater; if not, the disgrace
the less, and the danger also, under a Prince full of unconstant and violent
humors.

The Silures all this while making great depredations, where the Romans had an
Intrest; after the taking of Garactacus; Venutius, e Ingantum civitate, says
Tacitus, commanded in chief (unless it should be meant the Brigantes Country,
which I suspect I am at a loss to guess where his birth was; but I doubt that,
because there must be too great error in the transcribers, perhaps it might be
some petty State, not remembered at this day) having married Cartismandua, the
Q. of the Brigantes, the Traytoress to her Country, he continued, while
affection was betwixt them, obsequious to the Romans, she having allied her
self strictly with them: but unkindnesses arising, by reason of her want of
Faith to his Bed; at first they fell out betwixt themselves only; in which
contest, by craft she had subtly intercepted the Brother, and near relations
of Venutius, having assumed Velocatus his Armor-bearer to her embraces. Her
Husband being the more inflamed at this, gathers a considerable Force, and
intending to give her Battle, the Romans send her relief. The contest was
sharp and doubtful for a while, but at last did incline to Cartismandua.
Caesius Nasica commanding a Legion, at another time and place had also in
another fight somewhat the better: but Didius could do no more than just keep
what he had got, and that not without great disturbance.

Veranius succeeds: and him Paulinus Suetonius, with some few others.
VEranius came after him in equal command and success, and dyed immediately upon
it. And him Paulinus Suetonius succeeded. The Isle Mona, now called Anglesey,
was a Capital place amongst the Ordovices, as being the Seat of the Druids, and
stored with wealth, because many had fled thither with a great part of their
substance, as to a Place of security, being made an Island by an Arm of the
Sea, and not easily passable: he thereupon designs to Invade it; for his Foot,
he prepares flat bottomed Boats, in which he transported them, depending most
upon the stability of the Legionaries: the Horse followed, sometimes foarding
it, and sometimes swiming upon the Shore. The Britains had placed their
Battle, and were numerous; the Women, their Hair hanging loose, with
Firebrarnds in their Hands, passing up and down, and the Druids with their
Hands lifted up to Heaven, did pour forth many bitter execrations. At this
Novelty, the Roman Soldiery at first seemed to have had some Consternation,
but after a while, the Commander in Chief encouraging them, and they also
animating one another, with Exhortations to this purpose. That they should not
be daunted at the sight of Women, and Phanatick Men, they advanced and charged
the Britains: who not appointed with an equal advantage to resist them,
suddenly fled; of whom they threw diverse into certain Fires made hard by. This
done, he plants Garrisons amongst them, and to the intent, they might be less
subject to sudden Incursions, causes their Woods to be cut down.

As Suetonius was in the Island about settling his Conquests, there was News
brought to him of a revolt of the Province; the occasion that then offered it
self was this: Prasutagus, Prince of the Iceni dyed, leaving behind him great
store of wealth, and intending to secure his House, makes Caesar his heir, with
his two daughters: But this would not prevent the barbarous Lust and
Covetousness of the Romans, for they plundered his House, ravished his two
Daughters, whipped his Wife Boadicia: The chiefest of the Nobility were turned
out of their Inheritances, and the Royal Family accounted as Slaves. These
Villainies committed in a Licentious and Insolent manner, did move very much,
not only the Iceni, but their Neighbors the Trinobantes, as yet not having
lost their ancient courage, though they had been reduced into the form of a
Province, and thereupon they hold secret Counsels, with an intent to revenge
themselves, and if it were possible, to put off that Yoke, which the greedy
Romans had Imposed. Their hatred was most bitter against the Veterans at
Camalodunum, in the Colony there, (this Camalodunum was the now Maldon in
Essex, as is supposed) because they had thrust the ancient Inhabitants out of
their Houses and Inheritances, calling them Captives and Slaves.

There was a Temple built, and dedicated therein to Claudius: to the Solemn
Rites belonging thereunto, were diverse Priests appointed, who under Color of
Religion, did most greedily devour the Substance of the Neighboring Britains:
to their Aggravations was added an opportune Season, (to wit) the Roman General
was absent, with a considerable part of the Army, and the Town was but ill
fortified, by the carelessness of the Roman Officers. These accidents fell out a
little before the Attempt: the Image of Victory at Camalodunum fell down, and
turned backwards; Women did sing of Destruction, as if they had been Inspired;
Howling and Noises were heard in the Theater and Court; in the Arm of the Sea,
not far distant, was seen a strange Apparition, and upon the ebb, the Bodies
of dead Men on the Shore, which occasioned a great terror to the Romans, and
comfortable expectations to the Britains.

The Veterans, because Suetonius was far absent, sent to C. Decianus, a
Procurator for Aid, but he furnished them with only two hundred, and those ill
appointed: So there being not many Soldiers in the Town, the Chief of their
dependence was on the strength of their Temple. In this their distraction,
Boadicia Commander in Chief of the design, valiantly sets upon them, repaying
their cruelty in a just retribution of fury and revenge. Most of the Soldiery
were got into the Temple, where for two Days they continue, and then it was
forced with great Slaughter. The Britains in the current of their Success,
march out, and meet P. Cerealis, with the ninth Legion, and certain Horse
coming to the Succor of the Veterans, and fight them, routing all, and
destroying the Foot; but the Horse fly with Cerealis into the Camp, and there
secure themselves within the Fortifications. Catus a Procurator hearing of this
Slaughter, and his Avarice in the Province, which had caused him to be hated,
coming fresh into his mind, he thought it convenient for himself to fly, and
accordingly passed into Gallia, as a Place of greater safety for such a
hateful memory as he had.

Suetonius hearing of these things, hastens his return, and with an honorable
resolution, Marches through the Britain Quarters to London; a Place then famous
for Merchandise, and plenty of Provisions. Here he consults, whether it were
good for him to make that the Seat of War, or not: but considering among other
Reasons, his Number was not great, he resolved to march out, and could not be
persuaded to stay, by the Importunacy, Cries and Prayers of such, as either
Age, or Weakness of Sex, or a delight to the Place had urged to a stay;
resolving rather to adventure this Town, though of Concernment, then to put a
general hazard on the whole Roman Interest, whereupon he marches out, several
going with him, the rest staying behind, who without mercy were after by the
Enemy put to the Sword. The same fate fell upon Verulam, a Town favored by the
Romans, in their Liberties; in this heat of revenge, they destroyed in the
places before mentioned, and thereabouts, at the least seventy thousand Romans,
and their Confederates, giving no quarter, but executing them with various
deaths, giving a full draught of vengeance for their barbarous covetousness,
and savage Lust.

Suetonius having with him about ten thousand Men, which consisted of
Legionaries, Auxiliaries and Horse, and observing the Resolutions of the Enemy,
and that he could not long avoid a Battle, if they would force him to it, very
prudently takes in good time the advantage of an excellent place to his
purpose, and waits the coming of the Britains. In the entrance it was strait,
and encompassed with Woods, and he knew the Enemy was before, upon a Plain,
where they could lay no Embascodo. His Legionaries upon expectation of a
Battle, were close set together; on each Wing were the Horse, and the light
Armed with missive Weapons placed round about. The Britains transported with
their late success, and not enough aware of the disadvantage of a set-Battail,
though they had formerly, and their Ancestors sad experience of it, would
notwithstanding fight them upon these unequal terms; for too great joy, and a
passion of revenge, do equally, as well as fear, betray the Reason. Suetonius,
as was said, had chosen an excellent Place, and put his Men in admirable Order,
considering the quality of his own Soldiers, and those of the Britains; for
the Legionaries being close placed, incapable of being surrounded, could meet
with no more Enemies at one time, then they themselves were in number; and then
being well Armed, the other naked, without some extraordinary contingency,
these must yield: nor could a Victory be expected other ways to the Britains,
then either by some Stratagem, great Error by the Romans, or having a vast
number of Men, by such an opposition and slaughter of themselves, as can hardly
be imagined any Men can endure.

Boadicia did appear in the Head of a vast Army with great confidence, but
without good Discipline; such was their vanity also, that many of their Wives
were brought and placed in a kind of Coaches on the Skirts of the Battle, in
confidence to see the Slaughter of the Romans. The Queen her self passing up
and down with her Daughters in a Chariot, amongst the Forces, discoursing to
them to this purpose: that now she did not contend for a Kingdom and Wealth,
but as one of the meanest, to recover and defend their Liberties, to revenge
the barbarous Injuries committed upon her Body, and the chastity of her
Daughters. That the Roman Lust was grown to such a pitch, that they neither
spared Virgins nor Matrons; that the Gods who were Revengers of such horrible
Impieties were present; the Legion that durst give Battle was slain, the
others are either hid, or secure themselves in Fortifications: she puts them in
mind also of their number, and of the cause of the War, and concludes with an
Exhortation to die with honor, rather than live in Slavery: for her own part,
this was the Resolution of a Woman, the Men might live, if they pleased, in the
condition of Slaves.

On the other hand Suetonius uses all Art, and mixes Exhortations with his good
Conduct: he puts them in mind, that the Victory in most Battails, takes its
rise from a very few, and therefore they should not be daunted at the
apprehension of the smallness of their number, compared to that of the
Britains; their glory would be the greater in a Victory, by the mention of that
odds; but indeed many of the great number were Women; and above all, puts them
in mind, how well they were Armed, how naked the Britains were, and what their
success had been heretofore upon such advantage; desiring them first to throw
their Piles, which was a kind of heavy Dart, peculiar to the Romans, and
carried by the Legionaries; and then to follow their work, with their Swords
and their Pikes in their Shields, not regarding the Spoil, till the danger was
over, for where it falls, there it will be found by them after the Victory.

The Britains could not forbear, but must charge them rashly in this place of
disadvantage, which the Enemy received without motion, while they were spending
their missive Weapons; but immediately after they Sallied out, and coming to a
close Fight, easily made the naked People give way and fly. Their Battle was
surrounded with Wagons, so that they had great hinderance in the Flight,
whereby the Slaughter was encreast; the insolent and barbarous among the
Romans, spared neither Sex nor Age, Man nor Beast, destroying near eighty
thousand People. Boadicia, upon the fight hereof, with a courage mixed with the
sense of a Calamity already come, and to be expected, put a period to her days
by poison, and prevented the future Roman Cruelties.

And Paenius Posthumus, Camp-master of the second Legion, hearing of this
Victory, and being conscious to himself, he had not done well in refusing to
obey the Generals Order of being here at this Battle with that Legion, fell
upon his Sword and dyed.

After this, the Army kept the Field, and Nero, who was now Emperor, sent them
as a recruit, two thousand Legionary Soldiers out of Germany, eight Cohorts of
Auxiliaries, and one thousand Horse: The Nations which were either doubtful or
Enemies, were wasted with Fire and Sword, but nothing did more afflict this
distressed People than Famine, the Romans having secured all that they could
get, and burnt and destroyed the rest. Julius Classicianus was sent to supply
the Office of Cato, with whom Suctonius had some clashes, and that did somewhat
obstruct the Intendments of several Nations to submit to a Peace; for he gave
it out, that a new Governor was to be sent, who would treat the People with
more moderation, and sent word to Rome, that nothing could be expected of good
to the Roman affairs in Britain, until a new Lieutenant was sent, laying all
the fault of ill success on the frowardness of Suetonius, and all the good on
the Roman fortune; thereupon Polycletus a freed Man, was sent into Britain from
Rome, to have an Inspection into affairs; hereupon a great expectation from
Nero, that he would not only reconcile the discords among the Romans, but also
dispose the Britains to a Peace. He came over with a great Army, but it seemed
very ridiculous to the Britains that a Slave should command those that had made
so great a Conquest.

Not long after Suetonius was recalled, upon an accident of some loss at Sea
which he had sustained, and Petronius Turpulianus sent in his room, a Man of an
unactive spirit, and in whose time, all the care was to continue and increase
that peace, which Suetonius had left the Country in.

Him Trebellius Maximus succeeded, unexpert for War and unfit for action: it
fell out in the time of Peace, after the late great Slaughter, the Britains
having a deep sense of it, that the Romans in Britany being without an Enemy,
whereof they might be afraid, began to disagree one with another. Roscius
Caelius Lieutenant of the Twentyeth Legion, quarrelled with the Governor,
objecting to him his Covetousness, and the other to him his Faction, and by
these Accidents, the Legions grew mutinous, and siding with Roscius Caelius,
drove Trebellius out of the Country, and for some time the under Officers
governed the Army, wherein R. Caelius had the chiefest Interest, as being of
the boldest nature.

Vectius Bolanus was by Vitellius the Emperor sent some time after to succeed
him, a Man of whom it might be said, that he was not hated for any Crime, and
being withal good natured, he did procure to himself, rather Love than
Obedience.

Petilius Cerealis came next, a Man of a more warlike disposition, who gave a
considerable disturbance to the Nation of the Brigantes, and made some
Conquests upon them. Julius Frontinus did something of the like naure upon the
Silures, and him succeeded Agricola.

Agricola' s Undertakings and Conquests.
A Gricola past the Seas, and came into Britain in the midst of Summer; when he
was here, he found the Ordovices had lately cut almost wholly to pieces a party
quartered in their Country: Whereupon he summons in many of the Legionaries,
and some Auxiliaries scattered in their Quarters, through the whole Province,
(the Romans not before supposing there would be any Action that Summer, the
Winter drawing on) and with a considerable Body, marches into the Country of
the Ordovices: here he made great spoil, revenging the Cruelty lately done upon
the Romans, with an extraordinary and Brutish severity, to the greatest part of
the Nation, (which Tacitus his Son in Law does not positively deny: and I fear
me not upon the valiant (for they were unwilling to descend out of the Woods
and Fastnesses, into places where they were to Fight the Romans, upon so great
terms of disadvantage, as they had lately another fresh experiment) but upon
the Women, Children, and more tender People.

Paulinus, as was said before, was recalled out of Mona the Isle of Anglesey,
and it should seem, had not there so perfected his business, but that Agricola
thought it might be matter of profit to the Romans, and honor to himself, to
confirm the Conquest; whereupon he marches next way thither, and wanting Ships,
upon so sudden a Resolution, he contrives to Swim and Foard over that narrow
Water, which makes an Island of it, distinct from the other Country of Wales,
with his Auxiliaries accustomed to such Services. The People remembering their
former misery, and how that if they could not withstand the Romans, when they
had a less apprehension of them, they were not likely when they had enlarged
their Province; without disputing so much as their passage, Surrendered the
Island to the mercy of those, that they could not probably resist, with hopes
of success.

The Winter following, he contrives to secure what was gained, and among other
of his Resolutions, two he did take of especial benefit to the Roman Peace; the
one was in the Tributes and Exactions upon the Britains: he took care that
there should be an equality, and corrected all those petty Oppressions, in the
collecting them, which usually are more grievous, than the burden it self: and
as to the Roman Army, he made Election of Officers, according to Merit, and not
by Bribes, and affection, and recommendation, whereby he rendered it very
considerable for the next Expedition.

Summer being come, he assembles them together, and first in discourses,
intermixing commendations and chidings, as they had done well or ill, takes
afterward his march, from one Country to another, up and down those Places,
which were either not as yet Conquered, or would not willingly submit to
Conditions; making great destruction. When the Summer was almost spent, he
courts them with good words, and forbearance of Acts of Hostility, into terms
of Peace, which they willingly at last accepted; the Game inclining altogether
on the Roman side: So a Peace is made with them, Hostages are given on the
Britains part, for the security thereof, and several Garrisons planted on their
Borders, with great Judgment, which became a strait and sharp bridle to the
Britains.

The Winter following, he made a greater Conquest, then he had done the Summer
before, but it was of a different nature. The Britains divided into petty
Nations, had frequent Wars one upon another. So that Houses of value to have
been built, would have been ridiculous, seeing in the frequency of their Wars,
they could not have long stood free from Fire; and thereupon many other
blandishments, as of Gardens, and Orchards, etc. were neglected likewise. Their
thoughts being active, and not taken up with these things, would be with
somewhat else, and nothing was more obvious than the matter of War, whereto
they gave their minds upon some necessity also, and in that Military
Discipline, which was proper for petty Nations, in Woody and Boggy Countries, as
this then was; They were excellent in Art, and well fitted with strong,
resolute and hardy Bodies. Agricola did not much fear an open Invasion, from a
People weak by their Divisions, and naked; and amongst whom there were many
Traiterous to their Country, even Princes themselves corrupted by the Romans:
yet he might expect great disturbance in parties out of the Woods, which would
much obstruct the quiet of the Country, and might destroy the Fruits of the
Land.

Hereupon he gets together about him many of the chief Nobility, commending to
them the pleasure and delight of a civil life in fine Buildings, neat Clothes,
Comptness of Language; which some affecting naturally, and others the rather to
please the General, do observe and follow. Some distaste these things, whom he
disgraces and villifies; but the other he commends, and gives them
encouragement, by granting assistance thereunto. By these means he softened the
Nation, and made them more liable to the Impressions of the Roman steel upon
all disturbances; And of Consequence, rendered their Province more secure.

The next Summer he spent in a March Northwardly, Conquering several Nations,
(that is to say) destroying their Country, and killing many where he met them,
or they would attempt to set upon either his Army, or a party thereof, but this
was sparingly done; for whether the Britains were terrified at the
apprehensions of the Romans, or this so great an Army, or that they had
experimented a plain Field sufficiently to their sorrow already, or that they
hoped to protract the War till Winter, expecting then to make use of the
advantage they had, by their light Arming; or for some, or all these Reasons,
they never attempted to join their Forces, and to give Battle, but divided in
Woods, and Bogs, and places inaccessable; make now and then some Incursions on
the Romans, but with no considerable effect: and he foreseeing their thoughts
prevented their attempts designed for Winter, by fortifying diverse Castles
among them; which was done with excellent Judgment, as to the choice of the
site of the places, and great Art as to the Model, and stored them with a
twelve Months Provision before hand: so that what he gained by a strong hand,
he kept by prudent Managements. In this Expedition, he passed beyond the
Borders of Scotland, that now is, to a Water called Taus, beyond Bodotria. The
next Winter the Britains assaulted several of these Castles, and made some
Incursions into the Roman Quarters; but little mischief was done.

The fourth Summer was spent in securing what was gained, and more especially
that narrow entrance into the further part of Scotland, lying between Glota and
Bodotria, two Arms of the opposite Seas, they are now called Dun Britten and
Edinburgh friths, which he did with Castles and Forts, as if having enlarged
the Province, he desired to make it the bounds of the Roman Empire that way.

But the fifth Summer he passed beyond it, turning on his left hand, making
several Conquests of Copuntrys bordering on Ireland, and placed many Soldiers
therein, affecting a Conquest of that Island also: receiving to this purpose a
Prince of that Country, come out upon private dissentions then amongst
themselves; to whom he was courteous, with an intent to make such use of him,
as the Romans had done with several others in Britain heretofore, (that is to
say) to betray their Native Countries, to the pride and Luxury of the Romans;
for at this time they were fallen from their ancient Virtue, though Agricola
himself had some more than ordinary sparks left.

But the sixth Summer, his thoughts were taken up by a diversion on his right
hand; for the Britains beyond Bodotria intending to assault the Garrisons, and
divert his course, had already begun to make some attempts, by seizing the
Passes, and assailing certain Castles. Agricola for his further security manned
that Summer a considerable Fleet, which was of great use to him in his passage
into the Country; for his March was by the Sea side, and his sailing not far
from the Land. So that frequently the Soldiers both of the Navy and Army met,
and were in many respects very useful the one to the other.

Agricola suspecting the Britains might have advantage upon him in number,
divided his Army into three Parts, making his March with some Considerable
distances, thereby thinking to prevent his being encompassed with a multitude:
a manifest error doubtless against a new Enemy, whose valor he had not yet
tried, as appeared by the Consequence, though he might guess shewdly at them,
by what he had found in the rest; for which Tacitus makes an excuse that he had
heard the Britains were divided into Parties, and did intend so to set upon
him. They taking this advantage in the dead of the Night, set upon the Ninth
Legion, being somewhat weak of it self, and with good success; for they kill
the Watch, enter the Camp, and therein Fight it manfully with the Romans; and
had in all probability cut them off, if Agricola having notice of this
accidentally by his Scouts, had not sent the lighter-Armed with all expedition
before hand to their succor, and followed himself with the Legions. When the
Battle was at last before and behind, the Britains, after a bloody Fight in
the entrance of the Camp, the Day appearing, and the Legions also fled into the
Woods. Tacitus tells us that, at the beginning of the Summer, several of his
Officers upon a report of the Power of the Enemy, did advise him to retreat
within the bounds of the formerly intended Province for his security,
suspecting very much the danger; but after this Victory, the very same did
chiefly arrogate to themselves the glory of that battle; an infirmity common to
many Men of that disposition to this day.

The Britains with a noble resolution did attribute the loss of this day, not
to the valor, but craft and fortune of the Roman General. With this conceit
they make very much greater Preparations, confederate themselves by Solemn
Rites, and convey their Wives and Children into places of safety, intending in
a Field to try their fortune again with their new-raised Forces.

The Britains had thirty thousand Men designed for the main Battle, besides
many young and old Volunteers, who out of an honorable resolution came to
partake in the fortune of a Day; over whom, Galgacus of great descent and
virtue, to be mentioned not without honor to his name, commanded in Chief.
They took up their ground upon the declining of the Hill Grampius, now
Grantzbain; the first Battalion stood upon the Plain, the Chariots and Horse
passing up and down with great noise before the Battle, expecting the Romans.

The Romans having sent their Fleet before, by frequent and uncertain Landings,
as they did some other mischief, so they could not but make some distraction
upon the Britains: but at last Agricola takes his March directly to them that
were prepared to receive him, having with him certain of the Country, whose
faith and courage was a long time known to be truer to the Romans, than to
their own Nation. His Battle he orders thus, eight thousand Auxiliaries were
placed in a Body, and in the Van; on each Wing three thousand Horse were
divided, in the Rear his Legionaries were; the whole Front being extended
beyond a just and usual proportion: Agricola thinking thereby to prevent
surrounding by the Enemy which over-numbered him.

The Speech of Galgacus, as it is delivered by Tacitus, is to this purpose.
When I consider the cause of this War, and our necessary, I am greatly
confident, this day, and this your consent will give a happy beginning to the
freedom of the whole Island. We all have hitherto lived in Liberty; and
moreover, no Land remains beyond, and no Sea for our safety, the Roman Navy,
thus as you see, hanging on our Coasts; So that Arms, which Men of virtue
desire for honor, the faint-hearted must also use for his security. The former
Battails, which have with diverse events been fought against the Romans, had
their hope and reserves in our hands: For we, the choice of the British
Nobility, and seated in the furthermost recesses, never yet had view of the
enslaved shoares, nor were our eyes offended with the sight of subjection. This
inward bosom has defended us, the boundary of Land and Liberty for this Day
of Glory. Now the uttermost point of the Country is laid open, and things, the
less they have been within knowledge, the greater the glory is to atchieve
them. What Nation is there now beyond us, what else but Water and Rocks, and
the Romans Lords of all within; whose intolerable pride, in vain shall you
seek to avoid by service or submiss demeanor; Robbers of the World, that
having now left no Land to plunder, search also the Sea it self. If the Enemy
be rich, they are greedy of his wealth; if poor, they covet glory: whom not the
East nor West have satisfied: they only of all Men, with equal lust affecting
riches and vanity. To rob, kill, and commit rapine, falsely they term Empire;
and when they have brought desolation to a Country, they call it Peace.
Children, and near Relations, every Man by nature holds most dear, and those
are pressed for Soldiers, and carried away to serve in a slavish condition:
Sisters and Wives, though they may escape an open ravishment, are
notwithstanding frequently prostituted when they come as Guests, and pretend
friendship. The goods and substance of the Conquered they exhaust with
Tributes, and rob them of their Corn to supply their Garrisons, wearying out
their Hands and Bodies in preparing Woods and Fenny places for their purposes,
with a thousand stripes and indignities. Slaves which are born to bondage when
they are once sold, are after maintained at their Masters expenses: but Britain
daily buyeth her own bondage, and is at the charge of continuing it. Now as in
a private retinue, the fresh man and last comer is most abused by his very
fellow servants: So in this old servitude of the World, our destruction is
sought being the latest, and is most vile in account. We have no Fields to
manure, no Mines to be dug, no Ports to trade in, and to what purpose then
should they reserve us alive? Moreover the manhood and fierce courage of the
Subject pleases not much the jealous Sovereign: and this corner being so
secret, and out of the way, the more security it yields to us, in them it
works the greater suspicion. So seeing all hope of pardon is past, at length
all of you take courage, as well these to whom safety, as such to whom glory is
in greatest esteem. The Britains led by a Woman, fired the Colony, forced the
Castles; and if such a lucky beginning had not ended in sloth and security,
they might have with ease shook off the Yoke. We as yet never touched, never
subdued; and born to be free, not to be Slaves to the Romans: let us show
straight in the first joining what manner of Men Caledonia reserved in store
for her self. Or, do you think the Romans to be as valiant in War, as they are
wanton in Peace? No, not by their virtue, but by our discords they are grown
into fame: and the faults of their Enemies they abuse, to the glory of their
own Army, composed of most diverse Nations: and therefore as by the present
prosperity holden together, so if fortune do frown, it doubtless dissolveth
them; unless you suppose the Galls and Germans, and to our shame be it spoken,
many of our own Nation, which now lend their lives to establish foreign
Usurpation; yet have been Enemies longer than Servants, to be led and induced
with any true faith and affection. No, it is terror and fear, weak procurers of
love, which if you remove, those which shall have ceased to be afraid, will
strait begin to hate. All things that do incite to the Victory are on our side.
No Wife to encourage the Romans, no Parents to upbraid them if they flee; most
have either no Country at all, or some other: a few fearful Persons trembling,
and gazing at the strangeness of the Heaven it self, the Sea, and the Woods;
whom the Gods have delivered, mewed up, and as it were fettered into our hands.
Let not the vain show, and glittering of Gold and Silver terrify us: which
neither defends nor offends amongst the Enemies. We shall find assistance on
our side: The Britains will own their own cause, the Galls will remember their
former freedom, the rest of the Germans will leave and forsake them, as of
late the Vsipians did. And what else have we then to fear? The Castles are
empty, the Colonies peopled with Aged and impotent Persons, the free Cities
discontent, and in factions, whilst those which are under obey, with ill will;
and they which do Govern, rule against right. Here is the General, and here the
Army; there Tributes and Mines, and other miseries inseparably following them,
who live under subjection of others: which whether we are to continue for ever,
or straight to revenge it, lies this day in this Field. Wherefore going to
Battle, bear in your minds, I beseech you, both your Ancestors, and your
Posterity.

Which whether it be the Production only of the Authors brain, or that much of
it was said, it matters not; however, I think the memory of it is not remembered
here amiss. The Speech was received by a various noise of Songs and
Acclamations.

Agricola's is thus delivered: fellow Soldiers and Companions in Arms, your
service and diligence these eight years so painfully showed, by the virtue and
fortune of the Roman Empire has Conquered Britain. In so many Battails we had
of necessity to show our selves either valiant against the Enemy, or patient
and laborious almost against Nature it self. In which exploits we have born us
both hitherto, so that neither did I desire better Soldiers, nor you other
Captain. We have exceeded the limits, I of my Predecessors, and you likewise of
yours. The end of Britain is found, not by fame and report, but we are with our
Arms and Pavilions really invested thereof, Britany is found and subdued. In
Marching, when the passing of Boggs or Mountains, and Rivers troubled and tired
you out, how often have I heard the valiant Soldier say? When will the Enemy
show himself, when shall we Fight? see now they are before you, you have here
your wishes, and a place for your virtue to be shown in, and all things to
follow in an easy and expedite course if you win; if you loose, all against
you. For as to have gone so much ground, escaped the Woods, passed over the
Firthes, is honorable forward; so if we do flee the vantages, we have this day
will become our chief hurt. For we are not skilled so well in the Countries, we
have not the like store of Provision, but Hands we have and Weapons, and
therein all things included. For my part, I have been long since resolved, that
to show their backs, is neither safety for Soldier nor General: and therefore
a commendable death is better, than life with reproach; and surety and honor
are commonly dwelling together: or if ought should mishappen, even this will be
a glory, to have died in the uttermost end of the World and nature. If new
Nations and Soldiers unknown were in the Field, I would by the examples of
other Arms put you in courage: now recount you your own victorious exploits,
and ask your own eyes. These are the same Men which the last year assailed one
Legion by stealth in the night, and were with small work overthrown: These of
all other Britains have been the most nimble in running away, and therefore
have escaped the longest alive. For as in Forests and Woods the strongest
Beasts are chased away by main force, the cowardly and fearful are frighted by
the noise of the Hunters. So the valiant of the British Nation we have already
dispatched, the timorous and most inconsiderable only remain; whom at length
you have found, not as having intended to stay and make Head, but at last
overtaken, and by extreme passion of fear standing as stocks presenting
occasion to us in this place of a worthy and memorable Victory. Make an end
therefore of your warfare, and to fifty years travels, let this day impose a
glorious conclusion: approve to your Country that the Army could never justly
be charged either with protracting the War, or pretenses for not accomplishing
the Conquest. This was received with great Alacrity.

The Battle it self also, because it does consummate the Conquest of this
Island, and is by Tacitus not only excellently, but very indifferently
described, take also from him. Agricola leaving his Horse, advanced himself
before the Ensigns of Foot: In the first encounter, before joining, both sides
discharged, and threw their missive Weapons: wherein the Britains employing
both Art and Valor, with their great Swords and little Targets avoided our
throws, or shook them off, darting withal great store of theirs against us:
till at length Agricola spying his advantage, exhorted three Batavian Cohorts,
and two of the Tungrians to press forward, and bring the matter to a close
Fight, (a thing which they in respect of long service were able readily to
perform, and contrarily to the Enemies prejudicial) and hurtful by reason of
their little Bucklers and huge Swords; for the Swords of the Britains being
blunt pointed, were no way fit for close or open Fight. Now as the Batavians
began to strike with their Swords, and thrust with the Pikes of their Bucklers,
to mangle their Faces, and (having overborn in the Plain all that resisted
them,) to March up the Mountains, the rest of the Cohorts gathering courage,
upon emulation, violently beat down all about them, and many half dead, or
wholly untouched, were left, for have of winning the Field. In the mean time
the Chariots mingled themselves with the Battle of the Footmen, and the Troops
of the Horsemen began to flee: who, albeit they had lately terrified others,
were now distressed themselves by the unevenness of the ground, and thick
Forces of their Enemies. Neither was the form of the Fight like a loose
Skirmish of Horsemen to and fro, but standing still, and maintaining their
places, they sought by main weight of Horses to break and bear down one
another. The wandering Wagons also, and masterless Horses, afrighted as it
happened them by fear to be guided, overbare many which met them, or thwarted
their way. Now the Britains which stood a loof from the Battle, on the height
of the Hi'ls, and at their good leisure disdaining our fewness, began to come
down by little and little, and to compass about the backs of our men, which
were now in probable expectation of winning the Field. But Agricola,
suspecting, as much, opposed against them four Wings of Horsemen, purposely
retained about him for sudden dispatches and chances of War, and repulsed them
back as sharply, as fiercely they ran to assail. So the Counsel of the Britains
turned upon their own heads: and the Wings were commanded to forsake the
Battle, and follow the flight. Then might you have seen in the open fields a
great and horrid spectacle; pursuing, wounding, taking, and killing of them
which were taken, when others came in the way. Now whole Regiments of the
Enemies, according to their several dispositions, though Armed, and more in
number, turned their backs to the fewer others unarmed, and sought their own
death, offering themselves voluntarily to the slaughter. Every where Weapons
lay scattered, and Bodies, and mangled Limbs; the Ground every where imbrued
with Blood, and sometimes, even in them which were overcome, appeared now at
their end both Anger and Valor. When they approached the Woods, uniting
themselves, they entraped unawares some of the foremost of our men, which
unadvisedly followed, not knowing the Country: And unless Agricola had with
his presence every where assisted at need, setting about them of his bravest
and most ready footmen, as it were in form of a Toil, and commanding some of
his Cavalry to leave their Horses, where the passages were narrow, and others
where the Woods were thin, to ride up and down mounted; no doubt, says he, we
had taken some blow by our overmuch boldness. But after they did see our men
again in strong array to follow the chase in good order, they fled, (not in
Troops as before, and attending each other, but utterly disbanded, and single,
eschewing all company) toward the Desert, and far distant places. The night,
and our fullness of blood, made an end of the chase. Of the Enemies side, Ten
thousand were slain: Three hundred and forty of ours, amongst whom was Aulus
Atticus, Commander in chief of a Cohort, upon a youthful heat, and through the
fierceness of Horse, being carried into the middle of his Enemies.

That night the Winners, for their parts, solaced themselves with the Victory
and Spoil: and the Britains being utterly broken, crying out, and howling; men
and women together take and draw with them their hurt persons, call not hurt,
forsake their own Houses, and in despite also set them on fire themselves;
choose out Holes for to lurk in, and streightwayes forsook them; communicate
some Counsels together, and then have some glimmering of hope: sometimes at the
sight of their dearest beloved they are moved to pity, more often stirred to
rage: and certain it is, that some, as by way of compassion and mercy, slew
their own Children and Wives. The day following, discovered more plainly the
greatness of the Victory; every where desolation and silence; no stirring in
the Mountains; the Houses fired and smoking far off: no man to meet with our
Scouts: who being sent abroad into all the Quarters, found by their footsteps
the flight was uncertain, and that they were no where in Companies together.

Hereupon Agricola, because the Summer was spent, and the War could not
conveniently be divided, bringing his Army into the Borders of the Horrestians,
supposed in Eskdale, where receiving Hostages, he commanded the Admiral of the
Navy to Sail about Britain, lending him Soldiers and strength for that
purpose, and the terror of the Roman Name was gone before already; and he with
easy and gentle Journeys, to terrify the new conquered Nations, with the very
stay of his passage, disposed his Footmen and Horsemen into their Wintering
Places: and withal, the Navy with prosperous Wind and success, arrived at the
Port Trutulensis, from whence it departed; and coasting along the nearest side
of Britain, returned thither again, having invaded in its passage the Isles of
Orkney.

After this, Domitian the Emperor, envying his Glory, sent for him home, when
he had completed the Conquest of so much of Britain, as was formed into a
Roman Province, from the two Arms of Glota and Bodotria before mentioned, to
the Southward, inclusive of that part of the Island; more doubtless he did
design to invade and possess, and like enough he had effected it upon all the
North, and Ireland also, if Domitian's apprehensions had not recalled and
prevented him.

The Conclusion of the Roman Conquests in this Island.
THus all on the Southern part of Glota and Bodotria, about the year of Grace,
eighty six, was by degrees brought under subjection to the Romans, and formed
into a Province, or rather three; the Trent and Severne making the Divisions;
that part next Rome, being called Britania prima; the Capital place London:
from which Canterbury took after the dignity of the Seat, to the Archbishop of
that Province; for the Divisions of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, did follow
those of the Temporal in their first appointments. That which was beyond
Severne was called Secunda: Caer Leon upon Vske in Monmouthshire, being then
the principal place, and Archbishops Seat. Maxima Caesariensis was that,
beyond Trent; York being the chief Residence and See.

Hence it might be, that when Wales was in the Princes of their Country, and
disunited; that which remained in England, was divided betwixt the Justices in
Air, by the River Trent, in affairs concerning the Forest; and the Heralds in
their proper business. Hence it might be, that in the piece of Money, exposed
to view by Mr. Cambden, where on one side, was this Inscription, Hadrianus Aug.
Consul iij. Pater Patriae, and on the other, Exercitus Britanicus; three
Soldiers being Pourtrayed on this, and the Emperors Effigies on the other
side, (which the same Author would have to signify the three Legions, that
served here about his time; that is to say, Secunda Augusta, Sexta Victrix, and
Vicessima Victrix:) like enough it is, they had particular Relation to the
three several Provinces. And hence it might be that Geoffry of Monmouth did
feign the Division of the Country into Loegria Cambria and Albania, to come
from the three Sons of Brute, Locrine, Camber and Albanact; because he thought
it necessary to deliver Fathers to the several Divisions of the Country he
found here.

The Provinces continued for some hundreds of years under the Roman
Jurisdiction, the Limits a little varyed and drawn back, and some Disturbances
falling out, but neither very considerable.

And now was founded that Government, as I take it, here in England, which has
continued in the bulk and gross thereof through many Ages, to this day, or at
least not extinguish't at any time, though not without certain addings and
substraction, and now and then somekind of interruptions; but yet did they
never so far proceed, as utterly to discontinue that Series, which had its root
even in the very time of Romulus, at the Foundation of Rome. And upon the
coming in of the Romans, here was also introduced one other form of Government,
which having its Rise in the days of Moses among the Israelites, with a
fortune not unlike the other; first insinuating it self into the Roman Veins,
upon the Conquest of Jury, and then spreading into all the parts thereof, came
hither also, being a Member of it, and did so incorporate into that Body,
varying frequently in outward appearance, by diverse Factions; but continuing in
a great part the same to this day among us: both being alike, cut off from the
main Body; the first many Ages ago, the last in the days of Henry the Eighth,
and united in the Person of one single Monarch: both still retaining a great
Portion of the same Nature they had originally, though in some particulars
altered as in such ancient things it cannot be otherwise expected. But because
much of this many do not think of, and our Historiographers do generally give a
much later Original to certain Laws, and Customs, and Divisions of our Country
in the Civil Government; yet reprehended some of them in the times they are
positive in, by my Lord Cook, Mr. Camden, Mr. Seldom, Sir H. Spelman, and other
eminent Antiquaries: We will leave this Argument at present, and close with
certain words of Doctor HEYLIN, an Excellent and Judicious Geographer, of the
like Nature. He having Discoursed some time of EVROPE upon the whole, comes at
last to begin his particular Description in these words. And this shall serve
for Europe in the general Notion: Descend we now to the particular Kingdoms,
Regions and Islands of it, beginning first of all with Italy, contrary to the
usage of most Geographers, who commonly begin with Spain or Ireland, as being
the farthest Countries Westward, and consequently nearest to the first
Meridian, from whence the Longitude was reckoned. Which we shall do by reason
of that great influence which the Romans had in most parts of Europe, and many
parts of the World besides, in matters as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, which
much depended on the Power of that Empire formerly, and on the usurpation of
that Church in the latter days.

Courteous Reader,
BEsides some Errors in pointing, you are desired to Correct these
underwritten, which have escaped the Press by reason of the Authors absence.

In the Introduction.
PAge 26 Line 32 add in. P. 32. L. 18. for sereral r. several. P. 33. L. 31.
for presence r. Bosom. P. 35. L. 27. r. to him who.

In the History.
P. 3. L. 17. after the word and r. is. P. 5. L. 6. for druids r. denotes. L.
12. Leave out the word (was) P. 8. L. 25. for Moni r. Mons. P. 20. L. 5. before
the word confederated r. their. P. 31. L. 3. for Donaries r. Denaries. P. 34.
L. 33. r. with other bounds at the Sea. P. 42. L. 28. for upon r. up to.


