AN ANSWER TO Mr. Thomas Grantham's Book; CALLED, A DIALOGUE Between the
Baptist and the Presbyterian.

By MARTIN FINCH, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Norwich.

My Council shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure, Isaiah 46.10.

Who has enjoined him his way? or who can say, thou have wrought Iniquity? Job
36.23.

In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined according to
the purpose of him, who works all things according to the Council of his own
Will, Ephesians. 1.11.

For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be glory for
ever, Amen. Romans 11.36.

Therefore has he mercy on whem he will have mercy; and whom he will, he
hardens, Romans 9.18.

Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Marketplace; and Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
1691.

TO THE READER.
THOSE that would set up to make a Party, and draw Disciples after them, have a
mighty advantage in the Arminian way.

1. Because there is a strong Inclination in corrupt Nature, to quarrel with
the absolute Lordship and Dominion of God over his Creatures, to do with them,
for his own Glory, what semmeth good in his sight. Men would fain be from under
the Lordship and Dominion of God, but it cannot be.

2. Because it is natural to Men to think, that if they be saved it must be by
their own Merits, and Worthiness, and not from the special, and distinguishing
Grace of God. And it is that which Arminianism brings Men to at last: For if God
have not made a difference amongst the Children of Men by his special Grace in
Election, Redemption, and Regeneration then they, with what helps they had
common to them that are saved, and to them that perish, do make themselves to
differ.

The way is prepared before them that would teach Men in the Arminian way, it is
suited to Corrupt Nature. But to bring Men to own the Sovereignty of God over
them, to bring Men to be sensible of the Holiness and Justice of God, to bring
them to cry guilty before God, to acknowledge their own vileness, to wonder
that God should save any, who might justly have damned all for sin: To say in
their Hearts, if God take Vengeance upon them for ever, yet he is Righteous, to
say, let me live, and I shall praise thee for ever: To wonder that God was ever
manifest in the flesh, and suffered as Mediator, and Surety to save Sinners:
to see nothing in our selves, not so much as a good thought, or good
inclination, but what God puts into us. To see, that we cannot believe, repent,
and turn to God, but by his giving us a new Heart, and a new Spirit; infusing
Grace into us, making us new Creatures; that if we be saved, when others
perish, it is from free and special Grace, that is to be adored to Eternity: I
say, to have our Hearts brought to these things, is hard indeed, yea
impossible, except God be pleased to touch our Hearts, and turn them with his
Almighty hand. He can give our Hearts a saving turn in a moment, easier than we
can think a thought. His willing to do it for us, is the doing of it for us, in
the way and time of his own appointment.

Men may hold some Errors Notionally, and not Practically, else there were
more danger in Arminianism as to Eternal Salvation than Men are aware of.

For 1. An Arminian, if he should act according to that Doctrine, he can never
pray to God for special Grace, that God would determine and fix his Will to
himself, by his especial Grace, that God against all opposition from corrupt
nature would give a new Heart. All that an Arminian can pray for, according to
that Doctrine, is, that God would propound, and urge Arguments and Motives to
him, and that still he may be left to himself what he will do, which is but
mocking of God instead of praying unto him.

2. An Arminian, if he act according to that Doctrine, cannot thank and praise
the Lord for special and distinguishing Grace in Election, Redemption, and
Vocation; but must thank himself, if he be saved, (when others perish) by
improving that universal Grace, which others did not improve. There would be
but cold singing before the Throne in Heaven to Eternity, for that Grace that
brought them thither, if it were not special Grace that saved them, when others
go into everlasting punishment in Hell. Let my Soul be gathered to that people,
who have a Principle and Heart given them of God, to say to Eternity, Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be all the praise.

3. The Arminian Doctrine, whilst it pretends to give great encouragement to
Sinners to hope for Salvation by Christ, their Doctrine does (if it were true)
take away all possibility and hope of Salvation for any Man or Woman now living
upon the face of the Earth; which I make out by these two particulars.

1. It is clear from the Scripture, that those that shall have Eternal
Salvation in Heaven are Believers in Christ, and are sanctified in part in this
life, that he that dies an Unbeliever the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.
ult. And without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

2. It is clear from the Scripture, that by nature we are dead in Trespasses
and Sins, Ephesians 2.1. That the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. That except God do
absolutely give a new Heart, there can be no true Faith and Holiness in any
man. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Jeremiah
17.9.

Therefore, I say, if there be not such a special love in God to some, whereby
he will most certainly and infallibly, against all opposition from the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, give them a new Heart, give them converting and
keeping Grace, there is no possibility of the Salvation of any Man. Arminian
universal Grace can never bring any Man to Heaven; it must be special,
effectual, omnipotent Grace that must do it, or else all must perish for ever.
This Author directs his discourse against the Presbyterians, as if they only
maintained the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation in the sense that he
opposes; but I have shown by the Articles of Lambeth 1595. and by the Articles
of Ireland 1615. that the Episcopal Divines have maintained the same Doctrine,
and that those whom he calls Presbyterians, next to the Scriptures, learnt
that Doctrine from the old Episcopal Divines. Those that maintain the Doctrine
of the Sovereignty, Immutability, and Omnipotency of God, may be bold to say
what they are able on Gods behalf against vain man, that would enjoin him his
way, that would dictate to the Almighty what he should do.

Those that maintain that Christ, God-man, dyed so effectually for all those
for whom he dyed, that he will certainly and infallibly bring them to Grace and
Glory, have no cause to be ashamed of their Doctrine.

Those that maintain that, no man can come to Christ, except the Father draw
him, and that with such a drawing, as that they shall freely, and yet most
certainly and infallibly come to Christ, and be eternally saved, have truth on
their side: And all the Sophistry Cavils and Evasions of Arminians, are as
nothing to overthrow this Doctrine. Whosoever shall observe the Book that I
answer, will find that this Author does scarce attempt to argue and prove any
thing, except it be in a very few places, but only raises outcries against
others. Therefore what I have written, is only occasioned by this Author to
clear up these points, rather than to answer any Arguments he has produced for
his opinions; but that little Argument he has used, I have taken into
consideration.

If any Reader thinks that I have now and then used too much sharpness against
this Author, he may be pleased to take notice, that those that know me, can
testify that I have a greater Latitude as to any rigid judging of men, as to
their Eternal Estates, because they hold many erroneous opinions, than some
others have. Those that are truly built upon Christ, upon his Merits and
Righteousness as their Foundation, though they may in their Superstructure have
much Hay and Stubble, yet God will graciously pardon them in Christ. But when
this Author tramples not only upon the Assembly of Divines, but upon Calvin,
Zuinglius, Beza, and many other Divines of the Reformed Churches; and extolls
Michael Servetus, one of the greatest Blasphemers of the Sacred Trinity that
ever was in the World: It may be some Readers will think I have not been sharp
enough against such a confident Boisterous person.

There is printed with this Authors, a Book of Mr. Haggars, I never heard of
the person, or of his Book before, though it seems it has been printed five
times. It may be it has been answered, or none have thought it worth the
answering.

The Book is almost nothing but Errors and Mistakes: I do not remember that
ever I read a Book more confused, or where the Author shows himself more
ignorant of the true meaning of the Scriptures he makes use of, except it were
in some Books of the Quakers.

The Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in heavenly
places in Christ, according as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation
of the World, was laid.

The Apostle there shows.

1. That there are Spiritual Blessings bestowed upon some. These Spiritual
Blessings are effectual Calling, Justification, Adoption, Perseverance in
Grace, and the Heavenly inheritance.

2. He shows that all these Spiritual Blessings are conferred upon us through
the Lord Jesus Christ the Mediator, as the Meritorious cause. God purposed to
do all for the Heirs of Salvation, in and through him.

3. He shows the Eternal Designation of the persons that shall in due time
partake of these Spiritual Blessings, he says they were chosen in Christ,
before the foundation of the World.

4. He shows that they were not chosen upon any foresight of their Holiness, by
improving those common helps they had equal with others; but that God chose
them that they might be Holy; that is, he would in due time give them Faith and
Holiness: And this is yet more evident from v. 5. having predestined (that is
foreordained) us to the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ, according to
the good pleasure of his Will: So that it is most manifest, that those whom God
chose, he chose them so, as that he would himself make them holy, and that the
moving cause was not any worthiness or towardliness in them, which God foresaw:
But the Apostle says, it was the good pleasure of Gods will, his especial
undeserved free Love, and good will to their persons that was the moving cause
of their Election.

Now let the Reader observe what this Author says to this Scripture: Though
God calls men elect from the Foundation of the World, yet they are not elect,
until the very day of their Conversion, and turning from Sin to God, for God
calls things that are not, as if they were; From whence it is evident, they
were not elected, though so called. page 2.

What a strange passage is this? As much as to say, though the Scripture says
it was so, yet it was not so well; but says this Author, it is said of
Abraham, Romans 4.17. As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations
before him, whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead, and calls
things that are not, as if they were.

Now says this Author, Abraham was not yet a Father of many Nations, but it
was so before God who calls things that are not, as if they were.

For the understanding of this Scripture.

1. Observe, that though it was but at that time spoken of, and declared to
Abraham, Genesis 17.4, 5. that he should be a Father of many Nations, yet God has
made and appointed him so to be from Eternity. Though Gods Decrees and Intentions
what he will do, are manifested to men in time, yet they are all from Eternity.

2. Observe, that when God did declare to Abraham his Eternal Counsel, that he
should be a Father of many Nations, Abraham's Body was dead as to Masculine
Vigor. But the Apostle shows, that nothing can hinder Gods Purposes and
Decrees; for God quickneth the Dead, (dead Souls, and dead Bodies when he
pleases,) and calls things that are not, as if they were, that is, calls
for what he pleases, and it is done. As in the Creation, God did but say, Let
there be Light, and there was Light. The Apostle is showing Gods Omnipotency:
That God having appointed Abraham to be a Father of many Nations, nothing can
hinder his eternal purpose, for says the Apostle, he quickens the dead, and
calls things that are not, as if they were. Ut majorem ejus rei facilitatem
in deo declaret, to show the great facility of this Work to God, to whom it is
as easy to make any thing to be, as it is for us to call for a thing, and
easier too; as one Expositor notes well upon the place: So that this Author
quite mistakes the meaning of the place, for God did not tell Abraham that he
was a Father of many Nations, when he was not: But God told him, that he had
made him, that is, appointed him so to be, which should be performed in the
appointed Time and Season, by his Omnipotency against all natural
impossibilities; because he is the Almighty God that quickneth the dead, and
calls things that are not, as if they were. When he calls for any thing to
be done, to be effected according to his purpose, it exists the same moment.

The Context in Romans 4. with other Scriptures concerning Abraham, may give much
light into this Controversy.

1. Terah the Father of Abraham, and Abraham himself were at first Idolaters,
and served other Gods, Joshua 24.2, 3. Yet Abraham being a person that God had
chosen to Salvation from Eternity, he was called, and converted in the Lords
appointed time, though he was such an unlikely person to obtain Mercy,

2. As the Lord had from Eternity chosen Abraham to be a Vessel of Mercy, so he
had also made, appointed, and decreed from Eternity, that he should be a Father
of many Nations, and that of him as concerning the flesh, Christ should come,
and nothing could hinder Gods purpose being fulfilled in its Season, because
God is Omnipotent, he quickens the dead, and calls things that are not, as if
they were. From whence we may gather, that whatsoever God has graciously
purposed to do for any, he will certainly and infallibly perform it against all
Natural and Moral Impossibilities, for he quickneth the Dead, and calls
things that are not, as if they were. When he pleases to call any thing to
exist, and be, by the word of his power, it does certainly and infallibly exist.

Another Text that this Author brings to prove, that a thing may be said to
be done, when it is not done, is Rev. 13.8. and all that dwell upon the Earth
shall Worship him, (the Beast) whose names are not written in the Book of Life
of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World.

Upon which he says, Christ is called the Lamb slain from the Foundation of
the World, though he was not slain many thousand years after.

I answer, Christ was slain in God's Decree and Purpose, from Eternity; he was
foreordained, before the Foundation of the World, to be Mediator, 1 Pet. 1.20.
foreordained to be crucified and slain, as the Sacrifice for the Sins of the
Elect, 1 Cor. 2.7. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden
Mystery which God ordained before the World, unto our Glory. This manifold
Wisdom of God, and the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in saving the Elect by
the Blood of his Son, was ordained before the World was made, and consequently
from Eternity, Prove. 8.23. I was set up from Everlasting, from the Beginning,
or ever the Earth was. V. 30, 31. Then I was by him as one brought up with him,
and I was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him, rejoicing in the
habitable parts of his Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men.

In these Words, Christ, the Essential Wisdom of God, does declare, not only
that he was from Everlasting, as the Son of God, but that he was also set up
from Everlasting, as Mediator; that he was appointed to be incarnate, to take
upon him Humane Nature in Time, and to be slain for the Redemption of his
People that were given unto him of the Father; and upon the prospect of this he
says, his delight was with the Sons of Men: He rejoiced in the Thoughts of his
redeeming the Children that were given him. It was upon the account of the
Decree, that Christ was to take upon him Humane Nature, and die for his Church;
that as soon as ever Man fell, it was declared that there should come one that
should bruise the Serpent's Head, Genesis 3.15. And upon the account of this
Decree it was, that Believers under the Old Testament did really partake of the
Virtue of Christ's Death, as if he had been slain; and to encourage their
Faith, Christ was typically slain in their bloody Sacrifices, before he came in
the Flesh.

So that this Text is nothing to this Author's purpose, but if it be rightly
understood, gives much light against the Arminian Doctrine: It shows that God
decreed Christ's Death from Eternity: Ay, It was not only decreed from
Eternity, that the Son of God should take upon him the Nature of Man in Time;
but it was decreed from Eternity, that he should take that particular Body, and
not another; that holy Thing that was conceived miraculously in the Womb of the
blessed Virgin; that That holy Thing should be taken into personal Union with
his Godhead, and that at the set Time which God's Council from Eternity had
determined it should be done, he should then be crucified and slain, to make an
end of Sin, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness.

This Author should learn to distinguish between God's Decrees, and the
Execution of them. All God's Decrees and Purposes what he would do, in making
the World, Angels and Men, and disposing of things for his own Glory, were from
Eternity: The Execution of his Decrees are in Time.

The Arminians holding that Christ died for all Adam's Posterity, are
wonderfully confounded with this Objection.

If Christ died for all Adam's Posterity, then surely God would so order it in
his Providence, that all Adam's Posterity should have Christ preached to them,
and have the outward Means to come to the Knowledge of him.

To this Objection some of them say, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, and other
Works of Creation preach Christ, though but darkly.

I answer, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, and other Works of Creation, declare
no more, now Man is fallen, than whilst Adam stood; that is, they declare the
Glory of God as a Creator, they declare his Eternal Power and Godhead; but they
declare not a Word of God manifest in the Flesh, and Redemption by the Blood of
his Cross.

Ay, but this Author says, page 10. All that worship any thing for a God, do
by that acknowledge that there is a God; and all that do offer Sacrifice to a
God, do thereby confess there is a God offended, and that he is reconcilable
by a Sacrifice.

I answer, These Words tend to the Subversion of true Religion. The Heathens,
by Tradition from the Jews, took up a way of Sacrifices; but the Apostle Paul
says, 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to
Devils, and not to God. What though the Gentiles do know there is a God, and
this leaves them without Excuse for their gross Idolatry, in changing the Glory
of the incorruptible God into the Image of corruptible Man, and to Birds, and
four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things? Romans 1.20, 21, 22, 23. What if the
Heathen by natural Conscience do think that God is offended? And what if they
have, by Tradition from the Jews, taken up a way of offering Sacrifices to
appease a Deity? Still they have no sufficient Light, and Means of Salvation,
because they do not know Christ the Mediator, the only true Sacrifice for Sin.
All the Sacrifices they offer are an Abomination to the Lord, and make them
more abominable unto him.

That which I have written in answer to Mr. Grantham, may stand for an Answer
to Mr. Haggar's Book. Why should I trouble my self and the Reader with so many
impertinent things, yea, unsavory to good Christians, as are in that Author's
Book?

That which I aimed at in this Undertaking, was not so much to deal with these
Authors, as to throw down the whole Arminian Doctrine, and in the most plain
and popular way that I could, to set forth the Truth of God to the Capacity of
ordinary Christians. The Lord add his Blessing, and give us Understanding in
all things.

Norwich, Jun. 11. 1691. M. F.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. AN Examination of Mr. Grantham's Title Page. Chap. II. A Vindication
of Dr. Collinges. Chap. III. That Christ did not die for all Adam's Posterity.
Chap. IV. Ten Arguments to prove that all that Christ died for shall be saved.
Chap. V. Of Election and Reprobation. Chap. VI. Of God's Eternal Decrees; what
shall come to pass in time. Chap. VII. Of the Father's drawing the Elect to
Christ. Chap. VIII. Of the Saints Perseverance in Grace. Chap. IX. An Answer to
Mr. Grantham's Queries.
CHAP. I. Examination of the Author's Title Page.
THE Person with whom I have now to do, calls his Book, A Dialogue between the
Baptist and the Presbyterian; and styles himself Messenger of the Baptized
Churches in Lincolnshire. It is fit to enquire a little into these two Titles
he gives himself. He styles himself the Baptist. Indeed, we read, Mat. 3.1,
2, 3. In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of
Judea, and saying, Repens ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; and this is
he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. So we
read of John the Baptist, that was prophesied of by Esaias, who is already
come: but I find no Prophecy of any Thomas the Baptist, that was to be sent of
God. John is called the Baptist, because he Baptized Christ himself, and
because he was sent in an extraordinary way to Baptize the people of the Jews.
I think it is too high a Title for any man now living in the World to call
himself the Baptist.

2. This Author styles himself Messenger of the Baptized Churches in
Lincolnshire. I suppose, that all the Churches and Congregations in
Lincolnshire, of all persuasions, do think, that the Members of their Churches
are Baptized, though not in this Author's way, and is he the Messenger of them
all? But take it for the Churches of his own Persuasion. Let us enquire how he
is their Messenger. We read of Messengers of the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.23.24.
Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow-helper: or our
Brethren be enquired of, they are the Messengers of the Churches, and the glory
of Christ. Wherefore show ye to them, and before the Churches, the proof of
your Love, and of our boasting on your behalf. As for the Messengers of the
Churches here spoken of, as such, they were only chosen by some Churches to
travel up and down to other Churches for a short space, to get Contribution and
Relief for other Churches, that were in great want by being spoiled of their
Goods by Persecutors, or by some other means brought to some great outward
necessities. And if this Author be a Messenger of Churches in that way, he has
undertaken a good work; and I hope, that those he is so violent against, will
be as Charitable to relieve the necessities of other Christians, though not of
their Persuasion, as he can expect. But when he calls himself Messenger of
the Baptized Churches in Lincolnshire, he has another meaning. We read of the
Angels of the seven Churches, Rev. 1.20. Now by the Angels of those Churches,
is meant, Messengers of the Lord to those Churches: The Lord's Messengers to
declare his Mind and Will to them. Here were several Angels and Messengers of
the Seven Churches; but one Man was not the Angel or Messenger of several
Churches. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus was not the Angel of the Church of
Pergamos, and of the rest of the Seven Churches. So that it is likely, that
this Author counts himself to have Jurisdiction and Authority over many
Churches. And truly if he be the Baptist, a Title given only to John hitherto,
and be Messenger at the same time, of several Churches, we know not how many,
and have Spiritual Power over them, he is an extraordinary person, and it is no
wonder that he deals with so many persons and things. Yet truly, I should
think, if he were more than an ordinary Presbyter, he should visit with more
Mildness and Moderation.

There is another thing in the Title Page that is very bold and daring to the
most high God. He represents the Presbyterians as holding Cruel and
Soul-devouring Doctrines, making God the ordainer of all the Sins of Men and
Devils; and reprobating the greatest part of mankind without any help of
Salvation.

1. Concerning God's ordaining of all the sins of Men and Devils, I shall speak
(God willing) in answer to your Book, and show in what Sense God ordained and
decreed to leave Angels and Men to themselves, and so to sin.

2 As to Reprobating the greatest part of mankind, without any help of
Salvation; this you call, A Cruel and Soul-devouring Doctrine.

I answer, 1. That I suppose your self hold, that the greatest part of mankind
do in the end perish eternally. I am sure our Savior declared, that few there
be that find the strait gate and narrow way to Heaven. That it is but a little
Flock to whom God gives the Kingdom of Heaven. That though many are called, yet
few are chosen. Not but those that are saved, are a Multitude which no Man can
number, Rev. 7.9. yet comparatively they are few; they are few in comparison of
those that perish.

2. Whether they that perish were ordained of old from Eternity to Condemnation
for their sins; or reprobated in time, as you hold: Truly this little alters
the case. As for the greatest part of mankind, reprobated they are, and cast
into Hell at last, without any help, or hope of Salvation; and if this be cruel
Doctrine, have a care that you don't contend and strive with the holy
Sovereignty and Justice of God; and when you argue with men about these things,
have a care you don't quarrel with God himself. Do you think that those that do
not adore the incomprehensible Greatness and Holiness of God can ever be
satisfied that God punishes men's temporary sinning with Eternal Punishment.
It Is not talking of a common love of God to mankind, and talking of Universal
Redemption, when in the Conclusion God takes Vengeance for ever upon so many of
mankind for their Sin and Folly: That will really take off men from quarrelling
with God: But the humble acknowledgment of his absolute Lordship over the Works
of his Hands; and that he is infinitely Just and Righteous in all that he does;
though we, poor Dust and Ashes, cannot comprehend it: This must silence Man.

This Author sets down a Scripture in the Title Page, Psalm 64.7, 8, 9. But God
shall shoot at them with an Arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded, so they
shall make their own Tongue to fall upon themselves: This is to reflect upon
the Presbyterians, who, he had said before, are punished by their own Pens. I
pray God that you, as well as others, may not be punished for your Pen, for
your Writings. Lord enter not into Judgment with any of us; but pardon us for
Christ's sake. And as to those words you quote, God shall shoot at them,
suddenly shall they be wounded: How do you apply these words to the
Presbyterians, against whom you write? They hope to be pardoned and saved by
the Free Grace of God in Christ. God might shoot at them, and you with an
Arrow. Let us have a care of being proud Pharisees. And truly you seem to shoot
your Arrow against the Sovereignty of the God of Heaven, have a care it does
not fall upon your own Head. You do, as it were, arraign God at your Bar, about
his Lordship over the Creature; and he must do so and so, or else he is not
Just. Repent, and turn to God, lest he arraign you at his Bar-Tremble at this
word, at this Scripture you have set down. And for making men's Tongues fall
upon themselves, let us all fear and tremble. Those upon whom God is pleased to
bestow such Grace, as that they say from their Hearts, that they do not stand
upon terms with God; but acknowledge God might have had no thoughts of Eternal
Love to them; but might have decreed to leave them to their sins, and to
glorify his Justice upon them for ever: and that if it had not been for
special discriminating Grace, they had never come to Christ; though they had
those common helps that others think are sufficient. I say, these are not so
like to have their Tongues fall upon themselves another day, as those that say,
That notwithstanding any thing that God freely decreed as to their particular
persons; and notwithstanding any thing Christ did for them in Redemption, or
the Holy Ghost in working upon their Hearts, they might have been damned; but
their own Will had the Casting-Voice, and was so towardly, that they shall be
saved. When those that God on his part did every way as much, as for them, do
perish in Hell for ever.

CHAP. II. A Vindication of Dr. Collings, from the Error that this Author
charges upon him.
THE Author of this Dialogue visiting these Parts, first wrote a Contentious
Letter to Mr. B. K. Then next he falls upon that Learned and Pious Divine, Dr.
Collings, who is now at rest with the Lord. Though the Dr. was dead, yet this
Author must print what had passed about this Controversy: And though the
Ignorant and Erroneous may think, he has done great matters against the Dr.
yet he has done nothing at all: Yea, this Author gives up the Cause to the Dr.
in his second Letter, in these words, Page 7.

You cannot fairly collect from my Paper that God can be resisted in the thing
wherein he will act Omnipotently, for then he should cease to be God.

Now this is the very thing that the Dr. maintained in his Book, and in his
Answer to this Author's Letter: So that this Author's Tongue has fallen upon
himself, Psalm 115.3. Our God is in the Heavens; he has done whatsoever he
pleased. Isa. 46.10. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure.
When any say that God acts Omnipotently in this, or that which he purposes in
himself to do, I suppose, none have such gross conceptions of God, as to think
that God is hardly put to it to effect any thing that he pleases to do. When we
read of God's Right Hand, and the exceeding greatness of his Power in some Acts
of God, it is only to show the greatness of those Works above some other Works
of God; but not at all to show that God is hardly put to it to do those Works.
It is as easy for God, who is Omnipotent, to do the greatest Work that he
pleases to do, as to do the least Works he pleases to do. He does all things
that he pleases to do with the greatest facility. He made the World with the
word of his Power: He upholds it as long as he pleases with the word of his
Power: He converts Souls by the word of his Power: He raises the dead by the
word of his Power: His willing in this sense, is his effecting what he Wills:
He does whatsoever he pleases to do, as easily, and more easily than we can
speak a word.

But still I fear, this Author does not understand what he says, and what
others say in this matter; for if he had, he would have done with this
Contention.

For he adds, Does God never act Seriously when he does not act Omnipotently?

I answer, As for such a phrase as God acting Seriously, I do not love to use
it. It seems to me, that though we use such an expression as to Men, yet I think
it is below the Divine Majesty; and the Dr. using that word in his Book, you
catch at it; and it is all the advantage you have against him. What Man upon
Earth, not infallibly inspired, but may sometimes use a word that may not be so
proper; but for that which the Dr. intended in that expression in his Book, and
explained in his Letter, it will stand against you and all the World. That is,
Whatsoever the great and glorious God has purposed, and intended he will do,
shall certainly be effected by his glorious Power.

That which this Author does not understand, which would set his Judgment right
in this Controversy, is this; There are Laws, Precepts, and Commands of God,
whereby he shows what is our duty to do: This we may call the Will of God, in
respect of Precepts and Commands to us, what we ought to do: But then the Will
of God is often taken in another sense for his Eternal Purpose, what he will do
in us, for us, and with us: and this is always effected in the time appointed
by him. God's Will in respect of his Precepts or Commands, is, that none should
sin at all: but God did not purpose to keep every one from sinning; no, he did
not purpose to keep the Elect from all sin after their Conversion: in this
life, so far as God purposed to restrain sin in any, he does effect it. Though
the Creatures don't do what he commands them to do, yet he always does effect,
and does whatsoever he purposes to do in them, for them, or with them.

How the Dr. quoting those words, Romans 9.19. For who has resisted his Will?
You make those words to be the words of some Caviller and Objector, and you
say, that the Dr. and you have resisted God's Will.

I answer, The Apostle had said in the verse before, Therefore has he mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardens. Now let it be so, that
the whole of the 19th Verse, is the Allegation of one that objects against
God's giving Grace, or denying Grace to particular persons, as he pleases: Yet
observe, though the Apostle in the following words answers to the beginning of
the 19th. Verse, Why does he yet find fault? The Apostle does not answer as you
have done, but, O vain Man! (O proud Clay) shall not the Potter have power over
the Clay, to make of the same lump, one Vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor? So confirming what he had said, that God has mercy upon whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardens, Verse. 18. If then the latter
part of the 19th. Verse, be the words of a Caviller, or Objector against God's
Sovereignty, in giving or denying his Grace to whom he will, the Apostle
acknowledges that to be a truth, Who has resisted his Will? In his everlasting
Decrees and Purposes: But to take the meaning of the words as you do, who has
resisted his Will? I say, taking it for the Will of God in respect of his
Precepts and Commands to Men: Every one knows they had resisted God's Will in
that sense; that is, broken his Commands: and if that were the meaning of, Who
has resisted his Will? the Apostle would have made answer, all have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God: and not, O man, who art thou that reply
against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou
made me thus? He asserts the Sovereignty, Lordship, and Dominion of God over
the Creatures; and so he goes on, Verse. 22, 23. The Apostle by the Spirit of
God knew how to answer him that finds fault with God about his Decrees: He
shows the absolute Power and Lordship of God, that he may save one by his
Grace, and condemn another for his Sins, as he pleases; and that it is not for
Man to dispute and contend with God as many do.

Again you say to the Doctor, you seem to hold that God cannot affect an end,
(I suppose you mean he cannot convert a Sinner) without a willing the utmost of
his power to effect it. But you cannot give an instance where he ever did
exert, or put forth his power to the utmost in any thing that ever he did. We
must take heed, lest we limit the power of the Almighty; lest whilst we accuse
others, we our selves be found most ignorant of Gods Omnipotency.

I Answer, all this is against your self, for seeing Gods power is infinite,
and his greatness is unsearchable: Therefore he does effect, and bring to pass
whatsoever he wills and pleases to do, in the conversion of any Man he pleases
to Convert, or in any other thing that it is his Will and Pleasure to effect
and do. When the Doctor says, when God affects an end (that is, purposes to
bring a thing to pass,) he must needs put forth the utmost of his power to
effect it: The plain meaning is, not that God in any Act of his puts forth all
his power: But so much power, as to effect and bring to pass infallibly what he
purposed, and intended to do: And that when it is the Lords Gracious purpose
and intention to Convert a Soul, he does exert, and put forth his power, so as
that the Soul shall certainly and infallibly be Converted.

And whereas you say, you cannot give an instance where God did ever exert and
put forth his power to the utmost in any thing that ever he did, this makes for
the Doctors position; for it supposes, if there were a thousand thousand times
more opposition and difficulty in the Converting of a Man, or in any other
thing that he pleases to do, yet nothing is too hard: Yea, all is easy for God
to do, if it pleases him to do it. I think you have been overruled by the
All-governing hand of God to justify the Doctor, and to confute your self with
your own pen.

Your fourth Paragraph runs all upon the old mistake, that you do not
distinguish between the will of God, in respect of his precepts which he
commands us as our Duty, and his purpose and intention what he will do.

That which the Doctor puts you to prove, is this, that God willed within
himself the Conversion of the old World, the Jews and Pharisees that never were
Converted: That is, whether God decreed purposed, and intended to Convert those
of the old World, those of the Jews and Phriasees, or any other person that
never are Converted. You endeavor to prove that God did so will and purpose in
himself.

1. You say as to the old World, that God was so serious and inwardly
concerned, that he strove with them by his Spirit, and it grieved him at the
Heart, that they were Disobedient, and he gave them an hundred years to repent
in, and this shows he inwardly willed their Repentance. I am sure that if they
had Repented, God would not have destroyed them; for he has taught us so to
judge of his threatenings to a Sinful Nation.

I Answer, 1. God is said to strive with the old World. How did he strive with
those that perished? The Lord did reprove them by the preaching of Noah for
their Sins, and by Convictions of Conscience; but is this enough to Convert
men? if God had purposed and intended to save them, surely he would have done
more for them: He would have given them a new Heart, and a new Spirit, he would
have taken away the Heart of Stone, and given them an Heart of Flesh. This
expression of Gods striving with Man, must not be strained: Surely God is
greater than Man, and can prevail over the most Stubborn and Rebellious Heart
in the World, and give it a saving turn in one Moment

2. You say it grieved God at his Heart that they were Disobedient: It is said
indeed, Genesis 6.6. And it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it grieved
him at his Heart: This is spoken by a Figure called Anthropopathia. In another
place it is said, God is not as Man, that he should repent When God is said to
repent or grieve, it is spoken by a Figure, and must not be properly taken, and
so likewise, when God is said to have Eyes, Hands, Face, if we be not careful
to understand these things aright, we shall mightily dishonor God. So that
these things are spoken after the manner of Men, in condescension to us Poor,
Weak, Shallow, Creatures; but must be careful to understand them, so as to
consist with the immutability and perfection of God. We must not have such low
thoughts of the Majesty of God, as to think that God ever had, or can have
Perturbation or Sorrow at any thing, for that is inconsistent with his insinite
Happiness and Perfection: But this expression of Gods repenting that he had
made Man, and that it grieved him at the Heart, is only to set forth the
extreme, extraordinary wickedness of the old World, not the least perturbation
and sorrow in God, for he is infinitely above such things: Ah! What need of
Humility and Prayer to God for guidance for the understanding of the Scripture.

3. You say that God gave them a Preacher of Righteousness, and an bundred
years space to Repent in.

I Answer, if they had had a thousand thousand Preachers of Righteousness as
good as Noah was, and better, and had not only a hundred years space to repent
in, but had had never so many thousand of years, this was not enough to Convert
one of them, without Gods special Grace working a new Heart in them, and as to
Noah himself, he was as bad by nature as the rest: But Noah found Grace in the
sight of the Lord, Genesis 6.8. not only to preserve him and his Family when the
Flood came; but Noah found Grace in the sight of the Lord, to make him a real
Saint, and to be Righteous before God in that Generation: If the rest had found
Grace in the sight of the Lord, they had been turned to God too.

4. You add that you are sure if they had Repented, God would not have
desiroyed them; for he has taught us so to judge of his threatenings to a
sinful Nation.

I Answer that Repentance is twofold.

1. There is such a Repentance as Ahab had: A change of men's Thoughts and
Conversations merely out of slavish fear of outward Judgments here, or of Hell
hereafter; and upon such Repentance God may please, God does please sometimes
to defer outward Judgments, and to bestow outward Mercies, and when it is so,
God purposed to give such Repentance in order to that end, for we must by no
means admit that there can be any new immanent Acts in God, any new purposes
and intentions in him with whom there is no variableness: There is no
mutability in the Divine Majesty, from Eternity to Eternity.

2. There is saving Repentance, or Repentance to Salvation, such as Gods
Children have given them, when God takes away the Heart of Stone, and gives
them an Heart of Flesh, that is, Sorrow for Sin, accompanied with Faith and
Reliance on Gods free Mercy in Christ, for pardon of Sin, and desire and
endeavor to walk so as to please God, to be sure such shall never perish in
the World to come, though they suffer in common Calamities here in this World.

There is a Connection between true Repentance and Salvation, not for any Merit
in our Repentance: But so has the Lord in infinite Wisdom ordained from
Eternity, and has in time manifested it in his word, that those that he is
pleased to bestow glory upon hereafter, he bestows upon him them the beginnings
of of grace here, both were intended eternally to their particular persons, and
from his mere good pleasure, and the exceeding Riches of his Grace. Those that
God had a purpose of grace to from Eternity, them he calls in time, according
to his purpose, Romans 8.28. Whom he has predestined, them he has also
called, v. 30. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our Works; but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. Others
besides the elect, are called by the Preaching of the Word, yea, and may have
inlightning and Convictions of the Spirit, and God has Wise and Holy ends in
it:

To Restrain some of them from being Persecutors of the Church, and to restrain
them from gross Idolatry, and such like Sins, whereby they are less punished in
Hell.

2. That his elect may adore for ever his Free, Special and Discriminating
Grace, that they should be savingly Converted, when some that lived under the
same outward means of Grace, and some of them had great Convictions and
Enlightening too, and exceeded many of them, it may be in notional knowledge,
and such common gifts of the Spirit: And yet they are savingly turned to God,
when others are never so changed: Many other Holy ends might be mentioned, why
God affords the Preaching of the Word to many, upon whom he never purposed,
and intended to bestow special and saving Grace. But to the Elect, God gives
special Grace; and this the Apostle says, is not according to their works,
that is, not for any worthiness or towardliness in them above others, but
according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given them in Christ Jesus,
before the World began: That is, was promised them to Christ in the Covenant of
Redemption between the Father and the Son from Eternity: For which purpose and
Grace, they shall be enabled to praise God to Eternity.

2. Then you come to the Jews, and say to the Doctor, is it possible you should
call in question Gods Seriousness to the Jews? Did not God say to them, Psalm.
81.13. O that they had hearkened unto me, and that Israel had walked in my ways!
With v. 8. and 10.

I answer, as to God's Seriousness, and being Serious, I told you before, I do
not like that such words should be used, when we speak of the most high God:
but that which the Doctor put you to prove, is, that God purposed or intended
to Convert those Jews that in the Conclusion were not Converted. As for these
words, O that they had hearkened unto me! and that Israel had walked in my ways!

1. Some observe, that the words that we translate [O that] might be rendered
[O if] so they are rendered by the Septuagint, and the Targum; and so they only
show the issue of their Obedience, if they had obeyed the Law of the Lord.

2. This is spoken of Israel only; what is that to all mankind? The Jews had
some peculiar Promises as to being preserved in the Land of Canaan, and to give
them plenty of outward things, if they continued to worship the True-God, and
observe his Ordinances, though but in an outward way, tho without Spirituality
and Sincerity. God had said to them, Verse. 9. There shall be no strange God in
thee, neither shall thou worship any strange God: But they fell to Idolatry and
so forfeited God's protection to them in the Land of Canaan, and so the Lord
shows, that if they had hearkened unto him, to have no strange Gods, and to
walk in his ways though, as I said, but formally and outwardly) God would soon
have subdued their Enemies, Verse. 14. and the Lord says, he would have fed
them with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock would he have
satisfied them, Verse. 16. So that this place speaks of Temporal Blessings only.
Nothing of God's Intention and Pleasure to give Eternal Salvation to all that
People, and so is nothing to the purpose. See what is said of the generality of
that People of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. God has not given you a Heart to
perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear unto this day. No doubt God gave to
Moses, and his Elect amongst them, a new Heart; but as to the generality of the
People, God did not give them Hearts to perceive, Eyes to see, and Ears to
hear, which he does infallibly give to them, to whom he purposed and intended
to do it for them. No Text of Scripture must be understood so as to make God
Impotent instead of Omnipotent, which he should be if he could be disappointed
in bringing to pass what he has purposed and intended to do.

You say that Christ was inwardly serious in his endeavors to gather
Jerusalem, appears by his words and tears which are such as may break a Heart
of Stone.

I answer, The Texts, though you don't set them down, are Matt. 23.37. Luke
19.41, 42, 43, 44. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it, saying, if thou had known, even thou at least, in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes; for
the days shall come upon thee that thine Enemies shall cast a trench about
thee, etc.

So that our Savior is not speaking about the Eternal Damnation of the Jews,
but of the Temporal Destruction of Jerusalem, and the People of the Jews, which
came upon them about forty years after. It was such a Desolation as never was,
according as our Savior had foretold. But observe, notwithstanding the
Destruction that came upon that People, all the Elect amongst them were
Converted; and between this Prophecy, and Threatening, and the Destruction of
Jerusalem, there was a great and famous Church at Jerusalem, as we may see in
the Acts: So that our Savior does not mean, that the things that belonged to
their Spiritual and Eternal Peace, were hid from all the People of the Jews;
for many of them believed, and were saved after this time: but that the things
that belonged to the outward peace and safety of their City and Land, were now
so hid from the Eyes of the generality of that People, and that God would lay
their City and Land waste in a short space.

And for that place, Matt. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, and ye would not! behold your House is left unto you desolate: and in
the next Chapter, Mat. 24. he shows what Desolation should come upon Jerusalem.
As if Christ had said, You have had many Prophets before, that called you to
Repentance, and you have stoned, and killed them, and how often would I have
gathered you for your safety, to prevent your Ruin by the Roman Eagles, that
will as easily kill and destroy you, as the Eagle does the Chickens, and ye
would not.

Our Savior, as he was God, so he was Man; and some Speeches and Actions
belong to him as Man. Christ as Man preached to the Jews as a Minister of the
Circumcision: He was a Minister and Prophet to the Jews, and would have
gathered them as Man, whom he would not gather as Godman Mediator. Surely as
God he could have gathered them, so as to prevent both their Temporal and
Eternal Destruction, if he had pleased; and as God-man Mediator he did gather
the Elect amongst them as to Eternal Salvation.

And for what you say concerning Christ's Tears over Jerusalem, such as may
break a Heart of Stone:

I pray consider, this may give more light into this whole business; that this
is spoken of Christ only as he was man, and not as he was God: And so it is
said when Christ went to Lazarus's Grave, Jesus wept, John 11.36. Surely when
Christ wept over Jerusalem, and over Lazarus, it was only as man, he did not
weep as he was Gods As he was Man he had such sinless Passions as Humane Nature
has; but as he was God he was above all weeping and sorrow whatsoever.

But when you say that Christ's Tears over Jerusalem were such as might break a
Heart of Stone: you must know, that Christ's pouring out of Tears as Man, is
not sufficient to break an Heart of Stone. It is only Christ pouring out of his
Spirit upon us, as he is God-man Mediator, that can break an Heart of Stone: So
that you have done nothing to prove, that when God does graciously purpose and
intend to convert a Man, that he does not effect it.

Ay, but you add, that sure you are, that God's Mind in sending Christ to them,
was to turn every one of them from their Iniquities, Acts 3. ult.

Let us enquire into the meaning of that Scripture, Acts. 3.25, 26. Peter
preaching to the Jews, says, Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the
Covenant made with our Fathers, saying to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the
kindreds of the Earth be blessed: unto you first God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities.

The Apostle Peter was now preaching to the Jews, and tells them, that they had
been so wicked, as to deliver up Christ to Pilate, denied him to be the
Messiah, and had killed the Prince of Life, Verse. 13, 14, 15. yet he exhorts
them to Repent, and be Converted that their sins might be blotted out, Verse.
19. Now whereas those that were Convinced, that besides their other sins, they
had been guilty of Crucifying the Lord of Glory, they might think there was no
hope for their Salvation. He tells them, that they were the Children of
Abraham, to whom God promised, that by the Messiah, who came of his Seed,
according to the Flesh, all the Kindreds of the Earth; all the Elect amongst
the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, should be eternally blessed: Therefore, though
these Jews should be greatly humbled for their having a hand in Christ's death,
yet they should not despair of Mercy: For unto you first God having raised up
his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his
Iniquities; that is, that they should obtain Mercy, be blessed, and saved, any
one, every one of these Jews to whom Peter preached, notwithstanding all the
evil that they had done, if now the Lord were pleased to give them a Heart to
believe in Christ, whom they had Crucified. The Jews, notwithstanding they had
Crucified Christ, were to have a priority in having Christ preached to them,
and Salvation by him. This is all that is intended in the words. It was far
from Peter's meaning, that God purposed to save every particular man and woman
of the Jewish Nation then living, and to turn them from their Iniquities, for
then it should have been effected, for the Counsel of the Lord stands sure,
and the Thoughts of his Heart to all Generations. What do men mean in wresting
Texts of Scripture, thus to dishonor the most high God, as if he were
uncertain to effect what he purposes, and intends to do, as if he were like
Man, whose Purposes are often broken off and disappointed: No, our God is
wonderful in Counsel, and mighty in working; his Counsel shall stand, and he
will do all his Pleasure. As to this of the Jews, compare Scripture with
Scripture, and you will find, that God never sent Christ to save and convert
all the Jews, Isaiah 8.14, 15. It Is a Prophecy of Christ, and he shall be for
Sanctuary (to the Elect amongst them) but for a stone of stumbling, and for a
rock of offense to both the houses of Israel (to the generality and Body of the
Jews) for a gin and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; and many
amongst them shall fall, and be broken, and be snared, and taken. And the
Apostle Peter, 1 Epist. 2.8. after he had said that Christ was precious to
those that believe, he adds, and a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense to
them that stumble at the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed: And Simeon spoke by the Holy Ghost, Luke 2.34. Behold this Child is
set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign that shall
be spoken against. And when the Disciples said unto Jesus, why speak thou to
them in Parables? he answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given,
Matt. 13.10.11. and Luke 8.10. Unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom, but to others in Parables; that seeing they might not see, and
hearing they might not understand. It Is said too in another place, when they
were alone he expounded all things to his Disciples; yea (though others are ready
to dispute, and quarrel with God about it) when Chorazin, Bethsaida and
Capernaum repented not: At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have bid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.25, 26. These Scriptures make it plain,
that God never purposed nor intended to convert and save the generality of the
Jews, but only them, whom he had ordained unto Life Eternal.

4. You say, as to the Pharisees, God did by his Servant John seriously call
them to Repentance: yea, his Counsel was of God, Luke 7.29. who never said to
the House of Jacob, seek ye my Face in vain.

I answer, as to that place, Luke 7.29.30. the words are, And all the people
that heard him, and the Publicans, justified God, being Baptized with the
Baptism of John, but the Parisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, being not Baptized of him: For the understanding of this
Scripture observe,

1. What is meant by this. That the generality of the Jews that were Baptized
of John, they justified God? the meaning is, that they acknowledged, that God
had sent them a great Prophet to call them to Repentance, and they submitted to
the Ordinance of Baptism that he was sent to administer, not that the
generality of the people that were Baptized of John, were truly converted; for
John's Preaching and Baptism came to little: for when he carried them further
in his Preaching, to set forth, that Jesus was the Messiah, the Savior that
was to come into the World, they would not own him to be the Christ. Indeed
John was a burning and shining light, and for a season the people rejoiced in
his light; but the generality of the Jews did not believe that Jesus was the
Christ: But though some of them did admire him for his Miracles and Preaching for
a while, yet the Pharisees, at the last, did carry it with the generality of
the people of Jerusalem, and they cried out, Let him be Crucified; and said,
His Blood be upon us, and on our Children.

2. Consider what is meant by the Pharisees and Lawyers rejecting the Counsel
of God against themselves, not being Baptized of him. The meaning is, that they
wholly rejected the Command of God by his Servant John; they did not so much as
make a show of Repentance, nor were Baptized of him, as many of the common
people were; nor would own at all, that Jesus was the Christ, as John preached
he was. What is all this to prove, that God purposed and intended to convert
these Pharisees, and yet they were not converted. As for those words you
mention, Isai. 45.19. He has not said to the House of Jacob, seek ye me in
vain: It Is certain, that never any Jew or Gentile that ever did seek God with
all their Heart, diligently and sincerely in Christ the Mediator, that ever it
was in vain: But you are quite off from the business in hand, which is to
prove, that God does purpose and intend to give any persons Hearts to seek him
aright in Christ, and that God fails in the effecting and doing of it. Then you
conclude your Letter to the Dr. that Ministers, may boldly assure poor Souls,
that God wills not their death, but that they turn and live; yea, he has
sworn, that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked.

To speak a little of this; Preachers had need have a care that they speak
right things of God.

1. As to assuring men that God wills not their death, take it as to particular
persons; take any man that is yet in his Sins, how can you tell him, and assure
him, that God wills not his death? Has not the Lord said, The Soul that
sins, it shall die? and cursed is every one that continues not in every
thing that is written in the Book of the Law, Gal. 3.10. so that all men are
condemned by the Law. Well, come to the Gospel; He that believes not shall be
damned: Surely, according to the way of the Gospel, if God do not give them
Faith and Repentance, God wills their death and damnation; for none can be
damned but those whose Damnation God wills, to glorify his Justice. God wills
the Salvation of all that are saved, and he wills the Death and Damnation of
all that are damned: Surely, you hold, that God wills the death of those that
are never converted.

2. As to assuring men, that God wills that they turn and live: take it in this
sense, that where the Gospel is preached, God commands men to turn unto him and
live; and that all that do turn unto him, all to whom God gives Grace to turn
to him, shall live: But canyou tell a company of People that are yet in their
sins, that you can assure them, that God will give them Grace to turn unto him,
that they may live. That man that could indeed assure all people that come to
hear him, that God will certainly and infallibly give them a new Heart to turn
unto him and live; this were a rare Preacher, indeed: but this no mortal man
can assure all people of.

The way that Preachers are to go, is, first, to show men, how all have sinned,
and come short of the Glory of God, and that God is Righteous, though he should
take vengeance upon them for ever. To show them that there is no help and hope
in their own Righteousness or Strength; and to show, Christ is an Alsufficient
Savior to all Believers; that whosoever believes on him, shall not perish,
but have everlasting life: And to exhort them to pray to God to give them true
Faith and Repentance, to show them that they have not a good thought or desire,
but what God works in them; that it is not enough for Conversion, to have
Commands, Promises, and Threatenings set before them though God makes use of
these; but to tell them as our Savior did, that none can come to Christ, but
those whom the Father draws: None but those to whom it is given of the Father;
and that Sighs and good Moods, and Resolutions in their own Strength are far
short of true Conversion; and that they pray and wait in the use of God's
Ordinances, that the Lord, of the exceeding riches of his Grace, would give
them a new Heart and Spirit, that they may find, that God has put his fear in
their Hearts, that through his Grace they may find not only some sudden flashes,
and sudden resolutions to turn to God, but a penitent frame of Heart for sin, a
prizing of Christ, adoring of God's free Grace in him, and desire and endeavor
to walk with God. But to entertain people with Discourses of By-opinions and
Controversies, and to talk of Universal Redemption is but to do people hurt
instead of good: yea, upon preaching of Universal Redemption, Experience has
shown, that people generally are more Carnal and Profane in their lives.

Now to explain Ezekiel 18.32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies: and Ezekiel 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live; turn
ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O House of Israel?

1. This is spoken to the House of Israel, not of all mankind. They were the
Children of Abraham, his Friend, they were under the external Dispensation of
the Covenant of Grace; what is this to all mankind? The Gentiles, they were
aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12.

2. God has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, as it is the pain and
misery of the Creature; so God has no pleasure in the torments of the Devils,
and damned in Hell: yet it is his holy pleasure to punish them there to
Eternity, for the glorifying of his Justice. And when God Commands the people
of Israel, saying, Turn ye, turn ye, why will you dye? he shows them that
Obedience is acceptable to him, but not that ever he purposed, and intended to
give all their Hearts a saving turn, which he could have done, if it had
pleased him.

3. Compare Scripture with Scripture: God says, Ezekiel 5.11. Neither shall
mine Eye spare, neither will I have any pity, v. 13. Thus shall mine anger be
accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted; Minuit vindicta dolorem. Isai. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of mine
Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies: in the Hebrew it is, I will comfort
my self] in showing my Wrath and Justice upon them, Proverbs 1.25.26. but ye
have set at naught all my Counsels, and would have none of my Reproofs, I also
will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when you Fear comes. All these texts of
Scripture; those in Ezekiel 18.32.33.11. and those in Isaiah 1.24. Ezekiel
5.11, 13. Proverbs 1.25, 26. must be understood with great Caution and
Sobriety. God does often speak after the manner of men to our shallow
Capacities, but we must understand all Scripture so as to know that there are
no Passions in God's immutable Essence, nor any change in his Purposes for
ever. So much in answer to this Author's Letter to Doctor Collings.

But he is up with the Doctor again, Page 17. concerning Voluntas signi, and
Voluntas beneplaciti; but surely he does not rightly english voluntas
beneplaciti, or else his Printer has not done right, for he calls it (his
acceptable Will.) That which Divines mean by voluntas beneplaciti, is what God
himself has decreed shall infallibly come to pass: But as this Author speaks,
this distinction of Divines would be no distinction at all; for to be sure,
what God commands is acceptable to him: but the meaning of Divines by voluntas
beneplaciti, is not what is acceptable to God from Man as his duty, but what
God himself pleases to do, or suffers to be done for his Glory.

This distinction of Divines being well understood, is a great help to the
understanding of many places of Scripture: God gives out Precepts and Commands
to men for several wise and holy Ends.

1. To show his Lordship and Authority, that he has an absolute dominion over
them, to command what he pleases.

2. To show what is good and acceptable to him, to show what is their Duty.

3. To show them their inability, weakness, and insufficiency; that man may see
what cause he has to be humbled, and lie low before God; for man of himself
can do nothing of what God commands, from a right Principle, and to a right
End, but what God pleases to work in us, and do for us; that is another thing,
indeed as to his Elect, what he commands them as their Duty he purposes and
promises to do for them of his mere Grace and good pleasure. Though man by his
fall has lost his power to obey, yet surely God has not lost his power to
command: God gives some Grace to obey, to others he does not give Grace: Who
shall dispose of his Grace but himself?

Further to illustrate this distinction of Divines concerning God's Will of
Precept, what he commands men to do; and his Will of Purpose, what he will
certainly and infallibly do himself: Let it be observed, that God's Will, as to
some Precepts and Commands to men do vary, and alter as it pleases him. As for
example, several ritual Commands about the Worship of God, which he required in
his Worship under the Old Testament, are altered under the New Testament: But
take God's Will for his Purposes and Intentions, what he will do, and he is of
one mind, unchangeable from Eternity to Eternity.

Yea, to make this Distinction far more evident, God does sometimes give out a
Command to Man to do a thing, and yet may absolutely purpose and intend to
hinder a Man from doing of it; as in the case of God's Command to Abraham, to
offer his Son Isaac, Genesis 22.2. And he said, take now thy Son, thine only Son
Isaac, and get thee to the Land of Moriah, and offer him there upon one of the
Mountains that I will tell thee of: Abraham prepared all things to obey this
Command of God: and v. 10, 11, 12. and after he had bound his Son, stretched
out his Hand, and took the Knife to slay his Son, the Lord called unto him, and
said, Lay not thy Hand upon thy Son, neither do thou any thing unto him: Here
we see that God gave out a Command to do a thing which he never purposed and
intended to be be done; yea, which he resolved to hinder the doing of;
therefore it is one thing for God to command us to do a thing, and another
thing for God to purpose and intend this thing shall certainly be effected:
Yea, take another instance concerning Pharaoh, Exodus 4.21. And the Lord said
unto Moses, When thou go to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those
wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine Hand; but I will harden his
Heart, that he shall not let the people go. God sent a Command to Pharaoh to
let the People of Israel go out of his Land, Exodus 5.1. but before ever Moses
came to Pharaoh with this Message and Command, God said to Moses, I am sure
that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no not by a mighty hand, Exodus
3.19. So here you see, that God, as Sovereign Lord, may give out a Command to
show his Authority over Man, and require a thing of Man as his Duty, when he
does not intend to enable a Man to do it: Yea, when God intends to harden a
Man's Heart; that is, intends to leave Man to the Corruption of his own Heart,
that he shall never do what God commands him. If you will not adore the
Incomprehensible Majesty and Ways of God, but compare him with Man, put Laws
upon God, that he must do, as Man is bound to do; then, I say, this borders
upon Blasphemy, if it be not downright Blasphemy against the most high God.

CHAP. III. An Answer to this Author's Letter to Mr. H. wherein this Author
pretends to bring several places of Scripture for Universal Redemption.
IT seems Mr. H. sent a Paper of Verses to this Author: He answers these
Verses by a Letter, and with this very Humble and Civil Direction [To the
Nameless and Nonsensical Poet] indeed I have seen these Verses, and truly, to
speak my Judgment of them, though this Author calls them Nonsensical, yet they
were written with great Judgment [excepting the Scriptures which this Author
quotes, which are excellent in themselves, however wrested and mistaken by
Men;] I think there is more Truth and good Sense in those Verses, than in all
this Author's Book. It Is true, he that made those Verses did not show himself
to be a good Poet; but he showed himself a knowing Christian; and though I have
known the Person many years, yet I could not have expected, that he could have
framed so many solid Arguments against Universal Redemption; and if I had known
before hand, that he would have written to this Author, I would have advised
him to have written in Prose, and not in Verse. Good Poetry is one thing, and
good Sense is another.

These Verses were against Universal Redemption: This Author in Answer to this
Letter brings several Scriptures for Universal Redemption which are now to be
explained.

When the Papists bring for Transubstantiation the words of our Savior; This
is my B die: We deny Transubstantiation, but we don't deny the words of our
Savior; but show the meaning of the words to be otherwise than they understand
them: So in dealing with this Author, we do not deny the Scripture; we hold,
that Christ dyed for all, for every Man, for the whole World; that is, for all
the Elect, for all Believers of all Nations, of all Ranks throughout the whole
World; and we say no more is intended in any of those Expressions, but that
this Author, and those that are of his Opinion, mistake the meaning of the
Scriptures.

Before I come to explain the Scriptures this Author brings for Universal
Redemption:

1. Let it be considered. that the words [all] [every] [the World] [and the
[whole World] do not always signify all Adam's Posterity, but must be taken in
a limited, restrained Sense; yea, sometimes but for a few, that there is
nothing can be concluded from those Expressions, but by considering the Subject
matter spoken of, and the Circumstances of the places of Scripture where those
Expressions are used.

1. As for example of the word [all] it is not always meant of all Adam's
Posterity, but sometimes of but few Persons, Psalm. 145.14. The Lord upholdeth
all that fall: whereas Men fall into sin and misery; yea, the greatest part of
mankind into Hell it self, and the Lord does not prevent these things: The
meaning is only, that those that are upheld, and kept out of Sin and Misery
here, or Hell hereafter, he it is that upholds them; but this all that the Lord
upholds, are indeed but a small number in comparison of those that God does not
uphold. The Jews said to John, chap. 3.26. He to whom thou barest witness,
behold the same Baptizeth, and all Men come to him; when it was so few that
came to Christ, so that John says, verse. 32. that no Man (comparatively)
received his Testimony.

2. For that Expression [every Man.] it is often to be taken in a limited
restrained Sense, Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets were until John, since
that time the Kingdom of God is preached, and every Man presses into it: It
was only some of all sorts, and very few in comparison of those that were then
living in the World, 1 Cor. 12.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every Man to profit withal; when indeed the manifestation of the Spirit
there spoken of, the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit are given to few, very
few; but the meaning is only, that to every one of those to whom this
Manifestation of the Spirit is given, it is, that they may profit others with
it. Again, 1 Cor. 4.5. the Apostle speaking of the Day of Judgment, says, That
then shall every Man have praise of God; which is meant only of every true
Believer; for the greatest part of Adam's Posterity shall not then have praise
of God, but have the Sentence of Eternal Damnation pass against them.

3. As for the word [World] and [whole world] these Expressions are sometimes
taken too in a limited, restrained Sense, John 12.19. The Pharisees therefore
said amongst themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold the World
is gone after him: whereas it was but few, very few of Men then living in the
World that went after Christ, and owned him in any Sense, it was only of a few
in that little Country of Judea that were there spoken of, Luke 2.1. And it
came to pass in those Days, that there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus,
that all the World should be taxed; it was but all the Jews, as some Expositors
think; however it was but all that were subject to the Romans, which were far
from being all Mankind then living in the World.

I might give many more Instances that the word, all, and every Man, the World,
and all the World, are taken in a limited and restrained Sense sometimes; and
that nothing can be collected rightly from such Expressions, but as the Matter
treated of, and the Circumstances of the place shall require.

2. I would enquire in what Sense we are to understand Christ's dying, that we
may know what we dispute about: Let us consider,

1. Who it was that dyed for Sinners, and this may give light into this
Controversy, though it was only the Humane Nature of Christ that dyed, or was
capable of dying; yet the Person was God, the fellow of the Lord of Hosts:
therefore God is said to purchase the Church with his own Blood, Act. 20. 28.
If Christ, indeed, had not been God by nature, then People might have had such
low, undervaluing thoughts of his Death, as that he might dye in vain as to
some; yea, as to all he dyed for: But we that do believe he was God-man, cannot
believe but that he will infallibly save all that he dyed for. Indeed, if we
did not believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, and that Christ is the second
Person of the for ever blessed and glorious Trinity: and that he is the Son of
God by Ineffable Eternal Generation, very God as the Father is; and that he
took upon him Human Nature, that he might suffer the Punishment of our Sins,
and redeem and save us; we would never contend about his Death, who he dyed
for; because, if he had not been the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, he could never, by himself, have purged away our
Sins by the Sacrifice of himself. It is to be feared, that some Arminians are
Socinians too: Antitrinitarians, as Michael Servetus was, of whom I shall speak
afterward, if God permit. And indeed Arminianism prepares the way to
Socinianism, if God does not graciously stop Men in the way of Error. So that
this I lay down as a Basis and Foundation for an Enquiry who Christ dyed for;
that all would consider the Eminency, yea, the Infiniteness of the Person that
dyed for us. It was he that was in the form of God, and thought it not robbery
to be equal with God, though he took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
found in fashion as a Man, and was obedient to Death, even the Death of the
Cross, to redeem his Church. This was the greatest wonder that ever was done in
this World: It is the astonishment of Angels and Men to Eternity; and can any
imagine, that God was manifest in the Flesh, and dyed in vain for any for whose
sake he bare the Punishment of their Sins, and went through unutterable pain
and suffering for their Redemption.

2. Let us consider what is the sense and meaning of Christ's dying for us; It
is, that Christ dyed in our stead, as our Surety, and as a proper Sacrifice for
our Sins. Christ dyed, not only for our good; as the Socinians speak; but in
our stead, as well as for our good: Our Iniquities were laid upon him, Isai.
53.6. He bare our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.23. He suffered
for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. for all the Sins whatsoever of
them, for whom he dyed, Romans 4. ult. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and
was raised again for our Justification. Those for whom Christ dyed, he made an
absolute, perfect satisfaction for all their (...) yea, purchased Converting
and Keeping Grace for them here, and Glory hereafter: He did not do the work of
Mediator and Savior by halves, He obtained Eternal Redemption for those for
whom he dyed, Heb. 9.12. he gave himself for those for whom he dyed, to Merit
and Purchase for them Faith, Repentance, Grace and Glory to be infallibly
bestowed upon them in the Lords appointed time and season, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Titus 3.13, 14. as I shall endeavor to show in a Chapter by it self.

But as for this Author, and those of his way, though they make a great noise
about Christ's dying for all Adams Posterity: Yet they do really deny that
Christ dyed for any Man or Woman in the World, in a true Scripture Sense; that
is, that Christ so dyed for any, as to make Satisfaction for all their Sins,
and to purchase saving Grace here, and Glory hereafter, to be infallibly
bestowed upon their particular persons; For they say that notwithstanding
Christ's Death, there might not one Man or Woman in the World have been saved.
The truth is, though some may mean well, and think they exalt Christ by the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption: Yet they do debase and dishonor Christ, and
bring all at last to Man's Meriting his own Salvation.

1. I say that Arminians do Debase, Disgrace, and Dishonor Christ, and that
Glorious, and for ever to be adored Redemption by him. They talk indeed of
Universal Redemption by Christ, but indeed it is an Universal, nothing in
comparison of that True, Perfect and Eternal Redemption that our Lord Jesus
Christ has wrought for those for whom he dyed; which shall infallibly bring
them to Grace here, and Glory hereafter, as shall, God willing, be manifested
afterward.

2. I say that Arminians, (whether they do really intend it or no,) bring all
at last to Man Meriting his own Salvation. For if God the Father did no more in
Electing a particular person to Grace and Glory, and the Son of God in
Redemption, and the Holy Ghost in infusing a new Heart for those that are
Saved, than for those that perish for ever: Then those that are Saved, it is by
their own Merits, Worthiness, Towardliness and Goodness above others; and so
they are not Saved by mere Grace, not by any Special Discriminating Grace from
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to them; and so, whereas God has ordered it so,
that no Flesh should glory and boast in his presence; These lay a Foundation
for pride and self-conceit, and make poor provision for admiring free special
Discriminating Grace here, and to Eternity in Heaven. Yea, one of the Arminians
in answer to that question, who makes thee to differ? would not mince the
matter as some others do: But boldly and roundly answered to the Apostles
question, I make my self to differ.

These things being premised, I shall now close with you upon the Scriptures
you bring, and shall make it manifest (if the Lord put in by his Spirit to give
Light) they do not hold forth that Christ dyed for all Adams Posterity.

1. The first you name is Hebrews 29. We see Jesus made a little lower than the
Angels, for the suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by
the Grace of God should taste death for every Man.

This Scripture this Author cites in the first place, and Mr. J. C. in his Book
called Redemption redeemed, counts this Text the fullest of all other places
for Universal Redemption; but indeed it is a notable Text against it, and may
give us much light how to understand the word [all,] and [every Man] and [the
World] in other places of Scripture.

1. The Apostle shows what was the cause of Gods giving his Son to taste Death
for us, it was the grace of God; the for ever to be Adored grace of God, the
exceeding Riches of his grace that ever was, or can be to those persons that
God gave his Son to dye for.

2. He expresses what Christ suffered for them in pursuance of Gods eternal
and infinite grace to those persons whose Surety and Mediator he was, and that
is set forth by tasting of Death for them; whereby is meant, the bitter Passion
of Christ, suffering in his Soul and Body, to bear the Curse of the Law; the
Wrath of God due to their Sins, that so they might not bear it themselves.

3. He shows who it was that Christ tasted Death for, this bitter Death; in the
Greek it is [(...)] which, lest any should think is meant of all Adam's
Posterity, it is restrained by the Apostle himself; he shows it was only for
the Elect: for it follows, v. 10. For it became him, for whom are all things,
in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation
perfect through Sufferings: So that the Apostle shows, that the all that Christ
tasted Death for, are all the Sons that are to be brought to Glory: all that
God has Predestined to the Adoption of Children, Christ tasted Death for all
them, and only them.

Again, he shows who were intended by the all that Christ tasted Death for, by
calling him, The Captain of their Salvation; that those that Christ, as their
Captain and Leader, would infallibly conduct to Salvation, v. 11. For both he
that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one: The all, and
every one, that Christ tasted Death for, is restrained by the Apostle again, to
all those that are, or shall be sanctified by the Blood and Spirit of the Lord
Jesus their Sanctifier, and in the end of v. 11. it is said, For which cause he
is not ashamed to call them Brethren: and v. 12. I will declare thy Name unto
my Brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing Praise unto thee: So that
the all that Christ tasted Death for, is all that he makes Believers, makes his
Brethren, makes his Church; and v. 13. Behold, I and the Children which God
has given me: So that those that Christ tasted Death for, is limited to those
that the Father has given him, and are the Children of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ; such as are given to Christ, to bring all of them, at last, to be
actually the Children of God: So that all things considered, as I said before,
we have the Apostles example in enquiring into the true meaning of any
Scripture that speaks of Christ's dying for all, giving himself a Ransom for
all, his being a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World: to restrain and
limit such Expressions to the Sons that were to be brought to Glory: to those
that Christ was to make Brethren: to those that are, or shall be sanctified by
him, to his Church; to those that were given him of the Father, to be certainly
and infallibly brought to Glory.

2. The next place this Author brings for Universal Redemption, is, 1 John
2.2. Who is a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the Sins of the whole World. Now for the finding out the true meaning of this
Scripture,

1. Observe, that this Epistle was written to the Jews, v. 7. Brethren, I write
no new Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment, which ye had from the
beginning: It was the Jews that had the Commandments of God; the sum of which
old Commandments was, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart,
and thy Neighbor, as thy self, Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39. As for the Gentiles, they
had not the written Law committed to them, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his
Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt
so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments they have not known them.

2. Consider, that when the time came, that the Lord would visit the Gentiles,
and that the Gospel should be preached unto them, it was expedient that there
should be such Expressions used, that Christ was the Propitiation for the Sins
of the whole World, not only to encourage the Gentiles to look after Christ,
but also, in respect of the Jews, who did generally despise the other Nations
of the World, and thought the Messiah was only for them; yea, for a time, the
Jews that believed could hardly bear to hear of the calling of the Gentiles.
Therefore the Apostle shows that Christ was not only a Propitiation for the
Sins of Believers amongst the Jews, but for the Believers amongst the Gentiles
throughout the whole World.

3. The word [Propitiation] will give light into the meaning of the place, and
determine the true sense and meaning of it; for what is it for Christ to be a
Propitiation for our Sins? it is to make Satisfaction and Reconciliation for
our Sins; an absolute and perfect Satisfaction for all our Sins, to the Law and
Justice of God; and this is laid up with the Faithfulness of the Father to be
certainly and infallibly bestowed upon us in the Lord's appointed time. Those
that Christ has died for, he has made such an absolute and eternal
Satisfaction and Reconciliation for their Sins, for all their Sins, that they
shall certainly be Called, Sanctified, and Eternally Saved: So that as Divines
have observed the true sense and meaning of this place before us, is the same
with what we have, John 11.51, 52. And this spoke he, not of himself; but being
High Priest that year, he prophesied, that Jesus should die for that Nation,
(that is, the Nation of the Jews) and not for that Nation only, but that also
he should gather together in one, the Children of God that were scattered
abroad: that is, the Elect amongst the Gentiles throughout the whole World.

3. Then he cites, 1 Timothy 2.6.7. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be
testified in due time, whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle; (I
speak the truth and lie not) a Teacher of the Gentiles in Faith and Verity; for
the understanding of this Scripture.

1. Consider, that when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, the Magistrates were
Gentiles, and not Jews; and they were generally wicked Persecutors, whereupon
the Professors of the Gospel through their Corruption and Weakness did many of
them neglect to pray for them, but rather prayed against them: Now the Apostle
puts them upon Prayer for these Magistrates, and shows them, that if God do not
please to Convert them, yet he can so overruled them, that they may live
peaceable lives, and enjoy the liberty of God's Worship in their Dominions;
yea, the Apostle goes further, he would have them pray for the Conversion of
those Wicked, Persecuting Magistrates, and says, v. 4. That God would have all
Men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the Truth. Some of all sorts
and ranks, some Kings and great ones, as well as mean People; and that for any
thing they know, God will save, and bring to the knowledge of the Truth, those
Wicked Magistrates, that did then persecute the Church; all those that God will
have to be saved, he will bring them to the knowledge of the Truth: He can
easily do it, though for the present they be ignorant of the Truth, therefore he
would have them pray, that God would convert them: and whereas some Professors
of the Gospel then, were Jews, and were much alienated from the Gentiles, the
Apostle would take off their Prejudice from those Kings, and those that were in
Authority, because they were Gentiles; and tells them, that there is but one
Mediator between God and Man, and that he gave himself a Ransom for all; that
is, for all the Elect, whether Jews or Gentiles, and says, I am a Preacher to
the Gentiles; and God has made me an Instrument in his Hands for the
Conversion of many Gentiles; therefore why might not the Lord save, and bring
to the knowledge of the Truth, these Kings and great Men, as well as others, if
he pleases: and though great Men have great Spirits, high, proud Spirits many
times, and say, Who is the Lord? yet the King's Heart is in the Hand of the
Lord (as well as another Man's) and he turns it as the Rivers of Water, which
way soever he pleases, Prove. 21.1. therefore, v. 8. I will that Men lift up
holy Hands without Wrath (for these Kings, and those that are in Authority,
though they be wicked Persecutors for the present) and without doubting of God's
Power to Convert them if he pleases. This Paraphrase upon the words may give
light into the true meaning of the place.

2. That which may put all out of doubt concerning the meaning of this place.
Let it be considered, what it is for Christ to give himself a Ransom for Men,
[(...)] Christ's Ransoming Souls was not like others Ransoming: He gave his
Life a Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. there never was such a Ransom as he gave; he that
was God-man gave his Life a Ransom for many, it is said in that place of
Matthew; for all, in this place to Timothy; both signify the same, the many
that Christ gave himself a Ransom for, are all the Elect Jews or Gentiles. This
Ransom that Christ gave, was an Infinite Ransom, of infinite worth and value;
it makes sure and certain the discharge of all those for whom he gave himself a
Ransom. When Men do well consider of it, they will not so disparage him, that
was God-man, as to think that he gave himself a Ransom for Men, and that yet
they should be Prisoners in Hell for ever. If Christ had only died as an
Example, as the Socinians say, or for Men's good, some way or other, it had been
another case: but Christ dying in the room and stead of Men, and giving himself
a Ransom for them, this Ransom will do all for them to secure their Salvation:
And as to Faith, Repentance, and Perseverance in Grace, they all follow upon
Christ's giving himself a Ransom; for Christ would not give himself a Ransom at
random, at uncertainties, but made sure to purchase such inherent Grace for all
those that he gave himself to be a Ransom, that they shall be effectually
converted, adore this Grace that Christ, God-man, should give himself a Ransom
for them, and love him, and live to him: So that, I say, the very
consideration, what it was for Christ, God-man, to give himself a Ransom, is
sufficient to restrain, and limit the word all, to all the Elect, to all, and
only them that shall be saved.

4. Then this Author brings, 2 Cor. 5.14.15. For the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead: and that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

1. For the Explanation of this Text.

This Text speaks only of Believers, the word all is restrained, and limited by
the word [us,] those that have believed in Christ, or shall hereafter believe
in him to life everlasting: for surely the love of Christ constrains
Believers only to love him, and to live unto him, the love of Christ has no
such effect but upon Believers.

2. The Apostle shows, that they which live by Christ, they were by nature
Children of Wrath, as well as others: All dead Men, as being under the Curse of
the Law, as well as others, and that Christ died for them, not only that they
might be delivered from the Curse of the Law, not only that they might live in
that sense, but that those that are alive from the Law, as to Condemnation,
should not live to themselves, but to him that died for them, as to
Sanctification also: That is, that Christ intended and purchased for all those,
for whom he died, not only that they should live, as to Justification, but as
to Holiness and Sanctification too; he procured both for them, and both shall
be infallibly bestowed upon them; so that the Apostle's meaning is, not only
that the Love of Christ in dying for us, is a strong Argument, why they that he
dyed for, should live, not to themselves, but to him: But also, that Christ
both intended and purchased this grace to be certainly conferred upon them, that
they should be so Sanctified, that they should not live to themselves, but unto
him that dyed for them, and rose again, according to Titus 2.14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good works.

So that this Text duly considered, is a not able place against Universal
Redemption: For it holds forth, that all that Christ dyed for, he did not only
intend and purchase that they should be certainly and infallibly delivered from
Condemnation, but that they should also be sure to be Sanctified, that they
might live to Christ in Holiness and Righteousness.

5. This Author mentions the words of our Savior. John 6.51. The Bread that I
will give, is my Flesh; Which I will give for the Life of the World: For the
Explanation of this Text.

Consider that our Savior Preached but in that little Country the Land of
Judea, and at first forbad his Disciples to go and Preach amongst the Gentiles.
And the Jews to whom our Savior spoke these words, had a strong conceit (as
was hinted before) that the Messiah was for that Nation only: Therefore now the
time drew near, that many of the Gentiles were to be Converted; our Savior
tells them, that he will give his Life for the World, not only for those which
the Father had given him amongst the Jews, but amongst the other Nations of the
World: Amongst whom many now were to be Converted, for this was a great
Mystery, that Christ was to be Preached unto the Gentiles, and be believed on
in the World, 1 Timothy 3.15. for though there were many Prophesies of the
Conversion of the Gentiles, yet they were little understood, and Ephesians. 3, 4,
5, 6. the Apostle says that this was a Mystery which in other Ages was not
made known to the Sons of Men, (that is, not clearly made known) that the
Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs of the same Body, and partakers of his promise
in Christ by the Gospel: And this is the reason why Christ said that he gave
his Life for the World, not that he gave his Life for all Adams posterity, but
for all that the Father had given him amongst the Gentiles as well as Jews.

6. The next place this Author brings, is, 1 Timothy 4.10. for therefore we both
labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the
Savior of all Men, especially of those that believe: For Explanation of this
place of Scripture, the Apostles went through great hazards and dangers in
preaching the Gospel, yet they went on in their work, trusting in the living
God, who is the preserver of Men, that is, the meaning of the Savior of all
Men. In this Text God does afford wonderful outward preservation to all Men in
their callings, when he pleases; but he is the Savior and Preserver of
Believers especially, who are exposed to more outward dangers from Enemies,
than other Men are, and especially Ministers, they are in danger of Death
often, yet God preserves them from many and unknown dangers, until they have
done their work, and served their Generations according to the will of God.
Therefore the Apostle and others of the Faithful, would trust in the living
God, they would leave all to Gods Providence, would not be afraid of any
amazement, but go on in the way of their Duty; this is the meaning of the
words, the Apostle is not here speaking of Christ as Mediator, and of Spiritual
and Eternal Salvation by him, but of the Providence of God, as the Preserver of
Men, of which Men in general have Experience, but Faithful Ministers, and other
Believers, especially so far as God sees fit.

7. Then this Author quotes, 1 Timothy 2, 3, 4. This is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto
the Knowledge of the Truth.

I have opened these words before, when I discussed, 1 Timothy 2.6. but to say a
little more. The meaning of these words is, that God will have some of all
Nations, some of all ranks, Princes as well as Subjects: Yea, though those
Princes and Magistrates be wicked Persecutors, yet they may be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth: Therefore the Apostle would not have the
professors of the Gospel exasperated against them, as they are apt to be; but
says, it is good and acceptable in the sight of God to pray for them, if
perhaps God will give them Repentance, to the acknowledgment of the Truth, and
they have Encouragement to pray; because God will glorify his free grace in
Christ, in Converting and saving some of all Nations, and of all Ranks, and
some that for a time make havoc of the Church. If Men will not be content with
this exposition of the words, that by [all] is not meant all Adams Posterity,
but only some of all sorts; It may be, that they think that all Adams Posterity
shall be saved, though they don't think fit to say so openly: For when it is
said, God would have all Men to be saved, to understand it of all individuals
in the World, they must either say that God cannot do what he will, which is
Blasphemy, or else they must hold that all Adams Posterity shall be saved, and
indeed, Universal Redemption has a tendency to that Opinion; but Men dare not
say so, whatsoever they think, because so many express Texts of Scripture are
against it: But if God would have all Adams Posterity saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, who could let it, for he does whatsoever he pleases;
his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.

8. The next place is, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some Men count slackness; but is long-suffering to usward, not
willing that any should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance.

For the understanding of this Text, let is be considered what is meant by that
expression, the Lord is not slack concerning his promise. By the promise is
meant Christ's promise to come the second time without Sin to Salvation, Heb.
9. last. Our Savior at his first coming, had the Sins of his People to
satisfy for, and he has done that work, he has offered one Sacrifice for Sin
for ever; but he is to come the Second time without Sin to Salvation, without
any Sin of his People to make atonement for, but then he shall come in all his
glory: And when Christ who is our Life shall appear, his people shall appear
with him in glory. But it might be said, why is he so long before he comes,
seeing that he has promised to come the Second time? The Apostle answers,
that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise of coming, but there is a set
appointed time for it; and there are yet of the Elect to be Converted, Gentiles
and Jews, and the Lord is long-suffering to us ward; by the [us] is meant the
Elect amongst the Jews and Gentiles; not willing that any, that is, that any
one of the Elect should Perish, but that [all] should come to Repentance, that
is, all the Elect. So that the meaning of the words is, that though the World
be so full of Sin, yet Christ does not come presently to execute Judgment,
until all the Elect are brought to Repentance, and then he will come in all his
glory, all the Elect must be born, and born again before Christ comes to
Judgment: He is not willing that any one of them should Perish, but that all of
them should come to Repentance.

9. Then we are to consider, Acts 17.29, 30, 31. Forasmuch then as we are the
offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold,
or Silver, or Stone graven by Art, and Man's Device; and the times of this
ignorance God winked at, but now commands all Men every where to Repent,
because he has appointed a day, in the which, he will Judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead.

To open this place a little, Paul Preached to the Men of Athens, who were
greatly addicted to Idolatry: He shows them what a gross conceit it was, and
indeed contrary to the light of Nature, to think that the Godhead is like unto
Gold, or Silver or Stone graven with Art and Man's Device: Yet he shows them
that God had given up the Gentiles to this gross Idolatry, as Romans 1.21, 22,
23. and Acts 14.16. God had suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, and
here v. 30. the times of this Ignorance, God winked at; which must not be
understood, as if God had not punished them here, and in Hell, for their
Idolatry and other Sins: But the meaning is, that God let them alone to walk in
their Blindness and Ignorance. Gods Election then ran chiefly, and almost
wholly amongst the Jews, but [now] that Gods Election runs among the
Gentiles: Now the time is come to visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a
People for his Name, he commands Men every where, in all Nations where we his
Ministers come, to repent of their Idolatries, and other Sins in a more
especial manner, than ever he did before, that Men turn from Idols to serve the
living God; and this is a notable startling Argument to move them to Repent,
and turn to God: For there is a Terrible Day of Judgment to come, when God will
Judge the World in Righteousness by that Man [Christ,] whom he has ordained to
be Judge of the quick and the dead.

What is this to Christ's dying for all Adams Posterity but against it? For we
see there how God suffered the Nations to walk in their Idolatrous courses, and
did not send any to Preach the way of Salvation to them: And whereas [now] God
commanded Men to Repent by the Preaching of the Apostles; this was to bring in
the Elect among the Gentiles, and observe, that as to the Elect, the Lord does
not only command them to Repent, by the Preaching of his Ministers, but gives
them Repentance it self by his Spirit.

10. The next place is, Romans 5.18. As by the Offense of one Judgment came upon
all Men to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all Men unto justification of Life.

For the understanding of this Text.

1. Consider that the first Man Adam, and the second Man the Lord from Heaven
were both public persons. The first Adam stood in the room of his Seed: The
second Adam in the room of his Seed.

2. Consider that the Apostles scope in this Text and Context, is not at all to
compare the two Adams as to the number of their Seed, as if Christ's Seed were
equal in number with the first Adams Seed; but the Apostles intent is only to
compare the Power and Influence of the first Adams sin, to bring Condemnation
upon all his Seed, with the power, Efficacy and Virtue, of the Second Adams
Righteousness, to bring the justification of Life: And to that end, the Apostle
shows that the first Adam by one sin, by one offense, brought his Seed into a
State of Condemnation: And the Second Adam by his Active and Passive Obedience,
did take away for his Seed, not only the Sin that came upon them by the first
Adam, but their many Offenses committed in their own persons, v. 16. So that,
let it be well observed, the scope of the Apostle is to show, that as Death and
ondemnation came inevitably upon all the first Adams Posterity by his fall, so
shall the free gift of Righteousness come infallibly upon all in whose room and
stoad Christ dyed, as their second Adam, their Surety and Mediator. The first
Adams [all,] was all Mankind, the second Adams [all] was all the Elect, and
most certainly and infallibly, shall both Justification and Sanctification come
upon all Christ's Seed, whose public person he was, all for whom he obeyed the
Law, and bare the Curse of it. So that though every ordinary reader may not be
able to take up the right sense of this place, the Apostles scope is, that as
Death came in by one public person, so Life and Salvation came in by another
public person: And that the Lord Jesus will infallibly justify, and save his
[all] for whom he undertook, and dyed as their Head Representative, second
Adam, Surety and Mediator. This Text and Context rightly understood, throws
down the conceit of Universal Redemption to the ground.

11. then the Author puts two Scriptures together, but nothing to the purpose,
1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive: And John 5.29. They that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life,
and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

As to the first Text. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made
alive: The Apostle there is speaking of the Resurrection of the Body; and
though all shall be raised up at the second coming of Christ, yet in this 22 v.
and the next, the Apostle is speaking only of the Resurrection of the Bodies of
the Saints: He first shows how Man came to be liable to natural Death, and
says, in Adam all dye; by his sin and fall, Man came to be liable to natural
Death, as it was penal indeed, not only natural, but spiritual, and liableness
to Eternal Death came upon us by Adam. But the Apostle here is speaking only of
Natural Death; well, says the Apostle, in Christ shall all be made alive: But
says he in the next Verse, every one in his own order, Christ the first
Fruits, and afterward they that are Christ's at his Coming. Christ the Head of
the Church; He was the first that rose from the dead by his own power, as he
was God, and he was the chief, the most excellent person that ever was, or
shall be raised from the Dead; and then he says, that they that are Christ's,
they shall be raised at his coming, as Christ the Head, is raised from the
Dead: So they that are Christ's, all that are the Members of his Mystical Body,
they shall be raised at his second coming: And the other Text John 5.29. shows,
that as Believers shall be raised at the last day, that they may be glorified
not only in their Souls, but in their Bodies too: So the wicked they shall be
raised too at the day of Judgment, that in their Bodies as well as in their
Souls, they may be punished for ever. I wonder that this Author should so much
as name these two Texts for Universal Redemption.

12. The next place is, 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among
the People, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift Destruction. As to this place,

1. It Is very considerable, what is said by the Learned Dr. Ames, for the
understanding of these words, that is, that the word [(...)] here used, is not
wont to be applied to the Son; but appropriated to the Father, and that [(...)]
is constantly given to the Son, the Lord Christ: And so he Explains it by Deuteronomy.
32.6. Is not he thy Father, that has bought thee? Has he not made thee, and
established thee? So that the words may be understood of God as Creator, and
common Benefactor that had bought them by outward and common Mercies, as he is
said to ahve bought Israel of old: Others take notice, that the word [(...)]
which we translate bought, does often signify Freeing, making Free; so that
these false Teachers might be said, by the power of common Enlightening, to be
made free from many gross Errors, and gross Sins for a time; and yet
afterward, were entangled in vile Doctrines and Practices, and returned with
the Dog to the Vomit: This Exposition will stand very well.

2. But if their being bought, should be understood of their being bought by
Christ, then the meaning is only this, That these Apostates once thought, that
Christ had bought them, as well as others, and the Brethren in the Judgment of
Charity thought them to be such too, as Christ had redeemed: But if Christ had
indeed bought them by the inestimable and infinite price of his Blood, who is
God as well as Man; he would either have kept them out of those vile Heresies
and Practices they fell into, or would, after their fall, have renewed them
again to Repentance; for Christ, God-man, is able to get and keep what he has
bought with his precious Blood, and will certainly and infallibly do it.

13. Then for Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by
Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.

The Scope of the Apostle in that place, is to show the different degrees of
Light and Knowledge the Jews and Gentiles had, and that they should be judged
accordingly. The generality of the Gentiles had only the dim light of Nature,
which yet did reveal some things unto them, as that there was a God, that
Parents were to be honored, and that they ought to be kind and just one to
another, and the like: But the Jews had the written Law, which declared more of
the Will of God to them: Now the Apostle shows, v. 12. That as many as have
sinned without Law, that is, that never had the written Law, they shall perish
without Law; that is, they shall not be judged and condemned for breaking the
written Law that was given by God to Moses; but they shall be judged and
condemned for sinning against the Light of Nature: But whereas it might be
objected, How could they be guilty of Sin, who never had the Written Law? the
Apostle answers, v. 14. That the Gentiles which have not the (Written) Law, do
by nature the things contained in the Law: These (says he) having not the Law,
are a Law unto themselves: that is, in some few things they have the Light of
Nature to be a Law, and Light to them: This the Apostle sets forth yet further,
v. 15. which shows the work of the Law written in their Hearts; that is, that
though they had not that Supernatural Writing of God's Law promised to the Elect,
in the Covenant of Grace, yet they have a Natural Writing of the Law in their
Hearts, in some few Particulars (as was said before) and the Apostle gives this
Demonstration of it, that these Gentiles have some knowledge of Good and Evil;
because their Consciences sometimes accuse them, and bear witness against them;
and sometimes their Consciences excuse them as to some Acts; but the Apostle
shows, that their Consciences will more fully accuse them in the Day of
Judgment; so that they shall have nothing to say, why they should not have the
Sentence of Condemnation pass against them: Then the Apostle shows, that God
will judge the World by Jesus Christ at the last Day, according to my Gospel;
that is, according to the Doctrine that I Preach: This Doctrine Paul preached
upon all occasions, that God would judge the World by that Man [Christ] whom he
had ordained: This short Paraphrase may give light into this Context; I wonder
that any should bring this place for Universal Redemption.

14. Another place he brings, Coloss 1.23. If ye continue in the Faith,
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which
ye have heard, and which was preached to every Creature which is under Heaven.

The scope of the Apostle is to show, that according as Christ had commanded,
the Apostles had preached the Gospel all over, to every Man and Woman to whom
God gave them Opportunity, but the Gospel had not been generally preached
before to all Nations; nor has it been so generally preached since the
Apostles time: But in opposition to Judea, the Gospel was preached all over, it
was not confined to Judea: Not that the Apostles, or any other, did at that
extraordinary time preach the Gospel to every individual person then in the
World, but to a great number then in all Nations then known: Surely there were
not then Preachers enough to go to every Town; but the time being come to call
the Elect amongst the Gentiles, the Lord ordered so much Preaching every where,
as should be sufficient to bring those to believe who were ordained unto Life.
Christ being preached to a Nation, or a Town, is no proof that Christ died for
all that Nation or Town, but when the Lord orders by his Providence, that the
Preaching of the Gospel is sent to a place, it is a sign that there are some
Elect, and ransomed People there, whom the Lord will call out of Darkness into
his mavelous Light.

15. I should have named one Text before, that this Author sets down, and that
is, John 3.17, 18. God sent not his Son into the World, to condemn the World,
but that the World through him might be saved: He that believes on him is not
condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God: For the understanding of
this Scripture, we must observe, that our Savior speaks these words to the
Jews, and they had an Opinion, that the Messiah was to come only for them: They
looked for the Messiah to come as some great Monarch to tread down all the
other Nations of the World, and to set up the Jews in a glorious Estate, as to
outward Dominion. The generality of the Jews were so blinded, that they did not
look for the Messiah as a Spiritual Savior, but as one that should destroy the
Nations of the World by outward force: therefore our Savior tells them, that
he was not sent now, at his first coming, to destroy, judge, and condemn any;
but he was sent to save the Elect, not only amongst the Jews, but amongst the
Gentiles throughout the whole World, and that whosoever believes on him,
whether he be a Jew by nature, or a sinner of the Gentiles, is not condemned,
but he that believes not for the present, nor hereafter, is condemned already,
viz. by the Sentence of the Law, Gal. 3.10. under which Sentence of
Condemnation he must abide, because he has not believed on the Son of God,
which is the only way and means to deliver any from the Sentence of
Condemnation, which the Law has passed upon them.

16. Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, etc.

God shows to all Men, by the light of Nature, something of what is Morally
good, something of what God, as Creator, requires of them; and to the Jews,
the House of Israel, to whom those words are spoken, as is plain to be seen in
that Chapter, God did show to them more of his Mind and Will, what he commanded
and required of them; what is this for Christ's dying for all Adam's Posterity?

17. Then he quotes Psalm 103.8. The Lord is Gracious and full of Compassion,
and of great Mercy: It Is certain, that the Lord is Gracious, and full of
Compassion, and of great Mercy: But he has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy,
and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9.18. The Grace and Mercy of God is to be
adored for ever, that he saves any that have sinned against him: Sinning
against the Divine Majesty is so hemous, that God's Grace and Mercy is
unconceivable in saving any, though it had been much fewer persons than he does
save; and his holy Justice is to be adored for ever in punishing so many with
Eternal Damnation for Sin: There is such infinite Mercy in God, that he could
have pardoned all the Angels that sinned; and could have saved all Adam's
Posterity if he had pleased; there might have been no Hell, no place of Torment
for Devils or Men, if he had pleased, there might have been no place but Heaven
for all the Angels, and all the Children of Men to sing Halelujahs to Eternity;
but we must not order what God shall do, how he shall exert and put forth his
Attribute of Mercy: O that there were more Reverence of the Divine Majesty,
more holy trembling before him, more wondering that he should show Mercy to any,
and especially to our selves! for he has his Glory not only in them that are
saved, but in them that perish: In them that are saved he has the Glory of his
Grace, and in them that perish, he has the Glory of his Justice.

18. Psalm 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all
his Works. I answer:

1. God is good to all, as a Creator, during the Day of his Patience and
Long-suffering; and what Mercies he affords may be called Tender Mercies,
considering our Vileness and Sinfulness, who deserve every moment to be cast
into Hell. We are to adore the common Bounty of God to all, in his Patience and
Long-suffering for a time in this World.

2. This place of Scripture may be applied to the Saints only; for it follows,
All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee: They
shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power, v. 10, 11. So I
say the words may be understood, that the Psalmist is speaking of Gods being
good, in an especial manner, to all those whom he makes his People, and that
his tender Mercies are over them; over all the Saints, who are the Works of his
Hands, in an especial manner, that are made new Creatures by him, his new
Creation in Christ, Ephesians. 2.10.

3. Take [all] for all Mankind, it is certain that the Lord is not pleased to
show them such Goodness and tender Mercy, as to give them a new Heart, so as to
take away the Heart of Stone, and to give them a Heart of Flesh, and save them
for ever; which he could easily have done, if he had pleased; and the more are
they beholden to his, for ever to be adored, Grace, to whom he is so good
toward, whom he shows such tender Mercy, as to take away, and remove all
Mountains of Guilt and Rebellion that stand in the way to hinder their Eternal
Salvation.

Thus I have explained those Scriptures this Author brings for Universal
Redemption, which, indeed, intend no such thing: If the Lord be not pleased to
give us light into the meaning of Scripture, we shall father our Errors and
Mistakes upon the word of God; we must compare Scripture with Scripture; we
must bring a humble Mind to the study of the Scriptures: We must pray
continually to the Father of Lights, and of Spirits, that he would lead us into
all Truth: We must not interpret any Scripture, so as to derogate from the
Perfection of the Divine Attributes; we must not interpret any Scripture, so as
to derogate from the Infinite and Eternal Virtue and Merit of our Savior's
Death; it is always new, and of Infinite Efficacy, for all he died for, to
Eternity,

Then it follows in this Author, By these Authorities I teach, that Christ died
for all.

I answer, that so do others that you oppose, they teach that Christ died for
all, that is, all the Elect, all that the Father has given him, all that
believe and trust in him; but if you teach that Christ died for all Adam's
Posterity, you teach you know not what.

I pray consider, that when our Lord and Savior died as a Surety and Mediator,
it was near four thousand years from the Creation, and there were multitudes
then in the Prison of Hell, from whence there is no Redemption; and do you
think that Christ, God-man, died upon the Cross, and bare such unutterable
Dolor for them, to redeem them that were then in Hell?

There was reason, indeed, that Christ should die for those Saints that were in
Heaven before he died, because they were pardoned and saved, upon the account
of his having undertaken, as Surety for them, to make satisfaction to the
Justice of God for their Sins, Heb. 9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator
of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the Redemption of the
Transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which were called
might receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance. The Father trusted
Christ, (as we may express it) upon his Covenant, and undertaking, as Surety,
to make satisfaction to Justice; and so he pardoned and saved the Saints of the
Old Testament before Christ actually died for them: And as for the Elect that
were then living, and were to live afterward in their Generations, Christ
trusted the Father with the Payment and Satisfaction he made for them by his
Death, that they should have the benefit of his Death in due time bestowed upon
them: It sounds well enough in the Ears of Christians, that Christ was but once
to offer himself a Sacrifice, and that therefore when he died, he bore the Sins
of the Saints in Heaven, because they came there upon the account of his
Covenant and Undertaking with the Father, that he would, in the fullness of
time, take upon him Humane Nature, and would, as their Surety, make
Satisfaction for their Sins: But surely it will sound very harshly in the Ears
of all Christians, that Christ, Godman, should sweat drops of Blood, and die,
bearing the Curse of the Law for them, who were then in Hell when he died;
except Arminians think that the damned in Hell shall be saved at last. Indeed,
some passages of those of that Judgment, have a tendency to such an Opinion;
but such Doctrine is contrary to many places of Scripture, Matthew. 25.41. and
the last Verse, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

Then this Author goes on, Sir, show me, if you can, where the Scripture says,
that Christ, died but for some only, not for all.

I answer, this is but strife of words; Christ did not die only for some of the
Elect, but for all the Elect, but he died not for all Adam's Posterity, as has
been sufficiently demonstrated.

He goes on, and says to this person, Seeing you think that Christ died but
for some, show me sufficient testimony from the Scripture, that he died for
your self.

I pray, what Call has this Author to put this Person upon declaring to him
sufficient Testimony that Christ died for him? and what is this to the purpose,
if this person had not yet attained what Paul says, Gal. 2.20. He loved me,
and gave himself for me. But I hope this Person has a comfortable assurance,
that Christ died for him: Christ died for all Believers; and if he finds upon
Self-examination, that he is in the Faith, and Christ lives in him; he may
conclude, that Christ died for him: But why he should give this Author
sufficient Testimony of his Faith I know not: It may be, some will say, this is
but a hectoring, boisterous way of dealing.

The Author concludes his Letter, saying to this Person [Name one in this great
City for whom Christ died not:] What is this to the purpose, to prove Universal
Redemption? Though Christ did not die for all Adam's Posterity; and though there be
in this City, many ignorant and profane People; yet it would be presumption to
say of any particular person in this City, yea, in the whole World, that Christ
did not die for that Person; except one knew that the Person had committed the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which is a sin which few are guilty of; and for
such we are not to pray for them, 1 John 5.16. but for any other particular
person, though for the present he be never so ignorant of God, and abound in
Transgressions, who can say, but that this person may be one of those that God
has ordained to Eternal Life, and that Christ has died for? and therefore we
are to exhort them to Repentance, and pray for them, and if it be so, that they
be such as God has chosen to Salvation, and that Christ has dyed for them,
the Lord will at one time or other before they dye, turn them from Darkness
unto Light: Deliver them from the Power of Darkness, and Translate them into
the Kingdom of his dear Son.

CHAP. III. Ten Arguments from the Scripture, to prove that those that Christ
dyed for, shall all of them be called, justified and glorified in Heaven.
I have said enough already, I hope, to clear those Scriptures that this Author
brings for Universal Redemption. Now through the Lords Assistance, I shall
show, that though Arminians make such a poor, low, common thing of the precious
Blood of Jesus Christ, who was God, as well as Man; That they say, that Men may
be Damned in Hell for ever, notwithstanding Christ dyed for them; I shall prove
the contrary by many Scriptures.

1. John 10.15, 16. I lay down my Life for the Sheep, and other Sheep I have,
which are not of this Fold: Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
Voice; and there shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd.

1. Observe, that there are some that are called Christ's Sheep, before their
Conversion, given to Christ, that he should be the Shepherd and Bishop of their
Souls, in the appointed time, to bring them to Grace and Glory.

2. These Sheep are the Elect, both of Jews and Gentiles, some are of the Fold
of the Jews, some of the Fold of the Gentiles.

3. That Christ laid down his Life for these Sheep.

4. That Christ has undertaken to bring in and Convert those Sheep that he
laid down his Life for, that not one of them be missing and Perish: Therefore
Christ puts [a must] upon it. I must bring, as if he had said, because of my
engaging to the Father in the Covenant of Redemption, to bring them to Grace
and Glory; as also because of my own free and everlasting love to them, I must
bring them home.

Ay, but some might say, True, Christ may use some means outward and inward, to
bring in these Sheep that he dyed for, but peradventure, they will stop the
Ear, and their wills be rebellious: Ay, but says Christ, they [shall] hear my
Voice, that is, they shall certainly and infallibly be Converted.

2. Romans 5.10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

1. Observe that those that Christ dyed for, he Reconciled them to God, made
Satisfaction and Reconciliation for all their Sins. Christ dying, was no small
matter; It was not a thing of small Power and Virtue; it was not to make God
merely Reconcilable; but it was a perfect and eternal Reconciliation: Though
the benefit of his Reconciliation is given out in a certain order, and
manifested by degrees, as seemed good to the Counsel of Gods Will, yet Christ
did all by way of Merit and satisfaction for sin, when he dyed upon the Cross.

2. Observe, that such a Reconciliation being made by the Death of Christ, the
Apostle says, how much more shall we be saved by his Life? That is, by his
Resurrection and Ascension, and Intercession for them for whom he dyed. Those
for whom Christ dyed, for them he rose again. Romans 4. and last v. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our Justification. Christ
as the Head and Surety for those for whom he dyed, was discharged of the debt
of their sins by his Resurrection: So that, as he dies no more, death has no
more Dominion over him: So all that he dyed and rose again for, shall be
brought into such a state by Virtue of his Death and Resurrection, that death
shall not have Dominion over them. Christ also ascended into Heaven as a
public person, and Representative of those for whom he dyed. For all them
whose high priest he was, Heb. 6.20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus made a high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, for
them he ever lives to make Intercession, until they be all brought to Glory,
he presents his Merits, his Blood, his Satisfaction in the Holy of Holies for
them. So, that unless Men will say that Christ did not rise again and ascend
into Heaven, and does not ever live to make intercession, it must needs be,
that all that he dyed for, shall be eternally saved: For says the Apostle, if
we were Reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, how much more being
Reconciled shall we be saved by his Life? If there were such Merit in his Death
as to Reconcile us to God: Then Christ rising again, ascending into Heaven, and
ever living to make Intercession for those for whom he dyed, they shall all be
certainly and infallibly brought to Glory.

3. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
how shall be not with him also freely give us all things?

1. Observe the [all] here is not all Adams Posterity, but all that God has an
Eternal purpose of Grace to, which are in due time called according to his
purpose, viz. the Elect v. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? Those whom he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
v. 29.

2. The Apostle makes this to be a wonderful thing, that God should not spare
his Son, but deliver him up to Death as Mediator, and Surety for us: In this
was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9. God
manifests his love in giving other things, but in this, the love of God was
most of all manifested, that God sent his Son to dye for us, that he spared not
his Son, but delivered him up to bear the Curse of the Law in our stead. Thanks
be to God for his unspeakable gift, 2 Cor. 9.15. Consider the person that he
delivered up to dye for us, he was his own Son, his proper natural Son, and it is
said, he spared him not, he spared him not from nor in dying, but made him to
bear unutterable grief in Soul and Body, as Surety and Mediator for those for
whom he dyed.

3. The Apostle does positively conclude, that all those that God has such
love to, as not to spare his own Son, but to deliver him up to Death for them,
that God would certainly and infallibly, and freely give them all things, that
is, all things necessary to their Eternal Happiness. Those for whom God would
give his Son, to them he will freely give Faith, Grace and Glory: The new Heart
is the gift of God, and a great gift, but nothing to Gods not sparing his own
Son, but giving him to dye for us. Gods giving his Son to dye for any person,
was the highest expression of his love to that person, that ever was, or ever
could be: If God had such a love to give his Son to dye for a Man, he will
stick at nothing to bring about the Eternal Happiness of that person. He spared
not his Son, that he might spare that person: He punished his Innocent Son, as
Surety, that he might not punish that person for his Sins: He was at cost
indeed to Redeem a person by the price of the Blood of his own Son: But as to
giving that person a new Heart, He can more easily do it, than we can speak a
word; There is such strength in the Apostles arguing, as carries all before it,
throws down all Cavils and Objections whatsoever.

4. We may draw another Invincible Argument, from Romans 8.34. Who shall Condemn?
Christ has dyed, yea, rather is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us.

1. The Apostle here shows, that those that Christ dyed for, he rose again for
them, he sits at Gods Right Hand for them, he makes Intercession for them, that
they may infallibly obtain all that he Merited and Purchased for them, by his
Death.

2. The Apostle in the Name of all that Christ dyed for, makes a challenge; Who
says, he shall Condemn? Christ has dyed: Ay, but the Law and Justice may
Condemn; no Christ has dyed: Christ has delivered them, for whom he dyed from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for them, Gal. 3.13. he has made
satisfaction for their Sins, by his Death. But those that hold universal
Redemption, may say, O Paul, why do you Argue thus, that if Christ dyed for us,
we cannot be Condemned to Hell? Ay, but Paul knew what he said, he knew how to
argue from Christ dying for us, that we shall never be Condemned to Hell. Those
that hold that Christ dyed for all Adams Posterity, of which the greatest
number are, or shall be Condemned to Hell for ever, make nothing, or next unto
nothing, of Christ's dying for a person: But Paul makes it such a great thing
for Christ to dye for us, that he is bold to say, who shall Condemn? Christ
has dyed.

5. John 17.2. As thou have given him power over all Flesh, that he should give
Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him.

Our Savior often speaks of them that were given him of the Father, that is,
the Elect people, there was a Covenant of Redemption between the Father and
Christ, wherein he undertook to bring them to Glory, and that he might not fail
of saving every one of them; Christ as the Mediator, had power given over all
Flesh: Yea, over all Devils too, that nothing should hinder, but that he should
infallibly give Eternal Life to as many as the Father had given him to Redeem
and Save. Christ as God had all power of himself: Christ as Mediator, had power
given him over all persons, and things in such a perfect manner, that nothing
should hinder the Salvation of those that were given him. Christ as Mediator
has absolute power over the Hearts and Wills of Men, to alter, change and
frame the Wills of all that the Father has given him, to bring every thought
into Obedience to him, that all the Elect shall be a willing people in the day
of his power, he puts forth his power irresistibly, so far as infallibly to
Convert them, and puts forth his power after their Conversion irresistibly, so
far as to preserve them to the Heavenly Kingdom. Christ is mighty as God, and
mighty as Mediator; Has absolute power over all Flesh, over their very Hearts
and Wills, to open their Hearts to receive him, to work their Wills to embrace
him whenever he pleases; and will certainly do it for those that the Father
has given him to Redeem and Save.

6. John 17.19. And for their sakes, I sanctify my self, that they may be
Sanctified through the truth: Our Savior being now near his Death, he declares
who he was to dye for, not for all Adams Posterity; but for those whom the
Father had given him to be the Mystical Body, whereof he is the Head, and
declares, v. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the World, but for them whom
thou have given me, for they are thine: As if Christ had said, I am so far from
dying for all Adams Posterity, that I will not so much as pray as Mediator, for
any but those whom thou have given me. I dye to bring the many Elect Sons to
Glory, and for their sakes, sanctify I my self, that is, I Consecrate and
Dedicate my self as their High Priest, to offer my self a Sacrifice for them,
that they may be sanctified through the Truth, that is, that they may be
justified and sanctified through him, that they might not any one of them miss
of Eternal Salvation.

7. Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.

The Apostle Paul is here setting forth the Love of Christ to him, and as an
Astonishing Demonstration and proof of the for ever to be adored love of Christ
to him, he says that Christ gave himself for me, that amongst those that
Christ had such great and special love's to, as to dye for them: He was one, he
gave himself for me. Paul thought that Christ dying for him, was the greatest
Love that Christ could show to him: But now those that hold that Christ dyed
for all Adams Posterity, might say, O Paul, do you make such a great business
of Christ's giving himself for you, and that this shall secure your Salvation.
We hold he dyed for Multitudes that are, and shall be in Hell for ever: Ay, but
Paul knew better than Arminians do, both what unspeakable love it was for
Christ to die for a person, and he knew the certainty of the Eternal Salvation
of all those for whom Christ died, he rejoices, and triumphs in this, that he
knew he was one of those whom Christ loved, and gave himself for.

8. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ also loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with
the washing of Water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be Holy, and without blemish.

Here the Apostle exhorts Husbands to love their Wives, and with a great and
special Love, as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it Now, if
Christ had loved all Adam's Posterity so, as to give himself for them; this had
been no Argument for Husbands to love their Wives with a great and special
Love: but rather an allowance to Husbands to love other Women with as great and
special Love as their Wives: But the Apostle shows it was a great and special
Love that Christ had to his Church, such a Love as he gave himself for it.

By the Church, here, is meant, all the Elect; all that by the Decree of God
from Eternity, were to be the Lord's, the Lamb's Spouse; for this Church only
that Christ as Mediator was to be Head and Husband of, did Christ give himself.
This Church he was to Sanctify, this Church he was to wash from their Sins in
his own Blood; and whatsoever they were in themselves, polluted, defiled with
Sin, yet he undertook both to Justify them, and Sanctisie them, who also will
infallibly do it.

9. The ninth Argument to prove, that all that Christ died for, shall certainly
be saved, shall be taken from those Scriptures that make it manifest that those
that Christ died for, he purchased Faith and Sanctification for them, as well
as Reconciliation for their Sins, Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for our Sins, that
he might deliver us from this present evil World, according to the Will of God,
and our Father.

1. Observe, that those that Christ died for, the Heart of the Father was in
this thing, it was from the Will, the great Love and good Pleasure of the
Father, that he should give himself for them.

2. That Christ did give himself for their Sins, that is, to take away their
Sins, and that he might deliver them from this present evil World, that is, not
only from the Guilt and Punishment due to them for their Sins, that so they
might not be condemned with the World; but that he might deliver them from the
evil Manners of the World, from the wickedness of this present evil World, and
to make them new Creatures, he purchased Sanctification for them, to be
certainly and infallibly bestowed upon them, Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

See in the Verse before, who it was that gave himself for us; the Apostle
calls him, the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Ay, this puts infinite
value into his dying for us, that he is God as well as Man, and so cannot be
frustrated in the Ends, which he had in his Death: and the Apostle here shows,
that his End was to purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works: He intended for all for whom he died, not only to redeem them from the
guilt of all their Sins, but purchased Sanctifying Grace for them, whereby they
might be made a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, which according to his
mighty Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, he will
certainly do.

1 Pet. 1.18, 19. For as much as ye know, that you were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from your vain Conversation received by
Tradition from your Fathers; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot.

Our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, shed his precious Blood, not only to take
away the guilt of Sin, but to Sanctify them; to deliver them for whom he died,
from the Vanity of their Minds, and from their Vain Conversation, that so they
may be brought to walk with God here, and come to Heaven hereafter; and all
that do partake of Mortification of Sin, and Vivification in Grace; it is by
Virtue from the Death of Christ: he has given Sin a mortal wound by his Death,
he has nailed it to his Cross, that at last, all that he died for shall be
wholly freed from it for ever.

10. The last Argument that all those that Christ died for, shall certainly be
saved, is taken from several passages in the 53th Chap. of Isaiah, where we
have such an illustrious Prophecy of Christ.

1. There the Prophet speaks of the great Sufferings of Christ the Mediator, He
was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, v. 4.
and the Iniquities of all the Israel after the Spirit; that is, all the Elect
of God were laid upon him, to bear the Punishment due to their Sins.

2. The Prophet shows the effects of Christ's Death, what benefit comes to them
for who he died, he says, by his Stripes they are healed, v. 5. He shows what
Grief and Sufferings he went through to make Satisfaction for Sin, and compares
our Savior in his Death to a Woman in Travail: Ay, Christ had a hard Travail,
and sore Pains in Soul and Body to expiate Sin; but he says, He shall see his
Seed, v. 10. he shall see of the travail of his Soul and be satisfied; he shall
not bring forth Wind, such a windy, empty, poor Redemption as Arminians talk
of, who say, that notwithstanding any thing that Christ did in the Work of
Redemption, there might not one Man or Woman in the World have been saved; but
he brought forth a Perfect, Glorious, Eternal Redemption, so that all the
Children of his Cross, all that he had that hard travail for upon the Cross,
shall be eternally saved; and so as the Apostle says, Heb. 12.2. For the Joy
that was set before him he endured the Cross, despising the Shame: The Joy that
was set before Christ, as Mediator, when he endured the Cross, when he died
upon the Cross, was not only the Glory that should follow to his Humane Nature,
but the Glory that the manifold Wisdom, infinite Grace, and the holy Justice of
God should have to Eternity, by saving the Elect in such a wonderful way by his
Cross; and likewise this was part of the Joy set before Christ, when he died
upon the Cross, that all that he died for should be eternally saved, and stand
before the Throne as his Redeemed People.

Thus I have endeavored, for the Honor of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ,
for the Comfort of those that believe on him, to maintain, that he has not
failed in the Work of Redemption; but for all that he undertook to die, as
their Surety and Mediator, he will bring them to Eternal Blessedness. Now to
the Father that sent him, to the Son that was willing to take our poor Humane
Nature upon him, and die for our Sins; and to the Holy Ghost that does
certainly, and infallibly apply this glorious Redemption that Christ has
wrought to all, for whom he died, be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. And for
those that catch at a few Words and Phrases in the Scripture, to make this
Redemption by the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, to be ineffectual to
any for whom he died; I bow my Knees, and pray to God for them, that he may
please to give them Light and Understanding, that they may be taken off from
their erroneous Conceits concerning our Savior, and the for ever to be adored
Redemption by him which stands sure for ever.

But to remove what Doubts and Temptation may arise in the thoughts of some
upon two places of Scripture: It is said, Romans 14.15. But if thy Brother be
grieved with thy Meat, now walk thou not charitably, destroy not him with
thy Meat, for whom Christ died; and through thy Knowledge shall thy weak
Brother perish, for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8.11. from these two places some
maintain, that those that Christ died for may be damned in Hell.

Now for the understanding of these two Texts, observe, that some walked very
uncharitably toward those that were fellow Members with them; they pretended
more Light, and that they saw their Liberty further than those which they
counted weak Brethren, did about eating of some Meats which others scrupled:
Now, says the Apostle, to those that accounted themselves strong: Destroy not
him with thy Meat for whom Christ died: Those that are fellow Members in the
Church, you ought to judge of them with a Judgment of Charity, that they are
the Elect of God, and such as Christ died for; therefore don't do that which
tends to their destroying and ruin; and through thy Knowledge, thy pretense of
having more Knowledge, and to have a greater Latitude, shall thy weak Brother
perish for whom Christ died; if without Light and Satisfaction in his own
Conscience, he should be emboldened to do those things, by your Example you
draw him to sin, which deserves Damnation; but that eventually, any shall
perish for whom Christ really died, cannot be collected from these Scriptures,
or any others; those that we in Charity think are such as Christ died for, may
perish, we ought to think in Charity, that all that are Members with us in the
Church, are partakers of the Heavenly Calling, and such as Christ died for,
though in foro dei, in the sight of God, who knows infallibly who are his, they
are such as Christ never died for: our Judgment of Men that Christ died for
them, is but a Judgment of Charity, not a Judgment of Infallibility: But can
any one think, that if Christ, God-man, did really die for a Person, had such
inconceiveable Love to him, and had endured so much for his Salvation in his
Agony in the Garden, and upon the, Cross that he would not take such care, that
this poor Soul should not eternally perish, and be destroyed by the
uncharitable carriage of some proud, giddy Professor: yea, if Christ really
died for any Person, all the Wiles and Devices, and fiery Darts of all the
Devils in Hell shall never be able to destroy and ruin such an one, though other
Professors be uncharitable and hard-hearted, to give offense to the weak, and
shake them, and endanger them; yet Christ the Meek, the Pitiful and Merciful,
and Almighty High Priest, will not suffer a bruised Reed to be broken, nor
smoking Flax to be quenched: but tho they may fall, yet shall they rise again;
Christ says to the Sheep, that he laid down his Life for, that they shall
never perish; and that none, whether Men or Devils, shall pluck them out of his
Hand, John 10.27, 28.

CHAP. V. Of Election and Reprobation.
THis Author in his Dialogue with the Presbyterian, Page 17. does cite a
passage in the Confession of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.

By the Decree of God for the manifestation of his Glory, some Men and Angels
are Predestined unto everlasting life, and others fore-ordain'd to
everlasting destruction: and those Angels thus Predestined and foreordained,
are particularly and unchangeably designed, and their number so certain and
definite, that it cannot be either increased or diminished.

It Is either for want of acquaintance with Books, or want of Ingenuity, that
this Author falls upon the Presbyterians, as if they only were of this Opinion.
The Assembly of Divines at Westminster published their Confession of Faith but
about 46 years ago.

But first I shall show that the Episcopal Divines, long before them, printed
and published the same Doctrine.

2. Consider of the Doctrine it self.

1. Whereas this Author would suggest, as if the Presbyterians only held this
Doctrine, and so cast an odium upon them, I shall show, that the Episcopal
Divines did publish the same Doctrine long before.

1. The Articles of the Church of England in the Year 1552 say, Predestination
to Life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the Foundation of
the World was laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to
deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen out of Mankind, and
to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor.
Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called
according to God's purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, they through
Grace be justified freely, they be made the Sons of God by Adoption, they be
made like to the Image of his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ: they walk
religiously in good Works, and at length, by God's Mercy, they attain to
everlasting Felicity, Article 17. Here is plainly asserted, that there is an
Eternal Election of certain Persons, that they shall be certainly and
infallibly called to Grace and Glory by Jesus Christ.

And as for the 31th Article which this Author mentions, though he did not
think fit to meddle with the 17th. Christ is a perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both
Original and Actual.

They having before asserted the Doctrine of God's Eternal Election of some,
this Article may fairly be interpreted, that Christ is a perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, of the
Elect, or of all the Elect in all Ages, and of all Nations throughout the whole
World, and for them only: and their words being well considered, will constrain
such an Interpretation: To be sure they did not hold, that all Mankind should
be saved; and therefore saying that Christ is a perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, they cannot
be understood to mean any more than this, that there is no other name under
Heaven, by which Men can be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ; there is not
Salvation in any other. It is he alone that is a Perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and Satisfaction for Sin; so that whoever are saved in any Age or
Place throughout the whole World, are saved by him only.

2. The first Articles of the Church of England, being not so explicit and
plain about Predestination, and Arminianism being broached, there was a meeting
at Lambeth-house on the 20th Day of November, 1595. (now almost an hundred
Years since.) There was John, Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard, Bishop of
London; Richard, Elect Bishop of Bangor; Dr. Tindal, Dean of Ely; Dr. Whitaker,
Professor of Divinity in Cambridge; and sundry other Reverend and Learned
Divines there present, with the concurrent Approbation of of the Right Reverend
and Learned Prelate, Matthew, Archbishop of York, for the determining certain
Arminian Points of Controversy, they composed, agreed upon, and published
these Nine Assertions following.

1. Deus ab aeterno praedestinavit quosdam ad vitam; quosdam reprobavit ad
mortem.

1. God from Eternity has predestined certain Men to Life; he has
reprobated some unto Death.

2. Causa movens, aut efficiens Praedestinationis ad vitam non est praevisio
fidei, aut bonorum operum, aut ullius rei quae insit in personis
praedestinatis, sed sola voluntas beneplaciti Dei.

2. The moving or efficient cause of predestination unto Life is not the
foresight of Faith, or of good Works, or of any thing that is in the persons
predestined, but only the good Will and Pleasure of God.

3. Praedestinatorum praefinitus and certus est numerus, qui nec augeri nec
minui possit.

3. There is a predetermined and certain number of the predestined, which can
neither be augmented nor diminished.

4. Qui non sunt praedestinati ad salutem, necessario propter peccata sua
damnabuntur.

4. Those that are not predestined to Salvation, shall be necessarily damned
for their Sins.

5. Vera viva, ac justificans fides, and Spiritus Dei justificantis non
extinguitur, non excidit, non evanescet in electis, aut finaliter, aut
totaliter.

5. A true living and justifying Faith is not extinguished, it fails not, it
vanishes not away in the Elect, either finally or totally.

6. Homo vere fidelis, id est, fide justificante praeditus certus est
plerophoria fidei, de remissione peccatorum suorum, and salute sempiterna sua
per Christum.

6. A true believer, that is, such a one as is endued with a justifying Faith,
is certain with the full assurance of Faith of the pardon of his Sins, and of
his Everlasting Salvation by Christ.

I suppose they did not mean, that a true Believer may not have doubts and
fears, whether he be in Christ or no; but that he may have a full assurance of
his Justification, without such extraordinary Revelation as the Papists speak
of. This Article is directed especially against the Papists, whose Doctrine is,
that no Believer can attain a full assurance of his Salvation in this Life,
except he have an extraordinary Revelation from God.

7. Gratia Salutaris non tribuitur, non communicatur, non conceditur, universis
hominibus qua Servari possint, si velint.

7 Saving Grace is not given, is not communicated, is not granted to all Men,
by which they may be saved if they will.

8. Nemo potest venire ad Christum, nisi datum ei fuerit, and nisi pater eum
traxerit: Et omnes homines non trahuntur a Patre ut veniant ad filium.

8. No Man can come unto Christ, unless it shall be given unto him, and unless
the Father shall draw him, and all Men are not drawn of the Father, that they
may come unto the Son.

9. Non est positum in arbitrio aut potestate unius cujusque hominis servari.

9. It is not in the Will and Power of every one to be saved.

3. I come to the Articles of Religion, agreed upon by the Archbishops,
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation holden at
Dublin, 16.5.

Article 11. God from all Eternity did by his unchangeable Counsel, ordain
whatsoever in time should come to pass, yet, so as no Violence is offered to
the Wills of the Reasonable Creatures, and neither the Liberty, nor the
Contingency of second causes is taken away, but rather Established.

Article 12. By the same Eternal Counsel God has predestined some unto life,
and reprobated some unto Death, of both which there is a certain number known
only to God, which can neither be increased nor diminished.

Article 13. Predestination unto Life, is the everlasting purpose of God,
whereby before the Foundations of the World were laid, he has constantly
Decreed in his Secret Counsel, to deliver from Curse and Condemnation, those
whom he has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ, unto
everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor.

Article 14. The cause moving God to Predestinate unto Life, is not the
foreseeing of Faith, or Perseverance, or of good works, or of any thing which
is in the person Predestined, but only the good pleasure of God himself. For
all things being ordained for the manifestation of his glory, and his glory
being to appear both in the works of his mercy, and of his justice: It seemed
good to his Heavenly Wisdom, to choose out a certain number, toward whom he
would extend his undeserved Mercy, leaving the rest to be spectacles of his
Justice.

Article 15. such as are predestined unto Life, be called according to Gods
purpose, (his Spirit working in due Season,) and through Grace they obey the
calling, they be justified freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they
be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk
Religiously in good Works, and at length by Gods Mercy, they attain to
everlasting felicity, but such as are not predestined to Salvation, shall
finally be condemned for their Sins.

Article, 25. The condition of Man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he
cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works to
Faith and calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to do good works,
pleasing and acceptable unto God, without the Grace of God preventing us, that
we may have a good Will, and working with us when we have that good Will.

Article 32. None can come to Christ, unless it be given to him, and unless the
Father draw him, and all Men are not so drawn by the Father, that they may come
unto the Son, neither is there such a sufficient measure of Grace vouchsafed
unto every Man, whereby he is enabled to come unto everlasting Life.

Article 33. All Gods Elect are in their time inseparably united unto Christ,
by the effectual and vital influence of the Holy Ghost, derived from him, as
from the Head, unto every true Member of his Mystical Body, and being thus made
one with Christ, they are truly regenerated, and made partakers of him, and all
his benefits.

Article 38. A True, Lively, Justifying Faith, and the Sanctifying Spirit of
God is not extinguished, nor vanishes away in the Regenerate, either finally
or totally.

I have cited these Articles to show this Author, and others of his mind, that
there is no cause for any to fly out against the Assembly of Divines, or any
Presbyterians, for what they hold about Election and Reprobation, and such
points, as if it had been some new Doctrine that they had broached, but every
one may now see, that next to the Scriptures, they learnt this Doctrine of the
Episcopal Divines that were before them.

2. Let us consider the Doctrine it self.

1. Concerning the Doctrine of Election, let us see what this Author says,
page 27.

1. That God did choose in Christ unto Salvation, all that part of the fallen
race of Mankind, that dye in their Innocence, or accept of his Mercy and Grace,
according to the means he gives them, and this Decree proceeds from his own
goodness, and is not built upon any goodness in the Creature.

1. He says, that God did choose in Christ to Salvation, all that part of the
fallen Race of Adam, that dye in their Innocence.

1. I Answer 1. This Author quotes not one Scripture for this strange Assertion.

2. I wonder who they are of the fallen Race of Mankind, that can dye in their
Innocence? I suppose he means young Infants, those that dye in their Infancy.
But though those be called Innocent comparatively, yet besides the guilt of
Adams Sin, which is upon every one of his Posterity by Nature, as a consequent
of it, all have lost the Image of God in Holiness and Righteousness; and have
contracted by Adams fall, such an Universal Depravedness, that they have the
Root, the Spawn and Seed of all Sin in them, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in
Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. This Corruption of Nature, is
inherent in every one that comes by Adam, in a way of ordinary Generation: So
that not one is born without it. It comes by propagation from Adam, and if a
Child dye the first day it is born into the World, it does not dye in
Innocence; but if it be saved, it is washed, and made white in the Blood of the
Lamb, and has the habit, and principle of Grace infused into it, though
without outward means: God that forms the Spirit, the Rational Soul that the
Infant has, can form Grace in the Soul of the Child, as he pleases, can
Sanctify it in the Womb, or as soon as it is born, if he be graciously pleased
so to do. But how does the Infant dye in Innocence? Alas, there is an Universal
depravedness in the Soul of an Infant, which if it live to be capable to
express it, will discover it self: A young Cub of a Fox or Wolf, does not
presently discover its ravenous Nature, but it is inherent in it, bred with it,
and Men kill those young Cubs, though they never yet did any mischief; because
it is their Nature to be Ravenous and Mischievous; An Infant has the same
reasonable Soul, that it has, if it live to be a Man, though it does not
express it self, as it does when it lives to Age. So an Infant has the Seed of
all Sin, a corrupt Nature, though it does not Act, as it does when Age comes
on; and I say, that God may for the Guilt of Adams Sin, and because there is
such Enmity, Rebellion and Wickedness in Man's Nature against him, he may if he
please, glorify his Justice upon them; though they dye in their Infancy, they
are far from dying in Innocence.

I do not think God would have destroyed the old World, and called them the
World of the Ungodly, amongst whom, no doubt there were many Infants, and
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and made them suffer the Vengeance of Eternal
Fire, amongst whom, no doubt there were many Infants, if every Infant were
Innocent. I will not meddle to determine the Eternal Estate of those that dye
in Infancy, to be sure, you go too far to assert what you do, you are not the
Sovereign Lord, and Judge of all.

3. You say that God did choose those that accept of his Grace and Mercy,
according to the means he gives them.

1. I hope you mean his Grace and Mercy in Christ, that they know him, and
believe in him, for else there is no Salvation: If the Gospel be hid, if Christ
as Mediator, be not some ways made known to Men, they are lost for ever. 2 Cor.
4.3. He that believes on the Son, has Life, and he that believes not on the
Son, has not Life. But you seem to hold, that it is not of necessity to
Salvation to know Christ, and him Crucified as Mediator, but to have some
general Notions of Universal Grace and Mercy in the Divine Essence, which Men
do own and accept of, and truly you say, that few knew the Mediator by the Name
of Jesus Christ, till he was born of the Virgin, page 21. That is nothing to
the purpose, all that were saved, knew the Mediator as the Seed of the Woman
that was to break the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15. As he that was to offer himself
a Sacrifice for Sin, and therefore God taught them to offer Sacrifices
presently after the fall, by which they looked to Christ that was to come:
Jacob called him Shiloah, the Savior, the Peacemaker that was to come, Job
called him his Redeemer. All that ever were saved before Christ came, were
saved not by mere believing that God was Merciful and Gracious; But that he
would send his Son to dye, to be a Sacrifice for Sin: And they embraced the
promise of Christ, the only Mediator and Sacrifice for Sin that was to come:
And all that are saved, since our Saviors coming, do in some measure know and
believe in Jesus Christ, that dyed without the Gate of Jerusalem: You will
leave us a strange Creed, if you leave out the promised Messiah, and that it is
not necessary to believe in him to everlasting Lise?

Ay, but you say, the Turks themselves begin almost every Chapter in their
Alcoran, with these words, In the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful, page 21.

And what then, are the Turks in a State of Salvation, who deny the Trinity,
deny Christ to be God, deny Christ to have dyed, but one in his Room; and put
up Mahomet an Impostor as the great Prophet? Indeed your Friend Servetus,
Conversed much with the Turks, and would have had a Reconciliation of the
Turkish and Christian Religion.

It may be, this Author does not understand the danger of these Opinions, but
they tend to the Subverting of the Christian Religion. What if the Turks have a
Notion that God is Merciful and Gracious: They, and all others will, find that
except they come to God by Christ the Mediator, the Sacrifice for Sin, they
will find God to be a consuming fire to them.

This Authors mentioning of the Turks, puts me in mind of a Discourse I once
had with a Quaker, one of the most knowing Men that ever I knew of that way,
and he said, the Turks were as good Saints, as any were in England. Indeed, the
Arminians and Quakers they run all upon this, that there is a sufficient light,
that God gives to all Mankind, that if they do but heed that Light, it will
bring them to Salvation: Ay, and so our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the
Knowledge of him, and Faith in him, must be but an indifferent thing, and not
absolutely necessary, that they may maintain their Opinion of Universal Grace.
What darkness is coming upon this Land, that the blind, lead the blind after
this manner?

2. Well, then set that question aside for the present, what that Mercy and
Goodness of God is, that if Men accept God from the beginning, chose them to
Salvation in Christ: What, is this the Election, the Scripture speaks of? Here
is not a Syllable of Gods purposing of his mere Grace infallibly to give them a
new Heart, to give them Faith and Repentance; and so they must thank themselves
if they be saved: The Arminians will allow God only to decree, that all shall
be saved that are so wise and careful as to believe in Christ, by improving
that common and universal Grace that is afforded to them that are damned, as
well as those that are saved: They will not allow that God has elected any
Persons from Eternity, so as that he will certainly call them, and that they
shall obey that Calling; that those Persons from God's special and
distinguishing Grace, shall be infallibly saved, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

If there were no other Election but this, there might not one Man or Woman in
the World have been saved, but blessed be the Name of God for ever: God has
from Eternity chosen particular persons to Salvation: chosen them so as to give
Christ for them, and certainly and infallibly to give Christ with all his
Benefits to them.

Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to Eternal Life believed: they were not
ordained to Eternal Life, because they believed, but they believed because they
were ordained to Eternal Life: there were some of the Hearers that God had from
Eternity ordained to Eternal Life, that were now to be savingly called, and to
them God gave a new Heart, Faith and Repentance, when others contradicted and
blasphemed.

Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in Christ,
according as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that
we should be Holy, and without blame before him in Love, having predestined
us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the Beloved.

1. Here we see, that those that God blesses with Spiritual Blessings,
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Grace and Glory, it is by Jesus
Christ, all is communicated through him.

2. Those that God does in time Justify and Sanctify, he purposes to do it
for those very persons before all Time, even from Eternity; it is according as
he had chosen them before the Foundation of the World was laid. God from
Eternity chose Christ to be their Mediator and Head, and chose them to be the
Members of his Mystical Body: He did not choose them upon any foresight of
Holiness in them; but chose them to make them Holy, and without Blame before
him in Love.

3. If any ask the Question, Why God chose those individual persons, and not
others, the Apostle shows, that it was the good pleasure of his Will, v. 5. to
the praise of the Glory of his Grace, v. 6. to the praise of the Glory of his
Discriminating, Distinguishing Grace, who will be gracious to whom he will be
gracious, and will have compassion on whom he will have compassion; whatsoever
Men and Devils say against it.

Revel. 13.8. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him (that is, the
Beast) whose names are not written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from
the Foundation of the World. As Christ, the Mediator, was foreordained before
the Foundation of the World, to be Mediator, and was slain in the Decree and
Purpose of God from Eternity: so there were the Names of those he should be
slain for in time, written in the Book of Life; not that God uses Books and
Writing, as Men do, but the Persons of those that were Elected from Eternity,
were as certain, so many, and no more, as if they had been written in a Book:
And because they were thus Elected, God will not suffer them to be finally
deceived to worship the Beast, 1 Thessal. 1.4, 5. Knowing Brethren, beloved,
your Election of God, for our Gospel came not to you in Word only, but in
Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance.

So far as we can know that the Gospel comes with Saving Power upon the Hearts
of any; so far we know their Election before the Foundation of the World: Men
are not elected when, or because the Gospel comes with saving Power upon their
Hearts; but because God had elected them to Life from Eternity, therefore he
sets home the Gospel in due season with Saving Power upon their Hearts.

2 Thessalonians. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you,
Brethren, that God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth.

1. God's choosing from the beginning unto Salvation, is meant, of his choosing
them from Eternity, to the End, viz. to Eternal Salvation.

2. Through Sanctification and belief of the Truth, shows the way by which God
eternally intended to bring them to Salvation.

3. The Apostle shows, that God did in his eternal choosing of them, freely
purpose to bring them into this Grace wherein they stood; that is, he decreed
to give them that Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth, which
he had now actually bestowed upon them: Those whom God has chosen to the End,
Salvation; them he has chosen to the Means, to make them partakers of special
Grace to be infallibly bestowed upon them.

Romans 8.29, 30. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many
Brethren: Moreover, whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

1. There are some that God did in an especial manner foreknow: God did from
Eternity foreknow all Persons and Things: Ay, but God is said to foreknow some
in an especial manner [(...)] signifies a foreknowing with Love, and Favor,
and special Regard: He also did Predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son, to make them Holy like Christ in their measure; he shows, that that
Foreknowledge, that Free-love, was the cause of predestinating them to Grace
and Glory.

2. To make it plainer, he says that whom he has predestined, them he has
also called; those whom God did Predestinate to Life, from Eternity, them he
calls in time: They are called according to his purpose, v. 28.

Observe, God did not predestinate Species, or Kinds, or Qualities, but
Persons: not predestinate Men that he foresaw would believe in Christ; but he
predestined them to be savingly, certainly, and effectually called: and this
God effects in all that he has predestined to Life. There is not one whom
the Lord has prededestinated to Life, from Eternity, but he calls him
effectually in his own time.

Romans 11.5, 6, 7. Even so at this present time also, there is an Election of
Grace; and if by Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no more
Grace, but if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Work is no
more Work. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but
the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

The Body of the People of the Jews they were cast of, they were left to their
own unbelief, and blindness of Heart: Now lest any should wonder at this, the
Apostle says, God has not cast off his people whom he foreknew, that is, whom
he had Elected unto Life: God never fails of Converting and Saving them; and
shows, that as in the great defection in the time of Elias, God had a Remnant,
a few that did cleave unto him; even so now at this present time also, there is
a Remnant according to the Election of Grace; though the generality of the Jews
do not believe in Christ, yet there are some do believe, the Elect do. He lets
them know, that there is an Election, and that of Grace, of mere Grace; and
that though others do not believe in Christ, yet the Remnant, the few that God of
his Grace had Elected they believed, and were saved.

And v. 6. he shows, that both Election, Vocation and Justification are of mere
Grace in Christ, and not of Works and Worthiness in the Creature at all, that
those that are elected, and do believe in Christ, when others are not elected,
and so never have it given them to come to Christ, it was purely from the free
Grace of God to them; and so concludes: The Election, that is, those who are
elected to Salvation, they obtain Grace and Glory, and the rest of Men and
Women then, and so likewise in all Ages they are blinded, they are left to
themselves, and to their Sins.

I might mention many other Scriptures but these may suffice.

Ay, but says this Author in that 27th page, No Man that is an unregenerate
Sinner is actually elected, till he turns from Sin, and accepts God's Mercy by
Faith, Revel. 17.14. These shall make War with the Lamb. and the Lamb shall
overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are
with him are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful.

To say that no Man is actually elected till he turns from his Sin, and accepts
of God's Mercy by Faith, is to confound the immanent Acts of God with his
transient Acts. Election is an immanent Act of God it is the Purpose of God
toward Persons from Eternity. Conversion is a transient Act of God in time,
wherein he puts forth his Power, and Converts according to his Eternal Purpose
and Grace; and for that only Text this Author brings, it seems plainly to be
meant, of those that shall destroy the Whore of Babylon, who may be said to be
called and chosen, and faithful in that Work, though they were never called to be
Saints; never elected to Salvation, never truly faithful: As Cyrus of old was
called God's Anointed, and his Servant, in being an Instrument of God's taking
Vengeance, though he was a Heathen, Carnal-man: But take it for Effectual
Calling, being chosen to Salvation, and faithful in Christ, it signifies
nothing at all to your purpose. I hope that they that are chosen from Eternity,
may be said to be chosen to all Eternity: Once chosen of God and ever chosen:
It may be said here in this Life, and a thousand of Years hence, and to all
Eternity, that they are the chosen of God, for he abides by his choice for ever.

Then you say, that none are actually Reprobated, till they depart from God, or
reject his Mercy and Goodness, which he graciously holds forth to them, Romans
1.28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave
them over to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

The Scope of the Apostle is to show, that the Gentiles that he speaks of, had
so much knowledge of God, as to leave them without excuse, v. 20. so have all
that perish: But those Gentiles that the Apostle there speaks of, had not so
much as sufficient outward means to bring them to know God in Christ; but they
so grossly prevaricated against the Light of Nature, to change the Glory of the
Incorruptible-God, into an Image of Corruptible-Man, and to Birds, and
four-footed Beasts, and creeping things: that God in his Righteous Judgment
gave them up to vile Affections: they did not like to retain God in their
Knowledge; that is, they did not walk according to that Knowledge of God they
had by the Light of Nature, (for knowledge of God in Christ, which alone can
bring Men to Eternal Life, they had none) therefore God gave them over to a
Reprobate Mind: They had a Reprobate Mind by Nature, and so have all Men; that
is, a Mind void of Judgment and Understanding, till God takes it away. God's
Decree to deny his Grace to Persons from Eternity, is one thing, and a
Reprobate Mind, a Mind void of Understanding, is another thing; and is more or
less, as God gives up Men to themselves: and this, says he, is so clear, that
those who are our Adversaries are forced to allow it; for thus they speak,
chap. 11. of their Confession of Faith, God did from all Eternity decree to
justify the Elect, notwithstanding they are not justified till the Holy Spirit
does in due time actually apply Christ to them.

I answer, that when the Assembly of Divines say, that God did from all
Eternity Decree to justify the Elect, yet they are not justified till the Holy
Spirit does actually apply Christ: You seem to have quite forgotten what you
were treating of, and so instead of casting a slur upon the Assembly of
Divines, you cast a great slur upon your self, as if you did not at all
understand what you write of: for observe, you are writing of Election, and you
bring a passage of the Assembly about Justification; you would prove, if you
could, that none are actually Elected until they believe; and say, that the
Assembly are forced to allow, that none are actually justified till they do
believe. Surely that grave Assembly of Divines was never so abused as by you:
they knew well enough what they said: I would you had the thousandth part of
the Knowledge they had: The Assembly say well, that God decreed to justify the
Elect from Eternity, and so he decreed to Sanctify them from Eternity, but
they are neither actually Justified nor Sanctified, until the Holy Spirit do
call them. Election is one thing, Justification is another: Election is an
Immanent Act of God, and from Eternity: Justification is a transient Act of God
toward the Elect in time. Ay, but this Author will make this matter evident to
every considerate Reader, viz. that none are actually Elected until they be
Converted.

Says he, All that are actually elected have an Inheritance in the Kingdom of
God, and none can lay any thing to their charge, 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4. Romans 8.33.
But no unbelieving Drunkard, Whoremonger, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom
of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. And these Impieties may be laid to their
charge; therefore no unbelieving Drunkard, Whoremonger, or Idolater is actually
Elected.

1. To explain this, 1. There is an Eternal Predestinating some Persons to the
Heavenly Inheritance, by the mere good pleasure of God's Will, Ephesians. 1.11. In
whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things according to the Counsel of his own
Will. Here the Apostle shows, that whether they be Jews, who first trusted in
Christ, or Gentiles, who were brought to trust in Christ after the Jews, v. 12,
13. yet whatsoever they are, Jews or Gentiles, that truly trust in Christ, they
have obtained a right to the Heavenly Inheritance: Then he shows, how they come
to be partakers of this Grace, to have Christ given for them, and given to
them; and this he shows in these words, Being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things according to the Counsel of his own
Will: He would have them know, that all that God does for them in time, is,
because he had predestined them, and chosen them from Eternity to Grace and
Glory. So let that be well observed, that all that God has predestined to
Life, have the Heavenly Inheritance allotted and appointed to them, it is
theirs by Predestination, by Election.

2. There is a Title to the Heavenly Inheritance by the purchase of Christ the
Mediator.

3. There is an actual right to the Heavenly Inheritance by Regeneration and
Adoption. These three things considered, the Answer to this Author is, That all
that are saved, had a Title to the Heavenly Inheritance from Eternity by
Election; by the Gracious Decree of God, the Kingdom of God was prepared for
them to Eternity, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World: As if our Savior
had said, You that are saved, look to the first cause of it, you were Blessed
of my Father, he elected you from Eternity, he gave me to die for you, he
called you in due season, and made you a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works; and thus you come to inherit the Kingdom.

Again, The Elect, before Conversion, have Right, in Christ their Head, to the
heavenly Inheritance, before they be called, because Christ has purchased it
for them. Yea, Eternal Life was promised to Christ for them, as their Head in
the Covenant of Redemption, before the World began, Tit. 1.12. But when the
Apostle says, that no wicked Man has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God,
Ephesians. 5.5. the meaning is only, that though God may have purposed in his
Eternal Counsel to give the Heavenly Inheritance to a Man that for the present
is ungodly, and Christ the Mediator may have purchased the Heavenly
Inheritance, yet this is a secret thing known only to God himself: But for what
appears yet to the unregenerate Man himself, or to others, he has no Part nor
Lot in that Heavenly Inheritance.

As for those Words, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect? The Apostle had said, Ver. 30. Whom he predestined, them he also
called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them
he also glorified. The Apostle seems in this place to answer to two Objections
that some might make.

1. That it is long before some that are predestined, are called; and if they
be not called, they cannot be justified; and so if they should die before they
are called, What will become of them? The Apostle shows, that though God has
not yet called them, he will call them; and though there might be a Charge of
innumerable Sins against an elect Person, before he be converted, yet, Who
shall lay them to the Charge of God's Elect, to damn them in Hell? They are
Elect, and God's Election stops any Arrest of an Elect Person, so as that he
cannot be thrown into Hell. The Elect have a Reprieve, in order to their Pardon
in God's Time.

2. It might be objected, That whereas the Apostle had said, Ver. 30. Whom he
has called, them he also justified: Have not the Elect, after they are called,
if they live any long time after their Conversion, committed many Sins that
might be laid to their Charge? They did not sin only before they were called,
but sin much after they are called: How then are they justified? The Apostle
answers, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, with effect, so
as to bring them to Damnation in Hell? Though every Sin they commit does
deserve Eternal Damnation, yet it is God with whom they have to do; and seeing
he will not take Vengeance, but glorify his Free Grace in Christ to them, who
has to do with it? God that may do it, he justifies them.

Yea, the Apostle goes on, and shows, v. 34. that the Elect are secured from
Eternal Damnation in Hell, not only by Election, but by Redemption: That though
they have deserved it as well as others, yet, says the Apostle, who shall
condemn (that is, the Elect) eventually and eternally? Indeed, they are
condemned by the Law, till they be in Christ: But who shall condemn them, so as
to get Execution against them in Hell, seeing they are God's Elect, and Christ
has died for them?

Men know not what they do, when they set their Wits on work to deny that God
has set his free and unchangeable Love upon some from Eternity, whereby he
will certainly and infallibly bring them to Grace here, and Eternal Glory
hereafter, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For observe, Take away Election, and
you take away Redemption; for Redemption is grounded upon Election, Joh. 17.6.
Thine they were, and thou gave them me: Thine they were by Election, and
therefore thou gave them me to redeem, and bring to Glory.

Take away God's Eternal Election of a certain number of Persons to Grace and
Glory, and you take away Effectual Calling, and Conversion. For if God, of his
mere Grace and good Pleasure, had not so elected them, there had never been any
Person effectually called. It Is God alone that does inwardly and effectually
call any, so as that they are savingly converted; and if he had not freely
predestined and elected them, he had never called and converted them: Whom he
has predestined, them he has also called, Romans 8.30.

Take away God's Eternal, Special and Unchangeable Love to a certain Number,
that he will set them before his Face for ever; and if we were in Heaven, we
could not be sure to continue there. What a Multitude of Angels sinned and were
thrust down to Hell? It was Election that settled the Angels that see God's Face
for ever. The Angels that stand are called the Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.15. God
decreed from Eternity to determine and fix their Wills unto himself for ever.
It is from this Eternal and Unchangeable Love of God in Election, that the
Angels and Saints in Heaven are upheld in Love and Praise unto God for ever.

It has been an old Objection of Arminians, and revived by this Author, page
26. That many have despaired of Mercy, and have laid violent hands upon
themselves; and many, he says, in this City: He mentions it, that they fall
into this Despair because they are told Christ died but for a few.

1. I answer, This Objection uses to be brought too against Election. For my
part, I do not remember that ever I knew any in my whole Life, that laid
violent hands upon themselves because they heard that Christ did not die for
all Adam's Posterity, or that they were not elected. The truth is, those that
make away themselves may sometimes get such things into their Thoughts, as that
they have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and that they are not
elected, and Christ did not die for them: But the true cause of their laying
violent hands upon themselves is some extraordinary worldly Sorrow, which
works Death, (in that sense,) or Excess of Melancholy, whereby they are so
distracted, that they are not themselves.

2. As to Despair of Mercy; If God give up a Man to Satan, and his own Heart,
how easily may any Man fall into it, though he hold Universal Redemption, and
deny Election? For our Savior says plainly, Matthew. 7.14. Few there be that
find the strait Gate, and narrow Way. Yea, I will maintain, that the Doctrine
of Eternal Redemption, and of Christ's dying only for the Elect, and that the
Elect whom Christ died for shall certainly and infallibly be saved, is an
Antidote against Despair, if the Lord please to put in with it: And that the
denying of Election, and holding Universal Redemption, is the way to bring
those that have a deep Sense of their own Sinfulness and Unworthiness, is the
way to bring such to utter Despair of Mercy.

I make it out thus: Take a Person that is thoroughly convinced of Sin, that
sees, and is sensible that he has a Depth of Sin in his Nature, that sees
himself vile and abominable, by reason of the universal Corruption of his
Nature, as well as actual Sins, more than the Hairs of his Head, which cannot
be numbered: You come to this humbled, convinced Person, with your Arminian
Doctrine, and tell him that God did not decree any Person to Salvation from
Eternity, of mere Grace to give them infallibly both Grace and Glory, but that
Christ died for all Adam's Posterity. Says the convinced, humbled Sinner,
Shall all be infallibly saved that Christ died for? You must tell him,
according to the tenor of your Doctrine, No, there were many of them in Hell
when he died, and never shall be set at liberty from their Everlasting Chains
of Darkness. Yea, you can tell them, according to your Doctrine, that
notwithstanding Christ's Death, there might not one Man or Woman in the World
have been saved. Truly, this Doctrine is enough to drive Men into Despair. Ay,
but you can tell them, that whosoever believes, shall be saved: Ay, and so can
others tell them, as well as you, though they hold Election, and that Christ
died only for the Elect: For if God gives Faith, that is a certain sign of
Election, and that Christ died for that Person.

Well, Now let us see what those that hold Election, and that Christ died only
for the Elect, can say, in a Ministerial and Doctrinal Way, to keep a
convinced, humbled Sinner from Despair of Mercy; I say, in a Ministerial,
Doctrinal Way; for it is God alone that can do it inwardly and effectually. Now
therefore our Doctrine can say to such a convinced, humbled Sinner, that is
ready to despair; God has from Eternity decreed, of his mere Grace in Christ,
to give Grace and Glory to certain Persons; and some of these Persons that God
intended to make everlasting Monuments of his Free Grace, are not only by
Nature Children of Wrath, as well as others, but in time are Monsters in
respect of Actual Sin; as Manasseh, the Thief upon the Cross, and Paul, for
persecuting the Church of God; but being elected to Life, and Christ dying for
them, they are converted and saved: And who knows but that you are of that
number? There is a May be, that you are an Object of this Special Grace; and
it is certain, if that you, being convinced of Sin, do venture and trust in
God's free Mercy in Christ, you shall be saved. All that the Father gives unto
Christ to redeem and save, shall come to him; and he that comes unto him, he
will in no wise cast out. And if the humbled Sinner says, If I should put my
Trust in Christ, the Arminian tells me, that I may be a Child of God to Day,
and a Child of the Devil to Morrow: Therefore why should I, that know what a
vile Heart I have, ever think of any Hope of Salvation? but sink in utter
Despair. Our Doctrine assures them, if the Lord be pleased once to unite them
to Christ by a true and lively Faith, the Lord will give them from time to time
such Influences and Supplies of his Spirit, as that they shall be kept in the
state of Grace, until they come to the state of Glory. Therefore let all that
are wise and spiritual judge which Doctrine gives grounds of most
Encouragement, Support and Comfort, if the Lord please to set it home by his
Spirit.

CHAP. VI. Of God's Eternal Decrees, what should come to pass in Time; and of
his governing and disposing of things in the World for his own Glory.
THis Author, in his Epistle to his Book, falls upon the Assembly of Divines,
concerning God's Decrees, and (according to the manner of the Man) leaves out
that which should clear their Sense and Meaning, that so he might expose them.

The Words in the Assembly's Confession are these:

God from all Eternity did, by the most wise and holy Counsel of his own Will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass; yet so as thereby
neither is God the Author of Sin, nor is Violence offered to the Will of the
Creatures, nor is the Liberty or Contingency of Second Causes taken away, but
rather established.

This Article is almost word for word the same with the Eleventh Article of the
Episcopal Divines in Ireland, 1615. long before the Assembly at Westminster; so
that one would think it was taken thence.

God from all Eternity did, by his Unchangeable Counsel, ordain whatsoever in
Time should come to pass; yet so, as thereby no Violence is offered to the
Wills of the Reasonable Creatures, neither the Liberty, nor the Contingency of
the Second Causes taken away.

The Reader may see what a Harmony there is about God's Decrees, between the
old Episcopal Divines, and the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.

There have been two sorts of Atheists in the World; the first sort of Atheists
denied the Existence and Being of God, the second sort of Atheists denied God's
governing the World; the Lord keep this Age from being Atheists either of these
ways.

If the Evils of Afflictions that befall us came merely by Second Causes and
Instruments, and were not determined and decreed by God, how should we
sanctify God's Name, and humble our selves under the mighty Hand of God? As
Job did, when he said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away:
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

This Men drive at in this Atheistical Age, to throw down the Sovereignty,
Independency and Immutability of God, to make him change in his Purposes and
Intentions, as Men do; and to make Contingencies to God, as there is to Man.

It is come to this daring Boldness, that Men have asserted in Print, that God
has not determined the Period of Men's Lives, nor other things of that nature:
But who, I pray, shall order what shall come to pass, but that blessed God who
has made all things for himself, for his own Glory, for the Glory of his
Wisdom, Power, Justice and Mercy? And who is fit to govern the World, but he
that made it?

Ay, but the great Objection that blinds the Ignorant is, That if God have from
Eternity decreed all things that come to pass, then he has decreed that Men
shall fall into those Sins that they do fall into.

Answer. And what then? Do not we say that yet God is not the Author or
Approver of Sin, neither is there any Violence offered to the Will of the
Creatures? Men sin as freely as if there were no Decree of God to leave them to
commit those Sins. We say that God's Decrees are not the Cause of Sin, neither
is God the Author of Sin. Nihil isto contradicentius, aut impossibilius, nempe
Deum esse Authorem peccati: Nothing is more contradictory or impossible than
this Proposition, that God is the Author of Sin, says Dr. Twisse: Yet he is
one that this Author puts in his Black Bill.

Well, but this Author scrapes together several Passages quoted by Mr. Pierce,
and other Writers, out of Calvin, Luther, Zuinglius, Beza, and others; which
are very strange concerning God's determining Men's Sins. What do you say to
these Expressions?

I answer: 1. That Mr. Pierce and this Author might have spent their Time
better, than to quarrel with Calvin, Luther, and those eminent Instruments in
the Reformation. This is very pleasing to the Papists, and those that are
Popishly affected; for they hate the Names of Calvin, Luther, Zuinglius, and
those Divines that God made use of, to communicate so much Light to the World.
And if this Author knows it not, I will now tell him, that Bellarmine long
since, in his Writings, does inveigh against them upon this very Account,
concerning God's Decrees and Overruling Hand about the Sins of Men.

2. I say, I shall not meddle with any of his Quotations. One may cut out Snips
out of Authors, whereby the true Sense and Meaning of the Authors may be quite
altered.

3. I say, I shall not take upon me to justify all the Phrases and Expressions
of Learned and Godly Men: They may sometimes in haste express themselves not so
prudently and warily in such a tremendous Mystery as this is. The truth is,
God's mysterious Administration concerning Sin, in ordering and overruling it
to his own Glory, is past our finding out: It Is best to say, O the Depth! And
that to be sure, though we cannot comprehend it, he is righteous in all his
Ways, and holy in all his Works. I would have all Persons very cautious about
this Point, both of the one side and the other, and keep close to
Scripture-Expressions, which I shall now set before this Author, and those of
his Way; and do fear that till they learn more Sobriety, Awe and Reverence of
God, they would openly quarrel against the Scripture it self in this Matter, if
they durst. Let us then hear what the Scripture says in this Matter.

When Joseph's Brethren did wickedly and unnaturally sell him into Egypt, Genesis
45.5. says Joseph, God sent me before you, to preserve Life. And Ver. 7. God
sent me before you, to preserve you a Posterity in the Earth. And Genesis 50.20.
But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it for good.

1 King. 22.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And he said, Hear thou therefore the Word of
the Lord: I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven by
him, on his Right Hand, and on the Left. And the Lord said, Who shall persuade
Ahab to go up, and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And one said on this manner, and
another said on that manner. And there came forth a Spirit, and stood before
the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said, Wherewith? And he
said, I will go forth, and be a Lying Spirit in the Mouth of all his Prophets.
And he said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also: Go forth, and do so.
Now therefore the Lord has put a Lying Spirit in the Mouth of all these thy
Prophets, and the Lord has spoken Evil concerning thee.

Exodus 4.21. And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou go to return into
Egypt, see that thou do all these Wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in
thine Hand; but I will harden his Heart, that he shall not let the People go.

When Job's Substance was stolen by the Sabeans and Chaldeans, and his Servants
slain, Job worshipped, and said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away, Chap. 1.20, 21.

Concerning God's All-governing Providence, it is said, Eccles. 3.14. I know
that what God does, it shall be for ever; nothing can be put to it, nor any
thing taken from it: And God does it, that Men should fear before him.

Concerning the Assyrian, the great Enemy and Spoiler of Israel, it is said,
Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger, and the Staff in their Hand is my
Indignation: I will send him against an hypocritical Nation.

Isa. 13.16, 17. Their Children also shall be dashed in pieces before their
Eyes, their Houses shall be spoiled, and their Wives ravished. Behold, I will
stir up the Medes against them. --

Psalm. 105.25. He turned their Heart to hate his People, and to deal subtly
with his Servants.

Matthew. 6.13. And lead us not into Temptation.

Prove. 16.4. He has made all things for himself, and the Wicked for the Day of
Evil.

When Shimei cursed David, 2 Samuel 16.10. he said, The Lord has said unto him,
Curse David.

Romans 1.24. God gave them up to Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own
Hearts. Ver. 26. God gave them up unto vile Affections.

2 These. 2.11, 12. And for this Cause God shall send them strong Delusions,
that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned who believed not
the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness.

Though God had a glorious Design in the Death of Christ, yet they were wicked
Hands that crucified him: God's Decrees do not justify Men's Sins. It was a
most horrid Act of the Jews to crucify the Lord of Glory, yet Peter says,
Act. 1.23. Him being delivered by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked Hands have crucified and slain. Act. 4.27,
28. For of a truth, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the People of Israel were gathered together, to
do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined before to be done. The Hand
and Counsel of God determined before, even from Eternity, that Christ should at
that very time die, as Mediator for his Church; and the Jews, by their wicked
Hands, to satisfy their Malice, did crucify him, as if he had been a
Malefactor. O the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.

But of all the Reformed Divines, this Author shows most Wrath and Indignation
against Calvin, who in his Time was a glorious Light in the Church. Mr. Richard
Hooker, that wrote against him about Church Discipline, yet confesses him to
be the wisest Man that ever the Church of France bred. And another Episcopal
Divine says, He never heard any good Man speak of him without Honor. But this
Author makes scurrilous Verses of him, and directs them too to Calvin himself,
though he has been so long dead; and compares Calvin to Cain, and Michael
Servetus to Abel. Let us enquire what this Servetus was. This Author is much
mistaken, to think that he was put to death for being of this Author's Judgment
about Baptism; it was for Blasphemy against the Blessed and Holy Trinity.

Indeed, this Author says, he was a learned and worthy Man, though perhaps
mistaken in some things, page 27. Ah, Do you put a Perhaps he was mistaken in
some things, when he denied and blasphemed the Holy Trinity? Waving what
Sleidan, Ross, and others say of him, let us hear what Dr. Owen, in his Answer
to the Antitrinitarians and Socinians, says of this Servetus, page 44.

Servetus stuffed all his Discourses with horrid Blasphemies. Beza tells us, he
called the Trinity, Tricipitem Cerberum, (Words not fit to be Englished, they
are so full of Blasphemy;) and wrote, that Moses was a ridiculous Impostor,
Beza, Epist. 1. And there are Passages cited out of his Book of the Trinity,
(which I have not seen,) that seem to have as much of the Devil in them, as
ever yet was written or spoken by any of the Sons of Men. If, says he, Christ
be the Son of God, Debuissent ergo dicere quod Deus habebat uxorem quandam
spiritualem, vel quod solus ipse Masculo-faemineus aut Hermaphroditus, simul
erat pater and matter, nam ratio vocabuli non patitur ut quis dicatur sine matre
pater: Et si Logos Filius erat natus ex patre sine matre, dic mihi quomodo
peperit eum; per ventrem, aut per latus? To this height of Atheism and
Blasphemy had Satan wrought up the Man; so that I must needs say, he is the
only Person in the World, that I ever heard or read of, that ever died upon the
Account of Religion, in reference to whom, the Zeal of them that put him to
death may be acquitted. Thus he.

Although this Author thinks that God does not, for the Manifestation of his
own Glory, overruled the Children of Men, yet it is mamnifest that God has
given him a Spirit of Slumber, as a Check and Punishment to him, that he should
be left of God to desame such a Man as Calvin, and extol Servetus, an
Antitrinitarian, and one of the greatest Blasphemers of the for ever Blessed
Trinity, that ever was in the World. By this you have lost all Credit and
Esteem, with all wise and knowing Christians that Worship the Holy Trinity, God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, to
whom be glory for ever.

CHAP. VII. Of the Lords Drawing and Uniting of the Elect to Christ, in
effectual calling.
1. When Arminians have made great flourishes of Gods having the same love of
good will to all Adams Posterity, they are exceedingly grated with this
Objection that follows.

If God have the same love of good will to all the Children of Adam, why are
but some saved, and not all, why does not God convert all?

1. Some of them are ready to say, that God cannot Convert them, they are so
stubborn and rebellious, though he desires to do it; but this is downright
Blasphemy, to say that God cannot convert those whom he purposes, intends
and desires to Convert, he that made the Heart, can change the Heart, can turn
it as the Rivers of Water, which way soever he pleases, with the greatest
facility, easilier then we can stir a finger.

I heard above forty years since, an Arminian Preach, Mr. H.D. a Man of as
great Learning and Ability, as most of that way in England, this Man was
inveighing against Election and special Grace, at last he came to answer an
Objection to this purpose: You will say, Is not this a mere beating of the Air,
a mere flourish of words, to tell you that God has such a Love to all Adams
Posterity, that he would have them all saved, and yet they are not saved,
suppose (says he) that a Mother should say, that she had a great Love for her
Child, and she sees this simple Child running into a fire, that would burn it
to Death, and the Mother could prevent it, and pull the Child back, but she
suffers it to go on and Perish, who will say that such a Mother had such a true
and tender Love to the Child? So said this Preacher, If God have such great and
tender Love to all Adams Posterity, and sees them through their folly,
inadvertency and corruption of their Hearts, running into Hellfire, and he
could stop them, and save them, and does not, where is his Love and Desire to
save them?

Though I cannot remember the very words, yet it was to this purpose that he
brought in an Objection, he urged it very strongly, I think overruled by God,
to confute himself, I wondered how he would answer the Objection, his Answer was
this, what (says he) if I say God cannot, that is, that God could not Convert
them, and so left it: To such Absurdities and Blasphemies does Arminianism lead.

2. Others of them say, that God indeed can change the Rebellious Will of Man,
but they allege two things.

1. They say it is Dishonorable to God, to go any further for the Conversion
of a Sinner, than to set before him Arguments, Threatenings and Promises, and
urge these Arguments by inward Convictions; but they say, it is not for the
Honor of God to put forth such irresistible power, as shall infallibly change
and turn the Heart to God.

I answer, that God has promised to some, absolutely promised to the Elect,
that which Divines call the first Grace, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. I will put my fear in
their Hearts, I will write my Law in their Hearts, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new Heart
also will I give you, a new Spirit I will put within you, and I will take away
the Heart of Stone (that is, take away the stubbornness and rebellion of your
Wills and Affections) and I will give you a Heart of Flesh, that is, I will
give you a penitent, soft, pliable Will toward me and my Precepts; this God of
his infinite Grace, has promised to his Elect, without which, not one Man or
Woman in the World had ever been Converted and Saved; and dare any say, that
it is Dishonorable to God, to show this Grace and Favor? Is it come to this,
that where God has a gracious Respect to a person, that though the person be
ignorant, foolish and desperate, that it should be Dishonorable to the
Physician of Heaven, to cure the Man of his Spiritual Phrensy, and bring him to
a right mind? Surely this is so far from being Dishonorable to God, that the
Elect, and Ransomed People shall Adore him, and praise him for ever, for this
great, free and undeserved Grace to them.

2. They say, it is Dishonorable to the Will of Man, yea, impossible for the
Will of Man to be forced, therefore they say, that all that God does toward
the Conversion of any, is by Moral swasion, and urging Arguments to this great
Queen, the Will of Man, but she her self must not be touched.

I answer, if God did not touch, yea, by an Omnipotent sweetness change and
turn the Will of Man to himself, there had never been any one Converted in this
World: God works upon the Will in Conversion, to make it of unwilling willing,
and to make it as willing to turn to God, as ever it was unwilling, before God
touched and changed the Will.

Indeed this Author says, you present Christ not serious, because he will not
save Men whether they will or no, page 22. I say this is a very ignorant
Speech, and shows the Author to be little acquainted with the Scripture, or the
corruption of his own Heart; for though Men when they hear of Hell and
Damnation, would be saved from Misery, yet there is not any one that would be
saved in the way that God has appointed, until God by his immediate Hand, do
secretly touch and change his Will, i. e. that though all would be saved from
Hell under the Notion of a State of Misery, yet till God give special grace, a
new Heart, put a new bent upon the Will and Affections, there is no Man would
be saved in Gods way, in the Gospel way; that is,

1. To be made so poor in Spirit, as to be taken off from all standing upon
Terms with God, but acknowledge his Sovereignty, and his Righteousness, that he
might take Vengeance upon us for ever.

2. To acknowledge that we have not the least Worthiness and Righteousness, but
to creep under the Robe of Christ's Righteousness.

3. To be willing to part with Sins, that are as dear to corrupt Nature, as
Right Hands, and Right Eyes, to be willing to take up the Cross, and follow
Christ, to be willing to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord, so far as he shall please to make known his mind to us.

Ay, it were well if in stead of this blustering about these things, that all
of us did examine whether we our selves have been so graciously wrought upon by
the Spirit of God, as that we are willing to be saved in Gods way, in the
Gospel way.

Alas, Men are of this Opinion, and the other, and like the Pharisees, are
industrious to make Proselytes to their Opinions, and yet know nothing of the
new Birth, of the work of Grace upon their own Souls: Therefore let us all be
much in self Examination, and proving what work of Faith in Christ, what work
of Repentance for Sin, what love to God and to his people and ways, is begun in
us by the Holy Spirit, that so we may not think our selves something, when we
are nothing, deceiving our own Hearts.

2. Arminians turn the Covenant of Grace, into a Covenant of works; they quite
mistake, the reason why God does work Faith and Sanctification in those whom he
brings to Eternal Life, it is not to be the Righteousness in which they are
to stand Righteous before God for their Justification at Gods Bar, for we are
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, Romans
3.24, 25. So that the Righteousness by which we stand Righteous at Gods Bar, is
a Righteousness imputed to us; neither Faith as in act or work, nor our
Sanctification and good works, are our Righteousness in the Covenant of Grace,
as Obedience to the Law, was to be our Righteousness to justify under the
Covenant of works; but Faith is wrought ^n those that are saved, as a passive
instrument whereby they receive and embrace Christ (...)o be the Lord their
Righteousness, and so are t^ught to know and adore the way whereby they are
saved, and Sanctification is wrought is to se that are saved, that they may
have the first fruits of Holiness here, that they may in some measure walk with
God, and glorify God he^e, and be preparing for perfect Holiness and ^ommunion
with God in Heaven. But this lie at the bottom of Arminianism, that there is
Merit, the Popish Merit of Condignity, or h^w ever of congruity in our Holiness
and good Works, and upon Discourse with a Minister ^ great Note in the Arminian
way, I found him to be as unsound in the Doctrine of Justification, as any
Popish writer I had ever met with.

3. Arminians make Conversion an easy ^ork, a small matter, it is true, it is easy
to God^ work in any, easier than for us to speak a wo^^; but in it self, it is
a great work, and imposs^^le for any to believe and Repent, except Go^ give
them a new Heart, and infuse this habit and principle of Grace into them.
Indeed they say, that the Lord does require easy Terms, upon which Men may
have Eternal Life, but they don't know what they say; for us that are
universally blinded and corrupted by the fall of Adam, for us to go out if our
selves to Christ, for us to mourn for Sin, is it is an offense to God, for us to
desire and endeavor after Universal Holiness, is ten thousand times harder
work than for Adam to have coninued obedient to the Law, for which he had a
Cncreated Principle, a Habit of Holiness infused unto him by Creation, only it
was mutable, and left to the Managing of his own free Will.

1. B^t let it be observed, that the way of Salvati^n by Christ seems to be
Foolishness to a Natural Man, that we should look to be saved b^ one that dyed
himself, Paul says, this is to them that Perish Foolishness, it is a great
work of God upon our understandings to enlighte^ us, and convince us, that this
way of Salvaon is the only way, and that it is a glorious ^ay, that the
manifold Wisdom of God, the exeeding Riches of his Grace, and his Revenging
Justice against Sin, will shine to Eterny in this way of saving Sinners by a
Crucied Christ.

2. ^et it be observed, that when a Sinner is covinced and humbled indeed, and
sees what Majesty he has offended by his Sins, it is no easy thing to set his
hope in Christ, who^ he never saw; but that the Holy Ghost does ecretly and
inwardly reveal him to the Soul as the only and all-sufficient Mediator, and
unites the Heart to him, to trust and rely upon him for Salvation.

3. It is no easy thing for one that has such a corrupt Nature, and has
delighted in Sin, to be willing that Christ should Reign over him, to desire
that Christ would put down all the Rule and Authority of Sin, that he might be
for Christ, and not for another.

When Christ says, his Yoke is easy, and when the Apostle says, his
Commandments are not grievous, the meaning is not, that Christ's Yoke is easy to
the Flesh, and corrupt Nature, but easy and sweet, when God gives a principle
of grace, a new Heart and Spirit, so far as we are renewed, and are led by the
Spirit, so far Christ's Yoke is easy, and his ways pleasant to our Souls.

The truth is many take up opinions and wrangle, and dispute, but it is to be
feared, that few have experience of a Saving work of Conversion upon their
Souls, they do not seem to have a Spiritual Savor in their Discourses, but of
these things God will Judge.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Saints Perseverance, as being kept by the power of
God, through Faith unto Salvation.
THis Author has something about this point, page 19.

He says, some may depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits.

I answer, none ever doubted but Men may fall from the Doctrine of Faith, from
the profession of Faith, and from an Historical Notional Faith, from common
Grace, from common Enlightening.

But the Doctrine maintained by the Assembly of Divines, and, as I have showed,
by the Lambeth Articles, and by the Articles of Ireland, is, that none that are
truly regenerated, that have saving justifying Faith, shall be so left to
themselves, as to fall totally and finally, but shall be preserved unto the
Heavenly Kingdom.

Believers may be left to themselves at times, as David, Hezekiah, Peter and
others, that they may fall foully to the Dishonor of God, and to the wounding
of their own Souls; but God will graciously recover them again, Grace is in a
swoun in them, but not dead.

The Doctrine of the Saints perseverance is grounded,

1. Upon the free and Eternal, Unchangeable love of God to the Elect.

2. Upon the perfect and eternal Redemption Christ has wrought for them, and
his praying as Mediator, that they may be kept, and that their Faith fail not.

3. The Inhabitation of the Spirit, who abides in them for ever.

4. The promises of God to them, that they shall not depart from him; the
Nature of the Covenant of Grace, which they are brought under, is, that God
will guide them by his Counsels, and afterward bring them to his glory.

But I shall not enlarge upon these things, but let us attend upon what this
Author says upon this point: Truly though the Assembly of Divines had
positively declared for the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, yet according
to the faculty of the Man to catch at something, [he saith] nor need any Man
say more concerning falling away, than they do, for as they deny not but there
are Temporary Believers (and truly such are all that fall away) so they plainly
tell us, that the purest Churches in Heaven, are subject to mixture and Error,
and some have so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but
Synagogues of Satan. Now says he, surely the purest Churches under Heaven, are
true Believers, and if these may become Synagogues of Satan, it is too much to
prove the point.

Truly either this Author is more Ignorant than I took him to be, before I saw
his Book, or else which is far worse, has not an honest Mind, but is resolved
to wrest Men's words contrary to what he knows they intended, as we shall see.

1. He says, the Assembly deny not but there are Temporary Believers.

I answer, what Ignorance or worse is this? When Divines speak of Temporaries,
or Temporary Believers, they call them so, to Distinguish them from true
Believers, those that have a true lively justifying Faith: I suppose the phrase
was taken up from the Parable of the four sorts of grounds, Luke 18.13. Our
Savior there compares some Hearers of the Word, to the High-way-side, that the
Word does not affect them at all, a second sort to the Stony Ground, that hear
the Word with Joy, but they have no Root of grace in them; Ay, and if such do
abide to their Lives end with no other but such a kind of Faith as they have,
they could not be saved, but they often, especially if Persecution come, lose
that Historical, Notional Faith, and common enlightening they had; the Hearts of
these were never made good ground, they were never ploughed up, and sown with
the Seed of special Grace, to bring forth Fruit unto God. The Scope of our
Savior in that Parable, is, that some are affected with the Word, and after a
sort believe, and yet never have the Root of the Matter, a New Heart.

To explain this further, John 2.23, 24. It is said, many believed on him, when
they saw the Miracles; but Jesus would not commit himself to them, for he knew
all Men, he knew what is in Man; the meaning is, that though they believed
after a sort, yet he would not commit himself to them, and trust them as true
Disciples, and true Friends to him, for he knew all Men, he knew they were not
sound Believers, he knew they had not that precious Faith of Gods Elect.

And so it is said of Simon Magus, Acts 8.13. That he believed and was Baptized,
and yet Peter tells him, That his Heart was not right in the sight of God, but
was in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of Iniquity.

Men may be enlightened and convinced, and after a sort, be Believers, and yet
never be truly humbled for Sin, as Sin; never be taken off from all Confidence
in their own Righteousness, never rely upon Christ alone for Justification,
never have that Faith that works by Love, Gal. 5.6. Those that fall away have
but an Historical, Notional Faith, such as the Apostle James calls Faith
without Works, a dead Faith; Saving, Justifying Faith, differs not only in
degree but in its Kind and Nature, from this Faith that they have that falls
away, 1 Jo. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, no doubt they would have continued with us, but they went out
from us, that they might be made manifest, they were not all of us; that is,
that those who were Professors and Believers after a sort, they went out from
us, they fell away because they were not of us, they were not of the Elect and
Ransomed People, they were not partakers of like precious Justifying Faith with
us, for if they had been so, no doubt, (the Apostle puts a no doubt upon it)
they would have continued with us, and never have fallen to Judaism or
Heathenism again; but they went out from us, fell off from their Profession and
common enlightening, that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of
us; but he tells them that had true Justifying Faith, they have an anointing
from the Holy one, v. 21. and v. 27. the anointing which ye have received
abides in you, v. 27. Every one, the least as well as the strongest that have
justifying Faith, they have The Spirit of God dwelling in them, they have
another manner of work of the Spirit upon them, than any that fall away; they
are new Creatures, they are partakers of the Divine Nature, and this Anointing
with the Spirit of Grace, and with the Graces of the Spirit abides in them
against all opposition from the remainders of Corruption, against all
opposition from Men or Devils: The Lord, to humble them, and to show them, that
it is of his mere Grace in Christ, that they are saved, may leave them in part
to themselves at times, and they may be as a Tree cut down, but yet there is
the Root of the Matter, the Root of Grace always in them, and through the scent
of the Water of Life, through new Influences, Supplies, and quickenings of the
Spirit, they shall put forth Buds and Blossoms of Grace again.

God has promised to every true Believer, that he will never leave him nor
forsake him, Heb. 13.5. i. e. he will never leave him nor forsake him totally,
or finally, and it is God's not leaving or forsaking them, that keeps them from
not leaving or forsaking of him: Let it be well observed, that we all by our
fall in Adam, have forsaken God, the Fountain of Living Waters; we have left
God, and God has left us, as to any help by a Covenant of Works, that Covenant
was Mutable and Conditional; God would not leave and forsake Man upon condition
that Man did not leave and forsake him, as to exact and perfect Obedience; but
Adam, and all of us in him, did presently leave and forsake God, Romans 5.12. and
so God has left and forsaken all Adam's Posterity, as to Blessing them upon
the terms of the Covenant of Works. But Blessed be God for a Covenant of Grace,
and Jesus the Mediator, whom ever the Lord takes internally into this Covenant,
he will never leave them nor forsake them, and has himself undertkaen to keep
them, that they shall never totally and finally leave nor forsake him, Jer.
32.40. Hos. 14.4, 5. Isai. 54.9.10. Isai. 55.3.

2. The Assembly say in their Confession of Faith;

That the purest Churches under Heaven are subject to Mixture and Error, and
have been so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of
Satan.

Upon which this Author says, surely the purest Churches are True Believers,
and if these purest Churches may become Synagogues of Satan, it is too much to
prove the point.

I answer, That the Point in hand, is, whether one, whom the Lord has endued
with a lively Justifying Faith, shall not be actually and infallibly kept by
the Grace and Power of God unto Salvation.

Now this Position of the Assembly does consist very well with that point of
Doctrine which they maintained about the perseverance of the Saints.

The Assembly of Divines are not speaking of the Invisible, Mystical Church,
who are inseparably united to Christ, but of particular Churches and
Congregations of those that are Professors of the Gospel, and they say rightly,

1. That the purest of these Churches of Professors are subject to mixture; i.
e. that there may be in the purest Churches, unsound Professors, that never had
a Saving Work of Grace wrought in their Hearts.

2. That the purest Churches are subject to Error; as to lesser Errors, the
purest Churches in the World may be guilty before God: Christ may not only have
a few things, but many things against the best Churches, either for Errors in
Doctrine or Worship, or failings in Conversation in Ministers and People, who
can understand his Errors, all his Errors; the purest Churches had need to be
very Humble, and not boast of their Purity, but pray continually, that God
would pardon and reform what he sees amiss in them.

3. The purest Church may so degenerate, as to be no Church of Christ, but the
Synagogue of Satan: All that the Assembly of Divines here say, is very true,
and no contradiction at all to themselves in their maintaining the certain
perseverance of particular Saints; for though the purest Church may so degenerate
in time, as to be no true Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan; yet if
there be any True Believers in a Church, they are kept, notwithstanding the
Apostasy of the Church whereof they were Members; though the Church does so
degenerate, as to lose their Church state, yet if there were any one sound
Christian in that Church, he shall hold his spiritual Estate and Union with
Christ for all that. If Christ have a few names in a Church that degenerates,
those shall be safe, whatsoever becomes of the rest, as to their Church Estate,
and Eternal-state, Revel. 3.4. Thou have a few Names even in Sardis, which have
not defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white; i. e. they
shall walk with Christ in the white of Grace here, to their lives end, and in
the white of Glory for ever: Though the Lord do remove the Candlestick, the
Church Estate, and will not own a People any longer to be a True Church; yet if
there be any sound Christians amongst them, they shall never be cast off:
Therefore, how vainly does this Author say from this passage of the Assemblies
Confession of Faith, here is too much to prove the Point, when there is not the
least shadow of any thing they say, to prove, that any True Believer may fall
totally and finally: Though those that were Professors of the Gospel, and were in
Churches, may so degenerate, as to lose their Church Estate; yet if there were
any in those Churches that were True Believers, the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against them: A Degenerate Church may Excommunicate the Sound Members,
may prosecute them to Death, but can never separate them from the Love of
Christ. The truth is, when a Church does so woefully degenerate, as to be
accounted no longer a Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan, the Lord is
pleased many times to stir up those that are Sound Christians amongst them,
that they are more Lively and Spiritual than ever they were, and love not their
Lives unto the Death, in bearing witness to the Truth.

Now let us hear this Author declare, what his Opinion is about the Saints
Perseverance.

Says he, Page 20. For my part, though I doubt not but there is a State
attainable in this Life, from which, by the Grace of God, Christians shall not
fall, yet I hold it a vanity for any Man to affirm of himself, or of any other
person in particular, that it is impossible for him to fall, I hold it far
better for the best, as well as others, to take heed lest they fall.

I answer, This passage is very dark and ambiguous, wherein this Author rather
hides than declares his Judgment about the Point in hand.

The word Christian, may be taken largely, for those that are Christians by
Profession only; no doubt but they may fall from their Profession; or the word
Christian may be taken strictly, for those who are Christians inwardly in the
Heart and in the Spirit, as well as outwardly by Profession: Now this we
maintain from the Scripture, as has been declared before, that all such have
attained such an Estate, by their Union with Christ, by their Justification,
Adoption and Regeneration, that they shall never fall totally or finally.

This Author must intend some new Notion (if he understand himself) which must
be, that though every one that is Really and Spiritually in Christ, is not in
such an Estate, as that he shall certainly persevere in Grace, yet he who has
attained an extraordinary degree of Grace, or to an absolute Perfection, such
as the Quakers talk of, may, by the Grace of God, keep his standing. This is a
wondrous dark Passage, and I shall leave the Author in his Clouds; but we
maintain,

1. That none attain to an absolute perfection in this life, Romans 7. Gal. 5.17.
Eccles. 7.20.

2. That the strongest Saints in the World cannot keep themselves one day, but
are upheld by the secret Influences and Supplies of the Spirit, Phil. 1.13. 1
John 5.5. 2 Cor. 3.5.

3. That the Lord, who keeps strong Believers, keeps also the weakest True
Believer most certainly and infallibly, Phil 1.6. where he has begun the good
work of Special Saving Grace, he will perform it to the day of Jesus Christ;
that the weakest of Christ's Sheep and Lambs shall have Eternal Life, and shall
never perish, John 10.27, 28. that Christ will not break (nor suffer to be
broken) the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, Matthew. 12.20. that is,
where there is but a little Special Grace, that can but smoke, though it cannot
flame, Christ will keep it, that it shall never be quenched, but shall at last
flame out in Love and Praise, and singing in Heaven to all Eternity.

God keeps True Believers in a state of Grace till they come to Glory, not
because they are strong, but because they are his Elect, because they are
redeemed by the Blood of his Son, and at their effectual Calling, adopted to be
his Children, and says the Apostle, If Children, then Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. The least Babe in Christ is God's Child, as well
as the Eldest, and strongest Believer, and shall infallibly be an Heir of God,
and joint Heir with Christ: For as many as believed, to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God, John 1.12. The same Day and Hour that a Soul truly
receives Christ, the Lord does actually adopt that Soul, though it be a secret
thing to the Soul, yet it is as if God should say, I did predestinate thee to
the Adoption of my Child by Christ, and now I do adopt thee to be my Child, to
be an Heir of Eternal Life; and such shall certainly be preserved to the
Heavenly Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. The Inheritance is reserved in Heaven for all
that are begotten again to a lively Hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
and they are kept whilst they are in this World, by the Power of God through
Faith, till they come to the Heavenly Inheritance.

2. This Author says, I hold it a Vanity for any Man to say of himself, it is
impossible for him to fall.

I answer, 1. It is a Vanity indeed, for any Man to say of himself, it is
impossible for him to fall, taking it for falling into Sin at all, for there is
no Man that lives and sins not; yea, it would be Vanity, Pride, and
Presumption for the best Saint on Earth, to say, it is impossible for him to
fall into gross Sins, seeing David and Peter fell so foully, though they were
graciously recovered again.

2. It would be great Vanity for the best Saint on Earth to say, in any the
least Confidence in his own Strength, that it is impossible for him to fall
away totally and finally; for indeed, if they were left to themselves, it is
impossible that they should stand in a state of Grace one day; if everlasting
Arms were not underneath them, if they were not kept by the Power of God; If
Christ did not hold them fast, it were impossible that any of the Saints should
stand.

3. I say, That it is no Vanity, but a Triumph of Faith and Thankfulness to the
God of all Grace, for a True Christian, when God sheds abroad his Love in his
Heart, by the Holy Spirit, to say, Who shall separate me from the Love of
Christ? Was it Vanity in David to say, Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House of the Lord for
ever? Psalm. 23.6. and Psalm. 73.26. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and
afterward bring me to Glory: Was it Vanity in the Apostle Paul to say,
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the Righteous Judge will give unto me, and not to me only, but to all them that
love his appearing? 2 Timothy 4.8. I suppose this Author may be of the Judgment of
Bellarmine, and other Papists, that none can have Assurance in this Life of
their Eternal Salvation, except it be by extraordinary Revelation.

Then, as to what he says, That it is a Vanity to tell any other particular
Person, that it is impossible for him to fall; I answer, that if he intends
falling totally and finally, I suppose it is not ordinary to say to any
particular person, it is impossible for you to fall away; and if one do say so
to any particular person, it is upon a Supposition, that the Person is savingly
united to Christ, as if a particular Person under desertion says, I once had
Hope, through Grace, but now God will be gracious no more; I shall one day fall
by the hand of Sin and Satan, one may assure him, that if e're God has begun
the good Work of Special, Saving Grace, he will perform it to the Day of Jesus
Christ; Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

Ay, but says this Author, It is far better for the best to take heed lest
they fall. I answer, It is very well consistent with the Doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance, to take heed lest they fall, and to work out their Salvation with
an Holy Fear and Trembling, looking diligently, lest they fail of the Grace of
God.

1. They that have the fullest assurance of Salvation are to take heed lest
they fall into Sin; because Sin is Sin in a Believer as well as in another Man;
yea, in some sense it is more heinous in a Believer, than in another Man, and
though there be no Condemnation to those that are in Christ, so that God will not
cast his Children into Hell for their Sins, yet he may sorely chastize them
upon Earth, both by Inward Terrors of Conscience, and outward Afflictions.

2. Such Cautions, as, take heed lest you fall, and the like, are one means by
which God keeps his People from falling; God's infallibly keeping his People
does not take them off from their Duty of Watching and Praying, but encourages
them to their Duty: But still if the Lord did not hold every Believer with a
strong hand, notwithstanding all their care and taking heed, they would fall;
yea, and fall as low as Hell.

For what the Author adds, That good Laws were not made against Traitors and
Felons, to make Men Traitors and Felons, but to keep Men from being Traitors
and Feions. I answer, God's Laws and Precepts were not made to make Men wicked,
but to restrain Men from Sin; and that they do, so far as God is pleased to
give Men either Common and Restraining Grace, or Special and Sanctifying Grace:
But the aim of this Author, is to make his ignorant and unwary Reader, think,
that there are no other Decrees of God, but Laws and Precepts set forth to Men
as their Duty, which is a gross mistake, and is such a Vail upon this Author,
that till it be taken away, he will never understand these things. God's
Eternal Decrees and Purposes, are his Intentions, what he himself will do for
the manifestation of his own Glory; God's Laws and Precepts are his
Commandments to us as our Sovereign Lord; but of these things I spoke before in
my Vindication of Dr. Collings.

Before I end this Chapter, I would make this Observation, which may be of use
to his own Soul, if the Lord please to put in by his own Spirit; however, it
may be of use to others; and it is this, that this Author, though he talks of a
general Love of God to all Adam's Posterity, and of God's setting forth good
Laws, yet he seems to have had such a dark Education, that he is not acquainted
with the free Covenant of Grace, and the free Promises of Grace, that are made
to some Persons. Some Scriptures declare what God requires of us in Precepts
and Commands, and in other Scriptures he does freely and absolutely promise to
some, to all the Elect, to all the Spiritual Israel, that he will do it for
them, of his Free Grace in Christ: And indeed, if the Lord had not freely and
absolutely promised to do these things for some, there had not, there could not
have been any of Adam's Posterity saved.

The first Promise of Grace, Genesis 3.15. that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise
the Serpent's Head, does virtually contain all other Promises set forth
afterward. This Seed of the Woman is our Lord Jesus Christ, who being God by
Nature, was to take upon him Humane Nature, of a Woman: It was declared that he
should bruise the Serpent's Head, give him a mortal Wound for all whose Surety
and Mediator he was, that he should destroy the Works of the Devil, that he
should certainly and infallibly bring all the Elect to Glory, notwithstanding
all that the Devil had done to bring Adam and all his Posterity under the Curse
of the Law. The Words hold forth no less than a full, perfect and eternal
Rescue, in due time, from the Devil and Sin; that all, whose Surety and
Mediator Christ was, shall certainly be Partakers of.

In one Text, Deuteronomy. 10.16. it is said, Circumcise the Foreskin of your Heart:
In another, Deuteronomy. 30.6. it is promised to the Elect, The Lord thy God will
circumcise thine Heart. It is commanded in Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all
your Transgressions, and make you a new Heart: And it is promised to the Elect,
that God will do this for them, in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new Heart also will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the
Heart of Stone, and give you an Heart of Flesh. Let it be considered how
absolutely God undertakes for his Elect, in the Covenant of Grace; I will, and
I will. So Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their Hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Ver. 34
They shall all know me. There are Promises unto Grace, and Promises to give
Grace, to work Grace infallibly in the Elect: And if we do not partake of those
exceeding great and precious Promises, that the Lord will work Grace in our
Hearts, against all Opposition, we cannot be saved, Joh. 6.37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be willing in
the Day of thy Power. Joh. 10.16. Other Sheep I have, which are not of this
Fold: Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice.

To conclude this Chapter, I would have this Author, and all that shall read
what I have written, take notice, that I shall not meddle with those few
Passages that he quotes out of other Writers, for some of his Opinions. Indeed,
he seems as if he would put out another Book with Quotations taken out of Mr.
Pierce, and others out of the Ancients, for some of his Opinions; If this
Author will trouble the World with more Books to no purpose, who can help it?
He may do it with great ease, though it may be he never saw the Books
themselves; but Mr. Pierce and Mr. J. G. will furnish him with Quotations out
of the Greek and Latin Fathers, to his hand. But I shall not, I say, meddle
with any Quotations of that nature, for these Reasons: Because,

1. That before Pelagius broached his Errors, the Fathers did not speak so
distinctly and warily about the Points of Grace.

2. That this way of deciding Controversies is endless: As we see when our
Protestant Divines took that way with the Papists, we took the meaning of
certain Passages one way, and they another. A learned Episcopal Divine, and a
Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, long since said very well: The Fathers, in
some things, are for the Papists, against us; in some things they are for us,
against the Papists; and in some things they differ both from the Papists and
us. But because this makes Controversies endless, and casts a Mist before the
Eyes of the Common People, a learned Man amongst the Papists gives this Advice
to those that have to do with Protestants, Get them, says he, out of their
Castle of the Scriptures, into the large Field of the Fathers: And then he made
account they could do well enough with them.

3. That it is Scripture, one Scripture compared with another, that must decide
Controversies. As one of the Ancients said, I would hear, Thus says the Lord.
It is not what learned and Godly Men say, but what the Scripture says, being
rightly understood, and one place thereof compared with another, that must
decide Controversies. And there are certain Rules agreeing with the whole scope
of Holy Writ, that must be attended to; as that no Scripture must be
interpreted so, as in the least to reflect upon the Sovereignty, Immutability
and Omnipotency of God: No Scripture must be so interpreted, as to disparage
and dishonor that perfect and eternal Redemption that Christ, God-Man, has
obtained for us; as if he died in vain for any, for whose Sins he made his Soul
an Offering: No Scripture must be so interpreted, as to puff up proud Man with
a Conceit that he does merit his Salvation, when others perish by his
Towardliness and Care for himself, in improving his Talent better than others;
but that all our good Inclinations, every good Thought, and all holy Desires,
are freely given us of God: It is he that works in us to will, and to do; and
that not for any Worthiness and Towardliness in us, above others, but of his
own good Pleasure, of his free Mercy in Christ. It is by Grace we are saved,
wholly by Grace, from first to last: Election was of mere Grace, our Redemption
was of mere Grace, our Conversion of mere Grace; all is from special,
discriminating, distinguishing Grace: We have not the least thing to glory in,
as if we had made our selves to differ from those that perish; but we must
wonder here, and to all Eternity in Heaven, that we should find Grace in the
sight of the Lord.

CHAP IX. An Answer to the Author's Queries at the End of his Book.
THis Author did send me a Letter containing Six Queries; now he has added a
Seventh, and has styled me Preacher to the independents, which he did not in
the Letter which he sent to me.

As for the Title of Independents, we own it not; we are Dependents upon God,
his Word, and upon other Churches, for Help, and Brotherly Advice, and Counsel
in the Lord: But we desire to keep our selves independent upon this Author, or
any other that shall pretend to have any spiritual Jurisdiction over us; for we
hold, that there are no Churches of Christ's Institution, under the New
Testament, but particular Congregations; and that those particular
Congregations have not power over one another, but ought to be helpful and
assisting one to another, as the Matter shall require.

Independent is too high a Title for any Saints on Earth, or in Heaven; yea, it
is too high a Title for the holy Angels; it is only fit for the Almighty and
Everlasting God: And I heartily wish that this Author would but acknowledge God
to be Independent, Absolute and Uncontrollable, and then he would never write
such a Book as he has. Arminianism is a Quarrelling with God about his
Independency and Sovereignty in his Decrees and Dispensations; as if God were
not Independent, Absolute and Uncontrollable, but must be, and must do, as Men
shall enjoin him his Way, Job 36.23.

If this Author saw fit to publish his profound Queries, it had been but common
Honesty to have published also mine Answer; for I sent him an Answer in a few
Days, and had another Letter from him, which I also answered: And out of that
second Letter of mine, he takes occasion for his Seventh Query. It was well
that I kept a Copy of my Letters.

A true Copy of my Answer to Mr. Grantham, when he sent me his queries.
SIR,
INstead of Answering directly to your Quarrellings, I do, out of true Love to
you, beseech you, in the Fear of God, to consider of these following
Particulars, that may give you more Light into those Points about Election,
Redemption and Conversion.

1. Consider the Infinite and Incomprehensible Majesty of God, and the
Inconsiderableness of all the Children of Men, the Grasshoppers and Worms of the
Earth, Isa. 40.15, 17, 22. This may prepare our Hearts to think of his Decrees
and Dispensations to the Children of Men, with an holy Fear and Trembling.

2. Consider that God has made all things for himself, for the Manifestation
of his own Glory, one way or other; for the Glory of his Mercy, or for the
Glory of his Justice. This was God's End, Prove. 16.4. Romans 11.36. Rev. 4.11.

3. Consider that God has an absolute Sovereignty, an absolute Lordship and
Dominion over the Children of Men, to do with them as he pleases, Isa. 46.10.
Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15, 16, 17, 18.

4. Consider that none of us hold, that God punishes any but for Sin, and that
all having Sinned, and come short of the glory of God, he might have spared
none of the Children of Men, and his Throne have been guiltless from our Blood
for ever. Romans 3.19, 23. -- 5.12.

5. Consider that the exceeding Riches of God's Grace, is to be adored for
ever, that God should Predestinate any of the Children of Men, to the Adoption
of Children by Jesus Christ, give him to Redeem them, and his Spirit to
Sanctify them, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet 1.3.

6. Consider well, that it is one part of the Corruption of our Nature by the
fall, to quarrel with the Great and Holy God, concerning his Dispensations;
Genesis 3.12. Adam discovered this Temper, when once his Nature was Corrupted; The
Woman which thou gave me, she gave me of the Tree, this was nothing but
quarrelling with God; and Eve she said, the Serpent beguiled me, as if she had
said, why did thou permit the Devil to tempt me? Ah, let there be an Holy
Trembling, and if the Lord do not for one, as for another, should Men quarrel
with the Lord: Luke 4.23. to 30. When our Savior told the People, that none
could come to him, except it were given unto him of the Father, John 6.65. from
that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him, V. 66.
In stead of being humbled at their own Impotency and Inability, to come to
Christ, and looking to God to give them Faith by special Grace, they quarrel
with this Doctrine of the Effectual Grace of God, and fall off: We may conceive
it to be the temper of the Damned in Hell, to quarrel with the Holy Sovereignty
of God, as, why did God suffer the Devil to tempt our first Parents, which was
the first inlet to all our Misery, seeing he could have hindered it? Why did
God make our first Parents mutable in their Estate of Holiness and Happiness,
when as he fixed the Elect Angels in their Holiness and Happiness? Why did God
suffer the Devil and false Teachers to draw us to Errors of Judgment, and Sins
of Life, which increase our Condemnation, when he knew how prone we were to
Sin? Why did God choose the other Company in Heaven, and leave us to our
selves? Why had he not the same Love for us? Why did he not give his Son to be
an absolute and complete Redemption for us, and send his Spirit to turn us
Effectually and Infallibly, as he could have done, and has done for some as
bad or worse than we by practice, till the Lord turned them? I say, we may
conceive, that the Damned in Hell do thus quarrel with the Sovereignty of God
in his Dispensations, which should make us on Earth to have a care of all
things that tend to a quarrelling with God's Dispensations, for it is the
Spirit and Frame of the Devils and Damned in Hell: Therefore the way we are to
take for our Salvation, is to lay to Heart the Sovereignty and Greatness and
Holiness of him with whom we have to do, to be sensible of the Heinousness of
Sin, and to acknowledge that God is Righteous, though he should take Vengeance
on us, to hearken to the Report of the Gospel, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save Sinners and that he that believes on him, shall be sa ved, and to
pray and wait upon God to work upon our Hearts, by an Invincible overcoming
Power of his Spirit, to believe that Jesus is the Son of God, to rely on, and
trust in his Mediation and Righteousness, and to give up our selves to be
governed and sanctified by him.

7. Consider that the Universal Common sufficient Grace to all Mankind, which
Men cry up, though the Preachers of it may do it in the Simplicity of their
Hearts, and think they advanced the Glory of God by it, yet, it is Satan's
design thereby to rob God of the Glory of the Salvation of those that shall
inherit everlasting Life, and to make them their own Saviors; for if,
notwithstanding what the Father did for any in Election, the Son in Redemption,
the Holy Spirit in working upon their Hearts, they might have perished for ever,
then the chief praise must be to themselves, to their ingenuity, towardliness
and care for themselves.

8. Consider that if there were no other Election, Redemption and Power of the
Spirit for Conversion than Arminians speak of, there had never any of the
Children of Men been saved, or would be.

9. Consider, that though the Lord do Condescend to speak after the manner of
Men, as for Instance Psalm. 81.13. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Yet all such Expressions must be
understood, so as to comport with the Immutability and Omnipotency of God.

10. Consider, that the true State of the Question between us and the
Arminians, is whether Christ dyed for any? For whilst the Arminians make a
great Noise of Christ's dying for every Man and Woman of the Race of Adam, they
do indeed deny that he dyed for any in a Scripture Sense, that is, absolutely
to make satisfaction for all their Sins, absolutely to purchase Converting and
Keeping Grace for them, to be infallibly bestowed on them in the Lord's
appointed time, and so indeed, they make but a mock of that glorious Redemption
by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they make it an insignificant thing, they
make little, or rather nothing of it.

Sir, I perceive you take it ill, that I do not seek Acquaintance and
Familiarity with you, truly it is my Natural Temper to love Retirement, and not
to have much Acquaintance; but as to your self, I confess I do not desire
intimacy with you, because I told you the first time, I ever spoke with you
about fifteen years since, that one of your own Judgment about Baptism, had
charged you in Print, that you set the Houses of God on fire, where ever you
came, and that you pretended to be an Archbishop, and to have Jurisdiction
over other Churches, or words to that purpose; and since you came to live at
Norwich, you have been so quarrelsom with those of your own persuasion about
Baptism, and likewise with my worthy Friend Dr. Collings, that I would observe
the Counsel of the Scripture, Prove. 22.24. make no Friendship with an angry
Man, and with a furious Man, thou shall not go. If any of my Friends have
spoken so rudely and harshly of you, as you write, I am sorry for it, it does
not become Christians, Tit. 3.23. and if you, or any other that differ from me,
are Instruments of Real good to any, I do therein rejoice, if you draw any to
Error, and make the weak to stumble, I pray God to Convert them from the Error
of their way. I love all Men, I hope the best of them that differ in Judgment,
I hope many hold some Errors but notionally, and that in their dealing with God
about their Eternal Conditions, they make use of better Principles than they
profess. You find fault with Preachers having Curled Periwigs, truly I am not
for Preachers having frizled Periwigs, or Plush Capes upon their Coats, I like
them not, some are for a greater Latitude in these things, than I am; but I
Love and Honor Godly Men, though they can do some things that I durst not do
my self. Sir, I pray do not trouble me with more Letters, I have something else
to do, than to spend my time in vain janglings. The God of Love and Peace be
with you.

Your Affectionate Friend, M. F.


After this, I Received an Answer to mine, wherein he does not own that he was
the Person intended in that Book I saw, so I desire however, that the Reader of
my Letter would wholly wave that part of the charge against him.

Well, in my first Letter to him, I did not directly Answer to his queries, but
it seems I must do it, but I would be very brief in it, for I have spoken of
Election and Reprobation already.

It seems that in a Sermon which I Preached twenty four years since, from this
Text, 2 Cor. 13, 14. I had two passages that do not please this Author; it
being so long time since, it was with Difficulty that I got the Sermon.

The passage, page 13. opening that Scripture, the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you: I
showed that the meaning of the Apostle, is amongst other things, That these
Believers might always have the Sense and Comfort of the Love of God, in
choosing them before the Foundation of the World, to be Vessels of Mercy; it is
as if the Apostle had said, Oh! That you may always see the special and
distinguishing Love of God the Father toward you, that when he had so many
Millions of Souls in his Eye, that he should choose you to everlasting Life,
and pass by so many that you should be Jacobs, whom he has loved, and not
Esaus, whom he has hated; that he has not appointed you to wrath, but to
obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; the Sense and Comfort and Assurance
of this Unspeakable Love of God be with you. This is the first passage in that
Sermon, that offended this Author.

Now upon this, says this Author, both sorts being supposed to be living, when
you wrote thus;

Qu. Wherefore did the Lord pass by the Millions? And after what manner did he
hate them? Did he afford them no Means; that they might be saved? I answer,

1. This Author says, both sorts being supposed to be living, when you wrote
thus; How impertinent is this? Did I write, 2 Cor. 13, 14. did not the Apostle
Paul write it to the Church at Corinth, and Prays that the love of God may be
with them (as I have opened it in some measure) no doubt there are of the
Elect, and of those that are passed by, now living on the Earth, both in the
Sense that I hold Election, and in the Sense that he holds Election; but that
which I said was to open the meaning of the Apostle Paul's Benediction or
Prayer for the Church at Corinth, not mentioning the persons to whom I spoke,
whether they were Elected, or not Elected.

2. But for the Query, wherefore did the Lord pass by the Millions, and after
what manner did he hate them? did he afford no means, that they might be saved?

I Answer, that the Apostle speaking of the Love of God (in the Text I opened)
which to be sure, must be understood of the special Love of God, it seems that,
because Paul is not now alive for you to quarrel with, therefore you must send
Queries to me about God's Especial Love, and wherefore God had not the same
Love for all Adam's Posterity, and you must know of me, how God hated those
whom he did not choose to Salvation? It is sufficient to tell you, that he did
not Love them to Elect them to Salvation, to Grace and Glory, but Decreed to
leave them to their Sins, and to glorify his Justice upon them for their Sins;
and who are you that shall say unto God, What do thou? must God give you an
Account? He says, I will be gracious, to whom I will be gracious; He has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardens.

Yea, but you say, did he afford no means whereby they might be saved?

I Answer, 1. The fallen Angels that were far more glorious Creatures, than the
Children of Men never had any means that they might be saved.

2. As for the Children of Men, the greatest part of Mankind never had so much
as the Outward means of Salvation, and none but the Elect, have inward,
sufficient Means of Salvation; there is nothing short of God's giving actually
a new Heart, and infusing Grace, so as to make dead Souls live, is sufficient
to Unite the Soul to Christ; indeed the Quakers hold, and they grow upon the
Root of Arminianism, that all Men have a sufficient Light within, to bring them
to Salvation, if they would but heed it; but if the Light in us be Darkness,
how great is that Darkness?

Q. 2. What are the People, to whom you write, better than other Men, and why
do you call them Jacobs?

I pray, who did I write to? I only opened what Paul wrote to the Corinthians,
and if you ask what were they better than other Men? The Apostle shows, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11, 12. they to whom he wrote, had been some of them much worse
than many other Natural Men, but through the Exceeding Riches of God's grace in
Christ, they were washed, they were Justified, they were Sanctified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God; And this was a Fruit
and Effect of Gods free and eternal Love to them.

This Author adds, Or did you mean it of the Dead? Truly all the Corinthians
are dead, to whom Paul wrote concerning this special Love of God; but no doubt
there are many now living, that are partakers of the same grace; and as to
those that are not Elected, I suppose you do not question but there are
Millions, who are so passed by, as that they are now in the Prison of Hell.

Q. 3. You take your self for a Jacob, and me for an Esau (as I suppose.)

I Answer, Truly Sir, I am sorry you should thus disgrace your self; If you had
not written your Name to the Queries you sent me, I should have thought they
had been sent me by some Impertinent Woman, rather than by a Man. Why do you
say, that you suppose, I take you for an Esau? You may be Elected to Salvation
for any thing I know; Our Doctrine does not allow us to say of any particular
Man yet living, that God has appointed him to Wrath, except we had grounds to
think that he has committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is a sin
that is very rarely committed, and I never knew that person in my whole Life,
that I was so uncharitable to, as to think that person had Committed that sin.

But you say, that you are mine Ancient Acquaintance and Neighbor, and now a
Stranger in this City, and I never had the Humanity to invite you to my House;
had a Neighbor's Dog come to you out of Lincolnshire, would you not have been
more kind to him, than you have been to me?

I answer, That those that do not know things may think that you and I have
been great Acquaintance in Lincolnshire, and that we lived very near together,
either in the same Town, or within a few miles one of another: Sir, Recollect
your self, I cannot remember that ever I saw your face more than three times in
my Life, before I saw you lately in Norwich. The first time I saw you, was upon
the Road on Horseback, I met a Friend upon the Highway, that you were
traveling with, I saluted him, and he told me your name, and so after a few
words, you went your way, and I mine. The second time was about fifteen years
since, going to see a Neighbor that lay Bedridden (he was one of your way, but I
think a Godly Man, and I visited him several times in Love) you was there, and
we had two Hours Discourse, and all about Controversies. The third time was
about eight Years since you came into a Friends House, where I was upon a
Journey, and stayed about an hour. This was all our acquaintance, and as for
our being Neighbors, it is true, that in some sense, all are our Neighbors:
but I suppose you and I lived twenty Miles Distant, though I am not certain
where you lived, for as you never were at mine House in Lincolnshire, so I
never was at yours. What a poor business is it, that the World should be
troubled about our Acquaintance and Neighborhood? Sir, though you and I differ
in several points of Religion, yet I love all Men, and though I do not desire
intimacy with any Man, that is of a Contentious Spirit (I love Peace and
Quietness) yet if you please to let me know when you are in any want, you shall
find that not only my self will relieve you; but that I shall get others of my
Friends to Minister unto you, otherwise I do not desire Acquaintance with you,
whilst you are so violent and abusive.

Then you say, that some of my Jacobs have called you Rogue, and wished that you
were put out of the Town: I am sorry that you should use such passionate
Speeches, as to call any persons my Jacobs; and as to calling you Rogue, I hope
none of the Congregation that I belong to, ever used such unseemly words of
you, for my part, I have always spoke of you in Company with good Respect, till
you put forth the Book: I love to speak the best I can of every Man.

Q. 4. You tell me, that in page 19. God chose us, so many, and no more; I
pray, who are those us whom you call us, surely you speak of the Living? I
answer, Let the Reader hear with Patience what is said Page 19. the words are
these, This is especially applied to the Father in Scripture, to choose us
before the Foundation of the World, to foreknow us, to predestinate us to be
conformable to the Image of his Son; therefore in that Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.2.
where you have the proper and distinct Work of Father, Son and Holy Ghost about
the Vessels of Mercy, the Apostle says, We are Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit, unto
Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ; observe here, our
Election is ascribed to God the Father, he chose us, so many and no more, this
Man and not the other, Jacob and not Esau; then you have the proper work of the
Son in those words, the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ, it is he who
washes us from our Sins in his own Blood, he purchases all good things, the
second Person in the Trinity: He is the Lord our Righteousness, he is the
Propitiation for our Sins, he is our Mediator; it is not the Father that is
Mediator, nor the Holy Ghost, but the Son; it is he that took upon him our
Nature, it was the Word that was made Flesh; not the Father nor the Holy Ghost;
it was the Son that died upon the Cross for our Sins, not the Father nor the
Holy Ghost; then you have the special Work of the Holy Ghost about our
Sanctification, in these words, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience: It is the Holy Ghost, who in our Conversion does Sanctify us, and
bring us to the Obedience of Faith; he applies Redemption as the Son has
wrought Redemption; when the appointed time, when the fullness of time is come
to call home an Elect Vessel, he convinces the Soul of Sin, he reveals
Christ to the Soul, he infuseth the Habit of Grace, and after Conversion, is
with us, to mortify our Corruptions, comfort us, and lead us and to carry us
to the Heavenly Kingdom.

Now, What Cause had this Author to say, Who are these, Us? Surely, you speak
of the Living?

I answer, I speak, as the Scripture speaks in those Texts that I have
mentioned, of all the Elect, of all the Redeemed, of all that are or shall be
sanctified; and how strange and captious is it for this Author to go on, and
say, You have good Thoughts of your self, for you must be one of the Us: And
show me how many, and no more; or, at least, name One, to make good the Word
Us; and prove by the Word of God, that You Two were undoubtedly chosen to
Salvation? Surely, this Author was not in frame when he wrote thus; this is
just like a Woman scolding and quarrelling in the Streets, I am heartily sorry
for him.

Qu. 5. and 6. Are both about the same thing, about Jacob and Esau? Now,
concerning Jacob and Esau, note,

1. That Esau was not saved appears by Heb. 12.15. Lest there be any
Fornicator, or profane Person, as Esau, who for one Morsel of Meat, sold his
Birthright. This Observation may give much Light into this Matter, that when
any that were real Saints under the Old Testament are spoken of in the New
Testament, all their sinful Failings are covered, and their Grace only
mentioned: So it is with Abraham, Sarah, Job, Sampson, Lot; though they had
many sinful Failings, yet (I say) they are covered in the New Testament, and
their Faith, Patience and Holiness only mentioned. Or if there be an hint of
their sinful Failings, as of Rahab and Elijah, there is mention also of their
Faith and Prayer, and the Grace of God bestowed upon them. But when Esau comes
to be mentioned in the New Testament, the Holy Ghost leaves him upon Record,
that he was a profane Person, [(...),] one that despised, set light by, and
contemned holy things. So that let it be observed, that Esau, after he had been
so long dead, is, in the New Testament, where the sinful Failings of the Saints
of the Old Testament are covered, is left under this black Character, that he
was a profane Person.

2. As to what is said, Romans 9.13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated, let it be observed that the Apostle, in that Chapter, from
the Beginning to the End, is not treating about outward things, but about
spiritual things; and to show them, that amongst them that enjoy Church State,
and Church-Privileges and Ordinances, some are from Eternity elected to
Salvation of God's mere Grace, and others are passed by: And the Apostle
maintains the Sovereignty of God, that he might do so for his own Glory. That
this is the Apostle's Scope, appears from Ver. 11, 12, 13. Eor the Children not
being yet born, neither having done Good or Evil, that the Purpose of God
according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls; it
was said unto her, The Elder shall serve the Younger: As it is written, Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. As if the Apostle had said, You may see a
Type of Election and Reprobation in Jacob and Esau, that before they were born,
and consequently from Eternity, God had determined their Eternal Estate for his
own Glory, as it pleased him. Let Men cavil what they please, God will be God,
and do whatever he will.

Yea, but some may say, How does Paul make out this from what was spoken to
Rebekah, The Elder shall serve the Younger?

I answer, The Apostle knew by the Spirit of God, that there was a Mystery in
these Words; not only that two Nations were to come out of Jacob and Esau, but
that which was primarily intended was, that the Person of Jacob was loved, and
chosen to Eternal Life, and not Esau.

Yea, but how came the Apostle to mention what is written in Malachy,
concerning Jacob and Esau's Posterity?

I answer, The Apostle brings what is written there, by way of Accommodation
and Allusion, thus: That as God made a great Difference as to Jacob's and
Esau's Posterities, so much more as to Jacob 's and Esau 's Persons. Some of
Jacob's Posterity were afflicted in Egypt, and at other times, as well as
Esau's; and Jacob personally did never get Dominion over Esau, as to outward
Things, but the Apostle shows that the Person of Jacob was from Eternity
elected of God, and not Esau. If we cannot see how the Apostle could collect
this from that place in Genesis, and that in Malachy, yet, I pray, let us
reverence and believe the Scriptures, and not quarrel with the Penmen, who
were infallibly inspired. I have heard indeed of an Arminian Preacher, that
wished that Paul had never writ any thing, and especially not Romans 9. that
Chapter will confute all the Arminians in the World.

Now, that the Apostle speaks here of God's Eternal Decree and Purpose
concerning Jacob and Esau, does evidently appear by what follows: Is there
Unrighteousness with God? That is, in not purposing to bestow his Grace upon
some, Job 36.3. but passing them by, the Apostle says, God forbid: Surely, we
should ascribe Righteousness to our Maker, Ver. 14. And Ver. 15, 16. For he
says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, and I will have
Compassion on whom I will have Compassion. So then, it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. As if he had
said, There is no Unrighteousness with God, it is infinite Mercy that he saves
any; for he might glorify his Justice, in the Damnation of all for their Sins:
And that God should show Mercy to one, and not to another, who shall dare to
question God about this? I will do, says God, what I will; I will have Mercy
on whom I will have Mercy. Ver. 17. The ^postle shows, that God raised up
Pharaoh for that very purpose, to manifest his own Glory; made him a Man, a
King, gave him Power over the Children of Israel, left him to the Corruption of
his own Heart, for the same purpose, to manifest his Glory in his Confusion and
Destruction. If any contend with God about his Sovereignty, I pray God give him
Repentance here, or else they will be confounded before his terrible Majesty
hereafter. The Apostle goes on, Ver. 18. Therefore he has Mercy on whom he
will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardneth. Yea, but then if all be as God
wills, as God will have it, Ver. 19. Thou will say then to me: Why does he yet
find fault? For who has resisted his Will? The Doctrine of God's Sovereignty
cannot go down with unhumbled Men, that never were made truly sensible of their
own Meanness and Sinfulness, and of the Infinite Majesty of God; therefore,
Ver. 20, 21. Nay, but, O Man, who art thou that reply against God? That must
be challenging, and disputing, and quarrelling with God? Shall the thing formed
say unto him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter
power over his Clay, of the same Lump, to make one Vessel unto Honor, and
another unto Dishonor? And, as he shows in the following Verses, What if
God, willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much
Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath, fitted to Destruction? And that he might
make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before
prepared unto Glory.

God is from Everlasting, he was infinitely happy in himself; that he made
Angels and Men was merely from the pleasure of his Will: He could have made all
the Angels, and all the Posterity of Adam, Eternal and Immutable Vessels of
Honor, if so it had pleased him. But what if God, the great and glorious God,
who is to be adored and feared of all; What if God pleased to make Angels and
Men, for the Manifestation of his own Glory, one way or other? Who shall say
unto him, Why did God make Angels and Men at all, of whom, so many shall be so
miserable, that it had been good for them that they had never had a Being? But
what if the great and glorious God, willing to show his Wrath and holy Justice,
and to make his Power known, did decree to leave some to themselves, and to
their Sins, and to glorify his Justice upon them? Yea, but may some say, As to
the Children of Men, they were all left to fall in Adam, and are alike by
Nature: But what if God have before prepared some to Glory by his Eternal
Election, and redeems them by the Blood of his Son, and calls them in due time
by his Grace and Spirit, as those whom he has chosen to be Vessels of Mercy,
who shall question God for what he does? They that perish, perish for Sin; the
Throne of the Holy God is guiltless for ever: They that are saved, are saved by
the exceeding Riches of his Grace and Kindness toward them, through Christ
Jesus.

Thus I have answered the Author's Six Queries, he sent me in a Letter: Now I
come to his Seventh and last Query.

Qu. 7. Because, says he, I preach God's Love to Mankind to be such, that he
gave his Son to be the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, this you
call Arminianism, the Life and Soul of Popery? I answer,

This is utterly false, that ever I said so: Let him look upon my Letter, and
see how he has wronged me in print. I wrote to him in my second Letter, that
Arminianism was the Root of Quakerism; and that a good Divine says, that it is
the Life and Soul of Popery. But as for God's giving his Son to be a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, it is a Scripture-Truth, 1 John
2.2. And the meaning of that Phrase, as I have made it evident, when I opened
that Text in this present Book, is only this; That Christ died for the Elect,
not only for the Jews, but also for the Gentiles, throughout the whole World.
But I maintain, that Arminians deny that God gave his Son to be a Propitiation,
in a true Scripture-Sense, for the Sins of any one Man or Woman in the World:
Whilst they pretend to hold Universal Redemption, they hold not Redemption at
all; but do acknowledge that, notwithstanding any Propitiation Christ made,
there might not one Man or Woman in the World ever have been saved.

I said in that Letter, (though he did not think fit to mention it,) that
Arminianism was the Root of Quakerism; which I shall now demonstrate thus:
Arminians hold that Men have sufficient Grace to bring them to Salvation, if
they improve their Talent; that is, Nature, and what Helps they have, as they
should do: Hence the first Quakers, being Arminians, formed this into other
Words, but the same for substance; That there is a sufficient Light in all Men,
that if they do but heed, it will bring them to Salvation: And so Arminianism
is the Fundamental Point of that Sect.

I said also in my second Letter, that a good Divine (I did not name him, but
it was Mr. L.) said, that Arminianism is the Life and Soul of Popery. Upon
which, he says, Sure, you do not know what Popery is!

I will maintain what this Divine said, thus: Though the Papists hold many
other Errors, yet the Life and Soul of Popery is, their Doctrine of Man's
Merits, either by way of Condignity, or Congruity; the Generality of them being
ignorant of Christ's being an absolute Propitiation and Purgation for Sin, by
his Death: They look to be reconciled and purged by their own Merits, and
thinking that Faith alone in that Propitiation and Purgation by the Blood of
Christ, is not sufficient to justify them that come unto God by him, therefore
they trust to the Merit of their own Works; and thinking that such good Works
as are appointed in the Word are not sufficiently meritorious, they have
invented many superstitions Observations; and then, lest all should fail, they
count upon a Purgatory after this Life, where they shall be purified from their
Sins, by their suffering the Pains thereof. So that Arminianism, which makes
the Dving of Christ for a Person, such a low, insignificant thing, makes them
look out for better Helps, as they think, than from Christ the only Mediator:
And I suppose that upon such grounds that Divine called Arminianism the Life
and Soul of Popery.

As for what he adds Whether your conceit, that God hated so many millions
before there was any cause of hatred in them; yea, before they had a Being;
yea, before the World was; yea, from Eternity, be not the life and Soul of
Calvinism? I answer, God from Eternity had all in his Eye, knew them as really
as if they had then had a Being, and loved and chose to Salvation through
Christ, whom he pleased; and for the rest, let it be observed, that God is not
said properly to hate any (no not the Devils and damned in Hell) all that we
say is, that he never purposed to bestow that Grace upon them that perish,
which of his good Pleasure, he purposed to bestow upon others, but to leave
them to their Sins, and to Condemnation for their Sins: And whereas he speaks
of the Life and Soul of Calvinism, as I had done of the Life and Soul of
Popery, it should seem as if he made Calvinism as ill as Popery (yea, it may be
he thinks it much worse) It puts me in mind of what I have often heard, that
some of this Author's Judgment should say, That truly, if they were to change,
they would turn Papists rather than to any other Persuasion in the Land. I
speak this by the way; not that I charge this Author with any thing more than
he will freely own himself.

But to show what Promoters the Papists are of Anminianism, I would have two
things remembered and taken notice of.

1. A Letter dated, March 1628 from a Jesuit to the Rector of Bruxels, wherein
there are these words, Whilst King James lived (you know) he was very violent
against Arminianism, and interrupted (with his pestilent Wit, and deep
Learning) our Designs; -- Now we have planted that Sovereign Drug, Arminianism,
which we hope will purge the Protestants from their Heresy, and it flourishes
and will bear Fruit in due season. This Letter was long since Printed.

2. In the Year 1653, Pope Innocent the Tenth, by a solemn Bull, or Papal
Consistorial Determination, in the Case of Jansenius. Bishop of Ypres, declared
for the Pelagian Tenets: Now the Arminians follow the Pelagians. I have set
down these things, that Protestants may take notice, that Pelagianism and
Arminianism are more suited to the Popish than to the Protestant Religion. It
came into my Mind, upon this Author's talking of Calvinism, to set down these
two Passages, which, it may be, few have been acquainted with.

Now I have done with this Author, and do appeal to any Sober, Judicious
Person. Whether this Author has in his Queries dealt like a modest man; yea,
like a fair, honest, moral man? He has put me to a great deal of pains to
Answer his Book, considering my Age, and what bad Eyes I have had some years,
whereby both ^eading and Writing are made hard to me. If he write again, I do
not intend to meddle with him any more; I know in some measure all the
Sophistry, Cavils, and Evasions of the Arminians, and whatsoever he can write,
will be but a mere show and shadow of an Answer, a quarrelling at some
by-expressions, I know that what I have written already, will stand as an
Answer to all that he can write hereafter.

I bow my Head, and worship the Father of Lights, who has so far enabled me to
clear up these Points, that I hope the Faithful shall understand them, and be
rooted and grounded in the Truth. All the Weakness and Imperfection in handling
these things, is mine; all that is good to the use of Edifying the Church in my
Labors, is from God, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

