LITERAE ILLUSTR: DOMINI FAGEL, HOLLANDIAE PENSIONARII, AD DOMINUM JACOBUM
STEUART Advocatu^, Hoc codem, quo jam prodeunt, idiomate exaratae. In quibus
quae sit Serenissimorum Principum Auriacorum de Testae Legumque poenalium
contra Pontisicios in BRITANNIA Irtarum abolitione sententia, declaratur.
Vir Nobilissime and Amplissime.
Doleo vehementer valetudinem qua usus sum minus prospera, causam fuisse me non
potuisse citius respondere epistolis, quibus petis and efflagitas, ut certiorem
te facere velim, quid Serenissimi Principes sentiant de Legibus Paenalibus and
nominatim de ea quae vulgo Testa appellatur abolendis. Persuasissimum habeas
rogo, me hac in re apertissime and absque omni omnino circuitione recum
aucturum, maxim cum scribas, literas quas misisti sciente and approbante Rege
exaratas esse. Affirmate and significate igitur tibi debeo Serenissimos
Principes saepius declarasse and quidem ipsi Domino Marchioni d' Abbiville
Ablegato Majestatis suae ad Foederati Belgii Ordines Extraordinario, and etiam
nunc in ea esse sententia;

Neminem Christianorum persequendum aut molestiis afficiendum ob id tantum,
quod a publica aut praedominante, uti loqui amant, religione dissentiat, and
omnino pati posse quod Pontificiis in Anglia Scotia, Hybernia permittatur
profiteri religionem suam ea cum liberate, eoque modo, quibus in illa harum
provinciarum fruuntur, in qua quam maxima gaudent indulgentia.

Serenissimos praeterea Principes non tantum non adversari, sed quam maxim
probare, Eis, quos Dissentientes nominant, concedi omnimodam libertatem and
facultatem religionem suam exercendi absque ullis omnino impedimentis aut
obstaculis, ita ut nemo eis eam ob causam molestus, gravis, iniquus aut
incommodus esse debeat aut possit.

Adhaec Serenissimos Principes, si id majestati suae placeat, quam libentissime
acturos and annisuros sedulo, ut ejusmodi libertas stabiliatur and inconcussa
reddatur, imo sponsuros talem se libertatem defensuros, protecturos, and
Guarantia (uti loquimur) sua confirmaturos, de qua tu in literis tuis locutus
es: Quin and si Majestas sua id desiderat, omnem operam adhibituros, ut Leges
Poenales abrogentur, ita tamen, ut ea Legum Capita, quae Pontificiis ad
Parlamenta aliaque munera and Officia publica, Ecclesiastica, Civium, publici
Regiminis, Justitiae, aut Militiae spectantia aditum negant, sarta tecta
maneant, ut and ea capita quae in Securitatem and Tranquillitatem Religionis
Reformatae, and ne quid in eam Pontificii moliantur, sancitasunt.

Serenissimos autem Principes cum Majestate sua non convenire neque assensum
suum praebere posse ut Testa quae dicitur, aut modo laudata Legum poenalium
capita abrogentur, quibus nihil aliud agitur quam ne Pontificii aut ad
Parliamenta aut ad praedicta munera aut officia publica vocentur, aut ut sua
Religioni Reformatae securitas conslet, and ne quid ad tranquillitatem ejus
turbandam Pontificii moliantur; quoniam ita dicta Testa and ea Legum poenalium
pars nullam Pontificiis aut poenam aut mulctam imponunt, sed aliud nihil
statuunt quam ut ad Parliamenta and praedicta munera and officia publica ii
tantum habiles reddantur qui Deo and hominibus coram declarare and testari
possunt and volunt se esse Reformatae and non Pontificiae Religionis; Et ut
sedulo provideatur ne Religio Reformata a Pontificiis quicquam detrimenti
capiat. Serenissimos Principes censuisse and adhuc censere plura aut ampliora
ab iis jure exigi aut expectari non posse: Pontificiis and eorum posteris hac
via in perpetuum consuli, securis ne qua deinceps molestia personis, bonis, aut
etiam exercitio religionis eorum inferatur; contentos itaque eos esse, nec
tranquillitatem regni turbare debere, quia non etiam ad Parliamenta and alia
munera publica vocantur, and quod non simul abrogetur id omne quod iis in
Legibus tantum securitatem Religionis Reformatae spectat, and impedimento est,
ne quid Pontificii in ea turbatum eant.

Satisfieri etiam desideriis eorum quos Dissentientes nominant, cum in
perpetuum eximantur omni metu and suspicione, ne in libero Religionis eorum
exercitio unquam aliquid molestiae, incommodi aut obstaculi creari, evenire aut
obrepere possit.

Mihi igitur videtur ex hac declaratione Serenissimorum Principum manifestum
fieri eos nihil minus animo agitare, quam impedire ut Dissentientes quos
nominant a dictis Legibus poenalibus liberentur, cum parati sint omni opera
niti ut haec ita constituantur and firmentur, nec etiam ullo modo id agere, ut
Pontificiis negetur exercitium Religionis eorum, modo illud modeste, and absque
ulla publica ostentatione peragatur.

Me quidem quod attinet, sum and fui semper alienissimus ab iis qui Christianum
persequendum censerint ob eam solam causam, quod a publica and praedominante,
uti ajunt, religione dissentiat, and spero favente Deo eandem mihi in perpetuum
fore sententiam. Nam cum lumen quod in cordibus nostris. Religio accendit,
adscribendum plane sit, ut mihi quidem videtur, misericordiae divinae;
nostrarum partium esse arbitror Deo eo nomine gratias agere quam maximas,
misereri sortis eorum. qui etiam nunc errant, quemadmodum Deus nostri misertus
est, and ab eo ardentissimis precibus petere, ut errantes in viam reducere
velit, nobis satagentibus, ut eam iis placide and amice monstrare possimus.
Lubens tamen fateor me nunquam capere potuisse, cuiquam qui exercitio
religionis suae quiet and sine ulla molestia frui potest, and qui se
Christianum profitetur, fas esse statum cujuscunque Regni aut Reipublicae
turbare aut immutare velle, ut ad munera and honores publicos evehatur, aut ne
Religioni publicae and praedominanti, ut ajunt, inconcussa maneat sua vel
securitas vel tranquillitas.

Video autem Religionem Reformatam Dei Gratia tam in Anglia, Scotia, quam
Hybernia esse publicam, and ut ajunt praedominantem, video leges ibi latas and
sancitas a Rege and Parliamentis, id est, omni populo, quae ad munia
Parliamentaria, munera and officia Publica eos tantum vocant, qui sunt and
public profitentur and testantur se esse Religionis Reformatae, and non
Pontificiae, and quae cavent conservationi Religionis Reformatae, and ne quid
in eam Pontificii moliantur, non quod eae Leges severius quid statuunt in Bona
au Personas eorum, qui nolunt profiteri aut testari se non esse Pontificios,
sed quae salvis eorum religione, persona, bonis, eos tantum non recipient ad
regendam Rempublicam aut alia munera and honores publicos, quamdiu ex animo se
esse Reformatae and non Pontificiae Religonis, profiteri and testari nequeunt,
and quae prohibent, ne qua reformatos molestia afficiant, Serenissimis
Principibus, uti dixi, paratis in id cum Majestate sua eniti, ut ea Legum
poenalium capita abrogentur, quae alias poenas vel mulctas indicunt.

Constat igitur nullam circa abolitionem Legum poenalium superesse
differentiam, nisi quod nonnulli Pontificios ad capessenda munia, officia and
honores publicos recipere, and quicquid de iis Legibus in securitatem and
tranquillitatem Reformatae Religionis, and ne quid in eam moliri possit, cautum
est, abrogatum velint, aliis contra tendentibus, ut ea legum poenalium capita
firma and sacra, and haec Religionis publicae and praedominantis, ut ajunt, id
est Reformatae praerogativa immota maneat.

Extra omnem dubitandi aleam est nullibi dari Regnum, Rempubicam, quinimo
corpus aut collegium licitum, in quo non reperiantur leges quae inserviunt ejus
securitati and obviam eunt illicitis aliorum conatibus, and simul praescribunt
quibus dotibus ornati, cujus conditionis esse debeant, qui ad obeunda munia and
officia in Regnis, Rebuspublicis aut Collegiis istis admittentur, neque
injuriam ullam fieri iis quorum nomina ex hac regula non recipiuntur.

Negari etiam non potest inter Reformatam and Pontificiam Religionem quam
maximum esse discrimen; Pontificios enim non modo excludere Reformatos ab
omnibus muneribus and officiis publicis, verumetiam iis interdicere omne
Religionis suae exercitium, imo eos quam ac errime persequi omnibus in
regionibus and locis, ubi and quamprimum id tuto and absque periculo fieri
pos^^ credunt; atque utinam hoc ipso, quo vivimus, tempore tam tristia, tam de
ploranda, tam multis in locis hac de re exempla oculis nostris non
obversarentur.

Vellem itaque vel unicam mihi dari rationem, qua Reformatus Deum timens and de
Religione sua sollicitus moveri possit ad dissolvendas leges cum consensu Regum
and Parliamentorum conditas, quatenus eae Leges tantum prospiciunt securitati
Reformatorum, and repagulis quibusdam Pontificiorum in illos conatus coercent,
nec poenam nec mulctam infligunt, nec aliud exigunt quam ne Pontificii regimini
aut muneribus publicis admoveantur, atque ea via cavere volunt ne Pontificii
incrementum eamque acquirant vim and authoritatem, quae Religioni Reformatae
for midolosa and quam maximo detrimento esse posset, quod quotidie evenire
videmus, quando qui ad munera and officia publica vocantur, aut Pontificiis aut
Reformatis plus minus addicti sunt.

Et quisquam mihi aut alteri author foret ad Principes, quos Deus tam Illustri
Nutritiorum Ecclesiae suae titulo exornat, inducendos aut premovendos, ut
probarent, laudarent Reformatae Religioni, quinimo quieti and tranquillitati
publicae extra omnem controversiam tam periculosa tam noxia. Neque enim, pace
quod flat tua, ullus concedere possum, nihil inde, quod tu arbitraris, damni
Religionem Resormatam accepturam.

Fateor vulgo dici Pontificios in Anglia and Scotia non esse magno numero, and
non nisi exiguam partem munerum and officiorum publicorum penes eos esse,
(quanquam in Hybernia res plane aliter se habet) sed id mihi largiri necesse
est, si numerus, ut dicitur, Pontificiorum est tam exiguus, hunc numerum non
debere turbare tranquillitatem regni maxim cum tam ingens beneficium liberam
scilicet exercendae Religionis suae facultatem acciperet: Quod si numerus little
sit major, eum tanto magis metuendum. Plurimos quidem credo hoc rerum statu
Pontificios non admodum fore avidos munerum aut officiorum publicorum, neque
quicquam in Reformatos molituros, quod id Legibus prohibitum sciant, and
vereantur, ne id quandoque maximum personis and bonis eorum dispendium afferre
posset; sed remotis iis repagulis, videbimus eos regimini ad motos, and quam
maximam munerum and officiorum publicorum partem ab iis exornari, neque
Majestati suae, ut ut forti est animo, integrum erit resistere iis qui quotidie
and sine ulla intermissione hoc urgebunt, and ut obtineant, conscientiam and
religionem Majestatis suae appellabunt: quid autem Reformatis hoc legum auxilio
destitutis ab ejusmodi Magistratu foret exspectandum, and quantum emolumenti
Pontificiis, iis Legum vinculis solutis accederet, clarius est, quam ut
demonstratione aut probatione egeat.

In dubium vocare nec debeo nec volo sinceram Majestatis suae intentionem, nec
aliud ei esse propositum, quam ut subditi sui aequo jure and aequali liberate
vivant, agant; verum ratio ipsa and omnium temporum etiam hujus experientia
evincunt, impossible esse, quod Pontificii and Reformati regimini, muneribus,
officiis publicis simul admoti, placide and quiet ea administrabunt, nec alter
alteri suspectus sit, cum in principiis and fundamentis ipsis adeo sibi invicem
oppositi and contrarii reperiuntur; nec meo quidem judicio in ulius Regis aut
Principis potestate erit, simultates and aemulationes inde semper
repullulaturas tollere.

Quod autem vereris ne ii quos Dissentientes nominant, eam quam diximus
libertatem adipiscantur per abolitionem legum paenalium, nisi eae in totum, ut
and Testa quam appellant, abrogentur, maximum quidem esset Infortunium, sed
unice adscribendum Pontificiis, qui se and posteros. suos legibus paenalibus
adstrictos, and totius populi odio expositos mallent quam prohiberi, ne quid
contra securitatem and traquillitatem Religionis Reformatae moliantur, and
carere hoc parvo commodo, si quod est, quod in administratione Reipublicae, and
in obeundis muneribus and officiis publicis consistere posset, cum tamen haec
semper and ubique fuerit, praerogativa publicae and praedominantis, uti ajunt,
Religionis. Reformatis certe hi Pontificiorum conatus, tanto magis suspecti and
praecavendi essent, si viderint eos adhuc paenalibus legibus obnoxios, id tamen
agere, ut Maestas sua author fieret, velint nolint Reformati, ne sua religioni
reformatae Legibus jam firmata securitas constet, and ut Pontificiis aditus ad
regimen, munera and officia publica pateat, quippe quibus tunc auxilii nihil
superesset, quam quod a magistratu Pontificio expectandum foret. Injuriam sane
maximam Serenissimis Principibus facerent, qui quid hac in re incommodi
eveniret iis ascriberent, cum animi sui sententiam tam aperte testati sint,
eaque in tantum ipsorum Pontificiorum commodum cedat, idque ob eam solam
causam, quod permoveri non potuerint, ut consentirent Legibus ante latis tam
contrariis and religioni reformatae tam periculosis tam noxiis, qualia sunt
Pontificios ad regimen, ad officia and munera publica admittere, and abrogare
leges, quae unice securitati and tranquillitati religionis reformatae, and ne
quid in eam Pontificii moliantur, inserviunt.

Scribis Pontificios his in provinciis ab officiis and muneribus publicis non
excludi, sed in eo falleris. Legibus in id latis Pontificiis nominatim
interdictum est, fungi ullis muneribus sive administrationem Reipublicae, sive
Politiam, sive justitiam spectent. A militaribus muniis, quantum quidem ego
scio, exclusi non sunt, and duriusculum fuisset cum in initiis Reipublicae
nostrae arma ad defendendam publicam libertatem etiam ipsi sumserint,
strenuamque operam navaverint; eos etiam a militaribus officiis remotos habere,
maxim cum salus publica nullum inde detrimentum acciperet, tum ob exiguum
eorum numerum, tum quod Ordines, nascentibus omnibus motibus and molitionibus
facile obviam ire potuerint, quod utique tam prompte fieri non potuisset, si
Pontificii etiam regimini, muneribus and officiis publicis admoti fuissent.

Certus sum and liquido testari possum Serenissimis Principibus nihil aeque in
votis esse, quam ut Majestas sua regnet, and qui illi parent, vivant sibi
invicem quam maxim confisi, ut populus eam observet, colat, veneretur, omni
studio, obedientia and obsequio, persuasissimus sit de Paterno Majestatis suae
in eum animo and affectu: sed credere sese and conscientia sua convictos esse
Religionem Reformatam certissimo pericuso, Regnum vero quam plurimis malis
exponi, si aut abrogationem Testae, uti appellant, aut aliam legum paenalium
abolitionem, quam de qua mentionem saepius jam feci, promoveant, aut cum
Majestate sua id conentur, se iis conscientiae vinculis teneri, scientes quam
severam Deus ab iis rationem exigeret, si propter perituras hujus saeculi
utilitates operam suam contulissent in ea quae exconscientia animi sui tam
periculosa tam noxia religioni reformatae existimant.

Serenissimi Principes maxima semper veneratione prosequuti sunt and etiamnum
prosequuntur Majestatem suam, persuasi id officii sui esse, tam ex Legis
divinae quam naturalis praescripto; sed percipere neutiquam possunt (cum sic
agatur non de ferendis, sed de abolendis in totum Legibus cum consensu Regis
and populi latis) ab illis exigi posse, ut consentiant tali abrogationi, a qua
animus eorum tam alienus est, and quae adversatur omnibus totius orbis
Christiani tam Pontificii quam Reformati Legibus and consuetudinibus quae non
alios ad regimen, munera and officia publica admittunt, quam qui profitentur
religionem publicam and praedominantem, uti ajunt, and quae solicit satis
praecaverunt, ne ea Religio turbetur aut detrimenti aliquid accipiat.

Necesse non puto ut multis adstruam quam Serenissimi Principes Majestati suae
devoti sint, cum reipsa id tam publicis documentis, quae quicquid verborum
effingi potest, long superant, testati, Et parati sint eadem adhuc pari, aut
si fieri possit, majori studio and zelo repetere.

Te vero, ut haec quae tanta cum liberate ad te scripsi, eodem quo scripta
sunt animo accipias, vehementer rogat.

Vir Nobilissime ac Amplissime tibi addictissimus. GASP: FAGEL.
Pridie Non: November. 1687.
A LETTER, Writ by Mijn Here FAGEL, PENSIONER of HOLLAND, TO Mr. JAMES STEWART,
Advocate; Giving an Account of the PRINCE and PRINCESS Of ORANGE's Thoughts
concerning the Repeal of the TEST, and the PENAL LAWS.
SIR.
I Am extrem sorry, that my ill health has so long (...) hindered me from
Answering those Letters, in which you so earnestly desired to know of me, what
Their Highnesses thoughts are, concerning the Repeal of the Penal Laws, and
more particularly of that concerning the Test: I beg you to assure your self,
that I will deal very plainsy with you in this matter, and without Reserve,
since you say that your Letters were writ by the King's knowledge and allowance.
I must then first of all assure you very positively, that Their Highnsses have
often en declared, as They did it more particularly to the Marquis of Albeville,
His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, that it is Their Opinion, that
no Christian ought to be persecuted for his Conscience, or be ill used because
he differs from the public and established Religion; Tnd therefore, They can
consent, that the Papists in Engeland Scotland and Ireland be suffered te
continue in their Religion, with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the
States in these Provinces; in which it cannot be denied, that they enjoy a full
Liberty of Conscience. And as for the Dissenters, Their Highnesses do not only
consent, but do heartily approve of their having an entire Liberty, for the
full exercise of their Religion, without any trouble or hindrance; so that none
may be able to give them the least disturbance upon that account.

And Their Highnesses are very ready, in case His Majesty shall think fit to
desireit, to declare their wellingness to concur in the settling, and confirming
this Liberty, and as far as it lies in them, they will protect and defend it,
and according to the Language of Treaties, They will confirm it with their
Guaranty, of which you made mention in yours.

And if his Majesty shall think fit further to desire Their concurrence in the
Repealing of the Penal Laws, They are ready to give it; provided always that
those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the R. Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military: as likewise all those other Laws, which
confirm the Protestant Religion, and which secures it against all the attempts
of the Roman Catholics.

But Their Highnesses cannot agree to the Repeal of the Test: or of those othor
penal Laws last mentioned, that tend to the security of the Protestant
Religion; since the R. Catholics receive no other prejudice from these then
the being excluded from Parliaments, or from bublick Employments: And that by
them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the Designs of the R.
Catholics against it, or against the public tafety; And neither the Test nor
these other Laws can besaid to carry in them any severity against the Roman
Catholics upon account of their Consciences: They are only Provisions
qualifying men to be Members of Parliament, or to be capable of bearing Office;
by which they must Declare befort God and men, that they are for the Protestant
Religion. So hat indeed, all this amounts to no more than a securing the
Protestant Religion from any Prejudices that it may receive from the R.
Catholics.

Their Highnesses have thought and do still think, that more that this ought
not to be asked, or expected form Them: since by this means, the Roman
Catholics and their Posterity wll be forever secured form all trouble in their
Persons or Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion; and that the Roman
Catholics ought to be satisfied with this, and not to disquet the Kingdom
because they cannot be admitted to sit in Parlirment, orto be in Employments;
or because those Laws, in which the Security of the Protestant Religiou does
chiefly consist, are not repealed, by which they may be put in a condition to
overturn it.

Their Highnesses do also believe, that the Dissenters will be fully satisfied
when tfiey shall be forever covered from all danger of being disturbed, or
punished for the free Exercise of their Religion, upon any sort of pretense
what soever.

Their Highnesses having declared themselves so positive in these matters, it
seems very plain to me, that They are far from bring any hinderance to the
Freeing Dissenters from the Severity of the Penal Laws; since They are ready to
use their utmost end avours for the establishing of it: nordo They at all
press the denying to the R. Catholics the exercise of their Religion, provided
it be managed modestly, and with out Pomp or Ostentation. As for my own part, I
ever was and stillam very much agaitnst all those, who would persecute any
Christian because he differs from the public and established Religion: And I
hope by the Grace of God to continue still in the same mind; for since that
Light, with which Religion illum inates our minds, is according to my sense of
things, purely an effect of the Mercy of God to us, we ought then, as I think,
to render to God all possible Thanks for his Goodness to us: and to have Pity
for those who are still shut up in Error, even as God has pitied us, and to put
up most earnest prayers to God, for bringing those into the way of Truth, who
stray from it, and to use all gentle and friendly methods for reducing them to
it.

But I confess, I could neyer comprehend how any that profess themselves
Christianus, and that may enjoy their Religion freely and witthout any
disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to go about to disturb the Quiet of
any Kingdom or State, or to verturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may
be admitted to Employments, and that those Laws in which the Security and Quiet
of the established Religion consists, should bae shaken.

It is plain, that the Reformed Religion is by the Grace of God and by the Laws
of the Land, enacted by both King and Parliament, the pkublick and established
Religion both in Engeland, Sccotland and Iresand; and that it is provided by
those Laws, that none can be admitted either to a plac-in Parliament, or to any
puplick Employmene, except those that do openly declare, that they are of the
Protestant Religion, and not Roman Catholics; and it is also provided by those
Laws, that the Protestant Reeligion shall be in all time coming secured from
the Designs of the Roman Catholics against it: in all whnch I do not see, that
these Laws contain any Severity, either against the Persons or Estates of those
who cannot take those Tests, that are contrary to the Roman Catholic Religion;
all the inconveniences that can redound to them from thence, is, that their
Persons, their Estates, and even the Exercise of their Religion being assured
to them, only they can have no share in the Government, nor in Officas of
Trust, as long as their Consciences do not aliow them to take these Test: and
they are not suffered to do any thing that is to the prejudice of the Reformed
Religion.

Since, as I have already told you, Their Highuesses are ready to concur with
his Majesty for the Repeal of those Penal Laws, by which men are made liable to
fines or other Punishments.

So I see there Remains no difficulty concerning the Repealing the Penal Laws,
but only this, that some would have the Roman Catholics rendered capable of
all public Trusts and Employments, and that by consequence, all those should
be repealed that have secured the Protestant Religion against the designs of
the Roman Catholics, where others at the same time are not less earnest to
have those Laws maintained in their full and due vigor; and think, that the
chief Security of the established Religion consists in the preserving of them
Sacred and unshaken.

It is certain, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted
Body or Assembly what soever, in which there are not Laws made for the Safety
thereof: and that provide against all Attempts whatsoever, that disturb thelr
peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they judge necessary
for all that shall bear Employments in that Kingdom, State or Corporation: and
no man can pretend, that there is any Injury done him, that he is not admittid
to Employments when he does not satisfy the Conditions and Qualities required.

Nor can it be denied, that there is a great difference to be observed in the
conduct of the Reformed Religion, and of the Roman Catholics toward one
another: The Roman Catholics not being satisfied to exclude the Reformed from
all places of profit or of Trust, they do absolutely suppress the whole
Exercise of that Religion, and severely persecute all that profess it; and this
they do in all those places where it is safe and without danger, to carry on
that rigor. And I am sorry that we have at this present so many deplorable
Instances of this severity before our eyes, that is at the same time put in
practice in so many different places.

I would therefore gladly see one single good reason to move a Protestant that
fears God, and that is concerned for his Religion, to consent to the Repealing
of those Laws that have been enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament,
which have no other tendency but to the security of the Reformed Religion and
to the restraining of the Roman Catholics from a capacity of overturning it;
these Laws inflict neither Fines nor Punishments, and do only exclude the Roman
Catholics from a share in the Government, who by being in Employments must
needs study to increase their Party, and to gain to it mort Credit and Power,
which by what we see every day, we must conclude, will be extremely dangerous
to the Reformed Religion, and must turn to its great prejudice: since in all
plases, those that are in public Employments, do naturally Favor that
Religion of which they are. either more or less. And who would go about to
persuade me or agy man else to endeavor move Their Highnesses, whom God has
honored so far as to make them the Protectors of his Church, to approve of, or
to consent to things so hurtful, both to the Reformed Religion and to the
public Safety. Nor can I, Sir, with your good leave, in any way grant what you
apprehend, That no prejudice will thereby redound to the Reformed Religion.

I know it is commonly said, that the number of the Roman Catholics in
Engeland and Scotland is very inconsiderable; and that they ari possessed only
of a very small number of the places of Trust: tho even as to this, the case is
quite different in Ireland: yet this you must of necessity grant me, that if
their numbers are small, then it is not reasonable that the public Peace
should be disturbed on the account of so few persons, especially when so great
a favor may be offered to them; such as the free Exercise of their Religion
would be: and if their numbers are greater, then there is so much the more
reason to be afraid of them; I do indeed believe that Roman Catholics, as
things at present stand, will not be very desirous to be in public Offices and
Employments, nor that they will make any attempts upon the Reformed Religion
both because this is contrary to Law, and because of the great Inconveniences
that this may bring at some other time both on their Persons, and their
Estates: yet if the Restraints of the Law were once taken off, you would see
them brought into the Government, and the chief Offices and Places of Trust
would be put in their hands; nor will it be easy to his Majesty to resist them
in this, how steadfast soever he may be; for they will certainly press him hard
in it, and they will represent this to the King, as a matter in which his
Conscience will be concerned; and when they are possessed of the Public
Offices, what will be left for the Protestants to do, who will find no more the
support of the Law, and can expect little Encouragement from such Magistrates?
and on the other hand, the Advantages that the Roman Catholics would find in
being thus set loose from all Restrants, are so plain, that it were a loss of
time to go about the proving it. I neither can nor will doubt of the sincerity
of his Majesty's intentions, and that he has no other design before him in this
matter, but that all his Subjects may enjoy in all things the same Right and
Freedoms.

But plain Reason, as well as the Experience of all Ages, the present as well
as the past, shows, that it will be impossible for R. Catholics and
Protestants, when they are mixed together in places of Trust and public
Employments, to live together peaceably, or to maintain a good Correspondence
together. They will be certainly always jealous of one another; For the
Principles and the Maxims of both Religions are so opposite to one another,
that in my opinion I do not see how it will be in the power of any Prince or
King whatsoever, to keep down those Suspicions and Animosities, which will be
apt to arise upon all occasions.

As for that which you apprehend, that the Dissenters shall not be delivered
from the Penal Laws, that are made against the, munless at the same time the
Test be likewise repealed: this will be indeed a great un happiness to them;
but the Roman Catholics are only to blame for it, who will rather be content
that they and their Posterity shouldl lie still under the weight of the Pena
Laws, and exposed to the hatred of the whole Nation; than be still restrained
from a capacity of attempting any thing against the Peace and the Security of
the Protestant Religion. And be deprived of that small advantage (if it is at
all to be reckoned one) of having ashare in the Government and public
Employments; since in all places of the World this has been always the
privilege of the Religion that is established by Law; and indeed these
Attempts of the Roman Catholics ought to be so much the more suspected and
guarded against by Protestants, in that they see that Roman Catholics, even
when liable to the Severity of Penal Laws, do yet endeavor to per swade his
Majesty, to make the Protestants, whether they will or not, dissolve that
Security which they have for their Religion: and to clear a way for bringing in
the Roman Catholics to the Government, and to public Employments. in which
case there would remain no relief for them but what were to be expected from a
Roman Catholic Government.

Such then will be very unjust to Their Highnesses, who shall blame them for
any Inconveniency that may arise from thence; since they have declared
themselves so freely on this subject, and that so much to the advantage even of
the Roman Catholics. And since the Settlement of matters sticks at this single
point, that Their Highnesses cannot be brought to consent to things that are so
contrary to Laws already in being, and that are so dangerous and so hurtful to
the Protestant Religion, as the admitting of Roman Catholics to a share in the
Gorvernment, and to places of Trust, and the Repealing of those Laws, that can
have noother effect but the Securing of the Protestant Religion from all the
Attempts of the Roman Catholics against it would be.

You write, That the Roman Catholics in these Provinces are not shut out from
Employments and places of Trust; But in this you are much mistaken. For our
Laws are express, excluding them by name from all share in the Government, and
from all Employments either of the Policy or Justice of our Country. It is
true, I do not know of any express Law that shuts them out of Military
Employments, that had indeed been hard, since in the first Formation of our
State they jouned with us in defending our public Liberty, and didus eminent
service during the wars; therefore they were not shut out from those Military
Employments; for the public Safery was no way endangered by this, both because
their numbers that served in our Troops were not great, and because the States
could easily prevent any Inconvenience that might arise out of that; which
could not heve been done so easily, if the Roman Catholics had been admitted
to a Share in the Government, and in the Policy or Justice of our State.

I am very certain of this, of which I could give very good proofs, that there
is nothing which Their Highnesses desire so much, as that his Majesty may Reign
happily and in an entire Confidence with his Subjects; and that his subjects
being persuaded of his Majestes fatherly affection to them, may be ready to
make him all the returns of duty that are in their Power: But their Highnesses
are convinced in their Consciences, that both the Protestant Religion and the
Safety of the Nation, would be exposed to most certain, Dangers, if either the
Test, or those other Penal Laws, of which I have made frequent mention, should
be Repealed; Therefore they cannot consent to this, nor concur with his
Majesty's Will; for they believe, they should have much to Answer for to God,
if the consideration of any present advantages should carry them to consent and
concur in things which they believe would be not only dangerous but mischievous
to the Protestant Religion.

Their Highnesses have ever paid a most prosound duty to His Maesty, which
they will always continue to do; for they consider themselves bound to it,
both by the Laws of God and of nature; But since the matter that is now in
hand, relates not to the making of new Laws, but to the total Repealing of
those already made both by King and Parliament; they do not see how it can be
expected of them, that they should consent to such a Repeal, to which they have
so just an aversion, as being a thing that is contrary to the Laws and customs
of all Christian States whether Protestants, or Papists, who receive none to a
share in the Government, or to public Employments, but those who profess the
public and established Religion, and that take care to secure it against all
attempts wharsoever.

I do not think it necessary to demonstrate to you how much there Highnesses are
devoted to his Majesty of which they have given such real Evidences as are
beyond all verbal ones; and they are Resolved still to continue in the same
Duty, and Affection; or rather to increase it, if that is possible. I am, SIR,

Yours, etc.
Nov. 4. 1687.
London printed in the Year 1688.


