THE CASE OF Mr. JONAS PROAST.

THE CASE OF Mr. JONAS PROAST, Late CHAPLAIN of All Souls College in Oxford,
etc.
MR. Proast, late Chaplain of All Souls College, thinks himself unjustly
treated, in being removed from the said College, for these several Reasons.

First, He says that a Warden of All Souls cannot by his own Authority, even
for a just Cause, displace a Chaplain.

Secondly, He urges, that if a Chaplain was removeable by the Warden alone for
a just Cause, yet here in this Case, there was no good ground for his removal.

Thirdly, and lastly, He insists, that if a statutable Warden could remove a
Chaplain, yet Mr. Finch could not challenge any right of expulsion, being no
Statutable Warden.

To each of which Propositions, be pleased to consider these following Answers.
Mr. Proast's first Proposition. That supposing Mr. Finch to be a Statutable
Warden, yet he could not of his own Authority expel him, because a Chaplain
falls under the same Government as a Fellow of the College; and since a Fellow
cannot be expelled by the Warden, without the Officers, therefore neither can a
Chaplain.

In giving satisfaction to this Argument, I shall, first, by way of
Introduction, show what sort of Officer a Chaplain of All Souls is; and then,
secondly, endeavor to prove, that he is amoveable at the pleasure of the
Warden alone.

First, A Chaplain in All Souls College has a Ministerial, and Precarious
Office; he is provided by the Head, for the Service of the College; he is
brought in by him alone, and is removeable by the same Authority. From his
attendance on the Chapel he is often called Minister Capellae; from the
Incertainty of his Interest, he is as frequently named Conductitius. And in any
College, whenever the Founder designed to vest a lasting Estate in a Chaplain,
he constituted him a Chaplain-Fellow, and by that Addition, gave him an higher
and more durable Interest. This usual and ordinary distinction would be
altogether unnecessary, if, without that extraordinary Provision, a Chaplain,
de Communi jure was entitled to the Rights of a Fellow; This is the Notion of
a Chaplain in general, and in All Souls College in particular: There is no one
Statute that has any relation either to the Election or Government of a
Chaplain, they being no where so much as mentioned, but in those passages where
it is proper to assign them their Commons, and their Places in the Chapel, and
Hall; And it is observable, that above their bare Commons, they stand merely
upon the Courtesy of the Accountants at the end of the year, for any further
Gratuity. They take no Oath as Fellows do. They are Enrolled in no Register as
Fellows are. They are not subject to the same Penalties inflicted by the same
Officers, and (which is a plain Argument of their dependence on the Warden)
they have their Degrees given them in the House, not as Fellows, by the
Warden's consent and Fellows, but by the Warden only; in a word, they are in
all things, but that of waiting, upon the same bottom as Clerks, and
Choristers, who, ever since the Foundation of the College, have been turned
out, as well as put in, by the sole Authority of the Warden; all of them have
had no other Admission, than that of the Warden's putting their Names into the
Buttery Book, whereas the Fellows are admitted by the Warden, in the presence,
and by the consent of all the Society, and by such Admission entitled to a
lasting Title to their Fellowships.

How precarious an Office a Chaplain is I shall not judge, but shall repeat in
the words of the Learned Judges of the King's- Bench, when Mr. Proast's Cause
was before them.

They solemnly declared, That a Chaplain had so good and durable an interest in
his Place, as a Cook, and Butler; and that he could not pretend to the same
rights as a Fellow. Of this we have frequent Instances in the University; and
One more particularly remarkable in New College, of which our Founder was
formerly a Member; and from whose Statutes ours are chiefly composed; when Dr.
Woodward, by his own Authority, expelled Nine Chaplains with one dash of his
Pen; One of them upon submission was restored, but the others appealed to the
Visitor, who, with a Reprimand, sent them home, owning that he had no
Cognizance of the matter, the Power lying in the Warden, and they never were
restored. All which being premised, I am to show,

That a Chaplain of All Souls is amoveable at the pleasure of the Warden alone.

In order to make this out, I shall suppose, and take it for granted, that the
Chaplains for just causes are deprivable, since the Fellows, the principal
Members, and the Warden, the Head of it, are so, as the Statutes to that
purpose evidently evince. For it were absurd and unreasonable, that the
inferior Members should have a more firm and lasting Interest, Estate, or
Tenure in the Foundation, than the principal part, the Head of it; which being
granted, I proceed.

Those who in Societies have the sole Power of putting in Members, have always
Power likewise to turn them out, unless the local Statutes do otherwise direct,
and limit that Authority. Now the Wardens of All Souls College have always
alone nominated and placed Chaplains in the said College, neither do the
Statutes appoint any other in Conjunction with him, who can either appoint or
displace the said Chaplains.

That the Warden alone puts them in, will not, it is presumed, be denied by the
Complainant himself; for if it is, he never was Chaplain, and consequently not
injured by his Removal, since he was put in by Dr. Jeames, without the
concurrence either of the Officers or the majority of Fellows. Never since the
Foundation of the College did either of these lay claim to the placing or
displacing a Chaplain, as is most notoriously known beyond the possibility of a
Denial. So that it remains to be shown.

That in Societies those that have a power of putting in the Members, have
likewise a power to put them out; and that the Statutes of All Souls, in
relation to the Chaplains do not otherwise ordain and appoint, and thence it
will follow that the Chaplains being put in by the Wardens, and the Statutes
not appointing any other person to turn them out, are to be deprived upon just
occasion, by the Warden; according to the known Rule of the Canon Law. Cujus
est Constituere ejus est Destituere.

To give instances in other Societies of the Universal truth of this general
Proposition, is a Task proper for the Pen of a Civilian. It will be sufficient
for my purpose, to show how it would follow in the Fellows themselves, that
they being Elected by the Warden and majority of the Fellows, were by them to
be deprived, if there were not a particular Statute that gives such power only
to the Warden and Officers.

It is plain in the next place, that the Statutes of All Souls College do not
at all direct how, or by whom, the Chaplains are to be expelled. There is not a
single word about it in the whole body of them; so that it seems plain that the
Chaplains must be put out by the Warden alone, who alone puts them in, or else
(which is absurd) that they are not at all liable to Expulsion. But come now to
his 2d. Objection.

1. Mr. Proast says, the Warden is bound by the Statute de Totali numero
Sociorum, etc. Socios Scholares, Sacerdotes ac Ministros Secundum Regulas and
Statuta inferius edita and in posterum per nos and successores nostros edenda
regere corrigere and gubernare, etc.

2. Or as the Statute de Officio Custodis has it, Scholares Socios Ministros
Altaris Capellanos, viz. etc. Juxta Ordination^s and Statuta dicti Collegii
regere dirigere and gubernare and eodem omnes and singulos juxta erum demerita
corrigere punire and castigare.K

3. And lastly, That the Statute Propter quas Causas, etc. the only Statute
that treats of the Expulsion of any under a Warden, gives no power to the
Warden to expel any without the Officers.

1st. I answer, That the Statute Propter quas Causas speaks only of the
expelling of Scholars ( i. e. Probationers) and Fellows, who are in that manner
deprivable; not of Chaplains, or any other inferior Foundation Men, as Clerks,
Choristers, etc.

2dly. That the other two Statutes are to be interpreted referenda Singula
Singulis, i. e. Those under the Warden, concerning whom there are any Statutes,
are to be governed, corrected, and punished according to those Statutes. Those
other, concerning whom there are no Statutes made, either by the Founder, or
the succeeding Arch Bps. of Canterbury (and there are none about the expulsion
of Chaplains) are left to be governed, corrected, and punished by the Warden,
de jure Communi ad ipsius arbitrium and juxta bonam conscientiam; and so has it
been and no otherwise since the Foundation of the College.

The Clerks and Choristors of the College, whose tenure is exactly the same
with the Chaplains, as they have ever been put in solely by the Warden so
likewise have they been expelled. Instances of which done in the time of my
Predecessor remain fresh in the memory of many in the College.

All those Statutes that are objected against the Wardens Authority do here
directly confirm it. For wherever the sole Power of Government is lodged, there
the right of Expulsion is consequently vested; and though that power may be
subject to restrictions, yet upon the failure of any subsequent limitations, it
is left at large, and is to be taken in its full extent and latitude. Now the
Government of Fellows, and of Chaplains, is equally placed in the Warden, and
by consequence the power of displacing both is in the same hands. The only
difference is, that succeeding Statutes qualify this Authority in one, and do
not restrain it in the other, and therefore the Wardens coercive power is
limited in respect of the Fellows, but remains entire and unrestrained over
Chaplains.

But after all, if it were requisite (as I hope it appears otherwise) that the
Concurrence of the Fellows should be had to the expelling a Chaplain, yet it
will appear, that I had even that too, at least ex post facto, as may appear by
an Act of the whole Society, Dated the 8th. of Dec. 88. which at least imlpys
the ratifying and Confirming my Act of expelling Mr. Proast in a most Solemn
and public Manner.

Now by what has been said it is hoped that it appears that the Warden has the
Sole power of displacing a Chaplain, it is presumed that he is not Accountable
to any for it, since by it he is not Guilty of the least Breach of any part of
the Statutes. But since there are so many who have taken upon them to Censure
this Action, I am contented to have the Merits of the Cause truly exposed, and
shall therefore hasten to answer his Second general Proposition.

2dly. He urges, that if a Chaplain was removeable by the Warden alone for a
just Cause, yet here in this Case there was no good Ground for his Removal.

It will be justly granted, that there are many faults in Members of a Society
deserve Expulsion, which yet it freed disengaged Persons are hardly liable to
Censure. First, of those Causes there are none that merit a more severe
Punishment, than those which tend to the Disturbance, or to the Disgrace of the
College. All Founders were careful as for the Peace, so for the Reputation of
the Society, and sufficiently knew that a College would so long continue in
esteem, as the Members of it were Advanced and Promoted. Hence it is, that in
all Colleges the Members are under a Common tie of not disgracing each other,
and the neglect of this Rule in Apleford's Case was thought a sufficient Ground
for the Expulsion even of a Fellow: How far Mr. Proast has upon other Grounds
deserved his Punishment is reserved for another Opportunity; at present it will
be sufficient to show, that by his own Confession, the disgrace that he put on
his College, and upon the first Member of it, was sufficient ground for his
Removal.

The Matter of that was in short this: About the middle of March. 88. Dr.
Lamphire the History Professor lying ill, there were several of the Gentlemen
of the University, who thinking Mr. Dodwell a proper Person to succeed him,
went about to Colleges to form an Interest in his behalf. Insomuch that long
before the Dr. dyed, Mr. Dodwell was looked upon as secure of the place.

The Indecency of making so Public a Canvass for a place not yet Void, made
several Gentlemen think it a just Cause to oppose what had been so Unseasonably
carried on. And many of Mr. Proast's and my Betters in all Respects, looked upon
it as a Reflection upon Oxford, that a Gentleman of another University should
come among us, and take away, by much, the best Preferment in our Disposal. It
was therefore proposed by them, that some body should be put up in Opposition
to Mr. Dodwell; and to be short, they pitched upon me. I entertain not a thought
so vain as to desire the World should think I was set up upon the account of
any Great Abilities I pretend to; but the true reason doubtless was, that they
imagined I might have interest enough in the University to make some opposition
to Mr. Dodwell's Election; as through the favor of my Friends it did appear,
since in near 300 Votes (with all imaginable foul play) there were but 6
different between us.

I am not so foolishly vain as to pretend to vye with Mr. Dodwell, in any part
of Learning, but I hope on the other hand, that for endeavoring to put by a
Stranger, I may be easily excused without Censure, since in the Judgment of so
many and so great men (whose Character I presume Mr. P. will not easily
approach to) I was judged fit to oppose him in his Pretensions.

In short, when Dr. Lamphire was actually dead, I appeared, and acquainted our
Society with it, desiring the favor of their Assistance, I particularly spoke
to Mr. Proast, who denied me, However I thought I might reasonably represent to
him the indecency as well as the unkindness that would appear in any one of our
own College that should oppose himself against the Head of it, especially a
Chaplain who had so great a dependence on him. But he was pleased not only to
oppose me in his own Person, but got two of the Fellows within our own Walls to
join with him, and became a public Solicitor against me; and not only so, but
carried his kindness to his Friend, and his contempt of me a little further; he
brought great numbers of Out-liers against me, so many, that it can be made
out, that for Horse-hire, and other Charges in the Election, he was reimbursed
the better part of Twenty Pound. To conclude, the day of Election came, and I
lost it by three Votes he had made against me in our own College: I shall not
insist on the dishonor of losing the Preferment, nor upon the value of it,
though it is, or shortly will be 200l. per An. And consequently a young Man
might have reapt great profit from it; and if so, the loss must be considerable.

But let any indifferent Impartial Man judge, whether this Behavior may be
called Provocation: He is pleased indeed to say for himself, that he thought me
unfit for the Place. Had any Oxford Man besides stood, it is very possible that
I had been of his mind: But let me be ever so meanly qualified, I presume,
without the imputation of arrogance, I might in this Case have expected, if not
his Vote, yet a more decent respect; a more civil, if not a more kind
behavior; and I should reasonably have thought he might have been absent, did
it not appear by the whole drift of his Proceedings, that he was resolved to
show the utmost of his Skill and Industry to disappoint me.

He is pleased to affirm, that this was no Provocation. But I shall take upon
me to show him, that for one Member of the Society to oppose the Majority, even
in the case of a Fellow, had formerly, in the Opinion of no less a Man than one
of our Visitors, Archbishop Abbot, been looked upon as a high Offense, no less
than the violation of an Oath; and if this be a great Fault in a Fellow, I may
presume I may infer that it is a Provocation in a Chaplain, not indeed a breach
of an Oath, for he takes none at his Admission. The Case was this; Before the
Cicle for the Proctors was made; the University annually chose Proctors out of
any College. The Fellows of All Souls in the year 1617. appeared for a
Gentleman of Wadham, but Mr. Duppa (afterward Bishop of Winton) dissented from
the rest, which gave occasion to our then Visitor, to write this following
Letter, and the Officers to proceed accordingly, as appears by our Register.

AFter my hearty hearty commendations. After the Care I have of preserving the
reputation of your worthy College, whose welfare your Honorable Founder has in
especial manner recommended to my trust, I have thought fit, upon some reports
that are come to my ears, to write this my Letter unto you; whereby I am to
advise you, that, as in all other Acts of your College, so especially in that
Public Act of recommending one for the Proctorship, you embrace Unity and
Concord, and not make your selves a Scorn to the University, by any
distractions touching that particular, whereof there is some report, and noise
abroad: And therefore, as your Visitor, do admonish you, that upon whom a major
part of the Fellows that usually have interest herein, shall concur for this
Office, no Man do publicly dissent from this agreement. Because I take it to
be against this Clause of your Oath, at your admission to be Fellows. Damna
scandala vel prejudicia dicto Collegio nullatenus faciam aut quatenus in me
fuerit fieri sustinebo And peradventure, joined with willfulness, and contempt,
it may be a fault of a higher nature. Thus, without any request unto you for
any particular Person, or respect had to any other ends, than of maintaining
your public Credit in the University; and doubting not of your due respect
herein, I leave you to the Almighty. From Lambeth the 26 of April. 1617. etc.

And afterward it appears by the Register, that Mr. Duppa having violated that
Clause of his Oath, Damna Scandala, etc. That he should be put out of Commons 3
Months, allowing unto each Month 28 days.

R. MOCKETT. Cust. THO. DINGLY,

Dec. Jur.

The use I make of this Letter is this. Every Master of Art has as much a right
of Voting for a Proctorship, as a Professorship in the University: A Fellow of
the College was judged by that Visitor himself to have committed a great
Offense, to have violated his Oath, by disagreeing from the Majority, in favor
of another College; he proves further, that joined with willfulness and
contempt, it may be a fault of a higher nature, by which we may not
unreasonably understand that it would merit expulsion. Here is a Chaplain, a
Servant to the House, in our Case, that not only gives his own Vote against the
rest of the College, but he seconds his Proceeding with Contempt, and
Willfulness; insomuch, that he not only persuades two of the Fellows to join
with him, but likewise prevailed upon great numbers in other Colleges to oppose
his own.

Now whether this deserves Punishment, or Commendation; whether it be not
Willfulness, and Contempt, whether it be Conscience, or Provocation, is the
question to be satisfied.

Secondly, the ground upon which he justifies his Practice, is,

That every Man has a right of Voting as he pleases.

If the Gentleman means, That as a Master of Arts he is qualified by the
Statutes of the University to dispose of his Vote in all Elections, as he shall
think convenient, I readily grant it. But then. by the Authority we have
already mentioned in the Case of Archbishop Abbot, it will not so clearly
appear, that when our College shall set up a Member of their own, much more a
Governor: One Man; though a Fellow, has so far a right of Voting against the
Majority, as to do it with Impunity; it being in Fellows a Violation of a
Clause of their Oath, and certainly a great Offense in a Chaplain, when
circumstanced with that open Disrespect and Contempt Mr. Proast was pleased to
show in my Case.

Every Counselor or Advocate has a right of giving his opinion as he pleases;
But if his advice be against the Interest of the College, whereof he is Member,
the Justice of the Cause which he espouses will not purge the perjury, nor
excuse the contempt. The liberty or indifferency, which either Party has in
themselves is, by those relations they have to the College, restrained and
determined. And as man, howsoever a free born Englishman, has a right to an
exercise only of such Arts as are consistant with the Bylaws and Customs of
the Corporation whereof he is a Member, so are the public Privileges of every
Member of the University contracted by the capacity of the same person, as more
immediately a part of a private Society.

But then,

3dly. Let him show, if he can, that he has such a Right of Voting as may be
called an Obligation of Voting. For unless he makes that out, he cannot have
much to say for his Behavior; he cannot easily justify his rude and undecent
opposition to his own College, and to the Head of it more especially. It is to
be feared, that in Arch Bishop Abbot's time had Mr. Duppa pleaded that in his
opinion the Candidate of Wadham was not a proper Person for the Office, or that
every one has a Right of Voting at discretion, though against his own Society;
these Arguments would not have deferred his punishment, or have been looked upon
as a sufficient excuse. Neither can I think, that amongst unprejudiced Men, Mr.
Proast's exposing me as an unfit Man, can justify his appearance against me.
And to show you that it is not his Opinion, that he is bound in Conscience to
be at the Convocation-House, and discharge himself of his Vote some way or
other, without being tedious, I shall take the liberty to cite this Famous
Instance.

Upon the death of Sir Leoline Jenkins, Mr. Clark, a Fellow of All Souls,
appeared to be Burgess of that University in his place. The College heartily
espoused his Interest, and finally, the University very unanimously chose him
as a person very well qualified for their service. Mr. Proast, it seems, could
not bring himself to entertain good thoughts of the Gentleman (who would be a
great credit to any Society) neither could he be wrought upon to join with his
own house in his Election, but chose rather to Absent himself. By which
proceeding, be pleased to observe, that Mr. Proast's practice shows that he
does not understand a Right of voteing to be an Obligation of voteing, that if
he thinks a man unfit he thinks himself obliged to give voice against him. And
besides, you have a farther prospect of the Temper of the man, by his having
before refused to join with the House in favor of the greatest Ornament of it.
It appears that he does not think there lies any obligation upon him to be
concluded by the sense of the Society, and has no notion of the honor of the
College, or any authority he lies under to maintain it. But we come in the
third place to examine,

3dly. Whether he was turned out by the Warden purely for voting against him,
without any previous offense, etc.

When I lost the Preferment I appeared for, I am not conscious that the ill
usage of some, and the unkindness of others, provoked me to the least degree of
heat or Passion. I do solemnly protest, that I had not any thought or intention
of taking any kind of notice of Mr. Proast's Behavior, till I was solicited by
some of the Officers, and others the most considerable men of the College, to
this effect. They complained to me that Mr. Proast had long been a Burden to
the Society, by his making so many and so frequent quarrels and divisions in
the House. That in all our private Elections he constantly made Parties, to the
great dishonor and disquiet of the College. That he fixed ill Characters upon
any body at his discretion, and upon account of his troublesome and unquiet
humor had frequently deserved a removal; that I ought not now so much to
neglect the peace and good of the Society, as to let this injury, however in
appearance private, yet in the effects of it public, go altogether unpunished.
For that should I not upon this affront displace him, his Insolence, which
before was insupportable, would increase so far, as to put the Fellows out of
hopes of having any redress for the future; for that he had formerly looked upon
himself as above restraint, and independent of any power whatever. I was very
desirous to resist the Importunity of the Society, but those whom I conceived
to understand best, and promote most the Interest of the House, insisting upon
it, I protest solemnly, without any inclination to revenge upon my own
particular, I pronounced him no Chaplain, giving him fourteen days to remove.

This is the matter of Fact, and by it I presume it will appear, that I did not
expel him upon my own head; that I did it at the instance of the Fellows, not
so much for Voting only against me, as for his former rude behavior to them.
This, I confess, that had he not so openly opposed the College in my case, it
is not probable that the Fellows would at that time have made their complaint;
but this I declare on the other side, that had they brought this accusation at
any time against him, (since I my self have formerly been a Witness of the
truth of it) I should have thought my self obliged to do them justice.

After 14 days were given, it was the expectation of most People (how
reasonable a one, I am not a proper Judge) that the Gentleman would have made
some sort of submission, by which he might have reconciled himself to the
Society, but instead of that, he took another sort of Course, that of
disturbing me with rude Letters; upon which, I publicly declared, that the
next I received, without opening it, I would that moment shorten his stay, by
strikeing his Name out of the Book, as upon having another Letter left for me
at my Lodgings, I soon afterward did.

This is the truth of the whole matter, and I am in hopes it does not deserve
so severe a Censure as many have thought fit to pass upon it, without truly
knowing the Case, or understanding any thing of our Statutes. But I shall not
wonder, that those Persons who were for having Mr. Dodwell come in by any
means, fair or foul, take upon them to justify the insolence of those who
supported his interest, without weighing their Obligations to the contrary.

Were the turbulent and restless temper of the Gentleman as well understood at
Lambeth, as it is known in every part of the University of Oxford, I persuade
my self, that instead of his having any Countenance from a Visitor, I should
rather receive his Commendation, for removing the disturber of that Peace, that
is so earnestly recommended to his Care by our Beneficent Founder. I would not,
by any means, lay any thing to the Gentleman's Charge, but what is literally
true, and therefore have, in speaking of him, purposely avoided all
disrespectful Language; but being called upon to vindicate my self, I must say
that he is absolutely Unfit for a College. I am not singular in this Opinion.
Dr. Barlow the Bishop of Lincoln having removed him from Queens-College for the
same reason.

3. As to the third Point, which is a cavil against Mr. Finches Title to the
Wardenship, it might, with submission, be proved to be false, if it was not a
more easy, and more proper task to prove it immaterial.

1. For it it was granted, that he was only Warden de facto, and not de jure;
yet since he was then admitted, and owned as such by the whole College, and
more especially by the Visitor himself, and by Mr. Proast, in the
superscription of his Letter, etc. and had then, if not a lawful, yet an
uncontested Title: It must follow, that he was at least in Possessione
Jurisdictionis, and that all Acts of discipline for the Government of the
College were Valid, and Authoritative.

2. If the Consequence should be allowed, that all the Acts of a Warden, who
had no good Title, were void; then all the Leases made in his Wardenship would
be invalidated, all Fines must de novo be paid, and the common security of
those that transacted with a College would be overthrown: For it is impossible
to suppose, that a Warden de facto should be admitted to have Power of granting
Leases, and not of exercising Acts of Discipline, and Jurisdiction; since the
one Power is of more immediate and pressing necessity, for support of the
College, than the other; and consequently the one is often lodged in Inferior
Officers, the other is reserved to the Warden alone.

As to the Title it self, how far the King's Mandat in Re licita can dispense
with the Ceremonies of Election enjoined by the local Statutes of a College,
The Warden takes not upon him to determine; he is informed however, that this
Point was admitted, and judicially settled in Westminster Hall, in the
beginning of the Reign of Charles the Second. It is improper for him to State
the bounds and extent of the Dispencing Power; and no sign of Modesty in Mr.
Proast, without any great pretensions to Law, at one blow to disannul and
overthrow it. But this the Warden knows, that however unwarrantable the
exercise of his dispensing power may be, the use of a Mandat could not be so
prejudicial to the Rights of the College, nor so derogatory to the power of a
Visitor; as Mr Proast's Appeal from the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury (who
sede vacant were the proper Visitors) to the Privy Council, (who had no
cognizance of the cause at all.

As to the Mandat it self, it should be known, that it was obtained by the
Warden at the request of the best Members of the Society: That it was by them
then esteemed a security to the College; and was used in other Societies at
that time, as the best method to hinder the encroachments of men of ill
Principles. That his Government of the College in the late Reigns was such as
was suitable to this design, and was so far from being unacceptable to the best
part of the Society, that Mr. Proast will gain very few or none of the Members
of that College, that will concur in these unwarrantable exceptions to the
Wardens title.

Mr. Proast has put himself under a double capacity of an Informer, and an
Appellant. As to his Information, it is humbly presumed, that if any weight at
all be laid on it, the Most Reverend the Visitor will give the Warden time to
show the weakness of those Suggestions; before his Grace gives himself the
trouble of any proceedings upon it. As to the Appeal, it is hoped that upon the
reasons abovementioned, it will receive no other favor from our Most Reverend
Visitor, than it has hitherto found from the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
from the Privy Council, and in Westminster Hall; especially since his case has
been so often considered; and since after so long a circuit of process, after
so great and frequent troubles, and expenses; it will probably seem reasonable
to his Grace in his Wisdom to excuse the Warden, and Fellows of that Society,
from any new charge, and trouble upon this occasion.

L. W. Finch.

FINIS.

