THE POWER OF KINGS: And in Particular, OF THE King of ENGLAND. Learnedly
Asserted, By Sir ROBERT FILMER, Knight. WITH A PREFACE of a Friend: Giving an
Account Of the AUTHOR and his WORKS.

In Magnis voluisse sat est --

LONDON: Printed for W. H. and T. F. and are to be sold by Walter Davis in
Amen-Corner, near Paternoster-row. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
Whosoever would go about to speak Sir Robert Filmer's worth, has no more to do
but only to Number and to Name his Writings, as they were written in the
following Order.

Question Quodlibetica, or a Discourse of Usury, written about 1630. and first
published in the year 1656.

Patriarcha, or the Natural Right of Kings maintained, against the Unnatural
Right of the People to Govern, or choose themselves Governors. Written about
the year 1642. and never Published till of late.

Of the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Published in the year 1656.

The Anarchy of a Limited and Mixed Monarchy, or Observations upon Mr. Hunton's
Treatise on that Subject. First Published in the year 1646.

The Freeholders grand Inquest, touching our Sovereign Lord the King, and his
Parliament. In the year 1648.

Of the Power of Kings: and in particular, of the King of England. First
Published in the same year.

Observations upon Mr. Hobbes' s Leviathan, Mr. Milton against Salmasius, and
H. Grotius De Jure Belli and Pacis, concerning the Original of Government. To
which those upon Mr. Huntons Book being reprinted, were annexed in the year
1652.

Observations upon Aristotle's Politics, touching Forms of Government.
Published in the same year.

And the Advertisement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches, with the
difference between an English and an Hebrew Witch. In the year 1653.

Whosoever would give his Writings their due, has done it already, in saying that
they are His. Of which, who reads any one, may have some cause to wonder how he
came to be sufficiently furnished to write that; but who proceeds yet farther
to read them all, will have more abundant cause to wonder, should any else but
he have wrote the rest.

His Political Writings are chiefly levelled against a Doctrine but too
generally embraced of late That, all men are born equal. To disprove which,
though it might be sufficient to appeal to the Practice and Experience of
Mankind, whether all Nations have not still with one Consent mounted their
Kings upon Thrones; and whether all the Masters of Philosophies and Religions
have not constantly appeared in their Chairs, and in their Pulpits, while their
Disciples have humbly presented themselves at their Feet? Not to speak of all
the several Heights of Authority, or extents of Command, which either Popular
Oratory have attained to by their Wit, or Conquerours have raised themselves to
by their Arms. Our Author himself is an undeniable proof of his own Assertion,
and has given us the best evidence that all men are not equal by Birth, while
he himself has no equal in Writing. So impossible is it for him to treat
either of the means of Acquiring, or the Rights of exercising Sovereignty,
without acquiring and exercising a new Sovereignty over his Readers. For does
he overcome others? even we at the same time are made Captives without
resistance, and are his by right of Conquest. Or does he govern in their stead?
even then all Readers are insensibly under his Command, as much as if they were
his Subjects, and are his by right of natural Sovereignty. A Reason so far
exalted above ours as his, makes him appear like those Kings of old, who were
in Stature much superior to their Subjects, and seemed so far to overtop the
rest, as if Nature it self had marked them out for Heads of all. To be short,
no Power, whose Cause our Author pleads, can be so absolute, as what he obtains
over us at the same time himself. And yet of so sweet a Tyranny, who that are
under it can complain? Arguments so prevailing, who is able to withstand? And
where the Mastery is gained over us by no other force than that of Persuasion,
who would forego the pleasure of Obedience? The Empire which Wit and Eloquence
have over men, seems to be like that Command which Music has over the Wild
Beasts, that civilizes and subdues them at one and the same time. And we, while
we read this Author, feel the highest of rational Pleasures, even then when we
are made at once both Better Subjects, and Wiser Men.

The Power of Kings: And in Particular, Of the KING of ENGLAND.
TO Majesty or Sovereignty belongs an Absolute Power not subject to any Law.
It behooves him that is a Sovereign, not to be in any sort Subject to the
Command of Another; whose Office is to give Laws unto his Subjects, to Abrogate
Laws unprofitable, and in their stead to Establish other; which he cannot do,
that is himself Subject to Laws, or to Others which have Command over him: And
this is that which the Law says, that The Prince is acquitted from the Power
of the Laws.

The Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patent, Privileges, and Grants of Princes,
have no force but during their Life; if they be not ratified by the express
Consent, or at least by Sufferance of the Prince following, who had knowledge
thereof.

If the Sovereign Prince be exempted from the Laws of his Predecessors, much
less shall he be bound unto the Laws he makes Himself; for a man may well
receive a Law from Another man, but impossible it is in Nature for to give a
Law unto Himself, no more than it is to Command a man's self in a matter
depending of his Own Will: There can be no Obligation which takes State from
the mere Will of him that promises the same; which is a necessary Reason to
prove evidently, that a King cannot bind his Own Hands, albeit that he would:
We see also in the end of all Laws these words, Because it has so Pleased us;
to give us to understand, that the Laws of a Sovereign Prince, although they be
grounded upon Reason, yet depend upon nothing but his mere and frank good Will.
But as for the Laws of God, all Princes and People are unto them subject;
neither is it in their power to impugn them, if they will not be guilty of
High Treason against God; under the greatness of whom, all Monarchs of the
world ought to bow their Heads, in all fear and reverence.

A Question may be, Whether a Prince be subject to the Laws of his Country
that he has sworn to keep, or not? If a Sovereign Prince promise by Oath to
his Subjects to keep the Laws, he is bound to keep them; not for that a Prince
is bound to keep his Laws by himself or by his Predecessors, but by the just
Conventions and Promises which he has made himself; be it by Oath, or without
any Oath at all, as should a private man be: and for the same causes that a
Private man may be relieved from his unjust and unreasonable Promise, as for
that it was so grievous, or for that he was by deceit or fraud Circumvented, or
induced thereunto by Error, or Force, or just Fear, or by some great Hurt;
even for the same causes the Prince may be restored in that which touches the
diminishing of his Majesty: And so our Maxim rests, That the Prince is not
subject to His Laws, nor to the Laws of his Predecessors, but well to his Own
just and reasonable Conventions.

The Sovereign Prince may derogate from the Laws that he has promised and
sworn to keep, if the Equity thereof cease, and that of himself, without
Consent of his Subjects; which his Subjects cannot do among Themselves, if they
be not by the Prince relieved.

The Foreign Princes well-advised, will never take Oath to keep the Laws of
their Predecessors; for otherwise they are not Sovereigns.

Notwithstanding all Oaths, the Prince may Derogate from the Laws, or Frustrate
or Disanul the same, the Reason and Equity of them ceasing.

There is not any Bond for the Sovereign Prince to keep the Laws, more than so
far as Right and Justice requires.

Neither is it to be found, that the Ancient Kings of the Hebrews took any
Oaths, no not they which were Anointed by Samuel, Elias, and others.

As for General and Particular, which concern the Right of men in Private, they
have not used to be otherwise Changed, but after General Assemblies of the
Three Estates in France; not for that it is necessary for the Kings to rest on
their Advice, or that he may not do the Contrary to that they demand, if
natural Reason and Justice do so require. And in that the Greatness and Majesty
of a true Sovereign Prince is to be known, when the Estates of all the People
assembled together in all Humility present their Requests and Supplications to
their Prince, without having any Power in any thing to Command, or Determine,
or to give Voice; but that that which it pleases the King to Like or Dislike,
to Command or Forbid, is holden for Law. Wherein they which have written of the
Duty of Magistrates, have deceived themselves, in maintaining that the Power of
the People is greater than the Prince; a thing which oft-times causes the true
Subjects to revolt from the Obedience which they owe unto their Sovereign
Prince, and ministers matter of great Troubles in Commonwealths; of which
their Opinion, there is neither reason nor ground.

If the King should be Subject unto the Assemblies and Decrees of the People,
he should neither be King nor Sovereign, and the Commonwealth neither Realm nor
Monarchy; but a mere Aristocracy of many Lords in Power equal, where the
Greater part commands the less; and whereon the Laws are not to be published
in the Name of him that Rules, but in the Name and Authority of the Estates;
as in an Aristocratical Seignory, where he that is Chief has no Power, but
owes Obeisance to the Seignory; unto whom yet they every one of them feign
themselves to owe their Faith and Obedience: which are all things so absurd, as
hard it is to see which is furthest from Reason.

When Charles the eighth, the French King, then but Fourteen years old, held a
Parliament at Tours, although the Power of the Parliament was never Before nor
After so great, as in those Times; yet Relli then the Speaker for the People,
turning himself to the King, thus begins: Most High, most Mighty, and most
Christian King, our Natural and Only Lord; we poor, humble, and obedient
Subjects, etc. which are come hither by your Command, in all Humility,
Reverence, and Subjection, present our selves before you, etc. And have given
me in charge from all this Noble Assembly to declare unto You, the good Will
and hearty desire they have, with a most fervent Resolution to Serve, Obey, and
Aid You in all your Affairs, Commandments, and Pleasures. All this Speech is
nothing else but a Declaration of their good Will toward the King, and of
their humble Obedience and Loyalty.

The like Speech was used in the Parliament at Orleans to Charles the 9th, when
he was scarce Eleven Years old.

Neither are the Parliaments in Spain otherwise holden, but that even a greater
Obedience of all the People is given to the King; as is to be seen in the Acts
of the Parliament at Toledo by King Philip, 1552. when he yet was scarce Twenty
Five Years old. The Answers also of the King of Spain unto the Requests and
humble Supplications of his People, are given in these words: We will, or else,
We Decree or Ordain; yea, the Subsidies that the Subjects pay unto the King of
Spain, they call Service.

In the Parliaments of England, which have commonly been holden every Third
Year, the Estates seem to have a great Liberty, (as the Northern People almost
all breathe thereafter) yet so it is, that in effect they proceed not, but by
way of Supplications and Requests to the King. As in the Parliament holden in
October. 1566. when the Estates by a common Consent had resolved (as they gave
the Queen to understand) not to Treat of any thing, until She had first
Appointed who should Succeed Her in the Crown; She gave them no other Answer,
but That they were not to make her Grave before she were Dead. All whose
Resolutions were to no purpose without Her good liking, neither did She in that
any thing that they requested.

Albeit by the Sufferance of the King of England, Controversies between the
King and his People are sometimes determined by the High Court of Parliament;
yet all the Estates remain in full subjection to the King, who is no way bound
to follow their Advice, neither to consent to their Requests.

The Estates of England are never otherwise Assembled, no more than they are in
France or Spain, than by Parliament-Writs and express Commandments, proceeding
from the King; which shows very well, that the Estates have no Power of
themselves to Determine, Command, or Decree any thing; seeing they cannot so
much as Assemble themselves, neither being Assembled, Depart without express
Commandment from the King.

Yet this may seem one special thing, that the Laws made by the King of
England, at the Request of the Estates, cannot be again repealed, but by
calling a Parliament; though we see Henry the eighth to have always used his
Sovereign Power, and with his only word to have disannulled the Decrees of
Parliament.

We conclude the Majesty of a Prince to be nothing altered or diminished by the
Calling together, or Presence of the Estates: But to the contrary, His Majesty
thereby to be much the Greater and the more Honorable, seeing all His People
to acknowledge Him for their Sovereign.

We see the principal Point of Sovereign Majesty and Absolute Power to consist
principally in giving Laws unto the Subjects without their Consent. It
behooves, that the Sovereign Prince should have the Laws in his Power, to
Change and Amend them according as Occasion shall require.

In a Monarchy, every one in particular must swear to the Observation of the
Laws, and their Allegiance to One Sovereign Monarch; who, next unto God, (of
whom he holds his Scepter and Power) is bound to No Man: For an Oath carries
always with it Reverence unto whom, and in whose Name it is made, as still
given to a Superior; and therefore the Vassal gives such Oath unto his Lord,
but receives None from Him again, though they be mutually Bound, the One of
them to the Other.

Trajan swore to keep the Laws, although he under the name of a Sovereign
Prince was exempted; but never any of the Emperors before him so swear:
Therefore Pliny the Younger, in a Panegyrical Oration, speaking of the Oath of
Trajan, gives out, A great Novelty, says he, and never before heard of, He
swears, by whom we swear.

Of these two things the one must come to pass, to wit, the Prince that swears
to keep the Laws of his Country, must either not have the Sovereignty, or else
become a Perjured Man, if he should but Abrogate but one Law contrary to his
Oath; whereas it is not only Profitable that a Prince should sometimes Abrogate
some such Laws, but also Necessary for him to Alter or Correct them, as the
infinite Variety of Places, Times and Persons shall require: Or if we shall
say, the Prince to be still a Sovereign, and yet nevertheless with such
conditions, that he can make no Law without the Advice of his Council or
People; He must also be Dispensed with by his Subjects, for the Oath which he
has made for the Observation of the Laws; and the Subjects again which are
obliged to the Laws, have also need to be Dispensed withal by their Prince, for
fear they should be Perjured: So shall it come to pass, that the Majesty of the
Commonweal enclining now to this side, now to that side; sometimes the Prince,
sometimes the People bearing sway, shall have no Certainty to rest upon; which
are notable Absurdities, and altogether incompatible with the Majesty of
Absolute Sovereignty, and contrary both to Law and Reason. And yet we see many
men, that think they see more in the matter than others, will maintain it to be
most Necessary, that Princes should be bound by Oath, to keep the Laws and
Customs of their Countries: In which doing, they weaken and overthrow all the
Rights of Sovereign Majesty, which ought to be most Sacred and Holy, and
confound the Sovereignty of One Sovereign Monarch, with an Aristocracy or
Democracy.

Publication, or Approbation of Laws, in the Assembly of the Estates or
Parliament, is with us of great importance for the keeping of the Laws; not
that the Prince cannot of himself make a Law, without the Consent of the
Estates or People (for even all his Declarations of War, Treaties of Peace,
Valuations of the Coin, Charters to enable Towns to send Burgesses to
Parliament, and his Writ of Summons to both Houses to Assemble, are Laws,
though made without the Consent of the Estates or People;) but it is a
Courteous part to do it by the good liking of the Senate.

What if a Prince by Law forbid to Kill or Steal, is he not Bound to obey his
own Laws? I say, that this Law is not His, but the Law of God, whereunto all
Princes are more straightly bound than their Subjects; God takes a stricter
account of Princes than others, as Solomon a King has said; whereto agrees
Marcus Aurelius, saying, The Magistrates are Judges over private men, Princes
judge the Magistrates, and God the Princes.

It is not only a Law of Nature, but also oftentimes repeated among the Laws of
God, that we should be Obedient unto the Laws of such Princes, as it has
pleased God to set to Rule and Reign over us; if their Laws be not directly
Repugnant unto the Laws of God, whereunto all Princes are as well bound as
their Subjects: For as the Vassal owes his Oath of Fidelity unto his Lord,
toward and against all men, except his Sovereign Prince: So the Subject owes
his Obedience to his Sovereign Prince, toward and against all, the Majesty of
God excepted, who is the Absolute Sovereign of All the Princes in the World.

To confound the state of Monarchy, with the Popular or Aristocratical estate,
is a thing impossible, and in effect incompatible, and such as cannot be
imagined: For Sovereignty being of it self Indivisible, How can it at one and
the same time be Divided betwixt One Prince, the Nobility, and the People in
common? The first Mark of Sovereign Majesty is, to be of Power to give Laws,
and to Command over them unto the Subjects: And who should those Subjects be
that should yield their Obedience to the Law, if they should have also Power to
make the Laws? Who should He be that could Give the Law, being he himself
constrained to Receive it of them, unto whom he himself Gave it? So that of
necessity we must conclude, that as no One in particular has the Power to make
the Law in such a State, that there the State must needs be Popular.

Never any Commonwealth has been made of an Aristocracy and Popular Estate,
much less of all the Three Estates of a Commonwealth.

Such States, wherein the Right of Sovereignty is Divided are not rightly to be
called Commonweals, but rather the Corruption of Commonweals; as Herodotus has
most briefly but truly written.

Commonweals which change their State, the Sovereign Right and Power of them
being Divided, find no rest from Civil Wars.

If the Prince be an Absolute Sovereign, as are the true Monarchs of France, of
Spain, of England, Scotland, Turkey, Moscovy, Tartary, Persia, Aethiopia,
India, and almost of all the Kingdoms of Africa and Asia; where the Kings
themselves have the Sovereignty, without all doubt or question, not Divided
with their Subjects: In this case it is not lawful for any One of the Subjects
in particular, or all of them in general, to attempt any thing, either by way
of Fact or of Justice, against the Honor, Life, or Dignity of the Sovereign,
albeit he had committed all the Wickedness, Impiety, and Cruelty that could be
spoke. For as to proceed against Him by way of Justice, the Subject has not
such Jurisdiction over his Sovereign Prince, of whom depends all Power to
Command, and who may not only Revoke all the Power of his Magistrates, but even
in whose Presence the Power of all Magistrates, Corporations, Estates and
Communities cease.

Now if it be not l^wful for the Subject by the way of Justice to proceed
against a King, How should it then be lawful to proceed against him by way of
Fact or Force? For question is not here what men are able to do by Strength and
Force, but what they ought of Right to do; as not whether the Subject have
Power and Strength, but whether they have lawful Power to Condemn their
Sovereign Prince.

The Subject is not only guilty of Treason in the highest Degree, who has
Slain his Sovereign Prince, but even he also which has Attempted the same, who
has given Counsel or Consent thereto; yea, if he have Concealed the same, or
but so much as Thought it: Which Fact the Laws have in such Detestation, as
that when a man guilty of any Offense or Crime, dies before he be condemned
thereof, he is deemed to have died in whole and perfect Estate, except he have
conspired against the Life and Dignity of his Sovereign Prince. This only thing
they have thought to be such, as that for which he may worthily seem to have
been now already Judged and Condemned; yea, even before he was thereof Accused.
And albeit the Laws inflict no Punishment upon the Evil Thoughts of men, but on
those only which by Word or Deed break out into some Enormity; yet if any man
shall so much as conceit a Thought for the Violating of the Person of his
Sovereign Prince, although he have Attempted nothing, they have yet Judged this
same Thought worthy of Death, notwithstanding what Repentance soever he have
had thereof.

Lest any men should think [Kings or Princes] themselves to have been the
Authors of these Laws, so the more straightly to provide for their own Safety and
Honor; let us fee the Laws and Examples of Holy Scripture.

Nabuchodonosor King of Assyria, with Fire and Sword destroyed all the Country
of Palestina, besieged Jerusalem, took it, robbed and razed it down to the
ground, burnt the Temple, and defiled the Sanctuary of God, slew the King, with
the greatest part of the people, carrying away the rest into Captivity into
Babylon, caused the Image of himself made in Gold to be set up in Public
place, commanding all men to Adore and Worship the same, upon pain of being
Burnt alive, and caused them that refused so to do, to be cast into a burning
Furnace. And yet for all that, the holy Prophets [ Baruch 1. Jeremy 29.]
directing their Letters unto their Brethren the Jews, then in Captivity in
Babylon, will them to pray unto God for the good and happy Life of
Nabuchodonosor and his Children, and that they might so long Rule and Reign
over them, as the Heavens should endure: Yea even God himself doubted not to
call Nabuchodonosor his Servant, saying, That he would make him the most Mighty
Prince of the world; and yet was there never a more detestable Tyrant than he:
who not contented to be Himself Worshipped, but caused his Image also to be
Adored, and that upon pain of being burnt quick.

We have another rare Example of Saul, who possessed with an evil Spirit,
caused the Priests of the Lord to be without just Cause slain, for that one of
them had received David flying from him; and did what in his power was to kill,
or cause to be killed, the same David, a most innocent Prince, by whom he had
got so many Victories; at which time he fell twice himself into David's Hands:
who blamed of his Soldiers for that he would not suffer his so mortal Enemy,
then in his power, to be Slain, being in assured Hope to have enjoyed the
Kingdom after his Death; he detested their Counsel, saying, God forbid that I
should suffer the Person of a King, the Lords Anointed, to be violated. Yea, he
himself defended the same King persecuting of him, when as he commanded the
Soldiers of his Guard, overcome by Wine and Sleep, to be wakened.

And at such time as Saul was slain, and that a Soldier, thinking to do David
a pleasure, presented him with Readiness Head; David caused the same Soldier to
be Slain, which had brought him the Head, saying, Go thou Wicked; How durst
thou lay thy impure Hands upon the Lords Anointed? Thou shall surely Die
therefore.

And afterward, without all Distimulation, mourned Himself for the dead King.
All which is worth good consideration: for David was by Saul prosecuted to
Death, and yet wanted not Power to have revenged Himself, being become Stronger
than the King; besides, he was the Chosen of God, and Anointed by Samuel to be
King, and had Married the King's Daughter: And yet for all that, he abhorred to
take upon him the Title of a King, and much more to Attempt any thing against
the Life or Honor of Saul, or to Rebel against him; but chose rather to Banish
himself out of the Realm, than in any sort to seek the Kings Destruction.

We doubt not but David, a King and a Prophet, led by the Spirit of God, had
always before his Eyes the Law of God, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not speak Evil
of thy Prince, nor detract the Magistrate; neither is there any thing more
common in Holy Scripture, than the forbidding not only to Kill or Attempt the
Life or Honor of a Prince, but even for the very Magistrates, although, says
the Scripture, They be Wicked and Naught.

The Protestant Princes of Germany, before they entered into Arms against
Charles the Emperor, demanded of Martin Luther, if it were Lawful for them so
to do, or not; who frankly told them, That it was not Lawful, whatsoever
Tyranny or Impiety were pretended; yet was he not therein by them Believed; so,
thereof, ensued a Deadly and most Lamentable War, the End whereof was most
Miserable; drawing with in, the Ruin of many great and noble Houses of
Germany, with exceeding slaughter of the Subjects.

The Prince, whom you may justly call the Father of the Country, ought to be to
every man Dearer and more Reverend than any Father, as one Ordained and Sent
unto us by God. The Subject is never to be suffered to Attempt any thing
against the Prince, how Naughty and Cruel soever he be: lawful it is, not to
obey him in things contrary to the Laws of God, to Fly and Hide our selves
from him; but yet to suffer Stripes, yea, and Death also, rather than to
Attempt any thing against his Life and Honor. O how many Tyrants should there
be, if it should be lawful for Subjects to kill Tyrants? How many good and
innocent Princes should as Tyrants perish by the Conspiracy of their Subjects
against them? He that should of his Subjects but exact Subsidies, should be
then, as the Vulgar People esteem him, a Tyrant: He that should Rule and
Command contrary to the good Liking of the People, should be a Tyrant: He that
should keep strong Guards and Garrisons for the safety of his Person, should be
a Tyrant: He that should put to death Traitors and Conspirators against his
State, should be also counted a Tyrant. How should good Princes be assured of
their Lives, if under color of Tyranny they might be Slain by their Subjects,
by whom they ought to be Defended?

In a well-ordered State, the Sovereign Power must remain in One only, without
Communicating any part thereof unto the State, (for in that case it should be a
Popular Government, and no Monarchy.) Wise Politicians, Philosophers, Divines,
and Historiographers, have highly commended a Monarchy above all other
Common-weals. It is not to please the Prince, that they hold this Opinion; but
for the Safety and Happiness of the Subjects. And contrariwise, when as they
shall Limit and Restrain the Sovereign Power of a Monarch, to Subject him to
the General Estates, or to the Council; the Sovereignty has no firm
Foundation, but they frame a Popular Confusion, or a miserable Anarchy, which
is the Plague of all Estates and Commonweals: The which must be duly
considered, not giving credit to their goodly Discourses, which persuade
Subjects, that it is necessary to subject Monarchs, and to give their Prince a
Law; for that is not only the Ruin of the Monarch, but also of the Subjects.
It is yet more strange, that many hold Opinion, that the Prince is subject to
his Laws, that is to say, subject to his Will, whereon the Laws which he has
made depend; a thing impossible in Nature. And under this Color, and
ill-digested Opinion, they make a mixture and confusion of Civil Laws, with the
Laws of Nature and of God.

A pure Absolute Monarchy is the surest Commonweal, and without Comparison, the
Best of all. Wherein many are abused, who maintain that an Optimacy is the best
kind of Government; for that many Commanders have more Judgment, Wisdom, and
Counsel, than One alone. For there is a great difference betwixt Council and
Commandment.

The Council of Many wise men may be better than of One; But to Resolve,
Determine, and to Command, One will always perform it better than Many: He
which has advisedly digested All their Opinions, will soon Resolve without
Contention; the which Many cannot easily perform: It is necessary to have a
Sovereign Prince, which may have Power to Resolve and Determine of the Opinions
of his Council.

FINIS.

