A Reasonable Word TO THE Doctors of Reason: BEING Some Remarks on a Nameless
Author in his Pamphlet, Entitled, The Divine Unity asserted; AND Some
Observations upon a Short-Account, of the Proceedings of R. S. Bishop of a
Dissenting Congregation in London; with some of the Brethren, against a Member
of that Church as an Heretic.

Showing the Unreasonableness of those Pretended Reasons that are offered, for
Denying our Lord Jesus Christ to be over All, God blessed for evermore: And
Proving by the Word of God, and Sound Reason drawn from the same; That Jesus
Christ is the True God and Eternal Life. 1 John V. 20.

ALSO A Reasonable Reprimand to Mr. Considerator, for his foolish Boasting in
his Letter to H. H. as if He and Those of his Tribe, were the only Freemen of
the Commonwealth of Wit and Learning.

By N. Goldham, a Lover of Truth and Sound Reason.

LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood for the Author, 1699.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Ashhurst, Knight, Alderman, AND One of the
Honorable REPRESENTATIVES of the City of LONDON in PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Worship,
THE Ensuing Sheets being the Work of some spare Hours last Winter Mornings*
redeemed; not from my Employment or particular Calling, but from my Rest and
Sleep: I know not unto whom of Right, it does more properly belong, than to
your Worship; knowing that as you are my Governor, my Person is under your
Protection, and my Manners fall under your Inspection.

I thought it meet therefore, that a Work of this Nature coming from me, should
make its Acknowledgments to your Worship; and I do hereby Humbly submit, both
the Work and the Author of it, to your Worships Impartial Judgment and Censure.
And in doing this, I know not how to give your Worship flattering Titles, not
only (though chiefly) because in so doing my Maker would be offended, but also,
because I have Reason to believe, that your Worship is so Noble, and so truly
Great; that it is as much below your Worship to receive them, as it is Breach of
Duty in me to give them. Nor shall I with a Pretended show of Humility, (the
worst of all Pride) make any Apology, with a pretended Humble Petition for a
Pardon for doing thus; not only because in so doing, I should be guilty of a
Contradiction, having already (as in Reason I ought) submitted both the Work
and my Self, to your Worships Impartial Judgment and Censure.

And knowing also, such is the Gentleness and Candor of your Government, that
Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity are discountenanced, and suppressed with
Admonition and Reproof; or elfe punished with such Gentle and Fatherly
Chastifement, as may serve only for an Effectual Admonition to future
Reformation. And I can assure your Worship, (our Lord Jesus Christ who knows
all things bearing me witness I lie not) that at first, and all the while I
employed my Thoughts about the Work it self, and of submitting the same to
your Worships most solid and penetrating Judgment; I could not entertain one
Thought, of abusing Good Nature and a Gentle Governor at such an Unreasonable,
Wicked Rate, as sinning wilfully in Hope of a Pardon will amount unto.

I am very sensible, your Worship is called by the Good Providence of God, and
the Voice of this City, to Much and Great Business in Public Affairs, both in
this City and for this City and Nation; among the Chief of our English Tribes,
the Heads of their Fathers Houses, Men of Renown who have been and are to
Assemble together in Parliament; to Enquire and Determine what our English
Israel ought to do: (That our Lord Jesus Christ may direct your Counsels, and
bless your Resolves, is and ought to be the Prayer of every true English
Christian.)

I shall not therefore presume, to detain your Worship with a Long Entry to a
small Cottage; yet I think my Self obliged, to render to your Worship a Reason
for my doing thus; and among others this is one, There is a Generation arisen
up among us, who call themselves Wits, Freemen (as they say) of the
Commonwealth of Learning; but they prove themselves to be no other than a
Select Number of Conceited Dunces, who are far enough from being Freemen of the
Commonwealth of Sound Reason: And there is indeed, no such thing as the
Commonwealth of Learning, that being a good Gift of God bestowed but upon
some; but Reason is given by the same Author of every Good and Perfect Gift, to
Men as such; yet neither is this universal in common to all Men in any great
measures thereof, witness our Pretenders thereunto.

And yet so vain are these Conceited Ones, (and of all Fools they are the
worst) that they not only say, they are Freemen of the Commonwealth of Wit and
Learning; but they will needs make themselves (as Usurpers in all cases do)
Masters and Magistrates of that which is Superior to both; viz. The
Commonwealth of Sound Reason.

Hence it comes to pass, that so many Nameless Letters have been sent to our
Noble Senators, with bold and presumptuous Exhortations to make Use of their
Reason; as if Christianity were an Enemy to Humanity: Or as if Faith destroyed
Reason, charging all the Laity, as well the Nobility and Gentry; as the
Commonality and more inferior Mechanics, to be no better than Biggots to the
Clergy? And the Clergy no better, than Arbitrary Imposers of Idolatrous
Doctrines.

Since therefore, these Bold Invaders on the Rights of Mankind in point of
Reason, (as if they had engrossed it all into their own Hands) are grown so
Vain and Insolent, as to set Bounds not only to God's Word, but to God himself;
they not having the Fear of God before their Eyes, form an Idea of God
according to the Dictates of their own Foolish Brains: And whatever God says
of himself, yet he must be no other than what they say he is; and in all
Probability the next Step will be, to say, he is not.

I therefore looked for some Answers to those Unreasonable, as well as
Unscriptural Pamphlets from our Reverend Divines; but finding these Pretenders
had this Shift, to put off what the Clergy had said; And to amuse their
Readers, viz. That the Laity, and efpecially the more inferior Sort, take
those things upon Trust, and are led by the Nose by the Clergy.

To Convince therefore these Gainsayers, and to Honor our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to let those Gentlemen know, that we Laymen do see with our own Eyes; and
that every true Christian (though the meanest of Mechanics) is not taught by the
Clergy only, but by the express Word of God; to Honor the Son even as we
Honor the Father. For these Reasons, have I thus employed those Redeemed
Hours, and forasmuch as your Worship has an Undoubted Right, to judge both the
Author and his Work; so I Humbly take Leave to cast both at your Worships Feet,
and Subscribe my Self as I am,

Your Worships, Most Humble Servant, Nathanael Goldham.

To the Rational READER.
IT is to be Lamented, but not to be Wondered at, because it is foretold and
Prophesied of; that in the last days, and therefore in our days, many False
teachers shall arise, and deceive many; i. e. So many, that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect; many saying, Lo here is Christ,
and lo there; some saying, this is he, and others saying, that is he; Mat. 24.
23, 24. The Devil and his Imps setting up many Christ's, if by any means they
can delude poor Souls, and draw them from the true Christ; but our Lord has
forwarned us, not to go after them, because he has told us these things
before, Mat. 24. 25. Mark. 13. 21, 22. And being forewarned, I trust by the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; we shall be forearmed, (all his Disciples, even
we Lay. Men not excepted) and be enabled to withstand, and to stand against all
the Seducers, the cunningly devising Fablemen of our day: And for the
encouragement of our Faith, and Hope we ought to remember, that the Promise of
impossibility of being deceived, is not confined to the Ministry, but to all
Gods Elect, to every true Disciple of Jesus Christ. And it is almost in so many
words foretold (at least, it is plainly employed) that many of the Ministry,
many of the pretended Ministers of Christ, should be those very deceivers
themselves; Why else does our Lord call them false Prophets, false Christ's;
Mat. 24. 23. Mark 13. 21. 22. and false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 1. It Is those
Wolves coming in Sheeps Clothing; that do so disturb the Church, and in a great
measure take Peace from the same; and by there pretentions to Reason and great
swelling Words of Vanity, concerning their great Reason and Learning, Lead away
silly Women, laden with diverse lusts: And for ought I know, as many silly Men
too. Hence it comes to pass, that although the Preaching the everlasting
Gospel, be the most Honorable and Glorious Employment, that ever God called a
Mortal to in this World: Yet because many of the Sons of Ely, do so manifestly
declare themselves to be the Sons of Belial; the offerings of the Lord are
abhorred for the Priests sake. It is to be lamented, and I cannot without grief
of Heart write it, nor think on it; that the Ministers of the Gospel should be
so much slighted, contemned and despised, as at this day they are; because I
Read the Bible, and there I find our Lord says, speaking of his Ministers to
be sure, if not of all his Disciples; He that despises you, despises me, and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. And I dread what the
consequence of the despising of Christ, and him that sent him will amount unto;
and yet I am no more a Biggot to their Ministry, than I am a dispiser of them.
For however mean or Contemptible my Circumstances and Employment may be in the
World, yet it has pleased God to Bless me with such a Berean Spirit, that by
the Grace of God, I will neither follow their Doctrine, nor their Practice any
further then I have good Warrant from the Word of God; that they follow their
and my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore, if thou ask me what I
think should be the Reason, why in a professed Christian Nation a Christian
Ministry is so much despised, I must needs say, I think they may thank
themselves for it; for when by the Grace of God, a Church or Ministry is made
Beautiful as Tirzah, the same Grace will make them as terrible as an Army with
banners; Cant. 6. ver. 4. And although the World hates them, yet Herod like,
they must fear them, although they kill them; and they kill them because they
fear them, as well as hate them. Christ will honor them that honor him, and
although Christ Disciples must suffer Persecution, and be Reproached and
Vilified; yet at the same time, the fear and the dread of them, must fall upon
those very beasts that worry them. And therefore it is observable, that in
times of Persecution the Church and her Ministers are hated and troubled on
every side. But at the same time they are feared, not slighted; their
Persecutors being moved with Envy, rather then Contempt. The Reason is, because
the fire of Persecution makes them more bright and Beautiful, and therefore
more terrible: But when there is Peace to the Church, from outward Persecution;
and as in Constantines time, great Worldly Grandeur is added thereunto; then is
the time for the Devil to Play his Pranks another way, by sending in false
Brethren among them, to preach the Gospel for filthy Lucre sake: And at this
very door, it is that many of the lowest of the People are Let in to be
Priests; and which is worse, if worse can be, many of the lowest of the People
make themselves Priests: But which way so ever they get in, whether by the
negligence or ignorance of the Doorkeepers; or whether they Climb up some other
way: It is too Evident, that too many of these sorry Tools are in to the
dishonor of the Ministry; and when they are in, it is no wonder though they
quickly discover themselves to be as they are; and when they do so discover
themselves it is no wonder, if the lowest of the People do look upon them, as
lower than themselves, and that must be very low indeed. It is very sad, that
our Bishops the Ministers of the Gospel should have such an unjustifiable and
dishonorable regard for Ely's Seed, seeing the Lord has rejected them from
being Priests to minister before him; and yet when any of these fulfill the
Curse that was pronounced against that good Man's wicked Seed, and comes and
croucheth to them for a piece of Silver, and a Morsel of bread, saying, put me
I pray thee into one of the Priest Offices, that I may have a piece of Silver,
and a piece of bread, presently they are ready to lay Hands on them. But I
would to God they would rather reject all such Petitions and Petitioners, with
the greatest contempt and scorn to the Petition; and the Greatest pity and
Compassion and Fatherly Admonition to the Petitioners. But no doubt the Aged
Paul's of our day, would willingly see young Timothies growing up in their
stead: And why then do they not observe the Rule given to the First Bishop of
Ephesus, to lay hands suddenly on no Man, nor at any time upon a Novice, but on
such as desire the Office of a Bishop; because it is a good Work, and to prove
them too; for this was to be done before they took the Office of a Deacon, how
much more before they took the Office of a Bishop; and for want of this it is,
(I am greived to see it, and so are other Christians to) that the Ministers of
the Gospel are in general, and the Gospel it self is so much slighted and
despised. There is not that Majesty and Luster upon Ministers and Christians,
as there was in the Primitive times; and no wonder if Men slight, when God
departs; nor is it to be thought strange, if the Ministry it self be slighted
in the General, when there are so many Novices that know not how to divide the
Word of Truth aright; and therefore they spoke not as the Ministers of Christ,
as being called and sent of God to Preach the Everlasting Gospel; but as the
Scribes and low Spirited time-servers, that can Tell a Tale out of Ovid and
Homer, but are far enough from being like Ezra, who read in the Book of the
Law, and gave the Sense and the Meaning; the Gospel and Epistles to the
Primitive Christians being seldom mentioned, or if they be either not
Explained, or miserably perverted to set up some other Christ; or some other
Savior besides our Lord Jesus Christ: For alas poor Creatures they know not
what the terrors of the Lord, nor the Consolations of the Holy Ghost are
themselves: And how then can they persuade Men to be Christians? they are
strangers to the New Birth themselves, and how can they give any account of
those things they have not seen, nor felt. These things are to be Lamented, and
shall be reformed when God causes Glory to dwell in our Church and Land. It is
in vain for Men: In vain did I say, it is a sin and a shame for Men to go
before God in choosing of Ministers, one would think the Gospel should Teach us
so much good Manners, as to let God choose first; And when he has given some
visible Demonstrations who he has Chosen, then to set such apart by Fasting
and Prayer, and laying on the Hands of the Presbytery: So shall they revive the
Glory that is due to the Gospel Ministry, by having none but Work men among
them, that are able to divide the Word of Truth aright, and so need not to be
ashamed either of the Gospel, or a shame to it; being sound in the Faith, and
having the Spirit may Convince gainsayers: For want of a due regard hereunto,
the Church has too many Novices, and too many put too much Contempt on the
whole Ministry, for the sake of some Pretenders thereunto. But that which is
worse then all this, is, the Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
Gospel of his Grace; take occasion hereby to Assault the very Foundation of the
Christian Religion; and finding many in the Ministry, some of the lowest of the
People, before spoken of; who are either prepared to receive their Principles,
or not Fortified against them by the Spirit of the Lord.

They grow insolent, and because a Novice, or an Arminian cannot Confute them
for want of a Spirit of Judgment and of a sound Mind, they are ready to say,
neither can a Minister of the Gospel do it. And indeed it is a Question which
perhaps a Doctor of Reason cannot readily determine, whether it be harder for
an Arminian to Confute a Socinian, or for a Socinian to Confute an Atheist; for
there is a connection and a dependancy in those damnable Heresies, for the
denying the full satisfaction that Christ made to Divine Justice for our sin,
and our being Justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Christ's Blood, makes way to deny the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the
denying the Divine Nature of our Lord Jesus Christ, makes way for denying the
being of God, Arminianism naturally running into Socinianism, and Socinianism as
naturally into Athesim; as I trust Rational Reader thou will see by the ensuing
Discourse, that the most Goliath like Arguments that our Pretenders to Reason
have against our Lord Jesus Christ, Lie with equal force against the very being
of God. These Gentlemen having Formed an Idea of Religion, and of God himself,
according to that little Measure of Reason God has bestowed upon them; and
that Reason woefully Corrupted, they all three set this down for a Rule, and
tell us in so many Words that what is contrary to their Reason cannot be True;
and being very Conceited, as thou know Rational Reader, most of our Weak and
and Half Witted People are, they tell us, (what ever God tell us in his Word to
the contrary, no matter for that:) That one infinite Savior is not sufficient
to grapple with an in numerable Company of sins and Guilts; each of which they
will have to be infinite: But thy Reason will tell thee their Argument will
as soon destroy the being of God, as over throw the Satisfaction of Christ: They
also tell us the Father, the Word, and Holy Ghost cannot be one, that sin
cannot be Forgiven, if the guilty be not Cleared; and yet God himself says, he
will not Clear the guilty, and yet he will Forgive sin: And to carry on their
damnable Heresies with a high Hand, they set themselves up for Mastersof
Reason, Freemen of the Commonwealth of Wit and Learning: But thou will see
Reader, by the ensuing Discourse, that they are quite otherwise, and that they
prove themselves to be no other then a shame to Learning, a dishonor to the
Schools, a reproach to sound Reason, a scandal to the Gospel, Enemies to the
Crown and Dignity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Factors to Atheism.

Now Reader, I shall not detain thee any longer at the Door, then to tell thee
how I being no Prophet nor Prophets Son, came to be engaged in a Work of this
Nature: And indeed it was an unexpected Providence that led me to it, I being
at a Friends House some Months since I Accidently saw the two Books mentioned
in the Title Page; and by that transient view that I had of them while I was
there; I perceived they struck at the Foundation of the Christian Religion, I
therefore desired to Borrow them that I might inquire by the Scriptures of
Truth, whether those things were so or no; my request was readily granted, and
accordingly at spare Times and redeemed Hours, (for I resolved not to Lose one
Hours Time from my Employment for it,) but I say at Redeemed Hours I did look
over those Books, comparing the things that were therein asserted with the
Scriptures of Truth, and sound Reason drawn from the same: And I do Freely
acknowledge that at first I was somewhat Staggered in my Faith; and indeed Had
I not been almost turned aside from the simplicity of the Gospel thou had
never seen any thing of this Nature coming from me, nor should I have committed
my Tuoughts about those things to Paper and Ink, but finding the things that
were so confidently denied and Contended against, was not about Meats or
Drinks, or a Holy Day, or a White or a Black Garment, and such like Trifles as
these which makes them that observe them never the better; nor they that
observe them not never the worse, but the matters contended about being no less
then denying, or believing in the true God and our Savior Jesus Christ, I
resolved by the Grace of God to find out the Truth as it is in Jesus; and
therefore I gave the more earnest heed both to these Books, and the Reasons
therein offered, to maintain the things that were so boldly asserted; as also
to the Scriptures of Truth and sound Reason drawn from the same. And I can
truly say the more I looked into both, the more I were confirmed in my Faith,
and the more clearly did I see the unreasonableness, though deep subtilty and
cuning Sophistry of the Arguments that were laid down in those Books for
denying our Lord Jesus Christ to be over all, God blessed for ever more; and
for my own Memory sake I at first committed some Remarks, to Paper and Ink, and
showing them to a Friend, he advised me to go on further in it; Which
accordingly I did, and having almost finished what I thought to do with respect
to those two Books, I Communicated it to another Friend, and he showed me and
Lent me the great Boasting, vain Glorious Considerator upon Four Sermons of his
Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; a Discourse of the Bishop of Sarums;
another of the Bishop of Worster, and an Eminent Dissenter; and I have now
forgot who besides: And he stumps it about like a Haberdasher of small Wits
against his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; charges the Lord Bishop
of Sarum with a Dissent from the Catholic Church; and does in Effect tell his
Lordship, though he be a Dignity of the Church; yet he must vail the Bonnet to
him, as being a Freeman of the Common wealth of Wit and Learning; and seems
willing to persuade the the World that he is guilty of Sacrilege; and that he
has Robbed the Church of some of her best ornaments next to the Righteousness
of Cnrist imputed to her, and the Graces of his Holy Spirit wrought in her;
viz. Her Wit and Learning: And as for the first of the Former, and which indeed
Constitutes her Truly Christian, viz. the Righteousness of Christ imputed to
her; he will not own that she has any Right or Title to it; or that she shall
ever be made partaker of it.

And as for the Second, viz. The inwrought Graces of the Holy Spirit, and which
indeed makes her truly Glorious, he has brought up an evil Report upon it, and
will have it to be no other then Painted Paper-morality common to the Heathen:
And in order to persuade the World to believe him, He tells us, he is a Freeman
of the Commonwealth of Wit and Learning.

What a mortification must it be to this Gentleman, when he shall see that a
Man of a mean capacity and Employment, that never had the happiness to sit at
the Feet of Gamaliel, can see through his Sophistry; And yet it must be
acknowledged by all Men of common Sense, that the Schools will give a Man great
advantages in many things, if he have but answerable Measures of Reason, to
improve the knowledge that may be attained there; but Block-heads and Dunces
must look like themselves, as well when Posting from, as when Whipped to and in
the Cities of Oxford and Cambridge. For indeed the Schools know better then to
pretend to give Men Reason, much less Virtue or Grace; and yet we have a sort
of soft-pated Gentlemen, who because they can speak Three Languages, besides
their Mother Tongue, will needs count themselves wise Men, Ay, and good Divines
too; but they will not pass for such, among those that know what sound Reason
and True Divinity is.

The Cosiderator by his Vanity and Boasting, seems to be one of those
Paper-scull'd Gentlemen, I have therefore given him an Answer to some of his
Arguments least he should continue to be wise in his own Conceit, and to let
him know, that it better becomes such weak headed (though perhaps well-meaning
Gentlemen as he) to learn of the Mechanics than to contend with the Learned,
especially such of them as have answerable measures of Reason to improve the
Knowledge they have attained by Learning for the same end for which God gave it
them: And I have taken Notice but of some of his Arguments neither, because
notwithstanding his great swelling Words of Vanity; yet I find all his
Arguments are briefly couched, or may be reduced to our Short Accountant; and
to give that Gentleman his due, he is as Stout a Champion for their Cause as
the best of them all, and so much the better, because he is not so vain as the
Considerator; I thought therefore I ought not to let the Considerator pass
without a Repremand for his saucy insulting over the Dignities of the Church,
and thou will find Reader it is but a Reasonable one; for I have quoted him
Truly and Fairly, as thou will see, if thou compare Books; and as for the
Accountant I have Transcribed his Arguments almost word for word, at least I
have not knowingly omitted one Material Word in all his Book. Now Reader, I
shall leave thee to Judge for thy Self, whether it will be safest for thee to
believe God to be as he himself says he is, or as pretendingly Wise, but real
Foolish Men say he is: And if thou receive any Benefit by this Discourse, let
it be a Motive to thee not to lean to thy own understanding, but to live by
Faith on him that gives Wisdom to the simple, and understanding to them that
have no knowledge: And if what is written may have any influence thereunto, and
in so doing to honor the Son even as we honor the Father, he has his end;
who is thine to serve thee so far as it is Reasonable for thee to Command, or
him to obey.

Nathanael Goldham.

A Reasonable Word TO THE DOCTORS OF REASON.
OUR Nameless Author in his Divine Unity asserted, spends his third and fourth
Pages in laying down general Rules, which must be used in discerning Truth from
Error; that we may not be deceived. I shall therefore pass over those two
Pages, and consider how well he keeps to those Rules, or to the Rules of
Scripture; or right Reason, which he pretends to be so Great a Master of in
clearing so Great a Controversy; and which is so great a Mystery. And first to
begin with his Reasons, which he lays down as a Foundation to build a Faith
upon; that shall reach to Heaven. And he goes on, and prospers in this
building; about as far as the Men of Babel did, in their building in the Land
of Shinar, Genesis 11. 2, 7. Indeed his Reason is as much confounded as their
Language was, for they did but contradict, and so not understand one another;
and yet perhaps as great Doctors of Reason among them as our Author himself: He
tells us in page 5. that we have a Power of Reasoning, or Faculty of increasing
our Knowledge by Industry; whereby we come to a Certainty in many things.

Hence I gather from my Author's Reasoning, that there are various Degrees and
Measures of Reason; which the most High God is pleased to give to every Man,
according to the good Pleasure of his own Will; to some more, and to some less;
and to some (so far as appears to Bystanders) none at all, and others, he is
pleased to take their Reason from them after they have had it; witness
Nebuchadnezzar and our Bethlem. Now then, seeing God is one, and his Truth is
one, and the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: What an unreasonable Reason,
does the short Accountant give for his Faith in his 3d. page? Where he with
seeming Triumph tells us, that he therefore believes what God reveals, because
he has reason so to do: And what if this Gentleman had no Reason, must God's
Word cease to be Truth, because he has no reason to be believe it? And what if
he had some Reason, but not so much as now he pretends to; and what if some
have a great deal more than he, as I have some Reason to believe there are that
have. Is it reasonable to say, God's Word is true or false, right or wrong,
according to the Measure of Reason that God has given to every Man. If this be
not unreasonable Nonsense, I know not what is? Thus is the Word of Truth
fulfilled, He that leans to his own Understanding is a Fool: That there is
Reason, to believe what God reveals is certain; and to believe what God reveals
because he reveals it, is to make God's Truth and Power the Reason and
Foundation of our Faith; but to believe what God reveals, only because it is
agreeable to our reason, is both irrational and absurd: For thereby we make our
foolish Reason, the Rule and Standard of God's Truth; and not only so, but of
the very Being of God himself; so that if God does reveal, that the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost is one God; and that this one God is the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, this Gentleman will not believe it; because his
Reason does not comprehend it. So that because he cannot find out the Almighty
to Perfection, therefore he will not believe him to be, what he says he is:
Thus when the Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not;
then the Light must cease to be Light, because the Darkness cannot comprehend
it. These are our Doctors of Reason, or rather our Unreasonable Doctors, who
professing themselves wise are become Fools, Romans 1. 22. If you tell me that
you cannot believe, except you have Reason so to do; because then your Faith
would be unreasonable, and unreasonable Men and faithless Men, are joined
together in Scripture, 2 These. 3. 2. I answer, the Unreasonableness of Unbelief
lies in this; That it makes God a Liar, who is Truth it self; and that Men
following the Dictates of their own Reason, cannot comprehend nor will their
Wills submit to God's Will. Hence it is, that Carnal Reason is Enmity against
God, and whereas you tell us page 6. Colume 2. of your Divine Unity asserted:
That the Reason you plead for, is not Carnal or Corrupt Reason, it being right
Reason you plead for: Yet it is evident enough that you are wrong,
notwithstanding all your Pretensions to right Reason; for you confine Carnal
Reason to the inordinate Appetites of the flesh, such as drunkenness and the
like; which the Reason of the Heathens did see plain enough, was very
unreasonable. Now in this you are not right, for the World by Wisdom knew not
God; 1 Cor 1. 21. Now the World never accounted these Immoralities their
Wisdom, at least the wise Men of the World never did: And I have reason to
believe, Panl had as good a stock of this Reason you plead for, before his
Conversion as your self Sir; or any of the other six Wise Masters of Reason:
For as touching the Law, he tells you, he was blameless; and does not the Law
forbid Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and the like; and yet at this time a day, he
was much about as great an Enemy to Christ, and the way of Salvation by him as
your self Sir. For he verily thought, he ought to do many things against the
Name of Jesus; God grant you may be, as great a Friend to our Lord Jesus Christ
before you dye, as Paul was. And it is very reasonable indeed Sir, that you
consider, what was the grand Error and Mistake, not only of Paul, but of the
whole Body of the Jews, who continued in Unbelief; they could not believe that
that same Jesus was the Lord of Life. For Paul tells you, that had they known
it, they would not have crucified him; they could see, that he was Man plain
enough, and a Holy Man too, but their Reason would not let them see that he was
more than Man; except such as God was pleased to reveal his Son unto, as in
Paul. But my Author in his Divine Unity asserted, tells us in page 5. Colume 2.
that these Lights which he had before mentioned, namely, Sense, Reason, and
Revelation, must not contradict each other; and says, Our Sense is given as a
ground to work upon; and our Reason as a means to assist, and complete the
Knowledge we receive by Sensation; and Revelation cannot be received, but by
Means of these two former. 'Till now; No, nor yet neither do I understand, that
Sense is a Foundation for Faith; nor that Divine Revelation is confined to our
Reason; nay, the contrary is Evident; and to say, or (think that it is so) is
to make God like our selves; but such Fools God himself will reprove, Psalm. 50.
21. Nor is our Reason, till truly rectified by the Spirit of God, a means to
receive the revealed Will of God; nay, it is the main thing, that opposes the
great Mystery of God's revealed Will in the Gospel: For the Carnal Mind is
Enmity against God, and cannot be Subject to the Law, nor revealed Will of God;
and that not only the Reason of the Drunkard; (as before mentioned) but that
which Men call true Reason; though it be far enough from being so: Nay, our
Author goes on in the greatness of his Reason, or rather in the madness of his
Folly; and says, We cannot without the greatest Folly, suppose a thing can be
revealed to us, contrary to our Sense or Reason; and thinks he has
sufficiently proved it, by saying God cannot tell us, White is black, or that
two and one is not three, or that a Debt that is freely forgiven is fully paid.

Now in this you are not Wise, for I will show you that God is greater than
Man, Job 33. 12. and there is nothing more true, and certain than this truth;
that the God of truth cannot Lie, and there is nothing more true, and self
Evident than that God calls that White, which the Wise Men of this World call
Black, opposing their Reason against the revealed Will of God, still setting
themselves against God; so that what God reveals to be Good, proud, foolish Man
will call Evil. Ay Sir, and as great Doctors of Reason as your self; or else
how come the Wise Men and Scribes, to have a hand in our Lords Death, and to
think they did God good Service, when they killed his Disciples. Doubtless,
their Reason such as it was, (and they might have as good a Stock of it as your
self Sir, for ought I know;) I say, their Reason thought it reasonable so to
do; and it is not long since, one of your Doctors of Reason told us, if I am
not misinformed, there was no God in his Leviathan; and for ought I know to
the contrary, he might have as good Reason so to do, as you have, to deny our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to be God: But our Author goes hobbling on,
according to that little blind Reason he has; and can any Man think it strange
that he stumbles, when he kicks at the very Fountain of Light and Life: OUr
Author is like one of Jeremiahs conceited Lords, spoken of Jeremiah 2. 31. and
therefore, he will not come to him, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, Colos. 2. 3. No, he is so far from that, that he will tell God
to his Face, that a Debt freely Forgiven, and yet fully Paid, is a
contradiction: For what does it signify, for God to reveal himself to be a God
pardoning iniquity, forgiving transgression and sin, and yet a God, that will
by no means clear the guilty. This is a contradiction in this Gentleman's
Reason, and therefore, cannot be true by Revelation; Short Accountant, Page the
Third, Reason the Third.

Yet least our short Accountant should Charge me with being too short, in given
up his Account of his Reasons; for his denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be over
All, God blessed for every more: I must step back to his 2d. Page, where after
he has given some Account of the unkind, (and if all be as he relates it)
unjustisible carriage of Bishop R. S. and the Church under his Care toward
him. He begins to lay down his Reasons, which I shall consider, without taking
any notice of their Relative Neglects one to another; I having nothing to do
with either the Bishop R. S. or the Church, over which he is Overseer. I not
knowing this short Accountant nor B. R. S. nor any of his Congregation, that I
know of; no, not so much as by Sight or Name, till since I see R. S. on this
Subject, and upon inquiring after that, I have been told his Name. To begin
therefore with the Account he gives of himself, he says, As to his Life and
Conversation, he does not know that any has blamed him for it, nor that he
has been charged with Immorality, which is so far very well, and is his Mercy
that God has not left him so far to himself, as to run with many others, into
the same excess of Riot: But he was not as he says, Able to bear the hearing
that Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin, was God by Nature, Coequal,
Coeternal with the Father. And here I cannot but observe the dark ingenuity of
the Gentleman, who foreseeing that any Christian would be ready to grant that
the humanity of Christ, which was Born of the Virgin, was not God; for then he
had not been Man, but God only; and so we should have been at a loss for a
Mediator: For there is one Mediator between God and Man, theresore he says, He
was not able to bear the Notion of a Compound, of part God, and part Man, to
make up one Person. I do not find the word, part God, and part Man in
Scripture, but the Scriptures do plain enough declare, that our Mediator is
true God, and true Man.

But now I shall consider my short Accountants Reasons, why he cannot believe
him to be so.

His first Reason is, because God is represented in Thousand of Places of
Scripture, to be One single Person or Being; and in some few mistaken and dark
places, that seem to infer a plurality of Persons in the Divine Being.

Now says our short Accountant page 3. and our Nameless Author page 7. colume
2. We must not oppose a few Texts against many, nor dark ones agaiust clear
ones. Very true, and for the same Reason, we must not oppose many against a
few, nor clear ones against dark ones; and here any reasonable, unbyast man,
may see how those Gentlemen contradict themselves. Our Author says page 4.
colume 1. That if a thing does not appear clear to him, he has no good cause
to affirm it. And by the same rule, if a thing appears dark to him, it is
presumptuous Folly in him to deny it; for a Man to deny that to be true, which
he does not know, or understand to be so by an infallible Rule; (And I hope
this Gentleman will not say, his Reason is infallible in the things of a Man,
much less in the things of God:) such a Man is guilty of equal Folly with him,
that affirms a thing to be true, though he do not know it to be so, but upon
Hearsay; or by the Dictates of his own weak and erring Reason. So my Author
and I are agreed in this, that Scripture cannot contradict it self. But,

I proceed to my short Accountants Second Reason, which is this, That this
Revelation of God as one single Being or Person, is agreeing to the Notion taat
I have of God in my Mind by my Reason; as most High, Best, and the like. Now,
though I do not pretend to any great stock, much less to be Master of infallible
Reason; yet I must own, that according to that measure of Reason that God has
given me, this Argument seems most unreasonable and absurd; and it is to
believe a Man's Notions are true, because they are his Notions; what reasonable
Proofs are these? For though I never saw Hobbs's Leviathan, yet I make no
doubt, but he had as good Reason as this, to deny the Being of God; for what is
this more or less, than for the Fool to say in his heart there is no God, and
then to introduce this Saying or Notion of his, and produce it as an Argument
or Reason, to prove that there is no God. I must needs say, that I have reason
to believe, that the Scripture does not say in vain, that as the Fool walks
by the way his Wisdom fails him, and he says to every one that he is a Fool;
Eccles. 10. 3. And what if I had not reason enough to see this Truth of God,
would the Truth of God be ever the less veiled for my Ignorance; I see my short
Accountant falls much too short, in giving a true, reasonable Account of his
Faith. But,

I shall pass to his Third Reason, and see if there be any more truth in that,
than in his two former; and here he tells us, What* is not true in Reason,
cannot be true by Revelation: For says he, (pray mark the reason of the
Gentleman's Argument) What is above my Capacity to understand, or contradictory
to my understanding, cannot be revealed to me: Surely, if our Accountant were
not blinded with being wise in his own Eyes, he would have seen his Ignorance
in this Argument quick enough. Why, good Sir* is your Capacity solarge, and
your Understanding so great, that the one cannot be enlarged, nor the other
enlightened; are there not ten thousand things which your reason does not
understand, which are certain Truths for all that; and is not God able to
enlarge your Capacity and your Understanding, and make that appear to be truly
reasonable, which now by reason of your Ignorance, you can see no reason for;
except you will say, that you have attained to the highest pitch of Reason and
Understanding that God can give you, and consequently that you are infallible
in all matters of Faith, and in the very Nature and Being of God? And if so,
you would do well to turn out that doting Fool at Rome, and place a wiser in
the Chair, and lay aside the Scriptures, and Simon Magus like, set up for some
great one in the World: I still see reason to guide my Reason by the
Scriptures, and therefore I believe, when I see a Man wise in his own Conceit,
I may have more hope of a Fool than of him: Now, though I have reason to
believe, that our short Accountant and our nameless Author, are Brethren in
this unreasonable Work, of denying that Jesus Christ is the living and true
God; as much as Simon and Levy were in their unreasonable Zeal: Yet if my
Reason fail not, I think they contradict each other: For our nameless Author
tells us, page 5. colume 1. that Reason is a Power or Faculty, of increasing
our Knowledge by Industry; whereby if we rightly proceed, we may come to an
absolute certainty in many things. So then Reason is capable of being
increased, and growing by Industry.

Hence it follows, that small measures of Reason, can give a Man but small
Certainty in many things; if in any thing, how contrary is this to my
Accountants third Reason? whose Capacity is not to be enlarged, nor can any
thing be true, that is contrary to his present Understanding; but when Reason
is thus improved, my Author himself tells me, and I have Reason to believe him,
that it is but a certainty in many things; so that some things are still
exempted from a certain Knowledge of by Reason; according to my Doctor of
Reason, his own Argument. And if any thing be exempted, surely Reason would
inform a Man, that the things of God should be some of those things; especially
those things that concern his very Being and Nature.

But, to return to our short Accountants Third Reason, for I would not hide any
of his most comely Parts, nor diminish any of his strongest Reasons, he
proceeds in his aforesaid pretended Reason, and tells us, Though he is bound to
believe whatever God says is True, yet it is because I have Reason so to do:
But says he, I cannot believe the thing God says, till I know what he says.
You are very right Mr. Doctor, the Devil will tell the truth sometimes; but he
adds, nor well believe; (pray Mark) nor well believe God says so and so, till
by Reason I am assured it is true: Reason can never assent to that which
appears unreasonable, nor can I otherwise, than by Reason assure my self, that
the Scripture is a Divine Revelation. These are his very words, for as I said
before, I will not hide his strong Reasons: The first part of this Third Reason
I have Answered already, but he cannot well believe God says so and so, till
by Reason he is persuaded it is true: If Abraham had had such a Conceit of his
Reason, he might have Lived and Dyed in Unbelief; for ought I know to the
Contrary: For what Reason had he, to believe, he should have a Son when his own
Body was as good as Dead; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of
Women; but the revealed Word of God, and he did not say this is according to my
Reason, therefore I will believe what God says; no, he Argued quite otherwise;
and said, though I see no Reason for this, but a great deal against it; as much
as ever our Accountant can pretend to be Master of. Yet, because it is told me
by that God that cannot Lie, and Almighty power being engaged to perform it,
therefore I do believe it, and therefore it is said Romans 4. 18. he believed
against hope, and therefore against reason; but he would have had hope if he
had had Reason; for Hope will follow Reason, and it would be an unreasonable
piece of Nonsense, and a contradiction for a Man to say, I have Reason to
believe I shall have such a thing, but I have no hopes of it; Romans 4. 18. Yet
our Accountant will needs set up for a Master of Reason, though he knows not
what he speaks, nor where of he does affirm:

Besides, in this my Accountant gives no more Honor and Glory to God, by
believing; then he or any Man else, may give to the Devil: For when the Father
of Lies speaks truth, (and that you know he will do sometimes) then you may
believe him; if by Reason you are assured it is true; but God is to be Believed
on the Authority of his own Word. It is no wonder, that Men discover themselves
to be Fools, when no less Folly will satisfy them, then to kick against him,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Colos. 2. 3.

But, I pass to my Accountants Fourth Reason, in the aforesaid Third Page, By
Revelation says he, we are taught, and it is no way contrary to Reason, that
this one God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ is this one God; Joh. 17. 1. Very true; and how forcible are
right Words? but what does your Arguing either prove or reprove from this? We
are Taught by the Scriptures of truth, that Jesus Christ is the True God, and
Eternal Life, and that the true God is Jesus Christ; 1 Ep. John 5. 20. and John
17. 1. Titus 2. 13. Now, whether this be contrary to my Accountants Reason or
no, it is nevertheless true for all that; but I see no Reason to deny the
Father to be God for all this, and if I should, yet my Reason and the Inference
would be as Justifiable as his; in denying the Son to be God.

His Fifth Reason you have in his aforesaid Third Page, (for you must know they
being small, will lie in a little room; Whenever God the Father, and Christ his
Son are spoken of in Scripture, they are spoken of as two distinct Persons and
Beings, as Joh. 7. 16. It Is certain they are so, as the Scripture declares them
to be; yet the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are but one God for all
that. And he adds, Though they are said to be One in some Sense, yet never but
in such a Sense as God and others may be said to be One, viz. in Love,
Agreement and Will. One would wonder, that a Man pretending to Reason and
Religion, should not be ashamed to tell the World such an unreasonable untruth
as this; what! is Christ and God the Father no otherwise One, than God and
others may be said to be One; Namely, in Will and Love? Pray Sir read the 6
ver. of the First of Hebrews, there God commands all his Angels to Worship him.
Will you be so unreasonable as to tell me, that God is so One with any of his
Creatures, a^ to Command all the Angels of Heaven to Worship them? the Man
Jesus only excepted; who by virtue of his Union, and Personal Oneness with God
the Son; our Mediator being God Man, he must have this Honor: For has not God
in the first Command, forbid the worshipping any God but himself; and does he
not again say, He will not give his Glory to another, nor his Praise to graven
Images? So then though Christ be the true God, he is not another God, and truth
it self says, that it is the Will of God that all Men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father; John 5. 23. And why then, will you discover so
much Ignorance of the Scripture, and prove so evidently that your Wisdom, your
Reason, is but Folly, instead of being a sure guide to lead you to the
Knowledge of God; and again, Christ tells you, if your Reason will but let you
believe him, that as the Father knows me, even so know I the Father, Joh. 10.
15. And pray Sir, will your Reason tell you, that God and any others, which you
speak of, are so One, whether Angels or Men, as that thereby they know God, as
God knows them; surely God knows all his Creatures perfectly. Do any of his
Creatures know him so? Thus we see vain Man would be counted wise, though it be
far from him, and he is as extravagant as the Wild Asses Colt; but it is not to
be much wonderd at, upon due consideration of the matter; for how can it be
otherwise, when a Man is so far left of God to himself, as to be wise in his
own Eyes; and so neglect to Live in a Continued humble dependancy upon him, who
gives Wisdom to the simple, and Understanding to them that have no Knowledge;
this was the sin, and Folly of the Pharisees, who because they said, they did
see, therefore their Sin and Folly remained with them, Joh. 9. 41. And our Lord
tells us in the 39th. ver. That for Judgment I came into this World, that those
that were blind, and so made willing by Grace, to be led in the way they knew
not; according to that Gracious Promise in Isaiah 42. 16. should see; and that
they which did see, and were so conceited with their own Reason and
Righteousness, as not to submit to the Righteousness and Wisdom of God, should
be made blind and Dye in their Sins: Again, our Lord tells you in Joh. 5. 21.
For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them; even so the Son
quickens whom he will. Now Sir, will your Reason tell you? or if it do tell
you, and so delude you; can it prove to you by Sound, reasonable Truth; that
any Created being, whether Angel or Man, can quicken whom he will; and is this
such a Oneness, as God and others may be said to be One.

Unless I find some Truer, and so more reasonable Arguments then these; I shall
never be your Disciple: Therefore I shall pass on, and Consider our Accountants
6th. 7th. and 8th. Reasons in the 4th. Page; for they are all of a sort, and if
one be confuted the rest must Fall. He tells us, that those things are
attributed to the Father, which cannot possibly be said of the Son, as that he
is greater than all; and those things are said of the Son, which cannot
possibly be attributed to the Father; or to the One that is God, as that he was
conceived, grew in Wisdom and Stature, and many other such like things. Which
is very true, and herein my Author speaks Reasonably; for it would have been a
very Irrational thing for him, to have thought of imposing his Cunningly
devised Fables upon the Weakest Christians; if he did not Cunningly and
Deceitfully Mention some Truths. For it is no new thing for the Enemies of the
Gospel, to hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. But Good Sir, what sort of Logic
is this? some things are Attributed to the Father, which cannot be said of the
Son; and some things are Attributed to the Son, which cannot be Attributed to
the Father, which clearly shows that they are distinct; that the Father is not
the Son, and that the Son is not the Father: But it does not follow from hence,
that the Son is not God; and whereas you say the Scripture tells us, that the
Father is Greater than all; the same also it says of the Son, for it is
expressly said in Romans 9. 5. That he is over All, therefore Greater than All;
God blessed for evermore. And for those many Scriptures, that speak of Christ,
his being conceived, growing in Wisdom and Stature, and the Like; which cannot
be Attributed to God the Father: It is our unspeakable Comfort and happiness,
and shows that Christ God the Son, did really take our Nature upon him
according to the Scriptures; Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham; and his being
Conceived and Born of the Virgin, clearly proves that it was not a shadow, or
likeness of Man that he took, but real Man; and in regard it is said, that he
took on him the Seed of Abraham; And in the aforesaid Hebrews 2. ver. 14. it is
said, As the children are made partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the the same: Which clearly shows him to be God; for who
else must this he be, who took on him the Seed of Abraham? and took on himself
part of Flesh and Blood? It must be some Being superior to the Angels
themselves; for the Apostle speaks of it, as an Act of Sovereignty and Good
Pleasure in this Mighty He; in this Almighty Being; who did not take the Nature
of Angels, but did take the Seed of Abraham: So my Accountant and I are agreed
in this: That God the Son did take our Nature upon him: And in this Sense. God
was made Man; The Word was made flesh. I suppose my Accountant will discover so
much Reason, as to own that this He; the Apostle speaks of was not Man nor
Angel: For then he had spoken Nonsense, and his Words would have run thus,
verily an Angel or a Man, took not on him the Nature of Angels; but the Seed of
Abraham: So that it is Evident, this He, was neither Angel nor Man; but a being
infinitely superior to both. But,

My Author goes on to his 7th. Reason, and says, That there can be no
Essential or Personal Union between God and a Creature; Finite and* Infinite;
For the being of God does not require the being of a Creature to his being. A
very unreasonable assertion, and therefore must have some thing reasonable
joined with it; to gull the simple and unwary Reader: There can be no Personal
Union between God and a Creature he says; and pray why so? why, because the
being of God, does not require the being of a Creature to his being; or any
thing but himself, to make up his Person or Self. This is a sort of Logic,
that the Gentleman may think, may down well enough with Mechanics; and such
like ordinary Fellows: But it is strange, the Doctors of Reason should send
such stuff as this is abroad for sound Reason; but I forget my Accountant, and
his Brother the Nameless Author are Doctors of Reason; and perhaps they think,
they have ingrost all Reason into their own Hands; and if so, we must take what
they will let us have, and at their own price too; or else one would think,
they could not be so vain and Foolish as to tell us, there can be no Personal
Union between God and a Creature. Surely, Almighty Power is able to take a
Creature into Personal Union with himself, and as for that Nonsensical
pretended Reason, that the being of God does not require the being of a
Creature to his being: What Sense or Reason is there in it? If it had been
necessary to his being, it must have been Eternal as God himself is; and then
it could not be a Creature, for no Creature is Eternal; and then all the
Condescension, Grace, and Love, that the Scripture speaks of; in Gods taking
our Nature upon him; must vanish away into Idle Tales, or be led Captive at the
Heels of our Accountants foolish Reason: Pray try a little, how this Argument
will look in other Cases, the being of God does not require the being of any
Creatures to make up his being, happiness and blessedness; therefore he cannot,
or will not descend to the Work of Creation; and when they are all made, they
cannot all of them add one Tittle to his Essential Glory: Therefore they were
not made for, nor are to his Glory now made. Where is the wise Man? where is
the Scribe? 1 Cor. 1 19, 20. God will destroy the wisdom of the Wise, and bring
to nothing the understanding of the prudent; according to that old threatening
against the Wise Men of this World: Isa. 29. 14. That wisdom should perish from
the wise, and the understanding of prudent Men shall be hid. But,

I pass on to his Eighth Reason, where I find our Accountant having past all
bounds of ^ight Reason, will needs break through all bounds of Truth and Modesty
too; and therefore tells us, Whatever is said of Christ in Scripture, is said
of him as Man. But, he presently adds to cover this Story, That the shift so
many use, of Christ speaking so and so as God, and so and so as Man, is
unscriptural and Foolish; and sounds no better then this, that Peter as Peter
denied his Master; but Peter as John did not deny his Master. We look upon it
as a prudential piece of Justice, to suspect Common Liars when they speak
Truth; and therefore I hope, our Accountant will not think it any dishonor to
him; If I do by him, as the Noble Bereans did by Paul; search the Scriptures
before I receive this assertion for Truth or sound Reason: But upon a Second
view of this Eighth Reason, I find there is not one Scripture mentioned, and
therefore I may very honestly; retort his assertion back upon him again; and
tell him, this assertion is very Foolish and unscriptural: But if I can give no
other Answer than this, I know my Accountant will out Reckon me by abundance;
for he is a Man of Reason, and perhaps may be as ready to say to me concerning
Reason, as Zedekiah did to Micaiah concerning the Spirit; and ask which way
went Reason from him to me? 2 Chronicles. 18. 23. But what faith the Scriptures in
this Case? for by them my Author thinks to dishonor our Lord Jesus Christ,
with no less then Robbing him of his Divine Nature; Isaiah 9. 9. For unto us a
Child is Born: There his Humanity is spoken of, but read out the verse, and see
if your Reason has not robbed you of all good Manners and Modesty. You will
not dare to give the Lie to the Spirit of God, and there he is called the
wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father The Prince of
Peace; see ikewise Rev. 1. 17, 18. Now Sir, will you have the impudence, to
give the Spirit of God the Lie in these two Scriptures; or will you suffer your
Reason, to possess you with so much Madness and Folly; as to charge the Spirit
of God with Folly, and say he speaks Nonsense; choose you whither? But,

Our Accountant goes on, and I am willing to follow him; being willing to find
out the reason of a thing; and he tells us which he calls his Ninth Reason,
Page 4th. That though Christ be truly said to be the Son of God, yet he is never
in Scripture caelled God the Son. Now would I give you a Scripture, to prove
that he is called God the Son; but you have told me already such Scriptures are
dark, but I cannot help that; they are Scriptures notwithstanding, and the
darkness you speak of, lies in the weakness of your understanding; and the
Folly of your pretended Reason. Besides, the Scriptures were Written for this
very purpose, to give Wisdom to the simple; but those that are Wise in their
own conceit, may be sent away as they came: For you know God himself tells us,
that he sends the rich empty away. Pray, Sir Read Heb. 1. 8. but unto the Son
he says, Thy Throne O God is for Ever, etc. I think this is not so dark a
saying, but you may understand him to be called God the Son in those Words; and
admitting it were dark or hard, as those said, who told our Lord his sayings
were hard; when he spoke of giving them his Flesh to eat: And no doubt, but
they were as much above their understandings, and as contrary to their Reason;
as the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, is above or against yours; yet were
they the Words of Truth it self for all that. And Solomon tells us, Prove. 1. 5,
6. A wise Man will hear and increase Learning: And for this Reason among
others, to understand the Words of the Wise and their dark sayings. But our
Accountant, and his Brother the Nameless Author are Wise Men; whether it be in
their own eyes or others, no matter for that. Their Reason is the Touchstone
of Gods Truth, and therefore whatever God reveals, must First come and make its
acknowledgments to Mr. Licenser General: our Authors Reason; and if it pass
Muster in his Foolish Noddle, it may go for Truth; but if not, (as what
reasonable Man can think, that the Mysteries of God should be comprehended by
the Foolish, corrupted, unreasonable, though pretended Reason of Man:
Especially, seeing the Carnal Mind is Enmity against God and the Scripture;
yea, Reason it self may inform us, that none knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God and he to whom he reveals him.) Why then it must pass through the
strict Inquisition of the Doctor of Reasons Queries? as, First, How can these
things be? Secondly, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Joh. 6. 52.
These are hard sayings who can hear them; ver. 60. Or, Thirdly, Thou art not
yet fifty Years old, and have thou seen our Father Abraham? And if our Lord
stand to it, and assert his Divine Nature by saying, before Abraham was I am;
they will will be ready to Stone him for a Blasphemer; because they knew his
Mother, and his supposed Father according to the Flesh; therefore he cannot
speak the Truth, it will not pass with Doctor Reason: Therefore, Gods Truth
must be condemned for Folly and Nonsense: But woe unto those Men that will call
evil good, or good evil; or truth error, or error truth; when God rises up to
contend with those Men, he will make them know, he is not such a one as
themselves.

But our Accountant after all his Pains to build a Babel's Tower, undermines it
all at once in the winding up of his Reasons: For he says in his Tenth Reason,
and his last but one; That the ascribing the Divine Natures incommunicable
Perfections, and worship to one and another; or a third Person or self,
necessarily infers a Plurality of Gods; and is a breach of the First
Commandment; has many evil tendencies, and is the Ground of all the Idolatry,
Antichristianism and Paganism.

This is a high kick indeed, for here our Accountant charges the Angels with
Folly; and not only so, but all the blessed Company in Heaven; Nay, that is not
all, but rather then not do his own business effectually, he will enter into
Judgment with God himself. Well, however B. R. S. or any under his care may
slight him or his Book, as thinking neither worth Answering; yet I must needs
say he is a stout bold Fellow, for he dares to charge God himself with
contradiction; and with being accessory to the Breach of his own first Command:
For according to our Accountants Reason, he suffers the Worship and Worshippers
in Heaven, to infer a Plurality of Gods; and to lay a Foundation for all
Idolatry, Antichristianism and Paganism. For in Revelations 5. we have an
Account of the Worship of Heaven; and in the 11, 12, 13. Verses, we have an
Account of the Angels, and the Beasts and Elders giving Blessing, Honor, Glory
and Power to him; that sits upon the Throne and untothe Lamb for ever and
ever, ver. 14. and the 4 beasts say Amen to all this, and the 24 Elders fall
down and Worship him that lives for ever and ever: Here is Divine honor and
Worship, Given to him that sits on the Throne; and the same in the same
breath, given unto another; to use my Authors own Words, Even to the Lamb for
ever and ever. And yet God does not charge them with Idolatry, nor making to
themselves another God: No, this is the Worship of Heaven, and must continue so
for ever and ever. Sure, if our Accountant had any good hope of Worshipping
with this blessed Company in Heaven; he would endeavor to imitate them while
here on Earth: A Man had need have a good Stock of Patience, as also of Faith
and every Grace of the Holy Spirit; to live in a continual dependancy on him,
that gives Wisdom to such simple Ones as he pleases; and understanding to as
many of them as have no knowledge, as seems good to Sovereign pleasure; as
also humbly to remember, that the Ostrich hides her Eggs in the Sand, and
forgets that the Wild Beast may crush them; because God has deprived her of
Wisdom: Or else a Man indu'd but with an Ordinary measure of Reason, and not
Balast'd with the aforesaid Graces of Gods Holy Spirit; could not forbear the
resenting this unreasonable assertion, so as to give my Accountant a Character,
much below that of Master of Reason: But I may not give ill Language, having
not so Learned Christ. Neither is it fit for a Man of a mean capacity, to say
to such a Learned Gentleman thou art a blockhead; nor shall I say any thing of
the Impudency that there is, in bringing in an Impeachment and Charge of the
highest Treason and Idolatry; that Can be against the whole Court of Heaven,
the Blessed Him that sits upon the Throne and the Lamb (who is worthy of all
blessing, Honor, Power and Glory;) not being exempted: This is such a piece of
Fool hardiness, as none but those that dare Run, upon the thick bosses of Gods
Buckler can be guilty of. I hope, our Accountant will not discover so much
Folly; as to attempt to excuse himself of an error in this, by Quoting 1 Chronicles.
29. 20. Where it is said, All the Congregation blessed the Lord God of their
Fathers, and bowing their heads Worshipped the Lord and the King. That being
but an External or Civil Worship, which the People paid to the King; or that is
due from Inferiors to Superiors: And our Accountant himself tells me, he
could not bear the ascribing the same Glory to Christ in Prayer, which is due
to the Father; whereby he publicly enters his dissent and protest against the
Worship and Worshippers, and Worshipped also in Heaven: For the Truth is, what
ever Worship Kings and such may receive from their Subjects in this World; yet
there never was, nor shall be any King, Lord, or Potentate; that shall receive
Honor, Glory Blessing and Praise from all the Worshippers both Angels and Men,
that are in Heaven for ever and ever; but he who is the only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ who is the true God and Eternal
Life; 1 John 5. 20. It is strange, that there should not be one Doctor of
Reason among all this Blessed Company; to imitate Athaliah in crying out,
Treason, Treason, Idolatry, Idolatry, contradiction, Nonsense; because the
right Heir is Crowned, and receives the Glory of the Kingdom.

But upon Second thoughts, it will not appear so strange as true; for God has
not chosen many wise Men of this world, and those few that are chosen from
among them, must first become Fools that they may be truly Wise; For God has
chosen the Foolish things of this World to confound the wise; 1 Cor. 20, 27, to
the end. Thus we see the Scriptures made good, The wisdom of this World is
Foolishness with God: For it is Written he takes the Wise in their own
Craftiness, 1 Cor. 3. 18.

There is yet another thing, which our Accountant will needs call his Eleventh
Reason; or Stone in this Babel Building and his last: But whether it may be
called his Top Stone or Bottom? no matter for that, such as it is take it word
for word, Page 5th. that it is, says he, Great folly and boldness, to affirm
any thing Concerning God; which is unreasonable or absurd, yea, which we do not
understand to be true: Surely, what ever mistakes and Errors the Trinitarians
may be guilty of, yet it is certain they cannot be guilty of greater; not
indeed, so great Boldness and Folly as our Accountant is; as we have seen but
now in his last Argument. For I do not find that they enter into Judgment with
God, nor charge the most high foolishly, nor with folly; and I pray Sir, upon
second thoughts tell me, which is the greatest Folly and boldness, to believe
what God declares of himself, to be reasonable and true, though we do not
understand it; or to give God the Lie, and and tell him that what he declares
of himself is false, unreasonable, and absurd; because we do not understand it;
Such an Answer as this from a Servant to a Master, would be Accounted Impudent
boldness, and we see there is nothing more common among Men, whose
Understandings and Reason differ greatly yet, far enough are they from
differing infinitely; yet among Men, it is no new thing for the Wise and
Learned, to understand and know that to be true and Reasonable; which the more
Ignorant are rather more ready to wonder at, than they are able to give a
Demonstration of; Yet are these Gentlemen so confident in their own Reason,
that they will give the Lie to God himself; if he tell them the Father, the
Word, and Holy Ghost are One: So careful are these Gentlemen, that their Faith
may not stand in the Power of God but in the Wisdom of Men. But whether it be
right in the sight of God, to believe or obey Men rather than God? judge ye;
Acts. 4. 19. I have now done with my short Accountant, the rest of his Book
being merely Historical, of what did pass between him and B. R. S. and the
Church of which he was a Member; but I have nothing to do with that, my
Business being only to contend for that Faith; which was once delivered to the
Saints, and to believe the Truth as it is in Jesus: I shall therefore now, take
a view of our Nameless Author again; and see if he can produce any sound
Reason, to persuade us to deny our Lord Jesus Christ. For I take it for
granted, that it is as great a denial of him to deny him to be as he is, God
over all blessed for ever more; as it is to deny him to be our redemer: For
indeed the Holy One of Isarel is the Redeemer thereof.

But on a Second view of our Author in his Divine Unity asserted; I do not find
any other Reasons, than what I have already considered, and find in my
Accountant, save only he is somewhat larger; and in his 10th. page Colume 1. he
would deny the Divinity of our Lord, and prove it too if he didbut know how;
from this Argument, that Man is made after God's own Image. Now, says he, If
God be a Trinity and Man be his Image, we may find an Image of that Trinity in
our selves: But he excludes the Body from any part of this Image, which may
look tolerable enough at first view because God is a Spirit; and if he had
stopped here, he might have carried his Sophistry off pretty fair; but the Wits
of our day must over shoot themselves: He tells you the Reason why the Body is
excluded, because says he, It is imperfect; and there is no Imperfection with
God: Good Sir, did you expect to find the Soul of Man a perfect Image of God,
when you first entered on this Argument; really you might well have spared your
Pains here, and have given the Spirit of God the Lie once more; and you should
have as good Reason so to do, as you have to give our Lord himself the Lie, as
you do in your 15th. page colume 2. where you say, The same worship which is
due to the Father, is not to be given to Christ; but that which may be given to
a Creature for God's sake. Wherein you do in plain English give Truth it self
the Lie; for he hth told us, that all Men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father; as has been already proved by Scripture, John 5. 23. and by
the Example of the Worshippers in Heaven: But if you had been sincerely
looking, for a faint Resemblance of the Image of God in Man as a Trinity; to
say nothing of that Moral Likeness, that God at first stamped on Man's Nature of
himself, which consisted in Righteousness and true Holiness; which indeed was
the greatest Resemblance in Man to God; And yet we have reason to believe, that
the Angels were every whit as much like God, as in this sense Man was.
Therefore it must be something else in the make of Man, that did bear some
Image of God; for which cause it is said, he made Man in his own Image; and if
you had not wilfully shut your Eyes you could not but see, that the Scripture
speaks of Body, Soul, and Spirit in Man; as the Apostle Paul prays for the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 5. 23. that They might be sanctified throughout in Body,
Soul and Spirit. And if there be such a thing as Body, Soul and Spirit in Man,
then here is some faint Resemblance in Man of a Trinity in God. I say a faint
Resemblance, for I am not so void of Reason; as to think that a finite weak Man
can be a perfect Image of God. Yet our Author, to show what a Talent of Wit he
has; spends all his 10th. page both columes, and part of 11th. to prove that
which no Body denies; or that which is foreign to the purpose: But in his
11th. page his Wit runs over, and his Invention will run too fast for his
Reason do what he can; for he says, That cannot be called Generation or
Origination, which never began to be generated or originated; and if he had
stopped here, he might have danced in the Dark; and they that have no Eyes
could never have seen him: But the Gentleman's Invention hangs in the Light of
his Reason. He tells us the Reason is, That which never began to be a doing was
never done; and therefore ETERNAL GENERATION must be ETERNAL NONSENSE. Well
argued most Learned Doctor, a Man would be ready to think you were a Pensioner
to Hobbs, to make way for, and gain Proselytes to his Leviathan: For by this
Argument, that which never began to be cannot have a Being; and then the Fool
may ask us, Where is your God? and the Truth is, the Attribute of God's
Eternity is as much above, and out of your Reason, as the Doctrine of the
Trinity; and if you tell me there is a difference between a Being and an Act.

I Answer, that an Eternal Act is as much without a Beginning, as an Eternal
Being; and it is equally as great a piece of Nonsense, and as derogatory to the
Glory of God, to say God was before he acted; as to say he acted before he was.
Really Gentlemen, but only for the great Names and Titles, by which you are
pleased to dignifie, and distinguish your selves from the common People; such
as Masters of Reason, Learning, Scholarship, and the like; or else a Man may
find more sound Reason, among a few Men of the meanest Employments and meanest
Capacities; than in an whole Conclave of such Doctors as you are. For I pray
you Sir, tell me without Heat and Prejudice; and with solid substantial Reason,
what a kind of senseless, lifeless something worse than nothing, must you
snppose God to be; if you could suppose him to be without, or before he acted:
Has your great Learning spoiled your Memory so much, as to make you forget
that common Maxim, that where there is Life there is Motion. Sure, that Cause
must be very desparately defective and unreasonably bad, that necessarily runs
Men upon Atheism or something worse; and so much the worse, because they
pretend to plead for Reason all that while. Nay, the Considerator in his Letter
to H. H. is so confident, but foolish enough (God knows) as to tell the World;
they were always too hard for the Trinitarians, at these two Weapons Reason and
Scripture. But hitherto we have found them too short in their sound Reasoning,
we shall try what strength they have by the Scriptures in due place.

In the mean time it may not be an unreasonable Work, to enquire what true
Reason is; that we may not be as Men beating the Air, crying out great is
Humane Reason; and at the same time scarce know what true Reason is. And if the
Doctors of Reason would not be offended, I would tell them what I take it to
be. It is a good Gift of God, which he is pleased to bestow in some measure on
most of the Children of Men; whereby we are enabled to discern the Connection or
Dependancy, that one thing has upon another.

Hence it follows, that Knowledge is not Reason, neither can Reason work
without knowledge; any more than a Man can walk in the Air, or a Carpenter can
build a House without a Foundation. Hence it follows, that the greatest
Scholars are not always the wisest Men; as one of their own has lately told
us, as good, and as great a one perhaps as any this day living: Says he, There
are a great many Scholars, who are carried only by their Books. They know much
and therefore can tell a great deal; as you know every Fool can tell as he is
told: But for matter of sound Reason, whereby they are enabled to draw, just
and Reasonable conclusions from known and certain Premises; If it be never so
little out of their Book Road; and for which they have not as yet, consulted an
Author. Truly, a Man may let a great many of these Gentlemen alone; hence it
comes to pass, for we are now discoursing about Reason; it is a power of
drawing just and right conclusions from known and certain Premises: Hence it is
that though Learning is in it self, a very great, and very good Gift of God,
and a great accomplishment to a Man; and therefore to be highly prized by them
that have it, and to be honored by them that have it not: Yet great
Scholarship, cannot deliver some Men from being great Blockheads; for Sovereign
Pleasure will bestow his Gifts to whom, and how he pleases; to one a Word of
Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; 1 Cor. 12. 8. How
preposteriously then do those Gentlemen go to Work, that would Measure the
being and properties of the infinite God, by their weak and imperfect Reason;
of which there are as many degrees it may be, as there are Men in the World;
and which can no more Work of it self, without some Knowledge to Work upon;
then an Artist can Work without Tools, or Matter to Work upon. And it is
impossible for Man to have any saving Knowledge of God, but by Revelation; and
there are but three Ways, that ever God revealed himself by to Men; they are
his Works, his Word, and by his Holy Spirit; and it is not our Reason, as it is
a Faculty or Power in us now corrupted; that can gather any true or saving
Knowledge of God, as he is in himself or will be to us, from his Works of
Creation and Providence: No, nor from his Word neither, without the Aid of his
Holy Spirit; and that in an especial manner: We see this by the Heathen, who
were as great Masters of Reason, as any of our present Pretenders; and yet were
far enough from a true Knowledge of God; and how could they, for who knows the
Mind of God, much less the Nature, but the Spirit of God; and he to whom he
reveals him: But let us consider, the Knowledge that God gives us of himself by
Creation, and see what improvements Reason can make of it; we see a visible
World, and therefore by the Apostles Argument in Romans 1. 19. 20. we may
conclude, that there was some being, that gave being to those Visible,
Changeable things; and that this being must be, before all those things that do
appear; else he could not give them being: Thus arguing by Reason, from the
Effects to the Cause; we rise from the Men now in being, to the first Man that
was Made; and so likewise of all other Created beings, to the first of them:
And so likewise of the Heavens and the Earth, and all that therein is; whose
very being declare they had a Maker, who is God; for he that Makes all things
is God.

Hence we may Reasonably conclude, that this God is an Almighty Infinitely Wise
God; yea, that he is a Merciful God, for his Mercy is Written in visible
Characters over all his visible Works; and yet it must be acknowledged, that
all the Reason that the greatest Doctors of it ever had; could never gather any
Reasonable hope of the Pardon of their Sin, or of Eternal Life; by the
Revelation that God has made of himself by the Works of Creation and
Providence. If you tell me, you may hope for Mercy, because you are the Works
of his hands; his Mercy being over all his Works. I Answer, the Devils may as
Reasonably hope for Mercy as you, or I, upon this Account; for they are
Creatures, and so are we; and they are Sinners and so are we. So that there is
a necessity for God, to reveal himself to us by some more Clearer Light, then
that of Creation; if you and I, ever come to a true and saving Knowledge of
him; this necessarily leads us to consider, what Revelation God makes of
himself in his Word. But,

Before I come to Consider that I would a little inquire, what further
improvements Reason can make of the Work of Creation to find out God; and
Counting things One by One, to find out the Account as we have began; we may
come to know that God is an Eternal being, without beginning of days, or end of
time; and it is necessary he should be so, else he could not give being to all
other beings; neither could such an Infinite being arise, or spring out of
nothing; but he is a Self Sufficient All-sufficient being without beginning.
Now though Reason, rightly Arguing from the Effects to the Cause; may find out
the Eternal Power and Godhead (as the Apostle speaks) that is know; that God
is an Eternal being: Yet all the Doctors of Reason, can never show how it can
be so; any more than they can show how the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost
can be One God: And I do hereby promise, (not to trouble the Learned about such
impossiblities as either of these are;) that on the same Day in the Morning, of
which our Doctors of Reason, shall give me a reasonable Demonstration; how a
being can be without abeginning: I will, in the Afternoon of that same day
before the Sun goes down, give them as Reasonable a Demonstration; how the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost are one God. For when you have Magnified
your Reason, as far as you will or can, you have but two ways to Work it by;
either you must argue from the Cause to the Effect, or from the Effect to the
Cause; Not from the Cause to the Efect, for the very Supposition of a Cause,
destroys the Nature of a Being without a Beginning; nor can you find it out, by
arguing from the Effect to the Cause; for where there is no Cause all Effects
must cease. So that the Argument is very Rational, both against you that will
not believe God to be as he is; because your Reason cannot comprehend him:
Whereas if you could, he must cease to be God; for an Infinite and Eternal
Being, cannot be comprehended by a Finite, Foolish Man; As also against the
greater Atheist, who deny the being of God; because they say, there can be no
being without a Beginning; but that God is, all his wondrous Works decl^re; for
there could be no Effects, If there were not a first Cause to Produce those
Effects; and he himself must be without a Cause, or else he must be but an
Effect of some other Cause; and that destroys his Eternal Power and Godhead. So
that as the Works of God do clearly show that he is, and that he is and Eternal
Being; yet all the Reason in Man by the utmost searching, can never find out
the Almighty so to perfection; as to give a Demonstration how he can be so. So
that, however these Gentlemen of Reason cry out against Mysteries; yet this one
Attribute of Gods Eternity is such a Mystery, as all the Worshippers in Heaven
both Angels and Men, shall adore and admire God for; as well as for his other
excellencies and perfections, even to Eternity. And it is observable, that in
Rev. 4. ver. 8. There the four Beasts that stood round about the Throne adore
God for his Eternity; and they rest not day and night, saing, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God Almighty; which was, and is, and is to come, those Blessed Creatures
adore and believe, what they could not give a Reason for; and for that very
Reason they admire, and adore God so much the more: Whereas if they could have
told how God was, they would have declared it; and not Ananias and Saphira
like, have kept back any part of their knowledge. For we find in all their
Thanksgivings, they go as far as they can; in Rev. 5. ver. 9. in their new Song
which they Sing, they say; the Lamb is worthy to take the Book, and open the
Seals thereof; and when they Praise him for Redeeming them, and making them
Kings and Priests; they rest not there, but go as far as they can, even to the
Foundation of all; saying, who has Loved us and washed us in his blood; and
thereby made us Kings, and Priests unto our God: Where by the way we may
observe, that all Gods Kings and Priests are made so, by being washed in Christ
Blood; and not by their imperfect following Christ Example, of which more in
due place.

Upon the whole matter, let our Men of Reason make never so much Noise and
Clamor, against the Doctrine of the Trinity, as being contrary to Reason and
after they have darkened Counsel; by Multitudes of Words without Knowledge, yet
it is evident, that all their Reasons, may be reduced to one which lies with
equal force against the very being of God; that is, their Reason cannot
comprehend how three can be One: And I will for once venture to assert, not
knowing any Law nor Reason against it; that their Reason can as little
comprehend and their understanding is as much at a Loss, to know how a being
can be without a beginning: So that notwithstanding their pretentions to
Christianity, they are but Factors to Atheism; for if the Atheist can but
prove, that every Man's Reason is his sufficient Rule for what he ought to
believe; and Practice, he will gain a great Point; and the greatest Fools will
never want Arguments, to justify their Foolish Notions and Practices. For if
the worst of Fools, (an Atheist) come and say, there is no God; he will pretend
Reason for it: Though it be the most irrational thing, that a Reasonable being
can be guilty of; For there can be no beings that we see, but either made
themselves or were produced by some other Cause or sprang out of nothing; or
else it is Eternal without beginning or Cause: Surely, we our Selves did not
make our Selves, nor could something of it self, spring out of nothing; much
less could nothing, produce something: Therefore the Heavens and the Earth,
could not make themselves; neither could such a Fabric of it self, arise out
of nothing; therefore it must have a Creator, that by an Almighty Power, could
speak things into being; without matter to Work upon: Or else the Heavens and
the Earth must be Eternal, without Beginning or Cause; and then they yield
their Argument, and contradict themselves. If they say, the Heavens and the
Earth, did by Chance jumble into the order in which they now are, out of a
confused Chaos of matter, pre existant to the Heavens and the Earth; (to say
nothing of the strangeness that it should not jumble back again, into the same
Confused Chaos; by the same Chance before this time of day.) I Demand, how this
confused Chaos, or disorderly matter came into being; out of which this Heaven
and Earth, Chopped into into such an orderly Frame? If they tell me that this
confused matter was Eternal,

I answer, That this is so sottish and blockish, that none but Madmen or Fools
can be guilty of it; for who but those that have no reason, or having had it
have now lost it, will deny an Infinite, Eternal Being; and yet attribute these
Perfections to nothing, or confused Matter which is worse than nothing. But
these are not the Fools I am concerned with, I am treating with Gentlemen; a
Title too good, and too great for the greatest Atheist in the World, however
they may assume it to themselves; or their flattering Trencher dependants may
as treacherously, as well as cowardly give it unto them. But the Gentlemen I am
concerned with, are Men of Reason; only their great Learning has so stuffed
their Heads and Memories, that they have almost forgot what sound Reason is; as
has been already seen, in examining the Stuff they call Reason. It is to be
lamented, that one good Gift of God should fall upon such bad Ground, as to
drive out another; but so it is, what else is the meaning of that Word, Let not
the Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the Rich Man glory in his Riches, etc.
But to show, that as the glorying in these things, robs the Giver of his Due,
so it makes the Receiver become a poor, weak Fool, Jer. 9. 23. And indeed, it
is very unreasonable to think it can be otherwise, for if every good and
perfect Gift comes down from the Father of Lights; and is dispensed to us
through the Son, by the Holy Spirit; what can those Gentlemen do otherwise, but
discover themselves to be as they are; who shall deny our Lord Jesus Christ, to
be as he is; over all, God blessed for evermore; and thereby deny to live by
Faith upon him, and as much as in them lies, cut themselves off from him, in
whom dwells the Fullness of the Godhead. Col. 2. 9. But if Reason fail, these
Gentlemen say they will remove the Cause to the Scriptures of Truth; most
gladly therefore with them to the Scriptures I will go, and guide and subject
my Reason thereunto: And indeed, it is impossible for us to have a true
Knowledge of God; without the Revelation that he gives of himself, by his Word
and Spirit.

And here I cannot but take Notice, of the foolish as well as slanderous
Report; that my nameless Author (in his Divine Unity asserted, page 6. Col. 2.
as well as the Considerator in his 19th. and 20th. pages of his Answer to the
Bishop of Sarum) gives to the Christian Divines; saying, That were it not for
Church Awes, and for fear of losing their Stipends; they would deny the
Doctrine of the Trinity themselves. I thank God, I lie under no Temptation of
being biased by the Churches Smiles or Frowns; I being no Clergyman, nor the
Son of a Clergyman; and therefore my Judgment cannot be bribed with the hope
os getting, or fear of losing any Benefice. But God having given me an Immortal
Soul, it becomes me, and it is but my reasonable Duty as well as Interest, to
be as much concerned about the Eternal Salvation thereof; as any of those whose
Business it is, being called of God as Aaron to serve at the Altar; by
preaching the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and the great Mysteries of the
Gospel and Godliness, God manifested in the flesh; Ephesians. 3. 8. 1 Timothy 3. 16. And
here I must take leave to tell our Doctors of Reason, that if the Scriptures
tell me, that Jesus Christ is the true God and Eternal Life as I find it does;
1 John 5. 20. Tit. 2. 13. I must therefore believe this Truth, because I find
it Testified in the Scriptures of Truth; although thereby I should practically
give those Gentlemen ^he Lie, who say he is but a Man; and although to prove
their Sayings they tell me, their great Reason and Learning has taught them so
to say and believe; therefore to do them right, I do freely acknowledge that
they have a just right, to lay claim to the Title that the Apostle gives to
those simple Gentlemen; spoken of in the 2 Timothy 3. 7. Who were ever learning,
and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. And yet it is evident,
that these were no small Fools in their own Conceit; for in the next Verse, the
Apostle compares them to Jannes and Jambres; whose Ignorance and Folly was
over-laid with such a stock of Impudence, that they had Confidence enough to
resist Moses; though he was one of the greatest Men that ever lived upon the
Earth. And there were such pretended Wits in the Apostles days, Men of corrupt
Minds resisting the Truth, concerning the Faith reprobate: But their Folly was
made manifest, as the Unreasonableness of our pretended Men of Reason at this
day is. But let us see, how these Men reconcile Scripture to their Reason, or
rather pervert it; for my Author in his 16th. page, colume 1. argues; that
because we are to love God with all our Hearts, therefore the Son is not God;
for then our Love would be divided. Which argues strongly that he is God,
because we are commanded to love and honor him as the Father; as has been
proved by Scripture Command, and the Example of the Worshippers in Heaven: And
also is an undeniable Argument, that the Father and the Son are one; whether my
Author will receive it, or can understand it or no.

The next Scripture that I find Our Author mentions in particular, after he had
mentioned several to prove God is one; which signifies no more to his Cause,
then if a Man pretending to prove, there is no Night in our Climate; should
tell us when we see the Sun shine we may be sure it is day: For all true
Christians believe God is one, and that the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, is this One God. But the Text which he mentions and recites at Large, is
in his 18th. Page. 1 Colume; Phil. 2. 6. where the Apostle speaking of Christ,
says, who being in the Form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with
God; but made himself of no Reputation, and took one him the Form of a Servant:
My Author says, (the reconciling Sense is, that is, to there Foolish Reason)
that he thought of no such Robbery, as being equal with God: It is very
strange, that the Servant should so much excel the Master; when the Devil
himself, transformed himself into an Angel of Light; he did not Quote Scripture
so Falsely, nor pervert it so palpably as this amounts to; when he Brought
Scripture to Tempt our Lord, to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple; as any Christian may, see by comparing the 4th. of Matthew and 6th.
with the 91st. Psalm. ver. 11. But Let us Consider, what the Holy Ghost was
pressing on Christians in the Context; that we may not Charge him with
Contradiction and Nonsense, how bold so ever we may be with his Disciples; and
here we find he speaks of some Person or being, that was in the Form of God;
and therefore the other assertion, that he thought it no Robbery to be equal
with God, was a necessary Consequence of the Former; and to take it as my
Author does, is but to give the Lie to the Holy Ghost, or to Charge him with
Contradiction; let him choose whether: Besides, the 7th. and 8th. verses make
it clear, that the Apostle was speaking of some Person or Being, distinct and
infinitely superior to Humane Nature; and therefore speaks of his
Condescension, in taking on him the Form of a Servant, and being found in the
Fashion of a Man. Whereas were this this He the Apostle speaks of, no other but
a Man; the Apostle had contradicted himself, and his Argument would have been
mere Nonsense, and would have run thus; a Man humbled himself, and took on him
the form and fashion of a Man. Besides, it is a Contradiction in the Nature of
the thing it self; and is no better Sense than to say, a Man made himself a
Man: It may seem strange, that Men should be so blind; but how can it be
otherwise, when they will needs war against him who is the Light and Life of
Men. I always thought that my Author was endu'd with a considerable stock of
Learning; only it looked like a Jewel set in Lead, for want of sound Reason,
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ to manage it; until I met with his
reconciling Faculty, in his aforesaid 18th. page; and that brought to my Mind
what the Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. where speaking of some of
Paul's Epistles, of which this to the Philippians, and that to the Hebrews are
some: He says, There are some things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also other Scriptures to their own
Destruction: And when I read these things, I cannot for my Life, forbear
thinking on my Nameless Author: For, besides the flat Contradiction he gives
the Holy Ghost, it is directly contrary to the Scope of the Apostle; which was
to move them to Humility, and Condescension one to another from Christ's
Example: But if he were a Man only, to say nothing of the Nonsense that there
is, in saying a Man humbled himself to become a Man; the Man Jesus, considered
as a Man only; was highly honored in his being conceived, and brought forth of
a Virgin in such a Miracnlous Manner. So that consider the Text which way you
will, either with respect to the Words themselves, or with respect to the
Context; we are bound to believe the Truth as it is revealed; that He thought
it no Robbery to be equal with God. There is nothing more material in my
Author, which I have not taken Notice of, and showed how unreasonable it is;
especially where he pretends Scripture for his cunningly devised Fables. And
the Truth is, those Gentlemen would make much surer Work in their Babel
Building; if they could but race out the Scriptures from among us; than ever
they will be able to do by wresting them one by one, to speak according to
their foolish Reason.

And indeed the Considerator, in his Answer to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, bids fair for it; for though he had tried in vain by false and
absurd Glosses, to make the first Chapter of John, and many other Texts
mentioned by his Lordship; to speak according to his own, and his Master
Socinus his foolish Reason; or rather corrupt Mind: Yet he flies at first to
his best shift, though for Subtilty sake somewhat indirectly; to except against
the Gospel of St. John, the three Epistles and the Revelations; and would
impose upon us, that they were counterfeited by one Cerinthus in John's Name:
And therein he has not only secured his own Cause, but greatly obliged the
Papists; a piece of Wickedness they never had the Impudence to attempt, though
they kept them locked up in an Unknown Tongue. Yes, but the Considerator tells
us, that the Revelations of St. John were denied, and writ against by some of
the Papists; as being no part of Divine Writ. Well, be it so, every Body knows
for what Cause, we have it recorded in Acts 6. 10. because they were not able
to resist the Holy Ghost that speaks therein; and at the same time others of
them, are striving with all the might they have, to ward off the Blow that the
Spirit gives to that Interest; in wresting it to any sense, that may secure
their Popish and Foppish Cause.

In like manner does the Considerator, not only with the Revelations, but with
the Gospel of St. John and his three Epistles, and scarce any Text that is
urged against them; but they say either it is not right translated, or it is no
Scripture; or else they manifestly wrest it from the plain Sense and Meaning of
the Holy Ghost. There in one Instance among many we have in the Gospel of John,
Chap. 8. v. 58. where our Lord says, Before Abraham was I am; Considerator,
page 57. colume 1. that is says he, In the Decree and Counsel of God: Why,
good Mr. Considerator, what a great Secret have you found out now; are not all
God's Works known to him from Eternity, were not you and I, and all the Men
that shall be in the World to the end thereof, in the Counsel and Decree of God
from Eternity? Surely, God is not like Man; to determine and purpose one thing
yesterday, and another to day.

But pray Sir, be pleased to take a View of your own Learned Countenance; in
your 6th. page colume 1st. and 2d. There you give several Arguments, to prove a
thing cannot be possessed before it is in being; and in particular you instance
the Day of Judgment, which is not yet come; and therefore not possessed. I hope
you will not say it is not, or that it was not in the Decree of God; when and
before he made the World: Therefore your Saying after Grotius, that a Man
descending from Abraham; could not be any otherwise before Abraham, than in
Divine Purpose and Decree; is very true and turns the Argument against you:
Besides, Abraham was in the Decree of God as soon as any Man. Therefore you
must own, that our Lord did exist before he was born of the Virgin, or that he
spoke Nonsense; for they themselves knew, that the Decrees of God were Eternal;
and our Lord had not given them an Answer to their Question, which was whether
he had seen Abraham, he being not fifty years old? Besides, our Lord had told a
plain direct Lie; if he had said he was in the Decree of God before Abraham:
For Abraham was in God's Decree as soon as Adam, and therefore no Man
descending from Abraham, could be in God's Decree before him.

But the Considerator goes a little further, and says, our Lord did exist in
the Promise of God before Abraham; which is very true also, for he was promised
the same day of the Fall; but neither will this do the Business, nor discharge
our Considerator from charging our Lord with Folly or Nonsense, or both: For it
was promised presently after the Flood, long before Abraham; that God should
persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, and yet the Gentiles the Seed of
Japhet did not receive the Gospel, till since our Lord's coming in the Flesh.
So likewise was it prophesied of Josiah an hundred years before he was born;
could he therefore say before I was born I am? Nay, is not Mr. Considerator
himself, and the rest of his Learned Brethren prophesied of by Name? in 2 Pet.
2. 1. where the Holy Ghost tells us, there shall be false Teachers among
Christians; who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them; and bring upon themselves swift Destruction. Will you add so much
Pride to your Folly, as to say concerning your self as our Lord did? that
because I was in the Decree of God and prophesied of, therefore 1600 Years
before born I am: Besides, I Am, is a peculiar Title to God, signifying his
Self-existence and Self-sufficiency; which no created Being can take to himself
without Blasphemy. Well, but after all, the Considerator is resolved to be a
good Champion for a bad Cause; who will loose his Ground Inch by Inch: And
therefore, he says in his 57th. page; first colume, That notwithstanding all
this, we must be Socinians or Arrians; for Christians we may not be. No, by no
means! if the Considerator can but jump into the infallible Chair, and
prescribe a Religion for us. Thus it is, and thus it will be; as the truly
Rational and Learned, as well as Pious Doctor Owen has observed; Truth will
not please, the Devil will subscribe to any Creed, but that which God gives of
himself in his Word. But, good Sir, why must we be Arrians? Why, because Christ
though he did exist before the World was made, yet he was but a Creature for
all that; but the first that ever God made: But neither will this shift, enable
you to overthrow the Christian Religion; nor shall you thereby, rob the Author
of it of his Divine Nature; who is the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for us: Titus 2. 13, 14. For hereby you do but tread in your
old Steps; by resisting and contradicting the Holy Ghost as your Predecessors
did in Acts 7. 51. For in Revelation 1. the 8th. and 11th. Verses our Lord
says, he is the First and the Last: And to put the Matter out of Doubt, that
it is Jesus Christ there speaks; the 12th. Verse to the End of the Chapter
makes it evident, he being in the Likeness of the Son of Man. And in the 17th.
Verse, he says again, I am the first and the last: And in the 18th. I am he
that was dead and am alive: All which shows that this was Jesus Christ, and
that this Jesus Christ is Godman; for he being the first, God the Father was
not before him, then he could not be first; and he being the last End of all
things; all things must end and terminate in his Glory: For God's Glory is the
highest and chiefest Good, and therefore must be the ultimate and last End of
all things; and that this was no other than Jesus Christ, is evident in that he
says, I am he that lives and was dead. Surely, God cannot dye, therefore this
must be that mighty Child that was given to us, who also was the everlasting
Father; spoken of in Isa. 44; 6. and Isa. 9. 6. Godman, God with us in our
Nature. And therefore he may well be called wonderful, because he is Godman in
one Person; God he must be, else he could not be the first nor last neither;
for God only is the last End, as well as the first Cause of all things. Man he
must be, else he could not dye; and God he must be, else he could not have
power to raise himself again, as he tells you he had; John 10. 18. No man
takes it from me, says he, but I lay it down of my self; and I have power to
take it up again: And this compared with the next Verse, together with Acts 20.
24. proves the Father and him to be one; as he says of himself, in ver. 30. of
this 10th. Chapter; I and my Father are one. Besides, in the first Chapter of
Gonesis it is said, In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. Why
then will you impose Arrianism upon us, and contradict the Spirit of God; by
telling us that God created before the Beginning, or before he created the
Heavens and the Earth?

The Considerator therefore, shall never impose his School Divinity upon me, of
one Senior and two Junior Gods; for unto me and unto us Christians, there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him; 1 Cor. 8. 6. And indeed,
here lies these Gentlemen's Mistake, they find the Scriptures in many places
speak of Jesus Christ as Man: Therefore say they, he cannot be God, as my
Accountant page 4. but as has been observed, we do not say that Man is God, or
that the Humane Nature is the Divine; or that those two Natures are confounded,
but we believe according to the Scriptures of Truth, that God took upon him our
Nature; Heb. 2. 16. and united that Holy Thing, that by the over-shaddowing of
the Holy Ghost was conceived, and born of the Virgin: So that it did not
subsist, nor was it a distinct being of it self, but was united into a personal
Union with God the Son; and thus he continues to be two Natures in one Person
for ever. If you ask me how these things can be.

I answer, such Knowledge is as much too wonderful for the Angels (for ought I
know) as to know how God was; and therefore neither you nor I must pretend to
it: It is enough these are the true Sayings of God, and therefore it is to the
Peril of those that will not believe it: If you say it is impossible, I answer
with Men it may appear so and really be so; but with God all things are
possible. If you say it is Nonsense and Contradiction.

I Answer it is the highest impiety and greatest impudence, that a Man
professing to believe there is a God can be guilty of; to say, that any thing
that God reveals concerning himself or us; is impossible or contradictory to it
self: And therefore, after all the Considerators glorying of his own, and the
rest of his Brethrens Honor and Dignity; as being Freemen of the Commonwealth
of Wit and Learning; Page 44. both Collums. And after he has spoken very
Contumeliously of the Dignities of the Church, and given himself a good Word as
a Person fit for Preferment: If the Honors and Profits of the Church, were
bestowed as they were at first designed, upon Persons of Wit, Learning and
Merit; no doubt, but he might come in for an Archbishop: And yet in all this
glorying, I do not find him mention one thing, that Paul a Minister of Jesus
Christ made any reckoning of; his Study and glorying being to know Jesus
Christ, and him Crucified. No, the Considerator does not speak one Word of
this, in all his own Letter of Recommendation; though both Colums, Page 44. be
taken up about it; yet there is not one word of Repentance toward God, and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ spoken of, as being of any Concernment in a
Minister of Jesus Christ. And therefore, seeing he has such a conceit of his
own Merits, without those (accounted) unnecessary things; I would advise him to
step Over to Rome, for if he make good Friends, those things are not much
minded there; If he tell me there is no hope of getting a Cardinals Cap,
because the Doctrine of the Trinity is maintained by the Church of Rome also. I
Answer, the Being of God is an Article of their Creed too; and yet I doubt not
but Mr. Considerators great Learning, has delivered him from so much ignorance
in Church History; That he well knows some Atheists, or Atheistical Fellows
have by more Wit and Learning, then by sound Reason, Honesty and true God
liness stepped into the in^alible Chair for before now. And this may serve for an
Answer, to Our Nameless Authors argument in his Page 18. where he would deny
the Doctrine of the Trinity, because it is maintained by the Church of Rome; An
Argument so Weak and Foolish, that I did not think it worth my while, to take
any other Notice of it, than occasionally by the way: for sure we shall never
be able to maintain the Protestant Doctrine; If this be any Argument with us,
That we are right because we dissent from them, or because in many or most
things they are wrong; but a foolish Cause must have foolish Arguments or none
at all. And indeed notwithstanding the Considerators vain glorious boasting of
his great Learning; I look upon him to be as great a dishonor to the Schools,
for want of Answerable measures of sound Reason; as it must be an affliction to
our Clergy, to find such Heretics harbored in the Bosom of our Church: For
although he boast so much of the Mighty Revolution, that, greater liberty in
matters of Religion would make, from Christianity to Socinianism or Deism; yet
if he had sonnd Reason, and integrity answerable to his great Learning; and the
knowledge that he must needs have there by in Church History: The remembrance
of the Arrian Persecution, must deliver him from that foolish Dream; nor could
he were his seize in Divinity, and sound Reason, proportionable to his
great Learning; deny our Lord Jesus Christ to be the true God, and Eternal Life
according to the Scriptures; 1 John 5. 20. when he himself asserts That in his
Page 11. Colum 2. and Page 26. Colum 2. which by sound Reason, and by Just and
necessary Consequence proves him to be so, for he says, God neither has, nor
can give him the incommunicable properties of the Deity; such as Ominpotency,
Omnipresence, Omniscience, and the; like so then it is but for me or any
private Christian, to prove that Christ has those incommunicable properties of
the Divine being; and the Considerator himself will maintain that he is God.
Now Sir, if you had not excepted against the Revelation of St. John, as being
no part of Divine Writ; you know I could presently have proved that our Lord
Jesus Christ is Omniscient, Rev. 2. 23. I am he that searches the reins and
hearts: Pray Sir, compare this with Jer. 11. 20, 27. and 10. 9. But seeing the
Seducers, and Cunningly devising fable Men of our day, under the Specious
pretenses of Learning and Reason, would fain gather up us Laymen as Branches
cut off from the true Vine; (and may succeed therein among the withered
Branches, according to what our Lord has foretold and threatened; concerning
such in the 15th. of Joh. and the 6th.) Yet our Lord has given his word for
it, that they shall not deceive the Elect, though they may and shall deceive
many; Mat. 24. 4, 5. and 22, 23, 25. And that those pretenders to Reason, are
those very deceivers among others there spoken of is evident; not only from our
Lords words in ver. 11. calling them False Prophets, and deceiving many; which
they could never be able to do, if they did not pretend Reason for there
Cnnningly devised Fables; but also their own Practices should bewray them to be
Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, in treading in the very steps of the Grand Saddneers
in our Lord's Day; who that they might carry on that Fundamental Herisie of
denying the Resurrection the more successfully, they denied the greatest part
of the old Testament, and would own nothing for Divine Writ, but the 5 Books of
Moses; and sticking there, they thought to confound our Lord himself, by their
Rational and Learned Argument; that there must be Confusion, Contradiction,
Absurdity and Nonsense if the dead Rise: And you know Sir, they grounded their
Argument upon Scripture, and made their foolish Reason, and ignorance of the
Power of God, Judge of the Cause. Seeing therefore, the Considerator is not
ashamed to tread in the Sadduces Steps, but will imitate them in denying part
of the Word of God; and yet at the same time (as they did) pretend Reason and
Scripture for what they held: And to give them their due, there are as many
contradictions, and seeming impossibilities to Reason against the Resurrection,
as there are against the Doctrine of the Trinity; and our Faith therein, must
be entirely resigned up unto the revealed will and Almighty Power of God. But I
say, seeing the Considerator will imitate the Sadduces, in denying part of the
Scriptures; I shall endeavor to follow the Example of my Lord Jesus Christ,
and prove from such part of the Scriptures as they will own, that our Lord
Jesus Christ is Omnicisent and and Omnipresent; (but at the same time
protesting against their unreasonable partiality, in choosing and refusing what
they please for Divine Writ; and saving to the Service of the Truth all those
arguments that are or may be drawn from any part of the Gospel of St. John the
Three Epistles and the Revelation, for destruction from God is a terror to me,
and because of his greatness I cannot endure to add to those things, nor take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy; least God should take away
my part out of the Book of Life; Job 31. 22. Revelation 18. 19.) Now Sir, I
think you do not except against the Gospel of St. Mat. and there we read Chap.
28. ver. 20. Christ Promised his Disciples to be with them always, to the end of
the World. Now, Sir, let me freely Discourse with you, concenring this Promise,
our Lord Jesus Christ is gone to Heaven, and his Humane nature is to continue
there till the Restitution of all things; neither can a Man be at two Places at
one time. Now* what will you do, will you give our Lord the Lie in this
Promise; or will you believe that a Man, or the Humane nature of Jesus Christ
is not only in the Sacrament of the Alter, and so in Thousands of Places at the
same time with the Papist; but also every where, in all places of the World,
where ever there is a Believer: Or will you believe the Truth as it is in
Jesus, that he is the Omnipresent God, and so is with his People in all places,
and in all Conditions, according to his gracious Promise; Joh. 14. 18. I will
not leave you comfortless, I will come to you: Perhaps you will tell me, that
this is no more then Paul said of himself; 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4. where he tells the
Corinthians, that though he is absent in Body, yet he as present in Spirit, had
Judged already as though he were present, concerning him that has so done this
Deed: And in the next verse tells them what they should do, wehen they wre
gathered together; and my Spirit, with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Colo. 2 5. to the same purpose; but were not Mr. Considerator one of the best,
or rather the worst at perverting of Scripture, and one of the greatest
reproachers of sound Reason, under the greatest pretentions to it; I should not
have mentioned these Scriptures, as having the least show of Reason in them, to
invalidate the Truth of our Lords Promise; or that he will not be with his
People, and that really present with them to the end of the World, in all
Places, and in all Conditions according to that gracious Promise, in Isa. 43.
2. When thou passest through the fire I will be with thee, and the waters shall
not overflow thee. If you tell me this Promise in Isaiah must be understood of
God the Father. I answer, if it be so, it does but confirm our Lords Deity; the
Promise being no more then what he Promises his Disciples, which clearly
proves our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Omnipresent God, that fills Heaven and
Earth with his presence; for what Paul said to the Corinthians and Colossians,
is no more then what we may all say to one another, when we are desirous to
have a good Work carried on by the Church, or any other Civil Society, at which
we have a right to be present as Member; though we are else where detained, yet
approving the Work we say, our Heart is with them, our Mind and Spirit is in
the Work: But will Mr. Considerator say, this is all the comfort our Lord
promises his Disciples, Mat. 28. Truly if so, they might say of him, as Job
said of his Friends; miserable comforters have ye been; but our Lord cannot
deceive, any more then he can be deceived; and therefore he will come unto his
People, and will take up his abode with them; according to his gracious Promise
in Joh. 14. 23. Jesus answered and said if a man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him: Here the Son is to come, and be as much present with his
Disciples as the Father: And in ver. 16. of the same Chapter our Lord says, I
will pray the Father, and he shall send you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever.

All which, with many other Texts of Scripture, not only prove the Son to be
Omnipresent; but also the Unity of the Divine being, and the Trinity of that
Unity; and does undeniably prove to all sincere, unbyast Christians; the Divine
authority and Truth of that Word in Joh. 5. 7. which Mr. Considerator and the
rest of his Tribe do so much Bark at, but they shall never be able to Bite it
out of Gods Bible, as long as the Sun and Moon endure; nor can they, though in
Conjunction with the Gates of Hell; be able to Rob the People of God, of the
comfort and Consolation, that they enjoy by Communion with the real, (though
Spiritual) and Divine presence of Jesus Christ. For when the Atheist and Deist,
and Mr. Considerator himself have Mocked and Scoffed at Communion with God, as
much as their Elder Brother Ishmael himself did at the Son of the Promise; yet
know ye there are that know, their Fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ; Joh. 1. 3.

And yet, Mr. Considerator, to show what a Doctor in Capernaum and Nicodemus's
Divinity he is, proves himself as good an Advocate for the abomination of
Transubstantion as Belarmine himself; or any Cardinal of them all could do: Yet
is he no Papist but any thing; so he can but do some thing against the Truth;
for in Page 21. Colum 2. and 22. He labors all be can, to make the abomination
of Transubstantiation to be a small sin, if any; which he calls a folly or a
mistake; it is not an impiety he says, but a Philosophical Error; Colum 2.
Page 21. and has misrepresented that abomination, that he might redicule the
Truth; For he says, it is not pretended by the Papist, that the bread and Wine
have received any, the least change: Where as this is the very thing they have
burned many a Christian for, because they would not believe that the Bread and
Wine were changed; or Transubstanstiated into the very Body and blood of
Christ: And as for his Body being present in a Spiritual manner, it was the
Doctrine of the Lutherans and not of the Papists.

And in his 20th. Page, Colum he says himself, the Papists say, the words of
our Lord import, that the Bread of the Sacrament is really, and verily made to
be the Substance of Christ's body, in which he was Crucified.

But in his Page 21. Colum 2. He tells us, they are of another Mind, and that
they do not pretend that the bread and Wine, have received the least change in
what is an Object of Sense: Why good Sir, is not the very Substance of Bread an
Object of Sense? Perhaps this Gentleman, may pretend a License to Contradict
himself; but the Trinitarians must have a care, of saying any thing contrary to
the dictates of Mr. Considerators foolish Reason; for fear of being Guilty of
the unpardonable sin of Contradicton. But the Gentleman was laboring to
Contradict Christ, and to Charge him with Folly and Falsehood; therefore no
wonder if he Contradict himself, for our Lord has promised to be with his
People, to be really present with them in this World. This Mr. Considerator see
would prove him to be God, the only true God; therefore he will Give our
Savior the Lie, and say he neither is nor can be Omnipresent: Page 11. Colum
2. But our Lord says, Mat. 18. 20. that where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them: And that the will be with
his People to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Yet Mr. Considerator is
pleased to say, the Doctrine of Christ real presence, is worse then the
abomination of Transubstantiation: But that his Fables may pass with some
Color he thinks it meet to color his Charge with Falsehood; and tells us of
some, whom he says, ought not to call themselves the Reformed, who believe the
real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, page 20. colume 2. But I know
none of that Belief except the Papist, nor the Considerator neither I believe;
but the Gentleman's Design was, to deny the Real Divine Presence of Christ: But
that being too great a Truth, to be beat out of the Scripture of Truth; he
contents himself in that place, in denying his bodily Presence. I have insisted
the more on the Omnipresence of Christ; because Mr. Considerator in his 11th.
page, not only denies it; but also acknowledges if he be so, he must be the
Living and True God; because it is an incommunicable Attribute of God.

Now, we have our Lor'ds Words for it over and over again; that he will be with
his People in all places in the World: Now whether Mr. Considerator will
believe our Lord's Words, or give him the Lie; or whether his Reason has
taught him that the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ is bodily present with his
People; in all places and at all times; and if so, he gives himself the Lie: Or
whether he will believe that he is the Living and True God, and fills Heaven
and Earth with his Presence? Let him choose; I am not to be accountable for his
Faith.

But the Considerator goes on in his 11th. page, and tells us, some of their
Number think Our Lord Jesus Christ may be invocated in Prayer, not because he
is omnipresent or omniscient, but because it pleased the Father to reveal to
him our Prayers: And quotes Revelation 1. 1. He might as well have quoted Mark
13. 32. For neither of those Texts speak of Prayer, but of the Humane Nature of
Jesus Christ; and if he had been writing to those that deny his Humane Nature,
they had been to his purpose: But Christians that believe him to be Godman, are
confirmed in their Faith by these Texts; as by several other in Revelations and
elsewhere: He being that wonderful Person, who is the First and Last; who was
dead and is alive: But if some of your Number scruple praying to him, I do not
know any of the Number of Christ's Disciples, that make any scruple of it:
Stephen the first Christian Martyr, dyed calling upon God; and saying, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit; Acts 7. 5.

But pray Sir, sometimes you pretend to be a Man of Reason; but as is your
Reason so is your Divinity: The Scriptures speak every where of coming to the
Father by the Son, not to the Son by the Father; Ephesians. 2. 18. Through him we
both have access by one Spirit to the Father: Neither can any man come to the
Father, but by the Son; John 14. 6. But if the Father reveal our Wants to him,
and he cannot know them by his own Omnisciency; then we are necessitated to
come to the Son by the Father; and instead of Jesus Christ spreading our Wants,
and offering our Prayers to the Father with his own Incense; the Father must
offer up our Prayers to the Son.

It is not for Mechanics to call the Learned Blockheads, nor will I presume to
determine, whether it be a Common or a Strange Thing? to find such a Monster,
as a Learned Dunce among the Schoolmen. But I must needs say this Sir, that
notwithstanding your great Boasting in your 44th. page; of your being free of
the Commonwealth of Wit and Learning; (though I will not question the Copy of
your Freedom of the City of Learning.) And yet we Mechanics have so high an
Esteem for the Noble City of Learning; that we cannot think such Jolts, could
ever attain the Honor of being free of that City: But that we are informed,
that it is the Custom of that City confirmed by a Law, made by a Common Council
of the same, for the Encouragement of Strangers to send their Children thither;
that after seven years Service, every Tutor shall be obliged to make all his
Dunces free.

But notwithstanding all this, Sir, I think it is a Reproach to the States of
the Commonwealth of Sound Reason; to naturalize such Gentlemen as you are
among them: Yet I would not reflect on the Proceedings and Conduct of that
Sereen Republic. And therefore I do freely acknowledge, that it is very
probable, that we Mechanics may not understand the Meaning of some of those
Learned Words, that flow so naturally from such great Critics as you are; we
having not the Gift of diverse kinds of Tongues. And therefore, it is probable,
that by Wit and Learning you mean, only the Den of Subtilty and Cunning
Sophistry; whereby you are enabled to devise cunning Fables to deceive us
Laymen, if God do not give us more Grace and Sound Reason to withstand you. And
so you may notwithstanding all this foolish Flourish, page 44. be Strangers and
Alliens from the Commonwealth of Sound Reason. And truly you have little
Reason to Glory, in your being free of the Den of Subtilty and Cunning; for
when you have done all you can, the Old Serpent will outdo you in that kind of
Learning and Logic.

But I think it is almost time for me, to take my leave of Mr. Considerator;
for although I promised my self great Improvements of my Reason, when I first
saw his Title Page; and no doubt but much might have been learned from him, had
his Book been as rational as his Attempt is daring and bold. And yet upon a
Close View, I do not find his Reasons are any other, that what are contained,
or may be reduced, to what I find in my short Accountant; save only that his
great Learning has puffed him up with so much Vanity, that he is not ashamed to
speak evil of Dignities.

But Mr. Considerator goes on in his 11th. page, from denying the Omnipresence
of Christ, to deny the Satisfaction of Christ's Death: And in page 12. colum 1.
he says, The end of Christ's Death. was to recommend Mankind to the Mercy,
Forgiveness, and Favor of God: And again Col. 2. he says, He suffered to
recommend us unto the Mercy of God: And in page 32. colum 1. he says, Though
he would willingly give it us in the Lord Bishop of Sarum's Words, and does
indeed no less than charge his Lordship with a Dissent from the Catholic
Church, in his 1st. colum, page 31. But in page 32. colum 1. he says, The
Sacrifice of Christ was not tendered to the Justice of God, as an equivalent
Amends or Reparation; but to his mercy as a Supplication, and as such accepted.
And this he says, the Socinians contend for; but pray Sir, let us reason the
Case a little, about this Account that you give of the End of Christ's Death:
But first let it be remembered, that you grant, that Christ died to expiate the
Sins of Mankind; page 31. col. 2. This expiation was not offered to the Justice
of God you say, but to his Mercy; and to his Mercy, not as an Expiation of
Guilt; but as a Supplication for Mercy: This is a double Contradiction, I see
the Gentleman will not prove himself a small Fool; for first, you set the Cause
in the place of the Effect; and the Effect in the place of the Cause: And in
the second place, you destroy the very Nature of Mercy, and make it no other
than Justice it self; in that an expiatory and propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Sins of Mankind, must be offered up thereunto: First, You make the Effect to be
the Cause of that, which it is but the Effect of: For the Mercy and Love of God
was the first, and only moving Cause of God's sending his Son into the World;
and therefore all that he did in the World could not be the Cause, nor so much
as a Means to procure his Mercy; considered without respect to Justice: John 3.
16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Mercy
and Love in God, (as the truly Rational and Heavenly Dr. Owen has observed)
being no less than God's willing good to the Creature; and whoever God wills
Good to, they must have that Good willed to them: For God's Will in this Sense,
must infallibly be done both in Heaven and in Earth. But God will not convey
Good to any Creature, in a way that shall destroy a greater Good; then the
Salvation of all the Men and Angels in Heaven and Earth will amount unto. But
such is the Manifestation of the Glory of God's Justice, therefore though God's
loving Kindness and Mercy was from everlasting, and therefore needed not a
Sacrifice in time to procure it; much less a propitiatory one to appease it
which is a Contradiction with a Witness; but this is not to be taken Notice of
in Men, that have engrossed all contradiction to themselves, under the specious
pretense of Reason; for it is below the pretended Wits of our Day, the Great,
Vain glorious Freemen of the Commonwealth of Wit and Learning, to prove
themselves little Fools.

But I say, Mercy will never be extended in a way, that in the least derogates
from the Justice and Truth of God: No, Justice and Truth must be equally
exalted with Mercy, wherever it is extended: Therefore when God proclaims his
Name in Exodus 34. 6, 7. he proclaims himself to be a God that will show Mercy,
and yet will by no means clear the guilty. This you Men of Reason are pleased
to contradict, and do in so many words tell us; that a Debt fully paid, and yet
freely for given is a contradiction; Nameless Author page 6. col. 1. And Mr.
Considerator calls it a Mock Payment, page 13. col. 1. But we know the things
of God, uses to be accounted Foolishness with Men; but Thanks be to God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, we do as well know that God has made foolish
the Wisdom of this World; and that the foolishness of God is Wiser then Men; 1
Cor. 1. 20, 21, -- 25, 26, 27. But in the aforesaid Exodus 34. The Lord
proclaims himself to be the Lord God, merciful and Gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in goodness and Truth. Pray observe, goodness and Truth must go
together, and without Truth Goodness would cease to be so. And in verse 7. He
says, Keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, Transgression and sin;
and that will by no means clear theguilty. Now Gentlemen are you not ashamed,
if you are not you may be; to say a Debt fully paid, and yet Freely forgiven is
a Contradiction; for do you not thereby Contradict God himself and Charge him
with Folly and Falsehood; who says, he will pardon iniquity and forgive sin;
and yet will by no means clear the guilty.

Surely God is true, and can no more Lie then he can dye or deny himself;
therefore his infinite wisdom has contrived that which his Almighty Power has
effected, a way to pardon sin; and yet by no means clear the guilty. This could
not be done by offering up a Sacrifice to the Mercy of God, nor was there any
need of such a thing: Mercy being the first moving Cause of setting infinite
Wisdom to Work, to find out a way to save the sinner, and yet not clear the
guilty; and at the same time to save the Honor of Gods Law, and to vindicate
the immutability of his Truth, to show Mercy to the sinner; and yet at the same
time to magnify his Law, and make it Honorable; Isa. 44. 21. to magnify his
Mercy, and yet at the same time, and by the same way and means, and with
respect to the very same Persons; to exalt his Justice. This was a Work
becoming God, because no Created being had Wisdom and Power to do so; and as it
is wonderful in its own Nature, so likewise should it be to us; and Humbly and
thankfully closed up with. It is not to be quarrelled with, but if you will
reject the Counsel of God against your selves, because it is Foolishness with
you; yet know you that to them that believe, Christ is the Wisdom of God, and
the Power of God; and they do receive this Truth with all manner of
Acceptance. And although it may seem to be foolishness to you wise Grecians,
yet to them that believe both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the Wisdom of God and
the Power of God; hence it comes to pass, that the Lord is well pleased for his
Righteousness sake, he thereby magnifying his Law, and making it Honorable;
this answers the end of God, both in Creation and Redemption. See Sir Francis
Bacons Confession of Faith.
The end of God was to manifie his own glory, but for which he would not have
descended into the Work of Creation nor Redemption; For he bath made all things
for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil; Prove. 16. 4. And we are
Redeemed and Called for this very end, that we may be to the Praise of the
Glory of his Grace in Christ Jesus; Ephesians. 1. 6, -- 12. Yet so as that the Glory
of his Justice, might shine forth with equal Luster with his Mercy; Romans 3. 25,
26. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his blood,
to declare his Righteousness for the Remison of sins, that are past through the
forbearance of God; ver. 26. To declare, I say at this time, his Righteousness;
that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus; God
does all things becoming himself, and Gods glory being the chiefest good, and
the manifestation thereof the Highest end; God could have no Lower end, than
the manifestation of his own Glory; as the first and chief end, in the Work of
our Redemption and our Salvation, next thereunto. A wise Man will not do great,
and Noble things for a base and low End; how much less will God save sinners in
a way, that advances the Glory of one attribute to the abasement, or in the
least Ecclipsiing the Glory of another: This would reflect on his Wisdom and
Power, but God will not, God cannot extend Mercy in a way, that may reflect on
his Justice and Truth: If the King pardon a Convicted Traitor, he thereby
extends his Mercy, and shows a great deal of Pity, and Compassion, and good
Will to the Person of the Traitor: But he cannot with respect to that Person,
but stop the Execution of Justice, and the Law in that particular Falls to the
Ground; and that because he is Man, and not God; but not one jot, nor Title of
Gods Law shall Fall to the Ground; neither shall Justice be in the least stopped
or Suspended, by Gods extending Mercy to the Sinner; because the Lord is God
and not Man: Therefore we Read, that Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. Psalm. 85. 10. God is as Just in
Justifiing him that Believes in Jesus, as he is in Condemning the Unbeliever;
Romans 8. 26. So that it as clear as the Sun shining at Noon day; that as Mercy
was the first and only moving Cause, of Gods sending his Son into the World to
save Sinners; and therefore there was no need of his coming to procure Mercy,
his coming being the greatest Demonstration of Mercy and Love; Joh. 3. 16. So
likewise is it a Demonstration that all he did, and especially what he
Suffered; was with respect to Justice. The determinate Counsels of the Three
that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, the one
Eternal God; had first, if we may to help the weakness of our understanding use
such an expression; as First or Second, concerning the decrees of God. I say,
the First thing God had in his Eye in saving Sinners, by sending his Son into
the World; was the Manifestation of his own Glory: This being the best good
must be the First Cause, and Last End of all Gods Works; and in Subordination
thereunto, Gods Mercy and great Love wherewith he Loved us, was the moving
Cause of sending his Son into the World, with respect to God himself; the
Manifestation of his own Glory was the Cause, and must be the Effect and last
End thereof with respect to us; Love, Pity, and Compassion, and Mercy, was the
First moving Cause, and our Eternal Salvation the last End; so then if Christ
came to Expiate sin, or to take away sin; it must be to bear the punishment due
to sin, or to the Sinner for sin; to take away the guilt of sin; which cannot
be done but by bearing the punishment due for sin; the guilt must be taken
away. For God will by no means, therefore not by Mercy it self, clear the
guilty: Therefore the guilt must be taken away, that Mercy may flow in with all
its Blessed effects upon the Sinner; therefore the Fathers sending his Son, was
the Highest Act of Mercy in the Father; and the Sons coming and dying in our
Nature, was the highest Act of Love in the Son: The thing it Self was all Mercy
with respect to us, and the doing of it was with respect to the Honor of Gods
Law, and and the Manifestation of his Justice and Truth: Therefore Christ did
not offer himself up as a Supplication to the Mercy of God, but as an expiatory
Sacrifice to his Justice; and not as a partial expiating of sin, for that would
but in part take away guilt; but all guilt must be taken away, or else the
sinner will remain guilty; and God will by no means clear the guilty.

Hence we read of Gods forgiving for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 4. 32. and of
Redemption through his Blood the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his Grace. Here is Redemption, but at no less Price than the Blood of
Ghrist; here is the forgiveness of sins, but it is through the Blood of Christ;
for we are not Redeemed with Corruptible things, but by the precious Blood of
Christ; Peter 1. 18, 19.

All which shows that we are freely Forgiven, and yet Justice is fully
satisfied; God having no Motive, nor was it possible he should, to concern
himself about our Salvation; but his own Sovereign good Will and good Pleasure,
he will have Mercy, because he will have Mercy: This makes the difference
between Man and Man, and this makes the difference between Man and Devil; he
took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham: And what ever
Reasons may be given for this, by those wise Critics that will vainly intrude
into those things that they have not seen; yet they must at last all Center in
this; Even so O Father, because it pleases thee. It was the good pleasure of
God to save his Elect, therefore Christ did not come to purchase this good
pleasure; but to Execute it by taking away sin, both in its guilt and filth,
and to bring in an Everlasting Righteousness: Therefore we read, the pleasure
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; Isa. 53. 10. Dan. 9. 24. And our* Lord
does so often declare, that he came not to do his own will, but the will of him
that sent him; that is needless to mention particular Scriptures to prove it:
All which shows that Christ offering himself up by the Eternal Spirit as a
Sacrifice to God; was to take away sin, both in the guilt and filth of it; and
had respect to the Justice and Holiness of God to Vindicate his Truth, and the
Honor of his Law, in showing Mercy to the Sinner: Therefore it is said, he was
made sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and in
respect to Mercy and Love, our Lord tells us, At that day ye shall ask in my
name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: For the
Father himself loves you, Joh. 16. 26. Yet if any Man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous 1 Epist. of Joh. 2. 1. And he tells
us again, At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you; and in Joh. 16. ver. 23. Verily verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you: Which
compared with Joh. 14. 13. 14. shows that the Father and the Son are One, for
says he, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in the Son. And again, in the next Verse, If ye shall ask
anything in my name, I will do it. All which shows that Christ did not
purchase, nor does he interceed for the Fathers Love and Mercy, but interceeds
as an Advocate pleading his own merit in taking away sin, and bringing in an
Everlasting Righteousness; so that is for Gods glory, the Honor of his Law,
the strickness of his Justice, to show Mercy to the Sinner: Therefore he says,
I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son: And indeed, it is
little less then the Blasphemy to say, that the Fathers Love and Mercy is not
so great, or was not so early as the Sons; for God is of one Mind, and who can
turn him. Having thus proved that Christ offered himself up as a Sacrifice to
the Justice of God to make an Attouement for Transgression.

It will be necessary to enquire, what kind of Priest and Sacrifice this must
be, what mighty Mediator this must be that interposeth between the Justice of
God and the guilty Sinner. Aand as the Doctrine of Satisfaction, ought to be
received with all Humility and Thankfulness, with all Care and Watchfulness, to
prove our selves to be of the number of those, that are Redeemed from a vain
Conversation; and to have a Witness within us, even the Spirit, to bear Witness
with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God; and show out of a good
Conversation the Virtues of him, that has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light. Proving that the Grace of God that has appeared to us, has
Effectually Taught us to deny all ungodliness, and Worldly Lust, and to live
Godlily, and Righteously, and soberly in this present evil World: And that we
do not only look to the Blood of Christ, to deliver us from the guilt of sin;
but we do also Live by Faith on him, and do find his Blood Effectual to Cleanse
us from the Filth of Sin; 1 John 1. 7. so should we in our inquiry after this
Mighty Savior, be Serious and Humble; Resolving to guide our Reason by the
Word of God, Subjecting all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls thereunto;
Humbly imploring the Spirits aid and special assistance, without which we
cannot discern the things of God, because they are Spiritually discerned. And
surely, this mighty Salvation can be wrought out, by no other then an Almighty
Savior; whom we Read of in Isa. 63. 1. One that speaks in Righteousness, that
has dyed Garments; and therefore Travielleth in the greatness of his strength,
and is mighty to save; and therefore this mighty deliverer must be no other
then God's fellow, which no Created being can be spoken of; Zacha. 13. 7. And
this is evident from the Nature of the Work, which has been already proved he
was to do; which was to bring in an Everlasting Righteousness, and to make an
Atonement for sin; Dan. 9. 24. Which no Created Being could do, for no Man nor
Angel, nor any Created Being whatsoever can be Profitable to God, as he that is
wise can be Profitable to himself, Job. 22. 2. And not only are Christ's
Disciples, but all Created beings are unprofitable Servants; Job 4. 18. Behold
he puteth no trust in his servants; and he charge his Angels with folly: None
can do any more then their duty, therefore none can come in as Mediators
between God and sinful Creatures; none have any Excellency but what they have
received from God: Therefore it is but their duty, to return all back again to
him, from whom they received their Beings, and all the Excellency thereof; and
the more any Creature receives, the more is he in Debt to the Giver. So that it
is utterly impossible, for a Creature to interpose, between the offended
Justice of God and a guilty Sinner; the Nature of a Created being will not,
cannot admit of such a thing: Therefore, seeing our Lord Jesus Christ did
interpose between God and Sinners; he must be such a days Man, as could lay his
hand both on God and Man; and therefore must be that Child given to us, whose
name is called Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father;
spoken of in Isa. 9. 6. And indeed were he not so, we could have no Comfort
here, nor happiness hereafter by all that he did or Suffered.

For, First, What comfort could we have here, or Expectation of happiness
hereafter; from what he did if he were but a Man, or any Created being only; If
he were but a Creature, though such an imaginary One as Mr. Considerator speaks
of, in Page. 57. 1. and Colum 1. 2. Created before God Created the Heavens and
the Earth yet he being but a Creature, could merit nothing for us, that Command
to Love the Lord with all the heart, and all the might, and all the strength,
makes it the indispensable duty of every Created Being; to do all that they are
Capable of doing in Obedience to God: And in so doing, they do but their own
duty, which is but their Reasonable Service. The Nature of a Created Being, if
we could suppose such a One; as might be Ten Thousand times more Glorious and
Excellent, then the most Glorious Angel in Heaven; yet being but a Creature, it
ows its being, and all that it is Capable of doing to its Creator; It can pay
no more then its own Just Debt: And the more Excellent it is, the more it is
obliged to God to pay the same. So that it is utterly impossible, to find Works
of Superrogation in any Created being; so then if Christ were not the true God,
he could Merit nothing for us by all that he did, for If you tell me there have
been some Men, such as Abraham and David, and the like; for whose sake God
says, he will do good to their Posterity: I Answer, such Expressions are
always to be taken Figuratively as they were Types of Christ; or as
Declarations of Gods Faithfulness, in keeping Covenant with Abraham and his
Seed for ever: But all those Men had a Mediator, to take away there own Guilt,
for it is Written, there is none good, no, not one. Therefore they being saved
by the Mercy of God, conveyed to them through the Merrits of Christ; it is
impossible that they could do any thing, for the sake of which, God should
show. Mercy to their Posterity. For if an inocent Creature can do but its duty,
how much less can a sinful Man, though renewed by Grace; do any thing to Merit
for another.

And here both Mr. Considerator, and our Nameless Author, may take an Answer to
their Babels-Tower; that they have thought to build so High as to reach Heaven,
by their following Christ Example; concerning which, I shall only ask these
Gentlemen, Two or Three Queries.

First, Whether they think the Law of God was not a perfect Rule of
Righteousness, though our Lord had never come into the World?

Secondly, If it was necessary, that our Lord should come into the World to
give us an Example only or chiefly; what should be the Reason, why he was not
sent as soon, or before Sin entered into the World?

Thirdly, If we are saved by following Christ's Example, what is become of
Abraham, David; and all the Old Testament Saints that lived and dyed before he
gave this Example?

Fourthly, I would ask Mr. Considerator himself and my Nameless Author; whether
they do not think in their Consciences, if God should enter into Judgment with
them, and deal with them according to their following, or not following
Christ's Example; they must not unavoidably perish without any hope of Mercy.
Perhaps these Gentlemen's Ignorance, both of God, the Law, and of Sin, which is
a transgression of the same; may furnish them with a ready Answer to the last
Query, the same that one of their Tribe gave me, above twenty years ago to a
Question of the like Nature; namely, that he did not know, whether a vain
Thought were a Sin or no? But whatever their Answer may be to the aforesaid
Queries, I am taught by the Word of God, and sound Reason drawn from the same;
to believe that it is these Gentlemen's Ignorance of God, of his Law, and of
themselves; that first laid the Foundation of this Antichristian Fabric in
their Hearts; and is still the Principal Matter and Stuff, by which this Babel
Tower is carried on and supported.

But let us next consider, what Comfort here or Happiness hereafter, we could
expect from our Redeemers Suffering; if he were but a Man, or any Created Being
whatsoever: And here it may be remembered, that it has been already proved,
that no Creature can merit any thing from God by doing; but may not an innocent
Creature's Suffering, merit something at the Hands of God for others?

To this I answer, there are but three Accounts or Reasons, for which we can
suppose God should afflict or punish his Creatures.

1. His own absolute Sovereignty, and unaccountable Dominion that God has over
all his Creatures; and whatever he does on this Account. We all know he can do
no Injustice. Or,

2. God punishes the Creature for its own Sin or Guilt. Or,

3. For the Guilt of some other.

But our Lord Jesus Christ did not suffer for himself, for though the Messiah
was cut off, it was not for himself but for his People; Dan. 9. 16. For He had
no Sin nor was guile found in his Mouth. And it has been proved by Gods own
Proclamation, in Exodus 34. 6, 7. that Guilt must be taken away, or else the
guilty Sinner cannot be cleared; and so will remain under the Law and under the
Curse. Now Guilt cannot be taken away, without suffering the Punishment that
Guilt bound the Sinner over to; this could not be done by a Man only, or any
limited Power whatsoever. This Mr. Considerator not only owns in page 31 and
32. but also denies that the Acts of Christ, though they were of an infinite
Value, which yet he will not own they were; but if they were, he argues against
the Satisfaction of Justice thereby; because he says, One infinlte
Satisfaction is not equivalent to all those Guilts and Punishments, each of
which is infinite: And this he calls a Reasoning or Computation, which is
self-evident; but why does not Mr. Considerator see, that his Arguing is
self-contradictory, one while he will not own our Lord Jesus Christ to be God,
because he says, it implies more infinites than one: Which he says, is
impossible.

Now, to render him an insufficient Savior, he tells us of a great many,
infinite Guilts, which one infinite Savior is not able to grapple with. What
Pains does this Gentleman take to prove, that he is not of Paul's Mind and
Faith; who says, Christ loved him and gave hsmself for him. And that he is not
concerned to be one of that Number spoken of, in Isa. 53. 3, 4, 5. where it is
said he bare our Iniquities, Griefs, Sorrows, Chastisements; and by his Stripes
we are healed. And if he bare our Sins or Punishments, as the Scripture does so
often declare; he either bare all that was due from Divine Justice, or he bare
but a part: If he bare but a part, we are but partly cleared, he is but a part
Savior; Guilt is but in part removed, and finally we can be but partly saved,
which is to be fully condemned; for God will by no means clear the guilty.

And whereas Mr. Considerator speaks of a great many infinite Sins and Guilts;
yet it is certain that Sin neither is, nor can in its own Nature be infinite;
though as it is committed against Infinite Justice and Goodness, it has a kind
of infinite Evil in it; but properly it is not, nor can be infinite: For as
there is but one Good that is God, so there is but one Infinite, that is, God.
And indeed Mr. Considerator, should have considered, that as he argues in his
33d. page; he makes it as possible for Sin to destroy the very being of God, as
to overthrow the Satisfaction of Christ. For Sin is Enmity against God, and if
it had power it would destroy God; but as great, and as exceeding sinful as sin
is, yet the Power of God is able to subdue it, and the Goodness of God is able
to overcome it, and the Sufrings of Christ are able to take away the Guilt of
it.

And whereas he says, that one (supposed) infinite Satisfaction, is not
equivalent to a great many infinite guilts, I have already proved, that our
Lords Satisfaction was not supposed, but really such as Answred Divine Justice,
by taking away all guilt from all his Elect, else they could not be cleared,
and consequently not saved. And as for his setting many infinites of guilt and
sin, against one infinite satisfaction; if it had pleased God, to endue him but
with half so much sound Reason, as he has bestowed on many of the Common
People; of whom Mr. Considerator has Prophesied in his Page 30. Colum 1. That
they shall turn Divines* and raze the very Foundation of Babylon. I say, had
Mr. Considerator been a Legal Freeman of the Commonwealth of sound Reason, as
he Boasts Page 44. Colum 1. he would have easily seen, that his Argument, is
every Whit as strong for the destroying of God himself, and Causing him to
cease to be; as against the satisfaction of Christ. For if there be a great
many infinite sins and guilts, and therefore one infinite satisfaction cannot
Answer them; because many to one is odds: By the same Reason, there being a
great many infinite Evils, and but one infinite good; many to one being odds,
the many infinite Evils must destroy the one infinite good: Thus we see God
confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and makes their Knowledge foolishness; and it
is a thing to be much observed, that there is scarce any one Argument, that our
pretenders to Reason make use of against our Lord Jesus Christ: But when it is
looked into, a Man may see that an Atheist may with as much Reason, urge the
same against the very being of God. The Wisdom, and Justice, and Soveraginty of
God herein is to be humbly and thankfully adored, in that he is pleased to hide
those things from the wise and prudent; and to reveal them to Babes, even so O
Father because it pleases thee, This should teach all, both learned and
unlearned, to believe God to be, as he himself reveals himself in his Word to
be; least while we proudly go about to make God like our Selves, we provoke him
to Leave us to our Selves; and then Wisdom must perish from the Wise, and
understanding from the prudent; and in denying God to be as he is; we shall
proceed to deny him to be. And indeed, as great Charnock has well observed, of
the two; it is a greater evil to deny him to be as he is, then to deny him to
be.

Let every sincere Christian therefore, make it his daily Prayer to Almighty
God, to give him an understanding, that he may know him that is true; and also
know, that he is in him, that is true; even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is
the true God and eternal Life, 1 John 5. 20. and let us, one and all with Heart
and Voice, yield Obedience to the will and Command of God; Joh. 5. in honoring
the Son, even as we honor the Father: Joining with those Blessed Ones we Read
of Rev. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Singing Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving to the
Lamb, who has redeemed us by his blood, and made us Kings, and Priests unto
our God: Saying, Blessing and Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him that sits
upon the Throne; and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And let all that Love our
Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, say, A men, and Amen.

FINIS.

