Imprimatur

RAD. BATHVRST. Vice-Can. Oxon.

FIRMIANUS and DVBITANTIVS, OR Certain DIALOGUES Concerning Atheism,
Infidelity, Popery, and other Heresies and Schisme's that trouble the peace of
the Church, and are destructive of Primitive Piety.

Written in a plain and easy method, for the satisfaction of doubting
Christians. By THO. GOOD, D.D. Master of Baliol College in Oxon.

Take heed Brethren. least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbeleif, in
departing from the living God. Heb. 3.12.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for THO. HANCOX
Bookseller in Hereford. 1674.

To the Reader.
COnsidering the many Learned and judicious Tracts, that are extant against
Atheism, Infidelity, Popery, with other Heresies, Sects, and Schisms,
destructive of the Ancient Catholic Religion, and of that Peace and Unity,
Love and Charity, which is the badge and mark of Christ's sheep; I thought it
superfluous to add my poor Scrible after such fair Copy's, but observing the
length, and learning of those elaborate Tractat's, which many men have neither
money to buy, leisure to read, nor judgment to understand, I conceived that
these few short Discourses, (not fitted, nor indeed intended, for the perusal
of the learned) might nevertheless, be gratum opus agricolis, not altogether
unprofitable for men of ordinary Capacityes, to which purpose I have used such
means and methods. That I might be the better understood by these men, I have
endeavored that the matter of these discourses (for the most part) might be
plain and familiar, the phrase and expressions intelligible. I have made use of
two feigned names. ( Firmianus and Dubitantius,) to personate the sound
Believer, and the doubting Sceptick Christian, who are brought upon the Stage,
disputing by way of Dialogue, which is most suiteable to men of short
discourse, and most apt to comply with their apprehension. I hope the more
learned Reader, (if any such shall give themselves the trouble to peruse this
little Manuel) will not Censure the plainness of it, but rather commend the
Charity of the Author toward the w^ll meaning Christian, who amongst those many
Treatises, that have been written, can meet with very few that are calculated
for his Meridian, and consequently is apt to be blown about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftines whereby they lie in wait
to deceive* and who these gamesters are, he that has but half an eye may see,
and how many a poor soul has in these times of confusion been blown about from
one erroneous opinion to another, until he has turned Seeker, Scheptick, and at
last down right Atheist, there is no man so great a stranger in our Jerusalem
that can be ignorant.

Wherefore if these short and familiar discourses may have the happiness to
prevent the falling of any unsettled, wavering soul, or to restore any that has
fallen to a sound mind, 'twill be my great satisfaction and rejoying to be able
to apply to my self that of St. James, cap. 5.19. Brethren if any of you do err
from the truth and one convert him, let him know that he that converts a sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a
multitude of sins. Now the God of truth and peace grant, that these poor and
weak endeavors may work that good effect upon the erring seduced sinner, and
that the multitude of my sins may be covered, with the long white robe of my
blessed Saviors righteousness, for his holy name sake. Amen.

Thine in the truth that is i^ Christ Jesus. THO. GOOD.

DIALOGUE I. Against ATHEISM.
Firm. GOod morrow to my old Friend Dubitantius.


Dub. A good day to you, Firmianus.


Firm. Methinks I read some discontent in your face: what may be the cause of
it?


Dub. There is a great cause; I have been so long distracted betwixt diversity
of Opinions in point of Religion, that I am now doubting whether there be any
Religion at all, or any Supreme invisible Deity to be worshipped.


Firm. This is the common result of vain Janglings, that they usually end in
Atheism and Infidelity. But pray tell me, is it possible, that there should be
such fierce disputes, and bitter contentions about a very nothing? Certainly
such sharp disputes about the various manners of Gods worship, do strongly
argue that Religion is a thing of highest concern, or that all the wisest men
that ever were in the world are Fools, and madmen, to oppose, hate, malign,
persecute one another even unto death, for a groundless fancy, a very nothing.


Dub. Your discourse is very Rational, for I suppose wise men would never
wrangle about a mere Romance; yet I confess I have had strange irrational
thoughts, against the very Being of God, and the truth of any Religion.


Firm. You justly term such thoughts irrational. Did not I once tell you, that
when you had fors^ken your Mother the Church of England, (the most Apostolical
Catholic in the whole world) in short time you would become a Libertine, an
Atheist, any thing, or nothing?


Dub. Do you think that all Nonconformists, and Separatists from your Church,
are Libertines and Atheists?


Firm. I am not so uncharitable: but I must tell you, that causeless separation
is a very greiveous sin, and punished many times with the seve^est judgments,
such as are Spiritual blindness, Hardness of heart, and a Reprobate mind.


Dub. I fear those judgments have overtaken me: for since I became a Separatist
from your Church, I have been very cold at my Devotion, made little conscience
of public, or secret Prayer; of Obedience to those powers which God has
ordained; of Love, Charity, Honesty, and Upright dealing toward my neighbors.
I have lived an Atheist in practice so long, that I am now ready to be an
Atheist in Opinion, and to say with the fool in the 14. Psalm. There is no God.
I have so long s^ept out of one opinion into another, that at length I am
become a very Sceptick in Religion, doubting of all, and fixing upon none.


Firm. Truly Sir, you made good your name by your practice, which renders you a
right Dubitantius. But pray tell me by what degrees, and methods, you have
stepped out of our Church into the borders of Atheism, that I may with the more
facility bring you back the same way, by which you have unhappily gone out from
us, into the bosom of your dear Mother.


Dub. Your Demand is reasonable. It Is not unknown to you that I was once a true
son of the Church of England, you shall hereafter know for what reasons I left
her Communion, and became a Presbyterian: and to be brief I stayed not long, in
that opinion, but presently I proceeded Independent, then Anabaptist, then
Quaker, then Papist, then Antiscripturist, then what you now find me, almost an
Atheist.


Firm. I hope you are not fixed in that wretched Opinion, as resolvedly to deny
him a being, that gave you yours.


Dub. Sir, I am not; but have many doubts whether there be, and as many
thoughts that there is not a God, Creator and ^overnour of Heaven and Earth,
and all things in them cont^ined.


Firm. I have heretofore taken you for a rational man, and therefore I desire a
reason from you of such thoughts and doubts.


Dub. Those many Controversies, and sharp contentions about religion and
worship of God, have caused me to doubt, whether there be any Religion at all,
or any God to be worshipped.


Firm. Is it imaginable that so many wise men should contend about a trifle, a
fancy, a very nothing? It Is strange that what should be a most rational motive
to persuade you to believe that there is a God, and a Religion, should make you
doubt of both. There must be something in it, that draws so many Combatants
into the field, Zealous Sticklers for their several Modes, and Forms, of
Religion, hateing ^ne another even unto death.


Dub. This you have intimated before. I am fully convinced, that so many fierce
disputes about Religion, do argue, that it is not a mere fancy. I pray Sir,
enquire no further after the reasons of my doubts, but let me hear from you,
how they may be satisfied.


Firm. Most willingly; but that we may proceed the more methodically, let it be
agreed be^wixt us, what is the true notion of God. Upon supposition that God
is, what do you conceive of him in your mind?


Dub. It Is agreed by all, that the notion or conception of God in our mind, is,
Dr. Moors Antidote, and Dr. Stillings^eets Orig. Sacrae p^g. 395.
that he is a being infinitely perfect.


Firm. If God be a being infinitely perfect* then God is: for a being
infinitely perfect must necessarily exist and be.


Dub. Do not we say, a Rose is a flower, yet it does not follow (at a^l times)
that a Rose is: for in the winter there is no such thing as a Rose, and yet the
proposition is true.


Firm. There is a vast difference betwixt a being absolutely perfect, and that
which has a limited and finite perfection; for in this the essence may be
really abstracted from the actual existence, but not in that. For a being
infinitely or absolutely perfect, must necessarily exist; not contingently, or
impossibly; for those modes are inconsistent with a being absolutely perfect;
for whatsoever does exist contingently, is in possibility not to exist, which
is an imperfection: and impossibility of existence is the greatest imperfection
of all other.


Dub. This reason is so obscure, that albeit I cannot reply to it, yet I am not
satisfied with it. I fear some fallacy lies hid in the bowels of it.


Firm. I believe not; yet because you do not fully comprehend it, I shall
proceed to others tha^ are more plain and intelligible.


Firm. What say you then to that reason which is drawn from the General consent
of all nations, as well Heathens as Christians; Nulla gens tam barbara, etc.
says Cicero; No nation was ever so barbarous which did not confess a God; now
the consent of all nations is the law and dictate of nature, so that it is
impossible that all nations should consent in so great a falsehood, as the
Atheist endeavors to maintain.

Add to this their general practice in worshipping some supreme Deity; that
rather then worship no God at all, they would worship the Sun, Moon and Stars,
ye^ the most contemptible Creatures, the Crocodile, Onyons, Garlic, a Red
Cloth, any thing they first met with in the morning; so powerful is the
impulse and inclination of nature in this great business of Religion, which is
the proper distinguis^ing Character betwixt a man and a beast: as Lactantius
has long since observed.


Dub. I confess that the general consent of nations in the acknowledging and
worshipping a God, has been one main reason, that has kept me from being a
downright Atheist: Yet I have somewhat to say against it; because this consent
is not so general as is pretended, for I have heard there have been men in
Ancient times, and not a few in these we live in, who have said, not only in
their hearts, but also with their tongues, there is no God.


Firm. What are two, or three men in former ages, or a fe^ debauched persons in
this, to the general consent of all civil nations, from the beginning of the
world? Happily you have heard that so^e have denied, the Sno^ to be white, the
Fire to be hot. Monstrous opinions are no more a prejudice to the dictates of
nature, and common consent of all nations, then monstrous shapes and forms in
the body are to the laws of nature, which she generally observes, in the
forming of men and beasts in their due proportions, and lineaments* What if
some few, out of discontent, singularity, animosity, or brutish sensuality,
have turned Atheists? Is it not a great prejudice to this brutish opinion, That
few Sober men (if any) have been of their party, but such as have been first
Atheists in practice, sensual, debauched wretches? Nam quo quis in vita purior,
etc. says Cicero: ^y how much any man has been more pure in his li^e and
conversation, by so much his thoughts of the Gods have been more sound and
rational.


Dub. I confess it is a great prejudice to Atheism, that the Debaucher sort are
the greatest (i^ not the only) sticklers for it; but still my doubt remains,
and therefore I desire to hear from you some more evident reasons, for my full
satisfaction.


Firm. Most willingly I shall comply with you^ desire. My Third Argument shall
be this.

If the world had a beginning, and was not from all eternity, then 'twas made
by something else; for nothing can make it self. It Is as clear as the Sun at
noon day, whatsoever is made, is made by another; for that which is not, cannot
work, and consequently cannot produce it self, nor a^y other ^^ing: now this
something else must be made o^ some other cause, or else it self must be the
supreme cause of all things. If you affirm the former, you must run up into an
infini^e number of Causes, which is impossible, or else you must come at last
to one supreme independent being, which is the maker of all things, he himself
being made of none, which is the eternal God.


Dub. I begin to feel the weight of this Argument. If you can clearly prove the
world to have had a beginning, I shall be your Convert, and readily confess,
that verily there is a God that has made the world, and judges the earth.


Firm. This I hope I shall perform by his gracious assistance, whose cause I
plead, and whose poor sinful creature I am.

First, Then by the world we understand the whole Systeme, or Collection of
things in it contained, Sun, Moon, Stars, Air, Earth, Water, Men, Beasts,
Fo^les, Fishes, Plants, and all things whatsoever comprehended in this vast
circumference.


Dub. I willingly grant that by t^^ World we are ^o understand all things
therein contained, as you have enumerated them, which make up the visible
world, created by Almighty God, in six days, as your Moses would have us
believe.


Firm. That none of these were from all eternity, I shall prove by instancing
in two of the most principal of them, to wit, the Sun in the Firmament, and Man
that dwells upon the face of the earth, by which you may judge of the rest.


Dub. If you can prove that the Sun was not from eternity, and that there was a
first Man, and consequently that mankind had a beginning, I shall be abundantly
satisfied, it that wherein at present I much doubt, viz. The worlds beginning.


Firm. Before I proceed to my arguments, you must give me leave, to lay down
certain principles which no rational man will deny; As for example.

1. Quicquid fit, fit ab alio, whatsoever is made, is made by something else;
for nothing can make it self.

2. Omne ens est vel factum, fi^itum, dependens, vel non factum, infinitum,
independens; every thing that is, is either made, finite, independent; or not
made, infinite, independent.

3. Vere i^finitum non habet principium, aut finem; that which is truly
infinite, has neither beginning, not end.

4. Non datur pro^essus in infinitum; we cannot pro^eed in numbering, from
effects to causes, or in any other way imaginable infinitely, but we must come
^o some period o^ end.

5. Infinitum no^ potest pertransiri, it is impossible to pass over or through
that which is infinite, so as to come to an end of it, seeing what is infinite
has no end.

6. Infinito ^il potest addi, to that which is infini^e nothing can be added to
make it greater, or more then 'twas before that addition.

7. Aeternitas est duratio ^nterminabilis sine partium successione, in qua non
datur prius and posterius; Eternity in its full and proper notion, is a
boundless duration, without beginning or end, without succession of parts, as
that one part of it should be either before or after another.


Dub. No rational man can deny any of these principles: but I much wonder, how
so great a master of reason, as Aristotle was, should grant all or most of
these, and hold the eternity of the world, and not be sensible of manifest
contradictions.


Firm. That the Eternity of the world is a flat contradiction to many of these
principles, is evident; that Aristotle was an acu^e Philosopher, cannot be
denied; but it must be granted he was but a man, and one that had only the
light of corrupted nature to guide him, he might therefore err, not knowing the
Scripture, nor indeed the power of God, and therefore he was ignorant how the
world could have a beginning; and seeing he very resolutely maintained, that ex
nihilo ni^il fit, that whatsoever is made, is made of something, and that of
something else, and so we mu^^ proceed in infinitum, which he positively denied
as absurd and impossible, as well he might; or else the world must be from all
eternity, proceeding from the first mover, (whom he conceived to be a
necessary, not a free Agent) as heat from the fire, or light from the sun, and
therefore eternally existing with that first mover, or first cause: however
some have affirmed, that in his Book de Mundo (if that be his) he retracted
this error, which has been a grand occasion of Atheism, as F^rra* upon Aquin^s
^ontra Gent. has truly observed.


Dub. And well he might, if 'twas built upon ^o sandy a foundation, as to make
God a necessary Agent, for that was to render him inferior to some of his
Creatures, which are free and voluntary. But pray leave the Philosopher to his
other errors, and self-contradictions, and make it appear, if you can, that he
erred in asserting the eternity of the world.


Firm. That I hope to perform by principles granted by all sober men.

There is nothing in the world, but either 'twas made, and had a beginning, or
'twas not made, but was from all eternity; now it is evident, that there is no
particular thing in this visible world, which was not made. The Sun, Moon, and
Stars were made, Men, Beasts and Plants were made. For brevity sake, I shall
only instance in the Sun, and in Man, that they were made, and had a beginning,
and consequently the Moon, and Stars, ^easts, and Plants.

1. That the Sun was made, and had a beginning, I thus demonstrate: That which
was not from all eternity, but had a beginning, was made, and that by something
else, because nothing can make it self; but the Sun was not from all eternity.

The Major is evident, the Minor is thus confirmed; If the Sun was from all
eternity, then either it moved, from all eternity, or it stood still* if it
moved from eternity, then 'twas eternally together in the East, Meridian, and
West, not first in the East, then in the Meridian, then in the West: for in an
eternal motion, (if any such motion were possible) there can be no ^uccession*
no first, or last, ( prius or posterius) because in such a motion there is
neither beginning no^ end.


Dub. It Is evident, by what you say, that the Sun has not moved from eternity,
but how can you prove it did not stand still from eternity, seeing there are
some that hold it always stood still, and never moved to this day, but that
the earth moves and the Sun not at all.


Firm. It hinders not the force of the Argument, whether you hold the earth
move, and the Sun stands still, or the contrary; for it is but shifting the
Scene, and putting the Earth instead of the Sun, and the reason will be
altogether the same.


Dub. I perceive it does not, and therefore let me hear how you can prove that
the Sun did not stand still from all eternity.


Firm. If the Sun stood still from eternity, then there was an eternal night
upon half the face, or Globe of the earth, and an eternal day up on the other
half, (or at least many other gross absurditie^ would follow.) No vicissitudes
or changes of night and day, summer and winter, spring and autumn, and
consequently no productions, or generations of Men, Beasts, Plants, for that
half of the earth which was deprived of the light and heat of the Sun, (which
as a second cause gives life and vegetation to all the inferior Creatures, that
have life and growth) could bring forth no vegetables, or animals; and the
other half, which was always scorched with too much heat, must of necess^ity
be as barren by such heat, as the other by extreme cold; and so we should have
an eternal Sun to no purpose, and then what will become of your eternal world?

Besides if the Sun stood still from eternity, what caused it to move in time?
of its own nature certainly it could never awake out of an eternal sleep: if
any thing else set it in motion, then either it must be something that was moved
by some superior Cause, and this cause by another, and so to an infinite number
of causes, which is absurd and impossible, or else it must be the first mover
and efficient cause of all things, which is God.


Dub. You have abundantly satisfied me, that the Sun had not an eternal being,
and consequently that neither men, beasts, or plants, could be from all
eternity; however I desire to hear from you some particular arguments against
the eternity of mankind.


Firm. There is no particular man but had* beginning, was made and begotten by
his Parents, they by theirs, and so we must ascend from son to father, up to
all eternity, usque ad infinitum, which is utterly impossible, or else we must
come to a first man, who could not make or beget himself. Now if every
particular man be made, and begotten, then the whole kind must be made, because
the whole kind is nothing else, but the Collection of all particulars. Every
one of them we see by daily experience had a beginning, and is begotten or
made; therefore it is made by some other, for quicquid fit, fit ab alio, and
this of some other, and so forward until we come to the supreme cause of all
things, which is God.

Again, Either all men that are, or ever were in the world, were made; or some
were made, and some not made, but had being of themselves: if so, it is
impossible that these men should be of the same kind, with the men that were
made, for that which is made depending upon another, cannot be of the same kind
with that which is not made and independent, because a thing that is not made,
infinite, independent, is of another kind from what is made, finite, and
dependent; and these two (finite and infinite, dependent and independent) are
opposite members, dividing one and the same most common kind.


Dub. It Is a clear demonstration, that every particular man being made, the
whole kind must be made; hut pray tell me, might there not be a perpetual
successive generation of men up to all eternity, and so a processus in
infinitum, an infinite number of them without all beginning?


Firm. This is altogether impossible; for in a Catologue, or Series of things,
every one of which had a beginning, as it is evident that every particular man
had (and consequently the whole Series) there cannot possible be a processus in
infinitum, up to all eternity, or an infinite succession of causes and effects,
without all beginning; Eternity properly so called, has neither beginning, no^
end, for it is duratio interminabilis. an infinite unlimited duration, and
therefore whatsoever had a beginning cannot possibly be eternal, but the whole
series of men had a beginning, for whatsoever is made had a beginning, but the
whole Series of men was made, therefore it had a beginning, for every
particular man had a beginning: therefore the whole Series, which is nothing
else but a collection of all particulars, and therefore it cannot be equal or
comensurable to eternity, which is without beginning.

Again, If the ^eries, or rank of men did run up to eternity, or into an
infinite number of successive generations, then that infinite number of men
have been swallowed up of death many millions of years before this age we live
in, and so death has passed over that number, which is contrary to that certain
principle, infinitum non potest pertransiri; it is impossible to pass over, or
through that which is infinite: nay then ^here would not be any man living at
present; for if an infinite number of men are already dead, then all the men
that ever were or may be are dead, for infinito nihil pot^st ^ddi. Yea if the
world should continue ten millions of years longer, there could not be after
those ten millions of years more men in it, then there were ten millions of
years before this present; for nothing can be added to that which is properly
infinite, to make it greater in magnitude, or more in number, neither could the
Father be before the Son, nor the great Grandfather before or elder then
either; nam in aternitate non datur prius and posterius. In this infinite
duration, there is no former or latter, and consequently had the world been
from all eternity, it could not truly be said, that any man was before another;
not Abraham before Isaac, or he before Jacob.


Dub. You have made it very plain, that the world had a beginning, and
consequently (because it is ridiculous to suppose that it had its beginning from
it self, chance, or Atoms) that there is one supreme cause of infinite power
and wisdom, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things therein
contained, which is the Glorious and eternal God, of whose being I hope I shall
hence forth never entertain the least doubt.


Firm. Though you seem to be well satisfied with these reasons, which I have
urged for the being of God, yet because something in them are not so
intelligible to men of ordinary Capacities, who perhaps may cast their eyes
upon these papers; you shall give me leave to use other reasons that are more
plain and familiar, and such as may persuade more with men of ordinary
abilities, then those that I have proposed to you^ self.


Dub. Though I am fully satisfied in that great fundamental point, yet in this
I commend your Charity, and do not envy the satisfaction of others. But I
believe you cannot allege more convincing reasons th^n those which you have
already made use of; however I desire to hear what you can further say, for the
Con^irmation of this very great truth.


Firm. The other reason which I shall produce shall b^ taken from the Goodly
fabric of the world, the harmonious order of all things therein contained, the
horror of conscience in wicked men; the dread of perjury in very heathens, the
appearance of evil Spirits, their strange working in witches and wizards; which
may be seen more largely treated of in Doctor Fotherbys Atheomastix, Doctor
Andrews Cattechisme, Du-Plessis truth of Christian Religion, Grotius of the
same, Doctor Mores Antidote against Atheism, Parsons Resolutions, Doctor
Stillingfleets Origines sacrae, Gales Gentiles Court, Mr. Baxters Christian
Religion, with many others: I shall briefly sum up what these learned men have
wrote at large, beginning with that argument which is taken from the Goodly
fabric of the world. 1. It Was excellently said of Tertul. lib. de Resur.
facilius credas Prophetiae si sis discipulus naturae, if we be conversant in
the works of nature, they will lead us to the knowledge and belief of
Scripture. There is a most sweet harmony, betwixt those two Books, the Book of
Nature and the Book of Grace. What is said of the one, monstrat Quaelibet herba
Deum; every herb or plant does show there is a God, is most true of the
Scripture; Quaelibet linea Deum refert, every line in this Book, shows us the
power, providence, and wisdom of God.

And if the Atheist will disdain to read this excellent Commentary upon the
Book of nature, let him seriously peruse the Text, the harmonious beauty and
order of the Universe. Plato and some other of the Ancients, were used to
demonstrate the being of a Supreme Deity by a Clock; whose hammer when it
strikes shows the next wheel that moves it, that the next, and so forward
until you come to the Clockmaker; who made all the wheels, and caused their
regular motions.

Another instance is commonly made use of, If a man should travel into a far
Country, at present not inhabited, and there should behold some Goodly
building, he would presently conclude it grew not out of the Ground, neither
did the be^sts make it, but it was the work of some ingenious Artists; Or if a
man should behold a well ordered army of Soldiers, keeping rank and file,
turning altogether (as if they were animated by one Soul) sometimes to the
right hand, sometimes to the left, he would presently conclude that there was
some expert Commander to direct them. Even so he that casts his Eye upon this
Goodly Fabric of the world, must needs acknowledge the great Power and Wisdom
of its Maker; He that shall seriously observe the harmonious order, the regular
motions of its parts, must needs acknowledge the truth of that saying, Psalm.
19.1. the heavens declare the Glory of God, and the firmament shows his ha^dy
work. And Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for
the inv^sible things of God are clearly seen, by those things that are made;
viz his eternal power and Godhead. Job. 26.7. He stretches out the North over
the empty place, and hangs the earth upon nothing. Seriously consider what is
wrote in the, 36.37.38. Chapt. etc. of that Book, besides many other excellent
Texts in the holy Scripture, declaring how the Glory, wisdom, power of God is
manifest in the admirable frame of the world, and the exquisite order and
harmony of all things therein contained. See how the Heavens warm and water the
Earth; how the earth, brings forth the grass, herbs, and plants* how these feed
the beasts; how the beasts serve the several necessities of man; who is the
only Creature (the immortal Angels excepted) that can in a rational manner
serve, and set forth the glory of his Creator.

O how desirable are all his works, and that a man may see even to a spark,
^ccles. 42.22. none so little as does not manifest the Glory, none so great,
which is not subject to the Almighty power, and wise disposal of the Creatou^r.

Behold the in^nimate Creatures, how they declare it, the Sea whose proud waves
are bounded by his power, Job. 38.11. of whose wonderful ebbing and flowing,
no man is able to render a satisfactory account; certainly those that go down
to the Sea in Ships, and do business in great waters, these men see the works
of the Lord, and his w^nders in the deep. Ps. 107.

The earth which contains so much rich treasure in the bowels of it, such
v^riety of plants, herbs, flowers, both for use and delight in the Surface of
it.

The Air that compasses about both Sea and Earth, receiving multitudes of
vapors, and exhalations from them both, and returning them in grateful dews
and sho^res.

The wind that is brought out of Gods treasury, no man knows whence it comes,
nor whether it goes; the wisest Philosophers are at stand, they know nor what
to say of it.

The lightning and thunder, two terrible, yet very useful Creatures; frost and
snow, and ice and hail, all which declare the Glory of God: see Psalm. 147.148.
But above all the inanimate Creatures, those that are above them, all in place
and exellency, do magnify the Glory of their Creator; as the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. O says David, Psalm. 8. when I consider the Moon and the Stars, which
thou have ordained, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, and the Son
of man that thou visitest him?

Look we on the animate Creatures, plants, herbs, flowers, grass, grain, how
wonderfully they grow and multiply? consider their variety, beauty* virtue,
pleasures, profits, monstrat Quaelibet herba Deum, every herb points out a
Deity.

Consider the fish in the Sea, the beasts in the Land, the fowls of the Air,
see how they declare the glory of their maker, peruse with a serious and
diligent Eye the, 39.40.41. Chap. of Job as before.

Last of all, Thou stupid Creature, consider thy self, that art fearfully, and
wonderfully made. View the excellent harmony, consent and use of all the parts
in thy little world, with what dutiful care they serve each other, so that the
head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you; the Consideration of which
excellent frame, and contexture of parts in the body of man, made the learned
Galen stand amazed, and turned him from an Atheist, to confess, and believe a
God, and to compose an hymn, in praise of his Almighty Creator.

In a word if we consider the whole Creation, the harmony and Subordination of
the several parts of that Goodly Fabric of the Universe; they do wonderfully
declare the wisdom, power, and Glory of the omnipotent eternal maker of Heaven
and Earth.

If we behold how the Heavens serve the Earth, the Earth the Plants, these the
Beasts, these man, whose great end and errand for which he was sent into this
world, was to serve him, who made the inferior Creatures for man, and man for
himself, we must needs break out into the Psalmists holy Rapture, O Lord how
marveillous are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all: and he must
certainly be a very unwise man, that does not consider them, and a very Fool,
that will not understand them.


Dub. From what you taught me a little before, that it is utterly impossible for
any thing to make it self, or by the power of its own nature, and to spring out
of nothing into something; and by what you have now delivered, from the goodly
frame, and fabric of the world, and the harmonious order of its parts, it is
evident that it owes not its original to chance, which is a very dream: it is as
clear as the Sun at noon day, that their is an Allwise, an Almighty God, the
Glorious maker of Heaven and Earth; however I pray you let me hear your other
reason, from the sacred bond of Oaths, the horror of Cons^ience, etc.


Firm. It Is evident that very Heathens, and mere natural men, that have made no
Conscience of telling a thousand lies, of drunkenness, fornification, theft,
malice, envy, revenge, etc. durst not seriously and solemnly take one false
o^th, for fear of divine vengeance which has been executed upon perjured
persons, as i^ evident, from histories sacred and profane. It Is a most
remarkable piece of history, which is related of three notorious villains,
which did swear against Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem; as Eusebius reports it,
lib. 6. Chap. 18. of Eccl^s. Hist. And about the year 1661. we had a very
signal instance of Divine justice, executed upon on G. at Ludlow, in the
Council of the Marches, who taking a false oath in that Court, was stricken in
the same place presently with sudden death. Such judgments as these against
perjury were so frequently observed by some heathens, that when Diagoras
hearing a man for swearing himself in a Court of Judicature, and being
impatient to see that he was not presently thunder-strucken, became an Atheist,
and because Sentence against so great an evil was not suddenly executed,
therefore the heart of this fool, this wicked man, was fully set in him about
that great mischief, to say there was no God. Psalm. 14.1. Eccl. 8.11.


Dub. Some Pagans and false Christians, have dared to take false Oaths. The
Jesuits (whether they be Pagans or Christians I know not) will swear anything,
even solemnly in Courts of Justice, and therefore this argument* (impious me^
dare not take a false oath, therefore there is a Deity or some Supreme power
which they fear,) holds not, for the antecedent is evidently falls; but this is
rational, strange horrors and terrors of conscience, and fearful judgments
have followed perjured persons, (tho no man knew they were so) therefore there
is some invisible superior power whence such horrors and terrors and judgment^
proceed.


Frm. I do confess that there have been several perjured persons in former, and
are in these present times, but for a full answer to this exception, see what
is replied to another very like it Page 4. however I am content the argument
should stand, as you have proposed it, strange horror and terrors of
conscience, and fearful judgment have followed perjured persons, etc. which
sufficiently proves what I intended, and therefore I proceed.

Another argument very like to this, or which is rather an addition to the
former, may be taken from the fears and torments of an evil conscience, even
amongst the very heathens. Nero having killed his Mother, confessed that he
was often troubled which her Ghost. The wretched Caligula at the report of a
thunder clap would ^un under his bed. A thousand instances there are amongst
heathen writers, of wicked men laboring under the fears and terrors of their
own conscience, which Juvenal does describe to the life in one or two of his
Satyrs. What should be the reason that mere Pagans, men having no knowledge of
the true God, or of his Severity against wickedness, should be tormented with
the sad prospect of some fearful judgment, attending upon their villainies tho
never so secretly practiced, but the timor Numinis vindicantis, the fear of
divine vengeance?

A third argument may be drawn from the certainty that there are Devils, evil
Spirits, together with their wicked Instruments, Witches, Magicians, Sorcerers,
Conjurers, which none but a foolish Atheist (who will believe no further then
his sight leads him) can doubt of. How frequently the Devil has appeared in
this nation in times of gross ignorance^, and superstition, and how he does so
still to the poor 'Indians that worship him for their God, is abundantly
manifest by the tradition of our fore fathers, and the testimony of knowing
Christians, that have been in those parts. What pranks and diabolical feats,
have been acted by Witches and Conjurers, may be seen in those learned Authors,
that have wrote against them; as Dr. Moor, and many others. And albeit the
appearances of evil Spirits, Witch-crafts, etc. are not now so frequent in this
nation as heretofore, in times of Popery, and dark Ignorance, yet does it not
therefore follo^, that all our forefathers were Melancholy Hypocondriacks,
deceived themselves, and deceiving us with vain and groundless phansies: but
the true reason is this, in times of ignorance, and superstition the Devil
appears more frequently, to uphold his Kingdom over his vassals, and to
confirm them in their false worship; but in times of knowledge and Gospel light,
the Prince of Darkness uses all his arts to render men Scepticks in Religion,
and of no Religion at all, Atheists, Infidels, Profane: so that his very
appearing would pull down his Kingdom, which he exercises over these wretches,
who like Sadducees believe neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor any thing further
then they can see. Now the Prince o^ the Air is too subtle to confute this
Gro^s error in his best servants by any or often apparitions.

The last reason I shall take from that allowed disti^ction that is betwixt
good and evil, better and worse; which could not be, unless there were some
measure of man's actions: and this measure must be a law, either written in man's
heart, or instituted and written in books or tables; and thi^ law must have a
law maker, which must be able both to know, reward, and punish, not only man's
words and actions, but his very thoughts, which none can do according to the
exact rules of Justice, but he that is infinite in knowledge, and wisdom; that
is, none but the omniscient God.

Besides all this, there are degrees in good and evil; for of things that are
good, some are better then others, of things that are evil some are worse then
other. Now these degrees of good and evil, take their rise and fall by their
aproaching to, or declination from that which is summum bonum, or the chiefest
good; so that, if there were no best, or chiefest good, there could be no
better or worse, no good or evil at all, therefore there must be one infinite
good.

To conclude this first discourse; seeing the inclination of all People, to
believe a God, the instinct of nature to confess it, the excellent fabric of
the world to declare it, the force of wicked men's consciences to fear it; the
Custom of civil nations to adore it, do abundantly prove that God is, yea
doubtless that there is a God, that judges the earth, what a monstrous
Creature is the fool Atheist, that says in his heart there is no God?


Dub. Though I was abundantly satisfied with your former reasons against
Atheism, yet I heartily thank you for these which you have here added, which
though they are more largely treated on by several learned Authors, yet as you
have briefly summed them up, they are more suitable to men of ordinary
capacities, and of short discourse, who loose themselves in long treatises, and
are apt to forget what they have read in the beginning of them, before they
come to the middle, and are more tired with the length, then pleased with the
soundness and excellency of such discourses.

Sir being fully satisfied with your reasons against Atheism, I humbly beseech
the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, to bless them unto me, to preserve
me from all profane, irreligious Courses, from practical Atheism, which by its
own Natural propensity, and the just judgment of the most holy and righteous
God, is the great cause of that which is Speculative and Dogmatical.


DIALOGVE II. against Antiscrpturisme.
Firm. HAving given you such satisfaction about the being of God, as has fully
removed all your doubts concerning that first and great principle; if you
please we will discourse of the other that is like unto it, the Divine
Au^h^rity of the holy Scripture: for upon these two depend the great and
weighty business of Religion. He that is steadfast in the belief of the being
of God, and the truth of his most sacred word, (if he be true to these great
fundamentals) must of necessity be both an Orthodox and a serious Christian.


Dub. If you can give me as good satisfaction, in the divine Authority of
Scripture, as you have in the being of an eternal God, Creator of heaven and
earth, you will perform a work of greatest Charity, but I f^ar of as great
difficulty.


Firm. Happily you may perceive some difficulty in it, but if you will make use
of your reason, and lay aside all prejudicating opinions, which chiefly arise
from that contrariety which is betwixt men's carnal corrupt hearts, and the
holy and pure word of God, I hope by his blessing whose Cause I plead, to
persuade you to give your full assent to this other great principle of
Christianity.


Dub. I shall endeavor to weigh your reasons, in the balance of an even
unbiassed judgment, and to receive them, a^imo defaecato, with a mind free from
the dregs of sensuality, interest, partiality, or prejudice.


Firm. Upon the confidence to find this ingenuity in you, I shall present you
with these following reasons.

1. You do belive that there is an omnipotent God, Creator of heaven and
earth, that he made all things therein contained, that being infinite in
wisdom and knowledge, he made all these things for some good end, that he has
ordered them to act and work, in such a manner as is suitable to their several
natures, that in as much as they have their being, facultys, operations, from
their all wise and Glorious maker, they are bound by the law of Creation, to do
homage and service to him that made them.


Dub. All this I grant to be very rational.


Firm. These things being granted; that (not to mention other Creatures) as man
had his being, reason, and understanding from Almighty God, so is he bound to
serve him in that way and manner, which is agreeable to man's excellent nature,
which must be therefore a reasonable service, which all the world, as well
Pagans as Jews, and Christians call Religion, which according to all sober
people comprehends duties of piety, as prayer, praises and sacrifices, duties
of temperance, sobriety, and chastity, duties of honesty, justice,
righteousness, and all morality.


Dub. There is nothing more evident, then that as there is a most wise and holy
God, that made man, endued him with excellent facultys, of reason and
understanding, so there is a debt and duty owing from man to God, his maker,
which all the world calls Religion, and no people in the world were ever so
barbarous, (says Cicero) as to be destitute of all Religion; yea there is such
a tendency in* the nature of man (where it is not utterly extinguished by brutish
sensuality) that rather then he will worship no God at all, he will bow down to
a Sock, or a Stone; so that clear it is, if there be a God the Creator, and
man by him created, there must of necessity be a Religion.


Firm. Truly nothing does more necessarily follow (as Du-Plessis has well
observed) then a God, a man, a Religion. But if Almighty God did make man to
worship him, sure he gave him some rules for that worship, some law to direct
him in this great concern of his Soul.


Dub. I cannot deny it; and that this law was no law written in paper, or
engraven in tables of stone, but the law of nature written in man's heart; which
made Tertullian, utter these excellent words, o ani^a naturaliter Christiana, o
Divine Soul that art naturally a Christian. We see that the fire ascends, the
water moves toward the Center, birds make their nests, Beasts feed their
young, not by any outward positive law, but by the unerring hand of nature, and
may not man that has a natural inclination to serve his maker, perform this
service without any institued law, or prescribed Canon.


Firm. There Is no disputing against experience; you see he does not, and when
you shall embrace, and understand the holy Scriptures, you will see he cannot
by reason of his fall from that ^erfect sta^e, in which he was first made,
whereas the inferior Creatures kept their Station.


Dub. I confess there are different Religions in the world, opposite one to
another, so that all of them cannot be in the right way of wo^shiping God; some
of necessity must be false and erroneous.


Firm. If of all religions in the world, all are not in the right, how will you
know which is the true Religion, which is the false? This you cannot discern by
any imprinted law or light of nature (unless excited by Art and industry) which
is in some measure common to all men that are not natural fools, and Madmen,
stupid inconsiderate wretches, or debauched bruits, whose reason is ^unk down
into gross Sensuality.


Dub. It Is very true, if the mere light of nature were sufficient to point out
the true Religion, I am not able to say why so many Sober men, in several parts
of the world, who have not debauched their Reason, and judgment should so
strangely differ about it.


Firm. I believe you cannot, nor yet why Jews and Pagans did offer up bloody
Sacrifices to these Deitys, they worshipped. Does any light of nature make it
rational that the Gods should be pleased with the blood of poor innocent
Beasts? or is it rational to imagine that they should delight in humane
^acrifices?


Dub. I must acknowledge I do not understand, how the light of nature should
teach men, that such Sacrifices should please the Gods. I have oft^n wondered
at this part of worship used by Jews, and Gentiles; pray Sir, give your self
the trouble, of informing me whence this practice sprang?


Firm. You are satisfied that it had not its original from the light of nature;
for albeit, some kind of Sacrifices as Prayers, praises, alms-deeds, and it may
be the offering of the Fruits of the Earth, Deo datori, to God that gave them,
might spring from that light, yet the Sacrificing of Beasts was never showed,
to Jew or Gentile by natures Candle, but was after the fall of man, appointed
by Almighty God to prefigure the Grand propitiatory Sacrifice, which was to be
made by the blood of him, that was the lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, which the Devil (who is termed Gods Ape) taught his servants the
Gentiles to imitate, who had the shell but not the kernel, the shadow, but not
the substance, the outward rite, but not Christ crucified, represented by it.


Dub. I do acknowledge that the Sacrificing of beasts came not from the light of
nature; and you seem to make it probable that 'twas from divine revelation, and
positive institution.


Firm. You will be better satisfied, when you shall consider, That the founders
of all Religions in the world, did pretend to Revelations, Numa, Lycurgus,
Mahomet, etc. which the devil taught them to do in imitation of Moses and the
rest of the holy Prophets, who spoke as they were moved by God. 2. Pet. 1.20.

Now there being but Four Religions in the world, Judaism, Christianity,
Paganism, and Mahometism; If I shall prove unto you that Christianity, (whose
rule and foundation is the holy Scripture) is the only true Religion, and the
other Three false, I hope you will grant that the foundation on which it stands
is the true Revelation, and consequently that the Scripture is no invention of
man, but given by Inspiration and Revelation from God, which is the sum of my
first Argument.


Dub. If you can prove that the other Three Religions are false, 'twill
necessarily follow, that the Revelations to which they pretend are likewise
false.


Firm. This I shall easily do; beginning with Paganism, which consists in the
worshipping of the C^^^tures* 1. The Sun, Moon, and all the Host of Heaven; 2.
d^^d men; that called Sabaisme, this H^ll^nisme, from the nations that first
used these modes of worship, of both which we have a short account, im the book
of Wisdom, chap. 13. and 14. but more fully in Vossius de Idola^ria, and in
the Author of the Gentiles Court, who has m^de use of diverse excellent men,
that have wrote of this Subject.

That this Religion of Pagans was against the l^w, and light of nature, both in
respect of the things wo^shipped, and also in respect of the abominable ^ites
and Ceremonies, any man that has the least spark of that light remaining in
him, may ^asily discern.

First, The things worshipped were the Creatures, some of them that never had
life, others that once lived but are now dead, whose ghosts or Manes the
Heathens imagined to be confined to their Idols; whereas no Creature can be
c^pable of Religious wors^ip; for it is repugnant to all right reason, that one
Creature should thus worship another, God alone being the proper object of such
worship, because in him we live, move, and have our being, and he it is that
gives us life and breath, and all things; therefore Deo datori, to God the
Creator, and giver of all good things, all religious worship is only due.

Besides some of the wiser Heathens, acknowledge that there could be but one
God; 'twas a common saying amongst them, dicite plures, dicite nullum, it is all
one to say there are many Gods, as to say there is no God, for the notion which
they had of God, was that he was ens infinitum, a being of infinite power and
perfection; but natural reason showed them that there could be but one
infinite, because infinite power, and infinite perfection, comprehends all
power and perfection, and therefore it cannot be communicated to many, or more
then one.

Secondly, Their Rites and Ceremonies were so ridiculous, and so filthy, that
the Apostle styles them abominable Idolatries, it is against the rules of
Christian modesty, either to hear or speak of them. He that desires to see
Paganism smartly and solidly confuted, let him peruse the ancient Fathers,
Lactantius, Arnobius, Minutius felix, Eusebius, Clemens Alexandrinus, St.
Augustine de Civitate Dei, etc.


Dub. I always conceived Paganism, to be a most vain and vile superstition,
contrary to the very light of nature, and I am no better persuaded of
Mahometism, however I desire to hear your reasons against it.


Firm. You may please to receive them thus; my first reason shall be taken from
the novelty of, it being not much above a Thousand years since that false
Prophet Mahomet published his rapsody of nonsense, fabulous fictions, and
damnable Blasphemys to the world.

First, From which I thus argue, truth is before falsehood, Illud verum quod
antiquum; seeing the world is now above 5500 years old, and seeing Religion has
been practiced in it from the Creation, it is absurd to imagine, there was no
true Religion before Mahomet, or that the infinite goodness and wisdom of God,
should suffer gross errors to infect the whole world at least 3000 years before
the true worship of his holy name was known unto men.

Secondly, Mahometism is a mixture of Judaism, Heresy, and Paganism, with some
sprinklings of Christianity, A bundle of ridiculous fables, prodigious lies, as
is evident to any that shall peruse the Alcoran.

Thirdly, 'Twas propagated by the Sword, and such carnal weapons, by sensual
motives, and promises of fleshly pleasures, to be enjoyed by all those that
should be followers of that grand impostor, which are so unworthy of the
rational soul, that they cannot be called the cords of man, but are only proper
allurements for those whose reason is sunk down into brutish sensuality.


Dub. These reasons do sufficiently manifest the folly and falseness of this
new or rather no Religion, but pray you inform me why you rank Judaism in the
number of false religious, seeing it is grounded on the Scripturs of the Old
Testament, which you believe to be a divine Revelation.


Firm. When I reckon Judaism amongst false Religions, I mean only that religion
which is professed by the modern Jews, under and against the Gospel, not that
which their forefathers under the law lived and died in. Since the fall of Adam
unto the end of the world there was and shall be but one true Religion,
consisting of Repentance from dead works, holy obedience, and faith in Jesus
Christ; so that the fathers before the law, the Israelites under the law, the
Christians under the Gospel, were and are of one and the same Religion, for the
substance of it; 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3. they did believe in Christ to come, the
Christians do believe that he is already come; to them he was veiled in Types
and shadows* to us he is revealed, and those shadows are vanished at the rising
of the Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings.


Dub. By what you have said it is evident, tha^ all Religions that are and ever
were in the world, (except the Jewish under the law and the Christian under the
Gospel, which are for substance the very same) are utterly false, and
consequently their pretended Revelations, on which they are built, the
inventions of men and Satanical Delusions; and that the Christian and the
ancient Jewish being the only true Religion, it must follow that the Old and
New Testament is the only certain and divine Revelation; your Argument appears
to be very concluding; I pray you proceed.


Firm. My second argument shall be taken from the excellency and reasonableness
of Christian Religion.

First. This Religion is most holy and spiritual; resolving it self into most
excellent principles and ends; the Glorifying of God and humbling man, pointing
out unto us the most divine and he^venly life in the love and service of our
Creator, in the dedication and devotion of our souls unto him, in whom we live
move and have our being, placing our felicity in spiritual, not in fleshly
pleasurs, the rule of it (being holy scripture) contains laws most holy, most
pure, most righteous. Let all the world if they can answer the challenge made by
Moses. Deu. 4.8. what nation is there so great that has Statues and judgments
so Righteous, as all the Law which is set before you this day? which as to
their clearness are highly improved under the Gospel, engaging us upon higher
and more heavenly motives: those under the Law being for the most part
Temporal; to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present world. Tit. 2. "12. There is no virtue
which Christian Religion commends not, R. B.
no duty which it commands not, no vice, no sin, which it does not condemn;
no Religion, does so much condemn Pride, worldly-mindedness, sensuality, filthy
lusts, a poor, private, narrow Spirit, selfishness, as this, no Religion does
so much commend humility, meekness* selfe-denyal, charity, peace, unity; no
^eligion does so much exalt reason above passion and sense, does so much enoble
the Spirit of man, making it to look upon the Riches honors pleasures of the
world, as so many vain shadows, deluding dreams, transitory nothings; the great
design of it is not carnal and worldly, but high and heavenly, as to set forth
the Glory of God, to lift up the Soul above the Cre^ture, to lead man by the
way of holiness to everlasting happiness.

This Religion gives us the highest motives for "the sincere practice of Piety,
and all manner of virtuous living that possible c^n be, the pleasures of an
holy life here, the enjoyment of eve^lasting happiness hereafter; it gives the
strongest reasons against the power o^ temp^ation^, te^^hing us to mortify the
lusts of the flesh, an^ to contemn the vanities of the world, putting the joys
of Heaven, the torments of Hell, the love of God in the balance, against the
ple^sures of sin, which are no more then a feather to the massy glob of the
earth.

"Lastly, Christian Religion from holy Scripture, on which it is founded, does
reve^l unto us the nature, attributes, and works of God, beyond all the
Religions that ever were in the world; how does it magnify and reconcile the
justi^e and mercy of God toward sinful man? How does it set forth the infinite
power and wisdom of ^o^* in making the world of nothing, in such an excellent
form and beauty, which has drawn all ^o^sidering men into an admiration of the
goodly fabric of it? Yet the must acute Philosophers were at a loss how and
when 'twas made, whether 'twas from all eternity, or had a beginning in time;
whether 'twas m^de of pr^existen^ m^tter, o^ of the fo^tuitous concourse of
Atoms; which fond opinions deserve not any serious confutation.

"But the holy Scripture does ^le^rly solve all these doubts* and is indeed the
best Comment on the book of Nature, and does give such an account of the
original of the world, the time and method of its production, the peopling of
nations, the confusion of languages, the depravation of nature, which the
Heathens understanding not, fancied two principals, one good, the other evil;
from which all the good and evil in the world did proceed. Man's recovery by the
sacrificing of the Son of God, for want of the knowledge and belief thereof,
all the bloody sacrifices practiced by the Hea^hens, were mere Impostures, and
ridiculous nothings; these, and diverse other mysteries far above man's capacity
to devise, and not within the compass of natural corrupt reason, are made plain
unto us by Scripture Revelation; which does abundantly prove that none but an
infinite God could be Author of this Divine Revelation, of which those of the
Heathens, and that of Mahomet, were "so many apish imitations and diabolical
cheats.


Dub. I am fully satisfied by the characters which you have given of the
Religion in practice with the people of God (especially with the Christians)
that the rule and measure of it must be from heaven and not from men, and
consequently that all holy Scripture is divinely inspired, and is the word of
the eternal God.


Firm. I could further acquaint you with many mo^e reasons to confirm you in
this great truth, which are common in every Author that treats of it; ^s
namely the Antiquity of holy Scripture, some part of it being before all
writings; the continu^nce of it by an extraordinary providence, notwith^tanding
the rage and malice of cruel bloody persecutors, the sincerity, impartiality,
candor, simplicity of its writers, quibus nullum fuit mendac ii praemium, they
had no earthly motives to persuade them to utter such forgeries (as Atheist
deem them to be) nothing but bonds and imprisonments, losses of goods and
lives. Again it must be acknowledged, that the Penmen of the Scripture, were
very good men, or very bad, (for men of a cold indifferency they could not be.)
If they were very good men, they would never have conspired together, to put
such a cheat, such a grand imposture upon the world (as Anti-Scripturists would
have the word of God to be.) If very bad, they would never have wrote with so
much zeal, and earnestness against all manner of wickedness, and especially,
against Lying and Hypocrisy. Certainly they would never have exposed
themselves, to hazard lives and fortunes for no other reward, then to be
esteemed both Knaves and Fools by all prudent men. Add to this that Liars and
Cheats do not usually agree one with the other; but there is such a sweet
harmony and consent betwixt the Penmen of Holy writ, tho they lived at so
great a distance from one another, that questionless they were acted by one and
the same infallible spirit.

Lastly, The aversness, the slowness that is in our corrupt hearts to believe
all that is written in the Law and the Prophets, Luke 24.25. a^ising from that
contrariety which is betwixt the holy and spiritual word of God, and our carnal
and depraved minds, is no small proof of the truth of it, for it is otherwise
impossible to render any ration^l account, why we should doubt, or disbelieve
this sacred word, and never once question the truth of ordinary and common
Histories, which are conveyed down unto us, not with the tenth part of that
evidence which we have of the truth of holy Scripture.

But waving these reasons, I shall only mention Two of the best which are urged
against Infidelity, to bring up the rear of my discourse. The First whereof
shall be taken from the fulfilling of Prophesies; the other from Miracles,
which are the Seals of this our Magna Charta.


Dub. Tho I am sufficiently confirmed in the truth of this great principle, by
what you have already said, yet I would most gladly hear your Arguments from
Prophesies and Miracles.


Firm. First for Prophesies, I shall acquaint you with some few out of the Old
Testament, to which your own reading may suggest many more, which were exactly
fulfilled according as they were foretold.


Dub. Did not Astrologers, and Heathen Oracles foretell many things that came to
pass as they were foretold?


Firm. I grant it; but hear what judgment a learned Heathen passes upon them.
The Gods do foretell some natural things to come, for that they observe the
order and conjunction of their natural causes, but of things that are
contingent, or such as do depend upon the will of man, they have but
conjectures and do often times lie, and deceive us in both kinds, for as
natural things are variable so much more the will of man; Porphyrius lib. de
Resp. and ora^. cited by Parsons in his Resol. page 62.


Dub. This testimony of Porphyrius being an Heathen and a great enemy to
Christianity is very considerable, and experi^n^e shows it to be very true, for
O^acles have de^eived many; and we see that Astrologers; can give no certain
predictions concerning the weather which dep^nds upon natural causes; and
therefore I desire you to she^ me, if you can, any Prophesies of Scripture,
that are more certain.


Firm. I shall begin with that of Abraham, concerning his posterities
inheriting the Land of promise; of their servitude in a strange Land; of their
mighty deliverance 400 years before it came to pass, you may for this compare,
Cen. 15.13.14. etc. with Exodus 12.

Second, Jacob being in Egypt on his death bed, prophe^^ed thus of his ^on
Judah, that the Scepter should not depart from him, until Shilo came, which
fell out accordingly at the birth of our Savior, at which time the Scepter was
in the h^nd of a stranger, Herod by name, and then, and not till then, it
finally departed from Judah.

Third, 'Twas Prophesied of Josias ^00 years before he was born, that he should
destroy the Altar at Bethel. 1. Kings. 13. which was exactly fullfilled. 2.
Kings. 23.

Fourth, You may see how punctual the Prophet Isaiah is in fortelling the
nativity, the life, the passion of our blessed Saviou^, in so much that he
writes more like an Historian then a Prophet, as also how he foretells the
destruction of Hier^salem, and the grievous Captivity of the Jews by, and
under, the Babylonians, and then the destruction of the Babylonians and the
rebuilding of Jerusalem, by Cyrus 200 years before he was born; the same was
foretold by Jeremy, about a 100 years after Isaiah, and these Prophecies were
so famous, and so certainly believed, amongst the Jews in the time of their
captivity, that when the time of their expiration drew near; Daniel thus
writes of himself; In the first year of Darius, I Daniel understood in the
Scripture, the number of the 70 years, etc. Dan. 9.1.

Neither did the Jews only understand and believe this Prophecy, but Cyrus
himself an Heathen: which was his great inducement to restore the Jews and
rebuild the Temple at his own proper charges; Ezra. 1. And Heathen Historians
confess as much.

Fifth, The Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the four great Monarchies, is so
clear and evident, so distinctly described as if he had lived in them all, Dan.
2. and Dan. 8. how also he foretold the coming and suffering of the Messiah
after 70 weeks, cap. 9. many more of such Prophecies might be alleged, but
these are abundantly sufficient, to attest the divine authority of Scripture.


Dub. It Is very true if you could prove there were ever such Prophets, or
Prophecys in the world.


Firm. What proof do you expect? will you believe nothing but what you see with
your own eyes?


Dub. That were irrational, if you can prove by a certain tradition, that there
were ever such Prophecies, delivered by such men, as you name, I shall assent
unto them.


Firm. This I shall perform; first from the whole nation of the Jews, which
have delivered them from Father to Son, down along for many generation; do you
think that a people so careful and diligent in the keeping and transcribing
their records, could, or would agree together, upon no worldly interest at all,
yea even to the hazard of their lives, and fortunes to abuse themselves and
their posterity?


Dub. I confess it is not very probable; but have you any other proof, for the
certainty of these Prophecyes?


Firm. Yes, From the Testimony of very Heathens: It Is said by Josephus. lib. 1,
de Antiq. Iud. cap. 4. that the public writings of the Syreans, Chaldaeans,
Ph^nicians, Graeci^ns, are sufficient to testify the antiquity, truth,
authority, and certainity, of Holy Scriptures, if there were no other proof in
the world beside. There is scarce a memorable passage in the Old Testament but
it is mentioned by some Heathen writer, as the Creation of the world, Noah's
Flood, the Confusion of Tongues, the Children of Isreal's living in, and coming
out of the land of Egyp^, the writings of Moses, the Babylonish Captivity, etc.
as you may see in Eusebius. Grotius, de verit Christ. Relig. Parsons Resol. Cap.
3. lib. 1. part. 1.


Dub. Indeed a Testimony from an adversary is beyond all exception, I rest
satisfied with what you have said, for the Authority of the Old Testament; have
you any thing to say for the New, more then what you have said in general for
them both together?


Firm. Yes; I have the miracles of our Savior, and his blessed Apostles,
wrought for the confirmation of what they taught, acknoledged by Heathens,
Grotius de ver. Chris. Relig. Besides if you assent to the Divine Authority of
the Old Testament, you must acknowledge the Divinity of the New, which is for
the most part, nothing else but an explication of the Old, and the history of
those Prophesies, now fullfilled, which were delivered by the Prophets, who
lived in the time of the law.

You may add to this the miraculous preservation of both Testaments, not
withstanding the malice of persecuting Heathens; who used all arts of cruelty
to extinguish them; the propagation of the Christian Religion, into so many
parts of the prejudicating world, without, yea contrary to all carnal force and
worldly inte^est, by a few simple unlearned men, which if it was done without a
Miracle, was one of the greate^t Miracles that ever we read of. To this may be
added the opposition of many subtle Heretics, who never durst so much as
question the Authority of the Scripture, but rather betook themselves to their
own false glosses, that they might shift of those clear texts which made
against them; whereas it had been a more Compendious way to have utterly denied
them, if their impudence had been so great, as to oppose the general belief, of
those times wherein they lived.


Dub. Tho I am sufficiently convinced, of the divine Authority of the
Scripture, and of the truth of those Miracles which were wronght by Christ and
his Apostles for the confirmation of what they taught; yet to remove all
scruples that may be made against them, I shall desire to be more fully
satisfied in two exceptions that are urged by Antiscripturists.

1. That they were no true Miracles.

2. That we have no certainty that there were ever such persons in the world as
Christ and his Apostles, or that they ever wrought such mighty works as are
recorded of them in the New Testament.


Firm. That there were such persons in the world as Christ and his Apostles,
that they wrought those Miracles which are mentioned in the History of them,
both Jews and Gentiles, (sworn enemies to Christianity,) acknowledge, but
besides their Testimony (which being from adversaryes is v^^y cogent) we have
the tradition of the Catholic Church in all ages, and most places of the
world, for 1600 years and upwards; and as he that will go up by the side of the
River will at last come to the head and fountain of it, so he that shall ascend
through the several Centuries of the Church, will at last infallibly come to
the head of it Christ Jesus; to the place of his Nativity; his Preaching and
mighty Works that he did; his bitter death and bloody passion; or if he shall
descend from Christ, through the same Centuries, down to this present time, he
may be far more certain, of the birth, and life, and works, and sufferings of
this our bessed Savior, of the writings of the Holy Evangelists, and Apostles,
then that there have been such men in the world as Alexander the great, Julius
Caesar, Pompey, Scipio, Hannibal, of the Wars, and noble Acheivements managed
by them, of William the Conqueror, the Barons wars, and yet none but a fool
or a mad man, or one that has vowed to believe no farther then what he can see
with his own eyes, will doubt of these; for that the tradition which conveys
the same of these Worthies, and their Actions down unto us, is nothing so
general as that of the Catholic Church, neither is it at all practical, but
purely historical, wherein we are not at all concerned, whether or no the
things reported of those noble warriors be true or false.


Dub. He that will not assent to what is delivered by universal Tradition,
takes away the use of one of the most noble Sciences in the world, viz.
History; and wants rather a Cudgel then an Argu^ent to confute him. It Is evident
by undeniable tradition, that there were such persons as Christ and his
Apostles, that they did great and marveilous things, but how shall we know
whether the works which they did were true miracles? surely it is very difficult,
to know what is true and what is an imposture.


Firm. Tho at present this may appear difficult to you, yet I hope I shall make
this difference as manifest to you, as is that which is betwixt Gold and
dross. And here I will not trouble you with the niceties of the schoolmen
betwixt mirum and miraculum; that a true miracle is arduum, insoli^um, supra
vim naturae, hard, unusual, and above the power of nature; that it differs
from a ^alse one in the efficient, material, and formal cause, which is
ignotum per ignotius.

But to wave such subtilties, a true miracle may be known from a false one,

1. By the success; as Exodus 7.12. it is said Aarons rod swallowed up those of
the sorcerers, and in the primitive times, it is clear how the miracles wrought
by the Apostles, swallowed up in effect all false ones, ^one by satan^
Instruments; how (notwithstanding all those lying wonders, wrought by Simon
Magus, Apollonius, and others the prejudicating world was brought over from
Idolatry and superstition, to embrace poor persecuted Christianity, by those
true miracles* which otherwise had been the greatest miracle in the world.

2. A true miracle may be known from that which is a jugle or imposture, by the
design or end of it, which is for the confirmation of a divine revelation, to
bring men over to the worship of the true God, to propagate the true Religion,
the end of false ones is to draw men from this worship, which note of
difference God himself has stamped upon false miracles, Deuteronomy. 13*


Dub. But do not you now run into the same erro^r which you so lately
condemned in others? for by what you have said I must first know which is the
true Religion, before I can know which is a true miracle, and surely then there
will be no use of miracles, to confirm me in the truth, of what I knew before.


Firm. there is a mutual confirmation, betwixt the true religion, and a true
miracle; true Religion does give light to miracles, these do seal and confirm
that Religion. We see that all discursive knowledge, does arise from some
precedent knowledge, until we ascend to such principles, that are clear to the
light of nature, now evident it is to natural reason, that there is a God,
Creator of all things; that there is but one God, that this one God ought to
be religiously worshipped, the intelligent and learned heathens, have
acknowledged all these: Again it is evident that there were never but four
general Religions in the world, Paganism, Turcisme, Judaisme and Christianity,
and I think I have already made it manifest, that of all these Religions, none
is so r^tional or such a reasonable service, as is that of the Christian; which
for the substance of it is the oldest of all others, being the same which was
practiced, by the fathers both before and after the flood, for the
spirituality, morality, and unity of the God hea^ worshipped, it is excellent
beyond all others, most agreeable to the Common principles and notices of the
reasonable Soul.

Here upon any serious sober man, may conclude that all these miracles which
have been ^ttempted to draw men from Christianity, are but mere impostures, and
those that have been wrought for the confirmation of it, wherein one true God
of infinite majesty, wisdom, power, and glory, is worshipped in spirit and
truth, are the only true miracles.


Dub. Pray Sir excuse me this unnecessary trouble which I have given you; for
by what you had said before concerning, the supereminent excellency of the
Christian Religion, above all others, I might have seen the force of your
reasoning, which (as I conceive stands thus* If the Christian Religion be the
only true Religion then those miracles which were wrought for the Confirmation
of it, are the only true miracles.


Firm. You rightly conclude: I shall therefore proceed to the third note or
mark of a true mir^cle, and that is the effect and consequent of such a
miracle, which is the drawing of the mind from sin to God, the primitive
Christians much insisted on this as an undoub^ed evidence of the miracles
wrought by Christ, that they were done by divine power, because the effect that
followed them was the work of conversion of Sou^^ from sin and Ido^s, to Go^
and Christ* and all true piety and holiness of life; they tended mainly to the
overthrow of Satan's Kingdom. Christ by his miracles did not only disposesse
Satan out of men's bodies, but out of his Temples; upon this account he
convinces the Scribes and Pharisees, of most irrational blasphemy, when they
objected against him, that he did cast out devils by the power of the devil;
but he replied, every Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Mat.
12.25.

Beside^, Christ's doctrine, which he confirmed by miracl^s, was in every thing
cont^^^y to the devils d^sign; which was to draw men from the worship of the
true God, that himself might be worshipped, to ensnare men in the practice of
the greatest wickedness under a pretense of Religion, as is very obse^vable in
all heathen mysteries; which indeed were very mysteries of iniquity, abominable
Idolatry, not to be named to modest ears. Dr. Stillingfleets Orig. Sac. lib.
2. Cap. 10.

4. True miracles differ from diabolical impostures in three particolars, 1.
in the manner of their working, 2. their number, 3. the quality of things
wrought by them.

1. The impostares of Satan were done by a great deal o^ pomp and Ceremony,
magical rites, char^es and medicines: what Christ did was with a words
speaking* yea by the very touch o^ his garm^^^.

2. For their number, those Satanicall jugli^gs were comparatively very few:
there were not many that were cured by the devil and his instruments; but
Christ cured whole multitudes, and that not in the Revestryes of the temple,
where fraud and imposture might be easily suspected, but in the presence of the
people, Arno^ius's objection against the Gentiles is very rational, what
wonder is it to show one or two cured? when thousands lie continually in your
temples languishing for want of cure, which (...) even weary your God
Escula^ius with pray^rs and tears, but could have no help from him, with all
their importunities.

3. For the quality of things pretended to be done by miracles; the cures among
the heathens were some slight things, in Comparison of those performed by
Christ: what heathen jugler did ever open the eyes of any man that was born
blind, make the dumb to speak, the lame to walk, or raise the dead by a words
speaking, or by a touch of the hand? See Dr. S^illingfl^ets book before cited.

There is one other argument made use of by the learned Dr. Hammond, in his
tract of the reasonableness of Christian Religion, (which ^ friend caused me
to remember) for the confirmation of the truth of this divine Revelation. This
learned man proves the mission and doctrine of Jesus Christ, from that high
testimony, which God the father gave him, by a voice from heaven, coming out of
the midst of thunder; which way of Revelation was known to the Jews by the name
of (...) the daughter of a voice, and by this God did three times give
testimony unto Christ, 1 immediately after his baptism, 2. at his
trans^iguration; 3. a little before his death, and all in the p^esence of
sufficient witnesses: this testimony of God the father given three several
times, d^d ^ully ratify the doctrine of Christ contained in the scriptures of
the New Testament; God gave ^he very same testimony to Moses and h^s doctrine,
and that in the sight and audience of many thousands. Exodus 19.16.

Thi^ Mo^^s often reminds the people of, especiall^ Deuteronomy. 4.32.33. where he
tells them that never any people did hear the voice of God, out of ^^e midst
of the fire, as they had done and thi^ ^ay o^ ^e^^lation, seems to be so
suitable to the (...) of almighty God, and so pecu^^^r ^o hi^, that the devil,
who in other things, (...) A^e never attempted to imitate God in t^^ (...), nor
do I believe) he was ever a^^e. G^^ h^ving restr^ined him by ^his omnipo^^^^
(...) and re^erved this way of Revelation pe^^^^ (...).


D^b. (...) Disco^rse has been so rational, that (...) (as ^g^ipp^^) almost
persuaded to be a (...) bu^ ^^together such as you are, as to (...) ^wo great
principle^ of Christianity, concerni^g ^he being of God, and the Divine
Authority ^f ^oly Scripture: and methinks I see all false Relig^^ns fall fl^t
on their faces, before these great ^ru^hs, as Dagon did before the Arc.


Firm. No marviell, for he that does firmly believe that God is, and that the
Scripture is his word, must needs abominate those false worships, which are ^o
extremely contrary to his divine nature, and his most sacred writ; but seeing
you are so well persuaded of these principles, I shall not trouble you with any
more reasons for the confirmation of them; only if you shall hereafter meet
with any scoffing Atheist or infidel that shall deny either of them, you may
for conclusion of all, press upon him this dilemma or forked argument. Either
it is true there is a God, and the Scripture is his word, or it is not true:
suppose these things be not true, yet thou believe them to be so, thou art
only in an error for this short span of time; but what if they prove,
undoutedly true, and thou do not believe them, to be so, then thou art
eternally damned: now what a madness is it for any man, for the avoiding of a
seeming temporary error, to come within the danger of everlasting damnation?


Dub. This argument might startle any Atheist and make him consider with
himself how sad his Condition will be, if these things be so as solid and
undeniable reasons do demonstrate, and yet he should live and die an infidel.
O what will become of such an one unto all eternity? I am full of wonder and
amazement, that seeing there are such convincing reasons against Atheism and
infidelity, that there should be any such Creatures upon the face of the earth,
when certainly there are none such in hell, for the devil believes and
^rembles.


Firm. You will cease to wonder, when you shall rightly consider, the certain
reasons of those gross errors; which are,

1. Drollery and foolish jesting, which renders men inconsiderate and
mindlesse, even in the affairs of the world, much more in the things of
eternity: a man that is given to Droll, and jest, is incapable of any serious
business.

2. Many men are men of short discourse, they do not understand the force of an
argument, by reason of the weakness of their discursive faculty, which is
altogether rusty for want of use, exercise, and ingenious education: though in
the book of nature, the eternal power and Godhead of the Almighty, be wrote
in large Characters, yet every one, cannot Read in that book, no more then he
that never went to school, can read the Primer, half psalter, or any book of
the faire^t print.


Dub. This is true of many simple and illiterate men; that are very brutes, not
at all to be distinguished from the beasts that perish, but by the erect figure
of their bodies: their Rational souls, mean while being sunk down into mere
sensuality, such as have not God in all their thoughts, they trouble not
themselves to think of him, either that he is, or is not: these digenerate
Creatures do not concern themselves in matters of Religion; but (I hope) you
will not say that the witt^ of the time, are such ignorant Animals.


Firm. I shall not doubt to affirm it, and that for these reasons.

1. You may observe that these witty men are persons of no serious or solid
judgments, especially in things of highest concernment: they are such as spend
their time in idleness, Drollery, vain Recreations; so that albeit the Lord has
given them those two great books to read in, that of nature, and the holy
scripture, yet they vouchsafe not to read or meditate upon either.

2. They are under a judicial blindness; God has given them reason and
understanding, eyes that they might see, hearts that they might understand; but
they wilfully shut their eyes against that light, and then by the just judgment
of Almighty God, this light is taken from them; they are given up to blindness
of mind, and hardness of heart, as were the ancient heathens. Rom: 1.

3. Their lives are utterly contrary to the holy nature of God, to his sacred
word: there is an antipathy, an emnity betwixt their Debaucheries, their
filthiness, their profaneness, and his most holy laws, Romans 8.7. every line of
it flies in their faces, threatening them with hell and damnation: whereupon
they cavil with, they quarrel against it, they wish there were neither God to
punish, nor scripture to threaten Destruction against them, and so by
insensible degrees, they are brought to think and say in their heart there is
no God, as the fool did, Psalm. 14. so true is that of the poet, quod nimis
miseri volunt, hoc facile cr^dunt, the though^^ and imaginations of wretched
men are governed by their desires, they hate the light because their deeds are
evil, though their understandings are convinced by unansweareable arguments,
and reasons of the truth of these great principles, yet they will not believe
them; such is the perverseness of their will, that it either blinds their mind,
or else draws them against self Conviction to believe a Lie, and to hold the
conclusion, against the most evident proofs and premises.


Dub. I am persuaded, that you have given very good reasons, why so many are
Atheists and infidels, and that the chiefest of them are irreligious and
profane livers, that practical Atheism is the greatest cause of that which i^
dogmaticall or Atheism in opinion. 'Twas the fool that said in his heart,
there wa^ no God: first he was a fool, i. e. a sinner, and very wicked, as he
is discribed in that psalm; and thence he proceeded Atheist: a fool in
practice, and then a fool in judgment, for it is most certain, that a corrupt,
and wicked life, is the true parent of ungodly and vile opinions, from which by
Gods blessing upon your good endeavoures, I am now delivered, and am fully
persuaded, that God is, and that he is a rewarder of all those that diligently
seek him, that the holy scripture is undoubtedly the word of God, and
consequently that the Christian Religion, is the only true religion, but
observing that of those who profess this Religion, there are several parties,
and it is not unknown to you, that heretofore I have adhaered to the Church of
Rome, I would willingly learn from you, which party, they of Rome or we of
England be most Orthodox and Catholic.


Firm: Your demand is rational, I shall most willingly Gratify you in it^
only you must give me leave to propose these Two questions to you, and let me
receive your answ^r unto them at our next meeting.

1. What Inducements you had to turn to the Church of Rome?

2. What Reasons you had to leave it?


Dub. You must give me leave also, to recollect my self, that I may be ^he
better able, to give in my answer to your Quaeries.


DIALOGVE III, Against POPERY.
Firm. I Hope you have well considered of the questions which I lately proposed
unto you.


Dub. To the first I return this answer, My reasons that induced me to adhere
to the Church of Rome were these.

1. The Antiquity of that Church which has continued ever since the Apostles
time, when by the testimony of St. Paul, her faith was spoken of throughout the
world. Romans 1.8.

2. The universality of it; no Church has spread it self, so far and nere upon
the face of the earth, as that of Rome.

3. Her consent in Doctrine with the primitive Church.

4. The unity of it, under one infallible head which cannot err in point of
faith or manners.

5 The sanctity of it is Doctrine; that it is free from error in matters of
^aith; free from all immorality and improbity in point of manners.

6. The sanctity of life, in the authors, and first-fathers, of the Roman
Religion: these were the chief motives that caused me to adhere to the Church
of Rome.


Firm. Indeed these are six of those 15 notes which Bella^mine Lib. 4. de not.
Eccle. and others of his persuasion appropriate to that Church: but had you not
some other inducements? As first a vicious life, and the cheap and easy pardon
of your Sins upon confession of them to a priest, his absolution and injunction
of a pitiful penance. 2dly, were you not under some discontent for your
present low Condition? or 3dly, were you not ambitious of preferment, deeming
popery to be a ready way to it? or 4thly, were you not tickled with the Cunning
extolling of your excellent parts by some subtle Jesuit, lamenting your sad
Condition, that a person o^ so rare endowments, should be so miserably mistaken
in the great concern of your Soul, persuading you that out of the Church there
is no hope of salvation, and that you being no member of the Church of Rome,
were past all peradventure out of the Church, and unless you returned to that
Church, there could be no hope of your salvation? or lastly before you set up
for the Church of Rome, were you serious and conscientiou^ in any Religion? for
it is very easy for one that is of no Religion, that makes no conscienc^ of his
ways, being allured with the joye^ of heaven, and affrighted with the terrors
of Hell, to pitch upon any Religion, that confidently promises those, and as
confidently a freedom from these: and we know that Priests and Jesuits want
neither art nor impudence to perswa^e silly wretches, that hopes of Heaven, and
deliverance from Hell are only to be found in their Church.


Dub. Truly Sir I am verily persuaded, that many who have left your Church,
and gone over to that of Rome, have stumbled at such straws: but you have known
me long, to be a man of no vicious life, no male Content, not ambitious of
honor or preferment, not apt to be paffed up with a proud conceit of mine own
parts, not cold or careless in point of Religion; but the chief reasons that
moved me to go over to the Church of Rome, were those before named, which made
me believe that Church, to be the only true Catholic Church, out of which
there could be no hope of salvation; to these I beg your answer.


Firm. And you shall have it.

1. The doctrine of the present Church of Rome which alone could denominate her
ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical, is in several weighty points quite
contrary to holy scripture, neither has it the general consent of the fathers
and Doctors of the Catholic Church: the pr^sent Church of Rome, is no more
like to what it once was, in the purest primitive times* than an old decrepit
man full of diseases, Gout, Stone, Palsy, Dropsy, Scurvey, Blindness,
Deafness, Wrinkles, and a multitude of infirmities, is the same Strong,
Handsome, Healthy Man, that he was when at twenty five or thirty years old.


Dub. Tho I have sometimes much reverenced the Church of Rome, for her
antiquity, yet now I begin to doubt that there are many diseases in the body of
that Church, many wrinkles in her face, which were not from the beginning* but
not withstanding those infirmities, it is the same true Church as 'twas at the
first plantation, as the old decrepite man is the same man that ever he was for
substance.


Firm. I deny not but that the Church of Rome is in some sense the same it
first was, in respect of diverse Articles it holds: but in respect of those
gross errors, it now maintains, it is no more like what it was, then the old
decrepite diseased man is like what he was in his younger days.


Dub. Your comparison is very good and apposite to the present Church of Rome,
which past dispute is full of dangerous and desperate diseases, as I in part do
apprehend. I pray you proceed to my other motive.


Firm. The Church of Rome, is not so universal as her disciples boast of,
neither in respect of place or time.

1. It Is the observation of a learned man, that if the world were divided into
30 parts, 19 of them are heathens, 6 Mahometans, and 5 Christians, of which the
Papists are not the one half, as Mr. Breirwood in his Enquires does
demonstrate.

2. As to the universality of time, the Church of Rome cannot deduce her
present tenants, from the beginning of Christianity, through the several ages
or Centuryes: that it has continued a Church, from the first preaching of the
Gospel I deny not; but that it is the same for purity of Doctrine, as once it
was, is most false: for the ancient Church of Rome, never taught worshipping of
images, praying to Saints, that monstrous transubstantiation, half Communion,
Prayer in an unknown tongue, and many more Groundless fopperies, against
Scripture, the general consent of fathers, common sense and reason.


Dub. All this, I am inclined to believe: but how could these errors creep
into a Church, which did so punctually observe the traditions of their
forefathers? what the Church of Rome now believes and teaches, it received from
the Church that was in the next age before it, that from the Church next before
it, and so quite down to the Apostles times, as the Author of the Dialogues
betwixt the Uncle and the Nephew, has most learnedly demonstra^ed.


Firm. Truly very learnedly, even as Zeno proved there was no local motion:
you have heard how Diogenes confuted him by an ocular demonstration: were not
the Scribes and Pharisees great pretenders to a Strict observation of the
traditions of their fathers? And yet we know how grossly they had corrupted the
law of Moses, as is evident by our Saviors confutation of them. Mat. 5. and in
several other places.

Dr. Crakan^thorp and other Learned pr^^^stants do evidently show, the
beginning, the progress of the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, the manner of
their spring and Growth; but Suppose we cannot punctually t^ll, the beginning
and progress of such and such an error, shall we therefore believe it to be no
error you walk sometimes in the fields, C^^visse videas crescere non vides.
it is evident to your eyes that the Grass and grain do grow, though you do
not see them move at all; sometimes you visit a friend that is sick of a
languishing consumption, you see by infallible symptoms that your friend is in
a desperate Condition, will you not believe him to be so, because you cannot
tell the time when, or the manner how, his disease came upon him?


Dub I cannot be so unreasonable; and by what you have said, my third reason
falls to the Ground, for the present Church of Rome has no agreement with the
primitive, but is extremely opposite to it, in the points before named, besides
many others; I pray let me hear what you can say against their unity; for they
seem to be firmly united, under one infallible head the Pope.


Firm. Truly Sir they do but seem so; for they are miserably divided in the
great fundamental of their faith, see Mr. Pools Nullity of the Roman Faith.
their infallibility, and are not they very unjust to us to exact our belief,
of that, which they themselves know not where to find? for some of them tell us
it is fixed to the Popes chair; some say it is to be found in a General
Council, ot^^rs believe it to be in neither, but in both united together,
others would persuade us that it is in the whole body of the Church; so that if
you seek after this pretty knack of infallibillity; you will be abused as young
apprentices are used to be in great Cittys and corporations; who in waggery,
are sent from shop to shop for a penyworth of Ell-broad Packthred; or a pound
of stock fish Tallow: or a Lefthanded Shuttle; after these poor novices have
been sent from one end of the City to the other, they return home, without
such ridiculous Commodities, and are sufficiently exposed to laughter and
derision.

There Is scarce a Controversy in all Bellarmin's voluminous works wherein he
recites not the different opinions of the Roman Catholics among themselves,
insomuch that this great Cardinals, works were not to be bought in Rome (as
Sir Edw: Sandyes reports in his Europa speculum) because he had so imprudently
discovered, the nakedness of his mother in point of unity.

To say nothing of the contentions betwixt the Thomists and Scotists, Ochamists
etc: it is pleasant to see how sweetly the Dominicans, Franciscans Jesuits,
Molinists, Iansenists, Regulars, and seculars agree together. Though a late
Pope durst be so bold as to decide a Controversy for the Molimists against the
Iansenians, and so that which was none before, very luckily became an article
of Faith (such is the Popes omnipotent Power, that he can create Articles of
Faith, out of that which was a pure no^-entity, a very nothing in the primitive
times) yet I hear that the Iansenists are so saucy as to continue very
Iansenists still, notwithstanding his holinesses in^allible determination.


Dub. I see there is no such unity in the Church of Rome, as they bragg of; I
desire to hear what you can say against the Sanctity of their Doctrine.


Firm: the Sanctity of their Doctrine, referrs to that of Faith and Manners,
for that of Faith, which is briefly comprehended in the Apostles Creed, or any
other Doctrinall point contained in holy Scripture, expressly, or by good
consequence deduced from thence by the general consent of Fathers we allow of,
but as for popish additions of new atticles, by Pope Pius the 4. and the
council of Tr^nt, that are against Scripture; and can never be justified by
the general consent of the ancient Doctors of the Church; we reject as false,
and consequently not Holy; this I suppose you will dem^ns^rate when you please
to give me the reasons, which made you forsake the present Church of Rome

As to their Sa^ctity of manners, their Doctrine is so far from it, that the
better sort of heathens would blush to own; for brevity sake I shall re^err you
to the first and second part of the mystery of Jesuitisme, the Jesuits
morralls set out b^ a Sorbon Doctor, Mr. Fowls his History of the treasons and
rebellions of these holy men; the two former of these books assure us that by
the Doctrine of probability, and a good intention, the fowlest Sins are at most
but venial.


Dub. The Jesuits are but one party in the Church of Rome, many o^ their
tenants and practices disclai^^d, by other of the papists, and therefore the
whole Church is not chargeable with their errors.


Firm. Until that Church does expressly Condemn them* and Execute.
Ecclesiastical Censur^s upon such of her members, as do broach those damnable
Doctrines, does make them rec^nt, or excommunicate them, she is chargeable with
them.


Dub. I am of your opinion and do firmly believe the p^esent Church of Rome to
be neither Holy n^^ C^tholi^k, but an unsound member of that Church; but what
say you to the first ^ounde^s and ^athers of their Church, were not they v^ry
(...) men?


Firm. ^ B^llarmine could prove what he takes for gran^ed, that the Fathers and
Founders o^ their Church, as it now stands, were the ho^y Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles, I should agree with him in that note, but the truth is they have
no more right to call them their Fathers and Founders, then the Scribes and
^harisees had to ca^l Abraham their Father; from whose faith they had so
miserably declined; the Fathers of the present Church of Rome, as it is now,
were the corrupt Counsels, which were so many packed Juryes, and the popes; of
whose Sanctity you may consult Platina, who was a Papist.

By what I have said (I hope) you are satisfied, that you had no justifyable
reasons to adhere to the Church of Rome, as it is now, so much declined from the
Primitive; let me know how and why you did forsake it.


Dub. I am fully satisfied that the reasons, which drew me over to that Church
were false and fallacious, and am now as much confirmed, that the reasons which
made me leave her Communion are solid and demonstrative.

1. Which were her monstrous unnecessary imposible Doctrine of
transubstantiation.


Firm. How do you prove that to be unnecessary?


Dub. The change of the bread and wine into the very body and blood of Christ
is unnecessary, because certain it is (and they of the Church of Rome
acknowledge it) that there never was any such change in the Sacraments of ^he
old Testament, neith^r is there any in the other six of the New, (as the
Papists are pleased to multiply them; now if all other Sacraments without any
such miraculous change, do attain their ends, for which they were instituted,
why should it be required in the holy Eucharist? why not rather in that of
baptism? why should not the baptismall water be changed into Christ's very
blood? this being the Sacrament of Regeneration, that that of Nutrition; surely
as great a power and virtue is required, to regenerate and make a Christian, as
to nourish and strengthen him.

Again the faithful both before and under the law did eat and drink the body
and blood of Christ, in a Spiritual manner, before he had either body or blood.
They did eat the same Spiritual Meat and drank the same Spiritual Drink; 1.
Cor. 10.3. what need is there then of a Transubstantiation? If we seriously
peruse the sixth Chapt: of St. John's Gospel, we may learn that the body of
Christ is eaten and his blood drank in a Spiritual manner, that when the
Disciples murmured, at what our Savior had delivered in the former verses, to
satisfye them, he replies that the words which he spoke, were spirit and life:
Ver. 63. and not to be understood according to their gross conception.

I know some the Church of Rome affirm, that in that Chapter, our blessed
Savior speaks not of a Sacramental eating of the body of Christ; but
certainly is his body may be eaten, and his blood drank, without any such
monstrous change by every true beleiver not Receiving, why may not he eat the
body and drink the blood of Christ, without any substantial change of the
Bread and Wine when he receives? besides ^ most (if not all) of the ancient
fathers, who held a necessity of giveing the Eucharist to infants, urge the 53.
verse of this Chapter, for their opinion and practice, except ye Eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you, Surely
therefore they conceived, that our Savior meant by these words a Sacramental
eating, how then dare any of the Clergy of the Church of Rome, expound it
otherwise, seeing they take an oath never to expound Scripture, but according
to the unanimous consent of the Fathers: see the forma juramenti professionis
fidei. Conc. Triden. Sess. 24. Cap. 4. de Reformatione.


Firm. I very much approve your reason against the necessity of
transubstantiation: Let me here from you why you term it monstrous, and
impossible?


Dub. It Is therefore monstrous and impossible, because it implies
Contradictions, and gross absurdities 1. that a body is not a body; an
accident is not an accident, for if there should be such a change, the some
numericall body of our Savior, must be in Heaven and Earth, nay in ten
thousand places at the same time, ^it must be extended and not extended, it
must have dimensions and no dimensions, finite and not finite, which cannot be,
no not by Gods omnipotent, and absolute power; how do the schoolmens Noddles
abound with nicetyes, quidditys, perseities, Chimaeras, to solve such
incompossibilities?


2. This strange Metamorphosis does make accidents to be no accidents, it takes
away the very being of them; for accid^ntis esse, ^st in^sse, the being of an
accident is in-being, here must be Color, sapor, odor, quantity without a
Subject, which is all one as if we should say a man might be a man without a
reasonable Soul, In a word I would willingly learn, what does become of
Christ's Body, and Blood after it is received into the mouth, (or if any profane
mouse should swallow part of it, or lick up a drop of the blood) and thence
into the stomach, whether it be retransubstantiated into bread and wine, or
else be converted by the concoctive, and nutritive faculty, into the body of
the Communicant, as other nourishment is, and then twill necessarily follow,
that Christ's Body is essentially united unto, and made one with the Body of
every Communicant, which borders very nere upon B^asphemy, for by this means
James Nailer will ere long ( quod animus m^minisse horret) be Jesus Christ.

3. This Transubstantiation (if any such thing were possible) is wrought by a
miracle, but was ever any miracle done by Christ and his Apostles, which was
not discernable by the senses? when ^e cured the blind, the dumb, the lame,
when he turned water into wine, was not this manifest to the Sight, the Smell,
the Taste? shall we think that the God of truth Gave to m^n five Scences, to
deceive 4 of them by one pretended miracle? or that it is his method to inform
the mind by Impostures? if one or two or three Senses may be deceived, why not
all? then what will become of Romes orall Tradition? for may not the ear be
deceived as well as the eye? the nose, the taste, the touch? here are 4 Senses
to one against that tradition, and then how are the papists certain of what
they have received from the present Church, or how is she certain of what
she received from the Church immediately before her? is not the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which teaches men not to believe their eyes, and other of
their Senses, a ready way to Atheism, and infidelity? for if four of the five
Senses may be deceived then farewell all tradition, and if these inferior
faculties, may be thus bafled, what satisfaction could it have been to St.
Thomas that Christ was truly risen from the dead by putting his finger into the
print of the nails, or his hand into his side?

But beside what sense and reason, witness against this monstrous opinion, the
Scripture is clearly opposite unto it, for Christ at the institution of this
Sacrament, did not take his own Body into his hand^, but Bread, he brake not
his own Body, but Bread, he did not eat his own Body, he did not drink his
own Blood, but he drank of the fruit of the Vine, Mat. 26.29. for so he called
it after Consecration and Distribution; I will not drink henceforth of the
fruit of the Vine etc. in like manner St. Paul. It Is still this bread and this
cup. 1. Cor. 11.26.

When our Savior says ( Hoc est corpus meum) what does (hoc) stand for?
either it must signify this thing in my hand, (i. e.) the bread, or else his
own body* which body he holding in his hand, utters these words ( hoc est
corpus meum) that is corpus meum est corpus meum, a mere Identical trifleing
proposition, which according to all Logic is most absurd, and destroys the
very nature of a Sacrament, which consists of two essential parts the sign and
the thing signified; besides they of Rome con^ess that the Body of Christ, is
not present under the species of Bread and Wine, when the Priest begins to
pronounce ( hoc) nor till he has uttered the last syllable ( um) hoc est
corpus meum, such poor shifts these men are forced to use.

As for antiquity, so much boasted of by those of Rome, I know that some of the
fathers to draw men's minds from the earthly elements to heavenly mysteries,
used now and then high Rhetorical expressions, never dreaming of any
substantial change of the elements into the Body and Blood of Christ, as is
evident from Iraeneus, Panis Communis post consecrationem, non est amplius
panis communis, sed efficitur Eucharistia, quae constat ex duabus naturis
terrena and cael^sti, haec oblatio ^st figura corporis and sanguinis Christi.
Ambrose 1. ad Cor. Cap. 11. and lib. 4. de Sacram.

Non dubitavit dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum cum dedit fignum sui
corporis. Aug: Epist: 23. ad Bonifa and 12. Cap. contra Adiman.

Hoc est corpus meum i. e. typus corporis mei, Ter^ull.

Panem and vinum Appellatione corporis and sanguinis honoravit, non naturam
quidem mutans, sed naturae gratiam adjiciens. Theod. dial* 1. and 2.

In a word the ancient fathers, who opposed the Eutychian haeresy, did make use
of the sacramental union of Bread and Wine, to the body and blood of Christ,
showing that the humane nature of Christ is not more changed into the divine
then the Sacramental Bread and Wine is into the very Body and Blood of Christ,
therefore they believed no such thing, as that monstrous Popish
transubstantiation.

So that we see the falsity and absurdity of it by Scripture, antiquity, common
sense and reason; besides the great danger of Idolatry, in worshipping a piece
of bread, if there be no transubstantiation, as some of the papists themselves
confess, and they also acknowledge, that if the Priest, that consecrates were
not rightly ordained, or that he did not actually intend to consecrate, or that
he omitted any one Ceremony (which they call necessary) at the time of
consecration, that the Bread and Wine are not duly Consecrated, and
consequently no transubstantiation, and therefore great probability, that the
Papists in worshipping the host, do frequently comitt the very great Sin of
Idolatry, which was to me one great reason of forsaking their Communion.

Firm. Truly 'twas a substantial reason, and such an one that has wrought
upon others beside your self, however I desire to hear from you; what further
reasons, you had to leave the Church of Rome.


Dub. The next which I shall acquaint you with is the half Communion so
manifestly against scripture and antiquity.

Our Blessed Savior at the instituition of the Sacrament commands, drink ye
all of this, whereas at the giveing of the bread, he said only, take, Eat,
foreseeing and obviating this grand error of the Church of Rome; it is true the
persons then communicating, were only his disciples, which had received their
Commission to preach the Gospel, before that time, but not in that ample and
full manner, as they received it after his Resurection, as is plain from John
20, 22, 23. and M^t. 28, 29. but be it granted that they were all in full
orders, and upon that account the Cup was given them, otherwise they should not
have received it, by the same reason the bread might be denied to the people,
because none but Priests did then Communicate; but we know that a Priest when
he does not consecrate, is in the place of a Layman, and consequently the
disciples not consecrating at the Supper were no better, and therefore
according to the doctrine, and practice of the Church of Rome, should not have
received the Cup.

But what will they think of the whole Church of Corinth, to whom St. Paul
sent a first and second Epistle, they cannot imagine they were all Priests,
observe then how ^e ^xhorts all of them, to examine themselves in order to the
receiving of the holy Eucharist under both kinds. 1. Cor 11. this is so evi^ent
that our adve^saries have nothing to Reply.

As for Antiquity the practice of the Church of Rome is clearly against it, as
Iam able to demonstrate, from express testimonies, of the fathers, but our
learned writers have ^aved me that trouble, those that please may peruse
Chami^re, Ch^mnitius, Jewel, Cracanthorp; The confe^sion of the Council of
Co^stance stands as a lasting Monument against the Popish innovation in this
particular; the words are these, we decree in like manner, that though in the
Primitive Church* the holy Eucharist, was received under both kinds, by the
faithful, yet this Custom to avoid some dangers and scandals is reasonably
introduced that it should be received by the Priests only in both kinds, by the
people in one; is not this with the Socinians to make the Sacraments mere
indifferent Ceremonies, alter able at the Churches pleasure?

But the Council of Trent flies higher; Cen^^l. (...) S^ss. 12. C^n. 1.
if any man shall say that all faithful Christians* by Gods Command, or for
necessity of Salvation, ought to Receive the Sacrament in both kinds* let him
be acursed, I wonder whether Pope Gelasius, sat in, or was out of his
infallible Chair, when he roundly said, we find that some do abstain from the
Chalice of the Sacred Blood; let them receive the entire Sacrament or be kept
from the whole, because the division of one and the same mystery cannot be
without grand Sacrilege. Either the Pope was not infallible, or the present
Church of Rome is most Sacrilegious.


Firm. You rightly Judge, and were their fancy of Transubstantiation true (as
nothing is more false and ridiculous) yet were it not sufficient to debar the
Laity of the Cup, because they receive the Blood of Christ with his Body, for
this is not to drink but to eat it, and besides the Sacrament is not a sign of
his Blood in the veins, but as 'twas shed and powered out; might not the Priests
as well receive his Blood, with his Body, and then 'twere as superfluous for
them to drin^e of the Cup, as for the people; but I pray proceed in your
reasons against Popery.


Dub. My third reason is taken from the invocation of Saints departed; which is
against Scripture, and antiquity: it is an attribute belonging to God alone,
that ^he is a God hearing Prayers. It Is a chief part of his worship, thou
shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou Serve, it robs Christ
of one part of his Preistly office who now sitts at Gods right hand,
interceding for us, there is but one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, certainly is holy men, both before and under the law, prayed to
God alone through faith in the promised seed or Messiah, without invocateing
any departed Saint, because there was none then (as they of the Church of Rome
confess,) admitted to the beatifical vision, and consequently could not know
the need or prayers of men upon earth, in the Glass of the Trinity, there is
less reason now to make our adresses, to the spirits of just men made perfect,
Christ himself sitting, at Gods right hand, and Interceding for us.

Besides the worship of Angels is forbidden by St. Paul. Col. 2. and the
Angel in the Revelation twice sorbade St. John to worship him, Cap. 19. and 22
yea the worshippers of Angels were in the primitive times, branded with the
title of haereticks, under the name of (Angelici) and therefore much less ought
we to worship the Saints departed, for certainly they being the more
excellent Creatures, are much more capable of such worship then the souls of
men, that are now in Abraham's bosom, in Paradise, not yet in that perfect
bliss and glory, which they shall enjoy when their souls and bodies shall be
reunited, but according to many of the fathers in a certain and joyful
expectancy of it, after the last and final judgment, where the place of their
present abode is I shall tell you when ^he fathers are agreed about it.

For this Saint worship certain it is there is no express Scripture, and it is
as certain there is no general consent of antiquity, let any man peruse Mr.
Meads excellent treatise of the Apostasy of the latter times, wherein it is
apparent how the Cannonizing of Saints in the Church of Rome, agrees with the
heathens Apotheosis, their praying to them with the worshipping of Heroes,
their Dij Medioxumi, their having several Saints for Patrons of Particular
Countries, Trades and Callings, Physicians for diverse diseases, like the
heathens Dij Tutelares, as may be seen in Chemnitius his examen and in other
learned men.


Firm. You need not spend more words about this gross superstition, which is
nothing else, but a mixture of Christianity, and Paganism, and of all the
errors of the Church of Rome, most dangerous, for the Lord our God is a
jealous God, and will not suffer the honor and worship, that is due to him
alone, to be given to any other.


Dub. I shall submit to your advice, and proceed to a fourth reason against
Popery, which is their adoration of images so much condemned in holy Scripture,
what more expressly forbiden then image worship by the second Commandment?
which they of Rome have Cunningly left out in their mass books, offices,
Primmers, and Catechism's, and without all show of Reason, asserted it to be a
positive Command, belonging only to the Jews, how demonstratively is the
fourth of Deutronomie against it from the 12 verse to the 18? many other texts
might be urged to the same purpose, all which the Schoolmen endeavor to
baffle, by their Pitiful distinctions; betwixt an Image and an Idol, a
picture upon a cloth and one engraven in wood, or stone, betwixt (...) and
(...) which every Esurient Groeculus; every mean Sciolist, will smile at,
betwixt Mediate, Relutive, and Terminative, which a^e distinctions (at least
some of them) without a difference, mere Chimericall phansies: if a man shall
seriously peruse the 13* and 14. Chapters of the Book of Wisdom (which at Rome
is Canonical Scripture) and consider what answers the Heathens returned to
those that objected against them their Idol worship, Non imagini, s^d numini
sacrificamus. Ae
that they worship not the Image, but the ( Numen) or divine power it
represented, he will easily discern that the wiser sort of Heathens made as
wise Appologies, for their Image worship; as the wisest Papists do for theirs.

As for the antiquity of this gross superstition both Fathers and Councels are
against it, as is evident from that excellent Homily of our Church concerning
the peril of Idolatry, if it be replied twere the images of the heathens they
opposed, true it is, for in the first ages of the Church there were no others,
the Christians of those times, abominateing all image worship, but the reasons
they give against the heathen Imagery wound the Church of Rome under the fifth
rib; no Christian Church did then use images in their oratoryes; in after ages
they were admitted only for an historical use, as may be seen in St Gregory's
writings, who lived above 600 years after Christ, true it is by the Second
Nicene Council their worship was decreed; and so this iniquity was established
by a law, such a one as that packed convention could legitimate, and hence
forward not only the pictures of Saints, but of God himself and of the Blessed
Trinity were set up in Churches, which was an high dishonor to the Glorious
Majesty of the Almighty, to be portraid like an old Man, and gave an occasion
to ignorant people to conceive him to be so indeed, hence I have heard some of
them say, when they swore ( by God) that they swore by a good Man, by which
it is evident, how the gross superstition of the Church of Rome, has crooked
silly Souls, and that all such images, are teachers of Lies, very vanities, as
the Scripture shows and reason demonstrates.

For to say nothing of the Blasphemous images of God the Father, and the holy
Trinity, does not the image of any Saint, whom these pseudo-Catholicks worship,
lie to their imaginations? representing that which is not; for nothing but the
Souls, and Spirits of those Saints do now remain, so that whilst they picture
and worship them in bodily shapes, which pictures represent, what is not, they
worship they know not what, praying only to the Souls of Saints, yet
phansying them in bodily shapes as when they lived here on earth: how does it
concern all Serious Christians, to beware of the Religious worship of any
creature of Gods or man's making? of Angel, Saint, or Image, which is so
expressly forbidden in the word of God? And surely if we might worship the
picture of a man, which is man's Creature, 'twere much more rational to worship
a true man, yea the Son, Moon and Stars, and all the host of heaven, they
being all of them the Creatures of Almighty God.


Firm. You rightly conclude, were not a judicial blindness, upon the eyes of
our adversaries, they could not be Guilty of so dangerous a suspicion.


Dub. I shall trouble you but with one reason more for my forsakeing the Church
of Rome, which was breifely their prayers in an unknown tongue, a practice,
manifestly contrary to plain Scripture, and the ancient Doctors of the Church,
a most unreasonable service, opposite to that which we are to perform to
Almight^ God; It Is so bafled by St. Paul, that all the learned ^en of the Roman
party have nothing of sense or reason to answer, and as for antiquity 'twas not
so much as thought upon, in the first ages in the Church, the Liturgies then
every where were in the known and vulgar tongue, otherwise how should the
unlearned say (Amen.)

The practice of the Church of Rome is in this* as in diverse other of their
fopperyes, a very mystery of iniquity, I could heartily wish; that for the
undeceiveing of ignorant Papists; their Missales, Pontifical's, Breviaryes,
Lady Psaltres etc. were translated into the English and other vulgar tongues,
that such poor deluded souls might see to what absurd prayers they say (Amen)
to what childish ridiculous Ceremonies they ^ubmit.

I might here add the vain Reptitions, of so many Ave-Maria's, and
Pater-noster's, upon their beads, their saying of them at certain hours as a
Pensum, or task, or a Penance to make a Compensation for their sins, rather
then as a willing serious duty from the heart and soul; which is not Religious
praying, but a Childish saying of prayers, a vain heathenish babbling, after the
manner of an old wises charm; resting in the work done; as if the bare saying
of prayers, without any intention of the mind, were the only end of praying, or
the effectual ^erven^ prayer of a Righteous man. Iam. 5.16.

I might also add their cheating Purgatory, their purchasing of pardons, and
indulgences, for sins past, and for many hundred years to come, by sums of
money set down in the Tax book of their Chancery, their Pilgrimages, and
bodily Severityes to expiate for the sins of their souls, their allowing of
Brothell houses to Grati^ye the unmarried Clergy, and others in their unclean
Lusts, for which the Pope receives a lu^ty Pension.

But to deal truly with you no one thing wrought a greater dislike of Popery
in me then their barbarous bloody Cruel^y, toward those that they please to
call Haereticks, their savage inquisition, their Parisian, Irish, and other
massacres, Mr Fowes History.
their marian Butcherings, their intended matchless powder treason, their
poisoning and stabing of kings, their Justifieing of Rebellion and all manner
of wickedness, by their right intention, and Doctrine of probability as is to
be seen in the first and second part of the mystery of Jesuitisme, in the
Jesuits Morralls; can such Villainy* such Cruelty and Christianity stand
together? did Christ and his Apostles propagate the Gospel with such Carnal
weapons? how severely does our Savior rebuke his angry disciples, when they
would have called for fire from heaven to destroy the uncivil Schismatical
Samaritans? 2 Cor. 10.4.
y^e know not what spirit ye are of, for the son of man is not come to d^stroy
men's lives* but to save them; Luke 9.55. O that Christ's pretending Vicar had
the spirit of the meek and holy Jesus.

These Sir, were the reasons which moved me to forsake the Communion of the
Church of Rome, for upon this account I could not believe her to be the
Catholic Church, or any sound part of it, but a very Schismatical Haeretical
one, that had departed exceeding much from Primitive Christianity from the
faith that was once delivered to the Sain^s.


Firm. You have given very sufficient reasons* for your departure from that
unsound Church, which may satisfy any serious* considering Christian, and you
have saved me the trouble of any further addition to them; I am now fully
persuaded that you are neither Atheist, Infidel, or Papist; pray you let me
know what is your present persuasion, and what Church you most ^pprove.


Dub. Truly Sir there are so many sects amongst the Protestants, that I am in
no small doubt, with which of them to hold Commuion; but my inclination leads
me chiefly, to return to my old Mother the Church of England, from which most
unhappily (as I am now convinced) I heretofore separated; however for the
remov^l of some scruples, which yet remain with me, ^ earnestly desire you to
give your self the trouble of a short discourse, concerning the several sects
now in England.


Firm. I shall most ^readily gratify you In this your very reasonable request,
nothing doubting but that I shall, by Gods Gracious assi^tance) remove all your
scruples, and fix you a true son of that Church, which is the most Catholic
Apostolical Church now exstant in all the world, which those that do
acknowledge the holy Script^re to be the infallible word of God, the perfect
Rule of all the substantialls of Christianity both for faith and manners, and
have some competent knowledge in the records of antiquity, (the want of which
is one great cause of h^resy and schism), as to be able to trace Christian
Religion, through the several ages of the Church from the Apostles down to
these present times, I say those that do acknowledge these things cannot doubt
of.


Dub. You much confirm me in what I have often heard from grave and learned
men, that one great cause of errors in Religion, is ignorance in the writings
of the ancient Doctors of the Church, Councels, and Ecclesiastical histories,
this is not every man's work that have neither books to read nor brains to
understand them. and that the surest way to be an Orthodox Christian, is by
studying descendendo beginning with the records of the first century, then
discending to the second, thence to the third, and so on to the succeding ages
of the Church, whereby he will perceive how the true Religion has been handed
down from one age to another, and how and when, this or that error sprang up;
as he that sails down some great and clear pure river, may easily perceive,
where little Rivuletts, and puddles, have run into it, and have muddyed, and
troubled the Cleare^ Stream.


Firm. I much approve of what you say concerning the rise and cause of errors
in Religion, the chief reason of them is ignorance in the records of
Antiquity, and holy Scriptures, and want of orderly proceeding in our studies
from age to age; whereby we may easily perceive, how and when the puddles and
corrupt rivule^s of error have troubled the purer stream of Christianity, and
you may without much labor perceive that if you had been well instructed, in
the being and Attributes of Almighty God, in a firm belief of his most sacred
word, you had never fallen into those most dangerous errors of Popery,
Quakerism or o^ any such pernicous sect.


Dub. I do confess my error, and especially that I was so great a stranger,
not only to the writings of the fathers, but to the holy Scripture it self,
which I did too much neglect and scorn, but seeing by Gods blessing, upon your
endeavors, I am fully satisfied of the vanity, absurdity, and falsehood of
Atheism; infidelity, and Popery; if you please to give your self that trouble,
we will proceed in our discourse concerning Quakerism, Anabaptism,
Independency, and Presbytery, I shall not trouble you with any other sect,
because they are all included in some one of these, or at least are so vain and
ridiculous, that we should do them to much honor, if we should gratify them
with a sober and serious confutation.


Firm. I shall most willingly embrace your proposal* and if it please you we
will proceed to Quakerism, the error which you embraced immediately before, you
turned Papist, and in truth it is a fair introduction to Popery, and by many
gross errors which the Quakers embrace, it is as evident as the light at noon
day, who were the fathers of those spurious brats.


Dub. This is a very truth; the Quakers holding many things which are
maintained by Papists, we may easily know whose Children these poor deluded
Souls are, and the Corespondence betwixt them, made my passage to Rome more
ready and easy.


DIALOGVE IV Against QVAKERISM.
Firm. You have informed me in our last discourse that being sometime a quaker
you had a ready way open to become a Papist. I pray tell me why and how you
turned a quaker.


Dub. You put me hard to it. for I can give yo^ no ver^ good reasons for that
change, and those that moved me are so ridiculous, that I am almost ashamed to
name them, yet such as they are I shall give you the trouble of hearing them, I
am almost persuaded, that the man that perverted me, used some enchantments and
Diabolical arts. so that I was rather bewitched. then rationally persuaded, to
be of that party, (as I have heard some have been) but because I am not certain
of this, I shall wave it, and show you my reasons.

1. I observed that the cause why there were so many sects and schisms in the
world, was for want of a certain infallible rule to guide us in our judgments
and practices. as I was made believe, and I was persuaded that the Quakers had
such a rule, to wit, the light within them.

2. I observed these men to be very demure in their carriage, very austere in
their lives, sober and temp^^^t^, of afflicted dejected countenances* very
punctual and just in their dealings, not abating one fart^ing of the price of
any commodity they first demanded; great contemners of the world, no respecters
of any man's person how great soever; so meek, humble and lowly in their
apparel and behavior that they cannot endure the wearing of gold-rings, silver
or silks in themselves or any others, and if any man should strike them on the
one cheek, these poor innocent souls were so far from revenge that they
would turn the other, so that I conceived them to be so many Nathaniels so
many true Israelites in whom there was no guile.


Firm. How could you be deceived by such painted sepulchers? what could you see
more in them then what was conspicuous in the Scribes and Phari^ees of old?
take i^ for an infalible rule, that whosoever hold or practice any thing which
is contrary to the law of nature and good manners, express Scripture, the
usages of all sober and civil people in the world, are so far from being true
Christians that they are not worthy the name of men.


Dub. I am fully of your persuasion that these men hold and practice many
things which are contrary to the law of nature, good manners and holy
Scripture, but for my farther satisfaction, let us discourse some of their
tenants and practices.


Firm. For their tenants you may at your leisure peruse the Synopsis of
Quakerisme wrote by Mr. Danson. The heads whereof are briefly these taken out
of their own writings, which are a mixture of Popery and Socinianisme; as.

1. They affirm that there are not three persons in the Trinity.

2. That Christ did not make satisfaction for the sins of men.

3. That justification is not by imputed righteousness, but that our own
inhaerent righteousness, and good works is the cause of our justification.

4. That a state of perfection and freedom from sin is attainable in this life.

5. That there is a light in every man sufficient to guide him to salvation.

6. That the Scripture is not the word of God, or a standing rule of faith and
manners.

7. That there is no resurrection of the dead.

8. That there is no need or use of ordinances, as Baptism and the Lords
Supper,

9. That it is unlawful to take an oath before a Magistrate upon any account
whatsoever.


Dub. I know these and many more to be the positions of quakers and that they
are directly contrary to sacred Schripture;


Firm. These things are so clearly confuted by the express word of God and
tradition of the Catholic Church, that it is superfluous to trouble you with
any further discourse about them.

As for their practices they are extremely opposite to all good manners, and
the Civilities of a^l Nations that are not grossly barbarous, as well as ^o the
holy Scripture; and whereas you have observed their carriages to be very
demure, austere, and that they are of a sad countenance; it is no more then what
our blessed Savior reproved in the Scribes and Pharisees long since, indeed to
be sad and mourn in times of public Humiliation, Calamities and great
Judgments is Christian; but to be constanly so, savours too much of the
Pharisee, and is contrary to holy Scripture which instructs us, there is a time
to Laugh as well as to Weep, there is nothing which more delights and cheers
the heart then the exercise of a good Conscience toward God and Man, and we
know a merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, whereas a sad sour face a
hanging down look too much resemble Caines Mark, and is a very probable sign
of a disquieted, discontented, guilty, troubled, if not a malicious mind.


Dub. I am much of your judgment, but I pray you tell me what do you ^hink of
their denying all civil respect either in word or gesture to their equals and
superiors?


Firm. This practice of theirs is against the v^ry law and light of nature as
well as plain Scripture, a mere levelling devise of their seducers (the Popish
Priests and Jesuits) to make a confusion among us, to destroy all government, to
take away all honor and respect which is due to our superiors, for what honor
and reverence has that man in his heart toward them who will express none in
his words or gestures according to the laudable custom of the country where he
dwells?


Dub. Truly I have often admired at the uncivil behavior of quakers in saying
( thou and thee) to their betters in not bowing the knee or putting of the hat
to their superiors.


Firm. You might well wonder at such barbarous uncivil carriage, but pray you
tell me what think you of their pitching a certain price upon their commodities
of which they will not abate one farthing, was not that a certain sign^ of
their honest and upright dealing?


Dub. I confe^s I once thought so, but afterward I considerd that a man may
cheat and co^en in few words as well as in many, and I believe that these men
most of them are a^ great cheat^ as any in the world.


Firm. and I pray you what think you of their other rare quali^ies before
mentioned?


Dub. I did once believe them to be great contemners of the world, meek,
humble, lowly, etc. but it is evident they are quite contrary to what they seem
to be.

1. For I know that most of them are extremely coveteous and narrow breasted,
without all bowels of pity or mercy toward those that want, unless they be of
that fanatic party; which is mere faction, no Christian Charity at all; and
whereas many of them have been known to have been persons of mean fortunes at
first they are now rich and wealthy, and none of them (though very poor before
they turned quakers) now in a necessitous condition, being maintained as it is
very probable by their new Masters the Jesuits, a very rich and opulent
society, who make more Proselites by the length of their purse strings then by
the strength of argument, or personated Mimical gestures.

2. As for their humility and lowliness, it is evident they show no such virtues
in their carriage toward their betters; their contempt of gold-rings,
silver-lace and rich attire, is no infallible proof of their humility; Diogenes
may be as proud in his tub as Alexander in his palace, he may trample upon
Platos pride with greater pride; as haughty a spirit may be hid under a plain
country russet, as under the richest ^ables.


Firm. No question; but what do you think of their meekness and mildness, that
they will rather suffer an hundred injuries then revenge one, that they will
not take arms to offend the enemy or defend themselves or their country, are
not these rare signs of Christian meekness?


Dub. I see you are now in jest; you know ttha time was when they did take up
arms in an hostile manner against the King and his Loyal subjects, and if they
had a fair opportunity they would do the like again, and appear as cruel and
bloody as ever did Anabaptist fifth Monarchy-man or Jesuit.


Firm. I confess that many of them were in arms under Cromwell against the
royal party; the light within them did warrant them to rebel against their
lawful Sovereign, but now the light within them shows that it is not lawful to
resist Magistrates by carnal weapons.


Dub. You are pleased to make your self mercy with these men's bare-fac't
hypocricy, what a jugles this light within them? more unconstant then that of
the moon, a mere phansy, a Diabolical suggestion; the Divil suits his
tentations according as opportunities present themselves, when there is good
probability of prevailing by rebellion and treason, then the light (or rather
darkness within them) suggests unto them, it is lawful to take up arms, to
plunder and murder their fellow subjects, yea the King himself, but when there
is no probability to prosper by such villainous enterprises, then that light
within them persuades them to be as quiet as Lambs, as innocent as so many
pretty Pigeons.


Firm. Of a truth, this light by which they are guided, is the very blackness
of darkness, nothing but a groundless fancy, which any man in the world may as
well pretend for his rule as these Phanaticks; when several Sects are
contending, shall the light within them be the Umpire? When the Anabaptists
fifth Monarchy men, and diverse other Sects contend for their several opinions,
whether are they to go but to the Law and to the Testimony? If they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Esai. 8.20.


Dub. I have much wondered that any men should be so much deluded by their vain
imaginations, as to measure their opinions and practices by so uncertain, so
unconstant a guide as the light within them, which is so frequently beclouded
by pride, ignorance, interest, passion, humor, and Singularity.


Firm. You need not wonder, if you shall seriously consider that they who
flatte^ themselves, that they are in a state of perfection, that they cannot
sin, are above ordinances, that cast off fear, and restrain prayer, Job. 15.4.
should fall into the snare of the Devil, and lie under a judicial blindnes^.
And that they do so, seems very probable by what one Tolderfee of Lemster, in
the Country of Hereford relates of himself, in his recantation of Quaquerism^.
I have heard also of diverse of these seduced wretches, that at their meetings,
before they utterred their Enthusiasms, have swollen so much they have been
re^dy to burst, And it is too evident that the brethren of the Rosy C^oss, have
a great influence upon them: and it is upon Record at Bristol, That before
there was any Quaker in that City, Two Franciscans did foretell to one Mr.
Cowlishaw an Ironmonger there, (whose oath is to be seen upon the Register)
That within eighteen days Quaquerism should be set up in Bristol, which came
to pass accodingly: And besides all this a Popish Priest bragged in my hearing
that he had been a speaker at their meetings; by all which it is evident whose
Disciples these silly fools are. For your further confirmation you may peruse
Mr. Prin's Quakers unmasked. Dr Stilling-fleets against the Idolatry of Rome,
and Friar Barbanson, who above Two hundred years since laid the ground work of
this Sect in a Book whose Title is occul^ae Divini amoris semitae.


Dub. I am fully satisfied concerning the folly and madness of this
Phanaticism, and from whence it sprang; please you we will discourse of
Anabaptisme; pray you what do you think of that?


DIALOGVE V. against Anabaptisme.
Firm. ANabaptism is a most carnal and bloody Sect, as appears by the History
of John of Leiden, Knipperdoling, wrote by Sleiden and Bullenger.


Dub. But what do you think of their opnion ^oncerning Inf^nt Baptism? I shall
not trouble you with other of their Tenants, which are common to them with
other Schismatics.


Firm. That Opinion of theirs is contrary to Scripture, and the practice of the
Catholic Church.


Dub. I have often he^rd them say, That if there were any express Text in
Scripture for the Baptisi^g of Infants, they would allow of that practice


Firm. Though there be no express place in Scripture for it, as there was for
Circumcising of Children under the law yet there are many Texts which do infer
it by rational consequence. What express Text is there for the Communicating of
Women? which nevertheless the Anabaptists practice; Prove. 24. Eccle. 8.2. Romans
13.1. Pet. 2. Ier. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Heb. 6.16. 2. Cor. 1. Rev. 10.6.
have they not express Texts for obeying the Civil Magistrate? for taking an
Oath before him; thou shall swear, the Lord lives in justice, in judgment, and
truth. Thou shall fear the Lord and swear by his name. I call God for a rec^rd
upon my Soul; an Oath for Confirmation is ( not was) an end of all strife. And
we have the Angel in the Revelation (which was never under the Levitical law)
swearing.

Yo^ see here are express Texts for obedience to Magistrates, and for taking an
Oath before them; yet the Anabaptists will not swear at all, which is a moral
duty enjoined in the third Commandment; and how obedient they are to the
Supreme powers let Germany and England witness in our ^ate Civil Wars, so that
you may see that if there were an express Text for Infant Baptism, they would
not yield unto it but follow their own wild imaginations.


Dub. Doubtless it is grand hypocrisy to call for express Texts for
Infants Baptism, and yet to act directly against such Texts in other points of
Necessary duty.


Firm. True it is we have no express Texts for Infants Baptism, yet we have
many that do necessarily infer it, as that of our Savio^r suffer little
Children ^o come unto me which he took in his Arms and Blessed, certainly those
that were capable of his blessing, were capable of the seal of it. The children
of believers are said to be holy: The promise is to you and to your children: 1
Cor. 1.14. Act. 2. Math. 28.
Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. All which places evidently show that the children of believing
Christians have as much right to baptism, as the children of the Jews had to
Circumcision: unless we should say that the Lord was more gracious to the Jews
then he is to us Christians, and that the hand of his mercy is shortened to us,
which was so much stretched out to them.

If their Children were in Covenant with God, (as it is evident they were)
Deuteronomy. 29.11. then are the Children of Christians under the same privilege,
unless any man can give a good reason to the contrary, which must be drawn
either from the Mercy, or Judgment of God: There is no show of reason to say
'twas from his Judgment, much less from his Mercy, for who dare say it is a
mercy not to be in Covenant with God?

To these Texts of Scripture, we may add the practice of the Catholic Church
for Fifteen hundred years, as appears by the writers in their several
Centuries, which is the best Commentary upon the Scripture. The Fathers who
lived in the first ages of the Church had a fairer o^po^tunity to understand
the meaning of the Apo^tles, and their immediate successors, then we that live
at so great a distance.

Tertullian one of the most Ancient of them confesses the practice of Infant
Baptism, tho he does not approv^ it. Cyprian and Fidus would never have
contende^ about the ^ircumstance of time, if they had doubted of the lawfulness
of the thing.

I may add to what has been said; Either the Baptising of Infants is a small
error, or it is a great and gross one: if i^ be but a small error, an error of
Charity toward poor Infants, why did the Ana^ap^i^ts in the late times of
confusion, separate from those Churches which did not impose it as a necessary
con^ition of Communion with them? If it be a great and gross one, then the
Catholic Church has maintained a gross error for Fifteen hundred years and
upward. How then was that promise made good unto it, that Christ's spirit should
lead it into all truth and that the gates of Hell should not prevail against it?


Dub. Indeed those Texts of Scripture so well explained by the practice of the
Catholic Church ^or so many years since the time of the Apostles, is an
evident argument for the proof of Infant Baptism; but are you certain that
Infant Baptism was practiced in the Primitive times?


Firm. We are most certain from the writings of the Fathers in those times.

Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 39. Origin. lib. 5. in cap. 6. ad Romans Cyprian lib. 3.
Epist. 8. ad ^idum. Hieronymus lib. 3. contra Pelagianos. Nazian. Ora^iones in
sacrum lavacrum. Basil Orat. Exhort. ad Baptismum. Chrisost. Homil. 1. ad
Neophyr. Augustine lib. 10. de Genesis cap. 23. The custom of Baptising Infants
is an Apostolical Tradition, lib. 4. de Baptismo cap. 24. idem aff^rmat
Prosper. lib. 22. de Vocatione Ge^tium, cap. 8. These three Fathers making use
of the Baptising of Infants as an argument against the Pelagians, who denied
Original Sin, which practice of Infant Baptism these subtle Heretics durst
never deny, because they knew 'twas the practice of the Catholic Church.


Dub. It Is strange that so many Testimonies of the Ancient Doctors of the
Church, with such evident places of Scripture before allegd, should not silence
these perverse men.


Firm. By terming them perverse, you render a just reason why neither
Scripture, nor Fathers, nor Arguments ^ill satisfy them; few of this Sect, (or
indeed of any other) are Le^rned, except it be their Leaders, (Popish Priests
and Jesuits) which spread such errors by design to make divisions among us,
that they might ^eign. Now it is no strange thing to see ignorance and
perverseness to dwell under the ^ame roof; for whosoever is capable of
Conviction must have some knowledge and reason, that he may be able to
understand the force of an argument when it is proposed unto him, as seduced
Sectaries (being men of very short discourse) do not. Besides that little
portion of reason which remains in them is so beclouded with sel^conceit,
interest, and faction, prejudice, pride, and uncharitableness, that they have
utterly lo^t all use of it. He that doubts of this, let him discourse either
with Quaker, or Anabaptist, and he will find them a very proud, ignorant,
conceited, perverse people.


Dub. I have sufficient experience of their Pride and Perverseness; but leaving
them to their own simple fancyes and Enthusiasms, let us proceed to the
Presbyterians, to which party I first adhered when I forsook the Church of
England, and and of all dissenters from that Church, in my opinion, they have
the greatest show of reason for their separation.


Firm. In my judgment they have less reason to separate then any other, because
they agree with us in Doctrinals, and are divided from us because of some
Ceremonies, which are confessedly things indifferent; and for some modes of
Government, viz. the Episcopal and Presbyterian, of which, tho the former be
the best, and most ancient, yet learned and most moderate men of both parties,
do acknowledge, that neither of these Forms of Government, are so essential to
the being of a Church, but that it may subsist and be a true Church under
either of them, potius ad been esse quam simpliciter ad esse, but more of this
hereafter: But before we begin our discourse about Presbytery, let us speak a
few things concerning Independency, for I have heard that you were sometimes of
that persuasion.


Dub. True, I was once an Independent, or Congregational man, bu^ seeing all
Sectaries are in respect of Church fellowship Independe^ts, and that these men
for the most part have the same objections against the Church of England as the
Independents make use of, I thought it superfluous to trouble you with any
particular discourse ^oncerning them.


Firm. There are Three things belonging to Independency, which we have not
discoursed upon as yet, neither will they properly fall under debate in our
intended Dialogue about Presbytery; if you please we will take a brief survey
of them.


Dub. I willingly embrace this motion.


DIALOGUE VI Against Independency.
Firm. THe first thing that I except against in the Independency, is the
government practiced in their particular Congregations, without any jurisdiction
one over another, so that every of their Assemblies, is absolute within it
self, without depending upon any Classical, Diocesian, Provincial, National
Church, or general Counsel, whence they have the name of Independents.


Dub. Is it true that they will no^ admit o^ any Superior power over their
respective Congreg^tions, nor appeal in case of divisions among themselves,
unjust and injurious sentences given in their partial Judicatories.


Firm. They admit of no appeals, or no coercive po^er over them in any
Consistories, Classis, or Counsel; One Congregational church may advise,
exhort, or admonish another as brethren, or equals, but not punish or correct
as Judges o^ Superiors; What do you say to this new knack of Church Government.


Dub. I think it to be Anarchical and confused, the Natural Parent of all
Schisms and Hereses; I do not no^ so much wonder how England of late years,
since this headless faction prevaild amongst us, became a second Amsterdam.
What error what heresy so gross, so damnable, what injustice, what oppression
never so grievous which might not go unpunisht in such assemblys from which
there lies no appeal? how must they be broken into infinite fractions,
especially where the fear of a Common enemy does not unite and piece them
together?


Firm. You rightly apprehend; for all these dangers and inconveniences, are the
necessary, consequents of Independent Congregations where any Popish Wolf in
Sheeps Clothing has a fair opportunity to sow the seeds of Anabaptism,
Quaquerism, Socianism, or any poisonous Heresy whatsoever, to spread the
principles of Sedetion, and treason; as has been of late to much practiced in
this Nation, and I wish such Tares be not still scattered in our separating
Conventicles to this very day. 'Twas the observation of Sir Rob. Cotton above
threescore yea^s since that Priests and Jesuits did put on the habits of
Captains, Merchants, etc. that that they might deceive poor ignorant people
under that disguise, opera Posthu. Page 148.


Dub. You have said enough against this headless Church Government, and the sad
consequences of it. I pray you proceed to the second thing you promised to
debate concerning Independency*


Firm. The second error does concern tiths, which generaly the Independents
(with other sectarys) would persuade the world are a great oppression upon the
people, merely Levitical and not due or lawful under the Gospel.


Dub. I desire to hear from you what may be replied to these cavils, for I
believe they are no better.


Firm. The paying of Tiths is no oppression upon the people, no injury to them
at all, for if no freeholder, Farmer or Tenant whatsoever has any legal or
equitable right ^r title to the tenth part by purchase, donation, inheritance,
lease, or by any other imaginable conveiance: then the paying of Tiths can be
no injury at all, but the free holder, Farmer, or Purchaser has no legal right
to the tenth part, no more then the Minister has to the other nine, because for
many hundred years it has been invested in the Church by as good laws as any
layman has right or title to the free hold Farm or lease which he has Purchased
or pays rent for; so that the tenth part cannot descend to any m^n by
inheritance, gift or puchase, neither does any Tenant, pay one Penny of rent to
his Land lord for that part of the increase of Fruits, Grain, Grass or any
other Commodity whatsoever.


Dub. Truly Sir, I have heard as much; and if Tithes were taken from the
Church, no question Landlords would raise their Rents and Fines and Purchasers
would quickly find the price of land raised proportionably to a tenth part.


Firm. This is so plain that nothing but gross ignorance, Envy and Malice
against the Clergy can entertain the least doubt of it.


Dub. Sir, you put me in mind of one thing which I have often thought upon, and
much wonderd at; that generally those that go under the n^me of Protestants in
your Church, have little respect for their Ministers: whereas Papists and
Presbyterians show great respect to theirs.


Firm. You need not wonder at it, the true reason of this contempt is for want
of Zeal to that Religion which they profess; where^s Papists and Presbyterians
are Zealous in theirs. But your mere formal Protestants (of which number there
are too many) is a formal nothing one that is so far from the power of
Godliness, that he has not the naked formality of it: Now there cannot be a
greater sign of an irreligious Atheist, then contempt of the Clergy, for where
they are despised, God cannot be honored nor Religion had in esteem; if the
Gentleman that has assigned reasons for the Contempt of the Clergy had thought
on this, it would have been worth all the reasons in his whole Book, but it may
be he was so much a stranger to his own heart, that he thought not of it.


Dub. But are not many Ministers themselves a chief cause that they are so
contemned?


Firm. I was about to tell you so; it is much to be be wailed that too many in
holy orders are through ignorance, negligence in the duties of their calling,
looseness in their lives and conversations very scandalous, the greatest
Nonconformists of all others, not true to our Church and her injunctions in the
most weighty matters, placing all their Conformity in outward Ceremonies, and
neglecting what is most necessary for their own salvation, and of those poor
Souls which are committed to their charge, which are in great danger to perish
through the ignorance, negligence and evil example of such blind guids.


Dub. But is not the poverty of many of them and the poor pittances allotted
for their subsistence as great a cause of their contempt as any?


Firm. It Is very true; and 'twere a work worthy of the Defendor of the Faith,
and a Religious Parliament to redress this very great grievance, by uniting
Little Churches, by finding out some effectual means for restoring of
Impropriate Tithes and Glebs to their respective Ministers; which
Impropriations are the very dregs of Popery, and a grand Sacrilege in any one
that shall detain them from the Church.


Dub. I do a little wonder why you should c^ll Impropriations Popish, seeing
many of those who took up arms against King Charles the First, di^ it upon the
account of opposing Popery, and hindering the gro^th of i^ in this ^^nd, and
yet some of them are no ^mall I^p^op^ia^ors.


Firm. Certainly there was never a more manifest peic^ of hypocrisy in the
world, for men to be so seemingly zealous against the superstitions of Rome,
and yet be so deeply in love with her Sacrilege. Sur^ly there is some
mavelous sweetness in Tiths and Church lands, that prelatical, Presbyte^ians,
all parties can swallow down such morsels without any scruple: but let them
take heed they prove not like that little Book, Rev. 10.9. sweet to the palate,
but bitter in the belly.


Dub. Indeed I have heard that the Popes of Rome were the first and chiefest
Authors of Impropriations, and that they did alienate Ti^hs and Glebes from
their respected Parish Churches for the maintenance of Abbeys, Priories,
Nunneries, etc.


Firm. It Is very certain that these alienations were made by the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome for those uses, and at the demolishing of those places,
those Impropriate Tiths and Church lands, were either given or sold to
Courtiers and other of the Nobility and Gentry, which has proved the ruin of
many Ancient and flourishing Families, and a very great hinderance to the
growth of Religion for want of an able Ministry in many poor Parishes, where
according to the old saying Scandalous livings have made a scandalous Clergy;
and nothing would be a more effectual redress of this grievance, then (as was
said before) the Uniting of little Parishes, the restoring of Impropriate Tiths
and Glebes to the Church; together with a diligent inspection of the Bishops
into the lives and learning of all those whom they shall either Ordain, or
Institute.


Dub. I am fully persuaded, that the paying of Tiths is no oppression or injury
to any man; but the Independents, and other Sectaries imagine that Tiths are a
Levitical maintenance, and therefore to be abrogated under the Gospel; that
Ministers now are to be maintained by a voluntary Contribution, or at best to
have a set stipend.


Firm. That Tiths received not their beginning from the Levitical Law, is
evident to any unbyased judgment, from the example of Abraham's paying them to
Melchisedeck; of Jacobs vowing to give the Tenth of all that the Lord should
bless him with; from the Apostles large discourse about Abraham and
Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. By all which it is evident that Tiths had not their
Original from the Levitical ^aw, and were not at first affixt to the Ar^nical,
but to the Melchisedechian Priesthood.

As to that of Stipend and Voluntary Contribution, it is a mere plot of the
Devil, and Popish Emissaries, to render Ministers contemptible, by ^aking them
Stipendiaries, or Eleemosynaries, directly contrary to what St. Paul has laid
down, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor; which sufficiently
evinceth, that they ought to have an honorable maintenance, and not to depend
upon the cold and frozen Charity of the people, 1. Cor. 9.
(I am sure St. Paul found his Corinthians very backward to supply the
Ministers necessity in better times then these we live in) like so many
Stipendaries, or Alms-men, by which they will be force^ to Preach placentia, or
starve, and suit their Doctrine to the humor of every Mechanic. What a strange
piece of nonsense is it, that amongst our Congregational men, the Minister
should be the only poor Dependent? It Is most certain and evident to all that
can make use of their reason, that Gods way for the Ministers maintenance is
the best, which both before, and under the Law given by Moses, was by Tiths, at
least by God's approving of Ab^aham's paying them to Melchisedeck. '^was
strongly insinuated, that the great Lord of Heaven and Earth would in after
times order and appoint that Tiths should be the maintenance for the Priest and
Levite; which has continued for many hundreds of years under the Gospel, and
there are many fair proofs from holy Scripture, that they are due by Divine
Right; they are established by Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, are the most
convenient and rational way for the Ministers support, who by this means, when
the earth brings forth plen^ifully shares with the people in that blessing;
when less fruitfully as in times of scarcity, suffers with them in this
Calamity, and thus partaking with them in blessings and affli^^ions will be the
fitter to Stir them up thankfulne^s^ for the one, and to press upon them the
great duties of Patience and Humiliation under the other


Dub. I did not doubt of the lawfulness and reasonableness of Tiths before we
entered upon this discourse but now there is not the least scruple in me
concerning them.


Firm. Therefore let us now proceed to another gross error maintaind by the
Independents and other Sectaries, about the electing of gifted Brethren into
the office of Ministers.


Dub. That any gifted Brother any one that persuades himself that he has the
Spirit, and through a strong imagination conceives himself fit to Speak in the
Congregation, may without any farther trial, or lawful call take upon him the
office of Public Preaching and Ministering in the Congregation (which is the
most sacred and weighty of of all other) This is nothing less then a
presumptuous usruping of the Priests office. This I know to be the Opinion and
practice of Independents and other Sectareis; let me have your judgment of it.


Firm. That you shall most willingly. And herein my judgment is that this is
one of the most wild and Fanatic opinions, that ever entered into the minds of
men; that it opens a wide gap to all Schisms and Heresies, a certain cause of
all manner of disorder and confusions in the Church: upon this account, Priests
and Jesuits, and all manner of Sectaries, have had so fair an opp^rtunity to
vent their poisonous Tenants in the^^ Independent Congregations.


Dub. I am fully persuaded that Shisms and Heresies are the necessary
consequents of men's invading the Ministry without regular Ordination. But for
my better satisfaction, I pray you let me understand the reasons that make
against this Independent practice.


Firm. My Reasons are these; drawn

First from plain Scripture, as Ierem. 14.14. and 23.21. where there is a
complaint against those Prophets That Prophesied lies in Gods name, and he sent
them not. And again the same Prophet, I have not sent these Prophets, and yet
they ran; I have not spoken unto them, and yet they Prophesied, therefore they
shall not profit these people at all.

Neither was this Sending and Calling a necessary requisite only under the Law,
but also in the time of the Gospel. The first that were ever called and sent to
preach the glad tidings of the kingdom of Heaven, were the Apostles, who were
first Disciples to the best of Masters, before they were sent out to Preach.
First Qualified for the work, and then Sent. So upon the treason and death of
Judas, Matthias was made an Apostle in his place, but by Election and
Ordination. Acts 1. Heb. 5. No man must take this hono^ upon him but he that is
called of God; either immediately, or by the Governors of the Church; and
hereupon it was that St. Paul left Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus at Creete, to
Ordain Elders in every City, instructing them how the Priests and Deacons
ought to be qualified.

It Is well worth our observation how the Apostle makes the salvation of men to
depend ordinarily upon the Preaching of Sent and Called Ministers; Romans 10.
Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord he shall be saved; but such Calling
presupposes Believing, Hearing, Preaching, Sending; how shall they Preach,
except they be sent?


Dub. It Is evident by the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament: That
no man ought to take upon him the Office of a Minister, before he has a lawful
Call from the Church, or can by working Miracles make it appear, that he is
immediately called from God, which is not now to be expected.


Firm. And it is as evident from the practice of the Church from the time of the
Apostles, even to this present age; for he that shall peruse her Records shall
find that whosoever did presume to take upon himself the office of public
Preaching, or Administation of the Sacraments, without an extraordinary Call,
arrested by Miracles, or an ordinary one from the Governors of the Church, was
ever accounted a Theif and a Robber, no true Shephard that entered in at the
Church door, but crept in, or climbed up some other way.

And hereupon Tertullian complains, That in their Heretical Conventicles their
Women were bold pratlers, they did preach, dispute, baptize; mere Laics; did
usurp the Priests office, by which means, instead of converting Heathens, they
did pervert Christians. St. Hierom also in an Epistle to Paulinus, complains,
That every one did presume to interpret holy Scripture; prating old women,
doting old men, Husbandmen, Masons, Iacks of all trades; even as it has been in
this divided Nation; Tradesmen, Shoemakers, ^oblers, Glovers, Tailors, have
skip'd from the Shop to the Pulpit, and have left stitching of graments, to
make a rent in the Church.


Dub. There is no ingenuous man that is acquainted with the Tenants of
Anabaptists and Quakers, that will deny, that our Sectaries have sharpened their
Tools, which they have used against us, at the Forges of these Philistines. Have
you any thing else to object aginst these Schismatic practices?


Firm. Yes, The prudential order which is used in all other callings; the
ablest Lawer, Gentleman, Soldier, mu^^ not execute the office of a Judge
Justice of Peace, Commander in war without a Commission; a Student in Physic
cannot practice without a Linence; no man can set up his Trade in a well
Governd Corporation until he has served out his App^entiship, and is made a
Freeman. Such excellent order is observd in Civil aff^irs; but in the great
concerns of the Church, there should b^ nothing but confusion, if these men
might be sufferd to act according to their irrational and extravagant Phansies.


Dub. It Is most apparent that their actions are against Scripture, the practice
of the Cartholick Church, and the dictates of reason; which no Christian, no
Sober man will contradict. Therefore let us leave this headless Faction, and
discourse about Presbytery which has the most plausible reasons for its
Nonconformity to our Church, of any other that do separate from us.


DIALOGVE VII. Against Presbytery.
Firm.. THe first step you made out of our Church (as I have heard) was unto
Presbytery; I desire to know the reasons why you left our Communion, and made
choice of theirs?


Dub. I confess the first step I made out of the Church of England, was into
the Tents of Presbytery, thence to the Independents, and so to the
Anabaptists, and at last I became little better then an Atheist, as I before
have declared. Thus unh^ppy man as I was, being out of the true Church, I was
like Noah's Dove out of the Ark; fluttering over the Floods of E^rors, and
boi^terous waves of Shism^, Factions, and Heresies, finding no firm land for
the sole of my foot to rest upon.


Firm. This was not your case alone, but of many ^n un^table soul, that in
those la^e times of Rebellion, and confusion, Ephesians. 4. has been blown about with
every wind of doctri^e by the sleight of men, (Jesuits, Priest, and Socintans)
and their cunning craftines^, whereby they have lain in wait to deceive. An
^^ence it was that the Prophet David's curse fell he^vy upon them: for they
have fallen from one wickedness to another; from one wicked opinion to a
s^^ond, a third, etc. till at length they have turned Seekers, Scepticks,
Atheists, and Scoffers at all Religion.


Dub. This was once my condition, but praised be the Lord, who has brought my
foot out of the snare. I have by his blessing shaked off all those wild and
groundless fancies, and am more then half persuaded that the Church of England,
is one of the most Orthodox, Apostolical Churches under the cope of Heaven.
However for my better confirmation, let me hear your answers to those
exceptions which the Presbyterians have urged, against her government by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, her Lyturgie, her set Forms of
Prayer, her Ceremonies, her receiving persons of scandalous lives, and grossly
ignorant in the principles of Religion, to the holy Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ. These were the great scandals at which I sometimes stumbled and
fell from the Communion of the Church, into the Congregation of our Classical
Brethren.


Firm. I shall mos^ willingly give in my answer to those exceptions, in that
order you have ranked them. Therefore in the first place, let me hear what you
can object against our Bishops.


Dub. I have been told, They are Antchristian, not heard of in the Primitive
times. Such Plants as our Heavenly Father has not planted, and therefore to be
rooted out.


Firm. True it is, such dirt has been cast upon that Sacred Order by ignorant
and discontented persons; such an one was Aerius the first Anti-Episcopal man
we read of; but this groundless opinion is abundantly confuted by the Testimony
of holy Scripture, by the practice of the ^niversal Church; attested by the
general consent of Fathers and Councels, as you may see in Dr. Hammond's book
against Blondel; Dr. Taylor's treatise of the Divine right of Episcopacy, with
many others.

First, The Scripture is clean for differrent Orders in the Clergy. Our blessed
Savior besides his Seaventy Disciples, had his Twelve Apostles, which were
superior to them, as is evident by the choosing of Matthias into the place of
Judas; from the example of Timothy and Titus, the one a ^ishop of Creet, the
other of Ephesus; by the general consent of Antiquity, in those and other
Churches. In that once famous Church of Rome, we have the Catalogue of those
Bishops which presided there, about Thirty of them suffering Martyrdom for the
Testimony of our Lord Jesus. What should I mention the Angels of the Seven
Asiatick Churches? ^po^. 2.3.
which by the general consent of the F^thers, were the Bishops of those
Churches; nay St. Hierome himself (no good friend to this Order) does
acknowledge, That when Christians began to he divided, one being of Paul, an
other of Cephas, to prevent such Schisms, there past an universal Decree
throughout the world, That Bishops should be settled in every City, who should
govern with the Common Council of the Bresbyters; and that one of the
Bresbyters should be elected and set over the rest, for taking away the seeds
of Schism.


Dub. I am very well persuaded, by what you have said, that the Primitive
government of the Church, was by Bishops, with the assistance of the
Presbytery, who had authority over the Presbyters, and were their superiors.
But I pray you satisfy me in this one thing. Why did St. Paul so sh^rply
reprove the Corinthians, for not excommunicating the Incestuous Person, if they
had no authority so to do without a Bishop?


Firm. This at the first sight seems to be a very smart objection: but if we
seriously consider the words upon which it is grounded, it has no weight at all.
The Text that is cited to prove it is. 1. Corinthians. 5.2. Ye are puffed up, and
have not rather mourned, that he that has done this deed might be taken away
from among you. Where the Apostle reproves them for want of humiliation, for so
soul a sin, not for the neglect of Excommunication. He that had committed that
great sin, was to be taken away, or cut off from the church, but they
themselves could not exclude him, but this was to be done by the Spirit of St.
Paul, verse 3, 4. in whom the power of Jurisdiction was originally ^eated;
there being then no Bishop of Corinth; for evident it is, that in those
Churches, where there were no Bishops, the Apostles kept the power of
Jurisdiction in their own hands, until Bishops were settled among them, as is
manifest in the Churches of Ephesus and Creet. Neither can it ever be proved
that Bresbyters (as such) had any Jurisdiction belonging to the public
government of the Church, but by particular Substitution and Delegation from the
Apostles, and Bishops, and no^ by virtue of their own Order.


Dub. I am very well satisfied, both from Scripture, and the general practice
of the Church (which is the best Comment on the Text) That Episcopacy is an
Apostolical Institution: and I confess I am much confirmed in this persuasion,
by Gods blessing upon our English Bishops and Episcopal men; such as Cranmer,
Ridley, Jewel, Carlton, Abbots, Morton, Andrews, Usher, (who of English
extraction) Hall, Laud, and Sanderson, Hooker, Cracanthorp, Iackson, etc. whose
profound Learning and Piety, has given the greatest wounds to the Church of
Rome, that ever she received from any Protestant writers; and their judicious
works have been the strongest sense against Popery, Heresy, Rebellion and
Schism, that the Christian world can ever boast of.


Firm. I much rejoice that you have so good an opinion of our Bishops and
Episcopal men; I hope the Authority of these renowned Worthies will weigh much
with you in our following discourses. We will now, if you please, proceed to
your exceptions against Deans and Chapters, you shall find all those Learned
men before mentioned, and many more your opposites in this your second
exception, as well as in the former.


Dub. It Is probable I shall, however that I may receive full satisfaction from
you, give me leave to propose some doubts and scruples which I have against
them. As

1. They were not from the Beginning, but as it were of yesterday.

2. They seem to be very useless, serving only to maintain the pride and
grandeur of many idle drones.

3. Many poor Parochial Churches are robbed of their Tiths and Glebs to maintain
such lazy Ministers.

4. Their Vicars Choral, and Singing-men are many of them of no very
commendable conversation, have little sense, or relish of Religion.

5. Their Toning of Prayers, their Chore service is like a Latin Mass, not
understood by the people.

6. Their Organs, and other Musical Instruments are Levitical, utterly unlawful
under the Gospel.


Firm. You may think these are such knots which admit of no easy solution; but
I shall presently make you understand the contrary.

First, I shall show you that Cathedrals, Deans and Chapters, (though not under
those names) were from the beginning of Christianity. It is clear from the Acts
of the Apostles, and the Records of the Church, that the Apostles and Disciples
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (those spiritual Fishermen) cast in their
nets where they were like to make the greatest and most advantegious draughts.
They usually Preached in the most Populous Citys, where they established
Churches which anon after were called Mother-Churches, to which the Suburbican,
or those that dwelt in the adjacent Villages were subject, and with the
Mother-Churches made up the Bishops Diocese, which they governed (as St. Hirome
confesses) by the common council and assistance of Presbiters, termed at Rome
in after times Cardinals, or chief Presbiters, and in the time of Charles the
great (as the Magdeburgenses inform us) were incorpated into a College under
the name of Them and Chapter; the Dean by the Canon Law being called
Arch-Presbiter. Before the sounding of Universsitys, these Cathedrals were the
Schools of the Prophets, where young Students were trained up in the Study of
Divinity and other good learning; Gerard gives us a taste of their first
institution, their corruption, and how they might be restored to their
primitive uses. I could wish that some learned Person who has the advantage of
Books, and well Studied men to consult with, and leisure, (all which we Country
Ministers are deprived of) would write in the Vindication of Cathedrals, and
manifest to this invidious age, that the institution of Deans and Chapters is
very useful to the Church, and very Ancient, as I before intim^ted (although
under other names:) and I do somewhat wonder that neither Bishop, Dean, or Ganon
(so far as I know) has hitherto vindicated these Churches, from those
reproaches which have been cast upon them, by ignorant, spiteful, sacrilegious
persons. 'Twas not long since, that some of the Presbyterian and I^pendent
persuasion were Deans and Ca^ons of Christ Church in Oxford; such D^gnities not
then thought to be useless and A^^i-christian; why should they be esteemed so
now?



Dub. But do not we see that Bishops, Deans and Canons, do not join together in
the government of the Church, but rather are at variance and oppose one another,
are mostly Non-resident, keep not that Hospitality which their Predecessors
usually did? and therefore they being thus useless, 'twere fit their lands were
sold and employed to better purposes.


Firm. This was your second exception against Cathedrals, but a very frivelous
one, drawn from the worst Topic, from personal abuses, to take a way the true
use of the thing it self. This is mere Clowns Logic and makes as much against
Parish Churche^, Schools, Universities and all Courts of Justice, as against
Cathedrals. The abuses ought to be taken away; I am as much for a reformation
as any man, but not for an extirpation.

If Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, do not join together in the Government of the
Church, it is the fault of their Persons not of their Institution. Deans and
Canons ought to be of Council to the Bishop in a subordinate way; not to have
cordinate power and Authority with him. If they are too much guilty of
non-residence, (as it cannot be denied but that many of them are,) this ought
to be reformd by Mulcts and Punishments, but especially by those that have the
power of collating those dignities, that they do not confer them upon any
person that lives out of the Diocese, or at too great a distance from the
Cathedral, which is a very great abuse and wants Reformation. As for the
keeping of Hospitality, the cavil is just the same which the Egiptyans had
against the Isralits, for not fulfilling their tale of Brick, when they denied
them straw to make it. Sacrilegious hands have Robbed Cathedrals of many of
their rich Manors, and how should it be possible for Deans and Prebends to
maintain that Hospitality which their Predecessors heretofore have kept. I know
a Canon, of one of the most Ancient Cathedrals in England, that his necessary
expenses in his Residence, and journeys, being deducted, did not receive de
claro five pounds yearly, for seven years in twelve. Now according to the law
of God and nature, Families, Wives, and Children must be provided for; and how
can such necessary provision and any considerable Hospitality stand together,
out of an Hundred Marks or an Hundred Pounds of yeary Income; which is more
then some Cathedral Residentaries do receive to my knowledge? I wish that those
of the Gentry who have their Thousands of yearly Revenues would forbear their
squandring away of their Rich Patrymonies in vanities and very sinful courses,
that they would keep Hospitality and Residence, upon their own Rich Manors,
amongst their poor Tenants and Neighbors who eat the Bread of carefulness, and
then they might with greater confidence c^vil at the non-residence and w^nt of
Hospitality in the ^lergy. The best way to pull out the Moth which they
discover in the Churches eye, is first of ^ll to cast out the Beam which is in
their own eye.

Second, Whereas you object, that Cathedral dignities are made subservient to
the pride and luxury of the Idle and lazy Ministers; my reply shall be very
short. If any such be ^rept into such places I shall not be their advocate, but
be ready to throw the first Stone at them. But I pray you do not cast such dirt
upon those who have labored in the word and doctrine, but esteem them worthy
of double honor, however the infirmities of old age, have now seized upon them;
dimness of sight, weakness of memory, an hoarse voice, and feeble lungs. If
these Cathedral perferments be great encouragements to younger men, (which none
but Fools and Sacrilegious persons will deny:) Why may not such places, be as
so many Ecclesiastical Hospitals for these ( Milites emiriti) old soldiers of
Jesus Christ? who have war'd a good warfare, and though now they are less able
to teach in the Pulpit, yet may they instruct out of it, by their grave and
exemplary lives, and sage councels. 1. Tim. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well
((...) not (...) be worthy of double honor.


Dub. I beg your pardon for those hasty words that dropped from me against
Cathedrals, I clearly understand they are not so useless as the ignorance,
envy, and malice of some men would render them. Let me hear from you how you
can vindicate them from defrauding Parochial Churches of their Tithes and
Glebs, by appropriating them to themselves.


Firm. This exception cannot totally be avoided; yet Cathedrals are not so much
in fault as the Supreme power of the land, which took away their rich Manors,
and gave them in their stead lean and scandalous Impropriations, which (as some
say) was done in policy to prevent their total abolition, which fate Abbeys and
Priories had lately sufferred under; for those rich Manors being exchanged for
poor Impropriations, Cathedrals were not now so sweet and lushious morsels to
sacrilegious palates.


Dub. But is there no means to augment the maintenance of those Churches whose
Tithes are Impropriate to Cathedrals!


Firm. At his Majesty's happy Restoration, there was a fair opportunity which
offerred it self, the like we cannot expect. How easy had it been then to have
settled a competent maintenance upon most Churches in the Nation? Some
augmentations by his Majesty's appointment were then made, I wish there had
been more: I know no other way to redress this grievance, but by annexing some
Prebends unto the Vicaridges of these Impropriated Churches, which might be
done in Cathedrals of the old Foundation, where there are minor Prebendaries
distinct from Residentiaries, mean while those Parochial Churches are supplied
mostly by the Vicars Choral, whose maintenance from their College and privy
Tithes, received from those Churches where they serve, is not contemptible. I
wish 'twere better, and that some of them, by their industry and conscientious
diligence in their Ministry did deserve a better subsistence, at which wish no
man can take exceptions, but he that is guilty of ignorance or negligence in
the duty of his calling, which is his fault in being so, and not mine in
wishing it should be otherwise.


Dub. I perceive by your discourse that it is rather the unhappiness, then the
fault of Cathedrals that Parochial Tithes are appropriated unto them; but
certainly i^ Canons Residentiaries were Beneficed in, or near the Cities where
Cathedrals are situate, and a competent maintenance allowed them from the
respective Citizens, the Vicars Choral (those of them who are not Preachers)
might assist as Curates, for Baptizings, Burials, and other inferior Offices,
and so by the continual residence of the Bishops, Deanes, Canons and Vicars
Choral, the Chore service, Preaching Catechizing, Church discipline, and
Government might be much better performed then now it is, and those scandals and
reproaches which are so frequently cast upon Cathedrals, more rationally be
confuted.


Firm. I much approve of what you say, for the Non-residency of Bishops, Deans,
and Canons, and the remote Vicaridges of Vicars Choral from their respective
Cathedrals, is the just occasion that the service of God is very perfunctorily
performed, to the great scandal of the Government of the Church, which we can
look upon as a grieveance, but it is only in the power of King and Parliament to
redress,


Dub. The Lord put it into their hearts, to undertake so good and pious a work.
^et me now hear what you can answer to what is objected against the Lives a^e
Conversations of Vicars Choral, Petty Canons, Singing-men, as they are settled
in some Cathedrals.


Eiru^. My answer is, That the charge is too general, and favors of want of
Charity. That some of them may be such, whose conversation is not so
commendable as it should be, or that they have not that sense and relish of
^eligion, which ought to be in men of that Place and Calling, I fear may too
justly be charged upon them; but much of this dirt might be wiped off by the
constant Residence, grave Example, and strict Discipline of those to whom the
government of the Church belongs. It Is confessed, that through the corruption of
our natures, the best duties, frequently performed, are apt to degenerate into
cold and airy formalities.

It Is the great happiness of those Christians which dwell near Cathedrals, that
they may meet Three t^mes a day, Evening, Morning, and Noon, to offer up prayer
and praises to the High and Holy God; but it is very much to be lamented, that
Citizens, and others, not hindered by necessary occasions, should be so
frequently absent from these solemn Assemblies, as usually they are. It is yet
more to be lamented, that those whose duty it is to officiate at those solemn
services should look upon them as a ( p^nsum,) a task, a burden; as naughty
boys at school do their lessons; how far are such stupid souls from holy
David's zeal and piety. One thing (says that good King* Psalm. 22.4.) have I
desired of the Lord, which I shall seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple.

Want of sense and zeal at holy Offices, is not the fault of Chore, or Quire
service, but of those that Officiate; who if they will seriously fix their
hearts upon those holy duties, when they sing and give praise, as David did,
attending to the matter of their heavenly and ravishing Anthems, as well as to
the Music, they would not look upon the service as a burden, but as a blessed
opportunity thus to praise Almighty God in the beauty of Holiness.


Dub. Happily it might be so to those who understood those Anthems, but I have
heard some say, that the singing in Chores is to them much like a Latin
service, they knowing not what is sung.


Firm. This is your Fifth Exception, and it is indeed a very weak one; there
being none who frequent this service, but know very well what is sung, (unless
it be the full Anthem:) let those that make this objection, frequent this
service, and then they will be ashamed of so frivelous a Cavile, and easily
perceive the fault to have been in themselves, and not in the service.


Dub. There is one exception yet behind against your Chore service; as the use
of Musical Instruments, in the performance of a great part of it, which are
said to be Levitical, and therefore unlawful under the Gospel, as we have seen
in the Geneva Notes upon the last Psalm, as also in Aquinas, Quest. 22.9, 19.
and diverse other Learned Men.


Firm. This is a very gross mistake; for Musical Instruments are not part of
the Levitical law, never instituted by Moses, who was so faithful a servant in
his trust that he would not have omitted to enjoin them, had they been given
him in Charge by Allmighty God. They were in use long before Moses, presently
after the Creation of the world, for Genesis 4. we read that the rare gift of
playing on Musical Instruments was given to Iubal. Can we imagine that such a
gift was bestowed on him to Stir up wantonness and lust, by the more artificial
singing, of unsavory Sonnets? Or is it not more rational to conceive that this
skill in Music was given to men to Sing forth the Praises of our great Creator
in a more excellent manner? When we Glorify the Lord we ought to exalt him as
much as we can: Ecclesiasticus. 43.30. And surely if Music has a natural
influence upon our affections to Stir up and quicken them in wantoness and
daliance, certainly it may work the same effect, upon them to quicken and
enliven them in a more devout and intensive Praising of Almighty God in all
those that have a Religious tendency, and a serious disposition to his worship
and service; besides seeing it is a moral and perpetual duty, to show forth the
Praises of God, all rational men will consent that this ought to be performed
after the best manner, and consequently with such skill and are that has the
greatest influence upon our affections, rather then after such a manner which
renders the service of God mean and contemptible as it is rendered in many of our
Parochial Churches.


Dub. You have fully satisfied me that Musical Instruments in the service of
God are not Levitical, but are natural means to Stir up the affections in these
sacred Hyms and Anthems. Nevertheless I have heard that many who are much taken
with Chore Anthems, are much offended at the manner of reading of Prayers in
Cathedrals; when they pray for the Sick, they use the ordinary tone which is
used in Parish Churches, at other times they pronounce their Prayers in a
middle way between Reading and Singing. Which seems to be not so grave and
suitable to the Solemnity of Prayer.


Firm. I confess this is a common objection, and some that are no enemies to
Cathedral service have in this much desired a reformation, but this must be
left to the prudence of those that set at the Serne; mean while we ought not to
condemn the Quireservice for this seeming indecency, well knowing that the
stress of Religious duties does not consist in the toning and modulation of the
voice but in the Music of the heart and affections, in a serious and devout
fixing of the mind upon the things that are Read or Sung, the want of which, in
those who Read Prayers or Sing Anthems, is no little sin, and one main reason
why some of our Singing-men are not so seriously devout as they ought to be,
and really those that are frequently present, officiating in holy duties
unpreparedly, carelessly, formally, and irreverently, by Gods just judgment may
be given up to a senceless stupidity, for their profanation of the holy
ordinances of God.


Dub. It Is certain, that a^prophane carless performing of Divine service is a
very great sin, and a necessary cause of irreligion and practical Atheism, one
exception I had almost forgott which concerns Choristers, who are said to be,
for the most part, very untoward Children.


Firm. First, This cannot be denied, but the reasons are first, negligence in
the Music Masters, whose chiefest care it is to teach them to Sing, and the
end why they Sing: namely to set forth the Praises of their Creator* neither
are they so careful to instruct them how to behave themselves reverently and
devoutly at the worship and service of God.

Secondly, Some of them are not set to the Grammar School, where upon they
squander away a great part of their time in vain sports, and idleness which is
the Mother of all villainy and wickednss.

Thirdly. But the chiefest reason of all is that our Choristers are commonly
the Children o^ mean Parents, who for the most part are very ignorant in the
great matters of Religion, and extremely negligent in the concerns of their own
and their Childrens Souls; Now Deans and Chapters are necessitated to make
choice of such poor Children, because the better sort of people, disdain to
have their Children brought up in that noble Science of Music, which is their
gross ignorance; besides their scorn and contempt of this Science, they
misconceive that if they should send them to the Music School it would hinder
them in their Grammar learning, which might easily be prevented by employing
those hours only at Music which are spent in foolish, insignificant sports and
pastimes, which as I am informed, is the practice in some places beyond Sea;
where their youths spend much of the afternoons in Music and Dancing,
Training, Mathematics, and such like manly and profitable exercises, which
conduce both to the health of the body, and benefit of the understanding.


Dub. I perceive that those exceptions against Deans and Chapters and Cathedral
service are not so substantial, as once I conceived them to be. If you please,
we will now proceed to those which I have heard urged with much earnestness
against ^et forms of Prayer, and in particular against the Liturgy of the
Church of England.


Firm. Most willingly, I pray you favor me with the recital of them.


Dub. 'Twould be to much trouble and to little purpose to mention all that I
have heard, seeing many of them are very frivolous and not worthy of a serious
answer, those that seem to be the most material, are, First that they are
imposed by man's Authority. Secondly, they stint the Spirit. Thirdly they are
cold and dead forms, our Spirits are not affected, and quickened by them, as by
conceived and extemporary Prayers*


Firm. First, whatsoever is imposed upon us by man's Authority contrary to the
word of God is utterly unlawful, but set Forms taken out of ^ods word, are not
contrary to that word, especially when not only the very matter of them is
contained in Holy Scripture, but the very words and phrase. It Is a strange
piece of nonsense that what is in it self lawful and laudable should cease to
be so, because it is commanded by our Superiors. True indeed, that things in
themselves lawful (being in their own nature but indifferent) if commanded as
necessary and intrinsically holy, are upon that account unlawful and repugnant
to Christian liberty; but more of this when we shall di^course about*
Ceremonies.

Secondly, That the Spirit is stinted by a set Form; and that Reading of
Prayers out of a Book, cannot be praying by the Spirit.

To this I reply, That if their were any truth in these exceptions, how comes
it to pass that ^e have so many set Forms of Prayer, and thanksgiving in Holy
Scripture? How do set form^ of Prayer more stint the Spirit, then set Forms of
Psalms for Singing? Yea; does a set Form of Prayer more stint the Spirit then
the extemporary conceptions of the Minister limit and stint the Spirit of the
Congregation, to whom they are upon this account in the nature of set Forms?
When these queries shall be rationally answered, I shall through away all set
Forms which have been used by the ^hristian Churches for above 1400 years.
Besides those of the Presbyterian persuasion allowed them as lawful in their
conferences with the Bishops anon after his Majesty's restoration.

As to the other part of the other exception that reading of Prayers out of a
Book cannot be praying by the Spirit; this to those who understand the true
meaning of that Phrase is a most frivilous cavil; for setting aside the
extraordnary gift of prayer, to pray in, or by, the Spirit denotes first the
making of our prayers according to the mind of the Spirit expressed in the
Scripture, as may appear Col. 3.16. Secondly, to pray by the Spirit, is to pray
by that principle of grace wrought in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, and
enabling us to every good duty, as well as to prayer. Thirdly to pray by the
Spirit is when the Spirit does stir up our hearts to this Holy duty, working in
us good desires, and motions, quickening our faith and fervency, whereby our
hearts minds and spirits go along with out Tongues and Words, utterd either in
a set Form or by our extemporary expressions, which is usually practiced by
knowing Christians in their Closset devotions.


Dub. I confess I am not able to show why set Forms of Prayer should stint the
Spirit, more then set forms of Singing, and I am persuaded that praying by the
Spirit, signifies no more then the assistance of the holy Spirit quickening and
stirring us up to, and in, Prayer; whereby our hearts and spirits are fixed in
that holy duty joining and going along with the Tongue and Voice, but truly I
find by experience that my Spirit is more stirred up by a Prayer that is new,
which I never heard before, being lively delivered, then by a common Form read
out of a Book.


Firm. This is the chiefest reason which renders men such admirers of
extemporary Prayers, and so opposite to set forms; their own experience tells
them that they are more taken with such Prayers then with common Forms read out
of a Book; which phanciful experience no wise man will plead against reason and
judgment, it being very deceitful and the issue of a very common corruption,
and humane infirmity, which inclines us to be more taken with what is new, then
with what we have often heard, especially when it is delivered in a lively tone,
with pleasing actions and gesticulations of the Body, and without Book, though
for substance, and soundness, what is read be infinitely before it.

Pray Sir, answer me but this one question; whether are your affections more
stirred up at the reading of some portion of Scripture by the Minister, or at a
good Sermon, delivered from the Pulpit?


Dub. I confess I am much more affected, my affections are more wrought upon by
a good Sermon delivered with life and action then at the reading of the best
Chapter in the Bible.


Firm. I believe you, yet you will not say that the best Sermon that ever was
made by man, is to be prefer^ before a portion of sacred Scripture. The
explication, or application of the word, mixed with much of man's conceptions,
before the pure word it self, and esteem the hearing of it read useless and
unlawful.


Dub. God forbid I should:


Firm. You see by this one instance, how fallible your own phantiful experience
has been, and how it has lead you against Scripture, against the general
practice of the Church, against all sober reason, so dangerous a thing it is
for men of short discourse, that are not masters of reason, but are guided to
phansies, over powered by passions, engaged in parties to meddle with
controversies, which are too high and hard for them.


Dub. I confess that 'twas no great wonder, that so mean a man as I should be
mistaken, but it is very strange, that so many grave and learned men as were in
the late Assembly, should be so much against the Common Prayer Book of the
Church of England, which I have heard learned men affirm to be the best
Liturgy in the world.


Firm. 'Twas very strange that so many learned men, should be overborn by some
leading men, that had more zeal than judgm^nt, and happily more of interest and
design then of learning and piety* but as there have been Parliament-drivers,
so there have been Assembly-drivers, and Convocation-drivers, before you or I
were born, and will be after we are in our graves. And I am confident, tha^
disg^ised Priests and Jesuits have had more then one finger, in animating the
Presbiterians, against the Church of England, as well as (to my knowledge) they
have had in somenting Anabaptisme* and Quaquerisme, so^ it is their Maxim,
divide and impera, divide the Heretics, and w^e shall Reign.

I have more charity then to believe that the Assembly (the greatest part of
them) were of opinion that set Forms of Prayer were either useless, or
unlawful, though they cannot be excused from too much compliance (I fear)
against their own judgments. They could not be ignorant that the vote against
the Book of Common Prayer was contrary to the sentiments of the most learned
men in all the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, of very sober men in this Nation,
(known heretofore by the name of Puritans) the most discreet and moderate of
that Party were never against set forms; of the Reverend Bishops of the Church
of England; many of which sacred order have bee^ as famous in their generation,
both for learning and piety as former ages ever knew; yea since His Majesty's
happy Restoration, the chiefest of the Presbiterian persuasion, have
acknowledged set forms of Prayer in public to be lawful, they plainly confess
in their Conference with the Bishops they are not against them; but every days
experience will make it evident, they must be for them, as well as not against
them, unles^ the late Assembly, could have as easily voted, and made all
Ministers of the Church of England, Discreet, Judicious, Orthodox, and of a
ready Elocution, as they did rashly and inconsiderately, vote down the Liturgy.

Besides the Congregation, especially the weaker sort, those that are ignorant,
and cannot read, may better join in prayer, when the Forms of i^ are known and
common, then they can in strange and extemporary expressions, with which they
are ^ltogether unacqainted; which being the practice in the late ti^es of
confusion, has taught the people only to hear prayers, as if they were so many
Sermons, wherein they were not at all concerned to join with their hearts and
tongues, and to say Amen; or as if the ear were the only member to be employed
in that holy duty.

Again, Set and prescribed Forms, consisting of Scriptural phrases and
expressions, unaffected and ^^tted to the understanding of the meanest
c^pacitie, are soonest received into the heart, and aptest to excite and carry
along with them judicious and steady ^ffections, as King Charles the Fir^^ ha^
observed in his most excellent Book. Hereunto may be added, That out of well
composed Forms, the weaker Christians may be furnished with a stock of
wholesome expressions, composed by the advice, and joint sistance of the chief
Pastors and Ministers of the Church, for their help and direction in their
private Devotions, which i^ imposible to b^ done by the sudden, various,
uncertain expressions of diverse particular Ministers.

Besides, Set Forms are necessary for uniformity in the public worship; and
upon this account learned and sober men have wished there were but one public
Liturgy in all Christian Churches in the world; which (if it were possible)
would be a great means of peace and unity amongst Christians, by preventing the
spreading of Schisms and Heresies, that may be as well prayed up as preached
up; as also undecent, unscriptural expressions, tautologies, vain-repetitions,
fantastical affected words and phrases, utterly abhorrent from the sobriety
and gravity of Divine Oratory, which is quite another thing from that of the
Stage or Desk.

Lastly, Should we deal with an understanding Recusant, endeavoring to
persuade him to forsake his superstitious worship, and to join himself to our
Assemblies; how could we assure him (if we have no public established
Liturgy) that our way and manner of worship is, and shall continue
Scripture Proof, sound and innocent, without errors and indecencies? Do we
think that any wise man, would leave his Popish blind way of worship, to be
guided by our dark Lanthorn; not being rationaly assured, after what way we do
worship the God of our Fathers? which we cannot satisfy him in, if we have no
set Liturgy.


Dub. I very much approve of your reasons for Public Set Forms of Prayer; as
also of your ^nswer to that argument drawn from Experience, which appears so
great and mighty to some men's vain imaginations, but is indeed very weak and
fallacious.


Firm. You must give me leave to add Two things more in answer to that
argument drawn from Experience, and then we will discourse of those exceptions
against our Common-Player in particular.

1. I will oppose experience to experience, those that repro^ch our
Common Prayer, for a cold and dry Service, extolling extemporary conceptions so
much beyond it; let these men make this easy experiment to themselves. Let
them take some of the best of extemporary prayers verbatim, which your
Short-hand-writers can exactly do, let these prayers be read or repeated
memoriter, with all the advantages of pleasing tones, bodily gesticulations,
lively pronunciations, and assure your self they will at length appear to be as
dull, dry and cold as any part of our Liturgy.

2. I would have you seriously consider what the most judiceous Hooker says
concerning Sermons, and Reading of Scripture; why the former are so highly
esteemed and the other so much slighted; the truth is, they please more then
Lessons and Chapters by reason of those outward advantages which a Sermon well
delivered has above the Scripture barely read; besides the singular attention
and affection which men are apt to express toward the one, and their cold
disposition toward the other; partly because it is usual to let those things
pass carelessly by our ears which we have often heard before or, know we may
haer again when ever we please; and partly for that Sermons are new and fresh,
and if they slip by us for the present, what excellencies soever they contain
is lost, which creats the grater atte^^ion, which causes the greater
affections: so far that worthy man. This certainly is one great reason why set
Forms of Prayer are so much undervalued in respect of extemporary and conceived
effusions.


Dub. I am abundantly satisfied, that set Forms of Prayer are not only lawful,
but very useful in the Public Service of the Church. I shall now by your good
leave descend to those exceptions which are made more particularly against the
Liturgy of the Church of England. First, that it is taken out of the Mass
Book. Secondly that it contains many shreds of Prayer, which are short and
customary wishes, rather then serious and devout Prayers. Thirdly, that it
appoints diverse Apocryphal Chapters to be publikly read, which contain things
incredible and ridiculous. As for those exceptions which are made against some
particular passages in the body of the Liturgy, they are so frivolous that they
are not worth the trouble of a serious confutation; he that pleases may see
them sufficiently baffled by Mr Hooker, Mr Ball himself (a Nonconformist) in
his trial of the grounds of Separation, with many others.


Firm. Your First excep^ion is the issue of Spite and Ignorance; what though it
contains many things that are in the Mass Book, as the Creeds, the Te^
Commandments, the Lords-Prayer, and diverse Collects? Shall a true man refuse to
take his goods, and make the best he can of them because he finds them in a
Theifs house? Or shall the husbandman refuse pure wheat because 'twas once
mingled with chaff, and tares, albeit it is now winno^ed and s^fted? Or shall we
refuse Paul's Epistles, because there are in them certain savory passages taken
out of the writings of Idolatrous Heathens?

The Church of Rome was once a glorious Church, true it is; its now sadly
corrupted, yet as corrupt as it is, all is not chaff which that Church retains,
there remain^ in her some good wheat which was in her before her novel
superstitions were in their Swaddling clothes, this wheat we retain, the ch^ff
we h^ve blown away with a Fan of an orderly Reformation, you see what a
malicious cavil this is, that our Common Prayer is taken out of the M^ss;
malice in some, and ignorance, in others have been the true parents of this
groundless calumny.

2. As to your Second exception; that our Liturgy contains many short cuts and
shreads of prayer: pray you what do you think of the Publicans Prayer, (God be
merciful to me a sinner) is any prayer in our Liturgy more short then that
which our Savior so well aproved? Short ejacuculations, concise forms, Holy
breathings of the Spirit are very frequent in the Scripture, and past all
peradventure very acceptable to Almighty God; those that cavil at the shortness
of our prayers and collects, let them justify the length of theirs if they can,
from any one prayer in Scripture, or Fathers that is a quater of an hour long.

Let any rational man who is acquainted with the nature of Prayer, and humane
infirmities, seriously consider, ^hether or no, our Church has not carried her
self very prudently both in the Method, Phrase, Form and ordering of her
Service. Are not all her holy Offices the matter, and mostly the very words and
choi^e^t portions of holy Scriptures, what an unworthy calumny is it, to tell
the world our Common Prayer is taken out of the Mass? Could any thing be
uttered more falls and invidious? those excellent Prayers She uses, how are they
^itted to our infirmities, mixed with Psalms, Hymns, and choice portions of
Scripture? is not this order and method more suitable to the weak capacities,
and unsteady attentions of the greatest part of the Congregation, then a long
extemporary Prayer, for matter many times Heretical, Schismatical, Irreverent,
strangly bold, unbeseeming a poor sinful Worm, to offer up to the High and
Dreadful Majesty, of our Great and Good God?


Dub. I know by my own experience that long extemporary Prayers are very apt to
dull and de^den our attentions, and I cannot deny but that sometimes I have
been very much scandalized both at the matter, as also at the un-Scriptural,
^hantastical, Affected expressions used in such Prayers, which is not to be
seen in the Common Prayer Book, whose phrase and words are very grav^, and
decent, and being taken out of the word of ^od are most fit to be offered up to
the Almighty God, when we speak unto him in Prayer. I am fully satisfied with
the excellent Method, Matter, grave Oratory of the English Liturgy, being it is
so consonant to, and coresponding with, the Holy Scripture. So that I stand
amazed at the impudence of those that first gave out, that 'twas borrowed from
the Mass Book, and at the dull ignorance of those, that will believe so
noto^ious a Lie. The Book I acknowledge to be rarely composed, and not only
useful in our public Worship, but also a very profitable directory for our
Family, and private devotions.

Now to the last objection: Were it not better that some Apochryphal Chapters
were left out of the calender, and Canonical Lessons set in their place?


Firm. Many learned men have indeed thought so, and have wished for a change in
this particular, Mr Hooker has these words, Those Ecclesiastical Books (for so
they were called in ancient times, not Apocryphal under which title were
contained such Books which the Church allowed not at all to be read in public)
I say those Ecclesiastical Books which in case my self did think (as some do)
that 'twere more safe and better that they were not to be read at all publikly:
nevertheless as in other things of like nature, so in this I should be loath to
oppose my private judgment against the force of their Reverend Authority,
considering the excellency of some things in all, and of all things in certain
of those Ecclesiastical Books which we publikly read, and therefore I have
thought it better to let them stand as a list or a marginal border unto the Old
Testament, and to grant at the least unto some of them public audience in the
house of God.


Dub. I do fully acquiess in the pious, prudent, and peaceable determination of
this worthy man: and so from the exceptions that are made against the liturgy I
desire your discourse may proceed to those which are made against the
Ceremonies of the Church; it is superfluous to name them all. But only those
which are most spoken against, the Surplice, the Ring in Marriage, Bowing at
the name of Jesus, Kneeling at the Sacrament, and especially the Cross in
Baptism, which are said to be Popish and superstitions.


Firm. As the Kingdom of Heaven does not consist in Meats, and Drinks, but in
Righteousness and peace, Romans 14. so neither does it consist in gestures,
vestures, or any thing that is in it self indifferent; when the Church commands
us to wear such a vestment, or to use such a gesture for Uniformity sake, and
outward decency, not placing any intrinsecal Holiness, or absolute necessity in
any of those Ceremonies: it is our duty and not any superstition at all to be
obedient; yea we are guilty of the sin of disobedience, and superstition also
if we stand out against lawful Authority.

For there is a two fold Superstition, one Positive, as when we ascribe
Holiness to any thing that is in its own nature indifferent, morrally neither
good nor evil; another Negative, as when we Dogmatize, and call that evil which
Morally is not so, and in such things, Wear not, Kneel not, is as much
Superstition as Wear or Kneel possibly can be.

What is it to any understanding man, whether he Prays or Preaches in Black or
White or any other Color, unless it be for decency and uniformity? the power
of the Church limits us to a White Surplice, rather then to a Black Iump, or
short Cloak.


Dub. But is not this an intrenchment upon our Christian liberty, to be confind
to particular Modes and Forms?


Firm. Not at all. So long as our practice only is limited, and our judgment
left free as before any such Canon was made; it is strange that the same men who
enjoined three Ceremonies at the taking of the Covenant as to be bare Headed,
bare Handed, the right Hand lifted up, should so much scruple them in our
Public Service.

But in a word, it is plain Scripture, that every Soul should be subject to the
Higher Powers, not only for wrath but also for Conscience sake. Now unless the
Non-Conformists can bring as plain Scripture against our Ceremonies, to prove
them morally evil, they must incurr the sin of Schism, and disobedience to
those powers which God has ordained; and these are far greater sins then the
wearing of a Surplice, though we had borrowed it from the Pope himself.


Dub. You mind me now of one of the greatest exceptions against the Surplice,
etc. because the Papists use it in their superstitious Worship, therefore it is
unlawful for us to wear it in ours.


Firm. If this were a good reason, 'twould follow; whatsoever the Papists do
use or have abused in their Superstition, it is unlawful for us, (who have
abandoned such trash and I rumpery to) use, but Papists have abused our
Churches, (halices, and other Ornaments in their falls Worship and Services,
therefore we may not use them; but down with them, down with them even to the
Ground.


Dub. This indeed will be a very necessary consequent, but a very costly one, I
fear the men that make this exception, would not be very forward to Build them
up again: if Idolatry and Superstition, were a just cause to make us lay aside
our Surplices; by the same reason we must pull down our Churches, and upon the
same account the Primitive Christians ought not to have eaten meat offered to
Idols, neither to have made use of the Heathens Tempels, to celebrate the
Worship and Service of the true God.


Firm. You see then how frivilous the exception against the Surplice is, and so
are all those that are offered against the Ring in Marriage, bowing at the name
of Jesus. Kneeling at the Sacrament, the Cross after Baptism, and therefore I
shall very briefly pass them over.

1. For the Ring it is as Ancient, at least, as Turtullian who lived about two
hundred Years after Christ, he makes mention of it more then once, and our
Church does use it as an ancient Ceremony, no ways essential to Matrimony.

2. Bowing at the name of Jesus is likewise very Ancient: The reason of it was,
1. To show our readiness to yield obedience and subjection to him as our Lord
and King; to whom all power both in Heaven and Earth is given, and to whom
every Knee must bow. Phil. 2.10. The Ancient Christians rather bowed at the
naming of Jesus, then at the name of Christ, in opposition to the unbelieving
Jews, who most of all Blasphemed that sweet and saving name of Jesus: which
therefore they did endeavor the more highly to exalt. 3. To declare their
certain belief of what the Apostle forete^^, that at the name of Jesus every
Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things under the
Earth, that all things should be subject unto him. Phil. 2.

3. Kneeling at the Sacrament, our Church conceives to be the most humble and
reverend posture, and therefore most suitable to so high and Heavenly a
Mystery, especially it being Administered with a Prayer; yet we do not condemn
the practice of other Churches, where this holy Sacrament is received sitting
or standing; neither should they condemn us for Kneeling because Christ's
Disciples received it in a Table gesture, to which we are no more bound then to
the place, or time, in which they reciv'd it. An upper Room and after Supper as
the learned Dr. Sanderson has evidently demonstrated.

4. The Cross after Baptism is also a very Ancient Ceremony, which the
Christians of the first ages, used in a courageous and undaunted opposition
against the Heathens, and Jews, who scoffed and derided them for beleiving in,
and Worshipping a Crucified God for their Savior, who could not save himself.
True it is in process of time, the Cross was abused, to gross Superstition, and
therefore say some, it ought to be laid aside, as Ezekias abollished the Brazen
Serpent when the people made it an Idol.


Dub. Much more ought the Cross to be taken away being abused to superstition,
because 'twas but an humane invention, where as the Brazen Serpent, was set up
by Gods own direction and command.


Firm. Very true, but then let Ezekias do it, not the people on their own
heads, without the Authority of the King. However the use of an innocent
Ceremony ought not to be taken away because of 'its abuse; and here it ought to
be considered, whether it be better to use the Cross to put us in mind of our
duty, not to be ashamed of Christ Crusifi'd, as also of the courage and
boldness of the Primitive Christians, who not withstanding the Scoffs and
Reproaches of Infidels, would make such open profession of their Faith in Christ
Crucified, as to use the sign of the Cross, not only in Baptism, but also upon
sundry other occasions; or else, whether 'twere better to forbear the use of
it, because it has been so much abused to Superstition: let the Suprem power
judge which of these is fittest to be done, and determine accordingly either
for the Negative or the Affirmative; and I believe every sober and peacable
Christian will esteem it his duty to submit unto such a determination.


Dub. But seeing these and other ceremonies have been and are a great scandal to
tender consciences, and the occasions of many sh^rp contentions amongst
Christians, agreeing in the substantials of Religion, and seeing that
Conformists themselves confess them not to be in their own nature necessary,
but only expedient for order and decency, were it not better they were laid
aside, then continued is they are, the perpetual causes of discord and
dissension amongst us?


Firm. And are order, decency, and uniformity (without which there will be
neither love, Peace, or Unity,) such inconsiderable nothings, that a few
innocent Ce^emonies must be utterly abollished to gratify the dogmatizing
humors of those men, who esteem things in themselves indifferent, to be sinful
and unlawful, which is s^^t Superstition? It Is indeed much to be lamented, that
we should quarrel about Mint and Cummin, to the prejudice of more weighty and
material duties, and the scandal of our Religion. But by reason of our inn^te
and acquitted corruptions it is necessary that offenses should come yet woe: be
unto that man by whom they come; I know weakness and renderness of conscience
is much pretended, and we ought to take heed how we offend any of Christ's
little ones; but how can these men be reckoned in the number of weak or little
ones, who seem to themselves so great, so strong and able, in the things of
Religion? and for their tenderness of conscien^e, we appeal to their bloody
civil Wars, it is well known by whom and how they were began, and carry^d on,
till at length they came up to the death of the King, tho (I believe) very much
against the intentions, and designs, of the most grave, and sober men, of that
Party.


Dub. But really Sir, were it not more beseeming Christian prudence so far to
condescend to our dissenting Brethren (who agree with us in the Doctrine of our
Church) in taking away, at least some, of those Ceremonies which are more
liable to exception, then to comply with the Superstitious Papists in the use
of them?


Firm. I confess, some moderate men have thought so, especially since we are
frustrated of of one main end, for which our first reformers retained them,
which was to draw over the Papists into the Communion of our Church, which they
did adhere unto, for the Ten first years of Queen Elizabeth, until they were
interdicted by the Popes bull, But seeing we are deprived of all hopes of that
much desired issue and that by the cunning of Priests and Jesuits, stirring up
and animating the Conformists and Non-conformists against each other, about
these Ceremonies. Our differences amongst our selves do daily increase and
multiply; some wise and peaceable men have desired that the use of certain of
those Ceremonies might be forborne at least for a time, which not withstanding,
they are still continued. These peaceable men abhor the great sin of Separation
and do continue their conformity to the rites of our Church; daily begging at
the throne of Grace that the God of truth and peace would for his mercy ^ake so
assist those powers which he has ordained that they may be instrumental for the
establishing of truth and peace amongst us.


Dub. I like well of the temper of these men, and wish that their moderation
were not only known unto, but practiced by, all men; for certainly if the
Spirit of love, peace, and meekness, did rule more in our peevish and froward
hearts, we should enjoy a greater measure of Peace, Love, and Christian
Charity, then these angry times have hither to been happy with.

I return you my hearty thanks for that satis^action which you have given me in
those scruples which have much troubled me about the Government, Liturgy and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, there is yet one thing behind, at which I
have somewhat been scandalliz'd, it is this: Your Church does receive persons who
are notoriously pro^h^ne in their lives, and grossly ignorant in the principls
of Religion, to the Holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: besides she
tollerates at least Ministers, that are scandalous in their conve^s^tion,
frequenters of Al^-houses, not at all serious in Religion, show little sense of
it in their discourses, Preaching or practices: men of little conscience, and
of as little learning.


Firm. This accusation is most falls; whether it springs from spite or malice,
or extreme ignorance, I know not: sure I am our Church orders that no such
persons be admitted to the Holy Sacrament, that no such Ministers be permitted
to officiate, that they are to be suspended once, and again, and if they do no
not reform they are to be deprived; for the first you may see the Rubric
before the Communion, and the 26. Canon. For the Second see Artic, 26. and
Canon the 74. and 75. and Canon. 10. made 1640. which are so clear against the
admitting of profane persons to to the Communion, or tollerating of scandalous
Ministers without due Punishment, that whosoever charge these abuses upon our
Church must be grossly ignorant or very malicious.


Dub. Yet we see that such profane persons are admitted to the Sacrament, as
members of your Church, and such unworthy Minsters are allowed to officiate.


Firm. Such persons are no members of out Church, but rather the Synagoge of
Satan, and that Minister who does admit, such persons natoriously profane, to
the Holy Sacrament is a greater Non-con^ormist to the orders of the Church,
then he that scruples at a Surplice, and those Churchwardens who neglect to
present them, are guilty of Perjury, and ought to be debarred themselves from
the Communion Can. 26.


Dub. It Is evident that such Ministers are not Punished either by Admonition,
Suspensition, or Deprivation.


Firm. This is not true in all places to my knowledge, where such Ministers or
people escape unpunished, it is mostly by the fault of the Churchwardens and
Sides-men, in not presenting them; for what Judge either Ecclesiastical or
Civil, can punish offenses that are not brought before him?


Dub. But many times offenses and scandal^ have been presented, and the
offender not punis^^d; yea your Ecclesiastical Judges are more severe against
those who are Non-conformists to the laws o^ the Church, ^hen against those
that are Non-conformists to the laws of God as profane irreligeous wretches.


Firm. No m^n c^n excuse the personal abuses that are committed in any Court,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical; all Court Officers never yet were, nor ever will be
men of integrity, and of unbias'd judgments, no question that many abuses which
are committed by the Officers of Ecclesiastical Courts might be prevented if
the Bishops would be sometimes personally present in their respective
consisto^ies as was intimated, they ought to be Canon. 11. made. 1640. If we
must separate from a Church, that enjoins no Intolerable conditions for
Communion with her because of some personal ^aul^s of those who are entrusted
with her Government, we must turn Seekers, for where shall we find a Church,
whose Officers are always all of them impartially just and upright?


Dub. I confess there is no good reason, we should separate from a Church,
because of personal abuses in the Governors, or under Officers, where the
Government in 'its constitution is not Faulty, neither the terms of Communion
intolerable; but is there any reason that Nonconformists should be more
sh^rply dealt with, then Deb^ucht Profane Persons?


Firm. If we should compare Schism, Separation, Nonconformity, with
Profaness, it would not be easy to say, which is the greatest, or which is the
least Sin, the first may be, Majoris culpae, the other Majoris infamiae, as
Aquinas rightly judges, 1.2. q. 73. A. 5. of Carnal, and Spiritual Sins: those
(as Pride, and Malice,) are greater Sins, but these (as Drunkenness,
Fornication,) are more Scandalous.

But to wave the comparison, and to give you freely my own sentiments in this
particular. I do conceive that Debauchery, and Profaness, ought to be more
severely punished, then Negative Separation, and simple Nonconformity. My
reasons are these 1. Every prudent Parent will be mo^e severe against a wicked
Child, that continues under his Roof, professing obedience and s^bjection, then
against that Child which has utterly forsaken his Father, and utterly abandoned
his House, and Family. 2. The sins of Pro^^ness and Deb^uchery being willful,
(for Drunkards, and profane persons, do not ple^d ignor^nce and weakness,) are
o^ ^ more M^lign^nt nature then sins of Ignoranc^* though it be such an
ignorance which was not all together Invincible, but contracted by Pride,
Pevishness, Interest, or Prejudice under which many Seperatists, and
Non-Conformists, are in Bondag^ and ^aptivity. 3. The Lives and Conversations
o^ Debauched, and Profane Persons, who go under the name of Protestants, and
Members of our Church, (though intruth they are not, but rather Limbs of Satan)
are the greatest Reproach and Scandal to it. These are the men that furnish
Shismaticks, and Non-Conformists with their best Arguments, which they urge
against us. For what they object against our Church Government, Liturgy, or
Ceremonies, is ^or the most part very frivilous, and there is no Quaker,
Anabaptist, Independents, but m^kes the proph^ness of the Episcopa^ party, the
chief reason and ground of his separation.


Dub. This I confess to be true, from my own experience. Nothing wrought so
much upon me to fo^sake the Church of England, as the wicked and ungodly lives
of those which she receives into her Communion.


Firm. That was your error; for you cannot say that she receives any into her
Communion, whom by her Rubric, and Canons she ^xcludes; and although through
the laziness and connivence of Church Officers, or Governors, or both, many an
ungodly person receives the Sacament, yet there is no just ground for a
separation from the Church, which teaches nothing but what is Catholic and
Apostolical: Only I confess, tha^ in the exercise of Discipline, she comes
short of the Primitive severity against obstinate sinners; yet the present
Canons are so strict, that if they were duly observed, no openly wicked, or
ungodly person, should be admitted to the Communion; which would be a great
satisfaction (I am persuaded) to those that now separate from us.


Dub. But seeing the Primitive Discipline has been so long time wished for,
above an Hundred years since, as appears by the Rubric before the Commination;
how comes it to pass, that it is not restored? Shall we be still wishing and
never acting or doing*


Firm. Why it has not been restored, I know no other reason that is given, but
this; The times will not bear it; why the ^^mes will not bear it, I know not,
unless it be in respect of Se^taries, who cry down many ancient us^ges of the
Church (which they do not understand) for Popery; an^, these men must not be
offended, least they be driven to an utter hatred, o^ opposition to our Church;
or else, which is more probable, such is the wickedness and profaness of the
times, that they will not endure the Primitive severity. When will that time
come, that such strict discipline will be endured? The Church has been in
expectation of it above this Hundred years, but still Schisms, and Sects,
profaness and wickedness, increase every day more and more. No question the
times, as to Sects and P^ofaness, (if that were a sufficient reason) are much
more unfit to bear the ancient discipline, then they were when that wish was
first made, and the longer it is disused, the more unfit they will be, which I
wish our prudent ^overnors would take into their serious considerations.


Dub. Certainly a Strict Discipline, impartially executed, upon all
transgressors of Gods Holy Laws, by sharp rep^oofs, severe admonitions, due
Suspensations from the Sacrament, Excommunications, Penances according to the
quality of the offense, would give a great check, to that impiety and
wickedness which reigns so much in our Land; and take away much of the scandal,
which is given by our mixed Communions, at which block of offense many have
stumbled, and fell out of our Church into Conventicles, and Separate
Congregations.


Firm. No question, a strict discipline would do much toward an h^ppy
Reformation of manners in the Episcopal party, but as you have observed, the
great scandal that is taken by the Non-conformists, at the profaness and
wickedness of that party, so I must tell you, that as great a scandal is given
by them, to those who conform to the Church of England: though their lives and
conversations being contrary to her Laws and Canons, they are no more members
of our Church, then a glass eye, or wooden leg, are live parts of a man's body.


Dub. I do not see wherein the Non-conformists, whether Presbyterians or
Independents, have given any just occasion of scandal to any, they being men
that are very sober in their lives, and great professors of Religion, given
much to Family Duties, to Prayer, to hearing of Sermons.


Firm. Hinc illae Lachrymae, Here lies the scandal which m^kes Religion stink
in the nostrils of profane and wicked men, when they shall see that men
professing holiness, should make no conscience of Disobedience, of Perjury, of
Rebellion against, and at last of Murdering, their Liege Sovereigne; a man upon
whom his most mallicious and cr^tical enemies, could never charge any scanlous
sin.


Dub. These indeed are very grievious sins, and much to be lamented, but surely
you cannot charge them upon the generality of thesemen, but only upon some
ambitious Hypocrites, that made Religion a stalking-horse, to bring about their
devilish designs.


Firm. It Is true that all the Non-conformi^^s in England, were not in actual
arms against the King, neither did they sit in the High Court of Injustice
upon him, neither did they all, as natural agents, cut of his Head; but
morally, that is, very sinfully and wickedly, they had their hands stained with
that Royal blood: for whosoever did abet these sons of Belial in their
Rebellions, Treasons, Murders, of their King and fellow Subjects, either by
consenting to their Villainies, praying for their prosperity, praising God for
their Victorious success, or by assisting them with their councels, advice,
free and voluntary Contributions, by writing and preaching up the justice of
their cause, are guilty before God, os Treason, Murder, and Rebellion.


Dub. This censure is very severe, and yet I cannot tell what to reply against
it. Many well meaning people observing certain abuses in Church and
Commonwealth, much desired a reformation of them, and promised to themselves
great things from the Long Parliament; whereupon (such is the brutish
inclination of earnest desires, and great expectations in the minds of men,
that are of short discourse) that these poor inconsiderable persons, were
engaged against King and Country, before they had well weighed, That good
Intentions cannot justify unlawful Actions; That God has no need of the sinner:
That we must not do evil, that good may come thereon. But I am persuaded that
these seduced men do see their former errors, and are ^ruly penitent,
abominating from their hearts, all Treasons and Rebellions against their Dread
Sovereign, and for the future will keep themselves from such unchristian
practices.


Firm. I much commend you for your Chari^y, and for those that had their hands
in that grand Rebellion, acd are no^ truly penitent, my hearty prayers are,
that the Lord would be merciful unto them, and bless them, and show them the
light of his countenance. My severe censure (as you were p^^ased ^o ^ail it)
was never intended against such; but we see very few that have manifested any
signal tokens of repentance, for their lifting up their hands against the
Lord's Anointed; rather we may fear they will commit the same wickedness
against his Majesty that now swayes the Royal Scepter, if they hid a fair
opportunity. Disobedience, is a long step to Rebellion; and is it not evident,
that our present Non-conformists are more disobedient, more refractory against
his Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, then those that lived before the late wars;
who though they were Non-conformists, yet were they not Separatists, Brownists
(as our present Non-conformists for the most part are:) some of them (Mr. as
Ball in his Trial of the grounds of Separation, and others) smartly wri^ng
against such Fanati^ks.

And truly were there not a judicial blindness upon these men, they might see
by a wonderful providence, the Lord did not own them in their Rebellious
undertakings. How strangely did their numerous and potent Armies dwindle into
no thing: ho^ miraculously was our Gracious Sovereign preserved, against all
their Treasonable attempts, and brought to the Throne of his Fathers, with the
greatest honor, most general expressions of love and rejoicing, that ever any
Prince received from ^oyal Subjects, and all this, without the spil^ing of one
drop of blood. The Lord set it upon the heart of King and People, to keep this
sign^l dispensation of His Providence in perpetual remembrance, and not to
ruin themselves by Atheism, Irreligion, Profaneness, or any enormous
wickedness, for which the wrath of God has been pou^ed out in full Viols, upon
wicked Kings, and ungodly people, as Sacred, and other ^i^^ories do
s^sficiently manifest.


Dub. It may be feared that there are discontented persons who are like
wrangling Gamsters, that having a bad game dealt, them desire the Cards might
be shuffl'd again that they might have a better Stock, but I am persuaded many
would conform were there a Toleration in Reference to some Ceremonies as has
been said, and the Renouncing of the Covenant not enjoined.


Firm. You have had my opinion as to a Toleration in point of Ceremonies; as to
the Covenant, tho it h^s been the opinion of several moderate men that it had
been better if it had dyed without any such solemn Act for 'its Abrenunti^tion,
yet being it was peccant in all the four causes, the Efficient, Formal,
Material, and Final, 'twas expedient in some respects for the Parliament to
vote that it should be Renounced by all that expect Preferment in the Church of
England, and I do not see how any man who conceives himself bound by it can be
a faithful Subject to His Prince; besides there seems to be a signal judgment
in it, that the Covenant which was used as an Engine to remove the Cavaleers
out of their Livings, should have the same effect upon the Contrivers and ^igid
Imposers of it; for many of those were undon because they would not take it,
these because they would not Renounce it. -- Nec lex est justior ulla, -- Quam
necis artifices art perire sua.


It Is Justice Law that he should feel the smart,
Who was first Author of that cruel Art.
I remember what Tacitus says of Cajus Vibius. Eo immitior quia toleraverat.
And it is like that the Cavileers having such a hard measure from the imposition
of the Covenant, would when power was in their hands, make use of the Law of
Retaliation, by driving on the Act for Renouncing the Covenant; and
peradventure in some men there might be a grain or more of the Spirit of
Revenge not beseeming Christian Charity, how ever it is a remarkable piece of
Divine Providence, that those who Pressed the Covenant upon their Brethren
without mercy, should suffer by it without mercy.

Dub. But as long as men have so little of a Christian spirit in them, as to
act by the Law of Retaliation, of Spite and Revenge, there is little of Peace
and Unity to be expected.


Firm. We ought not to judge Acts of Parliament to be the Efforts of Revenge
and Spite, as for the Act about the Covenant there was some kind of necessity
for it, as to make trial who were Loyal and Obedient Subjects, who not, for as
'twas said before, he that conceives himself bound by the Scotc^-Chaine cannot
be a good English Subject. However if the Suspending of that Act would
assuredly unite us in Love and Peace, I heartily wish that 'twere not pressed upon
those that are of a quiet and peaceable Spirit, agreeing with us in the most
necessary Points of Religion, that so we that have one Faith, one Baptism, one
Hope, one Lord Jesus Christ, one God the Father of all, might keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace, which is both our duty and our interest, if we
consider what advantage the Papists make of those divisions which are too many
amongst us, the Seeds whereof have been Sown by the Roman-Emissarys.


Dub. It Is not to be doubted but that peace and unity and love among our
selves, would much dishearten those restless Enemies of our Church and State,
who le^ve no Stone unturned to divide us that they might Reign over us and
persuade us by their most cogent Arguments, (which are Gunpowder, Fire and
Faggot, Bloody Massacres) to embrace their gross Superstition: and cause
Religion and Primitive Christianity to flourish in our miserable divided
Nation, while that time which is now spent in vain wranglements and
un-Christian contentions would be better employed in devout Prayer, Holy
Meditation, in Mortification of our Corruptions, in duties of Piety toward
Almighty God, of Love, Mercy, and Charity one toward another.

And now Sir, give me leave to pay you my very hearty acknowledgments, for the
profitable pains which you have taken to bring me out of those Bracks, and Bogs
of Atheism, Infidelity, Schism, and Heresy unto my Old Mother the Church of
Engl^nd, in whose Faith and Communion, Thou O Father of Mercies, Prince of
Peace, and God of all Consolation, ever blessed and most Sacred Trinity ^ grant
that I may continue unto ^y Lives end, and that I may so continue, I beg your
daily Prayers.


Firm. It Is our great Christian duty, to Pray one for another. I shall not be
wanting in the performance of it, for your establishment in the true Ancient
Catholic Christianity, and I earnestly beseech you to remember me in your
frequent intercessions, and supplications at the Throne of Grace. Blessed be
the God of all power, and wisdom who has thus prosper'd my weak endeavors in
converting you from the error of your ways. I will ad no more but this; that
you be true to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline of our Church, as they are
contained in the Articles, Liturgy, Canons, and Rubricks of it, hold not any
truth in Unrighteousness, let your practice show to the World, that you truly
and heartily believe what you profess, be honest, just in your Dealings toward
men, Temperate, and Sober toward your self, serious, and single hearted in
all duties of piety toward God, and whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are just, Holy, Lovely, of good report,
Think on these things, Practice these things, make not the actions of men, the
Customs and Examples of these loose and evil Times, humane Laws, your rule to
walk by, but let the holy will and word of God, be the adequate measure of your
Life, and Conversation walk conscientiously according to this rule, and Peace,
and Mercy shalll be upon you, as a true Israelite, and one of Gods Peculiar
People. Amen.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 11. read Dependent. p. 12. l. 10. for putting, r. putting. p. 21.
for their r. there. p. 22. l. 3. leave our whether they be Pagans or Christians
I know not. p. 38. l. 12. for Statues r. statutes. p. 70 l. 26. ^. some of the
Church. p. 83. l. 12. for suspicion r. superstition. p. 104. l. 20. potius ad
been esse quam simpliciter ad esse, is misplaced. p. 113. ^r. ^. ^ot
^ankfulness. p. 116.25. r. license. p. 119. l. 22. r. clear. p. 121. l. 25. ^.
who was of. p. 123. l. 22. r. incorporated. p. 126. l. 28. r that have ruled
well. p. 129. l. 13. r. styled. p. 132. l, 29. r. that sit at the Stern. p.
133. l. 22. r. but not the end. p. 136. l. ^. r. throw away. p. 138. l. 19. r.
by phansies p 140. l. 30. r. assistance. p. 155. l. 15. r. ^^t^rio^sly. ibid.
2^. 1* suspension. p. 1^5. l. ^3. r. suspensions.


