Phanatical-Tenderness, OR THE CHARITY OF THE Non-Conformists. EXEMPLIFIED In
the Practices of many of them in Bristol and others their Favorers and
Accomplices in that City, in London and Pembrokeshire against Thomas Godwyn
Sometime Vicar of St. Philips and Jacobs Church in Bristol, and now Rector of
Poulchrohan in Pembrokeshire. Humbly offered to His Most Sacred MAJESTY, To His
Royal Highness JAMES Duke of YORK, etc. And the Lords of His MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers
Hall. 1684.

To His Most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES the Second, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's innate Propensity to Compassion being improved by all Christian
and Princely Experience has given me hopes that this Address humbly laid at
Your Sacred Feet* will be esteemed (if not in it self, yet by it is Necessity) a
Pardonable Presumption. As men under Pressures are required by devout
Prostration of their Souls and Bodies before his Throne to implore the merciful
Help and Direction of the King of Kings; so in the use of the means prescribed
by Divine Counsel, Subjects have no more assured way to relief than by a
submissive and dutiful Petitioning the Assistance of the Almighties Great and
Wise Vicegerent. Not that trifling Complaints should be permitted to disturb
the Course of the Serenest Debates, or any leap into Jordan without a
Prophetic Confirmation of mind that other Waters were insufficient for
effecting the Cure. As the Son of a Clergyman, a noted Confessor in the Late
Parliamentary Persecutions, and as my self suffering under Scoffs, Reproaches,
often and tedious Imprisonments and Bonds for the same Cause since Your
Majesty's blessed Restoration, I acquiesce and rejoice in the Toleration.
Nevertheless while Obedient Innocence supports my Contentment, at the same time
it commands me to endeavor settlement in a Peaceable Estate, and that
especially because successful Pride grows daily more insolent by silence, and
by degrees attempting upon my Neighbors also does infringe the Royal
Prerogative and interrupt the Churches Tranquillity. The Considerations whereof
with all Humility I offer to your Princely Wisdom, Praying sollicitously and
sincerely for Your Majesty's long and happy Life, that the dangers of this
beleaguered Church may be removed before your Translation to a more
incomparable Crown; In which will be completed the felicity of

Your Most Sacred Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subject and Servant, Tho.
Godwyn.

To His Royal Highness JAMES Duke of YORK, etc.
Great Sir,
TO undertake to inform your Judgment, how pertinaciously Malicious, how
pestilently Reproachful, how impudently Dissatisfied and implacably Cruel Men
listed in the Rowls of Faction are, were to say, That your Royal Father, and
Brother, and your self, High Prince, never felt the sharpness of those Vulters
Claws, nor disgusted the Poison of those Asps. But in regard of the Danger of
permitting an Execrable Brood to live to maturity for mischief, each private
Man is (as it seems to me) obliged to detect them* Grace and Clemency in their
King work no more upon those inform Minds than to create in them an audacious
Confidence to suggest Him unthinking and too soft to Govern; Meekness and
Temperance in their Fellow Subjects is their invitation to Injury; And the
Compliance of the Knave and Fool-Trimmer increases their Insolence. For this
Good Man furnishes even the Archest Hypocrites with formal Lies, and frames
Pretenses under which to shelter them, while they Level at the Government. They
indeed commend Moderation, but at the same time condemn it as Pusillanimous,
encouraging the Age, wherein they live, to the severity of the Execution of
Justice; For the Scourge only quieteth them, and if they are not themselves
blooded, they fall mad and terribly infest all others with bloodsheding. May it
please you, Great Prince, favorably to admit this Reason for the Publication
of these Papers, and this Apology for a Suffering Church-mans most humble
Tender of them to your most Judicious Observation; That, As I judged the
Imposers, and what has been imposed upon me ought not to be longer concealed,
so neither can I expect remedy by private Means, and have therefore recourse to
the Royal Fountain. I would gladly pass the rest of my Days in tranquillity, (if
God be pleased to permit it*) and should most unwillingly see other
well-meaning Persons ashamed of their Duty through my Cause. To prevent which I
am prostrate before you, beseeching your Mediation for and Protection of

Your Royal Highnesse's Most Humble and Most Faithful Servant and Orator, Tho.
Godwyn.

Phanatical-Tenderness, OR THE CHARITY OF THE Nonconformists, etc.
I Have been long persuaded to Publish to the World the barbarous usage and
insolent behavior of the malicious Nonconformists of the City of Bristol
(especially the Presbyterian Faction) toward me the space of twenty years past,
either as they acted under the pretense of Religion, with a barefaced contempt
of God and the Laws established, or as they privately suborned their
Instruments under pretensions of Legal Proceedings. I hitherto desisted, not
thinking it meet to add weight to the sorrows which oppressed good men, while
they beheld their most beauteous and dear Mother torn and bespattered by tender
Consciences, and men breathing out nothing but Zeal and Purity. But when these
Fits of rude Zeal, not curable by the Gentle Means, which had been long
administered, brake out into open madness, and needing severer Remedies, the
Patients are reduced to an unwilling Submission, I would gladly in Peace thank
God for confirming his great Mercies of Restoration, with these signal ones of
His Most Sacred Majesty's and our admired and envied Churches Preservation. To
my attainment of this Peace, I thought nothing more conducing than a
Publication of the practices of these men upon my Reputation, Estate, and
Person. My Verbal Relations have seemed incredible to many; I will therefore
exhibit in Print the Actions, the Actors, the Times and Circumstances, with
that ingenious Fidelity which becomes a Clergyman and a Gentleman, aggravating
or heightning nothing out of Passion, but so sincerely and nakedly delivering
each passage, that my bitterest enemies shall not be able to contradict; or if
to contradict, yet not to j^stifie me guilty of any Error, unless in sparing
them through forgetfulness of some of their many injuries.

Those, which blacken the first Pages, are not so amazing as them standing at
the foot of the Catalogue, no wickedness being fully audacious in an instant,
but strengthened by Time and Counsel, and growing by Success. Yet have they,
among many undiscerning Tempers, been received and allowed as sufficient Cause
of Justification for what did follow of a more violent Nature. Calumnies indeed
some of them are, and therefore not of themselves matter of complaint in the
judgment of one, who would be esteemed a man; but as they moved forward the
most fatal Engines of Cruely, I conceived that they ought in order to take
place in this account. The most eminent Sufferers, whom the World has seen to
fall under the rage of a Faction Confederate as Religious, had the Guardes of
their Allies and Subjects affections first weakened by poisonous infusions, and
their good Opinion subverted. Speak aluod, render him odious, and you render
him helpless, said Harison the Machiavillian Mouth of a Traitorous Council in
Consultation against a Most Gracious Sovereign. Prejudices entertained obstruct
scrutiny into the Quality of an Enemies Practices, and ill Actions are seldom
blamed, when done to a Person supposed to be ill deserving. And the more
numerous the Party is, which designs against any man, the more innumerable
shall his crimes be, his very innocence and care swelling the list of
accusations. Names are here plainly used, this Publication requiring it as
necessary, but not with intent to asperse any. For as the Actions were manifest
in the Places where Acted, so must the Names be in those other Places, it which
it is desired that the Deeds should be known. And as their Hearts could imagine,
and their Tongues and Hands prosecure evil with delight, so I may conjecture,
that according to the custom of other Debauches, these will be so fat from
taking offense at the Particularities of my Pen, that they will ^ather rejoice
and glory in the Repetition, as an opportunity of new acting them. The
Adversaries base Temper shall not be gratified by any king of Confornity with
them in Obloquy; but seeing they would not but be guilty of the Commissions, I
must (though I pity them and blush at it) proceed in the Relation. In the
recital of the last Passages (I confess) I blame my self, not for any thing
unduly represented, but that I have not retained that Patience in Penning which
I had in Sustaining them. But I entreat those sharp Judgments (whom
nevertheless the Love of Loyalty and the Church does sweeteh) that observe
discomposures, to pardon the imbecilities occasioned by a renewed sense of the
Oppressions. Now having said this in order to the Readers apprehending me what
probably I am, a Churchman and Loyal, I Preface the Bristol Narraon with the
mention of a Pedigree, which I should not have insisted on, more than that the
consideration of my Progenitors may in much measure give assurance that I think
my self obliged to Loyalty and Conformity.

I am the Great Grandson of Thomas Godwyn, sometime Bishop of Bath and Wells,
and Dr. Wootton Bishop of Exeter, and the Grandson of Francis Godwyn, sometime
Bishop of Hereford, and Dr. Ralph Barlow, sometime Dean of Wells, the Son of
Morgan Godwyn Dr. of Laws, Archdeacon of Salop, Canon Residentiary of the
Church of Hereford, etc. and Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First of
Blessed Memory. My Father being Sequestered, Plundered of all his Books, Goods
and Houshold-stuf^ ^t the taking of Hereford by Colonel Massey and Colonel
Birch, besides the burning of his Vicaridge House at Lydney in the Forest of
Dean, was also long imprisoned in Hereford as an eminent Malignant. But at
length being discharged from that Confinement, for some years suffered with his
Family under much indigency, continuing resolutely firm to his Principles of
Loyalty and Obedience. About the year fifty two he became Master of a small
Freeschool at Newland in the Forest of Dean before mentioned, the Salary
whereof was then but ten pounds yearly, where nevertheless his condition became
indifferently plentiful by the frequency of Persons Sons of Quality sent to him
from diverse Parts to be disciplined; but especially by the bountiful support
of the never to be forgotten most Loyal and Pious Lord Viscount Scudamore, of
Holme-Lacy in Herefordshire, and of James Scudamore of Ballingham in the same
County Esquire. Here his especial care (not to speak immodestly of others
committed to his charge) was to insinuate to his Sons, That the Institutions of
the Church of England were above any purely Primitive, and most rationally
accommodated to the benefit of the Present Age, replete with the most lively
excitements to Faith and Holiness, and only such as could make men happy in
their Temporal Concerns, establishing their Welfare in Peace by an undisputable
Obedience to their Lawful Prince, and other daily Discourses tending to the
Confirmation of our Minds in these Persuasions. About the beginning of the year
fifty five, the most bloody Regicide Oliver publishing an Edict, That no
sequestered Minister, refusing to take the Engagement, should be tolerated as a
Public Schoolmaster within England or Wales: My Father was forced to quit the
Employment, but not the House, the Feoffees of that School constituting me
Schoolmaster. Within two years after my Father died, not permitted in this
State of Nature, to see the so passionately desired Restoration, but
translated to a better, where after the congratulatory Hymns of Cherubim and
Seraphim, he makes one in the Triumphant Chorus, rejoicing for our Felicity.

But here began my Conflict with those Holy Men, whom an Infernal Inspiration
had Sanctified, and made the Worlds hopeful Guides to Eternity. For in a short
time after one Fawcet (who had been a eminent Covenanter and Pulpit Instigator
to Rebellion, and was sent down by the Company of Haberdashers, to be Lecturer
at Newland aforesaid) and one Bromidge (a London Brazier, Father to the late
Sheriff Pilkintons Wise, but purchasing an Estate in the Parish of Newland, and
dwelling there) a zealous Covenanter, also used diverse Stratagems, encouraged
by the imbecility of my years and judgment to Kid-nap me over to their lewd
and disloyal Principles. But God's blessings upon my Fathers Instructions had
fortified me against this danger, and my Youth was sufficient to answer
Arguments, the strength of which I have always thought to consist more in the
invincible Malice and Perverseness of their Minds, than any Reasons that Party
did ever produce. This Project of Proselyting me into an Uncooth, Rude, and
Rebellious Religion failing, the Reader (I suppose) conjectures the
Consequence, That nothing calm or suitable to Christian Persuasion would
follow, but Violence take place where Consent was not obtained. Therefore they
endeavor by all possible means to prevail with the Feeffees of the School to
eject me; but my Fathers memory (with peradventure some other sansfactions) in
the Chief of them so overruled, that nothing more than the appearance of some
snarling teeth was done to my Prejudice. But when God was pleased to smile, and
reinstate us in the Fruition of a just and free subjection to the Undoubted
Heir to these Crowns, the most Gracious of Kings (eligible above all men, were
our Condition to that degree unfortunate as to have the Scepter Elective) and
by his reestablishment to bring us to his Sacred House and Altar, there to
rejoice with the thankful who kept Holy Day, then did these Snaps of Sedition
retire into silence ashamed of their devices. At this School, and in serving
the Cure of St. Briavils (having entered into Holy Orders soon after His
Majesty's Return) I continued until after the Bartholomew Act, when the
Viccaridge of St. Philip and Jacob, in the City of Bristol became void by the
Non-Subscription and Conformity of Edward Hancock acting as Incumbent there. To
the acceptance of this Church I was invited by Mr. Nathaniel Cale, (my Fathers
intimate Friend) Mayor of Bristol that year, Mr. Henry Jones then Rector of St.
Stephens in Bristol and diverse others. In which Vicaridge, as soon as I was
s^tled, the Factious Parties began to practice against me without any
provocation, more than my exactness of Conformity, which I must boast my self
to admire in others, and always strictly to have enjoined to my self) having not
time to know Persons or enquire into Dispositions, had my Inclinations
otherwise led me. Within the space of four or five days (at the utmost) after
my Induction came seven Men (of whom I knew but one to my Lodgings, with much
smoothness and expressions of respect, desiring to be known to me, as being
Parishioners and Vestry-men; and after some short discourse had in my Chamber,
desired me to receive a Treat from them at the Kings Arms in Christmas-street,
then a Tavern. Where after a small sitting, their ill looks and affected words
sufficiently instructed me what the men were; but every second or third man
very kindly presented me with Service and a Glass. The Company
being-suspitious, the Treat could not be pleasant; but taking my leave, they
importuned me with a sort of unusual Complements to a longer stay, which I
refused. Two of these were not acquainted with the design, but my retiring so
unexpectly ^oon caused the others passionately to urge unto the two (Mr.
William Baber Powdermaker to King Charles the first at Oxford, and Mr. Nicholas
Willis then Churchwardens of that Parish, and brought along to palliate the
others contrivance) who were unwitting of the Project. That they had discovered
their design, Thomas Edwards Wheelright and Henry Lang a Sergeman were the
principal Actors in this Honey Plot, and raving at their want of success, could
not but divulge it. The next day Mr. Baber and Mr. Willis came to acquit
themselves to me, and declared all the passages, viz. That if they could have
made me drunk, partly by scandal, partly by Articling against me, they did not
question to remove me. Not long after died one James Powel, who during much of
the time of confusion had been Chamberlain of the City, and always both a
Defender of that Execrable Murder of our Martyred Sovereign, and violent
Persecuter of all such as he imagined Loyal and Affectionate to the Church.
This person (forsooth) must be buried without Divine Service read at the
Interment, because he had sometime before his death conjured his Relations so
to bury him, to which if I consented I should be liberally gratified. My Answer
informed them that I was unacquainted with such Testaments, and such sorts of
Liberality, which was more properly Scandalous Bribery; and I met the Corpse
brought to the Churchyard Gate, beginning, according to prescription, the
Service for the Occasion: but the Bearers ran forward with such haste, that it
would have given thoughts that their Master had whipped them forward, fearing the
late arrival of his Purchase. Me they violently plucked aside, and took from me
the Service Book, giving me diverse Blows, together with incredible Scurrilous
Language, and the Clerk putting his hand upon the Coffin, using persuasions
not to inter^upt the Office of the Church, a stander by wrest the Spade out of
the Sextons hand, and chops the Clerks hand so that the blood ran upon the
Coffin, his Funeral, being as his Life, besmeared with Innocent Blood. Alderman
Miles Iackson and Alderman Sandy stood by beholding these violencies, and were
not observed with the least word or motion to offer their Authority toward the
curbing them. I complaining to my Diocesan of the so unaccountable carriage of
these men, He immediately sent for Dr. Gilbert Jones then Chancellor of the
Diocese, and commanded him severely to prosecute these Offenders: But he making
me and five more Witnesses to dance attendance weekly for the space of above
half a year, I never heard more proceeding against them, than these words three
several Court days directed to them; Gentlemen your business here before me is
very foul, but I will do you all the kindness that I can, In Conclusion, the
good aged Bishop was tired with chiding and threatening, and we with attending,
and so our admirable Chancellor punished these Rioters.

These abuses were followed with Scandals of so notorious a nature, that none
the most debaucht Villians could be said to be guilty of greater, and the
Abettors tutered by one Ralph Farmer (vulgarly before my living in Bristol
called Malicious Farmer) who had been first a Maltster, then a Sequestrator,
and lastly, became such a Minister as the times encouraged, and held St.
Nicholas Church, from which the late Reverend Mr. Towgood Dean of Bristol was
sequestered. Particularly a Plot was laid for me at the Marriage of the Daughter
of one John Dowl, alias Gotly (a strange two legged Beast (as I found
afterward) but utterly unknown and unheard of by me before that time) with whom
upon invitation I dined and departed within half an hour after dinner, but
could not deny the promise of coming again to Supper, upon the very earnest
importunities of this Dowl with pretense of especial Friends of mine, (whom he
named) who had promised to be there likewise; I coming at the hour appointed,
seeing many disorderly Persons there, but none of ^^ose mentioned, took my
leave and went home, yet was I reported to have Danced and drank till past
Midnight, to have been so drunk that I was not able to go, but to be driven
home in a Wheelbarrow. These reports coming to the beforementioned Alderman
Cale's Ears, and he acquainting me of the rumor, by his advice I convened the
Authors before the Bishop; having first made my Complaint to his Lordship, and
discovered the improbability of receiving Justice from the Chancellor, if I
should sue them in the Ecclesiastical Court. The Authors were the said John
Dowl, and two other most profligate Persons, whom I had never seen before,
Thomas Boice and Robert Bowen. With them I also convened the Bridegroom, and
diverse of the Brides Relations. Dowl, Boice, and Bowen were by chance overheard
to be advised by Ralph Farmer to speak confidently, and if the Bishop should
condemn them, yet the infamy would stick to me. The Bishop being informed
hereof examined them singly. They all three agreed in their story alleging
what was before spoken; but Boice affirmed that I was there (concerned as is
mentioned) till Eleven of the Clock at Night, Dowl said till One, Bowen till
Two in the Morning. On my side, the Bridegroom and the Relations testified that
I departed the House at Seven of the Clock that Night, and that they neither
saw nor heard any thing tending to excess or folly of the nature of what his
Father-in-law and the other two declared. Furthermore going home, I was met
near the Door of my House, at seven of the Clock by three Country Gentlemen,
who intimated a desire to speak with me, and promised to be with me within an
hour; but staying longer, I was in Bed by nine of the Clock, and scarcely lain
down when the Gentlemen came and were brought up into my Chamber, and their
business being only to deliver a License, and treat with me concerning the time
of Marrying the Persons therein mentioned, departed. These I brought also and
my Servants, who all testified so much; yet the three found thus maliciously
false and (although unknown then to me) long known to the whole City to be the
vilest of Men, sticking at no sort of Rudeness, Lies or Debauchery, found among
the Godly, sober Party, the Credit of Saints and Angels.

Besides many other contumelious reports, groundless and silly (such as
Church-haters had forged in their extravagant mirth, and used to tell of
Parsons even before my Birth) impudently, packt upon me, for the space of
several years; I could not walk the streets without vollies of scurrilous
Terms, and reflections, thrown at me by Apprentices, and Journymen, the Masters
standing by and showing themselves therewith pleased.

But my Patience (I thank God) preserved me from the harms intended me by that
sort of Battery, and I was no more afflicted, then so ^a^ as Compassion for
their Malice and Folly, moved me to Sorrow; neither did I forbear passing
through any street by reason of the reproachfulness of the Inhabitants, or
gratify any ill temper by anger, or so much as turning my head to look upon
the Persons of disingenuity. Nevertheless I was not Ignorant that the ill
Characters of my Person, were not the sole aim of their Aspersions, but had
learned from the Examples of Superiors (at the pedestral of whose Imitators I
presumed to stand) that the blackning a Name by Obloquy, made a grand Progress
in Ruin.

And these were preparatives for justification of Actions to follow, which were
frequent Arrests of me and my Servants; of my self for words pretended to be
spoken, of which they never stood to the trial, of my servants for the like,
and for treading besides the Paths of some of their grounds in their looking
after my Tithes. And although they dared not stand to a Legal Deremination, yet
this was expensive, and they hoped by continual Actions to impoverish me, and
likewise to tire the patience of my Friends, whom I made use of as Bayl, that
if they could not drive me out of the City, yet they might secure me in a
Prison. The before named Dowle, Boyce and one Francis Bell were the Principal
Actors herein.

In the beginning of December in the year that Sir Thomas Lancton was Mayor (I
cannot exactly speak the number of the year) I had occasion to send a Letter by
a Trowman to one Henry Hyman living near Monmouth, who was wont to furnish me
with Provisions of Corn, Bacon, etc. and not finding the Trowman aboard his
Trow, his men directed me to the place where he was at the White Heart in
Corn-street. Where finding him, I had scarcely delivered my business and called
for a Flagon of Beet, when before I tasted it, came into the Room one Atwood
and Dickenson Chief Constable and Constable of All-Hollows Ward, (the later
being a reverend Heelmaker and Speaker in an Anabaptist Conventicle) who after
some gaping one upon another, and a short silence, began to demand of me what
business I had there. I Answered, That I would return them an Account if they
first satisfied me what Authority they had to examine me. But their Answer was
short, That they were Constables and must bring me before the Mayor. I refusing
to go unless they showed me a sufficient Warrant, they laid hands on me and
dragged me forth, Dickenson striking me diverse blows, because, forsooth (not
knowing the man but guessing by his words and gesture) I said I believed him to
be some zealous Tub preaching Cobbler. The Mayor being not at home, they drew me
to and fro through the Streets (as if some notorious Malefactor) in quest of
the Mayor, and after two hours finding him, Dukenson presented me, informing
him where they found me, and beginning to preach to the Mayor and both Sheriffs
(present then) how unseemly and scandalous a thing it was for Ministers to
frequent public Houses, etc. Sir Thomas (whose thoughts were clear of
Phanatical Dregs) required by what Warrant they had thus apprehended me; They
produced Sir Thomas's Warrant to search all Public Houses and suspicious
Places, and to apprehend all such Strangers as they any where met with, who
could not give an account of the Places of their Abode or Business in Town, it
being soon after an insurrection in the North. The Mayor replied, you intimate
that you know Mr. Godwyn to be a Clergyman, and do you not know his place of
Abode? They confessed, yes. What then is this (said he) to your Warrant? But
furthermore tell me whether you found Mr. Godwyn doing there any ill or
unlawful Act, or, can you prove that he sat there drinking beyond the limits by
the Law expressed? They answered, no, but began as before to Cant and tell him,
That Ministers of the Gospel ought to be Pure and of good Conversation and
Example. But the Mayor and Sheriffs threatening them for this Fact, they
departed. Yet this they reported (and diverse in the City Lovers of the Church
as well as Enemies believed it) That they had taken me in a House Drunk, and
that the Mayor had ordered me to provide Sureties the next day for the
Behavior, and intended to indict me the next Quarter Sessions.

Diverse litigious Actions and approbrious Reflections (too tedious to insert
here) being this year thrown upon me, the next year Mr. Willoughby was Mayor,
in whose time certain Persons in and near the City died of the Plage. But one
Mr. Walter Chester a Gentleman of my Parish falling sick and dying of a
Prurisie, because I had during the time of his sickness been diverse times at
Prayer with him, and had administered to him the Holy Eucharist, the Mayor upon
slight Information that he died of the Plague, shuts up my House and places
Musketeers at my street and back Doors. The Physician who was daily and almost
hourly with Mr. Chester in his sickness lived almost in the Heart of the City,
the Apothecary dwelt by the Toulzey, where the Magistrates and Merchants daily
met, yet no notice was taken of them, whereas my House in the Suburbs must be
shut up. And both to remove all pretense of the Mayor and other Magistrates not
knowing who was the sick Man's Physician or Apothecary, and manifest this an Act
of Malice against me, the last is shown by their fearless discourses and
reception of the former. For Dr. William Sermon the Physician and Mr. Martin
the Apothecary in the presence of the Mayor and Aldermen at the Toulzey made
Oath that Mr. Chester died not of any Contagious Disease but of the Plurisie;
so did one Woman who attended him in his sickness, and two others who laid him
out (as they term it) swear that there was not the least spot or token of the
Plague upon the body. But before this Oath taken, the Mayor and the rest
discourst Dr. Sermon and Mr. Martin as unconcernedly as if beforehand satisfied
there was no occasion for their Oath. Yet after their Oaths and a Permission
that the Deceased Persons Body should be interred in the Chancel of his Parish
Church, the Musketeers were continued at my Doors two days, and when the Corpse
of my Friend and Parishioner was carried by my Door to be Buried I was denied
by the Guard (which was strengthened with the Mayor and Sheriffs Sarjeants and
Officers more at that time than before) to do my Office as Incumbent or perform
the last Requisits of Friendship toward a Person I entirely loved. But then I
furiously brake through them, and accompained my truly kind Neighbor to his
last Repose. And here Malice took its old Course, and Mr. Thomas Days (since
an Alderman of the City as I have been informed) was the Author of a report
(which was spread abroad with the wonted celerity of a Party willing to fix
scandal) that he died not of a Plurisie, but a violent Fever occasioned by high
Drinking with me. Meeting him upon the arrival of the scandal at mine ears, I
desired him to intimate to me the place and time when Mr. Chester and I had
been together more than one quarter of an hour in a month before his sickness;
He answered, That he had heard so much; but being pressed to let me understand by
whom this was told him, and what probable Inducements he had to report what
tended so highly to the defaming of a Clergyman, I could obtain no answer, but
after a Hum and Haw or two pretended, he was glad that it was not true, and
that he would satisfy those to whom he had spoken it that he believed the
report to be false. I thanked him for his first great civility in so freely
murdering my Reputation, and the second in taking me to be so eminent a Coxcomb
as to believe, That he would make it his business to give himself the lie, and
then took my leave of him.

Within three weeks after this one Crow my Parishioner his Wife coverously
buying the Clothes of some who died of the Plague, fell sick and died of it
likewise. I had not heard of either his death or sickness, but took a Boat with
six Friends to go down to the Port of Kingroad to see the Saint Patrick Frigate,
which was newly built, rigged and ready to sail. In my absence notice was given
of this man's Funeral, but the Cause of his Death concealed. My Clerk desired
Mr. Forcith Rector of the next Parish of St. Peter's to bury this Person, which
he readily did, neither he, nor any Neigbour accompanying the Corpse to the
Grave suspecting the Disease whereof he died to be what it afterward appeared.
Two days after came Constables, Sarjeants and Watchmen armed with Muskets and
Swords acquainting me from the Mayor that my House must be shut up in regard of
the danger the City was in by suffering me or any of my Family to walk the
Streets, seeing I had been so desperate as to Bury a man dying of the Plague. I
knowing nothing of it, thought it had been the old story of Mr. Chester
revived, but afterward diverse persons dying suddenly, who had been at that
Burial, I understood the ground of my confinement. To remove the mistake I sent
four of the persons who were with me on board the St. Patrick that day to
testify my not Burial of that Corpse, they knowing me to be ten miles out of
the City. But Mr. Mayor replied That I was a bold adventurous Person and made
more Scruple of a Ceremony than running the City, and that if I had not buried
Crow, yet if I were at liberty I would bury others, and therefore the Guards
should be continued. So by this sort of preventive Justice my house was shut up
a whole month. Yet all this while diverse Inhabitants of the City, present at
Crows Burial, who did eat and drink in the House were not any way taken notice
of.

The same year being repairing my Vicaridge House, I cut down an Ash in the
Churchyard which was serviceable for that Purpose, and was Indicted at the
Quarter Sessions for making waste upon the City Lands. Now the pretense of
calling the Churchyard the City Land was that the Mayor, Aldermen and Common
Council had the Right of Presentation to that Vicaridge. Their folly could
amount to no more than putting me to expenses, for esteeming it my duty to
defend the Rights of my Church I proceeded to traverse the Indictment, but it
was let fall, they thinking it not safe to go on to a Trial.

Alderman Morgan (as I take it) succeeded Mr. Willoughby; nevertheless upon St.
John's day in Christmas in Mr. Morgans year, while I was reading the Evening
Service for that Festival, a great company of Boys (fifty or more) with shouts
and hideous noises at the Church Doors interrupted the Devotions of the Office.
The Sexton going forth of the Church endeavoring to curb them, was beaten into
the Church with Stones; the Sexton going forth again with the Clerk, they were
both dealt with in the same manner. Seeing no remedy I persisted to the
finishing of the Days Duty as well as I could in such a disturbance: which
ended, as we passed out of the Church diverse of the Boys fled, but some
continued fearless and impudent. Among others one Bingham more impudent than
the rest let down his Breeches and in most unseemly manner affronted me and
those People who came forth of the Church. I confess my indignation compelled
me to make him taste the severity of my Cane and the Tce of my Shoe. But the
provocation was the greater in regard I had thrice before complained to his
Grandfather and Grandmother Thomas Wright and his Wife, with whom he lived, of
his rudeness at other times when I was readding Divine Service, and have still
a confirmation that he was encouraged thereto by them and his Mother (then
married to one Heart a Seaman) which opinion what I am to deliver fixes in me.
For going directly from the Church to visit a sick Parishioner, while I was
praying with her the Lads Grandmother and Mother with other women were at the
door of the sick Woman's House, brawling and making noises little inferior to
that of the Boys at the Church door. When I came forth I was saluted with
variety of approbrious terms, and the Path leading homeward being by the side
of a Ditch the Mother suddenly gives me a thrust which had inevitably plunged
me in the mire and dyed my Gown, had not a man coming by observed her motion
and plucked me back by the arm. I used all mild expressions to persuade them to
come to my House and reason the matter with me there, that it did misbecome
them in that nature to make an uproar in the Street, and more to that purpose.
But they the more furiously belched out foul language, and after such Terms
used, the Grandmother threatened me to acquaint the Mayor with what I had done.
To all that was said I made no reply, but walked on with silence until that last
womanish threatening, to which turning about I answered, The Mayor will much
thank you for it. Immediately the Mother bawls out, What do you not care a Fart
for the Mayor? The Brawl oceasioned a great concourse among which were some
good people, but especially five men, who had often rebuked the women for their
misbehaviour. To these (as soon as the women had spoken the words) I said, It Is
a thousand to one but these malicious women will inform and insence the Mayor
with the words pretended to be spoken, whereas you can testify that nothing
like it came from me. I did not in the least suspect that the Mayor could be so
wretchedly silly as to take notice of it, but conjectured that through their
want of discretion a Gossipping or Pick-thank story might be promoted. But the
next morning came two Sarjeants to my House requiring my appearance before Mr.
Mayor immediately at the Toulzey. I desired to see their Warrant, but they
answered that they were the Mayors Sarjeants and their Persons were Warrants. I
refused to go without a Warrant, but they laid hands upon me and compelled me.
At the Toulzey were present the Grandmother and the Mother, who swear that I
said I did not care a Fart for the Mayor. The Mayor and Aldermen then present
(expect Sir Thomas Langton, who departed saying to his Brethren, You do not do
well to hearken to Women's Title Tattles, I Will be gone) required me to give
sureties for the answering at the next Quarter Sesons and the Behavior in the
mean time. But I had sent for the five men before mentioned, who offered to
swear That being between me and the women they heard all the words by me
uttered at that time, while the Women were Brawling, but that they did not hear
any such words spoken by me. Sir John Knight the Elder (who esteems himself an
Oracle of the Law) told them, this was a Negative Oath and would signify
nothing. I argued, That if I had spoken such words, the place where they were
said to be spoken was not within any part of the City, but in Glocestershire,
and that in the Women's Oath there was no mention of any particular Mayor of
Gloucester more than Bristol, or Bristol than Coventry; but to manifest that I
was not so ungratefully ill-bred as causelessly to affront so eminent a
Magistrate and one of my Patrons, I offered to take my Oath that I was so far
from speaking those words, that they were not so much as in my thoughts, until
the Women's speaking them. But Sir John could speak nothing but Law, and that
discreetly and accepted neither my asleveration as a Clergyman, nor my Oath as
a man; two witnesses swearing positively, and my Oath being only negative and
in my own Cause. I urged again, That if any person had been faulty in speaking
rudely of another, to any ingenious men his being ashamed thereof was
sufficient satisfaction, and that it was satisfaction enough in my judgment
that my self and five more (persons of known repute) could swear the words not
spoken by me, and what I offered was argument enough that I esteemed such
language misbecoming me, that it could not appear other than Malice and Revenge
in the women; and lastly, that if the words had really been spoken, I saw no
ground that they had for such proceeding, but that my rudeness was my own
punishment. Sir John insisted upon the positive Oaths, and required surety,
which I denied so much as to seek for: So my Mittimus was made and I was
committed to Newgate Prison for the space of six days, Sir John Knight,
Alderman Willoughby, Alderman Hix, Alderman Stevens, and Alderman Lawford
signed the Mittimus: during which time I desired on Sunday and Newyears day to
have the liberty to officiate at my Parish Church paying a Keeper to go with
me. The Jailer dared not permit this without the Mayors leave. I wrote to the
Mayor to desire that liberty, but was denied. At six days end I gave Bayl, but
the night before I went forth of the Prison, the Keeper of it (being sent for
into my Chamber to receive his Chamber-rent and Fees) began to persuade me to a
submission and to cast my self wholly upon the Mayor and Aldermens mercy: my
answers averse to his propositions seemed strange, especially in regard of
their Power, and that (although persons very rich in their own private
fortunes) they would prosecute me with the Chamber-stock, and in fine would
certainly ruin me. I replied, that little of their love to Justice would
appear in their relying only upon their Power and Riches; that the trust was
presumed to be put into the manegery of those that were impartial, who would
not be moved to wrong doing by either favor or spleen. At last after much
discourse to this purpose I said, Come, Come, Mr. Holt (the Keepers Name) thy
are a company of Noddies and know not what they do. This was a grand Offense
and moved the Sophies to high indignation, especially by the Keepers (to obtain
with his Masters the repute of being diligently jealous of their esteem) adding
and swearing more than was spoken, although words in themselves merely
frivolous. Hereupon I was again committed and detained under close confinement
ten days more, and then Bayled forth. During my Confinement the Mayor, Sir John
Knight, the two Sheriffs, Mr. Robert Aldworth the Townclarke who had been a
Colonel in Service against King Charles the 1st. and Son of that insolent and
ungrateful Rebel Alderman Aldworth, who being Mayor of Bristol shut the City
Gates against his Master, and the King forcing his entrance, with an unusual
Clemency, not only prohibited Military Execution (as in those cases) but was
graciously pleased both to pardon the Traitor and recommit to him the Sword.
Yet his Majesty had no sooner left the City but Aldworth did (notwithstanding
his many pretensively thankful asseverations of future Allegiance) conspire
against his Prince, whose most eminent Compassion reprieved him from the jaws
of Hell, and made the City a Parliament Garrison. Mr. Robins Steward of the
Sheriffs Court was sent with diverse others to the Bishop with the Complaint of
my rude carriage toward the Mayor at one time, and most of the Magistrates of
the City came at another. Sir John Knight, as most potent in Law, laid open the
offense in a speech very copious and prodigiously eloquent, concluding with a
Prayer that I might be prosecuted for this misdemeanour in the Ecclesiastical
Court; Mr. Aldworth seconded him; but Mr. Robins expressly denied to speak
against a Clergyman in a Cause whereof he was altogether dislatisfied. The
Bishop (when Sir John's Gaping fit was over) had liberty to deliver his
sentiments, that he thought the Magistrates had done very ill in Committing a
Clergyman to Prison on pretense of misdemeanour of words; that if any words
deserving punishment had been spoken, he accounted himself the proper Judge;
That they had showed too much of prejudice and little knowledge in endeavoring
to inflict on any man for the same offense two punishments, unless in such case
as the Law did especially provide; That he had taken care to examine the whole
matter and found that there was nothing but malice in it, being confident that
the words (which the Women testified) were not spoken, and that (if spoken) he
saw no remedy that they had by such ways of proceeding; That it was a blemish
to their Authority and Judgments to give ea^ to such impertinent Informations:
lastly, That he required them fortwith to Release me. But Sir John to manifest
his Subtilty as well as Eloquence, had reserved to the last what he had to
allege of most weighty Consequence, That I had assaulted and beaten a Boy (
Bingham before mentioned) in the Churchyard of St. Philip, etc. upon St.
John's day in the Even last; That by the Statute of the fourth of King Edward
the sixth, every Clergyman fighting, striking or brawling within the Precincts
or limits of any Church or Churchyard be forthwith suspended from his Office.
His Lordship replied, That Sir John mistook the meaning of the Statute, it
being intended to curb the licentiousness of extravagant Persons, who except by
the sense of a Penalty, knew not how to distinguish Places Consecrate from
Unconsecrate; That Sir John showed himself missed by passion in speaking so
sharply a Clergyman, and forgetting the Occasion, the Boys insolence in
disturbing Divine Service, and beating the Clerk and Sexton with stones; That
withal he had done well in showing his respect to the Church by promoting
Prosecution against the Women, who followed Mr. Godwyn through the Churchyard
brawling, terming him Rogue and Papist Villain, with many other approbrious
Terms, which (although it proved otherwise) might have provoked him to
unadvised Expressions; that the Statute urged by Sir John enabled the Ordinary
of the Diocese to proceed against Lay persons offending against the Tenor of it
to suspension ab ingressu Ecclesiae as well against Clergymen to suspension ab
Officio; That therefore he must either proceed against the Sextons of the
Cathedral for correcting, in his view, Boys or others misbehaving themselves
in the Church, or suffer Divine Service to the Reproach of Religion to be
huddled up with a mixture of all sorts of confused noises; which was Mr.
Godwyns Case; And that seeing Sir John, in the precise Letter of the Law,
termed this Act of Mr. Godwyns an Assault upon the Lad, as Bishop he must
proceed against the Master of the School within the limits of the Cathedral to
a suspension as often as any silly Woman should complain that her Son, or
Grandsons, or Cozens Buttocks were assaulted by the Master. Sir John retired
with much regret that his Learning and Faculties were slighted; but before
departure gravely informed his Lordship, that it would not redound to his
Honor to defend such as delighted in affronting Magistrates, and to encourage
Clergy men to be Strikers and Revengers of their own injuries. At the Quarter
Sessions following two Indictments were drawn up against me, and found by the
Grand Jury. These being upon appeal removed to the Kings Bench, in the Hillary
Term following coming to London, as I passed through Chancery Lane in order to
advise with Mr. Gregory (now Sir William Gregory, one of the Honorable Barons
of the Exchequer) I met with Aldworth beforementioned, who with much pretended
kindness saluted me, and desired my company for a short space in Lincolns Inn
Walks. I consented and received there diverse fawning and bemoaning
expressions, intimating how much he respected me, and was troubled at the
unhappy Differences between the City and me. He importuned me not to proceed,
for that his affection to me was such that he would make up the Breach, and
beget in the Magistrates an advantageous understanding of me; That his
acquaintance with me since my coming to Bristol assured him that what was Sworn
by the Women was malicious and false, with much more of that nature. In fine I
promised not to proceed, if he promised me faithfully to take care that no
advantage thereof should be taken. This with exceeding pleasantness and smiles
he thankt me for, bidding me not doubt in the lest but that he would do that
and more than I could imagine conducing both to my credit and interest, s^eing
my ready inclinations to a peaceable composure. I relying on these promises
returned to Bristol, immediately after my return was taken into custody by
Process out of the CrownOffice for not prosecuting the Traverse, and was forced
to pay Charges and give security to traverse the Indictments. The next Term I
met him in Westminster Hall, where he began to accost me with the same wheedle;
and my retort of his breach of Promise gave him no blush nor moved him from any
Complement, only he assured me that small charges would signify nothing in
respect to the kindnesses which he intended me. Many endearing expressions I
received, but bluntly told him that I would no more believe a Person who had
once forfeited his Credit in an affair of such a sort, that in might have been
at will preserved, wishing him to attend the Court to make defense, for that I
resolved by the first opportunity by Counsels Motion to endeavor to quash the
Indictments. Which the next day by the now Mr. Baron Gregory was performed, the
Court severely checking Mr. Townclark for advising and defending such
Prosecution. Now it pleased God to frustrate the malicious intentions of these
people without any great affliction to me. Yet I cannot but observe by the way,
that seeing how desperately the two Women and Holt swear, had their knowledge
been better informed, they would undoubtedly have sworn to a higher Pitch. For
the Perjury being the same as if they had sworn Burglary against me, the Oath
would not have choked them sooner in one case than the other. Holt not long
after died ravingly mad, and crying out against Perjury, and demanding what is
the reward of False Swearing? Mrs. Wright, Binghams Grandmother lived two years
after or thereabouts, and then falling sick, and being near death, was frequent
(as diverse, who visited her, informed me) in very horrid expressions as
despairing, although pretensively she was very religiously addicted. I was told
likewise by certain Neighbors who visited her, that she was very desitous to
speak with me, and to that end I came thrice, as well out of pity as Conscience
of Duty to Pray with and discourse her, but her Daughter ( Bingham's Mother)
denied me admittance. This Daughter is yet, or was lately alive, but, poor
Wretch! most unfortunate ever since that Oath taken, living before that very
prosperously. She Is laden with infamy and scorn by the miscarriages both of her
Husband and self; and her other great calamities ought not to be reflected
upon, if the leudness of her life, and no apparent sense of that misery did not
spur me on thus to mention so great an Object of Compassion, on whom I beseech
God to have mercy.

In the same year of Mr. Morgan's Mayoralty (Sir John Knight and Mr. Aldworth
being the principal Contrivers) I had two more admirable Trials of my Patron's
affection. The first was the old Project of Scandal, (and (were not my Evidence
Mr. Buroughs then Swordbearer now dead) I would more plainly say Subornation
of Perjury to render me scandalous) to the carrying on of which they busily
tampered with such as were esteemed meet for their purpose, whom while supplied
with drink, they found ready to say any thing that might gratify their
Masters, Their chief Factor was one Thomas Warren, whose employment it was to
pick up Merchants of Fame. Of such seven (Men and Women) were selected as able
to carry on the work, whose Names, and the Substance of what they were to
Testify being brought to Mr. Aldworth, he drew them up in form ready for Oath
and Signature. This was discovered by Mr. Buroughs, (a zealously loyal
Churchman) who gave me the respect of a visit, and to advise me to look to my
self, for that he overheard some whisperings of design against me, and saw
Papers handed from one to another by the Mayor, Townclark and others upon that
day dining with the Mayor. In short, the Mayor and other Particles of Justice
were on a certain day drawn together into the Council Chamber of the City, to
sit, as in a Council of War, to determine of a Poor Vicars Repute; and Thomas
Warren was File-leader of the Executioners; For two of the seven appeared not
at all. The five managed one by one by Warren, and brought to Aldworth (who
stood in the Stairs leading to the Chamber to preexamine and instruct) denied
to swear what they had said. Warren was angry, and Aldworth asked them what they
came thither for, if th^^ would not Swear? To whose question they answered,
That Mr. Warren made them drunk, and that (whatever they had said in their
drink) they would not swear what was read to them out of Mr. Aldworth's Papers
for all the world. So the Right Worshipful and Worshipful departed as wise and
honest as they came. Their intentions had been buzzed about the City among the
Conventicling Parties, before Mr. Burrough's discovery, although not so
privately, but that some of the Ort^odox Party discerned somewhat of
contrivance against me though they knew not what it was, the day only being
known when something of an high nature was to be proved against me. This
brought the Factious Birds in Flocks, and the uncertain rumor brought the
ingenious sorrowful men to be spectators. Diverse of these last saw Warren
busy in whispering and introducing the Witnesses one by one, but Mr. Buroughs
only heard the words spoken by and to Mr. Aldworth, having, by virtue of his
Office, more liberty than others to come within hearing.

This Holy Stratagem was improsperous, but Malice being always active, they are
furnished with a new Devise. Matter of Scandal was some years laid aside, but in
the same Mr. Morgan's Mayoralty I was sent for to the Toulzy by a Sergeant, and
there brought up into the Council House, where Sir John Knight twatled at his
accustomed rates, demanding of me particularly by what pretense of right I
received Tithes within the liberties of the City; my Answer was, As lawful
Incumbent of the Vicaridge of St. Philip of Jacob within the City. Sir John
replied, That the City by its Charter was exempted from all payments of Tithes,
the Chamber paying fourteen (to the best of my remembrance) pounds yearly to
the Abbey of Tewkesbury part of the Queens Dower pro omnibus Decimis Villae
Bristol. I justified the Tithes my right, as being received by my Predecessors
so long as that the memory of man could not allege to the contrary, and that I
would defend the Rights of my Church to the utmost of my power, not fearing
Gods blessing upon endeavors and a Cause so just. The Parishioners, such as
were Phanatical and willing to contribute to ruin the Church, had private
notice to be ready, and the Chief of them called up into the Council House* and
commanded to pay no more Tithes to me or any succeeding Vicar of that Parish,
assuring them, that if I brought any action against any of them, their charges
should be reimbursed out of the Chamber stock. I urged that the Rector of St.
Michaels in the City received Tithes time out of mind for Lands within the
liberties of the City, and that the City Chamber paid the Incumbent of little
St. Augustines an annual Composition for Priors Hill, in regard it was made
common to the Citizens for certain uses, and ceased to be beneficial as
formerly, together with other Lands within that Parish, upon which Buildings
were erected. Sir John learnedly confuted me with saying, that that of St.
Augustines was matter of benevolence, and the other should be enquired into. I
departed, and in pursuance of my Promise, served Thomas Warren and others with
Subpenaes out of the Exchequer for non-satisfaction for my Tithes. They
defended the Cause for a while, but, after considerable expenses, coming to the
succeeding Mayor Alderman Stevens with a Bill of Charges, and to Petition for
an Order for Reimbursement according to the former Assurance, the Mayor
(although very forward in encouraging them the preceding year, and as forwardly
concerned in the former practices against me) had considered of the matter, and
answered that no such Order should be granted; That Alderman Morgan galloped
too fast in promises, but that he would trot on considerately in performancies
of his engagements in rash attempts. This answer cooled my Adversaries, and for
that time they came to Composition; neither did I find any further trouble from
the following Mayors or other than due respects.

But the turbulent Spirit of Phanaticism began by banding together, to bring to
pass by their own Purses and Subtilties, what they failed of effecting by the
Magistrates. To this end diverse of them (fourteen in number) entered into a
Combination and mutual engagement to detain my Tithes, not only within the
Liberties of the City, but those parts of the Parish which lay without the
City. The Names of these were John Dowl, Thomas Warren, John Teage, Richard
Winston, Robert Miles, and Francis Bell, Principal Conspirators; with whom
associated in Council Thomas Edwards, Thomas Wright, Henry Lang not sued, but
promoters of the others obstinacy. The rest were rather drawn in, and therefore
after some time left them. But three years they held me in Law, making
Affidavits of one sort or other, and bringing down Commission upon Commssion.
At length (when they had almost worn me out) they began to suspect and disagree
among themselves. For the Greater charged the Meaner with such Large Bills in
Parnership from time to time, that they began to fear themselves ensnared, and
to show their Bills. This I by accident hearing was not wanting to add fuel to
their jealousy, which increasing, they deserted the Knot of Complicators, and
not only compounded with me, but became also Conformable. The rest stood off,
but not much longer. The miss of so many Contributors troubled them; for
Seditious men as they are Malicious and care not how deeply they engage in
mischief, so are they for the most part Seditious out of Covetousness. These
also began to be jealous one of another, and by degrees compounded, all except
Teage and Winston, who in conclusion were the Asses, which bare the others
burdens; for they were compelled to agreement on almost arbitrary Terms. Thus
was the storm over, which by most rational men's conjectures would have sunk or
wrackt me; but Divine Providence reserving me to further trials, permitted not
this Divice to be successful; their own follies ruined what in their first
consultations was perniciously resolved. Then I had some rest for two years,
the following Mayors Sir Robert Yoemans and Alderman Streamer being so
generously and discreetly affected to Loyalty and the Discipline of the Church,
that the sly Conventicler durst not attempt by them; The Bishop would not be
moved, and the Law gave him no encouragement. The Adversary had, during the
late times of Confusion, concealed the Vicaridge Rights, and hoped to have
involved them in Custom, insomuch that at my first coming thither my yearly
accounts of the Vicaridge Tithes, Offerings and other Customary Duties amounted
not to thirty pounds; which (by their own wrangling and disingenuous practices
chiefly) I had by this time raised to be an hundred and ten pounds yearly,
being perfectly assured they were worth thirty pounds more. But I thought I had
done enough, and was desirous of embracing that tranquillity, which then seemed
to Court me.

Nevertheless within half an year after the birth of my confidence that I
should be at rest (having patiently wearied the men of commotion) it pleased
God that I was afflicted with a violent Quartan Ague, which worried me two
years together. Toward the end of this distemper a certain Quaker named
Morris Williams (whose Wife was Master and Governor according to the methods
of perverseness in general use among Sectaries) fearing a Law Suit for the
tithes of many years in arrears, came to me and reckoned with me, the account
arising to twenty three pounds and upward. This Debt he said he could not pay
in ready money, neither otherwise, in regard of his Wifes unmanagable temper.
But he desired me for the future to take my Tithes in kind, wherein I should
have no opposition, but a free allowance from him so to do, and also to take as
much more as my Tithes yearly until the Debt should be satisfied. T^is was on
both sides concluded, but not put in execution, Morris Williams soon after
dying. His Widow I designed to compel to payment, being able to prove the
account and acknowledgements of her Husband. To this end I caused her to be
summoned into the Ecclesiastical Court, where she was required either to
produce and prove a will, or to Administer to her Husbands Estate. She denied
any Will made, or to take any Oath in order to Administration. Her refusal
being entered I administered as Principal Creditor, and by virtue of my
Administration took into my Possession diverse Head of Cattle. But Mr. Thomas
Day (beforementioned) being Landlord of what ground Morris Williams farmed,
caused the Cattle to be brought back by an illegal Replevin. His reasons for
fetching them back were grounded upon a pretended Right that he had to them, as
being made over to him by Morris Williams in his lifetime; and that the cause
of this Conveyance was that Williams and his Wife being obstinate
Conventiclers, if their Cattle should be seized for penalties, in meeting
contrary to the Tenor of the Acts against unlawful Assemblies, they might be
disabled from paying his rent. So here was a present Fraud to bassle the
procedure of Justice, out of pretense of an inconvenience that might possibly
follow. Mr. Day was that year one of the Sheriffs, which swelled his
confidence, and gave his dishonest thoughts the larger Wings. But yet this
knack of the Conveyance of the Cattle did not look safe; therefore at last the
Widow ^ued forth of the Prerogative Court Letters of Administration, and
although not sworn, was returned sworn by one ( Matthew I suppose) Hazard a
Nonconformist Preacher. I opposed my Letters of Administration to hers, and
upon a Commission inquiry being made what Bona notabilia Morris Williams had
out of the Diocese at the time of his death, there was only proof that a
certain man owed him five pounds for Hey received from Williams; but upon close
examination it was found a desperate debt, the Debtor owing many hundreds more
than he was able to pay, (whereas it is required that he had of such a value in
Goods or Good Debts to make it a Prerogative Case) neither could they prove
whether this Debtor was then within the Diocese or not. This notwithstanding (I
being confined by sickness to my Chamber, and not able to appear in or look
after the managing of my Business) the Administration was granted to the Widow.
And after my recovery being in London with my Proctor admiring how the Cause
was so carried, I received only this satifaction from him; This it is to bring
into any Court a Cause which is against the interest of the Court.

Mr. Day was not content with this Victory, nor with ordinary Courses for
recovery of Damages pretended to be sustained in driving of the Cattle, but
sued my Servant to an Outlawry in the Kings Bench. The Outlawry was
surreptitiously obtained; and the proceedings were in the Kings Bench on
purpose to make the Charge excessive before I could be able to make defense.
Therefore the Writ was taken out in the Middle of Hillary Term, and the Man
arrested and imprisoned, no Bail or Remedy to be taken, but that he must
continue a Prisoner until by Habeas Corpus he could be brought to give Bail
before one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, which could be no sooner than
Easter Term. Had not Malice and Zeal to Faction spurred him on, that is, if
bare reparation for a Trespass had been the utmost of his intention, the Man
might any day, or almost any hour of any day have been Arrested, the Cause
would sooner have come to Trial, and (if Justice had favored him) his damages
would have certainly not have been the less for his fair and legal proceeding
to Judgment. However I resolved to stand to Trial, having delivered a Writ of
Habeas Corpus to the Undersheriff, Mr. Day began some other Phanatical
Practices, and daily and hourly after the delivery of the Writ, some or other
from him were tampering with my Servant, instilling into his mind many fearful
apprehensions of Mr. Days power and his own Danger, and at length wheedled the
silly Wretch out of three pounds, and into a General Release.

But now I am to relate Passages, in comparison of which, all that has been
said is so slight and insignificant, that the past actions of mine enemies seem
rather Complements and Civilities than matter of Complaint. And if the truth of
what I am delivering were not known to many men of indisputable worth and
integrity, inhabiting in and near the Places of Action, I should forbear to
write what I must suspect that few or none would believe. But here Malice met
with an Agent, who besides his Power knew how to manage a Church-murdering
Weapon. I was advised by Dr. Ironside (the beforementioned Bishop) and my ever
Honored Lord to procure a Qualification to make me capable of some kindness,
which his Lordship would confer upon me as opportunity should serve. I hereupon
wrote to one Mr. Francis Melsam then belonging to the Paper Office in Scotland
Yard to make search for a Vacancy, and to give me necessary instructions to
whom I must repair for obtaining of it and when. But he very expeditely sent me
down a Qualification under the Lord Denzill Holles Hand and Seal, acquainting
me that he had given the Lords Secretary, as his accustomed Fee, five Guyneas,
and left the consideration of his diligence to my own Pleasure. I returned him
seven Guyneas, and the Instrument withal to be altered, the Clark in drawing it
having committed a mistake, naming Thomas Godwyn Vicar of St. Peter's instead of
Vicar of St. Philip and Jacobs Church; which receiving amendment of that error
was sent back to me. I came diverse times to make offer to his Lordship of my
service, and to render him thanks for this so ample a favor, but his Lordship
being either beyond Seas, or in the Country at such times as I was in London, I
had not the sight of my Worthy Patron. I confess his being one of the Five
Members filled my mind with inauspicious jealousies, fearing that he could not
be washed white with all those Sacred Lavers of Royal Clemency and Grace wherein
he floated, who scorned to publish any Recognitions of the Horrid Indignities
and Affronts thrown upon an Incomparable Prince. Within three years after my
becoming a Chaplain (to a Lord, whom I could not love, neither was very
solicitous to know) Dr. Ironsides died and the truly Heroic Dr. Carleton (now
Bishop of Chichester) succeeded. He observing the Synagogues of Satan to be
more in esteem and frequented than the Temples of our everblessed Redeemer, and
the insolent behavior of those that were trained up in those Nurseries of
Pride and Mischief, with a truly Episcopal Zeal labored the suppression of
them. These endeavors must be supposed to be received, not only with the
utmost reproaches of a Calumniating and Viperous Generation, but also all the
sly Arts of Revenge. Which nevertheless could not reach his Lordship; and
therefore they consult how to wound him through the sides of the Obedient
Clergy. Of whom likewise two only appeared open to their attempts, the Reverend
Mr. Pleydel Rector of St. Peter's Curch there, and now Archdeacon of Chichester,
and my self. In conclusion Mr. Pleydell also brake the Snare, but that laid for
me was of greater strength. For the Lord Holles denied the Signing and Sealing
the beforementioned Instrument, and expressly before the late Lord Chancellor
accused me of forgery. His Lordships Secretary was said to be gone into France,
and Mr. Melsam was removed and not to be heard of. A pretense was likewise
formed to the Lord Chancellor that I held two Benefices by the means of this
forged Qualification, and that St. Philips in Bristol was lapsed into the Kings
Hands by my accepting another Benefice, being not legally enabled to hold a
Plurality. One Mr. Thomas Carry was by the forwarding and underhand assistance
of the Holy Rabble, preferred to be a Petitioner for a presentation on the
account of the Lapse, and the Lord Chancellor exasperated with the Lord
Holles's Complaint and other Calumnies (requisite at such a time for
completing such a Project) would not receive my Addresses, petitioning either
for a new Presentation to correct what might be pretended to be error, or a
suspension of Mr. Carys Presentation, until the Lord Holles's Secretary should
return to England, when I doubted not to clear my self of the imputation. Mr.
Carry being presented, I wrote to the Bishop to entreat his Lordship to forbear
instituting him, for that I was assured by good Counsel that my Title was good,
and that I resolved to defend it. His Lordship received my Letter very
joyfully, and for a while denied Mr. Carry Institution. But by some artifice two
of my Friends were wrought upon to believe that his Lordships rejecting Mr.
Cary's Presentation, would highly redound to his Lordships injury by incensing
the Lord Chancellor, who hereby would be compelled to complain of the Bishop to
His Majesty and the Council Table. That the Bishop would hereby incur His
Majesty's Displeasure, and be so far from promoting my interest, that he would
render me utterly incapable of future favor, which would be the consequence of
Submission, and room made for it in my Lord Chancellors Breast by Friendly
Mediation. This plausibly told to these two Gentlemen, (whose Names I forbear
to mention, in regard of the trouble which the discovered fraud gave them) and
by Persons free from injurious intentions, to whom it had been derived from
many and different tempers, they readily deliver the same to the Bishop as
their persuasion, and his Lordship thinking it safest, and best conducing to
the growth of my hopes, Instituted Mr. Carry. Half an hour had not past after
his receiving Institution e're a Letter to his Lordship from me was brought
with the news, that I had proved the Qualification to be Signed and Sealed by
the Lord Holles, and that Mr. Lord Chancellor would be assured thereof the next
or second day by the Lord Holles, who promised to make my Lord Chancellor a
visit on purpose to clear my innocence. The Bishop was not more joyous at the
removal of the Lord Holles's misapprehensition, than afflicted with his last
Act, and that he was induced to it before he consulted me. But he could not
recall what was done, therefore he advises whether there were yet no remedy
left. To this he was answered, That although no other Patron, might revoke his
Presentation after Institution, yet the King might before Induction. Whereupon
his Lordship immediately dispatch an Order to the Churchwardens not to deliver
to Mr. Carry the Keys of the Church, nor suffer him to be inducted. But this
wrought no cure; for the before named Thomas Warren by Ladders, had put up a
Boy upon the Roof of the Church, which Boy went in at the Steeple Window, and
down by a Belrope into the Church, and opened a door which was only bolted
within, and Mr. Thomas Palmer (so famous for his service to the late
Parliament-General Blake, for his holding the Church of All Saints Bristol,
which was the right of that Reverend, truly Loyal and Orthodox Mr. George
Williamson ejected thence by Sequestration, and no less nototious for his
scandalous piecemeal Conformity in the Churches, wherein he has been concerned
since the Restoration of the Church of England, his private wheedling of
Nonconformists, and public resistance of his Diocesan in his charitable
endeavors of Regulation) this Mr. Palmer was ready at the violation of the
Church, and did induct Mr. Carry, and (if I may inoffensively write what I only
conjecture) probable reasons prompt me to speak him the principal Contriver.
Mr. Carry thus got into Possession, I that had nothing left wherewith to sustain
a necessitous life, must either quietly relinquish my right, or foolishly
contend against one that fought me both with my own weapons, and those of a
rich and insulting Party.

But now I must return to show by what Providence the Lord Holles became
convinced that there was no Forgery in this matter, unless in him or them who
were guilty of framing the Accusation. Waiting on a certain day upon Sir John
Baber, (who was diverse times pleased to treat me with the respects of a
Kinsman, and was a Neighbor and intimate of that Lords) he advised me by no
means to frequent the way through Coven-Garden, should my business thereabout
be never so urgent; for he understood that the Lord Holles would certainly take
me up with a Warrant, and prosecute me to the Pillory for Forgery. I could not
but be enraged hereat, and many sudden conceptions traversing my mind without
order, I nevertheless without much hesitation replied to Sir. John, that my
innocence would protect me, and did now render me fearless; that I would either
presently, or at the first opportunity of admittance show my self to his
Lordship and (if he attempted or mentioned any such thing) let him know how
much I dared contemn the threatenings, and could glory in the sufferings of
further proceedings. Sir John blamed me as very ill advised, earnestly
dis^wading me from such dangerous rashness. His Counsel nevertheless had not
prevalency, but I took my leave of him, and for some time walked under the
Piazza before his Lordships Door until I had digested some necessary
considerations which then exercised my thoughts. While I was thus walking my
Brother Mr. Morgan Godwyn a Person in Orders, and now Vicar of Bulkington in
Warwickshire past along, to whom I related Sir John's words and my own
resolution. My Brother approving my intent, went with me to his Lordship, who
was so far from menacing, that very complementally he desired us to sit and
talked very much like a good natured Gentleman, who would not willingly destroy
a Pilcher or Spart. In discourse he chanced to use the name of Mr. Newman. Now
I had formerly been to wait upon his Lordship, but missing him met with his
Secretary and Mr. Francis Melsam before mentioned, with whom sitting, as they
talked (though of matters not concerning me) twice or thrice they repeated the
name of Mr. Newman. Which that I should remember some years afterward, moved
me to the greater thankfulness to my Gracious Preserver, in regard it surmounts
my reason. But I (remembering it) had spent much time in enquiry about the Court
and other places for Mr. Newman, although to no purpose. My fancy steadfastly
persuaded me that this Gentleman either knew what his Lordship had done, or
could direct me to Mr. Melsam, which would be equivolent. After so much labor
in vain his Lordship puts the discovery in order, which more justly and
ingeniously he had never occasioned. He speaking of Mr. Newman, I soon told his
Lordship, That I was confident that Mr. Newman knew the Hand and Seal of the
Instrument to be his Lordships Act. Does Mr. Newman (says he) know any thing
of it? Well, Mr. Godwyn, I will send to speak with him to morrow. But I cannot
believe I did it, for although the Hand be very well counterfeited, yet I am
assured that I never had such a Seal in my life time, but pray come again to
morrow in the Evening, and I will tell you what Mr. Newman says. I departed
with this Order, but had not so much silly patience to wait until his Lordships
Meanders and Intricacies should entangle the Gentleman. Therefore enquiring of
his Lordships Porter we found his habitation to be in the Palace Yard at
Westminster, the Gentleman to be a Justice of the Peace, and a Barester of the
Temple. We first desired to know whether he had at any time heard of one Mr.
Thomas Godwyn Vicar of St. Philips in Bristol? He answered, Yes. Did you, Sir,
ever hear that he was Chaplain to the Lord Holles? He replied, I know it. But
pray, Gentlemen, why do you enquire this of me? Because (as we answered) it is
made a doubt whether the Lord Hollis did ever qualify him or not, it being
reported that what he has produced as his Lordships Act is merely forged. It
is (says he) no such thing; I saw the Lord Holles Sign and Seal it at Somerset
House, for the Secretary being sent about his Lords business, left it there
with me, the Writting having three blanks, which I my self filled up; and when
it was to be Sealed the Secretary having forgotten to leave the Seal, his
Lordship asked my advice whether another Seal were not sufficient? upon my
answer that it was, his Lordship borrowed his Son Sir Francis Holles' s Seal,
and therewith Sealed it. Moreover (says he) by mistake the Instrument was
penned as directed to Thomas Godwyn Vicar of St. Peter's, and in regard of this
error was remitted to be amended, which I saw done in my Lords Presence, and
instead of St. Peter's was inserted St. Philip and Jacob. I then informed him
that I was the Person, telling him likewise of my danger, and entreating him
the trouble to certify his Lordship with what he knew and had spoken. He
presently performed it, his Lordship seeming to hear it with astonishment. But
that which more astonished me, was the borrowed posture of a concerned gravity,
which he put on to cover the former denial; for it is most incredible that (Sir
Francis Holles's years then considered) his Lordship knew not his Sons Seal,
which he must have seen probably above one thousand, at least diverse hundred
times. His Lordship further pretended much sorrow, that he had wronged me by so
unhappy a mistake, but although he conclnded himself surprised some way or
other when he set his Hand to the Writing, yet seeing I had suffered thereby in
my Reputation and Fortune, he would upon his Honor labor his utmost to redeem
them, both with the Lord Chancellor and otherwise. I entreated a short
Certificate of this from his Lordship to the Lord Chancellor; to which he
replied, Mr. Godwyn, I will readily do more than that, and will on purpose go
to morrow to my Lord Chancellor, to testify your integrity. I desired his
Lordship to excuse himself that trouble, a short Letter from him being as
satisfactory to my Lord Chancellor as his oral testimony. But he answered, Mr.
Godwyn, suspect me not, I will upon my Honor speak to my Lord Chancellor, and
set you upright in his esteem. But here we have place to observe, that
sometimes men are possessed with very thin and soft thoughts of Honor, when
their words make them seem impregnable against the temptations of vicious and
malicious popularity. The Lord at the time promised came to my Lord Chancellor,
but (as the following discourse will demonstrate) was so far from the least
endeavor of wiping of the Stain, with which he discolored me, that
contraywise (thinking what was done already to be insignificantly regardless)
such additions of Scandal and Notorious Debaucheries were delivered into my
Lord Chancellors hand in memorial (I would call it a Libell if a Noble Hand
were not in some measure concerned in it) containing a whole sheet of Paper,
written on both sides, that no wretched Criminal in Newgate could be laden with
more. It was more than a year after e're I could learn from whose hand this
Paper came; but when I knew it, no Act (except the thought of the Commission of
any of those objected against me) could more seize me with horror. I came to
Mr. Thynne (one of my Lord Chancellors Secretaries) very joyfully suspecting
nothing of the Policy of the Upstart Vulgar in the Constitution of Nobility, to
overwhelm the memory of past injuries by the accumulation of greater. Mr.
Thynne producing this Paper, I desired of him, and presently after of Dr. Sharp
to know who was the Author, and what were the means of Justification, of which
I was solicitous out of self assurance, that no proof or probability of such
guilt could rest upon me. They answered that they could not satisfy or direct
me in either. At length walking in my Lords Gallery with the Doctor my great
vexation turned to sudden laughter, which he seemed to behold with more
trouble than he did my discontentedness, and desires to know what might cause a
change so sudden. I answered, it was the remembrance of a Dystich in Hudibras,
Thus Justice while it winks at Crimes,
Stumbles on Innocence sometimes.
The Doctor demanded what I meant thereby; I answered, that it was one passage
in that list of accusations, and that I would (if he pleased) relate unto him a
Piece of Impudence scarce to be paralleled, yet nothing more signally accepted
and rewarded. I showed him the Article, desiring him to hear what I had more to
say.

On a certain evening in the Summer season near eight of the Clock, Mr. Carry
(now presented by My. Lord Chancellor to St. Philips Vicaridge) with three
Country Gentlemen, (who intended to take Horse at the Lamb at Lawfords Gate
near my Vicaridge House) and a Citizen called upon me, desiring me to accompany
them to that Place and partake with them of a Glass of Sherry. I denied not,
but after each man's Club of half a Pint, I paid my own and Mr. Carys shot, and
returned home, and was in my Bed by one quarter after nine of the Clock at
farthest. A merry vein took the rest and held them there until six the next
morning. The rest retired to what Lodgings they could get; Mr. Carry only and
the Citizen went home. I received from the lips of the Citizen and two of the
Countrymen at what high rates they had drank, and in what a trim they parted,
they prefacing their story with these words, It Is well you departed so soon. I
could speak more plainly, but do not judge it requisite. Only I add, That the
Authors of the Libel knowing the time of our ingress into the Tavern, and the
time of my departure, must necessarily know my departure home in season, and
consequently my not being with the Company at their breaking up, and Mr. Carys
being there till the last minute of the stay made by the rest. Yet my
reservedness was traduced and punished for idleness and intemperance, and Mr.
Carys night Studies met with the recommendations of the Saints, the Patronage
of a great Lord, and by their means a remarkable reward.

I do not think that the Lord Holles did himself frame that Paper of Articles;
but whether in consultation with the Bristol Agitants he did not encourage it,
I dare not against my opinion affirm. I only affirm his Promise beforementioned
made to me upon his Honor, was either never, or at least not at the time
Promised performed. And I have great reason to think that he never intended the
Performance. For Sir John Baber, some little while after telling me, that the
Lord Holles would return me the Instrument, with what indorcement should be
necessary for the vindication of my repute among my Friends, (such as might
probably think amiss of me, when fame was grounded upon so great authority) the
Lord acknowledged that he did promise it to Sir John, but being then busy
willed me to come again, and that he would look for it, and lay it aside for me
against my next coming. I confess I expected not performance, but had a desire
to make a through inspection into the nature of a five Member Man changed. At
my next and last coming his Lordship told me that he did make a promise to Sir
John Baber, but through forgetfulness of the Promise, on a certain night being
in a passion he burnt it, but truly was exceedingly sorry for it. And this
being the word of a Lord I was bound to believe it, although I should otherwise
have thought the sorrow such as needed the Doctors consolation to his groaning
Board.

I became apprehensive what Honor and Promises were in the esteem of them that
had dared to lift up their hands against Gods Sacred Vicegerent, and was left
to the remedy of Prayer for deliverance from all such for the future. But
whither to betake my self I knew not, having neither money nor employment. Yet
I had not long waited when the Reverend and my kind Friend Dr. Woodroffe took
me down to Shrivenham in Barkshire to officiate there as his Curate: Where for
some months I lived very quietly and pleasantly, having no Phanatical broyls,
entangled with no Law Suits, nor pestred with daily passing amidst the throngs
of screwed faces distorted with hypocrisy, malice and the furies of ill
Consciences. But after some time spent there, my singular good Lord Dr.
Carleton Bishop of Bristol procured me a small Rectory of forty pound per annum
called Filton within four miles of Bristol, wishing me to be contented
therewith until some better opportunity showed it self.

During the time of Mr. Cary's Possession, diverse Persons learned in both the
National and Canon Laws, advised me that St. Philips Vicaridge was not lapsed
when Mr. Carry became pretender to it by that Title, but that by my accepting
Filton it became void and would be lapsed. I therefore resolved to take no
notice of it (if others should pass it without observation) until it were
lapsed into the Bishops disposal; at which time I readily received a Collation
thereto from his Lordship, and upon the 10th day of June, in the year 76. (as I
take it) was peaceably inducted into the Church by Mr. Archodeacon Pleydel
before named, six Vestry men (the Churchwardens being not at home) and some
other substantial Parishioners being present. From the Church I went to the
Vicaridge House and took possession thereof without the least opposition, and
after some time spent in it in discoursing I departed, first delivering the
Keys of the Church and House to the Parish Clerk in the sight of the Archdeacon
and of those Vestry men and Parishioners, who had accompanied me, to be kept
for my use, and so went home to Filton. In the morning I returned, and at the
usual time began to read Divine Service, and proceeded therein unto almost the
end of the second Lesson without any persons gainsaying or motion to the
contrary, except that Mr. Carry, while I was reading the Seraphick Hymn, went up
into the Pulpit, and after some stay there, being beckoned to by his Brother
John Carry (a factious busy fellow) came down again, and with his Brother and
Thomas Warren went forth of the Church, and in a short space returned with
about ten more in company. Eight of these (Mr. Thomas Carry standing by, bidding
and encouraging them with promises of Indemnity) came to the Reading Desk,
interrupting and requiting me to cease Reading and come down. One took the
Bible, another the Service Book from before me; others plucked me by the right
Arm, and some by the right Leg, and in so violent a manner drew me out of the
Seat, that my right Leg was pulled down three steps the other remaining above
by reason of somewhat in the way hindering its moving, and their hasty Fury
allowing me no time to help my self. By their so spreading me I was put to
inexpressible torture, and am yet lame, and do doubt I shall continue so while
I live. Having drawn me out, they plucked off the Surplice, and tare my Gown,
and set up their Idol in my place. This commotion began just at my reading the
stoning of St. Paul, out of the 14th of the Acts, the second Lesson for that
day being the Festival of St. Barnabas. I stayed in the Church until Mr. Carry
had ended his Sermon; but when I was come into the Churchyard, the Constables
(who it appeared were of the persons, who dealt so barbarously with me) laid
hands upon me to bring me before the Mayor for breaking the Peace, and causing
a disturbance and uproar in the Church. I told them that I would willingly go
with them, for that I thought my Reading Divine Service could be no breach of
Peace or cause of Disturbance; but was rather of opinion that their Actions
would be interpreted no less than riotous. Coming before Sir Robert Cann then
Mayor, they began a grievous complaint, That I had kept Mr. Carry out of the
Reading Desk, and had disturbed the Congregation, and had beaten them being
Constables, endeavoring to keep the Peace. When silence from their impertinent
Falsities gave me liberty, I acquainted Sir Robert of my Coll^tion, Induction
and other Acts before related; and that I was no otherwise concerned with any
Person than by performing the Requisites of my Office according to the
injunctions of the Church, until these men interrupted and laid violent hands
upon me. The Mayor told them, That whereas they had accused me, themselves were
the Offenders, requiring of them to appear the next morning at the Toulzey.
Thither I came with Mr. Pleydell and such Witnesses as both saw my Induction on
the Saturday, and mine and the others demeanor on the Sunday; and Mr. Carry came
with his Ianizaries. There were present on the Bench the Mayor, Sir John
Knight, Alderman Oliffe, Alderman Knight and others; to whom giving an account
of what had happened the preceding day, I desired the Offenders might be
punished and I restored (as I ought) to possession of my Church. Sir John began
to examine Mr. Pleydell by what Power he gave me Induction! who answered, by
virtue of a Mandat from the Bishop of the Diocese. Sir John desired him to show
it, that themselves and their Town Clerk reading it might judge whether it were
sufficient to enable him to do what he had done. That Mr. Pleydell answered,
That as soon as he had by an indorsement certified his Act, he returned it me.
Sir John very fiercely demanded it of me; to whose demand I replied, That my
business before them was not to examine the Legality of the Title, but the
force and violent retaking possession, and the Riot committed in a consecrated
Place, upon a Person exercised only in officiating in the Church; That Mr.
Pleydell and so many other Witnesses proving my peaceable Induction and
Possession, I ought to be restored, and that Mr. Carry had his remedy at Law if
Institution and Induction had been given me upon unjustifiable grounds. Mr.
Rumsey the Town Clerk squeekt it for Law, That if I refused to show my Title,
Mr. Carry ought to be continued in Possession, So said Sir John Knight, and
Alderman John Knight. The Mayor and Alderman Oliffe declared their Opinions,
That my Possession being no forcible Entry, but proved to be taken without
opposition, I ought to be reinstated in it, and that they were no competent
Judges of the validity of mine and Mr. Cary's Titles, which must be left to a
Superior Decision. Mr. Rumsey continuing to deliver himself in the former
Opinion, Sir Robert Can persisted to declare his thoughts to be as before the
same, and said further to Mr. Rumsey, Mr. Town Clark, You are by your Office to
direct us what is Law, and if you misguide us, as I very much suspect you now
do, look you to it. Thus Malice, or lgnorance, or both prevailing against
Justice and Reason, I was left to seek Redress where else I could find it, none
to be obtained there. But to (to make a show of Justice) on the Wednesday
following a Jury was impannelled (every person thereof being noted
Conventiclers) to enquire of the Force; but no notice thereof was given me, nor
Mr. Pleydell, nor any other concerned with me. This Jury readily brought in
against me a Verdict of forcible Entry, and he who had twice made forcible
Entry (first by putting a Boy by Ladders to go in at the Church Steeple to open
the Doors, and secondly, by pulling me violently our of the Reading Place, was
continued in Possession.

But as to the Action in the Church I caused Mr. Carry, and as many more as I
knew engaged in it, to be cited in the Ecclesiastical Court, and prosecuted
upon the Statute of the 4th of K. Edward the 6th. This Prosecution was so
managed, that notwithstanding many arts used and delaying practices, Mr. Carry
was forced to beg an agreement. Which he did first by Mr. Horn, a Revetend
Prebendary of the Cathedral, coming to Mr. Pleydells, to entreat his
intercession, whom Mr. Carry presently followed into Mr. Pleydells House,
vouchsafing (although a Thing otherwise of most exalted Spirits) to desire him
to interpose between us, and prevail by a Reference to put an end to the
difference. It was my hap to come thither a little space before Mr. Horn. Mr.
Pleydell telling him that I was in the House, said withal they should have a
speedy Resolve. The day before I received a letter, acquainting me that my Lord
Chancellor had received satisfactory accounts of the injuries I sustained by
the Lord Holles, and his Nonconformist Clients, and had granted me a
Presentation to a Benefice in Pembrokeshire, which was already past the Seal.
This Letter put me upon Consultation, whether it were best for me to prefer
this, or my Bristol Interest. In conclusion, my hopes of a more peaceable life
in Wales than Bristol, induced me to accept of an agreement, if such were
offered as would indifferently compensate my Charges. But before any thing done
I judged it became me to receive my Diocesans directions; who approving my
conceptions, this Treaty of accord being offered I embraced it. Not as a
Reference (which was very much urged) but if by proposals and arguments on each
side of the reasonableness of them any accommodation could be wrought, I
consented to a meeting in the Evening at Mr. Alderman Oleffe's House in order
to it. The four present were alone mentioned the persons to meet; but when I
came thither I found Mr. Penwarden Rector of St. Stephens, Mr. Brent of St.
Thomas, and one Mr. Fry an ingenious Clergyman, living in the City but not
beneficed. Between the time of my promise to meet and our meeting, Mr. Horn had
some conference with the Bishop concerning it, and brought with him a Letter,
wherein his Lordship advised me to accept fifty pounds, which he found Mr. Horn
on Mr. Cary's part inclined to give. It came open and had been seen by the
Company before my coming; and Mr. Horn and Mr. Carry had offered forty five
pounds. When I had read his Lordships advice, I was told what had been
proposed; to which I answered, That I should not have accepted so small a sum
as fifty pounds, if his Lordship had not thought fit that I should accept it, I
not being wont to call my Bishops judgment in question, especially his, of
whose very good affections toward me I was so well assured; but if that I were
paid our differences should be at an end. Forty five was the most they offered;
but I would abate nothing of fifty. At length Mr. Brent directing his discourse
to me in exhortations to Peace, I told him that I would refer the Cause to
himself, if he pleased by but three minutes reflection to consider it and make
it his own case. The rest of the Company persuaded Mr. Brent to undertake the
decision of this Matter, who in short time (after a second demand whether each
of us would abide his Judgment) ordered Mr. Carry to pay me the full fifty
pounds. On the other hand I was ordered the next Court day to withdraw my Suit
commenced in the Spiritual Court; secondly, to give Mr. Carry a General Release
upon the payment of the money; thirdly, to sign, when tendered to me, such a
Writing as Counsel should advise, whereby I should be obliged, neither by my
self, nor any other persons by my procurement to molest Mr. Carry for any Act or
Thing done before the Sealing of it. I was herewith very well satisfied, and
Mr. Carry seemed so much more, giving Mr. Pleydell and Mr. Horn (not only
verbally but otherwise) great thanks for their pains taken in bringing us
together, and to Mr. Brent the like for ending the Controversy. Afterward Mr.
Carry and I shaking hands, and all animosities laid aside, Mr. Carry desired of
me forbearance of payment of forty pounds of the fifty, for that he was not at
present furnished with so much money. I agreed to forbearance of thirty pounds if
he gave me Bond and Security for that sum, and paid me twenty pounds in the
mean time. At length it was concluded between us (this being on a Friday
Evening) that on Monday following he should pay me twenty pounds by two of the
Clock at the same House, and there likewise give me Security for the remaining
thirty. This being private discourse when agreed upon, we related it to the
Company; before whom also he desired, as a kindness, my delivering to him my
Books of Accounts, and what Papers I had relating to the Parish Tithes and
Customs, which I promised. But when Monday came Mr. Pleydell and I appearing at
the Place, and Mr. Carry after some stay beyond the time appointed, coming with
his Brother John Carry, I began to discourse him concerning our business,
telling him that I had performed according to Mr. Brents Order what I was on my
part to do, that is, I had in the presence of his own Proctor withdrawn the
Cause, and was ready to sign the Release and other Writing upon receipt of the
twenty pounds and Security for the rest. He hereupon was no more the former Mr.
Carry, who sued to me by his Friends, and himself for an Agreement, and seemed
as it were transported to another World upon the Composure, but began to deny
Security, affirming that he would never have any man engaged for him, but if I
would take his own Bond for payment within three years, that he would give. And
this was all the satisfaction I have received to this day. Sir John Knight I
imagine upon good grounds out of his inveterate malice to me, dissuaded him
from performance of his promise, whose counsel Mr. Carry finding himself out of
danger by my withdrawing the Suit, did readily entertain, partly out of his own
disposition to integrity, partly in imitation of the pious Examples of the
Parties, which set up and protected him.

This was done in August, but at the Michaelmas following I arrested him upon
the Contract, by an Action taken out of that which they call there the
Pye-Powder-Court. My Attorney declaring on my behalf, a Rule being entered
requiring their Plea by such a time, it was not filed or delivered in diverse
Courts after the time limited. Whereupon he being called in Court, and not
appearing, Judgment ought to have been entered on my behalf. But contrariwise
there was a juggle with the Clark of the Office (who was one of the Attureys
for the Defendant, a thing (I suppose) scarcely justifiable) and another
Attorney pretending the Plea to have been brought into the Office in Court
time, which ought to have been delivered, not only before that Court was
called, but before three Courts preceding that. I required my Atturneys to take
no notice of their Plea, but strictly to proceed to Judgment and Execution.
But the Steward of the Court refused to enter Judgment, and ordered a Jury to
be Impanelled for the Trial of the Cause the next Morning. I intended to have
kept to the advantage given me, resolving to prosecute the Steward in case he
should continue partial; but being persuaded that a Trial could not be my
disadvantage in a Cause so just and plain, I was prevailed with, especially
hearing the Names of the Iury-men, who in my Conscience I esteemed as honest. I
confess I had also somewhat of experiment to try upon Mr. Carry, whether he
could be constant to his lately imbibed Principles, and appear without blushing
and astonishment, where such Witnesses as I had to produce should on Oath
publish the gross turpitude of a Fact utterly inexcusable. At the Trial Mr.
Horn, Mr. Pleydell, and Mr. Penwarden proved exactly the three Considerations
on which I had grounded my demand of fifty pounds; But Mr. Brent having been
very sickly some time before this Hearing proved the three, but withal added a
fourth Consideration, namely the delivery of my Books and Papers relating to
the Parish, which as it was none of the Considerations, but an aftermade
Promise upon request, so neither was it declared for; yet it was proved that I
had told Mr. Carry that I had brought them to such a Place in Bristol, where he
should receive them upon the payment of the money. Nevertheless Mr. Brents
testifying this as a Consideration, I was Nonsuited and the Jury discharged.
Whether this Knack was really matter of Law, I do not undertake to know; But
the Iury-men and the rest of the standers by departed, declaring that they
thought it impossible that Mr. Carry should be guilty of so manifest a piece of
Knavery as was now laid open. For, alas! they before esteemed him as some
Rarity of Gods more especial Handywork, sent thither by an especial Providence.
Nevertheless he altered not his Countenance, but (as the Whore that Solomon
mentions going away wiping her mouth, and saying she had done no harm, so) he
gaining by them cared not by what brand his Actions were noted, and thought the
shame would be worn out when the money remained in his Pocket, knowing withal
that he had multitudes ready to blanch his blackest deeds, especially in any
thing of concern against me.

If he had never desired an agreement, I had merely as in respect to the
Presentation to Poulchrohan in Pembrokeshire been a Gainer more than the money
promised. The death of the Bishop of St. David's Dr. Lucy, and the late
Archbishop Dr. Sbelden soon after occasioning unfortunate and chargeable
journeys and attendance, with the forementioned Law Charges in endeavoring to
recover the fifty pounds, caused me forty two pounds expense, besides the
charge of a Clergyman serving the Cure, and demanding unreasonable rates (the
Place and Country especially considered) besides the havoc made of my Tithes
in Churchwardens disposing, and the ruin of the Parsonage House by my
Predecessors Widow, who did tear up and carry away the Boards and Timber of
three Rooms entirely, and almost of a fourth, together with eight Doors of the
House, and diverse Gates from off the Gleab Land, and other Wastes and
Inconveniences.

Nevertheless at length I arrived at my Parsonage, where I met with
Parishoners, who constantly frequented the Church and Sacraments, and among
whom was no sort of Dissenter, nor any that seemed inclined to defraud or give
me any trouble in my Tithes or Dues. Their Conformity and peaceable Demeanor
exceedingly gladded me: I began to overlook Fortune, and with disdain to view
her malignity, and to tell her that my prospect of a quiet life in that remote
Angle of the Kingdom was reparation for all her injuries, and strongly
conceited my self banished out of the reach of misfortunes. But Faction, which
searches the very Abisses of Hell for Weapons to furnish its Armory, wherewith
it dares attempt upon Heaven, exercised its Faculties, and sent after me
Executioners of my Infant Tranquillity. I thought that the Bristol men's Malice
had satisfied it self with a Lusty Revenge in my past losses and sufferings.
But nothing is more apparent than that Oppression suspecteth its own safety, if
the Oppressed be not continually beaten down with fresh blows and addition of
weights. The frequent Commerce between Bristol men and the Inhabitants of
Milford Haven (where I dwelt) gave them opportunity of enquiry by what Methods
and Persons further mischief might take its rage. And the first that I have
heard of was in large offers of Rewards to one Mr. John Powel Town Clark of
Pembroke* (within the Liberties of which Corporation my Parsonage House
stands) tempting him to the apprehending of me by the Town Warrants and
Officers. I happened to fall into an intimacy of Acquaintance at my first
coming into that Country with this Gentleman, whose near Kinsman, and my
incomparably kind Friend Nathariel Powel Esquire lived in my Parish, at whose
House I often met him, and in meeting, by degrees arrived at the greatest
Familiarity. He from time to time gave me intimation of designs against me, and
what Proposals and Answers were made. Concealing our Friendship he heard the
Invectives of those men (for I knew them not) whom the Party at Bristol had
employed as Factors. After two or three Congresses he began more plainly to
enquire into the nature of the Causes of Action, especially upon hearing great
Rewards offered. At last he shook them off finding no material ground for
complaint, or any thing that could correspond with those motions so eager and
high in the beginning: they ran on very largely in discourses of my Debts, and
that I was Knavish, and would pay no man; but upon examination had no
Commission from any of my Creditors to demand or sue me for any sum, and could
produce nothing but trifling matters for Costs recovered in three Suits for
Tithes, wherein I could not proceed for want of money after my ejectment out of
St. Philips. Only before parting he assured them, wherever I was concerned in
any just Debts, he was confident that I would carefully discharge them, time
only being in reason allowed in regard of my new and chargeable settlement; But
that if litigious causes of Action were framed, he would contribute his best
advice and help in my defense, rather than suffer me to be ruined by ill
practices. However they failed of Mr. Powel, they hit upon a surer instrument
Mr. William Skirm, a sort of perpetual Vndersheriff of Pembrokeshire, who by
himself, Brothers, Relations or Clarks, seldom fails of managing that Office
at the rate he does it. At the time of these men being in that Country Mr.
Thomas Brother of William Skirm had the Name of Vndersheriff, and knew his
Employment somewhat better than his white Staff that he carried as the Signal
of his Office. The Bristol Factors had not so much Wit as Malice, but brought
into Pembrokeshire Writs for Costs derected to the Sheriffs of Glocestershire
and Bristol, which would no way serve the turn there. But William Skirm knew
how to gratify them, resolving upon some present fetches until he should be
better furnished with instructions from Bristol. This I write as their own
Confession at Caermarthen in Company of one, whom they suspected not to know or
have any acquaintance with me; And further as being incapable of provoking Mr.
Skirm, (whom I had never seen, of whose name I had never before heard, neither
dwelt nearer to him than fourteen miles, the Haven flowing betwixt) by any sort
of injury that may be pretended in his Defense, or any relating to him.

This first Project of William Skirm's (for which the Ass his Brother as
Vndersheriff was a Cloak) was concerning a Bill of five pounds due to one Mr.
Daniel Lewis. This Lewis had been assigned payment in Corn according to his own
desire, but whether by his own change of mind or being inveigled, in July
gives me notice that he expected payment in Money and not in Corn. Necessity
compelling me to entreat his forbearance till Michaelmas following, with which
request he departed seemingly very willing to comply. But upon the 29th day of
August next following a Daughter of Lewis's (and servant to Essex Merrick
Esquire, suspected to be a principal Contriver with Skirm) came under pretense
of discoursing me concerning her Fathers Debt. Presently after her entry, one
belonging to me came and told me that there were Bailiffs near the House. The
Door being shut, Lewis's Daughter whilst I was looking out at Window, was busy
in opening the Door, but was seen and prevented. The Chief Bailiff Henry David
knocked at the Door very furiously again and again, threatening to break it open,
alleging that he had power so to do, attempting the same with a wooden Bar
lying near the Door. After these menaces he retired somewhat from the Door and
made Proclamation, (I heard the Words and diverse of my Family besides hearing,
saw the postures) holding a large written Paper by the Corner. His Proclamation
was, Thomas Godwyn Clark, Rector of Poulchrohan, I require thee in the Kings
Name to come forth and surrender thy Body to me, as the Sheriffs Baily, upon
pain of Rebellion. This he did thrice, and then came again to break open the
Door, I threatening to shoot any Person that should offer to break open any Door
of my House. In this manner he spent more than two hours, I in the mean time
wondering how strange and different from those of other Countries, were the ways
of proceeding in Pembrokeshire. At length my Man Servant driving home a
Cartload of Corn, the Bailiffs ran to him and seized the Horses. After many
words passing betixt them, Henry David striving to unharness them, they
thrusting the Man side, and the Man them, said the Man, My Master has
entrusted me with the Horses, and I will lose my life rather than part with
them without my Masters Order. This no sooner said, but he knocked down David
with the But end of a Pitchfork, and after three or four dry blows drives the
Cart to the place where it was to be unladen. David rising up again, came after
him with a drawn Sword, at which my Servant exasperated, beat him more severely
than before, and by accident struck some skin from off his Arm. Before this,
during the time of his blustering about the House, I had sent to know what his
business there was, with assurance of giving due satisfaction to the Law when I
knew what it required; and to this I had no other answer, but that I must
presently open my Doors, and surrender my Person to him. But at last, upon my
Servants coming, he received what his behavior demanded, and so departed. In
returning he with Lewis's Wife and Daughter (the rest were vanished) went to my
beforenamed worthy Friend Mr. Nathaniel Powels house to entreat some Cordial
Water for this fainting Executioner of Mr. Skirms Laws. There he told a
lamentable story, how the Sheriff sending him with an Execution issued forth of
the County Court, Daniel Lewis Plaintiff, I and my Servant had beaten him and
rescued the Horses taken in Execution. Mr. John Powel being present read the
Execution, and the Bailiff having showed his Wounds and Bruises went away. This
Execution was taken out, no previous Attachment or Summons (one of the two
being absolutely necessary) being served in order to a Legal Trial; neither had
I heard any thing of a Law Suit with Lewis, or in the least suspected it.
Moreover, the second of September following I caused the Cursitors Office to be
searched whether any Writ of Iusticies (without which the County Court could not
sue for any Debt or Account above forty shillings) had been granted in this
Case; which was certified not to be granted. But this my sawciness in examining
Mr. Skirms actions, which were wont to be justifiable by his bare Will, made
him excessively choleric, and to my face to threaten me That he would do my
business. Yet Skirm and one Richard Owen (a Soliciter in the County Court)
thinking to Palliate the foulness of the Act, gave out that David had no
Execution, but an Original Attachment to serve; all which appeared to be false,
as well upon search into the proceedings of the Court, as Mr. John Powell's
sight of the Execution.

But I must return to look after Henry David, who in the way home conducting
the She Setter (Mr. Lewis's Daughter) to her Master Essex Merricks House, the
complaint was made to this Worshipful Mr. Justice, who immediately granted
forth his Warrant for apprehending me and my Man. The next morning (August 30.)
the Constables took and brought me before this Gentleman, and one Mr. ( Thomas
I think to be his name) LLoyd of Grove, who required of me two Sureties for the
Behavior. I replying, that being a stranger in that Country I could not every
where procure Sureties, but if they saw good to believe me, I wou^d (this being
Saturday in the afternoon) certainly on Monday following bring them Security to
Answer and Traverse whatsoever Indictment on any pretense should be brought
into Court. I explained to them Henry David's words and behavior, and assured
them that I was not near him, but kept my self within the House, and that he
would send me no account wherefore he came thither, and that I had no cause (if
he had told me his business) to submit to an Execution, in regard I had no
notice to defend my Cause. Mr. Merrick answered, We know him to be a great
Rogue, but he has sworn against you, and you must either give good Bail or go
to Prison. I thankt them for their respects to me as a Clergyman, in refusing
me a Credit than which none is more usually given to inferior Persons,
especially in a matter of Complaint by so notorious a Rogue as they bespake
him; and then the Constables guarded me to the Town of Pembroke. These
Justices, and most men inhabiting the County had known this Henry David to have
been diverse times accused of Rapes, indicted and convicted of making arrests
and seizures without Warrant or Cause, of arresting two Widows, and not
allowing them time to procure Bayl, but carrying them into uncooth places, and
there proposing to compound the pretended differences, and release them upon
receiving satisfaction of his Lust. For these and other enormities the Judges
had fined him, and commanded that he should no more be suffered to act as a
Bailiff. But being so much the fitter instrument for Mr. Skirm, he was not in
the least discontinued. And this is the Man, and this is the Cause, for which I
must be disgracefully lead about by Constables from place to place, my word
esteemed of no weight, and for which I had been presently carried to Prison too
if Mr. John Powell had not heard of it and came to my help. This my Friend did
not only come and voluntarily engage for my appearance, but having made some
discoveries of it, openly taxt and proved Mr. Merrick to be, if not a manager,
yet one that knew the contrivance. And to say truth, his carriage in this point
only (without the suspicion of things of a later date to be mentioned
hereafter) are ground enough for me to believe the same.

If here in my discourse pretending to be bent against Bristol Nonconformists
and their Agents, any seem to enquire what Mr. Merrick has to do in it, my
answer is, That although he has obtained to be in Commission for the Peace,
yet is so far from being overzealous in the Cause of the King and Church, that
he is (like the late Earl of Shaftsbury) all true Protestant, and out of his
jealousy of Popery creeping in the Church, knows how in his forms of
Justice, Rates and Impositions to scandalize and discourage strict Conformity,
and to wink at Conventicling Liberty. His Father was a Dependant upon that
grand Rebel the Earl of Essex, who lead Presbyterian Villainy into the Field
armed, with intent at once to destroy and make Glorious their Great Master the
best and kindest of men. The same Earl was this Gentleman's Godfather, whence
the Font delivered him Essex; And how much a Favourer of those Factious Parties
he has been, those few true Royalists of the County, who dare speak, will
inform the inquisitive. But besides, what has been thus bred in the Bone, he
has also an inveterate hatred to Englishmen coming to plant in that Country;
witness his many provocations of the Stout, Loyal and Discreet Coll* Mordant,
who could have no rest until his Patience tired moved him to qualify Mr.
Merricks Gall by bleeding him in the Thigh; and witness his many Consultations
how to ruin Mr. Bartlet (an eminent Merchant there) and others, whom he
calls the Strangers, who come thither to eat the Country men's Bread ou^ of
their Mouths. Add to his private dislike of these, my Crimes of Loyalty,
Conformity and a remote derivation, his great intimacy with William Skirm; and
this Qustion has its Solution.

At the Assizes for the County held at Haverfordwest, and beginning Sept. the
1st I appeared, where I met with one Mr. William Meare, who taking me aside,
desired to know what was the Cause of the Clamor about Henry David I related
all to him as before; but (says he) it is said and affirmed that it will be
sworn by Daniel Lewis' s Daughter, that you threatened to shoot him; truly (I
replied) Sir, I called unto the Person, who threatened to break up my House,
forbiding him, and assuring him, That if he attempted it, I would shoot him.
And would you have done it? says Mr. Mear; Indeed I would if I could. (I
answered) I would not have killed him, but if he had done any such thing,
without satisfying me by what Warrant he did it, I would have put some Peper in
his Shins. He smiled and went away; and (as I learnt afterward) was Foreman of
the Grand Jury, before whom a Bill of Indictment being brought, and Henry David
swearing That after diverse times threatening to shoot him, at length I and my
Man had wounded and beaten him; the Jurymen (as five of them together told me
the same day) out of a deep sense of David's many wicked Actions and vile course
of life, did all refuse to find the Bill except Mr. Meare, who told them, That
although their reasons for rejecting the Bill were otherwise good, yet now they
were to be laid aside, for that he himself heard me say I would have shot him
if I could. This his alleging part of truth prevailed with the rest to find
the Bill.

This Mr. Meare is also in Commission for the Peace; but his ways of keeping
the Peace are very uneasy to many men, particularly to Mr. Thomas LLoyd (a
meek tempered Gentleman) Rector of the Parish wherein Mr. Meare lives. But I
need say no more of him; for there is scarce any Gentleman or Clergyman in the
County but does either fear or hate his Company. Mr. Merricks prejudices
proceed from an old Leaven of Religion, Party and Extraction; But this Man's
either out of a delight in trampling down and walking over ruins, or a desire
of augmenting his private fortunes by any of those means which himself terms
honest. The Scheme of his Religion is not yet finished, and it is feared is a
Task too difficult to be completed before his death. He is a man of such
impartiality, that when they lie in his way he spares not Neighbors more than
Strangers, nor Strangers than Neighbors, but upon displeasure they must all
alike feel his Correction.

Besides this Indictment, by Skirms advise David also sued me in an Action of
Battery and Assault; and I resolved to stand the Traverse of the one and Trial
of the other; but was disappointed by being arrested in Bristol, and forced to
remove my self up into the Kings Bench Prison. Nevertheless I took due course
for defense, but where Mr. Skirm is concerned due courses seldom take place.

But while I was at the Assizes, having occasion to go into the Shop of one Mr.
Hents an Apothecary (who knew not me nor I him) as I sat in it some time, I
saw a man holding up his Arm in a string to pass to and fro through the Shop.
Hearing him make some complaints to the Apothecary, and the Apothecary to call
Henry David, I enquired of him what he was, and what was the matter with him.
He answered, it is Henry David the Bailiff whom the Minister of Poulchrohan had
grievously beaten and wounded. I desired to speak with him, and coming to me
cringing and scraping with abundance of respect, upon request he related to me
the story of his adventure, but with a mixture of notorious falsehoods,
especially of my laying hands upon him. When he had ended I demanded of him
whether he knew me. He answered, No, if it please your Worship (I desire to be
pardoned in regard 'twas his very expression) I never saw your Worship before
in my life. Being twice more desired to recollect himself, he still affirmed
that he neither knew me nor had ever seen me, but believed my Worship was one
of the Reverend Prebendaries of St. David's Cathedral. This was again and again
repeated before the Apothecary, his Wife, his Wives Mother, and the Servant
Maid. At length I discovered who I was, saying to the four standers by, Is not
this a Prime Rascal to swear against a man, whom he never knew nor saw? I am
Thomas Godwyn Rector of Poulchrohan. Upon which words, without a word retort,
he shufled away. At the same Assizes Mrs. Wil^iams, Wife to the Vicar of
Rosemarket in Pembrokeshire, made Oath before Sir Francis Manley, Chief Justice
of that Circuit that this Henry David came and brake open her House after nine
of the Clock in the Evening, requiring submission to his lewd Offers* and
swearing he would lie with her before he went out of the Huose, and after using
violence with entreaty, she chanced to thrust him down backward over a Stool,
and escaping out of the House, was compelled to lie hid in the standing Corn
without Clothes for the space of three hours, he in the mean time searching the
House, and round about the House, swearing as before, and at his departure with
horrid execrations vowing he would have her another time although now he
missed. This poor Gentleman Mr. Williams being imprisoned for many years
arrears of Tenths due before he became Incumbent, and the House standing
solitary encouraged this Villain to this impudent attempt. And who now can
doubt but that the eminent worth of Henry David was Mr. Merricks, Mr. Meares
and Mr. Skirms Excitement to a generous vindication of his injuries, and the
wounds given him by one, whom he never saw nor knew?

By this denial of his knowledge of me, and the Witnesses of his behavior at
my House, I thought my self sufficiently fortified for defense. But being
detained in the Kings Bench somewhat longer than I conjectured, by the
exorbitant demands of Coling the Marshall, and my want of money, I could not
recover home before the Trial, but the Cause was lost for want of defense, and
twenty five pound odd shillings Execution taken out against me. And although I
returned not home soon enough for a Trial, I timed my removal from the Bench to
another Prison, and on Michaelmas Day, immediately before Evening Prayers I was
arrested by one Mr. William Morgan, that year Vndersheriff, or rather Mr.
Skirms Deputy. I often desired to know for what I was arrested, but was denied,
only was told I should know soon enough, and so forthwith was carried to the
Haven side to pass over for Haverford-West, where the County Prison was. But at
the Haven brinks Morgan surrendered me to three of his Bailiffs after he had,
sitting upon a Bank, written this Warrant.

To the Bailiff of the Hundred of Castlemartin, and the Bailiff of the Hundred
of Roose, and to William Philips, Thomas LLewellin and Henry -- Bailiffs
especally appointed.
By Virtue of a Capias to me directed out of the Great Sessions for the County
of Pembroke, these are to require you to apprehend the Body of Thomas Godwyn
Clerk, and him in safe Custody to keep and deliver to the Jailer of the County
Prison at Haverford-West, until he shall be thence legally discharged.

Will. Morgan Vicecom. Deputat.

So that I was again to be apprended, who was before arrested, no Plaintiff
named, no Cause of Action mentioned. The Bailiffs who were my Guardians told me
that I was taken in execution at Henry David's Suit, and that the Sheriff would
be with me on the Morrow; on the third day Morgan comes to me, I having been
kept at the Goalers House in the mean time. Then upon demand he told me as the
Bailiffs before, and ordered me to be put into the Prison. Within an hour and
half afterward I was committed to a Room, the delicacies whereof I intending to
recite, do at first take leave to raise the Readers Exp^ctations. The entrance
was well fenced with Locks and Chains, the Room well Boarded, and the Windows
well Barred, but had never been Glazed. Bed or Bedsted there was none, neither
Fire, nor Chair, nor Stool, or any kind of Seat except a Plank with three Legs,
and that of an odious House of Office, from which was no conveyance but into
the Room beneath, which having not been cleansed above eight years before,
stunk beyond any thing to be named. Demanding whether there was no other Room,
the Jailer answered me, yes, but that that was appointed for me as the best.
Asking further what I must lie upon, he pointed, There Is the Bed, which was an
heap of Dust mixed with something that only showed it had been Straw, and (as it
appeared) had been the recumbency of some poor Wretches my Predecessors in
Adversity. I required him to procure me some fresh Straw, he told me that he
could not, but that the Bed was good enough, and that many an Honest Man had
lain there without grudging. I offered to give a Shilling for two Penny worth,
and pay the Carrier besides; He told me I must be contented until Monday (this
being on Saturday evening) and then I should have some. No persuasions could
prevail to the contrary; So I was forced to walk all night, excepting that when
excessive weariness overtook me, I sat on the low Tripod, and with my Back
against the Stone Wall never Plaistered fell asleep, till awakened again with
the violence of the cold I arose to walking; and so by turns I passed the
nights and one day. I hoped to have prevailed with my tender-hearred Governor
on Sunday morning to furnish my Chamber; but in vain. When eating time required
that exerceise, the loathsomeness of the Place made the thoughts of Meat
loathsome also; but necessity compelling I bespake it of an Inkeepers Wife
dwelling opposite to the Prison; but when brought the Jailer would not attend
to open the Door, but it must be thrust in at an hole in the Door, through
which a Trencher or Plate could not be delivered. However on Monday I was
prosperous, and tumbled in much clean Straw, and on Tuesday I had Bedcloathes
sent; (but the Keeper would not open the Door to receive them till two days
after.) In time also I mitigated the ill sents by snuffing up the wind blowing
in at the holes called Windows, and by smelling to the Iron Bars in them.

In this condition I was the most part of three weeks. Some few times I got out
by the Privilege of Treating with my incomparable Adversary. For being under
Execution, I saw no hopes of deliverance but by composition. Therefore I
procured some Friends to motion it and bring him to me. Not to the Prison, for
his Nose would not brook it, but I was sent for twice to an Alehouse. In
discourse the first time he seemed inclined to take ten pounds, but made no
positive agreement. But at his second coming complained that Mr. Skirm and his
Master Margan the Sheriff (as he called him) had heard of his being upon
agreement with me, and threatened to turn him out of his Office if he agreed
with me a penny beneath the full Execution. At the first hearing I imagined this
to be a device to squeeze me harder, but I found the contrary, that he was
willing to discharge me for ten pounds, but dared not, unless any way might be
found whereby he might do it as if ignorant of the Law. This I said he had done
already (as I judged) by calling me, being in Execution at his Suit, out of the
liberties of the Prison, and even in another County; Haverford-West being a
Town and County of it self. This I knew to be so in England, but knew not what
was right in Wales, but I was confirmed that it was a Legal Discharge for the
Plaintiff, Sheriff or Coaler to call or take a Prisoner charged in Execution
out of the Liberties of the Prison, to which he was Legally Committed, and that
for the same he could not Legally be retaken or recommanded to Prison. This
advice I had from William Philips of Haithock Esquire* a Justice of the Quorum, and
a very eminent Counselor in that County, first by word of mouth to a friend of
mine, afterward under his hand. In fine, I was invited to the Eating of a Leg
of Pork and a Goose on Sunday the 17th of October, and in the morning the
Jailer came to acquaint me, that Henry David desired to speak with me, that
there was a good Dinner provided, etc. I delayed until I had Witnesses, which
being at last five in number to my liking, the Jailer renewing his request, I
went with him. After Dinner being very liberal in expenses at the Goalers
House, I was permitted to stay out all night (resolving nevertheless not to
return to the Prison without force) and all the next day until four of the
Clock, when I espied an Horse brought for me, and set in the Place which I
appointed, and so rode home. But the next day in the evening Mr. Morgan with
fourteen others came to enquire for me; but not finding me pretended to retire,
but went to Pembroke, leaving his Imps in convenient Places to besiege me, and
returned on the morrow with the Power of the County, forty six or fifty in
number. For being at Pembroke he informed the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town
that I had broken the Prison and escaped, and Mr. Essex Merrick (allway forward
in my concerns) as wisest Burger and ablest Lawyer, acquainted the Corporation
that they ought to assist the Sheriff, and might justify the breaking up any
House where they knew me to be, and take me. But I am advised (and it seems
reasonable) that the Sheriff, Vndersheriff or Jailer ought to have sworn before
the Mayor that I brake the Prison; which none could, and the Vndersheriff going
in to view the Prison before he set forward from Haverford with his Company,
himself said to the Jailer (who probably told him so) I see no sign of any
place or thing broken; this in the the hearing of diverse Witnesses (whom it
occasion served) I can produce. But without much consultation the Mayor
(Matthew Bowen by name, a Person actually in Arms for several years against
King Charles the first) commanded the Townsmen to follow him with what Arms
they had ready. So they came with Muskets, Pistols, Swords, Pikes and Bills;
and (I must confess) I resolved upon defense and rather to dye in the midst of
a Lawless Rabble, then without any just Cause or Lawful Grounds to surrender my
self to Execution, my death seeming inevitable if I should be carried back to
that Prison, whence the very Plaintiff could not release me without the Consent
of a bitterly engaged enemy. The first Aggressors and Enterers must certainly
have fallen, had not I been told that the Mayor of Pembroke was at the Door
desiring to speak with me. I opened not the Door, but discourst as we stood, I
within and he without. He told me his Name and Character, and I knew his voice.
He desired me to cease threatening (I having before affirmed that I would kill
the first Breakers up and Entrers of my House) and to deliver my self to the
Sheriff. On the other hand I required him as the Kings Lieutenant and Justice
of the Peace to see the Peace kept, telling him, that before his appearance, I
thought my self bound to preserve my self in my own House as well as I could,
but now left my self to him for Protection, whom I should thank for doing his
duty, and question for the breach of it. But this wrought nothing; Morgan with
his own hands, and others using Iron Bars and Sledges brake down the Door,
took me and carried me to Pembroke that night in the midst of that Black Guard.
Being brought into my Chamber there (notwithstanding so many Bailiffs and
others commanded to attend as upon some dangerous Malefactor) my Arms were
bound behind me with Cords till bedtime. Then Morgan came to see me put into my
Bed, where I was forced to Iye on my Back, and my Arms being extended to be
bound, and each Arm bound to a Post at the Beds Head. My right Arm being
somewhat lame, I desired that they would take what course they pleased to
secure a Person so suspicious as they seemed to think me, and make the knot as
fast as they pleased, but not to tie it so straightly upon that Arm because
infirm. Is that Arm Lame (said Morgan) then, Jailer, bind it the harder, which
he did, and in that posture and condition I lay all that night, my Arm asking
some part of the time, but ceasing after midnight (being then benumbed) and in
my Chamber a dozen of the Vndersheriffs Beardogs smoking trash Tobacco, and
playing at Tables all night. In the morning when I was unbound, my right Arm
hung down by my Side as dead; I could not move Finger or Arm. But my Arms were
immediately again bound behind me in order to my Journey to Pri^on, and I
desiring that if I must be thus dealt with, I might be nevertheless so bound,
as that my Riding Coat might cover the Cords; Morgan answered, You shall have
nothing that you desire. A quarter of an hour after Morgan calls, What is not
that fellow yet gone? Tie him to an Horse Tail, and drag him along. During the
time of the riotous disturbance, of my being in the way to Pembroke and in the
Town I gave no disrespective or angry word to Morgan or Bowen (who had a grand
Copper Nose, which might receive the Solemn League and Covenant into its
Recesses) but spent my time as merrily as if a Comedy were acting* taking only
the liberty to make some joco^e Remarques upon the Vndersteriffs knowledge of
his Office, and Mr. Bowens doing of Justice. Nothing otherwise until the
morning; but when I saw my arm in that plight, I confess I could not contain my
self, but cried This Horrid Dog the Vndersheriff has undone me; I have lost
the use of my Writing hand. Away they led me, and I complaining for want of a
Horse, the Jailer answered that there was an Horse provided for me the last
night, but that my jeering the Sheriff had caused him to contradict it; for he
says (quoth the Jailer) that seeing you are so merry, he will take down your
mirth. I went along, but a Servant of one Mr. William Holcomb (Son in Law to
Mr. Meare) pretended to lead me by my left Arm pinching me all the way that he
went. At something more than three miles end I fainted through want of sleep,
weariness and so many gross abuses, and not much using walking. Then was I set
on Horseback, and after a little time recovering, began merrily to reflect upon
the great state I rode in, to have so worthy a Gentleman as Mr. Jailer to lead
my Horse. This affronted the honest man, and he knowing the Saddle would turn
round, being too big, for the Horse being very small, had a present revenge in
his thoughts; for he lead the Horse out of the way up and down banks, till the
Saddle turning cast me down. This was done twice, and I attribute it much to
Divine Providence that I escaped with little harm, seeing my Arms bound rendered
me helpless. My Leader and Guides were very ^portive at my Falls, and their
lifting me up again, saying, that they must laugh as well as I. As I passed
thus along in Sta^e we met many Persons of Quality in a Company going to a
Wedding, who expressed their indignation of such usage of a Clergyman, Mr.
William Bowen of Haverford particularly affirming that he could not brook the
sight, but would cut the Cords, wherewith I was bound. I thanked and entreated
him to forbear in regard the Persons, in whose Custody I was, were ill men,
that valued neither Credit nor Conscience, but would Swear any thing, and might
do him a great injury, but that his intended kindness could not be very
beneficial to me, and thus persuaded him to ride forward, hoping that afterward
he might do something for me more eminently beneficial. I was also led forward,
and entering Haverford was brought through a considerable part of the Town unto
the Prison, multitudes gazing and admiringly enquiring whether I had spoken
Treason, or what was the matter? Being conveyed into my Old Lodgings my Arms
were freed from their Bonds, but my Legs were put into Irons; not such as
ordinary Malefactors for Burglary or the like are wont to be obliged to, with
which they can make a shift to walk, but an Iron on each Leg, through both
which an heavy Bolt was thrust and fastened with a Riveted Key. It was such that
it permitted me not to put one foot an inch before the other, neither to lie
down or rise without the help of two men, the one holding my shoulders the
other my feet. These two men were Prisoners but had some liberty before, but
were committed with me for affirming to the Vndersheriff that I had not broken
Prison, and other truths concerning my being called out of the Prison. The
coldness of these Irons in two days put me into a Fever, and my Feet and Legs
exceedingly swelled each day more and more, so that at four days end those
encompassing my Legs could scarce be discerned. The sixth day I labored under
a general indisposition, and having not before complained, I then said to my
two Friends, Two days more wearing these things will inevitably kill me.
Whereupon they made an outcry, and one of them (Samuel Roberts) procured a
Messenger to call to me one Mr. Thomas Lloyd, a very friendly Person, and
frequent visiter of me. He came as he had been wont to the Door (for the Jailer
would not trouble himself to let any in unto me, unless such as happened to be
there when it was his pleasure to enter himself) and being informed of my
condition, acquainted others with it, who came to the Jailer advising him to
take off the Irons, for the wearing of them would certainly soon dispatch me
out of this life, which happening, he, his Master, and as many as were
concerned in putting them on, would certainly be hanged. The fear of a Rope
brought him to compliance; but when he had unrivited the Key of the Bolt, the
Irons which encompassed my Legs could not be taken off without much pain and
bruising me. Nevertheless when it was done I was revived, and three days after
a violent distemper seized me, not to my injury, but salutiferous by the
Strength of Nature; and in a fortnight I was indifferently (through Gods great
blessing) well recovered. But then (just at the Fortnights end) came Mr.
Jailer, telling me that I must again put on my cold Irons, that he had taken
them off without the Sheriffs knowledge, and had been sharply checked for so
doing, and commanded to put them on again. He had brought with him one Thomas
Morgan (the Undersheriffs Kinsman) and two more to compel me in case of
resistance. I and my two fellow Prisoners demanded for what reason this was
offered? Whether I had not behaved my self quietly in word and deed? He
answered, That he could say nothing to the contrary, but it was the Sheriffs
pleasure and he must obey it. I refused to receive them, and resisted as well
as I could; but they were too hard for me, and threw me down; and Morgan beat
my head against a rough stone, (which was set at my Beds feet, to keep the
Welsh Feathers of my Bed within bounds) and brake it in five places. The noise
drew many Spectators, and the fame of the cruel usage of the strange Minister
that was in Prison flew swiftly about the Town, and fortuned to meet Mr. Robert
Chambers Collector of the Custom-House, and Mr. William Bowen before named and
certain others, who sought the Vndersheriff, and with severe menaces obliged
him to promise himself to see me forthwith delivered from my Irons, moreover
assuring him that an account must be given for what I had sustained in the
cause of so base a Person, his harsh dealing not only exceeding what was
imposed upon any Prisoners for just debts and far greater sums, but even the
severity used to the worst of Criminals committed in their memory, naming
particularly William Philips the Bailiff, who was at the taking me upon
Michaelmas day. I was committed to them between four and five of the Clock in
the Afternoon; and about eleven at night the Chain Chimes at the Prison Door
going, gave us matter of wonder, what the matter was. And the sight of Morgan,
the Jailer and three more coming in made the Wonder the greater. He began (but
somewhat smoothly) to blame my former Escape and Biting jests used toward him,
which were the cause of the hardships I had endured; I only nodded my Head
saying, Well enough, what next? If you will (said he) promise me not to break
Prison, but to be quiet and orderly your Irons shall be taken off. As you know
(I replied) what occasion you have to ask such a question, so I will promise
nothing else then (as I did before) to be gone as soon as lawfully I can, and
not otherwise. He answered, You did not go away lawfully, for although Henry
David and the Jailer might call you out of the Prison, and you go away thinking
your self discharged, yet I had in my hands a Capias ad satisfaciendum against
you for the Kings First Fruits. This is (I said) the first time I have heard
it; but the Jailer had no Warrant from you to detain me upon this Cause. No,
(he answered) it was sufficient in my hands. And was it warrant enough for you
to swear (fro then I heard so, though since told to the contrary) that I brake
Prison, for you riotously to break open my House, to bind and Iron me as you
have done? Well Sir, (said Morgan) I hope you will be an orderly Prisoner.
Jailer, take off the Irons. So once more my Legs were free from Cuffs. But, Mr.
Vndersheriff (said I) you must take care to send some body to cure my Head,
showing him and the Company where it was broken. He answered, that they were
rude abusive fellows in so doing, he did not allow them so to do; and then rose
up and departed. Not long after Morgan was acquitted of his employ, and Willam
Skirm succeeded, not by a Deputy but himself. And to him (I continuing in that
joyous Place) about the end of January came a Writ of Habeas Corpus to remove
me up to the Kings Bench. Upon the 28th of January in the Evening Skirm gave me
notice to provide for my Journey against Tuesday morning, the then 31st of
January. I sent home for Boots, a Riding Coat, and necessaries for my Journey
to be brought to me on the Monday; but Skirm with an unaccountable malice
(unless my Death was his Project) horst me early the Monday morning, that my
Journey might be the more remarkable upon the day of my Admired Sovereigns
Martyrdom, in order to my execution. My Journey was (the way that my Keepers
brought me) two hundred and threescore measured miles at least. I had no more
on my Legs than one pair of single Stockins, neither any covering more then
what I usually wore within the House, nor any money, my servants journey to me
with that supply constantly on Sundays being stopped by my appointment for
Monday. Thus I rode the first days journey to Caermarthen, where (having met
with a Friend who lent me twenty shillings) I purchased a Freize Coat and Boots
of the same. The Tailor sitting up all night to dispatch, had not finished them
by the time my Keepers were ready to mount me. They urged me to be gone,
swearing they would not slay; but I being in a Friends House refused to travel
farther without Clothes. Neither was the stay which caused the controversy
above half an hour. But I should first have related their carriage toward me
at my going to Bed. When they had seen me lain down, the Keepers (one being
John the Brother of William Skirm) took away my Clothes, and even my Shoos,
Stockins and Hat and locked me into the Chamber. The same they did at every Inn,
at which I lodged on the Road, the journey being seven days. At Caermarthen I
had a Fire in my Chamber, commanding it as known in the House; but every night
following, being unacquainted on the Road, in which I never before traveled,
these Dowty Gentlemen permitting me to sit by the fire in their Chamber during
their pleasure; when they thought it Bedtime, I was taken by the shoulders and
thrust into a Cold Room, and then stripped and locked in, no respect had to the
weather, (which was extremity of Snow every day but the first) not to my
pickled condition, riding on a low Horse through ways so deep, that my feet did
frequently, even for miles together hang in the dirt and water, I being tired
with holding them up to avoid it. Upon Sunday the fifth of February between
four and five of the Clock in the afternnon I was conducted to the Three Cups
Inn in Holborn and there detained until the Saturday following, no persuasion
prevailing with them to bring me into Court or before a Judge, not any reason
but their pleasure shown. There my usage was of the fame nature, but worse; for
they each night compelled me to go to Bed before seven of the Clock (stripped and
locked up as before) that they might take the opportunity of loose Rambles, and
then lying late in Bed in the morning by reason of the Evenings Debauchery, I
must lie still, let what importunities soever require my rising. Skirm, when I
demanded the reason of such dealing, would swear they would not leave the
Company of those Brave Wenches, whose Company they enjoyed the last night, for
to humor a pitiful Parson. Seeing they did not (as they term it) turn me over
on Monday, upon Teusday I wrote Letters to three Friends to come to me, but
being about to Seal them, Skirm demanded the sight of them, which being denied
him, he took away the Candle, and Pen and Ink to hinder my Sealing and
Subscribing them, telling me that I should not be permitted to send any where
any Letter of which he had not first the Reading. Neither found I any
opportunity of Writing until Thursday, when my Bailiffs bringing me to the
Tap-house Fire fell to Cards, and a Coachman (sometime before a Servant to the
Right Reverend the now Bishop of Chichester coming in and knowing me,
conveyed to me Pen, Ink and Paper, and while the two Honest Men were busy, I
wrote a Letter to my Brother, which the Coachman delivered. The day following
at Even my Brother came, whom they locked into a Chamber with me, promising to
return at our call, which we said would be within one quarter of an hour; but
when we called, the Chamberlain came to the door and told us that Skirm and
Smith were gone abroad with the Key. After some stay in a vain expectation of
their return, I forced open the Door, and my Brother departing, I went down and
sat by a fire until their coming. But then Skirm was filled with great wrath,
and with Dammees and other Execrations asked how I dared to open the Door? and
would I never leave those tricks of breaking Prison? with other such Language
mixed with Threatenings. But the next day I was brought into Court and turned
over a Prisoner to the Kings Bench Prison. The pretense for taking away my
Clothes at night was, that they feared I would make an escape. Whether that was
a legal way of securing me, I refer to better Judgments. But that they could
not fear any such thing after my coming to London, is manifest by these
reasons. On Sunday, the last day of our Journey Smith exchanged Horses with me,
I being not able any longer to ride the Jade on which they mounted me. Skirm
staying behind diverse times talking with Travelers, and Smith also sometimes,
I rode before and missing them waited their comin^ up. They also knew that I
very well understood the Road (leading from Oxford) which we traveled that
day, and that I as well understood that they knew it not; in all which respects
my escape (had I been inclined to it) would have been without difficulty.
Likewise at the Inn in Holborn (as I showed them after three nights lodging
there upon discourse of their misbehaviour) an escape was easy; For the Window
having a large folding Casement, and the Chamber being but one pair of Stairs
high, I could have let my self down by the Sheets tied one to another, and
covered my self with a Blanket until I had come to the House of an Aquaintance,
of whom I had many in the Neighborhood and in Grayes Inn. When they locked me
into my Chamber (as they did often) in the day time, when a rambling humor
possessed them, I might (as well as when I did it for my Brother) have opened the
Door and escapt without any ones observation. None of the House saw my Brother
or me come down, or him departing; which was a full conviction that I might
have given them the slip, if I pleased. So that the pretense was utterly
groundless; but mischievous men as they delight in ill doing, so would they
nevertheless be esteemed righteous and inoffensive; the repute is grateful,
although nothing more disliketh them than deserving it. But to look somewhat
back upon the penalties inflicted on me for my pretended Breach of the Prison;
(then which nothing is more notoriously known to be false) had it been real,
the vileness of the Prison and Cause under which I labored, and the odious
nastiness and condition of the Place considered, might in the esteem of men but
indifferently addicted to humanity, have excused the Act and mitigated the
Rigor, especially toward a Clergyman. But, alas, this was my fault, (as I too
much fear) this tied the Bonds and revetted the Irons, this led me through all
the dances of Ignominy. Again, had I not been assured by learned Counsel
confirming what experience had taught me, that the Goalers and Plaintiffs
calling me out of the Prison was a sufficient Discharge from the Execution, can
any man believe that I would publicly and directly go Home and continue at my
own House, and not rather have gone out of the way until I had made a
Composition? Any man of common understanding would have avoided errors, which
must have been of such unlucky consequence.

All the time of my Confinement in the Kings Bench, and before in the Country,
I was rated to the Poor beyond any Person in the Parish, notwithstanding all
that I had in the Parish was seized in Execution (for just Debts indeed but
illegally taken) and my Person in Durance at the same time under very hard
Circumstances. And both then and since I have been compelled to produce in the
Field two Musket Arms for the Malitia of the County; whereas the utmost Farm
of my Parsonage paid to my Predecessor was fifty seven pounds yearly Rent, the
Reparation of the Chancel and a large Parsonage House, First Fruits and Tenths
to the King, Charges at Visitations and other payments being all payable out of
those fifty seven pounds. Nor is any Incumbent in the County, whose benefice is
worth twenty or thirty pounds more than mine, charged with more than one Foot
Arms. Yet without respect to Imprisonment, Seizures in Execution of my Goods,
the annual Charge of the Rectory, and the smallness of the value, Distresses
have been diverse times levied (particularly in June last one of five pounds)
for fines laid upon me for non Appearance. All which things were done by
Instigation of Mr. Essex Merrick, (as I am well informed) and Distresses taken
upon any ones Cattle, which were upon the Ground, although it was sufficiently
known, that I had nothing left to be seized.

Being freed from my Imprisonment in the Bench and returning home in April 83.
the loss of my Worthy Parishioner and Friend Mr. Nathaniel Powel (though before
known, yet then) became to me more sensibly an affliction, especially because
his Death was shortly followed by his Eldest Daughters (having left no Son)
marriage with the before mentioned Mr. Lloyd of Grove his Son, a Gentleman who
with an affected and artificial (but easily discerned) smoothness labors to
cover whatsoever can be imagined to be couched in an ill natured, malicious and
covetous Bosom. Being allied to and intimate with William Skirm, and daily
conversant with Mr. Merick, his inclinations cannot be supposed to receive
disincouragement from them. But before my coming down, or any acquaintance with
him, he began to show what I must expect of him for the future; but above all
with a most unmanly Disingenuity practiced dissension between me and a very
near Friend. Nevertheless at my first acquaintance I refrained from making that
ground of variance, which was either matter of suspicion, or at most only such
noted Injuries, as were but the slips of an unguarded Tongue, and a raw
Judgment, which I might charitably think to be imposed upon. And although in
making up certain accounts between us I found some foul practices, yet those I
interpreted to proceed from the ill information of Servants, who had no other
way of creeping into a Masters Favor, but at the passages of an abused Ear.
And so hoping (after I had ascertained the truth of my accounts) by yiedling
and receding from my Right at the beginning to purchase a lasting good
Neighborhood, he obtained in a manner his own desires. But to me (and will be
ever to those who treasure up hopes in vessels made of ill-seasoned Timber)
these consessions were always unfortunate. Although I had been often wont to
say, that Good Men would not offer their Minister less than his Right, and that
Bad Men are so far from being won by his connivance that by it they become
daily worse and worse; yet I foolishly transgressed those bounds, within the
compass of which my Observation had prescribed me walks. My Tithes of Hey,
Wool and other sorts of Privy Tithes he set out in what measure he pleased,
not allowing me or my Servants to see whether there were a fair Division. My
Tithe Corn was, some manifestly discovered to be falsely set out; some devoured
with Swine and other Cattle after Tithing. He, his Wife and Servants seeing the
Waste without driving, or commanding the Cattle to be driven away; othersome
was clean devoured after Reaping before Binding, and (forsooth) because many
Loads of Corn were so eaten, I must have the Straw, which was left, set out for
Tithes. Diverse in those Parts have an ill sort of Husbandry permitting such
waste, and accounting that no damage, that is sustained by their own Cattle.
This received opinion that their loss would be small, but mine thereby total,
encouraged him to this malicious Project. His Servants frequently entered my
House without knocking at the Door, even after Prohibition, and threw into it
Tithes, which had been rejected as unduly set forth in respect to both their
quality and quantity. Neither was Mr. Lloyd contented to be vexatious alone,
but encouraged the rest of my Parishoners to the like, although two only
imitated him, the rest approving the reasonableness of mine or my Servants
seeing my Dues paid in Wait and Measure, as their nature required. But to
conclude my Discourse of this Gentleman, in October last three of his Servants
bringing Tithe Wool in such manner as is before mentioned, the Sheep having
been shorn a fortnight before, I denied to receive it. The Servants were very
rude in behavior and language, in which I since understand them to be forward
by their Masters instructions, hoping to provoke me to Passion, Of which
notwithstanding they failed, yet something said by me was managed to some
degree of Revenge, although short of expectation. Their undecent words and
gestures extorted from this question; Do you thus speak and act by your Masters
Order? To them answering, Yes, I replied, then your Master is a Knave and a
Coxcomb. Mr. Merrick and Mr. Lloyd consulting how to punish so great an
Enormity, concluded it required security for the Good Behavior, and appearance
at the next Quarter Sessions to answer to an Indictment. Hereupon Mr. Merrick
issued forth a very strict Warrant against me, and I being apprehended before
eight of the Clock in the morning, was carried about from place to place, and
detained in the Constables custody until past nine at night before I could be
discharged. But there was a farther design than thus barely to render me a
ridiculous Subject of the Vulgars Chat, which had taken effect, had not the
Chief Constable after his apprehending me received information, that upon my
arrival at Pembroke the Undersheriff was ready to arrest me; which he honestly
and kindly avoided bringing me before another Justice (as soon as I had gotten
security) and not before Mr. Merrick.

How justifiable Mr. Merrick's Warrant was, and the following dedainer of my
Person I undertake not to determine, but think what was done to be so unusual,
that in all the travels of his Brains to furnish his empty Rooms, he never met
with a President for it. Mr. Lloyd was no way by Birth or Office raised so high
as to be in danger of suffering diminution by so slight a Character; nor does
his ingenious virtue exempt him (if there were such danger) from severer
sufferings in most men's in those Parts (who know him) daily discourses. If I
exceed the Rules of Modesty, Mr. Merrick (whom I believe to know it) will
justify my forced assertion, That Mr. Lloyd is inferior to any Apology he can
pretend to make for himself as injured, if either his Birth, Education, or
(what most signaliseth a Gentleman) Honesty be respected. And my further Appeal
to Mr. Merrick enquireth, What would have become of himself some time since, if
words of an higher nature and consequence uttered by him against his Superiors
at a vast distance had been taken into strict examination? But for taking
notice of such things he thinks me fit to be whipped; only my hopes of being
received into Protection sufficient to supersede his and the unmerciful
sentences of others, do remove the fear, and move me confidently to cast my
self down an humble Petitioner;

That the Hands of the Sons of Violence may at last be restrained from
afflicting a poor Clergyman, who sincerely delights in the Peace of the
Church, and perfectly despises himself except in those things, which he
steadfastly believes to conduce to its Promotion.

IN this Relation is seen an unwearied Spirit of Malignity pursuing me; for
what just Causes, (God and my Conscience bear me witness) I know not. No man
living can more than my self heartily desire the repose of a quiet life; and
that (however stumbling occasions and Rocks of offense were still thrown in my
way) I have always studied to tread the safest and most certain measures
thereof, is my invincible Comfort. I challenge the whole World to make
discovery of any Act, whereby I endeavored to discompose another, either
maliciously or idly. The too too many errors of my life I will not palliate
by any excuse; yet am so far from taking pleasure in doing an Injury, that in
the presence of my allknowing Redeemer I do affirm that I have always more
lamented the condition of those, by whom I suffered, than my sufferings, and
could willingly again undergo them, if God would be pleased to accept my
toleration for their indemnity. That I would not by undecent submissions to her
enemies labor to purchase Peace is no argument of any turbulent motion in my
affections, neither ought it to tend to my Condemnation.

But whereas some, to whom my Case has been delivered, have demanded, and
others will probably demand, how it has happened that in a numerous Orthodox
Clergy my self only should be oppressed with these weights? My answer cannot be
expected to be much more certain, than to an enquiry, How one Vessel has been
shattered by a Storm in that Road, where many Fleets have before safly sailed?
The account whereof, because Providence has not, I dare not pretend to give.
But if a strong supposition possess any, that my ill doing has occasioned
dissatisfactions and enraged men to a revenge of received injuries, I can purge
my self no otherwise than by my asseverations in the preceding Paragraph, and
a request of reflection upon past times, whether men much better than the
highest Charity can presume me to be, have not singly fallen by the Arts of
malicious Confederates. And furthermore, as the cruelties of the two
Vndersheriffs of Pembrokeshire surmounted the others by many degrees, so were
they least known, it being impossible for me any way to exasperate them, whom I
had never seen or heard of before I fell into their griping Tallons. But my
Case is not single; For Mr. Thomson has in Bristol met with the same Swearing
Dammee Party, who at first by hurling at me holy Dirt and consecrated
Subornations and Perjuries, weakened my hopes of reaping for my Master a
plentiful Harvest by the exercise of my Function. God be thanked that their
open Acts of Malice and Impudence are dwindled into the corner whirperings of
Envy, and that they gall themselves whilst able only sneakingly to traduce him.

Neither can I forbear (which is my excessive grief) to affirm, That the
Orthodox Clergy are not so numerous as many believe, the number of them (I
reckon none Orthodox, who is not duly and strictly Conformable) is far
inferior to that of Trimmers and Half Sized Men. But some few years since such
was the paucity of them on Public Occasions of Clergymens meeting, and so
scorned were they being scattered among the full Tribes, who were contented
with any Worship, which was Golden, that they could not assist but only pity
one another. Exactness of Conformity does not only stir up the gall of
Nonconformists barely, but more dangerously and immoderately moves to
expressions of coffeehouse the tongues of those men, whose aim is to be
thought moderate by neglecting their Duty and Superiors, and paying an
unreasonably obsequious Deference to their Inferiors. When Dr. Ironsides
Bishop of Bristol required of his Clergy stricter Observance of the Rubric and
Canon (particularly, that Children in health should be baptized at the Font,
and that the Parents of the Sick should be held to an engagement of bringing
them into the Church with Godfathers, etc. in case of recovery; and also that
Thansgiving for Women after Childbirth should be publicly given in the Church,
and at the Altar) when these and some other things were commanded, the humor
of the People and matter of interest was most in debate by the plurality of the
Clergy, and those few who obeyed, were even derided by their Brethren, who also
came into their Parishes to Baptize the Children and give Thanks for the Wives
of the proud Opposers of Discipline, and by these practices sowed and somented
contention. It Is almost incredible what Invectives and ill Reports are daily
scattered to worthy Mr. Thomsons prejudice by Clergymen in and near Bristol;
and all this occasioned by his very regular Conformity. The same Pride which
hinders their imitation of what is so highly commendable, does also give them
troublesome thoughts, that singular Piety accuses them of culpable Remissness.

I humbly request a candid interpretation of the foregoing words, there being
no design, by comparison or otherwise to put a fair Character upon my self.
Only in my own vindication from suffering as an ill Doer, I have made use of
other Names and Instances to show Conformity to be ground sufficient for the
indirect Practices of my Adversaries. And as no affectation of singularity, nor
any other motives, but a perfect sense of Duty has hitherto obliged me to give
them this Cause, so my hopes are that I shall not whilst living cease from it.
Moreover as my Delight in Conformity is purely without outward respects; as I
pray and hope that no desires of worldly Felicity will be able to baffle my
Constancy and Patience, if it please God that they are to be further exercised;
so I declare my willingness (if God permit) to serve Him and my Prince in
Peace. Which to obtain by other probable means than this Manifestation, is
beyond the reach of my Judgment. That nothing is here written out of an
unchristian seeking Revenge, is my solemn Declaration before God, Angsel and
Men, my earnest wishes of mine eye seeing its desire upon mine enemies, being
their humility and amendment. That their Punishment, while they continue
obstinate, is in some measure conducing to the Churches welfare is my firm
opinion. But to inflict it my self, their power, numbers and riches considered,
is so far beyond my ability, that I cannot in any measure promise to secure my
self from new additions of violence. But that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty, according to my bounden Duty, I humbly and
heartily beseech the ever-blessed Fountain of all Goodness to encompass with
the Pledges of his Love our most Gracious Sovereign, His Royal Brother with all
that are related to them, and those, who being in Subordinate Authorities, do
either direct us in the way of Religion, or guard it for our safe conduct to
Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

