The Golden Apophthegms Of His Royal Majesty KING CHARLES I. AND HENRY Marq.
of Worcester, Both Divine and Moral, as they were delivered upon several
occasions in the Time of the late unhappy War between His Majesty and the old
Parliament,

Wherein is observable, I. The Witty Sayings of the Marquess of Worcester, and
his Majestys Prudent Answers thereunto. II. The notable expressions of the
Marquess upon his leaving a Bag of Gold in a poor town upon his journey
toward Ragland. III. His Noble Interpretaion on the Magpy that builded on the
Crown that was on the Head of the Effigies of King Edward that stood over the
Gate of the Castle at Carnarvan in Wales. And how they were disperced by
Jack-daws who were after beaten away by Buzzards, all which he compares to
Bishops, Presbyterians and Independents. IIII. The Pleasant Conference between
the Lord Marquess and the L. Genesis Fairfax. V. Some delightful Discourse between
the Marquess and his daughter the Countess of Glamorgan. VI. The Honorable
Description of the Royal Oak by the Marquess, when his Majesty was playing at
Bowls on Ragland Castle Green. VII. Several remarkable Passages between His
Royal Majesty and the Marquess touching Lebanon, Naboths Vineyard, London,
York, Lincoln, Troy, Ragland Castle, Naseby fight, Windsor, Alexander,
Aristotle and the Lord John Somerset.


Written by THO. BAILEY Dr. in Divinity

Entered and Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, over against the lower Pump in Grub-street,
1660.

HAving well considered the worth of these witty sayings, I shall not hold a
Candle (as it were) to the Sun, by writing an Epistle, the work in it self
being a Storehouse of excelent use both for Wit and Wisdom.

Apophthegm 1. Afflictions cannot be esteemed with wise and godly men any
argument of sin in an innocent person, more then the impurity of wicked men is
amongst good men any sure token of innocence.

2. That in the direct worship of God himself we ought to be guided by the word
of God, and not otherwise, but in the form and order of Ceremonies, that indeed
is solely left to the Church.

3. When the King first entered the Castle of Ragland, the Marquess kissed the
Kings hand, and rising up again he saluted his Majesty with this complement, My
Lord, I am not worthy: the King replied unto the Marquess, my Lord, I may well
answer you again, I have not found so great faith in Israel, for no man would
trust me with so much money as you have done: to which the Marquess replied, I
hope your Majesty will prove a Defender of the Faith.

4. Prepare for war when thou prepoundest for peace, otherwise thy peace will
be hardly obtained, or too highly prized, whatever thy first Article be, let
disbanding, be the last. A cunning Curre, though he wag his tail will show his
teeth, the best Treaty is with a drawn sword, and the safest peace is concluded
under a Buckler.

5. When King Charles had made his repair to Raegland, after the Battle of
Naseby, taking occasion thank the Marquess for some money lend his Majesty, the
Marquess returned his Majesty this answer, Sir I had your word for my money,
but I never thought I should be soon repaid, for now you have given me thanks,
I have all I look for.

6. The lower sort of people are desirous of novelties, and apt for change
weighing Government with the scales of their own fortune, they are too sensible
of evils in present, to fear worse in future, let such know they move in their
particular orbs, not in the common sphere, and that the alteration in the
heavens make no star greater, which way soever the change moves, a Cobbler shall
be but a Cobbler still.

7. It is a Princely alchimy out of necessary wars to extract an honorable
Peace, and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince to thirst after Peace then
Conquest. Blessedness is promised to the Peacemaker, not to the Conqueror. It
is a happy State whose peach has a peaceful hand, and a martial heart, able
both to use peace, and to manage War.

8. His Majesty being very well grounded in the true Protestant Religion, in a
Discourse concerning Sectaries, said truly, That there were but two good
sentences in a Sectaries Sermon, the first of necessity good, which is the
Text, the second by consequent, which is the end, and thereby an end of an
impertinent Discourse.

9. Sir Henry Bard, who was Lord Bellamount, coming into the Hall of Ragland,
and seeing so many Tables furnished with food, and feeders, swear that his
Majesty had a plot to destroy that Family first, in borrowing all the old man's
money, and then in coming thus to eat up his victuals: which his Majesty
hearing smiled at: but the Marquess asked the man who made the relation unto
him, of what Garrison the Lord Bellamount was Governor; it was told his
Lordship, that he was Governor of Cambden house; the Marquess replied, that
when the King had done as he said, that then his Majesty might go to his
Garrison, and there he might have Cambdens Remains.

10. There be three sorts of Government, Monarchical, Historical, Democratical,
and they are apt to fall three several ways into ruin. The first by Tyranny,
the second by Ambition, the last by tumult. A Commonwealth grounded upon any of
these, is but of short continuance, but being wisely mingled, either guard the
other, and makes the Government exact.

11. In the war, the King came to a Castle, and told the Lord thereof, that he
thought not to have stayed with his Lordship above three days, but his
occasion requiring a longer stay, and considering that it was a Garrison, and
that his provision might be spent by so great a pressure, was willing his
Lordship should take what provision the Country would afford for his present
maintenance, and recruir: to which his Lordship answered, I humbly thank your
Majesty, but my Castle will never stand long, if it leans upon the Country,
and I had rather be brought to a morsel of bread, then any morsels of bread
should be brought in to entertain your Majesty.

12. Sir Thomas Somerset, brother to the Marquess of Worcester, had a house
which they called Troy, five miles from Ragland Castle: this Sir Thomas being a
complete Gentleman of himself, delighted himself much in fine Gardens and
Orchards, whereby the benefit of art the earth was made so grateful to him at
the same time, that the King happened to be at his brothers house, that it
yielded him wherewithal to send his brother Worcester a present, and such an
one as the time and place considered was able to make the King to believe, that
the Sovereign of the Planets had new changed the Poles, and that Wales, the
refuse and outcast of the fair Garden of England, had fairer and riper fruit
then England bowels had on all her beds, this presented to the Marquess, the
Marquess would not suffer to be presented to the King, by any other hand then
his own, in comes the Marquess at the latter end of Supper, led by the arm,
with a slow pace, expressing much a Spanish gravity, with a silver dish in each
hand filled with rarities, and a little basket on his arm, as a reserve, where
making his obeisance, he thus speaks, May it please your Majesty, if the four
Elements could have been robbed to have entertained your Majesty, I think I had
but done my duty; but I must do as I may, if I had sent to Bristol for some
good things to entertain your Majesty, that had been no wonder at all, If I had
procured from London some goodness, that might have been acceptable to your
Majesty, but here I present your Majesty (placing his dishes upon the Table)
with what, that came not from Lincoln, that was not London, that is not York
that is to be, but I assure your Majesty, that this present came from Troy:
whereupon the King smiled, and answered the Marquess, Truly my Lord, I have
heard, That corn now grows where Troy Town stood, but I never thought there had
grown any apricocks there before. Whereupon the Marquess replied, any thing to
please your Majesty: when my Lord Marquess departed the presence, one told his
Lordship, that he would make a very good Courtier, the Marquess said I
remember I said one thing that may give you some hopes of me, Any thing to
please your Majesty.

13. The first night his Majesty came into Ragland Castle, the King desired to
see the great Tower, where his Lordship did use to keep his Treasure, his
Majesty spoke unto Doctor Baily then standing by to fetch the Keys; he ran
down to the Marquess and acquainted him with the Kings pleasure, who would
needs bring them to the King, and show him the Tower himself: when the King saw
the Marquess bringing the keys himself, he thus spoke unto the Marquess, My
Lord, there are some men so unreasonable, as to make me believe, that your
Lordship has good store of gold yet left within this Tower, but I knowing how
I have exhausted you, together with your own occasions could never have
believed it until now I see you will not trust the keys with any but your
self: to which the Marquess made this reply, Sir, I was so far from giving
your Majesty any such occasion of thought by this tender of my duty, that I
protest unto you, that I was once resolves that your Majesty should have lain
there, but that I was loath to commit your Majesty to the Tower.

14. When the King first entered the gates of Ragland, the Marquess delivered
his Majesty the keys according to the ordinary custom the King restoring them
to the Marquess, the Marquess said, I beseech your Majesty to keep them if
you please, for they are in a good hand, but I am afraid that ere it be long, I
shall be forced to deliver them into the hands of who will spoil the Complement.

15. King Charles coming to Ragland, when the tall Cedar of our Lebanon was
brought so low, and those Sycomores flourished when the Royal Oak was in the
fall of the leaf, it happened that his Majesty was at Bowls upon Ragland Castle
Green, a place proudly situated, where after he had ended his Recreation, his
Majesty was pleased to delight himself with observing the Country round about,
it happened, that one Prichard, the Kings partner at bowls, presuming more upon
his good bowling, then good manners, continued that familiarity that should
have ended with the rubbers, showing the King where his house stood, and told
his Majesty he must look through the wood, and he might see a white thing, and
that was it: moreover acquainted his Majesty what the Lord of Worcester had
advised him, viz. to cut down some of those trees, that the house might plainly
be discerned from the Green, whereby his Lordship when he wanted a good bowler
might make a sign, and so have him at a beck: to which the King replied, Mr.
Prichard, let me give you better advise, put up more trees where the trees are
so thin, that my Lord of Worcester may not see thy house at all. The Marq. of
Worcester supposing the King had dreamed of this greediness, of purchasing all
the Land which was near unto him, showed his Majesty a row of trees, and told
the King, that beyond that row of trees stood a pretty Tenement, and because he
would not have Naboths vineyard to be an eyesore to him, he had planted those
trees to hoodwink his eyes from such temptations.

Apophthegms of the Earl of Worcester.
1. The Marquess had a mind to tell the King as handsomely as he could of some
of his (as he thought) faults, and thus he contrived his plot against the time,
that his Majesty was wont to give his Lordship a visit, as commonly he used to
do after dinner, his Lordship had the book of John Gower lying before him on
the Table, the King casting his eye upon the book, told the Marquess, that he
had never seen it before, O said the Marquess, it is a book of books, which if
your Majesty had been well versed in, it would have made you a King of Kings,
Why so my Lord, said the King? Why said the Marquess, here is set down how
Aristotle brought up and instructed Alexander the great in all his rudiments
and principles belonging to a Prince; and under the persons of Alexander and
Aristotle, he read the King such a lesson, that all the standers by were amazed
at his boldness, and the King supposing that he had gone further then his Text
would have given him leave, asked the Marquess, whether he had his lesson by
heart, or whether he spoke out of the book: the Marquess replied, Sir, if you
could read my heart, it may be, you might find it there, or if your Majesty
please to get it by heart, I will lend it you upon these conditions, 1. That
you read it, 2. That you make use of it: but perceiving how some of the new
made Lords fretted and bit the thumbs, at certain passages in the Marquesses
discourse he thought a little to please his Majesty, though he displeased them,
the men who were so much displeased already protesting unto his Majesty, that
no man was so much for the absolute power of a King, Aristotle, desiring the
book out of the King he would show him one remarkable passage to that purpose,
turning to that place, that had this verse, viz.

A King can kill, a King can save, A King can make a Lord a knave, And of a
knave a Lord also. Whereupon there were diverse new made Lords slunk out of the
room, on which the King said, At this rate you will drive away all my Nobilty.

2. The Marquess traveling, was as he thought surprised by enemies, but
recovering the top of a high mountain, by the advantage of the ground, he could
see the enemy marching off another way, at which sight the Marquess dwelt with
his eyes a little longer upon that object then the L. John Somerset his Son
thought convenient, whereunto the Marquess answered, O Son, I love to see my
own danger, especially when it is marching off.

3. The Earl of Worcester traveling toward Ragland, at a certain Inn in a
poor town, where he lay, by the carelessness of servants left behind him 1000 l.
in Gold, being hid under a bench, and forgot to be taken away, the money was
never missed until they came to their journeys end at night, and it being told
my Lord that so much was missing, and where they had left it, my Lord made no
other words of it but these, You talk of a cheap reckoning, but I never paid so
dearly for a nights lodging in all my life: who would think that a man should
leave so much money behind him in such a lousy Inn? On that stood by at that
time told the Marquess, that it was a hundred to one if ever he h^^^d of his
money again, it was such a beggarly house, O Peace, said the Marquess, if they
will not be known of the money, you shall see it will be a brave Inn in a short
time: this money was sent after, and very honestly restored, and delivered into
the messengers hands that came for it. Being brought unto the Marquess, there
was much wondering at the honesty of the woman of the house, others praised the
whole town seeing it was generally known. The Marquess told them, It may be the
town never saw so much money before, and therefore they knew not what to make of
it.

5. The Earl of Clamorgan, the Marquess of Worcesters eldest son, accompanied
with diverse of high rank and quality, as they were on their journey for
Ireland, quartered in the town of Carnarvan, a Sea Town in North Wales, where
they were entertained with discourse at the Table, by some of the County
Gentlemen, who informed them of the falling of an old Welsh Prophecy at that
very time and place, which was viz. That there should come a magpy, and build
her nest in the Crown, then should come a Jackdaw, and beat away the magpy, and
after that there should come a Buzzard, that should beat away the Jackdaw, and
then there should be seen no Crown, but that of thorns upon the Kings head, at
last there should come a Band of men from a far Country, and take away the
thorns and then the Crown should appear again: this they said, was thus
hitherto accomplished, viz. Over the gate of Carnarvan Castle, there was the
picture of King Edward the first, in full proportion, with a Crown upon his
head, there did come a magpy, and did build her nest in the said Kings Crown,
and a Jackdaw did beat away the magpy, and the Buzzard the Jackdaw: this we
assure your honor to be true; for all our Townsmen have observed it. Dinner
being ended, they all went unto the Castle gate, being greedy to satisfy their
eyes with the sight, as well as their ears with the Relation; where being come
they beheld the sight, the nest being disordered by the fighting of the
combatants, and the materials of the nest made such a mournful aspect, as if
they had been Artificially pleated upon the Kings head. The Earl of Clamorgan
could not endure the sight but straightway commanded the nest to be pulled
down, the materials of which was such, as never any bird builded her nest
with, viz. White thorn: the story being related to the Marquess of Worcester,
after some pause he said, that is the nickname, which the Roundheads use to
give the Bishops: and none about him guessing at his meaning, he said, as I
take it, they used to call the Bishops magpies, whom they reproach for building
their nests in the Crown, then came the Presbyterian Jackdawes, and beat them
out, and the next thing that you shall see, will be the Independent Buzzards,
which drive them away, and who comes next God knows: but asking further whether
it was an open or an Imperial Crown, answer being made that it was open, O
then, said the Marquess, that was the reason the Kings Crown was too open, had
it been close at top with the Cross over head, such unlucky birds could never
have come there to have built their nests.

6. Antisthines being asked of one what learning was most necessary for man's
life, answered, To unlearn that which is naught.

7. The Marquess talking of an old drunken fellow, who having used his body to
disorder in drinking all his life time, at last giving it over, presently dyed,
Oh said the Marquess, If you take a brand out of the fire, that is thoroughly
burnt it will fall in pieces, but if you let it ly there still, it may remain a
pretty while before it turn to a^hes.

8. During the Siege of Ragland, there came a Musket Bullet in at the Window of
the withdrawing room, where my Lord was used to entertain his friends with his
pleasant discourses after Dinners and Suppers, which glancing upon? little
Marble pillar of the window, and from thence hit the Marquess upon the side of
the head, and fell down flatted upon the Table, which breaking in pieces the
Pillar, made such a noise in the rome, that the Countess of Glamorgan who stood
in the same window, run away, as if the house had been falling down upon her
head, crying out O Lord, O Lord, but finding her self more afraid then hurt,
she returned back again, no less excusing her self, as she was pleased to call
it rudeness to her Father, then acknowledging her fears to all the company: to
whom the Marq. said, Daughter, you had reason to run away when your Father was
knocked on the head, and pausing some while, and turning the flatted bullet
round with his finger, he further said, Gentlemen, Those who had a mind to
flatter me, were wont to tell me, that I had a good headpiece in my younger
days, but if I do not flatter my self, I think I have a good headpiece in my
old age, or else it would not have been musket proof.

9. There was a young and beautiful Lady, who was showing the Marquess, that
the Colors that hung on such a Tower, was one of the Curtains of her bed. To
which he replied, Madam. I would you would set the little boy that uses to
stand behind that Curtain, on the top of that Tower, that we may see whether or
no he would drive away all those men with his Bow and Arrows. To which the Lady
replied, Cupid never raised a siege in his life, but he has taken many a
strong hold: Then said my Lord, I shall tell you how you shall make yours
impregnable. How my Lord said the Lady? He said unto he, Whatsoever you see a
handsome young man be sure you shut your eyes, or else he will take the Fort of
your Virginity, fl^ing in at your Windows.

10. The Marquess was one day reading of us a Lecture of patience in our
adversity: amongst the rest of those witty Sayings which came from him, he told
us that there was nothing so bad, but it was good for something; for said he if
there were no silence there would be no Music; for the sudden stops which are
in Music add to the grace and perfection of the Art. Ignorance is a spur to
Knowle^ge, Da^kness a Pavilion to the Almighty, A Cabbinor Drawn Chamber for us
to sleep in. A Dungion for the Judge to punish his Delinquents, and a foil for
the Painter to make his shadows: so are afflictions good for our instructions,
and adversities for our amendments.

11. When it was told the Marquess, that some would warrant him that if he
would, he might be Duke of Somerset, he made them this Reply, When I was E. of
Worcester I was well to live, since I was a Marq. I am worse by one hundred
thousand pounds, and if I should be a Duke, I should be an arrant Beggar;
wherefore I had rather if I might go back again to my Earldom, `then at this
rate keep on my pace to the Dukedom of Somerset.

12. After much conference betwixt the Marq. and Genesis Fairfax, wherein ^any
things were requested of the Genesis by the Marquess, and being as he thought
himself happy in the attainment, his Lordship was pleased to make a merry
Petition to the General, as he was taking his leave, viz. in the behalf of a
couple of young Pigeons, which were wont to come to his hand, and feed out of
it constantly, in whose behalf he desired the General that he would be pleased
to give him his Protection for them, fearing the little command that he should
have over his Soldiers in that behalf. To which the General said I am glad to
see your Lordship so merry. Oh said the Marquess, you have given me no other
cause; for I resolved to undergo even the worst of evils you were able to lay
on me before ever I took up Arms for my Sovereign, therefore wonder not that I
am so merry.

12. Vespasian asked of Apollonius what was the cause of Nero's ruin; who
answered, That Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government he did always
wind up the strings too high, or let them down to low.

14. Some men have so much of the Serpents subtilty, that they forget the Doves
simplicity.

15. Justice should be blind and friendly, it is not by it, that those that be
in Authority should reward their friends, or cross their enemies.

16. misfortunes are not acceptable in any kind, yet those are endured with
most ease, that come rather by destiny than deserving.

17. The Marquess of Worcester, called for a glass of Claret Wine, it was
told him by his Physician that Claret wine was naught for his Gout, the Marq.
replied, what my old friend Claret? Nay, give it me in spite of all Physicians
and their Books, it never shall be said, that I forsook my friend for to
pleasure my enemy.

18. When it was told his Lordship not long before he dyed, that leave was
obtained by the Parliament, that he might be buried in Windsor Castle, within
the great Chapel, and wherein diverse of his Ancestors ly buried, with some
spritlinesse he spoke aloud, God bless us all, why then I shall take a better
Castle when I am dead, then they take from me whilst I was alive.

19. The Marq. being weak in body, and told by some friends, that when he was
dead they would Petition for money to bury him, He replied, Then will they
appoint those to dispose of the time and manner of my burial, and you shall see
that they, being it is so near the good time, will cause me to be buried
according to the Directory in spite of Christmas day, upon Christmas and so
they did.

FINIS.

