THE LATE SPEECH AND TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM GOGOR, One of the Three desperate and
incorrigible TRAITORS, Execute at the Grass Market in Edinburgh, the Eleventh
day of March, 1681.
For disowning His Sacred Majesty's Authority; and owning and adhering to these
Bloody and Murdering Principles, contained in that Execrable Declaration at
Sanquhar, Cargils Traitorous Covenant, and Sacrilegious Excommunicating of the
KING, by that Arch-Traitor Cargil, and avowing of themselves to be bound in
Conscience, and by their Covenant, to Murder the KING, and all that Serve under
Him; being Armed (the time they were apprehended) for that purpose.

MEn and Brethren, these are to show you, that I am come here this day, to lay
down my Life for owning Christ and his Truths; and in so much as we are
Calumniate and Reproached, by lying upon our Names, and dreadful upbraiding of
us, with saying, That we are not led by the Scriptures, and say we have taken
other Rules to walk by; I take the Great God to be Witness against all and
every one of them, that I take the Word of God to be my Rule, and I never
designed any thing but honesty and faithfulness to Christ: And for owning of
Christ and the Scriptures this day I am murdered; for adhering to the
Born-down-truths, I am Condemned to die; and I also leave my Testimony, and bear
Witness against all the Apostate Ministers this day, that have taken favor at
the Enemies hands: The only thing they take away my Life for, is, Because I
disowned all those Bloody Traitors not to be Magistrates, which the Word of God
casts off, and we are bound in Conscience and Covenant to God, to disown all
such as are Enemies to God, and which they are avowed and open Enemies to
Christ; And they have made void my Word, says the Lord: Say what ye will
Devils, say Wretches, say Enemies, say what ye will, we are owning the Truth of
Christ, and his written Word; and condemn me in my Judgment who will, I leave
my Blood on one and all that say we are not led by the Scriptures: I leave my
Blood upon you again to be a Witness against you, and a Condemnation in the
great Day of Judgment. I have no more to say, I think this may mitigate all
your Rage; and so forth, I leave his Enemies to his Curse, to be punished into
Everlasting Wrath, for now and ever Amen.

Sic subscribitur, WILL. GOGOR.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. and sold by W. Davies 1681.


