A MANUAL OF Practical Divinity: For the Benefit of weak CHRISTIANS; the
informing their Judgments, the quickening their Affections, and directing their
Conversation. WITH Several Things that may be of use for the Convincing and
Awakening those that are yet in their natural Estate.

By MARTIN FYNCH, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Tetney in Lincolnshire.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles near the West
end of Paul's, 1658.

To the READER.
I Published some years since a little Treatise, called Milk for Babes in
Christ, which foundsome acceptance with some new born Babes in Christ,
especially in the West Country; and those parts (as I am informed) have taken
off a great part of two Editions of that Book; and some there, to whom I am a
stranger, do desire I should publish someting further; for whose sake, with
others, I have written these few sheets, wherein there is some more Milk for
Babes in Christ, and a little stronger Meat for those that are more grown
Christians; but I can pretend to little of that: might I but feed any of
Christ's Lambs, it were much for such a poor Creature as I am. What you have
here is especially for weak Christians, whom sometimes weak gifts may edify:
God does not all by men of great parts, but uses also the weak things of the
world, that no flesh might glory in his presence. Its God that makes our gifts
to be accepted of the Saints, and useful to them, yea God makes the weak gifts
of his servants sometimes very acceptable and refreshing to his people: what is
wanting in our writings he can supply by the presence and supply of his own
Spirit in the reading of them. The wind blows where it lists, so does Gods
Spirit breath in whose books (as well as preaching) he pleases, and more or
less as it pleases him; without which all our writings prove to others jejune
and dry. One writes and another, one preaches and another; thou know not
which shall prosper, the ones labors or the others, or whether both shall be
alike good; for all our works are in the hand of the Lord. The Assistance of
Gods Spirit in writing or preaching, the spiritual Affections God gives, the
sincerity, simplicity and humility of a man's own heart, and some faith that God
gives of his blessing, satisfy a man's own heart much in such undertaking.
Nothing becomes those that the Lord makes any use of in these things, more then
an unfeigned humility of heart, having no confidence in themselves and
performances, and a true dependence upon the Lord in all they do. Those that
cannot add one cubit to their own stature by all the Light and gifts they have
without the gracious Influences and workings of the Spirit upon their hearts;
what can their Light and Gifts help others (communicated by preaching or
writing) without the concurrence of the same Spirit? What then are we, or any
of our Labors, that we should not say, We and they are nothing? And if God will
accompany any of them with his blessing, its his free Grace. How easily can God
blast all those Sermons and Books that are preached and printed in the pride of
a man's own heart? How often has the Lord said in such cases, there is so much
self there, I will not be there, and so the performance is lost? We know Gods
Spirit has not so wrought in the preaching of the word for conversion of
souls, as it has done formerly. It may be reading of good books is not so
blessed to men's souls neither as it has been: few are converted, yet more
preaching (through Mercy) amongst us then ever: none will complain of too much
preaching, though they do of too much printing. But what is the reason that so
few are converted? Is not there excellent gifts for preaching, possibly
excelling in some respect, the gifts and clearness of the light of former Ages?
but yet there must be the Arm of the Lord revealed, the mighty drawing of the
Father, without which, men cannot come to Christ. And it may be that before the
Lord accompany the preaching of the word with much success, the Lords Servants
shall not only in a doctrinal way know that its God that gives the Increase:
but their hearts shall be so possessed with the consideration of it, that they
shall lie more low before the Lord in their work, and cry mightily for the
pouring down of the Spirit: But how many mistaking these things will slight
outward means, because its Gods Spirit that makes all succesfull: this
temptation has not only taken with many grossly ignorant persons, who hearing
of Gods eternal Election, and of his distinguishing Grace throw up all outward
means presently, and in the sullenness of their spirits say, There is no Hope;
but also many professors of Religion have withdrawn themselves from a constant
and conscionable attendance upon the means of Grace. Therefore this I have
observed that it is expedient, when ever we speak to persons of that necessary
doctrine of the inward and efficacious workings of the Spirit to be that which
makes all ordinances succesfull, even then to give due cautions, that according
to the word, this is no ground of neglecting any outward Ordinances and duties.
But who sees not a formal spirit on the one hand, and a wanton spirit on the
other, breaking in upon us? The Lord put a stop to the spirit of error amongst
us, recover the dying withering, languishing spirits of Professors, send forth
a reconciling Spirit among his people, give more light into the Discipline of
his house, send forth more laborers into his harvest, and bless them that are
already at his work.

Tetney in Lincolnshire. 16. of (Vulg.) MARCH, 1658. MARTIN FYNCH.

The CONTENTS.
THE wicked and miserable estate of man by nature, chap. 1 How men deceive
themselves, and think that their estate is good, chap. 2 Great Salvation in
Christ for sinners. chapter 3 The freeness of the Salvation we have by Christ,
chap. 4 The Convictions and workings that are oftentimes upon men that are
never converted, chap. 5 The ways and temptations by which many souls miscarry
under legal workings, and a spirit of Bondage, chap. 6 The saving work of Gods
Spirit upon the heart, chap. 7 The woeful backsliding of many Professors and the
way of their Recovery. chap. 8 Of Assurance and Peace of Conscience. chap. 9
The Ministry of Angels, and their serviceableness to the Church, chap. 10 The
glorious times that shall be before the last day of Judgment, chap. 11 The
Influences of the Spirit, chap. 12 The Covenant between God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus, our Surety, chap. 13 The Saints comfort against Death, chap. 14 The
Holiness of Believers, chap. 15 The way of Believers joining in
Church Fellowship, chap. 16 The right use of the Law, chap. 17 The true
Humility that is in the Lords people. chap. 18 General Directions. chap. 19 How
the Lord is pleased effectually to call some after they have been long in their
natural estate, and have been very wicked. chap. 20
READER, What literal faults escaped, either in the copy or the printing, let
your Candor and understanding in reading mend them; the Author being so far
from the Press, must be excused.

Some Books printed and sold by Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles near the
West end of Paul's.
AN Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of England in Fol. The Faithful
Counselor, or the Marrow of the Law in English, in 4. to. The Privileges of
the People vindicated, in 4. to. All three by William Sheppard, Sergeant at
Law. The Retired Man's Meditation, or the Mystery and Power of Godliness by H.
Vane, Knight. The Prerogative of Popular Government: A Political Discourse in
two Books; the former containing the first Preliminary of Oceana, enlarged,
interpreted and vindicated: The second concerning ordination, against D. H.
Hammond, Dr. L. Seaman, and the Authors they follow: In which two Books is
contained the whole Commonwealth of the Hebrews, or of Israel, Senate, People
and Magistracy, as also the different Policies introduced into the Church of
Christ, during the time of the Apostles, by James Harrington, Esquire.
Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae, Justification without Condition, or the
free Justification of a Sinner, Explained, Confirmed and Vindicated, by W.
Air, Minister of the Gospel at New-Sarum. Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms of
Justification Examined and Answered by J. Crandon, in 4o. Seasonable
Instructions for these evil times: also Christ as a Father, sitting up with his
Children in their swooning state; being the sum of many Lectures painfully
preached upon the 1. Chap. of Paul to the Colossians, etc. by Nicholas Lockyer.
Mr. of Arts. An Exposition of the whole Book of Canticles, wherein the Text is
explained, and useful Observations raifed thereupon, by J. Robotham, in 4o. The
Extents and Limitation of Gospel-liberty, wherein is laid down an exact way to
end the present dissentions, and to preserve future Peace among the Saints;
whereunto is added good news from heaven to the worst of sinners on earth.
Gospel-holiness, or a Saving Sight of God, and the glorious Privilege of the
Saints; Both by Walter Graddock, Preacher of the Gospel, in 4o. A Description
of Jerusalem and the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished in the time of Jesus
Christ, with a Map, by H. Jesse, in 4o. A Little Cabinet richly stored with all
sorts of heavenly Varieties, and soul-reviving influencs, wherein there is a
remedy for every Malady, viz. Milk for Babes, and Meat for strong men, being an
abridgment of the Sum and substance of the true Christian Religion. No Power
but of God, and yet a Power in every Creature, wherein is showed that the
Almighty God is not wanting to us, in impowering of us; but we are wanting to
him, in not improving our Talents for him; Both written by Robert Purnel. A
Storehouse of Provision for further Resolution in several Cases of Conscience,
viz. of living above Ordinances, of walking in Fellowship with the unbaptized,
of Laying on of hands, etc. Also a small Catechism for Babes and little Ones:
all three by H. Jesse. Zions Glory discovered in the Churches and Ordinances
before the fullness of the Jews come in, by J. Proud. A Treatise containg three
things, viz. A Discovery of the unsupportable Burden of sin, to a heart that
is thoroughly convinced of sin. 2. The Restlesness of a soul to return to God,
who is so sensible of his withdrawing. 3. A Discovery of the sweet
entertainment that wandering hearts meet with in their Returns to God, by P.
Hobson. The Right Constitution of a Commonwealth, with some Errors of
Government and Rules o^ Policy, as laid down by Machiavel, and others, in 8o. A
Brief History containing most of those notable Occurrences and Revolutions that
happened in those late Contests between King and Parliament; being a short
mention of things from 1637. to 1648. by T. May, Esquire. Milk for Bubes in
Christ, or Meditations, Observations and Experiences, with diverse cases of
Conscience resolved; the glorious Privileges of them that are Christ's, with
the way to know whether we are of that blessed number; Also Election before the
foundation of the world asserted, and the Faith of Gods Elect what it is; by
Martin Finch, Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Tetney, in Licoln-shire, 8o. An Anti Diatribe or the Apology of some Ministers
and godly people, asserting the Lawfulness of their administering the Lords
Supper in a select Company; proving also the necessity of Examination, in order
to a more holy Church fellowship, being an answer to Mr. Humphrey's general
Admission; by H. Saunders, Minister of Hollesworth in Devon. Lazarus and his
Sisters discourse of Paradise, or a Conference about the excellent things o^
the other world. A Discoverer of some plots of Lucifer, and his Council against
the Children of men. An Essay upon two of Virgil's Eclogues, and two Books of
his Aeneids, translated by James Harrington, Esquire. The Gate of Tongues
unlocked and opened, or a Seed-time of all Tongues and Sciences, being a Short
way of teaching and thoroughly learning the Latin, English, French, etc. Hermes
Mercurius Trismegistus, his Divine Pimander in 17 Books, together with his
second book, called Asclepius, containing 15. Chapters, with a Commentary done
into English, by Dr. Everard. Some Sermons preached on several occasions by P.
Sterry, viz. The clouds in which Christ comes, in a Sermon from Rev. 1.7. The
Teaching of Christ in the soul, from M^t. 23. and 10. The coming forth of
Christ in the power of his death, from Psalm. 18.1. Divine Astrology, or a
Scripture Prognostication of the sad Events which ordinarily arise from the
good man's fall by death, being the substance of a Sermon preached at the
Funeral of Col. Will. Underwood, by George Cokayn, Preacher of the Gospel,
Soper-lane, London. Christian Experiences from Scripture-evidences under these
several heads, viz. 1. Comfort for Believers against their fears and
dismayings. 2. Comfort for Believers from their spiritual Incomes 3. Man's
fruitlesness without saving faith. 4. Counsel unto Saints as sojourners and
strangers. 5. Man's folly in determining by present Events or State of things,
by R. Coler, Preacher of the Gospel in Wiltshire. A Lamenting word, showing
how there is a Dissertion come upon us; and what are the Evils with whom they
are found, that have procured it unto us. A Collection of the Armies
Declarations, Engagements, Remonstrances, etc.
These written by T. Collier, viz.
The Right Constitution of a visible Church of Christ, with its Order and
Ordinances. The Day Dauning, relating to the Calling of the Jews, and Christ's
second Coming. The Confession of Faith of several Churches of Christ in the
West, signed by several Officers of the said Churches. A Catechism for the
Instruction of youth. A Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and an
enquiring Christian about the Authority of the Scriptures and the Principles of
the Quakers. The Personal Appearing and Reign of Christ's Kingdom on the Earth,
stated. An Antidote against the Infections of the times, or a Faithful
Watchword from Mount-Sion, to prevent the ruin of souls, whereby some special
considerations are presented to sinners; Admonition to Saints, and Invitation
to Backsliders: published for the good of all by the Elders and Messengers of
several Churches in Wales. A Warning Piece for the ^lumbring Virgins, or an
Alarm to the friends of the Bridegroom, being some awakning Meditations upon
Christ's own Watchword, Mat. 26.41. by Ge. Scortrech, Preacher of the Gospel in
Lincoln. recommended to the Reader by Joseph Caryl, William Greenhill. Geo.
Griffith.
Books against the Quakers.
A Faithful Discovery of a treacherous Design of Mystical Antichrist,
displaying Christ's Banners, but attempting to lay waste Scriptures, Churches,
Christ, Faith, Hope, etc. and establish. Paganism in England, being an
Examination of the Doctrines of the people called Quakers; by Joseph Kellet,
John Pomroy, Paul Glisson. A Confutation of the Quakers, being an Answer to
ninteen Quaeries propounded by them; and answered by S. Eaton, Minister of the
Gospel in Cheshire. A Testimony to the true Jesus, and the faith of him,
wherein the way of the people called Quakers, is examined and weighed, being an
Answer to James Nailors Book, called, Love to the Lost; by T. Higgenson. A
Looking-Glass for the Quakers, by T. Collier. The Conviction of James Nailer,
and his black Spirit demonstrated, by Lieutenant Ellis Bradshaw.
Books printed in the Welsh Language. VIZ.
The Bible with singing Psalms. The New Testament alone. The Practice of Piety.
The sincere Convert. Some part of the Works of Mr. Rees. Prichard sometimes
Vicar of Landyfre in the County of Carmarthen. Some Catechisms; together with
several other Books in Welsh.
Sold at the three Bibles in Pauls-Church-yard, near the West end.

CHAP. I. The wicked and miserable estate of man by Nature.
BY Nature our heart which should be the best part of us, is the worst, a deep
and bottomless pit of sin: God saw the imaginaton of the heart of man was only
evil continually, Genesis 5.5. God sees it whose eyes are so piercing like a
flaming fire; but few of us see it all our days, never until God anoint our
eyes with his eyesalve; then we cry out, we are unclean, we are unclean; God
many times begins in the conversion of a sinner with this, to show him the sin
of his nature, how desperately wicked his nature and heart is, beyond all the
sin that has broke out in his practice, that there is a great fire of sin upon
the hearth of the heart, from whence all those sparks fly out of the chimney of
the life and practice; O we are by nature full of sin as the Toad is full of
poison; and that poison we spit out is but little to what is within: this Root
of sin is of a spreading nature; it grows faster in wicked men's hearts then
Grace does in the Godly, that we grow worse and worse; and though by education,
afflictions, terrors of conscience, the branches may be lopt off, yet the Root
of sin in the heart does spread daily; O wretched men that we are, that our
heart which should be the Presence Chamber for the King of Heaven, that this is
a cage of unclean Birds! and when we want opportunities of Uncleanness, Theft,
Murder, Voluptuousness, outward pomp and applause, then our wicked hearts will
act over these things in a speculative way, delighting our selves in the
thoughts of them; Therefore it is that the Scripture sets out conversion by A
new heart, Ezekiel. 36. Washing the heart from wickedness, Jerem. 4.14. and
forsaking our thoughts, Esaias 55. because our hearts are so opposite to God by
nature, and so contrary to the heart that God puts into us when he makes us new
Creatures; and therefore it is that when our eyes are opened we grow sick of
our own hearts, and cry out, Lord deliver me from this proud, worldly, unclean,
deceitful, unbelieving, vain, hard heart.

There is no cozening and cheating tricks in the world but our hearts have
them, that if there were no Devil to delude us, yet our own hearts would
everlaftingly cheat us. Our hearts by nature are like a rotten stinking Fen,
from whence arise continual fogs, mists and vapors, which are a stench in the
nostrils of God.

Satan has a mighty power over us, that ma^icious subtle strong man armed, he
rules in the ^hildren of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Adam by his ^all hearkening
and yielding to Satan chose ^im for his God; the Devil calls us his House,
Matthew. 12.44. there he is at bed and board; ^e keeps the keys, and bolts and
locks all the ^oors against Christ; and unless Christ that is ^ronger then he
bursts them open, he dwells ^here for ever; O consider this all ye that are
(...) your natural condition, that Satan has pos^ssion of you, that you are
possessed with the Devil, though not in a bodily way as in Christ's ^me the Devil
possessed many, yet he has pos^ssion of the heart. Satan fortifies the hearts
^f men, and makes them strong Garrisons against ^e Lord Jesus.

Now we are in a fallen estate, and liable to Gods everlasting wrath, and there
is such in^itations to come to Christ that we may be de^vered from the wrath
and Hell to come; we have such cursed perverse hearts that we will not come to
Christ that we may have Life, but rather die in our sins: we say as those, Luke
19.27. that Christ shall never reign over us: as soon as ever we hear Christ
knock and call at the door of our hearts, we run and bolt the door against him,
and unless he please by an Almighty and irresistible power to change our wills
we never believe on him. O how through unbelief we refuse great Salvation, and
do as it were bid God shoot all his Arrows at us: we stand in the dreadful
storm of Gods wrath, and will not come to Christ the shelter and covert^ from
the storm: we open our naked breasts and bid God strike with the sharp sword.
The way of our wretched hearts is that if God never look after us, we never
look after him, if we should live never so many thousand years in the world:
after we are converted we seek him i^ some poor measure; we seek the Lord and
hi^ strength, and Grace and Spirit: but before w^ look not after him, but if he
come near to u^ in afflictions, in the Ministry of his Word, o^ common Reproofs
and convictions of his spirit we say unto God, Depart from us, we desi^ not thy
Christ, thy Spirit, and the knowledge o^ thy ways.

We cannot do any thing that God will accept of, though we be never so serious
and stric^* as doubtless many Papists and others are; Aristotle and others of
the Heathens that could write so many Books of Philosophy, yet could not tell
how to make one acceptable prayer to God; all their virtues were but as a Toad
painted over with fair colors, or as a Silken stocking upon a wooden Leg: a
man by nature wants faith, has not the spirit of Christ, has not Christ to
present his Duties to God the Father, and to take away the Iniquity of them,
and then what can he do acceptible to God? Its the way of our hearts by nature
that if we do any thing that is good for the matter of it, we make use of it to
keep us at a further distance from Christ, and closing with him by faith, that
we trust to our Duties for Salvation; and thus if we do any thing for God it is
out of base ends, as Jehu did, either for applause to be accounted Religious
and zealous for God, or to stop the mouth of conscience, or else we think to
make our good works a Ladder to climb up to Heaven by.

We are blind in spiritual things, having our understandings darkened and
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in us, and
blindness of our minds, Ephesians. 4. that all the my steries of the Gospel are
Riddles to us: and till we plough with the Lords Heifer, the Spirit of God, we
cannot understand those Riddles; when the Lord came to convert Nicodemus, how
blind and ignorant did he find him? Joh. 3. and when he came to convert the
woman of Samaria, how ignorant did he find her? we may see John 4. Its a
wonderful thing how in conversion God makes the ignorant to understand
Doctrine; how in a month or two God helps them to pray and discourse so
knowingly and spiritually, that before were perfect sots, and almost as
ignorant of God as the Beast that perishes.

And in the Description of our natural estate, Tit. 3.3. we are said to be
foolish; we are like fools and mad men; and indeed men will call themselves
fools first or last; either here if they are converted, or in Hell. What fools
are we to prefer the world before Christ? For this the Lord called the rich man
fool, Luke 12. and what fools are we that having but one precious Jewel, our
souls, that we will fell it for every base lust? we are more foolish then Esau
was in selling his Birthright for a mess of pottage. And what fools are we to
make no provision for Eternity? The Ant is wiser that provideth her meat in the
Summer; but we take no care for the long winter of eternity. And what fools are
we to set our selves against the Saints of God who are as dear to him as the
Apple of his Eye? Christ tells Paul its hard for him to kick against the pricks,
Act. 9. He makes the persecuting of the Saints to be as foolis^ and dangerous a
thing as for a man to kick and knock his shins against the pricks. And what
fools are we that though we will not neglect Fairs and Markets, yet will
neglect the means of Grace and opportunities of getting Christ? And what fools
are we that when Christ knocks at our doors, will not let in such a blessed
guest that brings the Spirit and a new Heart, and a pardon and eternal life
with him? And what fools are we that will build our eternal condition upon the
sands of our own Righteousness, and not upon Jesus Christ? If a man should
build a house upon the sands, we should say he is a fool indeed; the next Tide
will wash it away and the ground will sink and give way; all this folly and a
thousand times more is in our hearts by nature, but we see it not.

There is a strange forwardness and earnestness in us naturally to sin, and a
lothness to leave sin, insomuch that men will be in a rage against those that
would stop them in their sinful courses; and though God send many afflictions
as upon Pharaoh, yet men turn not to the Lord: indeed when men can scarce turn
them in their beds, they will say they will leave their wicked courses; but
when the affliction is over, they will be as bad as ever; men are so loath to
part with their sins naturally that they will undo their souls unto all
eternity, rather then part with their lusts; as Nero's mother enquiring whether
her son should be Emperor, she was told that he should be Emperor, but then
he should kill her: she out of the pride and ambition of her spirit said, Let
him kill me so he be but Emperor: so the Word of the Lord tells us that if we
go on in our sins, and are not converted, our souls will be damned to all
eternity, and men say in their hearts, Let me be damned so I may enjoy my base
lusts. O what wickedness is in the heart? Men will not fall out with themselves
and sins until they come to hell, except they be converted: but in hell men
will fall out with their sins, and say, O thou cursed pride, O cursed
drunkenness, O cursed uncleanness, O cursed unbelief that has undon our souls
for ever!

And if the Lord never convert us, but leave us in a state of Nature to die out
of Christ, how infinitely miserable shall we be for ever? The wages of sin is
death, Romans 6.14. Romans 1.18. Ephesians. 5.6. The wrath of God like a huge Mountain
will lie upon a sinners back in hell to crush him to pieces: you will always
see God frowning upon you: O think of this; if thou be not brought out of
the state of Nature, and ingraffed into Christ, thou will be separated for ever
from the Lord: you shall never enjoy communion with him, a glimpse of whose
Reconciled face in Christ is worth ten thousand Worlds; you will never taste
one drop of those Rivers of Gods pleasures for ever, of which the Saints shall
have their fill: O that will be a dreadful word, Depart from me ye cursed,
Depart from me whose Loving kindness is better then Life: Depart from me, a day
in whose Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere: go among the Devils who
like roaring Lions seek to devour you. When once men come to Hell, there will
be no means of Grace for ever, Eccles. 9.10. No work, nor device, nor knowledge
in the grave: No more dealings of Gods Spirit with men, no inward nor outward
comfort, nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, which shows
extremity of torment in Hell. The Saints indeed when they die, their places and
Relations know them no more nor they them: but then they know a better place,
Heaven, and enjoy better Relations, but a natural man leaves all his outward
comforts and goes into infinite torments.

O thou that are in thy natural condition, give ear to this, and flee from the
wrath to come: it may be now thou know not how to spend a day without some
pastime or other; O how will thou spend eternity in Hell where thou shall never
have a drop of water to cool thy tongue! O consider what heart-distracting,
heart tormenting thoughts you will have in Hell if the Lord never convert you
here! how sadly will you remember what great sins you committed, and with what
hardness of heart! how will it torment you to think how many checks of
conscience and motions of the Spirit you put by? what terror will it be to you
to think what holy Saints you opposed and jeared, what precious means of Grace
you slighted, and what pains you took for the world, and how careless you were
for your poor souls! O think it no small matter to die in thy natural estate and
be damned: if once thou come to hell, there will be no ease nor end of thy
misery for ever; If God should but say to the damned in hell that after a
hundred thousand years they should come out of their torments, it would be some
lightning to their hearts: but there will be no end: the worm dies not, and the
fire goes not out. Christ goes over with those words three times almost
together, Mark 9.44,46,48. because he would have men in their natural condition
take special notice of it, that if they die out of him, they will be miserable
for ever; miserable indeed to be always dying, always burning, always
weeping, always suffering the torments of Hell. O therefore consider the state
that thou art in before it be too late: there is corruption and sin enough in
one man's heart to undo all the men in the world if it were divided to them. O
then how easily will it undo one soul? Know then if we be not justified freely
by Gods Grace in Christ, and sanctified by the Spirit of the Lord, we must
unavoidably perish for ever: Wherefore as the holy Ghost says, To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Heb. 3.7,8. The time of Gods
patience, the time of Grace, is but a short time, therefore called a day. To
day if you will hear his voice. Its but a day in comparison of Eternity; nay in
comparison of Eternity, a man's days upon earth are but as a moment or the
twinkling of an Eye, and the time of Grace is but a short time, but a day in
comparison of the greatness of the work that is to be done, the making of our
calling and Election sure. Its but a day in respect of the uncertainty of our
enjoying the means of Grace, and its but a day in respect of the uncertainty of
our lives; for in a moment we go down to the grave, and all our thoughts
perish. To day therefore hear his voice, come in to Christ: do not say to
morrow is soon enough, do not put off the offers of Grace, for now is the
accepted time, this is the day of Salvation.

CHAP. II. How natural men deceive themselves, and think that their Estate is
good.
ITS a great mercy for a man that is not in a state of Grace, to know that he
is yet without Christ: but men flatter themselves that they are Christians and
Saints, when there is no cause in the world for it.

Men deceive themselves in their spiritual estate sometimes by not examining
their condition; many men never take thought, whether they have Christ or no;
and if men do examine their spiritual Estate, usually it is by false signs, as
outward performance of Duties, or outward abstinence from many gross sins: Its
a sad thing when we have nothing to evidence a good estate but outward thing;
no work upon our hearts, but only we have performed many Duties, and sat under
Ordinances; so did they, Isa 58. the beginning.

And many deceive themselves in their spiritual Estate by shunning a
heart-searching Ministry; they call for a Minister that may prophecy to them
smooth things; there is many men's. Ministry that never touches upon the heart,
has little tendency that way.

And men have a way to excuse sin, and so think they are in a good estate,
though they live in all manner of sin, as Adam laid the fault upon Eve, and Eve
shifted it off to the Devil. Men that never pray in their Families, never read
the word in their Families, lay the fault upon business.

Another way whereby we often deceive our selves in our spiritual estates, is
by looking upon the failings that the Saints have, and so flatter our selves,
that our condition is the same with theirs: thus men will say, David did so and
so, and Peter did deny Christ; Yea, But David and Peter believed in Christ, and
mourned heartily for their sins. A Saint hates all sin; do you do so?

Again, By Nature we are ignorant of the true nature of every Grace, and
therefore are easily deceived in our estate; we do not know the true nature of
saving faith; we think it lies only in knowing that Christ dyed for sin; we are
ignorant of the nature of Repentance, how the Love of God in Christ does break
the heart, and we think, if we give to the poor, then we have Charity; whereas
in the Scriptures account, a man may give all his goods to the poor, and yet
want true Charity, 1 Cor. 13.

And then men are loath to examine themselves to purpose, whether they be in the
faith or no, for fear they should despair if they come to see their estate is
not good; though, alas, very few despair; and its one thing for a man to be
convinced of his estate being bad, and another thing to despair: for though he
be not converted, yet he may be converted afterward.

Likewise the quietness and stilness of many men's consciences makes them think
that they are in a good estate, when as that may be a great Judgment upon
them; its one thing to have true Peace of Conscience, and another thing to have
a seared Conscience.

There are certain plain signs that a man is not in a state of Grace, which are
evident in many, and in such great Characters that he that runs may read
them; as if men jear at the Spirit of God, and jearat men for having the Spirit
of God, that they will say. This is a man of the Spirit. Do thou think that
thou art a Saint? All Saints have the Spirit of Christ in them, and they are
led by the spirit of God, Romans 8.14. and they prize the Spirit highly.

And if men be wholly ignorant of the way of Justification by the blood of
Christ, and declare plainly that they seek life by their own obedience and
Righteousness, it is evident that they are not in a good estate; for all
Believers desire to be found in Christ, having on them the Righteousness which
is of God by Faith, and how many by this may be convinced that they are not in
a good estate?

Or if men live in all manner of sin, allow themselves in drunkenness,
swearing, and the like: These transgressions of the wicked, say within my heart
says David, That the fear of God is not before their eyes, Psalm. 36.1. Let men
say what they will, if that they commit iniquity with greediness, it is evident
that they know not Christ in a saving manner, For he that says he knows God,
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the Truth is not in him, 1 John 2.4. Indeed Hypocrites may deceive us, because of the inlightnings they
have, and reformation of life and smooth carriage; but the common sort of
narural men do plainly bewray themselves to be out of Christ; and it is a sign
of a carnal man to judge every body to be Saints that make such slight and
overly profession of Christ as the common sort of people do; if we be Saints,
and know what the new birth is, we shall not think it is such an easy and
common thing to be true Saints; but that strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leads to eternal Life, and few there be that find it.

Some deceive themselves by building their hopes of salvation upon their gifts,
parts and knowledge, when as Satan and many Reprobates outstrip many Saints of
God in those things, and yet have no saving nor experimental knowledge.

Others build their salvation upon the esteem that they have with others that
are Saints; but thou may be but a Judas or Simon Magus for all that: the
Apostle bids us in that case, every man to prove his own work, to see what work
of Grace he can find in his own heart, and then he says, he shall have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6.4.5.

Others again build their salvation upon this that they have left some gross
sins, as swearing, drunkenness, whereas it may be their hearts are (...) bad a^
ever, but only they were forced to leave those sins, they so galled their
Consciences, but yet their reformation never proceeded from faith.

CHAP. III. Great Salvation in Christ for sinners.
GOD that might have damned all mankind for sin, and might have left us in that
lost estate for ever, has so loved the world, that he has sent his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have
eternal Life.

Some things we shall here take notice of concerning him, in whom God accepts
us, and gives us eternal Life.

Christ our Mediator is God, Joh. 1.2. Phil. 2.7,8. 1 Timothy 3.16. He is God by
nature. God the Father acknowledges him to be God, Heb. 1.8. when he says to
Christ, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever; he knows the hearts of men, Joh.
2.22. All the Angles, every one of them is by the command of God the Father to
worship him, which shows he is God, Heb. 1.6. He laid the Foundations of the
earth, and the Heavens are the work of his hands, Heb. 1.10,11,12. He is God
and therefore he is mighty to save: he is God, and therefore has everlasting
arms to hold his members from falling into hell. O what a glorious head has
the Church! though we are but like Nebuchadnezzars Image, the feet of clay and
Iron, yet our head is of pure gold.

Christ Jesus our Surety and Mediator is man, he was made flesh, 1 John 2. came
in the likeness of sinful flesh, took our nature after it was corrupted. Romans
8.3. Because the Children that God has given him were pertakers of flesh and
blood, he also took part of the same, Heb. 2. This is no small comfort to us,
that Christ has taken our nature, and was made like unto us in all things, sin
only excepted, he knows what it is to be tempted, and can succor them that are
tempted.

O, This is wonderful that Christ should put on the poor suit of our nature,
and after we had so stained it by sin: O, That God should be so mindful of us,
as to send his Son in our nature to die for us, that God who was infinitely
happy before ever we were, that he should ^o it; That God that had so many
thousand Angels to sing praises to him, and could have created millions of
creatures more glorious then the very Angels to praise him for ever, and that
could have created a thousand worlds before this of men to praise him; that
glorious God that took infinite delight in his Eternal Son, the Lord Jesus,
before ever the world was, Prove. 8. that this blessed God should send his Son
in our Nature, and humble him to death, even the death of the Cross; This is
wonderful indeed.

The Lord Jesus was a public person, Romans 5. therefore he is called a Surety,
Heb. 7. A Savior, Luke 2.23. An Advocate, 1 John 2.1. A Captain of Salvation,
Heb. 2.10. The Covenant of the People, Isa. 42.6. A Ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6. A high
Priest, Heb. 4.4. What he did was for others; for our sakes he sanctified
himself; He was delivered for our offenses, rose again for our Justification,
Romans the fourth and the last.

There is infinite merit in Christ to justify all that believe in him, that
nothing needs to be added to his Righteousness for Justification in him: in him
alone without works shall the house of Israel be justified, and shall glory.
Isa. 45. ult.

The Believers under the old Testament looked for acceptance with God only
through Christ; and therefore offered up the Sacrifices that were Types of him;
prayed in his name. Dan. 9.10. He set open his window, prayed toward
Jerusalem, which was a Type of Christ, and prayed, verse 17. that God would
look upon his Sanctuary which was desolate, for the Lords sake, that is, for
the Lords Jesus sake.

Christ has purchased all Sanctification, and is the Author of it to sinners:
The precious Faith by which we believe to everlasting Life, is from Christ, 2.
Pet. 1.1. There the Apostle says, that precious Faith is obtained through the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ our Lord; and so Heb. 10.2. And Repentance is
from him, Act. 5.31. And of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16.
yea Phil 1.11. All the fruits of Righteousness, all Grace whatsoever is said to
come by Jesus Christ; he was filled with Grace to communicate to us; He is that
Fountain and River of Life that serves all the City of God, that spiritual
Joseph that laid in with abundance to serve all Egypt.

The Lord Jesus had experience of all kind of sufferings and temptations, that
he might be a pitiful and a merciful high Priest for us, Heb. 2. ult. Heb.
4. ult. He was tempted in all points as we are, yet without sin. It was
requisiite that the Lord Jesus our high Priest should be tempted in all points.
(1) That he might know the malice of the Devil experimentally by his own
feeling. (2) That he might overcome Satan. The Lord Jesus, the Captain of our
Salvation fought a single duel with Satan that we might see his strength, and
that Satan might be overcom, that so the Saints when they are set upon by
Satan, might have faith in him, that he who has overcome him, and broke the
Serpents head, where his wound is uncurable, will prevent all his designs
against them. (3) That he might sympathize with the Saints, and succor them
when they are tempted; in that fourth of the Hebrews, v. 15. the Apostle says,
We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was tempted as we are, ((...)) pierced through as we are The
darts of temptation were thrown at Christ as well as they are at us. (4) Christ
was thus tempted that the Saints might know that great Temptations might
consist with great love; yea the greatest Temptations with the greatest love;
For what greater Temptations then Christ had in the fourth of Matthew? But many
poor Saints are fit to think that if God loved them, and they had Truth of
Grace, they should not have such Temptations, whereas Christ him self who was
so infinitely beloved of the Father, and had so much Grace, and was so full of
the Spirit, had all manner of temptations; and truly Satan as he made the world
his last temptation to Christ, Mat. 4. offering him the Glory of the World to
see whether Christ would be allured with that; even so does he deal oftentimes
with the Saints, that after he has tempted them much in their first conversion
with blasphemous thoughts, scruples about every thing almost, and with infinite
more temptations, his last temptation when they grow old, shall be to draw them
to the love of the World, to grow covetous and earthly in the old age of their
profession, to see if he can slily draw their hearts from God, and take them
off their zeal and life in religion by minding of earthly things, the Lord
Jesus who himself overcame this Temptation, and who prayed for his members,
Joh. 17. that the Father would keep them from the evil of the world, yea and
Gal. 1.4. gave himself for us, to deliver us from this present evil world. He
breaks this snare of this cunning Fowler Satan, that our foot be not taken.

Again the Lord Jesus suffered by reproaches and persecution from the world;
this also was requisite, (1.) That he might succor his people in such cases.
(2.) That the Saints might not think much to suffer from the world, when the
Master of the House had done it. (3. That the Saints might not think that they
are Hypocrites and have not sincerity, because that the world raileth on them
and persecutes them; for Christ he had no sin, and yet the world would have
dirt to cast in his face. (4.) That the Saints in all these sufferings which
they endure, might have an example of patience from Christ, who when he was
reviled reviled not again.

O Blessed are they that fall into this pitiful Samaritans hands the Lord
Jesus, a pitiful and merciful high Priest indeed: Are they poor? he knows how
to succor and pity them in that condition, for he had not whereon to lay his
head: Do they lie under the apprehension of Gods wrath? Christ knows how to
succor them in that condition; for he knows what a burden that is, which made
him cry out, my God my God, why have thou forsaken me? Is a poor creature come
to his dying hour? Christ knows what the pangs of death are. Thus the Lord
Jesus has not only infinite Love as God, but as Mediator, and as one that
has shot the same gulphs of temptation that we are to pass through. The
carriage of Christ upon earth toward sinners is to be diligently studied by
those who would see the heart of Christ toward sinners, and what infinite
riches of mercy God bestows upon us in him; he converted many in his own
person, and of the poorest sort, Fishermen and men of mean rank many of them;
and as few of them were mighty and Noble, so few of them were of the Wise men
after the flesh, though Christ could as easily have made Herod and the learned
men of those times have followed him as Matthew and the rest. That follow me,
that Christ spoke to Matthew, accompanied with that Almighty Power, of the
Spirit, that it came to his heart withal, would have made any of them have
followed Christ. O the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory, that
he would condescend to keep company constantly with a few Fishermen and other
poor people in the days of his flesh, when he could have called all the
Princes of the earth to wait upon him the Lord of all; he could have fetched
them from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear his Wisdom and to minister
unto him; and though Christ would use many harsh words to the Pharisees because
they trusted that they were righteous in themselves, and despised others, yet
how sweet in his carriage to others; even bringing Publicans and Harlots into
the Kingdom of God! O his compassions to the very bodies of men, healing their
sick! O the affectionate expressions of Christ to his Disciples a little before
his death recorded in John, and what affectionate Prayers he put up for them to
the Father, and for all that should believe on him through their word, John 17.
And behold what manner of affection he discovered after he was risen; He
appears first to Mary Magdalen that had been such a great sinner, sends word to
Peter that had denied him, of his Resurrection, and never mentions his fall; O
what manner of Mediator has God provided, so full of merit, so full of Grace
to be communicated to sinners, so full of compassions toward sinners! Thus God
has laid in Sion a sure Foundation, a tried Stone, a precious corner Stone;
and he that believes on him, shall not be ashamed.

Whatsoever evil and mischief sin brought upon us, Christ freeth us from it
that are in him; Sin made God and us to be at odds; Christ Reconciles us, and
makes God and a poor sinner friends never to fall out more; He has made peace
by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. Our sins made a horrible stench in the
Nostrils of God, Christ's death was a sweet smelling savor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. to
take away that stench. Sin brought the wrath of God upon us; Christ delivers
us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. Sin brought us into prison, Christ
makes us free, and we are free indeed, John 8. Esaias 61.1. Ephesians. 1.7. We have
the Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

There is nothing but great things and wonders in what God has done for
sinners in Christ. He raises a poor soul that believes in Christ to a better
estate then ever we had before we fell; that our latter end after all our
prodigality is better then our beginning: for we are made immutably happy and
Righteous by Christ; we have union with the Lord Jesus the second person of the
Trinity in an intimate Conjugal manner, which Adam had not before the fall; we
stand upon free Promises, an absolute Covenant; there was no such Promise so
free and absolute without Conditions before the fall, as that after the fall,
Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: yea a Believer in
Christ has not only created gifts as the first Adam, but the Influences of the
Blessed Spirit, and the strength of Christ by which a soul can do all things,
Phil. 4.13. that so he is fitted for all spiritual Duty from an unfailing
strength and spring of Grace in the Lord Jesus.

And if those that believe in the Lord Jesus, are brought into a better state
then Adam at first was in: then much more is the Lord Jesus the Author of all
this to them, worthy of more Glory then Adam: for the Lord Jesus had not only
all those created gifts that Adam had, but besides he was God equal with the
Father, and as Mediator he was exalted far above Adam; for he had fullness of
Grace in him, John 1.16. the Spirit without measure, John 3. had power over all
flesh, John 17.2. Mat. 28. He does not speak there of his Power as God, but of
his Power as Mediator, for that only could be given him, as he says, thou
have given me power over all flesh.

Whatsoever a Believer has, it is through Christ; for whatsoever God does for
a poor creature, either to justify, sanctify, quicken, or comfort, he does
all for us in Christ, He blesses us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in him, Ephesians. 1.3. We are by nature dead in trespasses and sins, and God
makes Christ our Life, Ephesians. 2.1. Gal. 1.20. We are naturally in darkness, and
God makes Christ our Light, Ephesians. 5.8. He makes Christ our Sun to shine upon us,
the glorious Sun of Righteousness that is so full of Light and heat to us: we
are naturally in a famisht and starved condition like the Prodigal, and God
makes Christ our food; he gives us Christ as the true Manna and bread of Life,
John 6. We are naturally poor and beggarly, and God makes Christ our riches and
Treasure, Prove. 8.17,18,19. We are naturally naked, and God makes Christ our
clothing, putting on us his Robe of Righteousness: We are impotent and weak,
and he makes him our strength. Thus he makes Christ all in all to us, both
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

CHAP. IV. The freeness of the Salvation that we have by Christ.
THe Dispensation of Grace and Eternal Life in Christ Jesus, is every way free
to us; the Lord has shown the greatest kindness when there was not the least
desert, that every one that is saved by this Grace may say, O that ever such an
ugly creature as I should have the best Robe put upon me; such a Prodigal as I
have been, find such unexpected kindness; such a Blackamore as I am, that ever
I should have the kisses of the fairest of ten thousand: this is wonderful
indeed!

That God should choose us to eternal Life, when he might have appointed us unto
wrath, this can never be requited; that such a person as Christ the eternal Son
of God should undertake to bring us to glory, this is free indeed; and that the
Lord should do this without the least desire or engagement on the creatures
part: and that the Lord Christ should not shun the greatest sufferings in order
to our Salvation, but be wounded, bruised, bear the curse of the Law and the
wrath of God: can this ever be requited? And that the Lord should do this after
we had spent so fair an estate as we had in Innocence, and we had wasted it as
the Prodigal did, what manner of love is this!

And that the Lord Jesus went through the work of our Redemption without
grudging; did he ever say, Shall I die for such base wretches as these are? but
when Peter would not have had him died, he took him up sharply and said, Get
thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.21,22,23. we read not that he took him up so
when he denied him: can this ever be requited for ever?

And that the Lord Jesus should think of every thing, and purchase every thing
that was requisite to make us happy in his Death; he purchased all Grace, he
gave himself for us to deliver us from this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. He
knew that was a great enemy, and he purchased Grace to keep us from the evil of
that; and if we mind Christ's Prayer, John 17. we may see how Christ thought of
every thing for us. And that Christ after his bloody Sacrifice should make
intercession for us and bear our Names before Jehovah, and that he should take
such care to send the Comforter in his absence to abide with us for ever: this
is not after the manner of men's love: O Lord our God, free! free! every way
free! O let us say that believe in Christ, we must take this as free love; we
never deserved it, and we can never requite it: O I will love thee for ever and
praise thee for ever.

And what are we for whom the Lord has done all this, all the while before we
are converted? We hate God and are Rebels against him; and after we are
converted, we perform but little Duty: we are but little in prayer, little in
praises, little in heavenly meditation: sometimes we have a holy thought, and
then abundance of vain thoughts for it: sometimes we have a savoury word, and
then abundance of vain discourse for it; and those few duties we do have a
great deal of weakness and sin in them: our prayers full of deadness,
formality, unbelief: we are proud when we have enlargements, so sinful in our
best performances that all Saints will confess, their Righteousness is as
menstruous rags.

O let this discovery of the freeness of Gods Grace in Christ draw the worst of
sinners that are yet in their Natural estate to come to Christ: if Christ and
Grace were not free, how should Paul, Mary Magdalen, Zacheus and such have ever
been converted?

Object. 1. But the sinner will say, I have been a sinner of a thousand; may I
be welcome to Christ, I have scoffed at the Saints and railed at them?

Answ. So was Paul before his conversion; I (says he) was a Persecutor, a
Blasphemer and injurious to the people of God, where ever he came; yet he
obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.12,13. yea, he confesses to King Agrippa, that before
his Conversion, he was mad against the Church; and yet the Lord turns this man
in his full speed, and there was no qualification to move the Lord to it; he
was going to persecute the Saints when the Lord met him and converted him.

Object. 2. But I have no good in me to commend me to Christ.

Answ. Christ expects none until you be in him by faith; Christ does not look
for Grapes of thorns: how should you be holy until you be in Christ?

Object. 3. Ay, but whereas others though they be not converted, yet they have
parts and understanding, and can speak of Religion, but I have no parts nor
knowledge.

Answ. The Lord has promised to make the ignorant understand Doctrine; if God
convert thee^, he can make thee understand the things of Religion presently.

Object. 4. Ay, But I am a poor man or woman that live in obscurity and the
Lord surely will never convert me; for of what use can I be to God? he will
call Scholars and great men that may be more serviceable then ever I can be.

Answ. The Lord knows how to make use of the poorest child or servant that he
converts: sometimes he converts a child or servant, and so brings Religion into
a Family; his Love is not grounded upon our serviceableness; we bring glory to
Gods Grace by our coming to Christ; and the poorer creatures we are, the more
glory redounds to the free Grace of God in saving us. Besides, The weakest
Saint when he comes to Heaven, shall be able to sing Praises and Halleluiahs to
God as well as the most eminent: and if God had only looked at serviceablness,
he had made choice of the fallen Angles before us, who could have done more
service then any of us. God can make the poorest Creature an eminent Saint; and
though it may be you may not have such gifts and opportunities of service in an
outward way, yet you may do God much service in an inward way, fearing him,
loving him, trusting in him, admiring of his Love.

And let those that are in Christ, and justified freely by Grace, watch against
any thoughts that may arise in their hearts of any worthiness in themselves, as
if they had any form or comeliness for which they should be desired, but only
that God has been gracious because he would be gracious; and this is certain,
that the more a man grows in Gospel Grace the more wonderful will the Love of
God in Christ be to him, that the souls of Believers are oftentimes astonished
at the free Grace of God to them, and cry out in the warmth of their Spirits:
Never love like to this Love, let all the Angels in Heaven wonder at it to
eternity.

CHAP. V. The Convictions and Workings that are oftentimes upon men that are
never converted.
MAny men that are never converted have mighty Convictions upon them, that they
see they have been very sinful, and are ready to despair as Judas did, Mat.
27. they are so troubled in their Consciences; sometimes men are convinced of
the vanity of the world which they have set their hearts so much upon, they
will cry out with Severus the Emperor, Omnia fui, and nihil mihi profuit; I
have had honor and riches, and those things, and never the better; and they
will sometimes say, Now none but Christ; O give me Christand I have enough;
this is in some worldly disappointments and discontents, and in the trouble and
confusion of their Spirits! How mightily was Balaam enlightened and convinced?
Number. 23. and Number. 24. he was convinced of the blessed Estate of the Saints; and
desired in his way to die the death of the righteous.

There are many that are so enlightened that they get a great deal of knowledge,
and shall tell Christ at the last day, Mat. 7. We have prophesied in thy name,
that they have preached Christ to others, and yet are shut out for ever from
the presence of the Lord.

Indeed, Those that are not savingly wrought upon, and yet are much enlightened,
commonly they fall into great Errors; and if they be in Church Fellowship, they
will, usually go out from the Saints, because they were not of them; joined as
Members in Christ's mystical body, 1 John 2.19. This last age wherein Gifts and
Knowledge are more common then heretofore, afford many sad instances of this,
that many have had only common inlightning; and because they never received the
Truth and ways of God that they seemed to own in the Love and Power of them,
therefore God gives them up to strong delusions and errors, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10,11.
And these in Gifts go beyond many of the true Members of Christ; but they are
kept, when the Lord leaves others with their parts and gifts to be deluded
with error.

God knows how to make use of the parts and gifts of Hypocrites, and those that
have only common inlightnings, that while they are in the Churches of the
Saints, God may make their parts and gifts of use to the Saints: God makes use
of their falling away to show his people by whom they are kept, and how
excellent the Grace of Christ in the hearts is above parts and common
inlightnings.

When this sort of Professors have been most flourishing and best in
appearance, and high in the thoughts of many for Religion, some of eminent
Grace and acquaintaince with the ways of God, have seen the rottenness of their
hearts, and have said that they were but Hypocrites, as their falling away did
afterward manifest.

And this sort of Professors have usually a mighty itch upon their Spirits
after novelty of opinions, that they rove from one opinion to another, and are
seldom settled in any thing, but take up and lay down; and if they have found an
opinion wherein they stick, they presently pass sentence upon all Professors,
be they never so eminent in Grace, that agree not with them in that.

Thus many that have common inlightnings will for a time make profession of
Religion, and perhaps have high notions, and afterward turn very Atheists,
neither pray nor hear, nor discourse of heavenly things, but grow as proud and
covetous, and profane as any other, and so the Scripture speaks of them, that
they have Consciences seared with an hot Iron, and return with the dog to his
vomit; (being but dogs yet in the sight of God) and with the swine after all
their outward washing and reformation, to their wallowing in the mire.

O, What deep convictions have many men, and cry out of their sins, and the
people of God rejoice and hope that these are the pangs of the new birth; and
yet these men either pacify their Consciences many times with legal
Reformation, with their own righteousness, and leaving those particular sins
which have so galled their consciences, without ever becoming new creatures, or
else time wears out their trouble, and they grow more profane and wicked then
ever they were before, and among other sins, that they are given up to by the
righteous hand of God, they will fall to mighty opposition, and rage against
the Saints of God.

But were these men united to Christ by faith? No, in no wise; as the Heaven is
higher then the Earth, so is the work of the Spirit upon a true Believers
heart, above all the convictions and inlightnings, and profession and outward
reformation of those that fall away.

Nebuchadnezzer had great convictions, yet we do not know that ever he was
converted; however not before he was driven from men to the beasts of the
field, Dan. 4.31,32. yet before that he had great convictions. First, By
Daniels interpreting of his dream. Dan. 2.47. He told Daniel that his God was
the God of Gods, and the Lord of Kings; yet presently he fell to Idolatry; Dan.
3. and commanded all to worship the golden Image which he set up; and was so
impudent, as if he had lost all his former conviction, saying, ( verse 15.) to
the three Children when they would not worship his Image, What God is there
that can deliver you out of my hand?

But this is observable, that many under their convictions remain all their
days in a stoutness and sullenness against God, and will turn their heels upon
duties and means, and cry out, All is in vain, I shall be damned; and thus
their hearts were never truly humbled to lie at Gods feet; Lord, if thou damn
me, thou art righteous, but O let me live, and I shall praise thee; but their
hearts rise up against the Lord, and are fit to curse God and die; thus it is
with many. And if they perform any duties, and use any means of Grace, and God
do not reveal his Love and pardoning Mercy, they will take it ill at Gods
hands, and say as they did, We have fasted, and he regards it not: and so
under all legal workings and convictions, there remains a desperate proud heart
in a man still.

If men's Convictions arise so high as to see that they are Unbelievers, and to
be convinced of the greatness of that sin, (whereas many that have much trouble
for sin, never go so far) then many times if God do not give them true Faith,
they will content themselves in a faith of their one making, which is only a
work of their understanding, whereby they say that they will be justified by
Christ: but it will be such a dead faith, that for the most part it has no
Sanctification, not so much as outward Sanctification accompanying it. Neither
does it truly humble the Soul, and lay it prostrate at the Lords feet for a
pardon, merely from his own good Will and free Grace; but the soul is still
full of its self, and confident in its own qualifications. Neither does this
Faith bring joy in the holy Ghost, though there be some flashes of Joy, as
there was in the stony ground Hearers. Mat. 13.

For men to be convinced of sin both in general and particular, is a thing
worth the desiring; yet this is not the saving work of Gods Spirit: But how
many are convinced of many gross sins, and sins that are more plainly forbidden
in the Law, and their Consciences are troubled for them? but yet it may be all
their days never see these more secret sins of trusting in their own
righteousness, trusting in their own strength, speaking evil of the Saints and
ways of God, quenching the motions of the Spirit, neglect of duties and means
of Grace: These sins many are never convinced of, that yet will cry out, they
are damned for some gross sins.

CHAP. VI. The ways and Temptations, by which many souls miscarry under legal
Terrors and a Spirit of Bondage.
WHen a soul is awakened with a sight of sin, and has legal terrors and
warnings to flee from the wrath to come. Satan soon takes the Alarm, and
bestirs himself to keep the Soul still in an unregenerate ^ate. To find out all
the stratagems of this cunning and long experienced enemy the devil, is a
difficult thing: his ways are like the way of a Serpent upon a rock, or like
the way of a ship upon the sea, which leave no fotsteps to trace them by Were
it not that our Lord Jesus knows all his divices and wiles, and is able to
prevent all his designs, no flesh would be saved, but all by one means or other
would be devoured by this roaring Lion; yet by the Light of the word, and by
the observation that Believers are helped to make of the motions of Satan; we
are not wholly ignorant of his divices: not to speak here of the way he takes
to keep them from Christ, who are wholly ignorant, and had never any common
workings: nor to speak of the innumerable temptations upon Believers and those
who are sealed by the Spirit of God, whereby he endeavors to pluck them out
of Christ's hands, only that they are kept by the mighty power of God through
faith to Salvation; only here to speak of the ways and temptations by which
Satan endeavors to ruin them that are awakened with a sight of sin, and are
under legal terrors and fear of the wrath to come.

1. Satan endeavors to keep such as are thus awakened and troubled for sin,
ignorant of the righteousness which is by faith in Christ Jesus; that free
Justification of a sinner which is by the blood of Christ; insomuch that Satan,
the god of this world does so blind the eyes of many that have been much
awakened by the sight of sin, that they never understand all their days the
remedy that is provided for them; no, not so much as in a notional way with
brain-knowledge, but they set themselves in their own strength to reform their
lives, and think that God will accept of their doings for satisfaction for the
wickedness of their former life, and they have a kind of peace and satisfaction
in their Spirits that God is at peace with them: thus many are everlastingly
cheated, never knowing the things that belong to their everlasting peace; and
being ignorant of Gods righteousness, under all their zeal of God and legal
performances, go about to establish their own righteousness, where none but
Christ's will be accepted, and so never submit to the Righteousness which is of
God by faith, Romans 10.3,4.

2. Satan endeavors to persuade such that those legal terrors and breakings
are true conversion, that they bless themselves in their legal humiliation, as
if it were Gospel-repentance, and the heart of flesh that is promised in the
new Covenent.

3. Satan otherwhile puts those that are thus convinced and troubled for sin,
upon some way of opinion and Judgment, and there by his delusion and the
deceitfulness of their own hearts they find much peace and quiet: their sore is
skinned over, and they are so far now from questioning their own Salvation as
they did a little before, that they now question every bodies Salvation but
their own, that do not fall in with that opinion that they are fullen upon.

4. If the Gospel be preached in the hearing of men under legal terrors, Satan
will endeavor to make them rest in a bare notion of Christ, and a faith of
their own making, that they will either conclude Christ and all his benefits is
theirs, because they have been so humbled and broken with the Law, and have so
reformed and amended their ways, or else they will resolve in their own
strength to believe in Christ: and so though it may be they were convinced that
they could not keep the Law in their own strength, yet they think that its an
easy thing to believe in Christ, and so never saw themselves so fully undone;
that as they could not keep the Law, so they could no more believe in Christ
then they could raise the dead: that now they were undone for ever, if the Lord
did not work faith by an Almighty power.

5. It is commonly known and observed how Satan does give ease to many in these
troubles and terrors by turning their thoughts to something else, sending them
to company and pleasures to be cured of their wound, which so cures them that
they are no more sad, but will grow as loose and profane as ever they were;
but if that soul belong to God; he will not let the soul sleep thus, as if a
man should sleep upon the top of a Mast, but will awaken the soul and hunt it
out of those ways, that it shall find there is no peace and rest out of Christ.

6. But in these legal terrors and fears, if true peace do not come from the
Lord to settle and quiet the troubled and perplexed Conscience, nor Satan's
Receipts put by these troubles, Satan tempts these unto despair, and many times
to self-murder, and many in this temptation have been wonderfully delivered by
mercy: yet O with what violence will Satan put these thoughts upon poor souls,
yea and strangely answer the Objections that arise in the heart against it! As
one that was in great troubles, when Satan tempted her to cut her throat, there
was this Objection presently in her heart: O I have made profession of
Religion, and how will this open men's mouths against the good ways of God?
and say, This will be the end of them all that are these forward professors?
Unto this Satan presently hinted this: that she might put a little penknife
down her throat and that would do it, and would remain there and never be seen,
and so no dishonor would come to religion: but now when the Temptation was
strengthened, behold, sudden and unexpected comfort and Discoveries of Gods
Love came that brought peace to her spirit, and made the Devil go away with
shame! O a cunning Devil! and O a gracious God that comes many times when there
is but a step between the soul and destruction and makes it to live in his
sight. Many ways might be mentioned whereby God has delivered poor creatures
from murdering themselves, as sending some to knock at their doors, when they
have been going to hang themselves, sending some providentially to be in those
places where they intended to drown themselves: sometimes sending some to
discourse with them about spiritual things whereby they have got some light and
hope, and so have been put by that wicked intention; sometimes rebuking the
Devil and not suffering him to tempt them further, when they have been even
almost overcome. But here it must be noted that but few of them that have made
away themselves in the world, have done it from despair of mercy, though Judas
did so: the only man that we read of in Scripture that murderd himself under
terrors of Conscience for sin, which doubtless was permitted by God among
other ends, for to clear the Innocence of the Lord Jesus our Mediator, and to
show the greatness of that sin in betraying the Lord of Life. But though some
few in the world have made away themselves through inward despair of Gods
mercy, yet others have done it out of worldly discontent and pride, as
Ahitophel that the Scripture speaks of, that because his Counsel was not
followed, went home in a discontent and hanged himself; and how did Nero and
many of the Heathens, and many of the Jews horribly murder themselves when
they were in danger because they would not fall into their enemies hands! how
many of those Heathens whose wisdom and sayings many foolishly adore, did thus
destroy themselves, sometimes great companies of them together! The greatness
of this sin of self-murder might be many ways made out; It is a breach of the
sixth Commandment: Thou shall do no murder, and self-murder is the greatest
murder; it is an unnatural sin; for all creatures endeavor self-preservation:
it takes men away from the means of Grace for ever; for there is no work, nor
device, nor wisdom in the grave whether they go, Eccles. 9.10. Self-murder
refuses the common courtesy that is in Gods proceedings, in giving a Reprieve
for a time before the day of execution; if men fear they shall be damned, yet
there is no ground for self-murder; for while a man lives, there may be mercy
for ought he knows, God having pardoned such great sinners; and if a man be
damned at last, yet self-murder being such a great sin will make men's damnation
greater; and though men in despair would fain be dead, yet if they die out of
Christ, they will wish themselves upon the earth again: for though they have
great terrors of Conscience, yet they will have greater in Hell; Selfemurder
exceedingly pleases the Devil, and therefore as he is forward to put men upon
it, so he is forward to be their Executioner; To say it is impossible for a man
to be saved that commits this wickedness, and thus sins against God, is not so
clear, but thus to aggravate the sin, may well be done, it being a sin so great
as cannot be expressed! Yet has Satan drawn the wicked heart of man many times
to it; sometimes in terrors of Conscience, but for the most part in excess of
Melancholy, and in worldly sorrows and discontents; though those persons will
many times pretend that sin is their great trouble; yet the Lord knows, and
experienced Christians oftentimes find it out to be but the sorrow of the
world, the distractions about earthly things; If God leave a man, he is like a
Reed shaken with every wind of Temptation and trouble till he be broken in
pieces.

CHAP. VII. The saving work of Gods Spirit upon the Heart.
ITs a mighty work of God to make a man a New Creature, and he alone can do it;
we are his workmanship. Ephesians. 2.10. (...), his Artificial work, a work wherein
the Lord has shown singular skill: and God when he makes a man a Saint works
very powerfully: therefore Conversion is compared to making children of stones,
Mat. 3. to raising the dead, Ephesians. 2.1. To make our rebellious hearts to stoop
to Christ; to turn Satan out of doors, requires Omnipotency How does God in
Conversion arm some word to turn a sinners heart? the same word that he has
heard often before, and it took no impression upon him. Is not thy word as an
Hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces? Jer. 23.29. But then the Lord must
strike with it. A blow of this Hammer with his hand will break a rocky heart in
pieces; one blow of his hand; though we strike and strike again, sinners hearts
are not broken.

God works very mysteriously in the Conversion of a soul, that the soul it self
we see is able to give but a poor account of it. Gods workings are compared to
the wind. Joh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but thou know not whence it comes, nor whether it goes, so
it is with every one that is born of the Spirit: the wind as it blows freely,
so is it a mysterious thing; we see nothing but the Trees shake and tremble.

And Gods workings are compared to the way of the Spirit, which is a very
mysterious thing. Eccl. 11.5. If thou know the way of the Spirit, and how
the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, then may thou know
the works of God, who works all: and what a Mystery is this! the way of the
Spirit, if we understand it of the Angels, or if we understand it of the
Spirits of men, children, how the Spirit comes into the child in the womb, and
whetherin the Spirit be formed of some matter and of what, and how the Spirit
and Life should be in the child so long, and it not to be stifled in the womb,
These are mysterious things, and so says he, is it to know the works of God.

Again, the workings of God in Conversion are compared to the secret Influences
of Leaven, Matthew. 13.33. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a woman that hid a
piece of Leaven in three measures of meal until the whole was leavened. A
mysterious thing how a little leaven spreads it self and leavens the whole
Lump: and so how God speaks but a word to the Heart, does but say to Matthew
Follow me, and the soul leaves all and follows Christ: this is a mysterious
thing. It is Infinite Grace that God shows in the Conversion of a soul, that
he should put forth his Almighty power to convert us, which he might put forth
to damn us and torment us for ever: that he should work Grace when he was not
desired, when we sought him not: God first calls, and not the creature: and O
that he should work though the creature resist and hang back; we linger in our
natural Estate as Lot did in Sodom, and we should tarry in our natural estate
till God reigned down fire and brimstone upon us as he did upon Sodom: and now
as the Angel while Lot lingered, pulled him forcibly out, so does the Lord pull
us forcibly out, Col. 1.13. He snatched us out of the power of darkness, so the
word signifies: and O how does God work Grace oftentimes upon the most cross
and crabbed natured men, that if they had not Grace, there were no living with
them!

In Conversion the Spirit convinces the soul of sin, as John 16.9. stops it in
its sinful course, and the soul sees the Law meet him many times, as the Angel
met Balaam in the way with a drawn sword in his hand, and convinces the soul of
Righteousness in Christ's perfect Righteousness, and draws the soul abandoning
all other Refuges to pitch upon Christ for Life and Acceptance with God: that
the soul now it sees its wound, does not go to the Law but to the blood of
Christ; that the soul says, Lord, thou providedst me a Garment of
Righteousness in Adam, one that is worn out, and is all menstruous rags; and
now Lord, thou have provided me a new Garment of Righteousness, the
Righteousness of thine own Son, a Garment that will never wax old: Lord, I
accept of this Righteousness, I put on this garment of mine elder Brother to
come to thee in.

When the soul is converted, Christ becomes the souls all in all for
Justification, Sanctification, Consolation: Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
what do I desire in the earth but thee! all but dung, all but dross in
comparison of Christ. Communion with God becomes the greatest nourishment and
refreshment to the soul: Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me,
for thou art my exceeding Joy; this is the language of a true Saint.

Sin grows irksom and a tedious burden to the soul, and not so much for fear
of Hell, as from the Love we have to God and Christ, our dear Redeemer. Now the
soul thinks that much that God does for him, and that nothing that he does for
God: he thinks as Solomon, when he dedidated the temple, The Heaven of Heavens
is not able to contain thee; What is my poor prayers and preaching, and
service? I with all my duties am less then the least of all the Mercics and
kindness that thou have shown to thy servant.

The soul now is much in the admiration of of Gods love and in desires after
it, and in thankfulness for it: Thy loving kindness is better then Life, Psalm.
63,3. though skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his Life.
Life is so dear, yet thy loving kindness is better then Life. If a soul that is
converted were going to die for Christ's sake, that the Grace of God in him
costs him his Life, yet he cannot but bless God that ever he had Grace wrought
in him.

The soul that is converted, misseth God soon, and cannot miss him long. Psalm.
63.1,2. My soul thirsts to see God as I have seen him in such an Ordinance,
in praying, hearing, meditating, breaking of bread, and I long to see him as I
have seen him in such a Promise in which he has sometimes strengthened me,
quickened me, and revived me when I walked in trouble.

And the nature of a soul that is converted, is to fear sin most when he fears
sin least; that is, to fear to commit sin most when he through the assurance of
Gods pardoning mercy to him fears sin least for damning of him.

In Regeneration the Lord infuseth a new life; the seed and habit of Grace,
wherein in the Soul is passive at first: God by a Work of his own plucks up all
other foundations, and lays down Christ for a foundation in the heart. Isa.
28.16. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I lay in Zinn for a foundation Stone, a
tried Stone, etc. which tried stone and sure foundation is the Lord Jesus. Now
its God that lays in Zion (that is, in the heasts of his people) this
Foundation, behold I lay, Its my work says the Lord: no man himself can lay
this Foundation right. O, This is the saving work of Gods Spirit, when as God
has laid Christ for the Foundation in a Soul, that the soul builds all upon.
Christ, he bears the stress and weight of all, as the foundation bears the
weight of the building that all our comfort and peace and strength is built
upon Christ, and there is now an union between Christ and the soul, as there is
between the foundation and the rest of the building; and this union the Lord
makes by the Spirit, and by the faith whereby the soul is glued and cemented
for ever unto Christ.

CHAP. VIII. The woeful Backsliding of many Professors, and the way of their
Recovery.
MAny Professors are gone back mightily from the Lord, some by error of
Judgment, some by looseness of Conversation and deadness, and formality, as if
they had never been acquainted with the Lord: Its hard to come to a true sense
of it, because a man may keep up the outward profession of Religion, he may
grow in Gifts, may be in Churchfellowship, and yet be much backsliden in his
Spirit: if the Lord will make use of any thing here written to make any
sensible of it, and recover them out of it, it were a great Mercy.

Several signs of a backsliding Professor shall be laid down.

1. Sign, If the Conscience be not so tender as to sin, as it has been, that
is a sign of a backsliding heart; I do not say if the Conscience be not so
scrupulous, but if it be not so tender: for when a man comes from under the Law
and the Spirit of bondage, he shall not have such a scrupulous conscience as he
had before, as people in that condition many times will scruple Whether they
may eat or drink, because they are unworthy of the creature, with iunumerable
other Scruples of that kind; and it is a great Mercy to be freed from a
scrupulous conscience; its one way by which God does in a way of Judgment
deprive men of the use of the lawful comforts of this life when they have them
in possession: but I speak of true tenderness of Conscience a heart standing in
a holy fear and aw of Gods word: such a tender Conscience as Joseph had, Genesis
39.9. How shall I do such great wickedness, and so sin against God?

2. Sign, If there be a general neglect of secret Duties, or constant deadness
or formality in them, this is a sign of a backsliden heart, when a soul could
have watched for opportunities to pray, and could have prayed with groans and
sighs that can not be uttered, and now duties are generally neglected, or we
have nothing but hard hearts, and dry eyes in them.

3. Sign, If there be a general neglect and carelessness of assembling our
selves with the Saints, and holding communion with them: its rare to see a man
that has left meetings and Communion of Saints, that does not fall woefully
either as to error of conversation.

4. Sign, If there be an itch upon the Spirit after novelty of opinions and
teachers; and a disregard of those whom the Lord has made Instruments of good
to us heretofore: thus the people forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 1.15. Were not the
Galathians much backsliden that now slighted Paul, whom God had made an
Instrument of so much to them that they would have parted with any thing to him?

5. Sign of backsliding is, If Professors grow worldly and earthly who have sat
loose from the world heretofore: Do we see a Professor that now holds his
hands from doing good to poor Saints, and grows now an oppressor, and is all
for racking, and that which is called now in these days by the fine word
Improvement: know that, that man is backsliden, and gone back.

6. Sign, If men grow careless of offending their Brethren, and will grow
touchy with a whole Church. Men usually when they break with God in some secret
way, they are never well till they have broken with his People: time was when
they could have born more from a single brother then now they can with a whole
Church.

7. Sign. If men quite leave off using means to convert their Relations and
Neighbors, to draw them to Christ; time was when thou had a heart to be
speaking of the ways of God to thy friends and neighbors, and now thou can
come into their company, and nothing but Complements or Worldly discourse: If
men leave off to take care of the public cause and interest of Christ, and
mind not whether Religion get ground in the town and country, this is a sad
sign of a backsliden heart.

8. Sign. If men grow careless of Gospelinstitutions, as hearing the word,
Church Fellowship, breaking of bread: O, sometimes you counted it above all
earthly things to have a name in Gods house, and to see the Lords goings in the
sanctuary: and now you have no stomach: its a sign of want of Spiritual health.

9. Sign. If that though there be some stirring affections now and then; yet if
the constant frame of the heart be worse then formerly, this is a sign of a
backsliden heart; A man through obstructions may have flushings in his face
which may make him look well; but if his constant complexion be pale and wan, we
say he is not right: so here; if our hearts are grown dead in duties, hard
after the commission of sin, backward to duties, and our thoughts generally
vain, it shows some great distemper, though at times by fits we have some
stirring Affections.

10. Sign. When we grow high and are puffed up with our knowledge, that now all
the Saints in Town and Country are nothing to them, and all their gifts they
think are nothing to theirs.

11. Sign. When we grow intimate companions of wicked men; the falling at ods
with the Saints, and the falling in with wicked men, is a sad sign of a
backsliden heart; they are both put together, Mat. 24.49. eating and drinking
with the drunken, and smiting our fellow servants.

12. Sign. If we cannot bear opposition from the world in our Christian course
as we have done, but are fit to comply: time was when we made nothing of scoff
and jears, and now we can scarce bear them, but are fit to suit our ways to the
world, that they may let us alone, this is a sad saln Spirit.

13. Sign, If a man's heart is not affected with the thoughts of Gods free Grace
in Christ as heretofore, this is a sad sign of a spiritual consumption: time
was when a Sermon of free Grace was like the honey and the honey comb; but if
ever God recover us, the Doctrine of Gods free Grace in Christ will be the
sweetest Doctrine in all the world to us.

I shall not stand to aggravate this backsliding and revolting from the Lord,
the Lord aggravate it upon our Spirits; only that (1) Though the sold be
recovered, and come safe to heaven, yet it hinders our present serviceableness
to God, and now is our working time; Heaven is the time of receiving, our time
of enjoying. (2) The backsliding of professors grieves the Spirit of God more
then the sins of other men. (3) They bring an evil report upon the ways of God,
that those that are without will say, See what their Religion is, its only a
little heat, a sudden passion, such a one has done going to Sermons and
Meetings now. (4) Its a mighty dis heartning to young Beginners to see old
Professors backslide and grow so dead. Satan persuades them that they will do
so too, and therefore you had as good never enter upon the profession of
Religion: you see the ways of God are so strict that they soon grow weary of
them; thus Satan temps many young Beginners. (5) Backsliden Professors are
dangerous company for any body; wicked men are hardened by their company, and
thriving Saints are deaded and offended. (6.) That is a great aggravation of
our sin herein, that it is without all cause; as the Lord said, Jer. 2.5,6,7.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they have forsaken me? Does
not God keep a good house, and does he not bountifully reward, that we run away
from him? (7.) Wicked men are constant, they don't fall off from their ways,
and shall we fall off from the ways of God? Jer. 2.11,12,13. Have the Nations
changed their Gods? but my people have changed their God for that which cannot
profit: O shall the Heathens be constant to their dumb Idols, and shall not we
be constant to the living God? (8.) Slighting of God after we have had some
acquaintance with God is quite contrary to the course of his dealings with us,
Ezekiel. 36.11. God promises to be better to us in the end then in the beginning:
He will give us more Communion with him, and glory afterward then he has done
yet, and if God be better and better to us, shall we grow worse and worse to
him? God forbid.

Now O that we might recover, that we might remember from whence we are fallen,
and Repent and do our first works.

1. Bathe our selves by faith in the blood of Christ for the pardoning of all
our backslidings; look upon God in Christ as not ready only to pardon our sins
when we were in gross ignorance, but to heal all our backslidings, because he
loves us freely, Hos. 14.4. Jer. 3. the beginning. Look upon our Father as
having a best Robe to put upon a poor Prodigals back, and shoos to put upon his
feet: though the poor backsliden soul has scarce a shoo to his foot, as we
say, he has worn out all. (2.) O look for fresh and new workings of Gods
Spirit upon our hearts, to create in us clean hearts, and renew right spirits
within us: Its said of the Lord, that he renews the face of the earth: that
he does every Spring, when Winter has made the earth to look as if it were
clothed with sackcloath: the Lord in the Spring puts on a new face and
dress upon the earth: the Birds sing, the Trees flourish, the grass grows: this
is our case in our Winter of backsliding, a Winter indeed, O look that God now
should bring a spring time upon thy heart, is there not need? (3.) O look at
the heart to be renewed: a clean heart says David, good Lord, after his
backsliding, Psalm 51.10. O I would have that bone set right, that I may walk
in thy Statutes: that instrument well tuned; David does not say only Lord, let
me never commit Murder and Adultery again, but Lord give me a clean heart; O
that has bred all this mischief, the foulness of my heart, Lord therefore
cleanse that. (4.) If ever the Lord quicken us again, be more watchful and keep
close to God; if we recover out of this dangerous disease, let us have more
care of our souls health, have a care of spiritual surfets. (5.) And look that
our Recovery be through, that the humor be not only diverted, but purged away.
(6.) Count all our outward enjoyments nothing, but sit mourning in Sion until
God graciously visit us. (7.) Labor to see not only in general that we have
backslidden, but particularly wherein, that we may return no more to folly.

And those who yet have thriving spirits, keep in with that God that smiles
upon you; say not that it is impossible that thy soul should wander as a Bird
from her Nest, but watch and pray lest you enter into temptation. Often
consider that these last times will be times of much backsliding of Professors,
2 Timothy 3. O get particular and distinct Knowledge wherein Professors do
commonly backslide, and get your hearts deeply affected with them; and remember
what special notice God takes of those that keep close to him in a time when
many fall off: Thus he took notice of Noah, Genesis 7.1. and of the sons of
Zadock, Ezekiel. 44.15.

Expect to be tempted and tried by an hour of temptation, and look not only to
be tried as to conversation, but as to Judgment; as to Opinions, Satan will
have a bout with you with that Weapon of Error: How many are fallen off that
way; but labor to have more grounds out of the Word and clearer light for all
you hold: Let plain Christians who have no skill in Controversies, yet furnish
themselves with Scriptures for every point, as for the Godhead of Christ,
Justification by Christ, and the like, and labor to have your hearts given up
to the Truth you know: put not your selves upon Temptations in hearing every
body, suspect those Opinions that neither further your Communion with God nor
his most holy People, but straiten you in both; stick close to the Word, and
not move a hairs breadth from it: Don't love to dispute against that which you
are convinced to be Truth, to show your parts and reach; Take in the benefit of
other light in your doubts, and look up to the Spirits guidance to lead you
into all Truth.

CHAP. IX. Of Assurance and peace of Conscience.
ALL Believers have not Assurance: some Believers walk in darkness and see no
light, Esaias 50.10. A true Saint may be in great doubtings, so great as Heman
complains, that his troubles were so great that they did as i^ were distract
him; yea a Believer may be a long time in that condition, Psalm 88.15. Heman
was so exercised from his youth up: There are several causes why many Believers
are in great doubts about their spiritual estates; as [1.] want of constant
meditation upon Gods free Grace in Christ. (2:) Falling into great sins. (3.)
The often prevailing of the same corruption. (4.) Want of answers of prayers.
(5.) Some great cross and affliction that is befallen them, that they are
tempted to think would never have befallen them if the Lord loved them: this
mistake has disturbed the peace of many a Child of God. (6.) The not meeting
with communion with God in Duties; if God loved me says the soul, would he let
me come and go from his Ordinances and take no notice of me? (7.) The subtle
Disputes of Satan against our Sincerity in the ways of God many times baffle us
and make us fit to give up the cause. (8.) The observing that a Hypocrite may
go far, strikes many a Child of God into a great fear whether he be gone beyond
a Hypocrite or no? (9.) Unacquaintedness with Gods workings upon our hearts; we
know but in part: as we know not all the evil in our hearts, so a Saint does
not know all the good and Grace that God has put into them. (10.) The weakness
of Grace, but like a grain of mustard seed in our hearts, the least of all
seeds: so Faith and Sincerity lies like a small mustard seed among huge clods
of corruption, and the soul has much ado many times to see this grain of
mustard seed among these clods. Thus and many other ways a true Child of God
may fall into great doubts and fears about his spiritual estate; indeed if men
know of no workings that have been upon their spirits, its a sign they are yet
in a natural estate: the Saint of God knows that there have been workings of
the Spirit and convictions upon him; but he fears that they were but common
workings, such as are upon Hypocrites and Reprobates, and not the saving work
of Gods Spirit, that he questions whether he has gone beyond the stony-ground
hearers many times.

So that there is great need of the witness of the Spirit, besides all our
evidences to put the matter out of doubt, that we are effectually called, and
so it is written, Romans 8.15. The Spirit himself witnesses with our spirits that
we are the sons of God; He makes a heart-affecting discovery of the love of God
in Christ to the soul, Romans 5.5. excites and stirs up Faith in the heart to act
afresh upon the Lord Jesus, works some joy in the soul from the apprehension of
our Acceptance in Christ. The Holy Ghost sometimes in assuring us of Gods love
in Christ, takes Promises in the Scriptures and sets them with power upon the
heart, as, I am He that blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own Names sake,
and will remember thy sins no more; Not that all words of Scripture that are
cast into our minds are from the Spirit of the Lord, but sometimes from Satan;
sometimes Promises come into our minds in an ordinary way, as other things come
to mind that we have read or heard; but when any word of Scriptute is given in
and applied in a way of comfort to our spirits from the Spirit of God, (1.) It
will take some Impression, though it may be that when the Spirit comes to
comfort and witness, he many times comes not with such irresistibility as when
he comes to sanctify: yet some Impression it will have upon the heart, if not
to fill it with joy and Triumphing of spirit, yet some way to support it and
bear it up. (2.) If it come from the Spirit, it will be suitable and seasonable
to our condition; as if a poor Saint be in affliction, and the Holy Ghost
should give in such a word as that in Heb. 12.9. He afflicts us for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his Holiness, this is a seasonable word; but many
will say, that such a Scripture was given in to them in such a condition when
as the Scripture was nothing suitable to their condition, but they mistook the
meaning of the place. (2.) When the Spirit gives in Scripture, usually (though
not always,) it is when the soul is in some strait, some great strait, and
then he gives them in some word upon which he causes them to hope. (4.) Such
words of Promise as the Spirit applies thus to a soul, are very dear to the
soul ever after, yea it makes the whole Word of God more dear to them, and such
words do abide upon the memory very long. (5.) They raise up thankfulness in
the heart. (6.) They do not cherish us in any way of sin: if you thought you
had any word from the Lord to put you upon any thing that the Word says is
sin, then you were mistaken. Sometimes the Spirit of God in comforting and
witnessing to us does not make use of any particular places and Promises, but
makes a general Discovery of the Gospel and New Covenant, and applies that to
the soul, and shows him that he has an Interest in the New Covenant; that he
is one of those whose Names are written in heaven, and is sprinkled with the
blood of Christ which cleanses him from all sin.

This also I would here note, that the Spirit of God does speak peace to the
consciences of many Believers that yet think they have no peace, and question
the truth of Grace in their hearts. I say, though it comes not so high as
Ravishments of spirit, yet the Holy Ghost in some more secret way has quieted
their hearts; How comes it to pass else that those Believers notwithstanding
all their doubtings, yet do really and experimentally find that they can go to
God as to a Father in prayer, and they are carried out to put all their cases
to God, and trust him with all their concernments; and they find that the
rancour of their spirits is taken off against the Lord; these things declare
plainly that in some secret way the Spirit of God has quieted their hearts and
given them some satisfaction concerning their sincerity and Truth of Grace,
though it has not been so plain as to some other Saints that have had full
assurance and abundance of joy in the Holy Ghost thereupon.

Let not the Saints be impatient and fret to do evil, if the Spirit don't
presently give them assurance; neither let them think that they shall never
have assurance because they have been long without it; The Lord oftentimes lets
things come to the worst before he sends help: Peace and Assurance may be very
near when thou think that there is almost now no hope; yea, this is
observable that when the Holy Spirit shall give assurance after much doubting,
that assurance oftentimes is more lasting then others that have had comfort
sooner.

But God lets some even spend their days in sighing and their years with
heaviness, and even mourn out their eyes and hearts, and find no rest and peace
in Believing; the Lord makes known to us by such examples the bitterness of
sin, the power of his Terrors, the danger of backsliding and that he only can
speak peace.

Let Christians beware of getting a habit of complaining and doubting, as I
have known some have got such a habit of complaining, that upon all occasions,
and in all company they must be laying out their doubtings; not but that
Christians should make known their troubles and fears in suitable times one to
another, both that others seeing the straits that they are in, may pray the
more for them, and might comfort them with the comforts wherewith they have
been comforted of God: but I say many have such a habit of complaining, that I
had almost said, whether they have doubts and troubles upon their spirits or
no, they think it not well if they have not some complaint to make, and think
that their godly friends expect it always from them.

Some not considering what Faith is, viz. the souls being brought off from all
other things to depend and rely upon the Lord Jesus for eternal life, they
bear false witness against themselves that they do not believe in Christ,
thinking that faith is nothing but some high Ravishments and almost perfection;
whereas ask such souls, Has the Lord convinced you of your miserable estate by
nature, both in respect of the damning and domineering power of sin? and they
can truly say yea; the Lord has convinced me of this; Ask them further Has
the Lord shown you that all your own Righteousness can never save you, nothing
but a crucified Christ can do it? the soul can truly say yes, the Lord has
powerfully convinced me of this; ask the soul further. Has the Lord ever made
you truly sensible that you could not believe in your own strength, but Faith
was the Lords free gift? and the soul can truly say yes; the Lord has made me
sensible of this; and you ask further, Did you ever find an Almighty power of
Gods Spirit drawing your heart to Christ, to take him for the Lord your
Righteousness, so that your troubled soul found rest and peace from his Blood?
yea, the soul says truly, This I have felt in some measure; why here is true
Faith and Assurance, and yet many a poor soul not considering that this is the
saving work; but seeing that it comes short in many things, does question
whether it be in Christ or no, whereas open and unravel but the work of Grace,
and say, Have you gone this step and the other step? and it can say truly that
These things God has wrought in me.

How much means is used to many, and yet they can find no comfort and peace of
conscience? The Covenant of Grace is clearly opened to them, servent prayers
are put up to God for them, the experiences of other Saints are made known to
them, but all will not do it: for indeed the Lord only can speak peace to the
soul, he is the God of peace.

But let those that have peace of conscience and Assurance, be thankful for it
as a great mercy; for all Saints have it not: indeed it is a great mercy, it
yields much present refreshment to the soul; what will make us glad if the
light of Gods Countenance will not? And so does Assurance of Gods Love stand us
in great stead in time of Afflictions; it keeps the soul from sinking in great
Afflictions: it keeps Satan from many advantages, yea when we come to die, and
look that King of Terrors in the face: Assurance of Gods Love makes grim Death
look smilingly in our Eye.

CHAP. X. The Ministry of Angels, and their serviceableness to the Church.
THough curious and unscriptural Notions about the Angels are to be avoided:
yet these things that the Scriptures reveal of them and their Ministry, are
very profitable to be known. The Angels are called spirits, and a flame of
fire, Heb. 1.7. They are active and quick at the Lords work; they are as a
flame of fire not only for their terribleness but for their quikness; how quick
fire goes out of a Gun, and how quick is a flash of lightning! The Angels were
very forward to perform their service to the Lord Jesus; an Angel brought news
to Mary that she should be the mother of our Lord, Luke 1.27.28. An Angel at
Christ's birth told the Shepherds the glad tidings of Christ's coming into the
world, and a multitude of them praised God, saying, Glory be to God in the
Highest, on earth peace, and good will to men, Luke 2.9,13,14.

They had command to worship the Lord Jesus, Heb. 1.6. When he brings in the
first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship
him; but why must all the Angels of God worship Christ when he came into this
world, and was made flesh? (1.) To own and acknowledge Christ to be God now in
that mean estate, the form of a servant that he had put himself into; for
worship only belongs to him that is God. (2) To acknowledge the benefit of
confirmation that they have by the Lord Jesus, by whom they are made immutably
happy. (3.) To show an example unto men to worship and honor Christ, when as
the Angels that are more excellent creatures do it. (4.) To show their
admiration of that glorious and wonderful way of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

And then at Christ's death, the Angels came and ministered unto him, and
strengthened him. And as the Angels were forward to do service to Christ: so
they are to minister to the Saints; for the Lord has made them ministering
spirits to them that shall be Heirs of Salvation, The Lord makes use of them to
keep his people out of many dangers, Psalm 21.11,12. He has given his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up lest at
any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone; indeed God is so careful
of his people, that he would not trust all the Angels in heaven wholly with the
safety of his people, but has given them unto Christ to be their Leader and
Commander and bring them unto Glory, who will lose none of all that the father
has given him; who has Infinite Power and Wisdom to manage all their
concernments; but the Angels are Ministers under Christ to be helpful to the
Saints as the Pastors of Churches are Overseers, and have the charge of the
flock under him also; And so the Angels lift up the Saints many times as Nurses
do little children, that they don't dash their feet against a stone, whom every
little thing would throw down; They have their Orders from Christ whose
Ministers they are to do his pleasure; therefore Christ is said to sit between
the Cherubins, Psalm 99.1. to show how he has the Angels fit to send upon his
Designs: and how often does he send them to encamp round about the Saints in
their dangers and deliver them? and because of the Angels serviceableness to
the Saints, they are called their Angels, Matthew. 18.10.

The Lord gives them great Power for to perform this service and Ministry to
the Saints; we see that the Angel, Act. 20.7,10. that was sent to fetch Peter
out of prison, he did but touch him and his chains fell off, and when they came
to the Iron gate it presently opened; the Lord gives the Angels power over the
fiercest creatures, that when Daniel was thrown into the Lions Den, the Lord
sent an Angel and shut the Lions mouths, that they should not hurt him, Dan.
6.32.

And as they serve the Saints in other things, so in destroying of their
enemies; as an Angel smote Herod with death, Act. 10.23. Yea 1 Kings, 19.35. in
that great strait that Hezekiah and the people of God were in, when that huge
Army of the Assyrians came against them, the Lord, the text says sent an Angel
that smote in one night on kundred fourscore and five thousand of them, whom
they left all dead corpses. Its a wonderful Execution.

When Lazarus died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.
As they do rejoice in the conversion of a soul, so in the finishing of our
course; and are joyful to bring us home to our Fathers house: yea, the
Scripture tells us that the Lord will send the Angels at the last day to gather
his people together from the four Winds, who will know them all in the utmost
corners of the earth, having been ministering spirits unto them.

(...) may be stirring affections and freedom of speech from the apprehension
of popular applause in some Auditories; but gracious men know a difference
between those inlargements and the soul-humbling assistance of Gods spirit.
(10) Gods Spirit gives to his servants many times a more then ordinary
assistance in their labors amongst the Saints for their sakes, for their
quickening, comforting, strengthening and edification, whose building up was one
great end of the ordinance of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.10,11,12. (11) Gods Spirit
gives his servants affections in preaching, as Zeal, Compassion to souls, and
the like; but though something of this may be observed by the hearers in the
delivery of the word; yet not so as to the Preacher himself by the observing of
the inward frame of his heart: some men's tone and art of speaking may
counterfeit affections, and other men's age and weakness of speech may hide very
spiritual affections in that work.

(6) The blessed Spirit is the great thing in reading and hearing of the word.
(1) How clearly will the Spirit open a Scripture to a man's understanding? when
a man has read many Expositors, the Spirit of God is pleased many times to be
the best Commentator. (2) How the Spirit of God applies the word read or
preached with power many times upon the conscience, and indeed then comes the
word with power when it comes in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1.5. and we should
not observe only what we read or heard, but what impressions the Spirit of God
made upon the hearts in reading or hearing. Those which Peter preached to, Act.
10. the holy Ghost fell on them: when it is so with hearers, then the word
affects them indeed. (3) The Spirit of God in hearing of the word sometimes
enlarges a soul and enlightneth it into a Truth far beyond what the Preacher
made out in expressions. (4) Yea, the Spirit makes use of some passage in a
Sermon many times to work upon a soul that was but a parenthesis and
circumlocution or reflection upon the hearers ignorance and dullness, things that
many would think might very well have been left out.

(7) The Spirit of God is of infinite use to us to lead us into Truth, Joh.
16.13. He leads Believers into all truth, all necessary truth to Salvation.
Gods spirit does as it were print a body of divinity in the hearts of
Believers, and though many of them be of weak Judgment, and not able to answer
the subtle Arguments that may be brought against a Truth, yet Gods Spirit
keeps them in the Truth that they are not led aside.

(8) The Spirit brings things to our remembrace, John 14.26. That though many
an honest heart when he has read or heard the word, complains he can remember
very little, yet Gods Spirit will bring things seasonably to their Remembrance,
that it may be many years after, when by reason of some Temptation or
affliction they have most need of such a truth, then they have such a place of
Scripture, or such a passage of a sermon heard long ago brought to their
Remembrance by Gods spirit, and shall be of mighty use to them. The
conscionable and diligent hearing and reading of the word is frequently blessed
with seasonable remembrance: yea Gods Spirit has sometimes convinced and
converted a soul by bringing things to Remembrance that were read or heard many
years ago, and then took no impression upon the soul, that the benefit of
hearing and reading of the word both by Believers and Unbelievers does not
always appear upon that instant, but it may be a great while af^r.

CHAP. XIII. The Covenant between God the Father, and the Lord Jesus our Surety.
ITs a thing of unspeakable comfort to know that the Covenant of Grace is an
everlasting Covenant, and that it was principally made with Christ as the head
of the Elect; several things show, that there was a Covenant and Agreement
between God the Father and the Lord Jesus concerning the work of Redemption;
Christ being called the surety of the better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. shows that
there was a Covenant between God the Father and him, as there is between a
Creditor and a Surety, that Christ gave Bonds (as it were) to God the Father,
and paid the debt: when Christ is called Gods servant, Esaias 42.1. holds forth
as much, that though Christ as to his Divine nature was equal with God, yet as
Mediator he became the Fathers servant; God the Father and he agreed and
Covenanted about the doing of this great. Work of saving sinners. Yea in Psalm
89.28. God the Father says, my Covenant shall stand fast with him, that is,
which Christ (for many things in that Psalm show, that its to be interpreted of
Christ,) so then there is a Covenant that God the Father has made with Christ
the Mediator, which Covenant the Lord says shall stand fast; upon this
account the Lord Jesus is said Revel. 13.8. to be the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the world, because that it was agreed and Covenanted between God
the Father and Christ, that he should in the fullness of time be made flesh, and
die for sinners, and therefore it was said to be done from the Foundation of
the world, because so it was written in the Volume of Gods Book, that the Lord
Jesus had agreed to come to do the will of God, Heb. 10. which was to offer up
one Sacrifice for sins for ever, which was himself; and for the same Reason it
is said, that the Promises are made to Abraham's seed which is Christ, Gal.
3.16. not to seeds as of many; but they are principally made to one says he,
and that is Christ; and this the Apostle asserts, 2 Timothy 1.9. when he says we
are saved and called, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began:
which shows that God the Father and Christ dealt together about the Redemption
of souls before the world began; and all things agreed on and made sure between
them. This the Lord Jesus means, John 10.16. when he says, there were other
sheep which he must bring home; why must he bring them home? how was he bound
to it? only by this Covenant and Agreement with God the Father wherein he had
covenanted to do it.

Thus then it may be expressed in three particulars: 1. God the Father decreed
the salvation of the Elect; all those expressions where he is said to choose
them, love them with an everlasting Love, evince so much. 2. God the Father
appointed the Lord Jesus to be the Way and means by which they should be saved;
therefore is Christ said to be appointed by God the Father, Heb. 3.2. therefore
God is said to lay help upon him for poor sinners, Psalm 89. and therefore God
is said to appoint us to obtain by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.7. this is
everywhere spoken of in the Scripture. 3. God the Father made a sure Covenant
with the Lord Jesus, and agreed with him that he should do this great Work of
bringing many sons unto glory.


And so as we may express it to our Capacities under the Notion of a Covenant,
there were several things agreed on between God the Father and Christ our
Mediator.

1. They agreed of price what that Ransom should be that should discharge poor
sinners, and make full satisfaction to Gods Justice; and it was agreed that it
should be the death and bloodshedding of the Lord Jesus! this is expressed,
Heb. 10. where Christ says to God the Father, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, according to the Law, but in the Volume of thy Book it is written
of me, Lo I come to do thy will O God, that is, I come to give thee
satisfaction according to thy own heart by that which we agreed upon, My own
death.

2. They agreed of the time of payment; therefore it is said, Gal. 4. when the
fullness of time was come God sent his Son, that is, when the time that was
agreed upon between the Father and Christ, was come, then Christ was sent
forth, not that Christ had time given him because he was not able to pay our
debt before, but God saw that the fittest time, after the Church had been so
long under Ceremonies and hard services, then Christ comes forth to purchase a
Redemption from sin and those things to, that we might see more of the great
Benefits we have by him.

3. It was agreed what power the Lord Jesus should have to carry on the work of
Redemption, and all power was given to him, Mat. 28. and John 17.2. Thou have
given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as
thou have given him; Now Christ as God had of himself power over all things,
but now as Mediator, God the Father gives him power over all flesh; and so
Ephesians. 1.22. God the Father is said to have given Christ to be Head over all
things to the Church: Now Christ as God was Head over all things without any
giving of it to him: but Christ as Mediator has it given to him to be Head
over all things to the Church, that is, for the benefit of the Church, that so
the Lord Jesus is the Head over all things, has command over the good Angels,
Devils, men and all creatures for the good of the Church, whose Head he is in
another manner then he is Head of all things: so I say, this was agreed that
the Lord Jesus should have universal power and dominion for the managing of
this great Work.

4. It was agreed in this Covenant between the Father and Christ, that the sins
and failings of Christ's members should not break the Covenant that the Father
and Christ had made for their salvation; therefore it is said in that 89. Psalm
from 23. to 32. that the Covenant should stand fast with Christ; and says God,
if Christ's children break my Commandments, I will visit their Iniquity with a
Rod, I will have liberty says God, to chastise them and whip them home when
they play the Prodigals and wander from my House: but then it shall not break
the Covenant that they sin against me, but I will pardon their iniquities, and
remember their sins no more.

Upon the account of this Covenant between the Father and Christ, the Lord
Jesus is said to trust God the Father as Mediator, Heb. 2.13. Behold, I put my
trust in him: and again, behold I and the children which God has given me.
Christ as Mediator trusted God the Father to carry him through the great work
of his Mediation. (2.) He trusted him that he would accept of his death. (3.)
He trusted him that in the appointed time he would bestow all the good things
purchased by his death upon them for whom he died: which good things were
especially forgiveness of sins, the Spirit, Sanctification, and eternal life;
God the Father had trufted Christ with the salvation of his people, with which
he would not have trusted all the Angels in Heaven: and therefore Christ might
well trust God the Father in this matter; Christ knew Gods infinite Love to
those for whom he died, and knew the Covenant between the Father and him on
their behalf, and so trusted the Father fully in the business, relying upon the
love and faithfulness of God: his love to the Elect, and his faithfulness to
keep Covenant with him.

CHAP. XIV. The Saints Comfort against Death.
DEath in it self is the King of Terrors, a very terrible thing, (1.) In it
self it is part of the curse, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die:
thou shall be liable to temporal and eternal death when I please to execute it;
but indeed death is not kept up to the Saints as a curse, but as a servant to
carry them home to their Fathers House. (2.) Death is an abhorrency to Nature,
that nature dreads it exceedingly: it parts the soul and body that have been
such intimate acquaintance, it leaves the body to be a dead carcass fit for
nothing but to be laid among the clods of the earth. (3.) Its terrible to flesh
and blood, as it depriveth men of the comforts of this present life; it
carries us from all the comforts of wife, children, friends, estate. Sigismund
the Emperor when he was near death, charged them that were about him that they
should not name death in his hearing; belike the thoughts of it were very
terrible to him. (4.) Death is terrible to many men's thoughts in respect of the
suddeness of it: sudden death comes sometimes, (1.) by a sudden decay of
nature, such diseases as the Apoplexy may be breeding in the body that shall
pluck down this earthly Tabernacle in one moment. (2.) Sometimes by Accidents
from without, as fire, enemies, falls, and the like. (3.) Sometimes by a sudden
stroke of Gods hand when there is no natural cause, but men might live a great
while: Thus God cuts off many in the midst of their days; not but that all men
live to the time appointed and set down by God; but that the Lord cuts them off
from that time, when they might according to the course of nature live a great
while-longer: Thus the Lord smote Herod suddenly with death; the hundred and
fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians in one night, Esaias 37.36. (5.) The
unavoidableness of death makes it terrible to the thoughts, that the stoutest
spirits see they cannot grapple with it; what man is he that lives and shall
not see death? who can deliver himself from the power of the grave? Psalm
89.48. Death fetches a General out of his Tent when he lies environed with
armed men; Death fetches the Prince out of his Palace, goes through all his
Lifeguard, and none can withstand him: so that men of brave and stout spirits
have no courage to deal with death, but their valor is turned into fear and
amazement. (6.) The pains and pangs of death make it terrible to the thoughts
of flesh and blood: to think what a strange confusion then will be in the
spirits, when the eye-strings and heart strings crack, and man can exercise no
more his spirit and understanding. (7.) That which above all makes death
terrible unto many, is the consequence of it, that after death comes the
Judgment, the particular day of Judgment presently; O says many an unwakened
conscience, O what shall I do to appear before God to make up my accounts to
him! so that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. that the sting of death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the Law; that is, that the greatest sting of death is
for a man's sins to be unpardoned, and unforgiven, and the strength and power
that sin has to damn is from the Law, that it is the breach of Gods holy Law;
but he tells us that Believers are freed from the damning power of sin, and from
the curses of the Law through Christ Jesus; as terrible as death is to nature,
flesh and blood, and to a man that fears hell, because it is the day of
execution to all that are out of Christ; yet a Saint may look upon death with
comfort; for though it be a dark entry, yet it leads to our Fathers House where
are many Mansions, though it be a rough passage, yet it lands us safe in
Heaven; infinite advantage comes to a Believer by death. (1.) Perfect enjoyment
of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the sight of whose blessed face shall
fill us in Heaven with unconceivable joy for ever. (2.) Clear understanding of
God, his Grace and the mystery of all his dealings with us in the world; now
we see all these darkly, but the Apostle says, then we shall see face to face;
now how poor and confused is our knowledge; how little a portion know we of the
Almighty, and of his Grace to us! then all will be clear. (3.) Freedom from
sin, which though it does not reign in Believers now, yet then it shall not in
the least remain, but they shall be Holy throughout. (4.) Freedom from
afflictions whereof all Gods children are partakers more or less in their
Pilgrimage. (5.) Freedom from all Temptations either to sin or for sin. (6.)
Spiritual and full enjoyment of the Saints, and not of Saints in their
weaknesses and mistakes, which yet we in our Pilgrimage do rightly judge to be
a great mercy; but then we shall enjoy communion with Saints, full of the
Spirit, Saints made perfect; Many particulars might be added to these, which
shall be omitted for brevities sake, but two questions must here be briefly
resolved.

Quest. 1. How comes it to pass that many natural men will often wish they were
dead, and many time die like lambs, and others murder themselves?

Answ. 1. Its seldom a real desire that ignorant people have to die, but a
sinful customary expression. (2.) If they be in good earnest, it arises from
ignorance. (1) Ignorance, what a serious thing it is to die. (2) Ignorance of
their own condition; they think they are in Christ, and that so death will be
an end of all troubles to them. (3) Ignorance of the torments of hell, as if
they were not greater then the troubles they have here for which they wish
themselves dead. (3) Those that murder themselves, are either so distracted by
excess of Melancholy, or so dejected by some outward crosses, or so overwhelmed
with despair, or so confounded in their understandings by Satan, that they are
not able to put forth scarce a serious or rational thought, but are carried
with a strange confusion, and hurry of thoughts into any thing.

2. But then it will be asked. Why many gracious persons seem to be wonderfully
a fraid of death before it come, and die with very little Comfort seemingly
upon their spirits, but rather trouble?

Answ. 1. So far as a Saint is flesh and blood, and so far as there is
corruption in him, so far death will be terrible to him; yet in the mean while
the regenerate part in him desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, as
that which is best of all; but as Ridley said when he came to die, I am not
afraid, but the flesh will have its course. (2) A Saint knows more then other
men what a serious thing it is to die, he considers the account that is to be
given to God, and the straitness of the way that leads to eternal Life, and
many times is not so assured of Gods love in Christ, and this damps his spirit
as to death. (3) Though a Saint sometime seems to be unwilling to die, yet
before the Lord takes them away he usually makes them not only willing but
desirous to die, to be with Christ, and that is a wonderful thing how God can
in one moment turn the scales in these things, and make that Saint that even
now trembled at the thoughts of death, now to say, Lord, here am I, When will thou send for me home? This the Saints have sometimes experience of. (4) Their
Comfort at death may be damped much, and seeming trouble appear to standers by
through some secret strong temptations of Satan, or through violence of their
disease.

CHAP. XV. The Holiness of Believers.
HOliness is most properly to be urged upon Believers more then upon natural
men; the great thing and the first thing that they are to do, is to believe in
Christ, and after they are in Chrst, then they are to be urged to walk holily
in him. Believers are to be holy both in soul and body, not only in the
thoughts of their hearts, but in all the actions of the outward man: The
Apostle Paul urges the holiness of the outward man, of the body as well as the
heart, by six arguments, all laid down in the sixth chapter of the first epile
to the Corinthians. His first Argument is, v. 13. How the body is not for
fornication but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body, that is, the Lord he
is for the body of believers as well as the soul: he has a care of their
bodies, of their outward man, and bestows many mercies upon the outward man,
and therefore says the Apostle, there is all the reason in the world that the
body, the outward man should be for the Lord. His second Argument is in the 14.
verse; he says, that God will raise up our bodies at the last; there is much
in that; if God will at last raise up the bodies of Believers, and glorify
them, and make them like to Christ's glorious body: O, how should they glorify
God with their bodies now in the mean while! His third Argument is, That our
bodies are the members of Christ, v. 15. His fourth Argument is, That our
bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, v. 19. His fifth Argumentis, That we
are not our own. neither bodies nor souls, v. 19. His last argument is, that we
are bought with a price, v. 20. All these Arguments are very strong for a
Believers glorifying of God with his body as well as with his soul, both which
are the Lords.

Several Arguments may be brought for the Saints holiness in general, as (1)
the Grace of God in Christ should be such a prevailing Argument to holiness,
that where there is any Gospel-ingenuity, we should reason as the Apostle does,
We were dead, and we judge that Christ having died for us to save us, that its
but reason we should live to him, says he in that place, 2 Cor. 5.14,15. the
love of Christ constrains us, (...), the word signifies it keeps in, it stops,
restrains, bridles: we have corrupt and wicked hearts by nature; but when a man
comes to be in Christ the love of Christ does bridle corruption, it puts a
mighty stop to it. (2) Sin is contrary to the work of God upon the heart of a
poor creature when he converts him to Jesus Christ. (3. All sin is a
transgression of Gods holy Law, 1 John 3.4. and that is a great matter. (4) Sin
is contrary to one great end of Christ's coming, which was to destroy the Works
of the devil, 1 John 3.5. Ephesians. 5 25.26. Titus 2.14. (5) Sins of Believers
harden natural men, and embolden them in their sins, when they see them that
have knowledge, and profess Religion, to do such things. (6) Christ that is our
head, is holy; that is one of the Apostles Arguments why we should be holy. 1
John 3.5. in him says he, is no sin, in Christ your head. O strive to be like
him. (7) God dwells among his people in an intimate way of presence: Number.
5.1,2,3. There shall no uyclean thing be fomnd among you, because the Lord
dwells in the midst of you: This is a strong Argument, the hearts of Believers
are as it were the presence Chamber of the King of Glory; and shall not they be
swept and clean? (8) Sin is contrary to the use that Believers are designed to
in the world they are to be lights of the world: sin makes them but dark
Lanthorns; they are to be the salt of the earth to keep the world from stinking
and putifying. (9) God has glory from others by the holiness of his people;
when they see our good works, they glorify our Father which is in he aven.
(10) Sin darkens the soul, and hinders it in its communion with God.

There are some corruptions in the hearts of Believers that do exceedingly
dismay them as if they would never be subdued. Sons of Anak indeed, that we and
all our graces look but like grasshoppers in comparison of those great Goliabs;
but God that at first infused such gracious qualities and habits, when we were
stark dead in trespasses and sins; how easily can he subdue the strongest
corruptions in our hearts that believe! God that first converted Paul when he
was in his full speed against Christ, can pluck out the thorn in the flesh; 2
Cor. 12.7,8,9. He tells him that his Grace was sufficient for him: There are
many things that Believers should have in their eye, as to holiness; as, (1) to
avoid Temptation. (2) Get sound Repentance for former sins, which may prevent
much sin for the future. (3) Take heed to the word, as our Rule in all our
walkings, Psalm. 119. (4) Pray servently and importunately against every lust.
(5) But above all act faith; put forth your faith upon the Lord Jesus for the
subduing of corruption; the heart, and so also the life is purified by faith in
him. Act. 15.9. It is not a man's resolutions and vows against sin: it is not
the austerity of the Papists, it is not the doing of so many outward things
that will kill a corruption in the heart, but Christ believed on in the heart.
For by faith, (1) we are ingraffed into Christ as our stock, that so we may
grow upon a new root, that by faith, as John 15.1,2,3,4,5. we are implanted
into Christ. Now as the Branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in
the vine, no more can we except we abide in him: (2) By faith we get some hope
and courage against sin that it shall be subdued, and are freed from those
fears that cut off endeavors and sink the soul. (3) By Faith a soul is enabled
to apply, plead and argue the promises that are made against the prevailing of
sin in Believers, of which sort there are many in the word, as Jer. 31.31,32.
Ezekiel. 36.26,27. Romans 6.14. (4) By faith we receive the Spirit from Christ,
which is he that can mortify the deeds of the flesh, the strongest corruptions
in the world. (5) Yea if we have not so much holiness in the outward bulk, yet
it gives much comfort to a soul when it finds that the little holiness he has
does flow from union with Christ, and that such a corruption was mortifyed
merely by faith in Christ.

CHAP. XVI. Of the gathering of Believers into Church Fellowship.
1. THis thing has been woefully mistaken and neglected, that there is no
difference in most places between within and without, between the Church and
the World, (2.) It is the duty of all that can to join themselves to some
Church of Saints for communion, as Paul when he was converted assayed to join
himself to the Disciples, Act. 9. (3.) We are not to stay to be put into
Church Order by the Laws of the Magistrate, seeing Christ who is the Head of
the Church has appointed the order of his House; the first Churches embodied
and walked in Church Fellowship when the Magistrate was against them and
persecuted them: usually those that stay while the Magistrate settles things in
the Church, will submit to any thing right or wrong that the Magistrate shall
appoint. (4.) There are many Privileges of Believers joined in Church
fellowship, enjoying the Ordinances in Christ's way, and watching over one
another, comforting one another, yea such a presence of God as we seldom find
out of it; hence it is said, that in his Temple, that is, in his Church every
one speaks of his Glory, Psalm 29.9. God is known in Sions Palaces for a
Refuge, Psalm 48.2,3. I am like a green Tree in the House of God, which House
is his Church, Psalm 52.8. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel;
in Salem also is his Tabernacle, his dwelling place in Sion. Psalm 76.1,2.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee.
They shall meet with such blessed communion with God, Psalm 84.4. However those
that are in Churchfellowship may not find all this through the deadness and
formality of their hearts: yet all this provision is in Gods House. (5.) There
is no Rule for partaking of the Lords Supper but in Church Fellowship: the
Lords Table is to stand in his House, which is a Church of Saints. (6.) To find
out the way of Church fellowship and Gospel Order, the way is not to go unto
Antiquity, unless we go as high as the Apostles days; though something may be
gathered to clear the Congregational way from the first centuries, but
afterward superstition and ignorance came in like a Flood: it has been the
time of the Beasts Reign, and Satan's being loose to deceive the Nations: and
therefore say not The former days were better then these; what a dark midnight
was it in Wickliffs time, 1371, and in John Husse's time when he was condemned?
who would frame things now according to the way of the professing party of the
world in those times? and what were the Bishops times when we were so
overspread with superstition, that as a godly man says, the Table was an
Altar, the Minister was a Priest, and the Sacrament was a Sacrifice, and there
wanted nothing to be added to it but the Name of Mass, and to call it the
Sacrifice of the Mass; there are many Promises in the Scripture that there
shall be much light in the last days, Knowledge shall abound. (7.) A
particular Church is a company of visible Saints that join themselves
voluntarily together to enjoy the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus among
themselves, and to build up one another in their most holy faith: this appears
by the Epistles to the Church of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus and the rest, where
they are called Saints, faithful, Brethren, sanctified in Christ Jesus, such as
the Lord had begun a good work in, Phil. 1.6,7. The Apostle says it was meet
to think so of every member of that Church: yea, he calls the members of the
Church of the Thessalonians Elect, 1 These. 1.4. and gives the Reason, ver. 5.
because that the Gospel came to them not in word only, but with power and the
Holy Ghost and much assurance; not but that in those Churches there might be
some that in the sight of God might be unbelievers; but when they were taken
into to those Churches, they had such knowledge and Grace, that so far as the
Church could judge, they could own them to be effectually called. Many shifrs
may be found out to withstand the Truth, but (if the Epistles to the Churches
be weighed, and the practice of the Apostles in the first Churches) they are of
no weight. (8.) Whatsoever corruption crept into the Church of Corinth, and
other Churches, does no way alter the case; for they were all visible Saints
when they were first gathered; and the Incestuous person and such were to be
Excommunicated, 1 Cor, 5. else their Churchstate would soon have been
destroyed; for such leaven would soon have leavened the whole lump; and though
that incestuous person was suffered a while, yet upon the Apostles writing to
them he was cast out; and God so blessed that dreadful Ordinance of
Excommunication to him that he repented and was taken in again; And for their
disorders at the Lords Supper, they so repented and reformed upon the writing
of that Epistle, that the Apostle charges them not with those disorders in his
second Epistle to them: yea, the Apostle in his second Epistle to the
Corinthians, gives them great commendations as Chapter 7.12,13,14. Chapter 9.14. he
speaks of the exceeding Grace of God in them (9.) The more evidence of Grace
and satisfaction in every member, the purer the Church is at its first
gathering. (10.) Most people amongst us make not so much as an outward
profession of Religion; how many either hold fundamental Errors, or are grossly
ignorant, or are profane, and scoffers at the Spirit of God and power of
godliness? yet the Apostle gives a direction to Timothy to teach the Church
what they should do in case of profession, that if men have a Form of
godliness, and deny the power of it, declare themselves plainly by their
conversations to have no Grace in their hearts, he bids us from such to turn
away, 2 Timothy 3.5. (11.) The creeping in of corrupt members into Churches, the
best Churches, is so far from being an Argument to lay aside all Rules and care
of the Church in admitting members, that its a strong Argument to put them upon
all Christian care; if so many enemies get into the Garrison, when every man
that comes in is questioned, what will there be when there is no watch nor
care at all? because that Believers after all their watching, praying and
believing have some sinful weaknesses, should they neglect all care and duty?
this were a strange Argument; Nay, but therefore watch and pray, and strive and
believe for power against corruption. (12.) The way to come out of confusion
into Church order? is by godly men's joining together as a Church of Christ upon
good satisfaction of one another Grace, and so to choose their Officers that
are to be their Overseers in the Lord; the choice of whom by the Church is part
of their liberty wherewith Christ has made them free; that society of people
is no longer fit to be called a Church that must have their Officers imposed on
them. (13.) In the common way there is little like Church Fellowship; instead
of watching over one another to keep one another up, there is watching for one
another halting and rejoicing in them; instead of Heavenly Discourse, swearing
and cursing. (14.) Though the generality of people amongst us do not in words
deny Christ and the Doctrine of the Gospel, but in words agree to it, as it is
the Religion of their country commonly here professed, yet they no otherwise
profess it then they would do any other Religion, if it should be publicly
commanded; as the main Body in King Henry the eighths time, and Edward the
sixth, Q. Mary and Q. Elizabeth, turned four times in twelve years: therefore
let not wise and gracious men lay weight upon such a sandy verbal Profession of
men, that has no signs accompanying it of Grace and sincerity in their hearts.
(15.) When Believers enter into Church Fellowship, what can be said against a
Holy Covenant, thereby professing and declaring the full purposes of their
hearts, to walk in all the Ordinances of Christ, and in the fellowship of that
Church as God shall give them light, assistance and opportunity; such
engagements in all Politic Bodies have their use. (16.) Although living
together be convenient for those that join in Church Fellowship, especially
some of them for to manage Church Affairs, that they may be always present;
yet rather then to live without the Ordinances all our days in a way
satisfying to our own consciences, we may join to the nearest Churches till God
open a door of opportunity for us at home. (17.) The Church is not the
Officers, but the Body of the Saints, Acts 15.4. And when they were come to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders; so
that the Apostles and Elders were not counted the Church: and ver. 22. then it
pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church; so the Apostle in his
Epistles to Rome, Corinth, and the rest, calls the Body of the Saints the
Church; I know not how any Officers of the Churches can be the Church
Representative as some phrase it, except they be Deputed and appointed by a
Church to be their Messengers to transact any business for them and in their
stead; and of Messengers of the Churches in that sense we read in the
Scripture. (18.) If that one thing were done among the godly in the Nation,
that visible Saints embodied together and chose their Officers to go out before
them in the Lord; all other differences about the power of particular
congregations and the jurisdiction of Synods and the like, would either by
light or love among the Churches be sweetly composed; but while many godly
Ministers stand so stiff upon their former ordination, that will look for no
solemn Call from those Churches they count themselves Pastors of, and observe
no way of admission of members to maintain purity, and will manage all by
themselves as it were without either presence or consent of the Church, it may
be a great inconvenience and hinder communion of their and other Churches,
which might else more comfortably own one another Church state notwithstanding
other differences; those things are urged by the New England men with many
Arguments; and that of the holiness of those that are to be admitted into
Churches, is excellently defended by Mr. Cotton in that Book of his called The
Holiness of Church members, in which he answers all that is usually brought
against it; so that he that would with small expense either of money or time
see that point cleared, that may get that Book: (19.) To say that there has
been true Churches in England heretofore, no way proves that there is a true
Church in every Parish; for though there might be true Churches in some
Parishes, it does not follow that therefore there was in all: and because that
there was a Church in such a place a hundred years ago, it does not follow that
therefore there is now: for God gives Churches a bill of divorce many times;
what is become of the Churches of Asia, the Church of Rome? Has not the Lord
taken away their Church State? yet Rome still holds Christ that died at
Jerusalem to be the true Christ, the denial only of which some conceive will
only unchurch a people, and not their profaneness and wickedness otherwise, be
it never so great; a very strange notion it is; but the Lord threatens to
unchurch the Church of Ephesus for other grounds, besides such gross
Infidelity, as was intimated; yea though they had many excellent things in
them, yet Revel. 2,4,5. I have somewhat against thee because thou have left thy
first love; remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
thy first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly and remove thy
Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent, where we may observe to our
present purpose, (1.) That God does sometimes remove a peoples Church state;
for so I think all acknowledge that by Candlestick is meant their Church State;
for the seven Candlesticks were the seven Churches, Revel. 1.20. (2.) It shows
us plainly, that though a people do not deny Christ that died at Jerusalem to
be the true Christ, but outwardly acknowledge and own him; yet if the Church
generally leave their first love, and grow formal and carnal, that there is to
be seen no difference between them and unregenerate men, God will unchurch
them, will own them no more (after some time of his patience and waiting for
their Repentance) to be a Church and house of his. (3) That God does not use to
stay generations before he unchurch a people that fall off from him for he
says in this place, he will come quickly to remove his Candlestick, except
they repent. God will not have Churches now look for such for bearance as the
Church of the Jews, which was an extraordinary thing, and not to be paralleld;
but says he, I come quickly, not to wait now many hundred years as I did upon
the people of Israel. (20) Although the Officers of Churches have a power of
order, yet they have not all Church Power; for the Church of Corinth were to
consent to put forth that Church act of excommunicating the incestuous person,
1 Cor. 5.4. Though some officer for order-sake be the mouth of the Church in
the managing of it; they are by most allowed to choose their own officers,
without which they should fall short of the privilege of most societies and
relations in the world; and this is some act of power that most grant is seated
in the Church: and thus was an Apostle chosen, Act. 1. and the Deacons, Act.
6.3. and Elders, Act. 14.23. In that Synod they were not chose neither by
Magistrates or by the Officers of the Churches only, but by the body of the
Church, Act. 15.2,3. and so when any great affairs are to be transacted with
another Church, the persons commonly called the Messengers of the Churches are
sent not only by the Officers, but by the whole Church. Act. 15.23. 2 Cor.
8.19. and these do represent the Church indeed from which they are sent;
therefore he says in that place. verse 24. show ye to them, and before the
Churches the proof of your love; to show that what is done before them when
they are thus delegated and appointed by the Churches, is done before these
Churches; and the Church must say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which
thou have received of the Lord, and fulfill it, Col. 4.17. but for a man to
come only by a Patron into a place that he looks upon as a Church, and is not
solemnly chosen by them, and then will take all Church Power to himself, is far
from being according to Rule. (21) Believers may join together in
Church Fellowship, though they do not agree in every thing, if they agree in
the main: Churches gathered upon rigid Principles of uniformity in every thing
makes way for breaches: if men be sound in the faith, and not of turbulent but
peaceable Spirits, some mistakes about lesser matters may be born with until
God shall reveal these things unto them. (22) Its observable that godly
Ministers in most parts of the nation begin more and more to be unsatisfied
with the common way of taking all to the Lords Table; though yet they differ
what is the way of Reformation; but this serves not only to countenance the
peaceable and sober separation that is practiced by some, but promises much
that God will reveal these truths of discipline more fully then hitherto: we
know that the godly in the Bishops times first began to scruple one Ceremony,
and then another, and so light came in by degrees, it is a good thing to see
that men cannot bear such profaning of Gods Ordinances, as has been amongst
us, and that they labor for purity of ordinances, though they do not presently
come into Gospel Order in every thing. (22) The Pastors of the Churches must be
godly.

It is a greater mischief then many are aware of, that many that are public
Preachers, and count themselves Pastors of Churches, are not gracious men; yea
by those that put them into that work, and those that sit under their Ministry,
it is not regarded whether they be godly, only that they have some learning and
parts. (1) John 21.15,16,17. Christ says to Peter, Love thou me? then feed
my Lambs: Christ does not send others to seed his Lambs that neither love him
nor them. (2) Mind the description of a Pastor or Bishop which are all one. 1 Timothy 3. He must be sober, no drunkard, apt to teach from some gifts of
knowledge and utterance that God has bestowed upon him: he says, he must not
be greedy of filthy Lucre: Oh how many have entered upon the ministry merely for
filthy Lucre to get a living! he says, he must not be a Novice, (...), a young
plant in Christ; he must not be one that is newly converted; then surely he
must not be one that is not converted at all. (3) The Duty of a Pastor
requires it also, as it is set down, 1 Timothy 3.5. that he is to take care of
the Church of God: now a natural man hates the Saints of God, and will sooner
devour and make havoc of the Church of God, then take care to preserve and
comfort, and help it; so they are said, Heb. 13.17. to watch for the peoples
souls. And how can they do this that do not watch over their own souls? (4) We
may consider also what rules the Apostle gives to Titus about this business.
Tit. 1.8. He says, that they that are called to this office, must be Lovers of
good men, and that none can be but a Saint; hereby we know that we are passed
from death to life, if we love the Brethren; and he says also, that he must be
holy, (...), the same word that is used, Act. 13.35. concerning Christ; and
verse 9. he says he must be one that will hold fast the faithful word, which
there is no hopes that wicked men should do when persecution arises because of
the word. (5) Men that are not visibly Saints and called, are not to be members
of a Church, notwithstanding any parts and accomplishments they may have, much
less should they be Pastors of Churches. (6) A carnal Minister ascribes all to
his parts and learning in his work, and not to the ability that God gives, 1
Pet. 4.11. and so God has not the glory. (7.) The Scripture says that the
prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and a stinch in his
Nostrils. (8) Though many of them may have good parts, and may be seemingly
sound in the matters of Religion, yet we have no ground to think that they will
continue sound, because the Scripture says, that because they have received
the truth not in the Love and power of it, God will send men strong delusions,
2 Thessalonians. 2. (9) Though Christ sent Judas, yet he was never a Pastor of a Church
of Saints, and he was outwardly a Saint, so in the esteem of the Apostles; and
Christ did it not for our imitation. Christ limits us, though we must not limit
him, and there is a particular Reason given of it that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled. (10) Christ's words concerning hearing the Pharisees that sit in Moses
chair, was rather a dispensation then an injunction; and its one thing to hear
occasionally, and another thing to sit down under a man's Ministry; and it was
only upon some points about the Law, not in all things; for they taught that
Christ was the Prince of Devils, and a Deceiver; least of all did Christ
countenance their Ministry in these words, to be good and lawful; for see how
Christ inveigheth against those Pharisees, Mat. 15. as if he he had been made
up of invectives. (11) The Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. having spoken in the verse
before of the spiritual man judging all things, and he himself is judged of
none, propounds that question, Who has known the mind of the Lord that he may
instruct him? By him is meant the spiritual man, for of him he is speaking, not
of instructing the Lord; but says he, we have the mind of Christ, and
therefore can instruct them unto edification; so then this Argument is taken
from their insufficiency for the work, that a natural mancannot reach a Saint
who is above him. (12) So the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.6. speaking of Ministers, uses
that comparison, the husbandman that labors must first be parraker of the
fruits of the earth; How else can he sow? So has a Minister need to be
partaker of some experience of the blood of Christ and comforts of the Spirit;
How else can he preach Christ feelingly and powerfully unto others? (13) We see
whom God has used for conversion. Those that went under the name of Puritans
and Nonconformists in the Bishops times, and go now under many more names in
the world; but it is with those that are his servants that he is present: it is
to them that he has Promised to bless what they put their stands unto, and to
be with them to the end of the world; it is not what God can do, or sometimes
has done: for we must not limit him; but whether the Lord has appointed the
preaching of wicked men as an Ordinance of his for conversion of sinners, or
the building up of Saints. (14) In other things that are not of that
concernment that this is, men will not trust those that have not experience; as
in Physic, though a man has read several Physic books, and is able to define
diseases, and to talk pretty well, yet you will not choose such an one to be
your Physician if he want experience; much less should you trust that man with
your soul that has only read some Divinity books, and so is able to speak
something, if he have no experience of the power and sweetness of the truths of
God himself.

CHAP. XVII. The right use of the Law.
THE Law we are speaking of is the moral Law, the ten Commandments, with what
comment and exposition is upon it in the Scripture.

This Law is of excellent use. (1) It discovers to us the holiness of God,
that he would have his creatures live according to rule, and not in sin and
Confusion. (2) It serves to discover sin to men, Romans 7.7. and to this end all
are to get knowledge of the Law, Romans 7.1. and we are often to examine our
hearts and lives by the Law, and to know the Law in the spirituality of it,
that we may see spiritual and secret sins. (3) The Law serves to awaken the
consciences of natural men with the fear of hell and damnation, and to set them
more seriously to look after their eternal condition: but those that are in
Christ they are not to fear hell by the Law, because they are freed by Christ
from the damning power of it. (4) The Law rightly understood, will show a soul
an utter impossibility that ever he should get life by own works and
righteonsness; for the Law requires perfect obedience, gives no strength to
obey, admits of no repentance, neither will be satisfied to inflict temporal
punishments and afflictions, but throws the sinner into hell, and lays him up
there for ever, except the soul has interest by Faith in the perfect
righteousness of Christ which fully answers the Law. (5) To Believers the Law
may be a constant help to thankfulness: they see the strength of sin, 1 Cor.
15.56,57. that is, the power that sin has to damn, is from the Law, because it
is the breach of Gods holy and righteous Law: now to see how Christ has
delivered them from all the curses and damning power of the Law, this may make
them cry out, Thanks be to God that has given us the victory through Jesus
Christ our Lord. (6) The Law is taken into the hands of Christ, and is made a
rule for Believers to walk by; the Believers Salvation or Damnation does not
depend upon his obedience or disobedience to the Law, for he is freed from the
Law as a Covenant of Works; yet he is not freed from duty and filial obedience;
but the Law, as it is a rule of obedience stands in force, and is to be obeyed
by all Believers; Several reasons to prove it. (1) Christ expounds the Law,
Mat. 5. and clears up the strictness and spirituality of the Law more. (2)
Else the breaking of the Law would be no sin, which would be a monstrous
opinion. (3) The same things that the Laws forbids are set down in the new
Testament to bring damnation, 1 Cor. 6.9.10. as Idolatry, Adultery, Thest,
Covetousness. (4.) The new Covenant promises the putting of Gods Laws into our
mind, and writing them in our hearts. Heb. 8.10. therefore the Gospelis no
enemy to the Law, but writes it in our hearts, as it was written in stone, and
gives us principles to obey it. (5) Paul after his conversion looked upon it as
a mighty work of Gods Spirit upon him, that he delighted in the Law of God
after the inward man, Romans 7.22. that is, that God had given him a heart to
delight to do those things the Law called for, which shows that Believers are
to make the Law as a rule of obedience. Thus a Believer is not without Law to
God, but is under the Law to Christ, as Paul says he was, 1 Cor. 9.21. that
is, as the Law is taken by Christ into his own hands, and held forth by him to
his people, as a rule for their obedience to him: so a Believer is under the
Law: every Command of it, and every breach of it is sin, even in Believers. The
Believer is not freed from the Do this of the Law, but when the Law says, Do
this and live, he is freed from that; he does not expect life by his doing
those things in the Law, for he is justified freely by Grace, he lives not by
his doing, but by the faith of the Son of God, who loved him, and gave himself
for him. And for the threatenings of the Law, Not'do this and die, the soul that
sins it shall die; this a Believer is freed from, for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. Christ has redeemed
them from the curse of the Law, by being made a curse for them, Gal. 3.13.

Quest. How may a man know whether he has a Gospel-work upon his heart, or
that he is yet under Law as a Covenant of works, and has only legal workings
upon him?

Answ. 1. Such as do not think it is a hard thing to come off from the Law, as
a Covenant of works, to trust alone in the righteousness of Christ, such may
well suspect that there has been only a legal work upon them; for its the
hardest thing in the world to rest only upon Christ, though it is easily said.
(2) Such as do not know the Law from the Gospel, and the Gospel from the Law in
their main Principles and terms: there are too many that know not in the least
measure, no not with a notional knowledge what the difference between the Law
and the Gospel is; such may well think that they are not yet come off from the
Law as a Covenant of works. (3) Such as have their hearts rise against
Gospel-preachers and Professors, as Gal 4.29. As then he that was born after
the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. A
man that is upon the Law for life, has a strange enmity in his heart against
those that look to be justified freely by Grace. (4) Such are under the Law as
a Covenant of works, as cannot bear the vilifying of man's righteousness as to
Justification, though he hears the same persons urge it never so vehemently
as to Sanctification, and walking before God to all well pleasing: O if thou
can not freely say that all thy own Righteousness is as menstruous rags, and
that when thou have done all, thou art but an unprofitable servant, then thou
may justly fear thy estate. (5) Such as think they have kept the Law
themselves, like the young man in the Gospel, All these things have I kept from
my youth. (6) Such are under the Law yet as have had legal breakings for sin,
but never had the least Gospel sorrow for sin, who have never in the least
mourned for sin, because it peirced Christ, but only because it pierces
themselves.

Let all labor for a right understanding of the Law, in which take their
directions. (1) Look upon the Law as requiring perfect obedience; so strict as
that it will not abate one farthing to a sinner: there is no compounding with
the Law. (2) Count your selves utterly unable to keep the Law. (3) Count the
forfeiture for breaking of the Law to be no less then eternal damnation. (4)
Always look upon Christ as having a righteousness answering the Law fully, Romans
10.3.4. Romans 8.3,4. (5) Count your selves under all the wrath and curses of the
Law, except you be in Christ, Gal. 3.10. whatsoever are the intentions of God,
and the merits of Christ for an elect person yet uncalled, he being considered
as a child of old Adam, he is under the curse; he does not in his own person
enjoy the state of freedom which God has graciously purposed to bestow upon
him, and the Lord Jesus has purchased for him, though yet it is impossible for
the Law to throw the Elect person into hell, because God will certainly bestow
upon them in his own fit season the Grace that Christ has purchased for them.
(6) If you be in Christ, reckon not your selves to have to do with the curses
and threatenings of the Law, but see them all taken away by Christ from you. (7)
Often seriously remember that many perish everlastingly by their mistaking of
the Law, and resting in the Law; that you may see by the Epistle to the Romans
and Galathians, where the Apostle shows the danger of resting in the Law, and
shows how forward men are to do so. (8) Never go out in your own strength to
obey the Law, but fetch strength from the promises of the Gospel to obey the
commands of the Law. (9) In the reading of Scripture observe what places are
most properly Law, and what places are especially Gospel, and make those which
are Law and Duty to come in after free Justification, to come in as filial
obedience to the Lord. (10) When a soul has been enabled to yield a good
measure of obedience to the Law and Commands of God, yet he must rely upon the
Lord Jesus by faith as freely and alone justifying him: he cannot spare the
least part of Christ's Righteousness after all the holiness he has attained to,
but is still to desire to be found in Christ, not having on him his own
righteousness, but that which is by the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by Faith.

CHAP. XVIII. The true Humility that is in the Lords People.
ALL Saints have more or less a humble frame of heart, that whatsoever Grace or
Gifts God bestows upon them, they have low thoughts of themselves.

1. How a humble frame of heart is shown toward the Lord. 2. How a humble
frame of heart is shown in our carriage toward other Saints.
I. Toward the Lord. (1) When after all our duties and performances we look
upon our selves but as unprofitable servants and infinitely unworthy that God
should deal so graciously with us, but we look upon all as free grace; without
this a man has no Gospel humility, but is a proud Pharisee, whose heart is
puffed up with his own righteousness, and does not glory only in the Lord.
Where there is true humility of heart, the Soul says with Jacob, Genesis,
32.10. I am not only unworthy of of Christ and Heaven, but I am less then the
least of all the mercies and faithfulness which the Lord has shown to his
servant; but a man under legal workings only, has a desperate proud heart
against God still, and is fit to stand upon terms with God, that he has no
cause to damn him, though he in words confess he might do it. (2) This is true
humility of heart when a man can loath and abhor himself for sin, as David,
Psalm 51.3,4. Job. 42. But when a man can think of old sins, and new sins, and
no way affected, its a sign of a proud unhumbled heart. (3) When a soul is in
some measure submitted to all Gods dealings, to all chastisements and
afflictions, as David, Psalm 39.9. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it; there is much humility of heart seen in this when we are willing
God should do with us, our Estates, Relations and enjoyments as it seems good
in his own eyes: a proud heart will not bear to be crossed; but says a humble
heart, Though it be a grievous affliction that is befallen me, yet it is from
the Lord, and I will be dumb and not open my mouth against it, because he does
it. (4) When a soul goes on to wait for a mercy and beg for a mercy when God
delays a mercy, and seems to slight the soul; and yet now for the soul to
wait and not to stir from the door of Mercy, but beg the Alms more humbly and
submissively, this is like the woman of Canaan: indeed she does not go away in
a snuff: let Christ call her dog, and she says Truth, Lord I am no better; yet
Lord, give the dog a few crumbs, but hearts that have not been truly humbled
will fling up praying and hearing presently, if they cannot find Comfort soon;
like a sturdy Beggar that, if the Alms do not come presently, goes away in a
rage: O but there is many a humble heart waits and prays many a year for a
mercy. (5) When a soul can submit to God when he takes away a mercy that he had
given us but a little before. O says a proud heart, when God takes away a
mercy; If God had never given me it, it had been better; I could have been
content to have been without it; but did God give me Estate, Children, Honor
to take them away so presently again? O but says an humble heart, I was
unworthy to have this mercy at all; I have cause to bless God that I have had
any sun-shiny weather in my jorney. (6) It shows humility of heart, when after
God has made great use of a man, and God will now lay him aside, that yet now
we are well content, and take great care that Gods work may go on, though we be
not employed in it; as Moses, Number. 27.14,15,16,17. when the Lord told him that
he should die and not lead the people into Canaan, because of that sin at the
water of Meribah, he does not stand upon terms, and say. After I have done such
great service, will thou be angry for such an offense, that I, who have had
such a great deal of care and trouble with this people, should not see the end
of the work? No, No; he does not say a word to excuse his sin, or to show the
least discontent that he was laid aside, but takes care for the work going on
when he is laid aside: says he, Lord set a man over the Congregation that may
go in before them and go out before them, that the Congregation of the Lord be
not as sheep without a Shepherd: a proud heart would have been so offended
that he would not have cared what became of the work, if he were laid aside.

So secondly, Humility of heart is seen in our carriage toward other Saints:
As (1) when we look upon our selves as the least of all Saints, as Paul says
of himself, says an humble heart, Though it may be I can discourse better, yet
I cannot pray so well as younder poor Saint, or I cannot trust God in straits
and difficulties so well as he, or I have not that Gospel simplicity that he
has, or I am not so forward to heavenly discourse as he is; or says an humble
heart, Younder Saint can submit better in affliction then I; or surely he has
not so vain a heart as I, or surely he has not such distractions in duties as
I: so that an humble heart in one respect or another does truly look upon
himself as the least and unworthyest of all Saints. (2) When we can take a
reproof from the meanest Saint in the world, the meanest for Estate or Gifts:
whereas a proud heart says, If such a one had told me of my fault, I could
have born it; but for such as you to reprove him, he cannot take it well: but
says an humbly heart, Lord I bless thee that thou openst the mouths of any to
deal faithfully with my soul. (3) Where there is an humble heart, we are
desirous to partake of the Light and gifts of others as well as show our own.
(4) An humble heart does not envy others that out go him in Gifts and Grace,
and success, and are more honored then he is as John did not envy Christ that
he out-stripped him, John 3.26,27,28. but could cheerfully bear witness unto
Christ's deserts, though he ecclipsed him. (5) An humble heart can condescend to
the meanest office to be serviceable to poor Saints: a proud heart is fit to
think it a disparagement to go to the houses of poor Saints, and to be seen
with such mean people: but says an humble heart, Its a great Mercy and favor
that I may enjoy Communion with the Lords people, or be any way serviceable to
them; though they be never so mean and poor. (6) An humble heart is not so
delighted and tickled, and puffed up with applause and commendation from
others, but many times is the more humbled upon it, and is more sensible of his
own unworthiness.

All Saints have cause enough to be humble and very low in their own eyes: a^
for the sins of our unconverted Estate, which we should often think of so as to
admire Gods free Grace, in calling of us out of darkness, and to have new
sorrow for old sins; so as to put forth fresh acts of Faith for pardon; so as
to avoid all Occasions and Temptations to draw us to those old sins again; so
as to rely mightily upon Christ's strength to keep us, and so as to be humble
and very low all our days. The Lord many times sets on old sins upon the
Consciences of his people with some terror; but then it is usually when we are
either in danger of falling into those sins again, or have our hearts grow
proud and puffed up, forgeting what we were formerly, but that God has loved
us freely.

And so our daily sins after Conversion, our deadness and formality, and
unserviceableness, all call for great humility of heart and selfabhorrence.

CHAP. XIX. Some directions for Believers in their walking with God, and their
conversation in the world.
1. LEt all Saints be well acquainted with Gods workings upon their souls, the
time and manner; and be sensible of the backwardness and opposition of their
own hearts to all the grace that God has wrought in them: that God has
magnified his Grace exceedingly in all the good that he has done them: Our
Iniquities and the stubborness of our hearts testify against us; but God has
made it appear that he has done all that he has done for us for his own names
sake.

2. Be sensible of the corruption of our hearts; remember all the iniquities of
our youth; get sound Repentance for the sins of our unregenerate estate when we
knew not God; observe our great backslidings, since our Conversion, and the
sins that do most easily beset us, and loath our selves for them, and beg
special Grace and strength from Christ where we are most weak and tempted.

3. Renew our Faith daily upon Christ, and meditate upon Gods free Grace in
Christ, which is notonly to be taken as a cordial in some swooning fits, but
our daily food; for we live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.

4. Getting Intimacy with the spirit of God, and wait daily for his comforting,
teachings, strengthnings and sanctifying influences, and seasonable bringing of
Scriptures and truths to our remembrance: refuse not his light when he would
teach us any thing, though it be a despised, persecuted Truth, and never so
contrary to our former apprehensions; quench not his motions when he would put
us upon any duty; resist not his motions to stop us in any way of sin: be
thankful for all his visits: for his visitations preserve our Spirits; we will
thank a godly man for a visit, much more the blessed Spirit: count all our
Prayers and services but as dead carcases, if there be not the Spirits
breathings and influences in them; grieve him not who is our Comforter, and
makes us glad: be not proud of his enlargements, but let him have the praise of
them.

5. Be constant in all duties and Ordinances, private and public, and be
careful that we neither be dead nor formal, nor rest in our duties; pray
against distractions in duties, which is a sin that is very hardly mortified.

6. Watch against errors in judgment, be not taken with the outward appearance
of those that bring opinions, knowing that Deceivers will come in Christ's name,
Mat. 24. and will transform themselves into Ministers of righteousness: Nay,
follow not men that are really godly without light out of the word; for godly
men know but in part: do not reject every thing that seems to be new; for
many Truths, especially about Discipline, are revealed in these last times,
which godly men in former times were ignorant of; that though God revealed to
them the necessary Truths to Salvation, yet in other things they are mistaken.

7. Expect Temptations every day, and be sensible of our own weakness to stand
in an evil day; labor to know that our Temptations are Temptations; don't
venture upon Temptations, don't come too near the devils forts, and think we
can retreat when we will: don't think that the devil plays only one game at
once: he has many stratagems at once; if he cannot prevail to draw to sinful
lusts, he will endeavor to draw to Error: if he cannot sink the soul with
terrors, he will labor to puff it up with Gifts; be not confident when we have
gotten a victory over Satan, and think we have routed him: he will not leave us
so, but will rally his forces again, and give us open battle or lie in ambush
for us; Sometimes Satan only feigns himself to be overcome, and comes afterward
with more success; yea a soul that has got the better through the strength of
Christ in some great temptation wherein Satan has seemed to fight with all his
forces, yet may be worsted in a less temptation, if Christ the Captain of our
Salvation do not lead us on.

8. Be well skilled in the Promises, and meditate in them day and night, and go
not to the Promise, upon legal terms: close with the Promises of free Grace,
such as, Ezekiel. 36.27,28. Jer. 31.32,33. before we close with the Promises that
are made to Grace already wrought, such as are made, Mat. 5. to such as are
poor in Spirit, and hunger and thirst after righteousness: close with Christ
before we close with the promises: for all the Promises are Yea and Amen in
him, and through him to them that are in him, 2 Cor. 1. And they are made first
to Christ, Gal. 3.16. as the head of the Elect; let every Promise be as a
stream to lead us to Christ, the head and wel-spring of the Promises, who has
all that in him, that all the Promises put together do contain.

9. Though in our young time we have been carried out in holiness in some
comfortable measure, yet be careful least in our old age, and when we have been
Professors a great while, we do not fall off from our first love and zeal, and
tenderness of Conscience: we read of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. what great things he did
for God in his young time; yet in the next Chapter we see how much he fell; and
Solomon in his young time was fearful of Idolatry, but in his old age he was
mightily carried away with it: not only young Christians but old Saints of
twenty or thirty years standing, had need walk circumspecty.

10. Practice that great duty of selfexamination daily, and desire of God to
search us, and try us, and make us to know our iniquities, and give us sound
humiliation for them; for godly men may lie a great while in a sin before they
be truly sensible of it, as David, before he was truly sensible of that sin of
Adultery, as appears by 2 Samuel 12. that it could not be less then three
quarters of a year: for when the Prophet Nathan came to him, the child that he
had by Bathsheba was born; for in the fourteenth v. Nathan told him that the
child that was born to him should die: and so verse fifteen, The Lord struck
the child: and so for his sin in numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24.8,9,10. it was
nine months and twenty days that the people were numbering; and all that time
David was not sensible of the sin, but in the end of that time: the Text says,
His heart smote him, and he said I have done very foolishly; and what a sad
thing is it, that a sin should be three quarters of a year unrepented of, and
such great sins! A Saint of all men in the world had need have his eyes about
him; and if it be possible, have a thousand things in his eye together: and
surely if there are some sins that we commit and don't know them, and mourn
only in the general for them, we should mourn the more for these sins we are
convinced of, and apply Christ's blood to cleanse us from secret faults.

11. Think daily of the greatness and freeness of Gods Love to us, who has
taken such a course of mercy to us, when he might have taken a course of
Judgment: well says the Scripture, That as the Heavens are higher then the
Earth, so is his mercy toward them that fear him: and so are his thoughts of
Mercy above ours: What is all our mercy and pity unto His? Peter talks to
Christ of forgiving seven times a day; Christ tells him Ay, seventy times seven;
such is Gods forgiveness, his Mercy: our mercy to others is commanded, and is
our duty; but Gods mercy is free: our mercy to others arises from Gods mercy
to us; but Gods mercy arises from him self; our mercy is but to some few, his
to thousands and ten thousands: we oftentimes repent of our Mercy, he repents
not: O whilst we live, and when we die, think much, and speak much of free
Mercy: O the infinite expressions of it in the giving of Christ for us, and to
us! What a Miracle of Mercy is our perseverance, notwithstanding all our
backslidings! the daily meditation of free Grace is an approved receipt against
hardness of heart: this will soften the heart and bring it to godly sorrow for
sin to admiration: we are said to have hearts like an Adamant stone, Zech. 7.
Now the Adamant stone is the hardest stone in all the world, it will cut glass
with ease; no hammer nor fire will stir this stone: yet this Adamant stone
being steeped in Goats blood new and warm, that will soften it; so will our
adamant hearts be softened, being steeped in the thoughts of Gods free Grace,
being steeped in the blood of the Lord Jesus that scapegoat that carried away
our sins into the Land of forgetfulness.

12. Though we shall have daily infirmities whilst we are here below, yet watch
against sin, and especially have a care we make no eminent turns from God:
there are some sins that grieve Gods Spirit above others. David had many sinful
failings, he told a lie to Abimelech, 1 Samuel 21.2. feigned himself mad, 1 Samuel
21.13: made a rash oath concerning Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.22. was very cruel to the
Ammonites, 2 Samuel 12. numbered the people in self-confidence, 2 Samuel 24.
committed Adultety with Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11. Yet it is said of David, 1 King.
15.5. that he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord all the days of
his life, but in the matter of Vriah. Some think it is spoken of his
Government, that that only was amiss in his Government that he murdered Vriah;
but I rather think that this is only mentioned because it was the most eminent
turn from the Lord that ever David made: the sin that grieved the Spirit of God
above all other, in comparison of which God did not take notice of other
failings: that sin of murdering Vriah was a mighty deliberate contrived sin, 2 Samuel 11.. He wrote letters about it and plotted it, which is a great
aggravation of any sin: and he might have many checks of conscience that while
it was a bloody sin; it was a very disingenuous sin to take away his life that
was fighting for him, it was a cloaked sin, 2 Samuel 11.25. He put it upon the
chance of war; it was a very scandalous sin, and his Adultery might be
comprehended in it, for that was against Vriah as well as the murder: it was
the effect of his Adultery: and where one sin is the effect of another, it is a
great aggravation of it: O therefore watch and pray, that though we have many
weaknesses and much deadness, yet that we may not so wickedly depart from our
God.

13. Labor to be heavenly in the night season; we are but a little heavenly in
the day time: we had need be heavenly in that time of retirement in the night
season: David meditated of the Lord in the night watches and at the dawnings of
the day: commit our thoughts to God in the night seasons to prevent vain and
sinful dreams. God can leave a sweet savor upon our spirits in the night.

14. Observe when we pray for others what hints of Gods Spirit we have that he
will hear us: God has a secret way to bring some into our prayers, and to cast
others out of our prayers, as Jer. 7.16. God bad Jeremiah not pray for the
people: its a sad thing when a Minister finds no enlargement of Gods Spirit to
pray for the people where he lives: but I say, observe when we pray for any
wicked man or for our relations, what hints of Gods spirit are upon our hearts
that we shall be heard; a praying Father sometimes praying for his child in the
cradle may have such faith in Prayer, such hints of Gods Spirit, that he knows
God will answer these Prayers, though it be twenty years hence, and he be dead
and gone: others again when they pray earnestly for their Children, find no
Faith, no Ptomise, no impressions of Gods Spirit all their days that God will
hear them for them.

15. Lay up Prayers for jorneyes and travails that God would make us heavenly
and holy abroad as well as at home: besides the need we have of his protection
from the dangers that are in Travail: but the danger of sin is most to be taken
heed of: many men will commit those sins abroad that they will not at home.
Judah, Genesis 38.14. at Timnah, a City of the Philistines fell into the sin of
whoredom with his daughter in Law unknown: this sin he committed abroad in his
jorneying which he was zealous against at home, and would have his daughter in
law burnt for it: Therefore I say, Lay up Prayers before hand for all our
travails, not only for outward Protection and success in our affairs, but for
our Spirits, that God would keep them holy and in communion with himself; for
abroad we may have these temptations that we have not at home, and we may want
the company of Saints which has a secret, strange influence upon the Spirit;
abroad we may want such opportunities of secret duties as we have used at home,
which may put the heart much out of frame.

16. Its a great matter in Religion for Saints to walk with God in our
relations; if our Parents be alive, we are to honor them, and be subject to
them: so was Christ to his Parents for our example, Luke 2.51. yea the Apostle
would have Children requite their Parents for all their care and cost, and not
be stuborn and undutifull, if they don't do for them as they would: if God
brings into the Relation of a Husband, he is to love his wife, and not be
bitter and harsh, and like a Nabal; that the wife may not miss her other dear
relations that she has left to cleave unto him, but find all made up in his
love; yea, if the wife be barren, the husband must not think much with her;
when Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.6,7,8. was troubled because she bare no Children to her
Husband Elkanah, he comforted her and said, Why art thou grieved? Am not I
better then ten Sons? If God calls to the relation of a Wife, we know what
directions the Scripture gives for the Wife to be subject to her Husband: yet
many godly women that are close walkers and tender-conscienced otherways; yet
do not seriously consider enough, lay that Duty upon their consciences; but
though their Husbands through their Love may cover it, yet they must look upon
it as a sin before the Lord. Let Husband and Wife beg of God to give them
suitable affections one to another, and mingle all their conjugal love with
spiritual: If God call to be a Father, then the Scripture tells us, that we
must bring up our Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: be not an
Eli to our Children: he though he was a good man, yet failed much in this, 1 Samuel 2.22,23,24,25. he was too indulgent to them; for he should not only have
spoken as he did, but he should have reproved them more sharply, and should
have put his sons out of their office in which they were so wicked: bless God
if he work Grace in our Children, for he is not bound to them; he has no need
of our posterity, but can take out of the prophanest families if he please; the
most eminent Saints have had profane Children: care not only for outward
things for them, but that they may be the Lords, that when we are dead and
gone, they may know the God of their Fathers, and when we are rotten in our
Graves, they may stand up in our steads to own and love, and walk with that
blessed God that we in our pilgrimage walked with. If God call us to be
masters of Families, and have servants; then we are as David to walk in our
houses with a faithful heart, instruct our servants and family in Gods ways, as
God knew Abraham would do, and forbear threatening, and give them that which is
right for their service: and if they be sick, not to throw them off to shift
for themselves; but as the Centurion went to Christ for the cure of his
servant, so should we look out for cure for them. If we be to marry, we are to
marry in the Lord, not to marry carnal yoak-fellows for their beauty or riches:
some have paid dear for that; for while they have married carnal yoak-fellows,
they have either been carried too much away with their sins, or have lost so
much of their Liberty in Gods ways, that they have gone with sorrow to their
graves.

Be well acquainted with the Covenant of Grace, get distinct knowledge of it:
Many Professors are very dark in the blood of Christ, insomuch that they loose
their peace almost upon every sinning, and so have legal repentance for sin,
when they should have Gospelrepentance, which is the Repentance that Believers
should have, called, Zach. 12.10. mourning over Christ crucified, and mourning
as for an only Son, which is not only great mourning but mourning out of Love.

18. Count upon opposition from the world, and never think if we walk with God,
to escape the worlds censures: the thoughts of this to frame our actings in
Religion, so as to keep peace with carnal people, has made some comply so far
as to lose their zeal, and be a shame to Religion.

19. When we have any orderly opportunities put into our hands in any thing, to
lift up the name of God in our generations, let it not slip, but put our necks
to the work if we are clear in the work and our call to it; for it may be there
will never such an opportunity of service to God be put into our hands all our
days again: now is our working time, now we have opportunities for Reformation
and converting others, which we shall not have in the Grave whether we are
going.

20. Walk in love with the Saints, break not with them upon every small
difference of Judgment, if you see some truth that they are dark in; it may be
they see much more in other things then you do: watch against the Beginning of
differences: Do not every thing you may, when you are in the presence of weak
Saints, 1 Cor. 10.32. consider the tempers of these Saints we converse with,
their natural tempers, their education, temptations, corruptions, and walk
tenderly and wisely toward them, carry our selves humbly toward all Saints,
especially when we differ in any thing from them: for many times not so much
the thing wherein we differ from others, breaks love between and us, as our
high and proud carriage in that matter. In all our care to walk in love with
the Saints, and not to give them offense, look up to God to send a Spirit of
love between you; for sometimes when a godly man has it in his eye to order a
business so as to give no offense to his Brother, yet not looking to God in it,
offense is taken; whereas at other times when we have done that which might
justly give offense to our Brethren, and our heart looks up to God to prevent
offenses and breaches, God covers wonderfully these things, and holds our
Brethrens eyes and thoughts from looking upon them, and so graciously prevents
the folly and rashness of our spirits in making a breach with our Brethren; for
God can send an evil spirit of discord between men as he did in a way of
Judgment between Abimeleck and the men of Sechem, Judge. 9.23,24. And God can
send forth a Spirit of Love that brethren may live together in Unity: give
always the respect that is due to godly men according to their age and
condition that God has placed them in the world: beware of vanity and
unprofitable converse with godly men. God oftentimes punishes that with foolish
and causless breaches: let all our reproofs to our brethren be with tenderness
and a Spirit of meekness, else they will provoke; forgive our brethren freely
and from the heart what may be amiss in their carriage toward us, as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us: there will be something amiss in our carriages
toward our Brethren; and if we do not forgive, where will our love be?
Minister to the wants of the Saints according to our abilities, freely without
grudging; do not unsaint our Brethren because of some ignorance and error. The
Patriarcks are supposed to have been ignorant that Polygamy, the having of more
wives then one was a sin: the disciples ignorant of Christ's death and
resurrection at the first: visit the Saints, those that are the poor,
especially when they are under afflictions, not only to comfort them, but
because then usually there is much good to our selves in converse with them.

21. If God has made our days hitherto days of outward prosperity, and
compassed us about with fullness of the creature, watch against sin the more.
David committed those three great sins of murder, adultery, numbering the
people, when he was in prosperity and greatness. And do good while we have
estates or oppornity, and look and prepare for afflictions; don't think God
will always use thee to such fair weather; and if God continue prosperity,
learn heavenlyness, not to stick in the creature; learn moderation not to
surfer on the creature, and daily make wise observation of the vanity and
emptiness of the Creature.

22. If Afflictions come, see if thou can find out the particular cause of
them, which sometimes may be known by the time when it comes. As for
Nebuchadnezar, Daniel 4. to be struck just when he had been saying, Is not this
great Babel which I have built; it was easy to know that his pride and vain
glory was the cause of that woeful affliction that came upon him; and so Herod,
Act. 12. to be just smitten with death when the people cried it was the voice
of a God, and he took that to himself; it was easy to see that that was the
cause of his death: so also we may sometimes know the cause of our afflctions
by that way of affliction that God uses to us: it may be so like our sin as
David's affliction in the ^eath of the Child that was by Bathsheba Vriah's wife.
1 Samuel 12. it was easy to know that that sin was the cause of the child's
death; and so Adonibezeck, Judge. 1.6,7. when he had his Thumbs and great Toes
cut off, he presently was convinced what was the cause of the affliction,
because he had served threescore and ten Kings so himself. Sometimes God shows
us the cause of our afflictions by setting it up upon the hearts of our
Brethren among whom we live; Sometimes he sets it home upon our own Spirits
that such a sin is the cause of it: but if the Lord never let us know all our
days, the particular cause of many afflictions: yet we are to kiss the rod,
submit to his hand, search and try our ways, humble our selves under his
hand, and walk more closely with him in the whole course of our lives.

23. Take heed that we offend not with our Tongues; let our words be few, take
not up most of the time in discourse, when better gifts are present, but be
swift to hear; let our discourse be seasonable to time, place, company; if they
be wicked, such discourse as may awaken and convince; if they be strong Saints,
such discourse as may be suitable to them; sometimes it is not fit to speak in
the company of weak trembling Saints what horrible temptations other Saints
have, unless it be to comfort them that they are not alone, but others of Gods
children are tempted as well as they; otherways weak Saints many times fall
into great torment of spirit that they shall be tempted as they are, and that
they shall sink under the Burden. Do not use to commend your selves, neither
affect in discourse to give others occasion to commend you: do not delight in
rough and harsh speeches; be wary to whom we open our hearts in secret matters,
not unless they can keep Council and give Council; use heavenly discourse
among godly men: for want of that makes their company to be little better then
other men's; in discourse be not silent when there is cause to speak, out of
affected gravity; nor speak out of for wardness or indiscretion, when our
silence is better.

24. Prize the Scriptures as the word of God; so they are called over and over:
Blessed is he that hears the Word of God and keeps it. Now the Lord is
revealing light out of the Scripture more and more, Satan tempts many to deny
the word of God: all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
(...), the breathing of God, 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God wrote the Scriptures,
and they wrote them as they were moved by the holy Ghost, (...), forcibly
carried out of themselves, and above themselves by the holy Ghost; By the word
of God, when the Scriptures are so called, is meant that which God has spoken,
that which he has said; and therefore for men to boggle at the expression, and
say the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but only Christ is the Word of God,
it is as much as to say, the Scriptures are not what the Lord has spoken, and
what holy men wrote as they were moved by the holy Ghost, as the holy Ghost
indicted: this is a horrible temptation: it is true, Christ is called the word,
and so is he the Eternal Word of God; but the Scriptures also are the Word of
God, the written Word of God. Where this temptation prevails upon men that they
question the Scriptures being the word of God, by degrees they throw up all
Religion, all truths, one after another; and though they do it at first under
the notion of living in the spirit, and of the Light within them; yet at last
they turn very Atheists; and thus after a generation of grossly ignorant and
superstitious persons there is risen up a multitude of deluded and erroneous
persons even in the fundamentals of Religion: But O let those that are the
Lords people study the word of God day and night; try all things by the Word;
get suitable hearts to the Word that we may understand it the better; look up to
the Spirit that indicted the Scripture to be our Expositor and comment upon
them; and often try our selves by the word, and take heed to all our ways
according to the word; read it ofner then other books, and give up our hearts
to all the Truths of it.

25. Lay up experiences which are better then Cabinets of Jewels; lay up
experiences of the comfortings of the Spirit, of his gracious influence in
prayer and other duties; lay up experiences of the ravishing consolation that
flows from Christ's blood; lay up experiences of the vanity and emptiness of the
Creature, and of Gods care over us to keep us from many sins and errrors when
we have had great temptations to them; take special times to meditate of all
the special experiences we have had, both in inward and outward Mercy.

26. Beware of covetousness and greediness after the things of this world; for
there is no satisfaction in the creature; we think if we had so much as some
others have, we could be satisfied; but this is certain, nothing but God can
set bounds unto the desires of men's hearts after worldly things; but our
hearts, if they be set upon the world, will cry Give still; all the world
cannot redeem us from death, nor all our Silver or Gold buy off any of the
pangs of death; and though men are earnest upon the world for their Children,
that they may leave them great matters to be some body in the world; yet we
must know that the happiness of our Posterity does not lie in our leaving them
great estates; for if they never have Christ, it usually makes them more
sinful in this world, and more miserable in the world to world to come: yea
God oftentimes raises poor Children to greater Estate in the world then they
ever come to, and blasteth and crusheth the great Estate that men leave without
his fear; and though the next Heirs it may be may keep it together, yet their
Heirs may suddenly consume; and too often the more money men lay up for their
Children, the fewer Prayers they lay up for them; besides, as Christ bids us
beware of covetousness upon that account, Luke 12.17. a man's life, that is, the
comfort of it does not consist in the multitude of that we possess; not only
the true comfort of a man's life does not lie in multitude of riches, but in
Communion with God; but the outward comfort of a man's life does not consist in
the multitude of riches: many men of ordinary estates do enjoy more outward
comfort then men of great Estates. How many great men have no comfort in their
Estates! either God denies them of Heirs, and that is a torment to them, or
gives them not Power to eat of that which they possess, or God sends them
such pains and sickness of Body, that they spend their days with grief, and
their years with sighing: Some way or other God sends them such crosses and
troubles that eat out all the comforts of their Estates: therefore let our
Conversation be without covetousness, and be content with the things which we
have, though it be little; for God has said, He will never leave us nor
forsake us.

27. Beware of distracting cares, fears and sorrows about earthly things; for
these heart-distracting cares are mighty contrary to the life of faith; they
work not only death of soul, but the sorrow of the world, and grief about these
things, do hasten death of the body; they drink and suck up the juice of our
natural Spirits. All our distracting cares cannot add one Cubit unto our
statures; they cannot keep any of those crosses off; yea they provoke God to
bring those troubles and crosses that we in an unbelieving way care and perplex
our Spirits about; they make the troubles of our Pilgrimage more then otherwise
they would be; for they provoke God to continue the rod longer upon our backs,
and make the afflictions we have more tedious; as a man in the stocks, to take
on, and gall his legs to get out, makes his suffering a great deal more then it
would be if he sat quiet; there is no way but to submit to God in all that
befalls us, and not to distract our hearts in a carnal way about troubles before
they come, and be impatient and murmuring when they do come; yet a Christian
will find this a hard lesson to learn.

28. Beware of the leaven of Hypocrisy as Christ calls it; leaven indeed that
leaveneth and sowreth our duties exceedingly: beware not only of gross
Hypocrisy, such as declares a man to be an Hypocrite; but lay aside all other
Hypocrisy that is more secret, as in such particulars as these; (1) When we
are to pray before others, not to depend upon the assistance of Gods Spirit as
we do at other times, but to fetch in some fine expressions by the strength of
memory which we have used or read heretofore; this is an evil to be watched
against. (2) Its the working of Hypocrisy in our hearts when we are enlarged
in secret prayer, to have a thought in our hearts to wish that such and such
might hear us that they might think highly of our gifts. (3) And so when we
purposely give others occasion to commend us in conference. (4) Or when we
undervalew our selves not in the humility and truth of our hearts, but
purposely that others might commend us. (5) Or when we boast of things beyond,
or live and speak at too high a rate of those things that God has wrought by
us, and too highly commend those that God has wrought upon by us that we might
have more praise.

29. Watch against spiritual pride, seeing that we have nothing but what we
have freely received. Spiritual pride is of all things most contrary to the
dispensation of Grace in Christ, wherein the Lord has taken a way to save us,
wherein we are nothing, but his free Grace is all in all: let all Saints look
upon themselves as the greatest of sinners; for though we have not committed
many great sins as Murder, and the like that others have committed, yet we have
the same corrupt nature that the worst of men have; and our sins have
aggravations that make us greater sinners, as the light we have of the love of
God to us in Christ, the Ordinances and means of Grace, all these aggravate the
sins of Believers: and though we may be higher in Gifts and in place then many
Saints, yet be not high-minded but fear, knowing that you are therefore a City
set upon a hill which cannot be hid; and God having given you eminent Gifts,
and brought you to some eminent place, God will be more dishonored by your
falls and miscarriages, which is a mighty humbling consideration that religion
may have more dishonor by you then by twenty other Saints failings.

30. Reprove sin; for though some may turn again and rent you, yet sometimes
you may be an instrument of converting a soul; and if this fall out but once in
all thy life, its a great Mercy; however it is thy duty to leave it to the Lord
to give success in it.

31. Be not peremptory and too earnest for the sudden removing of any
affliction; for if that it lasts long, usually the more good is done thy soul
by it.

32. Be not weary of prayer and other duties, because you do not always find
such extraordinary joys and communion with God, as sometimes you have done; as
sometimes the Lord has been so present in prayer with a Saint, that he cried
out, Lord I could spend eternity thus! Eternity thus! Then hours and days to be
in duty is no wearisomness to the Spirit, though to the body: but at other
times the souls is tired with a short walk, a short duty: but continue in
prayer and all duties; whether our Communion with God be more or less in them.

FINIS
CHAP. XX. How the Lord is pleased effectually to call some after they have
been long in their natural Estate, and have been very wicked.
GOd is pleased to suffer some of his Elect to go on a great while in Ignorance
and to fall into great sins before he convert them, as Matthew, Zachaeus; Mary
Magdalene, an elect person, yet God leaves her to be possessed with seven
devils, and to be a Harlot before he convert her. Paul an elect person, yet God
leaves him a great while to go on in a Pharisaical way, and to be a grievous
Persecutor before the Lord convert him. The Thief upon the Cross was an elect
person, yet the Lord let him run on a long time in his sins, and for these he
is sentenced to die, and the^ the Lord converts him: now there are many reasons
why the Lord in his insinite wisdom suffers many elect persons to fall into so
much sin before the Lord convert them; As (1) because God will make it more
eminently appear that it was his mere Grace to save them and convert them: God
does convert many in their young time, before they have run into much
profaneness; others God leaves to go on a long time in profaneness; and though
he could have converted them before, yet he does it to magnify his own Grace.
(2) And God does it that men might be the more humble after their Conversion,
remembering what great sins they fell into before the Lord called them. (3)
Hereby men's conversion is more remarkable to themselves and to others, and
tends much to the awakening of others when they shall see a notorious sinner so
changed, it may startle others exceedingly. (4) That the worst of sinners might
not be hardened, and go on desperately in their sins, and say, There is no hope;
no but seeing others converted after they have gone on so long in sin that they
might now come to Christ, and say, I will have no more fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but cast my self upon the free mercy of God in
Christ. (5) That we might use means to convert the greatest sinners, and not
say, There is no hope that that Drunkard and that Worldling should ever be
converted, and so never use means to discover sin and Christ to them. (6) That
God might show the certainty of Election, that those that he has chosen shall
be called according to Gods gracious purpose, which purpose shall stand. By
this we see that all the Father gives to Christ shall come to him, and be
effectually called, though they are long before they are converted. (7) Hereby
God will show us the infinite merit of his Sons blood that it will cleanse from
all sin; that though an elect person has so abounded in sin, yet the blood of
Christ is able to save him to the utmost. (8) And thus God shows the power of
his Spirit, that he is able to convert men, not only when they are less
sinners, but when they are mightily hardened in sin, and have long accustomed
themselves to do evil.

Question, But does God love an elect Person, and has he care of them before
they be converted?

Answ. Yes, God loved them from eternity; God loved Jacob, Romans 9. before he
had done good or evil: God does not then begin to love a soul when he is
converted, though then the effects of his love do more appear. (2) God gave his
blessed Son for his elect, while they were enemies then they were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son; he died for the ungodly, Romans 5.9,10. and this was
infinite love. (3) If God did not love the Elect before they were converted,
they would never be converted. Its his infinite love to them that he unites and
draws them to Christ, without which drawing they could never come to Christ.
(4) God Has such a love and care toward an elect person, that he never
suffers them to fall into the sin against the holy Ghost, though they fall into
other great sins. (5) God has such a care toward them that they never die
unconverted. Romans 8,30. Whom he did predestinate, them he has also called. God
either converts them in their young time, or else lengthens out their days upon
the earth, and brings them to Christ, though it be at the eleventh hour; As God
called some of all sorts of sinners, excepting those that commit the sin
against the holy Ghost; so he calls at several ages, some in their
childhood, some in their middle age, and some in their old age; but God
calls most in their young time, whilst their hearts are yet tender.

How has the Lord been pleased to work Grace in them that have been mightily
prejudiced against the powerful preaching of the word, as its recorded in the
life of that gracious man, Mr. Robert Bolton, that before his conversion, he
hearing Mr. Perkins preach, he said, He was an empty dry fellow, but after he
was converted; he had high thoughts of his powerful Ministry. Another, was
that afterward one of the most eminent in grace and gifts, that our times have
known when the Bell went for Mr. Perkins, secretly was glad in his heart that he
was dead, that he might not be so startled by his heartsearching ministry,
which thought did exceedingly humble him afterward, and God pleased powerfully
to work upon him, and make him a burning and shining light. Thus where sin
abounds, Gods grace sometimes calls a soul, and so abounds much more then sin
abounded. If we knew all passages concerning those whom the Lord converteth;
what profaneness in some, what strange ignarance in others, what wicked
resistance of the Spirit, it would make us cry out, O the wickedness of the
creature, and O the unsearchable riches of Gods free grace! some have gone to
an Ordinance to sleep, and the Lord has made such a noise by his Spirit in
their hearts, that they have been past sleeping, their souls have been so
effectually awakened; some have gone to ensnare the Preacher, and the Lord has
changed their hearts, and opened their eyes; some have gone boldly to outface
the Lord in his Ordinances, and the Lord has made their stout hearts tremble
at his word; some have gone only out of novelty to hear a man, because he was a
stranger, or was a noted Preacher, and the Lord has converted them; some have
gone with their hearts as full of prejudice against the Preacher as could be,
and yet the Lord has bowed their hears before they came away, and made them
say, Surely God is in this man and in his Ministry of a truth.

Some shall certainly be converted, and must enter into Gods rest, Heb. 4.6.
(1) because God has ordained some to eternal life, Acts 13.48. and the
Election must obtain it. (2) The Lord Jesus has died for them, and has made
their peace by the blood of his cross; And God the Father has given him power
over all the devils, and over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to
them that he has given him and them; Christ says, he must bring home, and
they shall hear his voice, John 10.16. (3) The Lord has made many free and
absolute Promises, as Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heartwill I give you. Genesis 3.15. The
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Now these must be made good to
some in their effectual Calling and salvation, and that is to the elect; for
all the free and absolute Promises show what God both can do and will do for
his elect; and so though they sometimes live a long time in an unconverted
estate, yet the Lord does in his appointed time give them a new heart, writes
his Laws in their hearts, and puts his fear in their hearts, and causes them to
walk in his Statutes and Judgments to do them, according to the free and
absolute promises of the New Covenant, that they are all taught of God, and he
will be their God, and they shall be his people.

And therefore when we are converted, what an engagement have we upon us to
live to God, and lift up his Name in the world: O all you that have been
converted, and after all your sinfulness have been plucked as brands out of the
fire; O show forth the praises of him that has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light. Consider, (1) you have but a short time to bring glory to
God in the exercise of grace in this world. (2) There arises a great deal of
comfort to a man's own soul in the exercise of grace. (3) There are but few
converted; and therefore those that are savingly converted had need bestir
themselves to glorify God with that grace they have received. (4) Natural men
do evil with both hands, and lay out all their strength against the Lord; and
therefore how should you that are such monuments of his mercy bring glory to
him! (5) You may more comfortably and cheerfully die, when you have improved
that talent of grace that you have received for to bring glory to God in your
generation, 2 Timothy 4.6,7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course: not that when we come to die, Paul or any Believer does look for heaven
for his service; for when we have done all, we say we are unprofitable
servants; but we rejoice that God has used us and employed us to lift up his
name in the world. (6) The more you lay out your selves to bring glory to God,
the more cause others will have to bless God for you in the day of their
visitation; seeing your good works, they will glorify your Father which is in
heaven; and say, I bless God for the holy life, and heavenly discourse, and
winning conversation of such a one of thy children; for it was a means to
convince me and convert me to Jesus Christ; but O what a sadder thing would it
be if a natural man should have cause to say upon his deathbed, or in hell,
that the life and conversation of such a professor hardened himagainst the
ways of God; he saw such a professor so deceitful in his calling, another so
vain in his discourse, another so proud in his carriage and apparel, another so
worldly, another so loose in his conversation, that he looked upon Religion but
as a fancy, and was hardened in his sins! O then be afraid lest you should
receive the grace of God in vain, though not as to the salvation of your own
soul, but in that respect it be well with you for ever, yet fear lest you
should not glorify God in the world, and make his name as ointment poured
forth to others. O therefore (1) hold forth Religion in an holy, humble,
heavenly, winning conversation: the good conversation of Believers may draw
others to enquire into Religion, and so the Lord may catch them. (2) Lay out
that grace you have received for the comforting and strengthening of weak
Brethren. How do men of great gifts and experiences, through sinful
bashfulness, or too much habit of vain discourse, become of little use to their
Brethren, yea to those Brethren with whom they are joined in Church Fellowship!
We have got an habit of jesting and vain discourse in our converse together,
when as the old Saints were serious and spiritual; and this same way of idle
talking and jesting is almost every where; and should this prevail, that
spiritual communion that should be among Saints would soon be lost; but O never
come into one another company, but do or receive good; communicate your
knowledge and experiences to the weakest Saints and poorest Saints. Christians
must not be like some Philosophers that we read of, that would as soon part
with an eye, as with some curious notions that they found out in their studies;
but Christians should comfort one another with the comforts wherewith they have
been comforted of God, and inform one another in all doubtful cases with the
light which the Lord has given them. (3) Lay out your selves to convert
others; thus did Paul after his conversion, Romans 15.19. compassed Sea and Land,
took many a weary step, went through innumerable dangers to convert souls to
Jesus Christ. O how do many professors grow careless of Familyworship? O labor
that those that dwell with you may be converted in your Families, and may have
cause to bless God that ever they came to such a service, where they got the
knowledge of Jesus Christ. (4) When the Lord lays afflictions upon you, have a
care that you do not dishonor him then by murmuring and impatience; that
carnal men will say, Are these the people that speak of such high things, of
Communion with God and the Seal of the Spirit, and yet none more impatient when
any cross befalls them! and thus they will be ready to think that Religion is
but a Notional thing, that has no power to subdue the heart to the Lord; few
are converted amongst us, and one cause of it may be, that the carriage and
conversation of professors is very low, and carries little in it to hold forth
conviction to those that are without.

FINIS.

