She lays her Hand to the Spindle and her hands hold the distaffe: Pro: 31.
19.
Depiction of woman at spindle.



SOME PROPOSALS For the employment of the POOR, AND For the prevention of
Idleness and the Consequence thereof, Begging.

A Practice so dishonorable to the Nation, and to the Christian Religion.

In a Letter to a Friend by T. F.

For even when we were with you, this we commanded, that if any would not work,
neither should they eat, 2 These. 3. 10. Let him that stole steal no more, but
rather let him labor, working with his hands, the thing that is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. LONDON, Printed by J. Grover,
and are to be sold by Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, and Brab.
Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill. 1681.

Some Proposals for the Employment of the Poor, and for the Prevention of
Idleness, etc.
SIR,
IT is now above four years since I erected my Workhouse in Little Britain for
the Employment of the Poor in the Linen Manufacture, which has proved so
great a Help, and afforded such Relief to many Hundreds of poor Families, that
I never did, nor I fear ever shall do an Action more to my own satisfaction,
nor to the good and benefit of the Poor.

In a former Letter that I wrote upon this occasion, I gave you some account of
the management of the said Workhouse, especially with relation to the Parish
of Aldersgate; which Letter being wholly out of Print, and much desired by some
persons, I shall here insert the chief things contained therein, with what else
has come into my thoughts concerning that matter; hoping that when the great
benefit of such an Undertaking shall be made public, every good man will some
way or other give encouragement to it; there being nothing so necessary for the
prevention of Poverty and the consequence thereof, Begging, as to provide some
Employment for our Poor People, whereby to prevent Idleness, the Mother and
Nurse of all Mischief, and one of those sins for which God destroyed Sodom with
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, as the Holy Scripture informs us.

To the end therefore that Poverty, together with that wicked Trade of Begging
(which so many thousands of late years have taken up, to the dishonor of
Almighty God, and the great scandal of the Government of this Nation) may be
prevented, I shall humbly propose a few things, which being put in practice,
may with Gods Blessing, prove effectual to the ends designed.

And the first is this, That every Parish that abounds with Poor People, would
set up a School in the nature of a Workhouse, to teach their poor Children to
work in, who for want thereof, now wander up and down the Parish and parts
adjacent, and between Begging and Stealing, get a sorry liveing; but never
bring any thing to their poor Parents, nor earn one Farthing toward their own
maintenance, or good of the Nation.

This, in a short time, would be found very advantageous, not only to the poor
Children themselves, who by this means, whilst young should be inured to
labor, and taught to get their own Livings, but also to their Parents, who
should hereby both be freed from the Charge of keeping them, and in time, be
helped by their Labors, as it is in other places; and moreover the Parish
should be freed from much Charge which many times they are at, to keep such
poor Children, or at least which they are necessitated to allow their Parents
toward it.

Nothing being accounted a better Argument for a large Pension, than that a Man
or Woman has six or seven small Children, whereas unless they were all born at
a time, or came faster into the World than ordinarily so many Children do, it
is very hard if some of them are not able to work for themselves. I my self
have at this time many poor Children, not above five or six years old, that can
earn two pence a day, and others but a little older, three pence or four pence,
by spinning Flax which will go very far toward the maintenance of any poor
Child. Not that I would have these Schools confined only to Spinning, but left
at liberty to take in any other work that the Children shall be capable of, as
knitting of Stockings, winding of Silk, making of Lace or plain Work, or the
like: For it matters not so much what you employ these poor Children in, as
that you do employ them in some thing, to prevent an idle, lazy kind of Life,
which if once they get the habit of, they will hardly leave; but on the
contrary, if you train up a Child in the way that he should go, when he is old,
he will not depart from it.

And this is the way (as I am informed) that is practiced in Holland and other
places, with so great advantage, that there is very few Children who have
attained to seven or eight years of age, that are any charge to their Parents,
or burdensome to the Parish. And Mr. Chamberlain in his Book, Entitled, The
Present State of England, has observed, that in the City of Norwich, it has
been computed of late years, and found, that yearly, Children from six to ten
years old, have gained twelve thousand pounds a year more than they have spent,
chiefly by knitting fine Jersey Stockings.

This School would be of no great Charge, but many ways advantageous to the
Parish. At this time I have a person who for five shillings a week, does
constantly teach between twenty and thirty poor Children to spin; Some that are
little, upon the single Wheel, and others that are bigger, upon the double, or
two handed Wheel (like that which you have at the beginning of these Papers,
which I esteem the best way for spinning, and full as proper for Wool as Flax)
which when they are expert in, I give the Children leave to carry away with
them to their several places of abode, that so there may be room for others;
and of these, there are diverse that can earn six pence a day, and some more,
allowing them two hours in a day to learn to read in, instead of that time
which is allotted to the poorest of our Children to play in; a custom that I
verily believe has been the ruin of many thousand poor Children, and has
nothing in the World to justify it but an old Proverb, which yet we have not
fully observed: For instead of giving them all work and no play, the generality
of our poor Children have all play and no work, which is a thousand times more
mischievous than the other. Not that I would have all manner of Recreation and
Divertisement prohibited to Children, nor will it be hard to find some others
besides playing at push-pin, or hide-Farthing, neither of which, nor twenty
others now in use, are any ways conducing to the health of their Bodies, or to
the improvement of their minds; but are only fit to teach them lying and
wrangling, with twenty cheating Tricks, which many times they retain as long as
they live.

I believe there are very few persons who have had occasion to take one of
these poor Children for a Footboy, or otherwise, but can tell you the sad
Effects of such an idle Life as they have been brought up in; the Lad having
from his Cradle, if he had any, been permitted to play, has made it so natural
to him, that send him in what haste you will, upon any Errand, if he meets with
a Play-fellow, will have a touch of his old Sport, and many times for want of
such a one, will be exercising his hand alone, rather than forbear his old
Trade.

Let any man that has occasion either to walk or ride through the Out-parts of
this City, (where mostly our poor people inhabit) tell but what he has seen of
the Rudeness of young Children, who for want of better Education and
Employment, shall sometimes be found by whole Companies at play, where they
shall wrangle and cheat one another, and upon the least Provocation, swear and
fight for a Farthing, or else they shall be found whipping of Horses, by reason
of which, they sometimes cast their Riders, to the hazard or loss of their
Lives or Limbs; or else they shall be throwing of Dirt or Stones into Coaches,
or at the Glasses, insomuch that I have been a hundred times greatly troubled,
to see the Rudeness and Misbehaviour of the poorer sort of Children,
(especially of late years) they having been generally so much neglected, that
they have neither been taught their Duties either toward God or Man.

To me it seems very strange, that such Children whose Parents receive any
Pension from the Parish, or that are brought up at the Charge of the several
Parishes or in Hospitals, as soon as they come to six or seven years old, are
not taught to do something toward their own Maintenance, which is the way in
Holland, as has been said. There the Children in Hospitals, as soon as they
come to any Bigness, are two hours in a day, to wit, from Five to Seven in the
Morning, taught to read and write; but when seven a Clock comes, they are by a
Bell called to Breakfast, which when they have eaten, every one has their
several Employment allotted to them for all the day after, excepting only such
time as they have to eat in. The Boys are sent to the Ship-yard to pick Okum,
to turn the Wheel for the Rope-maker, to wind Quils for the Weaver, or to braid
Nets, or the like: the Girls to Spin, to Knit, to weave Lace, or to work with
the Needle, or some such like Employment as they are fit for; so that as I am
informed, a thousand Children shall be brought up with less Charge in Holland,
than five hundred here; and I cannot apprehend what Harm such a Dutch Trick
would do us, if we had Wisdom enough to practice it.

If it be said that their Children are not maintained so well, nor learnt so
much as generally our Children in Hospitals are;

I answer, It Is so much the better, for why should poor Children that must be
put out to poor Trades, where they must work hard, and fare hardly, be fed with
white Bread, or taught farther than is necessary for such Trades? Is not this
to make them too big for their Business, which is always for the worse? Why, I
pray must a poor Boy that is designed for a Mason, Bricklayer, Shoemaker, or
the like honest and necessary Trade, be taught to write as if he were designed
for a Master in that Art; or so far in Arithmetic, as if he were designed for
a Merchant? Is it not enough that such Children are taught to read the Bible,
and so much of Arithmetic and Writing, as may fit them for such Trades and
Employments, as they are intended to be put unto? And must Children be kept
from seven to fifteen Years old, to learn so much, when two hours in a day
would be more than enough to effect it? And all the rest of their Time might be
spent in doing something or other that might help to keep them, and be by
degrees, inured to the Work and Business for which they are designed and
intended. This in a very short time, however it may seem hard at first, would
be much more pleasant to the Children themselves, than sitting eight or ten
hours in a day under a severe Schoolmaster, who many times shall whip a poor
Child for not remembering or else for mistaking a few words, as severely as a
Rogue in Bridewel, for picking a Pocket, or cutting a Purse.

I am well aware from some Discourses that I have met with of late, that what I
have said in this particular, will give offense to some whom I am very
unwilling to displease; And that they will object the great prejudice which
will be done to some Children of good parts, if they should be hindered in
their Learning, by the Advantage of which, if their Trades failed, they might
be able to teach Arithmetic, or Writing, or to keep Merchants Accounts.

To which I answer, First, that there is no danger, that many Handy-craft
Trades should fail: As long as People are born naked, there will be need of
Shomakers, Tailors, Weavers, and such like; and as for those that may be able
to teach Arithmetic, Writing, etc. there neither is, nor I believe, ever will
be any want of such Persons, even among them, which received their Education
from their Parents, and not upon Charity: Nay, I dare say, there is so many of
these at present, that not one half of them can be provided for in those ways.
Not but that if a poor Lad were found of extraordinary Parts, he might be
permitted a more liberal Education; but the number of these is very few, and to
give it unto others, is to do them and the Commonwealth a great prejudice. I my
self have known some persons kept seven or eight years at School, to learn the
Latin Tongue, which have stood them in very little stead afterward, being gone
from School they have soon lost it, and thereby all the time they spent to gain
it; whereas, if they had instead thereof, been taught some useful Art or other,
they might have been the better for it as long as they lived. It is very well
known, that at this time, there is hardly Employment for one half of the
Clergymen that are in England. Yea, some will tell you, that there are not
above ten thousand Livings in England, and that there are above thirty thousand
men in Orders to supply them. I am not bound to make good the truth of this
Computation, but sure I am, that great Multitudes want Employment, and that if
the smallest Living or Lecture shall be void, there will be many Competitors
for it. Also, some will tell you, that the number of those that pretend to the
Law of late years, are so much increased, that many of them (Thanks be to God)
want Employment, although there are a sort of men in the Country (as I am
informed) that make it their Business to set men together by the Ears, and ride
from Market to Market upon but a very little better account, not but that I
think and know there are many worthy men of that Profession, I heartily wish
they were all such; it is only those that are guilty of encouraging Suits and
Quarrels, that I am offended with, and if they are offended with me for saying
thus much, I cannot now help it.

But not to forget the Objection, pray let it be considered before you engage
persons in a liberal Education, how they shall be maintained in it? and before
you send Lads to Cambridge and Oxford, how they shall be kept there; if any man
will be so kind to do it for a poor Boy, it is very well, and I for my part have
nothing to say against it: otherwise, I am very sure, and know it by sad
Experience, that for want of such Supplies, some have been sent to those
places, that had better have stayed away, and been put to some honest Trade, by
which they might have lived more comfortably themselves, and more profitably
for the Nation: but at the Rate that some would order the matter, the Plough,
the Sea, and Manufactory, which are the great Concerns of England, should be
wholly neglected, as being too mean Employments for the poorest of our
Children. He that has a mind to see more of this, let him read Britania
Languens, page 100. 102. etc. and page 133.

But that I may after so long a Digression return to the Bufiness I was upon,
to encourage the setting up of Schools for the Instruction of young Children,
and bringing them to some Employment, whereby to get their own Living, the
Charge hereof, as has been said, would not be great, but the Advantages very
many; and among others, this is not the least, That the Parents of such poor
Children would have more time to follow their Business and Employments, and
that with more Content and Satisfaction, when their Children were not only kept
out of Harms way, but were learning something that would do them some good at
present, and more hereafter; all the Trouble they should have, being only in
the Morning, to dress them with such poor Rags as they had to put upon them,
and to give them some small matter for their Dinner, and to fetch them home at
Night, if they were too small to go home alone: for at this School, I would
have Children taken in from three to ten years old, those of the younger sort
might be taught their Letters, and to read till they were able to Spin, or do
some other work, and even then I would have two hours in a day at least,
allotted to these poor Children, to learn some plain and uncontroverted
Catechism, that might teach them the Principles of Religion, and also to
perfect their Reading, which through the Blessing of God, might be a means to
prevent much of that Ignorance and Wickedness that is found amongst our poor
People, and bring them to Sobriety and Virtue, which being once done, they will
of their own Accord, naturally fall to some honest Employment, without which,
it is impossible they should continue good, or happily enjoy themselves.

That this is a way that would very much conduce to the Happiness of poor
people, and their poor Children, I have found by very much Experience, having
at this time several poor Children at my Workhouse, that over and besides
their learning to read, have learnt to spin both upon the single and double
Wheel, and can earn from two pence to six pence a day, as has been said;
which, every Saturday Night, I cause to be paid to the Children, to carry home
to their poor Parents, or else, cause to be laid out for themselves in such
things as they need.

But before you enter the Child upon the double Wheel, or suffer it to spin
with both hands, you must teach it to spin well with either hand upon the
single Wheel, which is turned with the Foot as the other is, by means whereof,
you may teach the Child to draw out the Flax with either hand indifferently,
and to be as nimble and quick with one hand as with the other; otherwise, when
it comes to spin upon the double Wheel, which has a Quill for each hand, the
Threads will not be alike, but one will be more twisted, and the other less; it
may be, the one will be too much, and the other too little, and so will not do
well together. In this School, are taught Boys as well as Girls, which they
take very well unto; and for want of other Employment, they may be kept at,
till they are fit to go to Prentice, or to do other Business; and the Girls,
till they are fit to go to Service, and no longer: For it is a thing greatly
complained of in the Country already, that by reason of so great numbers of
Single Persons that of late are fallen to the Spinning Trade, and to live at
their own Hands, there is so great a want of Servants, that it is very hard for
the meaner sort to get a Supply, unless upon much higher terms than formerly;
and the like would soon be here, if Single Persons that were come to any Age,
were encouraged to live at their own Hands: For which reason, and some others,
I have taken special care, that no person that is fit to go to Service, or to
Prentice, shall have any of my Work.

From what has been said in this particular, touching the great Benefit that
would arise to every Parish, by setting up such a School for the Ends above
specified, I would advise any person that had a mind to settle any thing upon a
poor Parish, to appropriate it to some such use as this, rather than to give it
at large to the Parish, to be disposed of at their pleasure: For this would be
in effect, rather to ease the Rich, than to help the Poor, it being too well
known, that several Parishes that have great Incomes for their Poor, have yet
their Poor as ill provided for, as those that have less.

If therefore I had a 100 l. a Year to settle upon a poor Parish, I would do it
after some such way as this:

Twenty pounds a Year I would appoint for an able and honest Woman, to teach
forty of the poorest Children to read, and to spin Flax or Hemp, first upon the
Single, and then upon the Double Wheel, which when they had well learned, they
would be in a capacity to get their own Living.

Five pounds a year I would allot for the Rent of a Large Room to teach the
Children in; Twenty five pounds a year I would assign for the buying of Hemp
and Flax to teach the Children to spin upon.

Twenty five pounds a year I would allot for the payment of the poor Children
that should spin the same, allowing one penny for every 600 yards of Yarn,
which the Children should every week be paid for and carry home to their poor
Parents, or else be laid out for them in such things as they needed.

Fifteen pounds a year I would allot for the Weaving of such Yarn, and
whitening such Cloth as should be made of the Yarn.

Eight pounds a year I would allot for the buying such Wheels and Reels, as the
poor Children should use; which, at their going out of the House I would have
given unto them.

The remaining two pounds, I would appoint to be laid out for a Dinner for the
Trustees, which should be upon a day prefixed, upon which day they should audite
the Accounts for the Year past, and distribute the Cloth which was made, some
of it to the poor Children that spun the Yarn, and the rest to other poor
people in the Parish, especially the aged and impotent, it being more easy for
them to get a Meals meat, to feed their hungry Bodies, than a Shirt to cover
them; neither is the Charity much less to cloth the Naked, than to feed the
Hungry; nor the Promise greater to the one than to the other. However, by such
a deed of Charity, I should do both; and also by teaching the Children to read,
and learn their Catechisms, you should instruct their minds, which is a piece
of Charity no whit inferior to the feeding their Bodies, or clothing their
Backs: For without Knowledge, Solomon says, The Heart cannot be good; and God
by the Prophet complains, That his People perish for lack of Knowledge.

This Settlement I would so make, that it should not be in the Power of the
Parish, nor yet of the Trustees to alienate to any other use or purpose
whatsoever; but upon so doing, it should come to the Hospital of Christ Church,
or some such like Foundation; the Governors whereof, would always take care
that the Trnst were performed, or in case it was not would soon take it out of
their hands.

Having this proposed (as I conceive) a very likely way to prevent Idleness in
the younger sort, my next Care must be to prevent it in those that are of Age,
which I judge may be done by each Parish, if they would provide such Work for
them, as they might carry to their own Homes, which though never so mean and
homely, are more desirable than any other place, which also is the way that I
have taken in the Parish aforesaid, and which is the way that all the Countries
take for the Spinning of those vast Quantities of Yarn, which is every Year
made use of, for the making of Bays, Says, Serges, and Stuffs of all sorts.
And that which some of late have proposed of bringing them to a public
Workhouse, will never effect the end desired; for suppose a Woman has a sick
Child, or Husband, or some Infirmity upon her self, in all which Cases, she may
do something at home, but cannot leave her own House: and supposing that none
of these should happen, which is yet very frequent, not one person of many,
will endure the Thoughts of going to a public Workhouse. Sometimes it
happens, nay, very frequently I have known, that Persons of good Education and
well related, have fallen into great Poverty, which for these Reasons, and lest
they should fall into Contempt by the Discovery, they are willing to hide as
much as they can, and therefore cannot expose themselves to work in a public
place. True indeed, for Vagrants and sturdy Beggars that have no Habitation,
and that will not work unless they are held to it as Galley-slaves are tied to
their Oars; such Workhouses are very necessary, and I wish we had more of
them, and that those we have were employed to that purpose; but for such poor
People as have Habitations of their own, and are known in the places where they
live, and that would take Pains at home, it is altogether unreasonable and
unprofitable in my poor Judgment to bring them to a public Workhouse.

Obj. But against this, of every Bodies carrying their Work to their own
Houses, it will be objected, what Assurance can you have, that these poor
People to whom you deliver your Flax and Hemp to spin, will bring it home
again? They may die, and what will become of it then, or they may pawn it, or
run away with it?

Answ. To all which I answer, that it is possible that one or all of these may
happen as they have done sometimes among those that I have employed; but to
prevent all Loss that may come by these ways, if the Persons be wholly unknown,
which can hardly be if they live in the Parish, let them leave six pence in
hand, which is about the Price of a pound of Hemp or Flax, which no poor Body
who is of any good Behavior, but will find Credit for, if they have it not of
their own; and let this lie as a Pawn till they bring home their Work, and as
long as you shall employ them, or be satisfied of their Honesty.

Obj. But some will object, that by this setting poor People to spin, you will
take them off from other Employments, as winded of Silk, stitching of Bodice,
kniting of Stockings, making of Lace or the like, which are more necessary
Employments than spinning of Flax and Hemp to make Linen Cloth, we having that
already very cheap from other Countries, for which also his Majesty receives
much Custom, which by this new Trade will wholly be lost.

Answ. To which I answer, That there is no fear that any Person who can wind
Silk, knit Stockings, make Lace or the like, will leave these Employments, if
they can have them, to spin Flax and Hemp, the Price thereof being so very low;
but if any of these should fail, as many times they do (as for Instance,
kniting of silk Stockings was of late years a very great Employment, whereas
now they have found out a way to weave both Silk and Worsted: the kniting Trade
is greatly abated, and it is like, in time will come to very little; had not
then the poor People better spin than do nothing? And were it not much better
that his Majesty should lose the Custom of some Linen Cloth, than that the
poor People should lose both their Bodies and Souls too in Sloth and Idleness,
the latter whereof, is many times the Consequence of the former.

But as to the Custom of Cloth, it is humbly conceived, that if a higher Impost
were laid upon Foreign Linen, it would be a ready way to encourage this
Manufacture at Home; and also bring in as much Money to His Majesty, though
there should come in less Cloth than now there does.

But further, let it be considered, that this Employment of Spinning Flax and
Hemp, is set up, and intended only for those Persons that have nothing else to
do, or that can do little else; of which number there are very many ancient
People, who cannot see to wind Silk, to stitch Bodice, or to work with a
Needle, which yet can Spin indifferent well: Nay, there are some at this time
which spin to me, that can see no more than the Wheels they spin upon, that yet
follow this Employment, and can draw a Thread that for some purposes does well
enough; And for young Children, there is nothing they can more easily learn,
than to spin Linen, their Fingers being never so small, being big enough to
pull out the Flax, and to make a fine Thread, in so much, that some Children
that I have taken up, that came begging to my Door, which in six months time,
have drawn a pound of Flax to so fine a Thread, that the Spinning has come to
twelve pence, which very rarely Ancient People will draw to seven pence.

Obj. But again it will be objected, where will you find a Stock to employ so
many poor People as shall want Work?

Answ. To which I answer, That there are few Parishes, but either have a Stock
of Money, or so many good Men, that would willingly lend gratis, if not give
considerably toward the carrying on of so good a work as is the Employment of
the Poor: But in case either of these should fail, the Parish may as easily
raise a Stock to set the Poor at Work, as raise Money by a Rate to keep them in
Idleness. It Is very well known, that some Parishes about London, do raise some
thousands of pounds every year for the Relief of their Poor; and yet as the
matter is handled, very few who are not through Age or Sickness confined to
their Houses, but do beg up and down the Streets: To prevent which, I know no
better way, than to provide Work for all that are able; and instead of giving
them twelve pence or two shillings in a Week, in dry Money, to give them the
like value in Flax or Hemp, which, when they had spun, they should be paid for
at the same rate, together with what the Spinning of it came unto. This in all
probability would lessen the number of our Beggars and Street-walkers, who
having not sufficient for the Supply of their Wants, allowed them by the
Parish, make up the rest by begging: if any one of these should pretend that
they cannot spin, the Answer is very near at hand, they may soon learn; since I
set up this Employment, I have taught several persons of about sixty years of
age, to Spin, who do constantly follow this Work, if they have no other; but if
this answer will not do, the next should, which is this, if the Person cannot
live of her Pension, and will not, being able, accept of such Employment as the
Parish has to give; let her get some other, by means of which, she may help to
maintain her self, so that she be not found begging in the Streets, upon pain
of losing that Relief which she received from the Parish; to prevent which,
it is like she would fall to work, from which, and her Pension, she might make a
good Shift to live: Or, otherwise let her person be secured as an Idle Beggar,
in the House of Correction, where she should be made to work, or forbid to eat,
as the Apostle St. Paul advises, saying, If any will not work, neither let
them eat.

But further, to encourage the setting up of the Linen Manufacture for the
Employment of the poor, I desire it may be considered, That there is no
Commodity that I know of, that is of the like Value, that can be set up with
less Stock or less Loss at first, three parts of four even of that Cloth which
comes not to above two Shillings an Ell, will be paid for Labor to the Dresser
of the Flax, and to the Spinner, and Weaver, and as they spin finer, the price
will advance so much, that five parts of six shall go out upon that account. I
my self have seen a Pound of Flax not worth above eighteen pence at most, spun
to that Fineness, that the Pound of Thread has been worth eight or ten
Shillings; and from other Countries we daily receive Thredspun of Flax, not
above three or four Shillings a Pound, at the price of three or four Pound
Sterling. Then as to the Loss by Children and Learners, it will not be near so
much as in many other things. A Child may first be set upon spinning of Tow,
which cost about two pence a pound, which though it be spun never so badly will
serve for some kind of use or other, which in Wool would be good for nothing,
which yet is many times the Price.

Moreover, I desire it may be considered, that in this Trade all sorts of
Persons whether Young or Old, Male or Female, may find Employment; if of Years
and able, they may beat Hemp, dress Flax, and make them ready for the Spinster,
and when spun, may be employed in weaving it, and those of both Sexes that are
not able, may be put to spinning, as it is usual in many Places.

Obj. The next Objection I have met with is this, what will you do with all the
Yarn these poor People shall spin, if you turn it into Cloth, the Commodity is
brought over so cheap, that you will never be able to sell it without much Loss.

Answ. I must confess, this Objection has too much of Truth in it, wholly to
be removed: The best Answer I can make to it at present, is this, That we had
better lose something by the Labor of the Poor, than lose all, by letting them
live in Sloth and Idleness: For, suppose you should give six pence for that
which really is not worth five pence, here will five pence be gained to the
Nation, though one penny should be lost to the Parish. But besides, let it be
considered, that if this Person had not been employed, there would not less
have been spent, but rather more; forasmuch as six pence that is got by Labor,
does many times go further than twelve pence given for doing nothing, all that
time People are idle, they will be spending, if they have where withal; and if
they have not, it is like they will be worse employed, and either beg or steal
to supply their Wants.

All that I can further say to this Objection, is only this, That it is to be
hoped in time, as our People grow more skilful and industrious, we may be able
to sell as cheap as our Neighbors; but if we cannot, it is much better to lose
something in a way that will make the poor People better, and the Nation
richer, than to suffer them to live in Sloth and Idleness, to their utter
ruin, and to the great Loss and Damage of the Kingdom.

Obj. But it may be some will object and say, Where will you find Persons that
have Skill to manage this Employment, or whom shall the Parish trust with it?
If it be left to every body's Care, it will come to nothing; forasmuch as
commonly that is no body's, which is every body's Business: And if you leave it
to the Care of one or two, the Parish may be cheated.

Ans. To this I answer, That it is not to be doubted, but that in every Parish
some such honest and faithful Persons may be found, as would not wrong the
Parish, nor imbezzle one farthing of their Stock, but account it their Honor
to be employed in so noble and generous a Work, which would not only make a
better Provision for the Poor, but make them better also.

But farther, I answer, that there needs not much Skill to manage this Affair,
and that which is necessary will soon be learnt; this was one of the greatest
Encouragements I had to fall upon the Linen Manufacture, because there was so
little of Difficulty in it, to what there is in some others. Every Merchant
will tell you where you may buy Flax and Hemp at the best hand, and it will be
as easy to find both Men and Women that shall dress them, who will give an
Account how many Pound of every sort each hundred Weight makes, which you must
enter into a Book for that purpose; when this is done, what you deliver of any
sort to the Spinster, must likewise be entered with the name of the Person and
Place where she dwells, which I have done by drawing two Lines after this
manner, with the name of the person set above, upon A.B. in C.D.
the first of which lines I make so many strokes as I deliver out pounds to the
Spinster; for Tow, which is a cheaper sort, I make a little Dash on the Top of
the Stroke; when it is brought home, I make the Strokes through both the Lines,
as above, with a D. for delivered out, and an R. for received in again; but in
case you still deliver the same for Quantity and Quality that you receive in,
you need not trouble your self in this Manner, but let the Account stand just
as it did at first.

When the Yarn comes in, I lay every sort by it self, that is spun to a
Fineness, and when I deliver any of it to the Weaver, I enter to his account
the Quantity and Quality; as for Instance, to A. B. in C. D. so many pound of
Yarn, which cost such a price; and when the Weaver brings home his Cloth, I
weigh it again, by means of which, I can certainly tell you, at the making up
of the Account, whether all my Flax and Hemp be brought home by the Spinner,
and all my Yarn by the Weaver; as also what my Cloth stands me in: By which I
do prevent being deceived by others, and deceiving my self.

When I first began to employ the Poor in Spinning, the best direction that I
could receive, was to pay for spinning the same price that the Flax and Hemp
stood me in, or what those sorts were generally sold for; but this I soon found
to be a very unequal way: Forasmuch as some People would spin a much finer
Thread than others, and better deserve 8 d. for spinning a pound of Flax that
cost but six pence, than another four pence; so that after a little time, I
brought all the poor people to spin six hundred Yards for a penny, were the
Thread finer or courser, which was three Knots or Lays about a half yard Reel,
with one hundred Threads in a Lay, which makes just six hundred yards; and
since then, with much ado, finding the Loss to be great, I have brought them to
fifty Yards more, which yet is much less than is spun in other places. In the
Contract which the City of Bristol made with one Mr. King, and others, for the
Employment of five hundred of their poor People in the way of Spinning: For the
first Year, he was obliged to pay them two pence half penny for sixteen hundred
Yards of Yarn, which is much about the price that I pay the poor People here,
because they being either wholly to learn, or much to seek, might not be
discouraged; but after the first Year, by this Contract, he might alter the
Price, provided he never brought them to spin above eight hundred Yards for a
penny; and I doubt not, if our poor People could be brought to spin so much
here, there would be no Loss by the Liunen we make, but rather Profit; but the
Mischief of it is, our Poor People have not been brought up, either to work
hard, or to fare hardly; and the Trade of Begging, being known to be so easy
and gainful, they will much rather range about forty or fifty Parishes in a
day, and get a penny in each Parish, than work hard in one to get six pence or
eight pence; which they must do in this Employment: So that till the Magistrate
will do his Duty, and see the Laws put in Execution agaiust Beggars, or the
People grow so wise, as not to encourage this wicked Course of Life, I have
little hope to see this matter much amended.

Having given you an account of the price I pay for spinning, I shall now tell
you what I pay for Flax and Hemp, (though this is sometimes more or less, as
the Markets rise or fall) as also what I pay for dressing them, and for weaving
the Cloth I make, because I would give the greatest Encouragment I could to the
setting up this Manufacture, for the Employment of our poor People, till some
other, or better way should be found out.

For Riga Hemp at this time, I pay twenty shillings a hundred, which is very
low; for Quinborough about twenty two, which is cheap; for Muscovia Flax, about
forty four a hundred; for Quinborough about forty shillings a hundred; for
Holladay about thirty six; for Paternoster Flax, about thirty: All which
Prizes are very high to what they are at some times; for English Flax, about
five pence half penny a pound undrest; which Prizes I rather insert, to give
Buyers a little Aim, than for a standing Rule. For beating of Hemp, I pay four
Shillings and eight pence, a hundred Weight.

For dressing Hemp long or short, eleven pence a dozen pound, for dressing Flax
I give three pence a Stone, accounting eight pound to the Stone.

For Weaving Cloth, I pay the several Prices following, for Yarn spun to six
pence and seven pence a pound, for every Ell of Cloth half-ell wide, two pence
half penny; for that which is three quarters wide, three pence; for that which
is three quarters and half wide, three pence half penny; for that which is Yard
wide, four pence; for that which is Ell wide five pence.

For Yarn spun to nine pence and ten pence a pound, I pay one half penny more
for every half quarter of an Ell, rising as before; in that of seven pence and
eight pence, and the like in that which is still finer; for course Cloth, Yard
half quarter wide, I pay three pence an Ell, and for Sacking, about three pence
a Yard.

Which prices I have here inserted, as I said before, rather to give some Aim,
than to be a standing Rule; yet this I am sure, no one need to exceed them, but
in some places they may be abated, according to the Cheapness of Living, over
what it is in this City.

It is a thing greatly to be wished, that we could make Linen Cloth here, as
cheap as they send it us from abroad, but if that cannot be done, nor any other
way found out to employ our poor People, we had much better lose something by
the Labor of our poor, than loose all their Labor, and keep them into the
Bargain, which must be done one way or other; for the Back and Belly have no
Ears, Hunger will break through stone Walls, and if some People cannot
honestly, they will any way supply their Wants, though they are hanged for
their Pains.

But Thanks be to God, there are still amongst us, an honest sort of poor
people, that are content to take any pains for a Living, rather than beg or
steal, and for their Sakes chiefly, I have set up this Employment, and do
heartily wish it were better for their sakes, they being indeed the truest
Objects of Charity that will do what they can to get a Living, and it is great
Pity, that such poor Souls should not be helped: If by what they are able to
do, they cannot procure to themselves Necessaries of this sort. You very seldom
see any begging about the Streets, except upon some extraordinary Occasion or
Accident, and then it is done with great Modesty, and as much against their
Natures as any thing in the World, but starving.

But as for those common Beggars, and especially those profligate Wretches
called the running Camp, which every day pester our Streets; they are a People
that one would think came from the Suburbs of Hell it self, a Dishonor to
humane Nature, a Shame to the Government, and an intolerable Trouble to all
persons they come near, by their Swearing, Scolding, Fighting, etc. You may
easily know them, as also by their numbers, for they commonly go in Companies,
and will be present at all Solemnity, but more especially at Feasts and
Funerals. Of late they are grown so impudent, that they will thrust themselves
into Churches, and by their Brawling and Scolding, many times disturb the
Minister; when Sermon is done, the Congregation must not pass out, but one by
one, because they will make the most they can of it, by asking every person
something, and what they get, they spend as wickedly as they get it: So that to
relieve these Miscreants, is a greater Act of Folly (that I say no worse of it)
than to throw a man's Money down the Thames, for hereby you give Encouragement
to this wicked kind of Life: and would once People be persuaded to forbear this
foolish Pity, they would be necessitated to work. I lately heard a Gentleman
tell this Story, who was persued by a lusty Rogue in Lincols-inn-fields, that
refusing to give him any thing, cried, Ah, Master if all were of your Mind, I
know what I would do; upon the hearing of which, he turned back again, and
said, why Sirrah, what would you do? Truly Master said he, I would fall to
work: and I doubt not but the rest of his Brethren would do the like, but that
they find Begging so beneficial a Trade.

It is not above six Months since, that a Gentleman of good Quality, that lives
in the Country, told me, that having occasion to pass some of the Fields about
the Town, he met with a young Fellow that asked him for an Alms, whom he no
sooner looked upon, but he well remembered him to have lived in the same Parish
where he did, and asking him if he were not such a man, he told him he was, and
presently called the Gentleman by his name; who asking him how long he had
followed that Trade? told him, ever since his Wife died, which was about three
years: in short, the Beggar asked him where he lay, and desired he might have
leave to wait upon him at his Chamber, which he readily granted him; withal,
wondering in himself, what he should have to say to him, but when he came, he
soon acquainted him with his Business, which was to get him to put out 200. l.
that he had gotten by his new Trade, to keep him as he said, when he was old;
by which you see, that begging is a very gainful Trade. So that it is no wonder
that so many fall upon it, and that all places, but especially this City and
Suburbs are so filled with them, nor is there any Hopes to see them fewer, till
the Laws are put in Execution both against them, and those that do relieve
them. If any shall think that I am very uncharitable, because I would have all
lusty Beggars made to work, or soundly whipped, and such as relieve them,
punished as the Laws require, I am very confident that they do not consider
upon what good Grounds such Laws were made, nor the great Evil such Relief does
both to the persons themselves, as well as to the Nation, nor yet the plain
Injunction of the Apostle, who says, If any will not work, neither let them
eat.

Obj. But some will still object against the setting up the Linen Manufacture,
That the Commodity is more proper for other Countries, because they have more
plenty of Hemp and Flax; and also, that if we do not take off their Linen,
they will not take off our. Woollen Cloth, which is the Staple Commodity of our
Nation, and ought rather to be encouraged than any other.

Answ. To which I answer, First, that for Flax, our Country, at least some
parts of it, is as proper as any other, and may with good Management, be made
so for Hemp also.

A Worthy Person in Surry, having a mind to employ his poor Neighbors, and to
prevent the great Mischiefs that Idleness had produced among them, as Begging,
Stealing and breaking of Hedges, resolved to set up the Trade of Spinning Flax,
and making of Cloth, which for some time he did, by supplying himself with Flax
from London; but afterward, he caused ten Acres of his own Land to be sown
with Flax; and after a just Computation of his Charge, reckoning his neat Flax
at one penny in a pound less than he paid for the same sort from London the
Year before, made twenty shillings an Acre of his Ground, which would not have
been let at four shillings.

But Secondly, Let it be considered, that some Countries have fallen upon the
making of Woollen Cloth; and others in a manner prohibited it, by laying so
great a Charge upon it; so that it is in a manner absolutely necessary for us
to fall upon the making of Linen Cloth, to make up the Damage they have done
us.

It Is true, the Exchange of Commodities one Nation with another, is a very
profitable way of Commerce, provided the Balance of Trade be any thing equal;
which it is well known has not been with France for some Years of late: So
that there is very great reason we should fall upon making such Cloth as we
receive from thence, and that as great an Imposition should be laid upon their
Linen Cloth, as they have laid upon our Woollen: The Linnens imported from
France of late years, as says Britania Languens, has been estimated at five
hundred thousand pounds: and so much as our Importations from France, exceed
our Exportations thither: So much the Nation loses, and is impoverished; and
in the same Proportion France gains, which may be accounted a double Loss to
England, not only in making us so much poorer, but also in making our most
formidable Neighbor so much the richer, and consequently, so much the more
able to do us harm: Therefore, so much Cloth as we make here, and would
otherwise be brought us from France, to the same proportion our Nation saves,
and France loses; which is a double advantage to us.

I confess, it is very necessary; that the Woollen Manufacture should be kept
up to the height, and a thousand pities that any of our Wool should be carried
out of England unwrought, especially at such a time as this, when the Commodity
is so much advanced, and grown so scarce, that it is much to be feared, we shall
not long have enough for those Hands that are already employed in it; so that
instead of prohibiting the wearing of Silk, and Hair Stuffs for five months in
a Year, when so many thousand Persons are employed in those Commodities: It is
thought may prove very prejudicial; and that we had more need to encourage
these Manufactures, or any other, to employ our Poor, than forbid them; neither
indeed, will this be a way to lessen our Woollen Manufacture, but much more to
increase it: Forasmuch as any Person that wears Silk, or Hair that is brought
from beyond Sea, in Exchange for our Woollen Cloth, may be truly said to wear
twice as much, as he that has nothing but Woollen upon his Back.

I desire also, that it may be considered, that although it matters not how
great a price is paid for what is worn of the Woollen Manufacture among our
selves; yet if we shall not be able to send it abroad at a reasonable price, we
shall put other Countries upon seeking out other Commodities that will be
cheaper, which may prove very mischievous.

There is no great danger, that ever our making of Linen Cloth should do the
Woollen much harm, unless we could make it cheaper than we have it from other
places; and then if we furnished them with Linen to as good advantage as
Woollen, the matter would be much the same.

But lastly, I am not fond of one Employment for our Poor, more than for
another, let but our idle People be employed, and the Trade of Begging
suppressed, and I shall have attained my End: for this I am sure, is a far
greater Evil to the Nation, and every way more mischievous than the setting
them to make Linen Cloth, or any other thing would be. Nay, I am very
confident, I conceive upon good grounds, that it were much better for the
Nation to employ the poor to pick Straws, if there were no better Employment
for them, than to let them live in Sloth and Idleness, because what they got by
their Labors, would go much farther than so much given them for doing nothing:
all the idle person has to do, is to spend what you give him, which he will
quickly do, when that is all his Business, but he that is employed has
something else to mind; neither will his Wants be so many, as the others, nor
himself in half so much danger as the idle Person, whose Head is the Devils
Anvil, where he forges all his Instruments of Death, and by being altogether at
Leisure, may even be said to tempt the Devil himself to fall upon him, being
ready for want of other or better Business, to do any thing, which either the
Devil or his own wicked heart can suggest to him, or set him upon.

But there is one Objection more, which I have lately met with, which I cannot
well pass over, and that is this?

Obj. Though it cannot be denied but that in the general, the Employment of the
Poor is a very good Work, yet it may not be convenient to set up any
Manufacture in this City for the doing of it, least by this means you drain the
Countries of all their poor People, and in time so fill the City and Suburbs
with them, that all the Manufactures in England shall not be enough to employ
them; and also, because by Experience it is found, that all those Places where
there is any Manufacture set up, are much fuller of poor people than any other.
And lastly, because it is not convenient, that the making and Consumption of
any Commodity should be in one and the same place.

To which I answer, first, that if the Employment of the Poor be good in any
place, it is so here, both because they are more in number in this City and
Suburbs, than in any other Places, and because if they are here suffered to be
idle, they will have more Temptations and Opportunities to do mischief, than
they will have any where else.

As to what is objected, that by the setting up of any Manufacture here for the
Employment of the Poor, you will drein the Countries of all their poor People,
and at last so fill the City and Suburbs with them, that all the Manufactures
of England shall not be enough to supply them.

I answer, first, that there will need no more work to employ them in the City,
than in the Country; so that if all the Manufactures in England will not employ
them here, neither will they do it in the Country. But,

Secondly, I desire it may be considered, that where there is one person comes
to this City to find Work, there is two comes to beg or to do worse: so that if
due care were taken to employ all persons that were idle, and the Laws put in
Execution against Beggars, a great many persons would soon leave the City, and
return to their own Countries, where they might have near as much Money for
their work, or at least more meat for their Money; and till this easy and
gainful, though wicked Trade of Begging shall be suppressed, I do not expect to
see fewer, but more Beggars every day. It is well known, that of late years,
many persons have come from the farthest parts of this Nation to set up this
Trade here, and if speedy Care be not taken to prevent it, this City and
Suburbs will drain all the poor people of England unto them, Begging being here
a better Trade than any where else, and greater Encouragement given to it.

As to that part of the Objection, which says, that those Towns, where there
is any Manufacture set up, are fuller of poor People than any other places, the
Answer is easy.

First, Because those places have abundantly more People in them than any
other, all Manufactures being carried on chiefly by the Poor, and not only by
the Rich; so necessary are the Poor to the carrying on of any Manufacture, that
the one would cease without the other.

But let it also be considered, that as in these Places, there are the poorest,
so also here are the richest; and as there are in these places more poor People
than in others, so also there are more rich People than in those places where
there is no Manufacture, the Trade of such places being very little; Let any
one compare the Trade of Colchester with the Trade of Ipswich, and he shall
find, that where the Town of Ipswich gets one penny, the Town of Colchester
gets twelve pence; and for every twelve pence returned in Ipswich, there is
near twenty shillings returned in Colchester. Let the Poor of any place be
never so many, provided they work and do not eat the Bread of Idleness, the
place will be the richer for them, and the Trade far the better: For these
People must eat, and drink, and wear Clothes, as well, though not so good, as
those that are richer; and by these the Trade will be much increased, and the
Inhabitants made much richer than otherwise they would be: A multitude of poor
People well employed, would be like a multitude of Bees in a Hive, which would
much sooner fill it with Honey than if they were fewer.

I would gladly know how our poor People shall be provided for, if Begging must
not be allowed, nor Working encouraged, for fear of bringing more poor People
among us. Put the case this were an Evil which yet I cannot allow, must we not
do good to our own Poor, for fear it should bring the Poor of other places
among us. For my part, I am so far from thinking abundance of poor People an
Evil, that if they were well employed, they would prove a Blessing to us: For
in all Labor there is Profit, says the Wiseman: it is only Idleness that makes
the poor a Burden both to themselves, and the Places where they inhabit.

But lastly, That all Pretenses may be taken away from such as object against
our Employment of the Poor among us, lest we should bring in the Poor of other
Places: If the several Parishes do not like of this, they have Laws to keep
them out; and they may thank themselves, that so many necessitous Persons do
daily come in among them, because they do not prevent Inmates, but suffer any
to settle among them, that may be chargeable, without giving Security to
prevent it.

But it is further said in the Objection, that the Making and Consumption of
any Commodity, should not be in one and the same place.

To which it is answered, that this part of the Objection, even by the
Confession of all, has no force in it as to many things; and why it should as
to any, I see no reason: It was never doubted, but that good Beer and Ale,
which some call our English Manufacture, may without any prejudice, be made and
consumed in one and the same place; and why not any Commodity for the Back, if
there be need of them, as well as those for the Belly? I do not understand: We
use to say, Every man will Christen his own Child first: So much of any
Commodity as is necessary, will be made use of in the place where it is made,
and only the rest sent abroad.

Put the Case, for want of other Employment, the City of London should set
their poor People upon making Linen Cloth, and that in time they should be
able to fit the Country with it, upon as good terms as they do twenty others
that are made in this City. Where would be the Prejudice, if in the first place
they supplied themselves with what they have occasion for.

But as to the sort of Work, you will employ the poor People in, I am not
concerned so much for that, as that you do employ them some way or other, and
prevent that idle kind of Life, which many of them lead, which will bring them,
not only to Beggary, but to all manner of Vice, as has been already observed
from what has been said, I think it does plainly appear, that the only way to
prevent Poverty and Want among those that are well and able to work, is to
bring them to Labor, and prevent Idleness, which being done, it will be much
easier to provide for those that through Age, Sickness, or the like, are
utterly incapable of doing any thing toward their own maintenance: And that
this might effectually be done, care must be taken to put the Laws in
Execution, which are made on that behalf, which I am told, has strictly
enjoined every Parish, to take care, that such Persons, may have such an
Allowance, as may be suitable and sufficient for their Wants, that so they need
not be necessitated to beg, nor forced to go out of their own Parish to seek
Relief: insomuch, that if the Places where they live, be not able to give them
a sufficient Supply to their Wants and Necessities, they ought to apply
themselves to their next Neighbors for Help and Assistance; and in case they
fail herein, it is their own Fault. And indeed, what can be more reasonable than
such Laws as these? Forasmuch as there is nothing can tend more to the
Dishonor of any Nation, than to see such poor, aged, sick and impotent People,
necessitated to beg up and down the Streets, when God knows, many times they
are fitter to be in Bed. That we do not force such as are able to work and get
their own Livings, is a shame only to our Prudence, and want of good
Government; but that we necessitate such Persons as those to beg, is a shame to
our very Profession of Christianity, and shows that we are hard-hearted, and
have no Bowels of Compassion to our poor Brethren. Surely this is not to give
Honor to the Aged, nor to be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the lame, and
Wisdom to them which have no Understanding, nor yet to do to others as we would
that they should do unto us, if we were in such Circumstances. It many times
falls out, that Persons who have lived well in their younger Years, and it may
be wrought hard when they were able, that by reason of Sickness, or some sad
Accident, have come to Poverty in their Old Age.

How often has it fallen out, that Widows, by trusting their Estates in the
Hands of Knaves, have lost all they had, and been brought to Want? having
outlived all their Friends and near Relations, and nothing to help them, but
the Kindness of the Parish, and if that fail, how miserable must they be?

Now for the Prevention of which, I would propose one or two things more.

First, That in every great Parish, there might be some other persons appointed
besides the Churchwardens, who should be men of the best Reputation, both for
Honesty and Estates, to whom I would have given that honorable Title of being
called Fathers for the Poor, as it is now in the French and Dutch Churches,
whose chief work and Business it should be, to visit such poor People, and to
inspect their Wants, and to have some part at least of the Parish stock,
committed to them for the Supply of them whereas now alas, the poor people must
themselves apply to the Churchwardens if they are able to crawl abroad,
otherwise, if their own Neighbors, which many times are poor enough
themselves, are not the kinder, they may perish in their own Houses for want of
Food, Physic, Fire or Clothes, as I have great reason to believe many hundreds
have done of late years, I pray God lay it not to our Charge, that in a Nation
so abounding with Riches and Plenty as England does, any person should perish
through want. It is well well known, that the Churchwardens of most Parishes,
come not to those places, because they are better or richer men than others,
but because of their long Standing in the Parish; and many times, God knows,
they are no more affected with the Wants and Necessities of a poor Creature,
than a Grave-maker at the sight of a dead Corpse.

Secondly, I propose that some such Houses may be crected here as are in
Holland, for the Reception of aged persons, to which they may resort, and be
admitted as soon as they find themselves in a declining Condition, before all
is spent or lost, paying for their Admittance according to their Age, and the
Quality of such Houses as they should desire to go into; for of these, I would
have several sorts. This in a few years would prevent much of that Poverty and
Necessity, that oftentimes fall upon old Age; as to give an Instance or two,
suppose that a Woman buries her Husband, who leaves her in Goods and Money to
the value of one or two hundred pounds, but altogether unable to manage the
Trade her Husband followed or any other, what can this poor Woman do, to live
upon the Interest of this Money, though she knew never so well, how to secure
it, she cannot; and if she lives upon the Principal, it will soon be gone. In
such a case, what more advisable, than that this Person forthwith go and
purchase for her self a Being in one of these Houses, where she shall be well
provided for, as long as she live, and be delivered from the fear of Want in
her old Age, which many times is more grievous than the fear of Death it self?

How often have it fallen out, that Widows who were left well by their Husbands,
for Want of Understanding to manage their Estates, or by trusting it in
insolvent hands, have lost all, and brought themselves to Poverty; or suppose
as many times it happens, that while a Man and his Wife live, their Trade
should either grow out of Fashion, or so bad, that it was not possible for them
either to get a Living by it, or to fall into any other. In this case, would it
not be much for the Advantage of both these Persons, while something was left,
to go and make Provision for themselves in one of these Houses where they
should be comfortably provided for as long as they lived, and the longer Liver
of them.

I doubt not, but there are many persons that have known the Cases now put
often to happen, and many others of the like nature; this would be a sort of
Charity, if I may call it Charity, very advantageous to the Persons that should
partake of it, and as it may fall out, very profitable to the Setter of it up,
but however, without Loss, and would really be a far greater piece of Service
done to the Nation, than are for the most part our Alms Houses, which though
never so well intended, are in some Respects prejudicial, drawing poor People
to settle in such places where they are erected, and a means to make some
People careless in laying up any thing against old Age, in hopes of being there
provided for; not that I would wholly discourage this way of Charity: In some
Respects it may be good, but yet I will say, that this is no way inferior to
it, in as much, as many times it would effectually prevent that Poverty which
often falls upon Old Age, which is doubtless as great an Act of Charity, as to
relieve Persons in Necessity. I am verily persuaded, if one such Building as
this I am now speaking of, was erected, for the Reception of Aged Men, or
Women, or both, and well endowed for the performance of such Conditions as
should be made, there would be no want of Persons to go into it; and that in a
short time, so many would be erected, that the next Generation should not see
one quarter so many of poor aged People, exposed to Beggary as in this. There
are some persons that I know, who have poor Relations, that would willingly be
at one or 200 l. Charge, to see them thus provided for. I wish that all that
were able, were so well minded; but on the contrary, to their shame be it
spoken, I know some that have so little Charity for their poor Relation, that
though they are able, yet suffer them to want; nay, to beg. I hope the number
of such uunatural Wretches are not many, yet some such there are, who provide
not for their own Kindred, of whom the Apostle says, That they have denied the
Faith, and are worse than Infidels.

But now Sir, that I may give you an account of the Workhouse in Aldersgate
Parish, and the management of Affairs there (which was the thing you desired,
and what first I chiefly intended) by which I hope there will appear a very
likely way to prevent much Poverty for the Future, and Beggary for the Present.

The House being finished, I acquainted the Parish, that if they had any poor
People that wanted Employment, if they went thither, I would supply them, upon
these Conditions, viz. that they should not take away their Pensions from any
that I employed, nor give Pensions to any but such as would, being able, follow
that Work I had to give them, or some other, by means of which, and the Pension
received from the Parish, they might provide for themselves without Begging:
For I have long observed, that a great many of those Persons we find begging up
and down the Streets, are such as do receive some Pension from the Parishes
where they live? but that being too small to maintain them, they make up the
rest by Begging, which might easily be prevented in every Parish, as it was in
this we are now speaking of, there being here no Person that had a Pension, and
was able to work, but was supplied therewith, and with these together, were
enabled to make good Provision for themselves, and to live much more happily
than before: And if at any time any of these Persons should be found begging in
the Streets, the Parish promised to take away their Pensions, and I promised to
take away their Work, and leave them to provide for themselves as well as they
could, which must be by begging or stealing; but wherever they begged, it
should not be in this Parish, at least, not with any good Success: For the
Parish having called over all their poor People, and appointed work for those
that were able, thought it convenient to give a Badge, with the three first
Letters of the Parishes name upon it, to such, and only such as they found
incapable of any Labor; by means of which, they were permitted to go into the
Parish, if they were able, or else to send some in their names at such an hour
of the day, to receive such broken Bread and Meat as their Neighbors had to
give, who also promised to give it unto these, and no others: for by this
Badge, which was made of blew and yellow Bays, pinned upon their sleeve or
breast, they were known to the Inhabitants to be those very persons, whom the
Deputy, Common-counsel-men, and Churchwardens had judged fit to receive such
Charity. And I know not why any body should be offended that the Parishoners
should invite their poor Neighbors once a day to come to their houses to
receive such Bread and Meat as they were willing to give them, neither would I
have these poor people go under so dishonorable a name as Beggars, but to be
looked upon as invited Guests.

And would their rich Neighbors now and then invite them to their Tables, it
would take away this Reproach, and be an Obligation upon their Servants, to
take care that what they gave them at other times, were decently set by for
them, and not scambled up and down as in some places I have seen it done as if
it were to be given to Dogs, rather than Christians; this were indeed to follow
the Advice of our blessed Lord and Savior, who says, Luke 14. 13. When thou
make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, and the Blind, for they
cannot recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of
the Just.

And this course of giving a Badg to your own Poor Neighbors, by which they
might be known, and resolving to relieve no others, unless there were not
enough of these; in which case, some from other Parishes might be allowed to
come in like manner, tho at first sight it may seem to have little in it, yet
if duly practiced would be found of very great moment, and productive of many
goods effects; insomuch, that it is impossible it should fail, unless the
Parish fail in their promise.

For first of all, by this means, you will in a short time clear your Parish of
all those idle Beggars that daily infest it, to the great trouble of all
Housekeepers, whose doors are seldom quiet from one or other of them, to the
great Disturbance of the whole Family, it being in some places almost one
bodies work to give them answers.

Then this will tend to the quiet of all Passengers that shall have occasion to
go through your Parish, who are wont to be haunted with those evil Spirits,
from one end of the street to the other; and if by accident they meet with any
one by the way, with whom they have occasion to speak, and shall make the least
halt, they must in their own defense, give them something to be gone, or else
they will hear all they say, or by their begging, hinder them from saying any
thing; this is a thing so well known to all that live in or frequent the City,
that I need not say more concerning it. Now by means of a Badge, the Parish
will know whom they relieve, and when it shall come to be known that they have
resolved to relieve at their doers, no other but their own poor Neighbors as
it will in a short time; the common Beggars will know better how to employ
their time, than in visiting such places, where nothing is to be got.

And while this Parish of Aldersgate took the course prescribed them, I my self
have taken a Friend, and gone through the chief places of this Parish, and have
not found one Beggar in it; I must confess, of late they have been something
remiss in the Prosecution of the Methods agreed upon, but I doubt not they will
fall upon it again. (For I hear, instead of Badges made of Bays, they have made
some of Brass, and resolve to give the poor aged and impotent People,
new-coats, all made of gray Cloth, to put them upon, that so the Parish may the
better know their own poor People, that are appointed to take such Relief as
they have to give at their doors;) and then I am sure, what I now tell you was
done, will be done again.

Obj. But here it will be objected, That some Parishes are so full of poor
People, who are not able to work, that they are not able to relieve one quarter
of them in this kind.

Answ. To which I answer, That there are several Parishes and some Wards within
the City of London, which have very few or no poor People in them, wherefore I
humbly propose, that by the Allowance of the Lord Mayor, etc. it may be
permitted to those poor Parishes, to send daily some of their poorest People
for Relief.

As for Example, Suppose the Parish of Algate which is very full of poor
people, should be permitted to send such a number of them into the Ward of
Langbourn, with a Badge of the Parish, by which they might be known, at such an
hour of the day, to receive what Bread and Meat they had to give, and this Ward
desired by the Alderman, Deputy, or Common-counsel-man of every Precinct to
give their broken Victuals only to these persons: this in a short time would
have the like Effect in this Ward as it had in the parish aforesaid; yet least
it should be found troublesome to the Ward, that these poor people should be
ranging about it from one end to another, it might with ease be ordered, that
every Precinct should have such a number allotted, according to it is Bigness or
Smallness, to receive their Fragments; by which means, the Ward should be more
quiet, and the Streets rid of those multitude of Beggars which are every day
found in them, to the great trouble of the People, and the Dishonor of the
Government, as has been said.

And till some such Course as this was taken, I would advise every Family that
have broken Bread and Meat to bestow, that they would not throw it away upon
those common Beggars that come to their doors every day, who many times are too
fine mouthed to eat any of it themselves, unless a choice Bit now and then, and
either throw away the rest, or sell it unto others; but rather to invite two or
three poor Families to come for ir at such times as you should apppint, which
would be a great Comfort to them. This is the way which I have taken for many
years last past, so that now my door is seldom troubled by common Beggars on
this account.

From what has been said, I suppose it will appear very practicable to bring
all the Parishes in England into such a Method, that no poor Body should want
Work, or be permitted to beg otherwise than by the allowance of the Parish,
which yet I would not have called by this Term: For what has been done in one
Parish, may be done in every one, if the Circumstances are the same.

But it is like some will still object and say, that this of Aldersgate Parish,
is a rich Parish, and the Poor very few in it to what there are in others; so
that what is related, may with greater ease be effected here, than where the
Poor are more numerous.

Ans. To this, I say, it is very true, there are several Rich Men in this
Parish, and the Poor of this Parish, though many, are not yet so many as in some
others; yet even here there are many poor People and their Children that do
spin Flax and Hemp, though they are not all Pensioners to the Parish, nor I hope
ever will be, it being my design to prevent that as much as I can. But over and
besides those of this Parish, there are above 1500 more out of other Parishes
in and about the City of London, some of which do constantly follow this
Employment, and others only when they have no better. As suppose a poor Woman
that goes three days in a week to wash or Scour abroad, or one that is
employed in Nurse-keeping three or four months in a year, or a poor
Market-woman, that attends three or four Mornings in a Week, with her Basket,
and all the rest of the time these folks have little or nothing else to do; but
by means of this Spinning, are not only kept within doors (some of which would
otherwise be begging in the Streets) but made much more happy and cheerful,
being by their own Labors able to make Provision for themselves.

And were the Rich of this Parish fewer than they be, and the Poor many more
than they are, the same course might be taken, and would prove effectual to the
Ends before expressed: And by how much greater the number of the poor People are,
by so much the more need to find them Employment, it being much more easy to
provide them Work, than to keep them in Idleness; and much more for their
advantage, to be put into a way to get their own Bread, than to give it them
for nothing: If with their Pension, you find them Employment, it is like that 6
d. will go further, and do them more good than 3 s. nothing being more
mischievous to the Poor, than to live in Sloth and Idleness, as has been said.

But further, to encourage the setting up of Schools in every greeat Parish,
for the Instruction of young Children, and bringing them to labor; and also
for providing Work for such as are of Age, which they may carry to their own
Habitations: I have a few things more to say.

First, By means hereof, you will prevent much of that mischief that happens to
young Children, by suffering them to wander up and down without any Care or
Government, by reason of which, they do not only get a lazy, idle Habit, which
yet is no small Evil, but learn all manner of Wickedness that they are capable
of, as Lying, Swearing, Thieving, and such like, which by sad experience, we
find many times they retain as long as they live, being bred in the Bone, will
hardly be got out of the Flesh, it being almost as possible to wash the
Blackamore white, as it is to teach them to do well, that have been long
accustomed to do evil: Whereas, if due Care were taken to instruct young
Children, and to put them into a good Course of Life, before Evil had taken
hold of them, both Labor and Virtue would be much more pleasing to them, than
Idleness, Sloth and Vice.

Then by providing Work for such of your poor People as are able, and may want
it. By this means, you shall in the first place, most certainly, make Provision
for all the honest and industrious Poor in your Parish, who will, with great
Joy and Thankfulness, be employed in any honest way to get a penny, Idleness
being to them the greatest Burden in the World, insomuch, that several persons
have told me, they have taken as much pleasure in earning a penny, as they have
in useing it, their minds being all that time quiet in which they have been
employed, and the day seemed shorter, and passed away much more pleasantly than
otherwise it would have done, no part of it being a Burden to them; and had
you seen as I have done many a time, with what Joy and Satisfaction many poor
people have brought home their Work, and received their Money for it, you would
think no Charity in the World, like to this of finding them Employment. Do not
think that all the poor people in England are like those idle Vagrants you find
up and down the streets, no, there are many thousands whose Necessities are
very great, and yet they do what they can by their honest Labor to help
themselves, and many times they would do more than they do; but for want of
Employment, several that I have now working to me, do spin some fourteen, and
some sixteen hours in four and twenty, and had much rather do it, than be idle.

Here, if it were to the purpose, I could tell you many sad stories of the
great wants and necessities of several poor people, that I have been an
Eyewitness of, that would melt the most rocky heart into Compassion; the
poorest people are many times those that come least in sight, who fare hard,
and work hard to get bread.

Some Trades are grown so bad, and several Commodities fallen so low in their
price, that some who could with ease have earned 2 s. or 2. s. 6. d. in a day,
can now hardly earn 12 d. by reason of which you have men run away from their
Wives and Children, leaving them to the Parish; and sometimes, run distracted,
or make away with themselves, Instances of all which cases, I have known too
many.

To whom should Charity be extended rather than to such poor people, who are
willing to take any pains for their Living, and yet are wholly idle many times,
for want of work; but by this means of providing work for all persons that want
Employment, it will be much more easy for the honest and laborious poor to
find Relief.

Secondly, By this means you will leave all idle persons so much without
Excuse, that they will not deserve your pity, whatsoever their Wants and
Necessities are, they must thank themselves, who will not make use of such a
means, as is put into their own Power; for if this Course was taken in all
Parishes to employ all that were able, and did want work, then when you saw a
lusty person begging in the streets, you might say, go to your Parish, and work
for your Living: but unless this be done, and you are sure that this person may
have Employment, to bid him go work for his Living, is no better than to say to
a Brother or Sister that is naked, and destitute of daily Food, go be warmed
and filled, but give them not those things that are needful for the Body.

I pray God lay it not to the Charge of this City and Suburbs, that so little
Care has been taken in this respect, for this is one of those things to which
it is chiefly owing, that our prisons are so full of Fellons and Debtors, of
which it is thought, no Age has produced the like; for tho I know one man that
within a few years last past, with the Charity of some worthy persons has
delivered many hundred poor people out of Prison, that lay there either for
their Fees or very small Debts; and I have reason to believe that many more
has been delivered by others, yet let any one but go to the Marshalsey, or the
prison of White Chapel, or to the two Compters of London, and he shall find
them very full of Prisoners at this time.

It was hoped that the City of London would have provided a Stock, and
appointed a place to which poor persons might have brought their Pawns, and
have been supplied with Money upon any Extremity, which would have been no loss
to the City, and much to the Advantage of the poor, who now are fain to go to
such Brokers as will not lend twenty Shillings a Week under six pence, which
comes to 26 s. a year, by which Trade they make above two of one in a years
time, to the Ruin of many poor people; neither is this the worst of it, but
for every 20 Shillings they borrow, they must leave many times, above 40. s.
worth of Goods, which they must fetch away in such a time, which being never so
little elapsed, the Goods are no more to be heard of.

Neither are many of our Tally-men much better, who trust poor Persons with
twenty shillings worth of Goods, or rather with twelve or fourteen shillings
worth, instead of twenty, to pay them by 6 d. or 12 d. a week, wherein, if they
fail to pay, they hurry them into a Prison, with great Charge for Arrests and
Proceedings at Law, which many times exceed the first Debt (which we hope will
be in a great measure prevented, by setting up a Court of Conscience in the
City of Westminster, and Borough of Southwark, as it is at present in the City
of London) at which Prison, they are sure to lie, till Charity comes thither
for the Release of poor Prisoners, which they very well know will come at
ceatain times of the Year; and then, if you meet with a kind Jailer, or a
Creditor of any Compassion, it is like you may get out your Prisoner with some
small Abatement, otherwise not; so that in effect, most of those Moneys that
are carried to Prisons, run either into the Bailiffs, or the Jaylors, or into
the Pawn-brokers, or Tally-mens Pockets.

This I instance, not to hinder people from delivering persons out of Prison (I
wish there were many more so well minded) but to provoke them to do all they
can to keep them from coming thither: It being twice as great an Act of
Charity, and much more for the benefit of any person, to keep him from falling
and breaking his Head, than to take him up and give him a Plaster: So to keep
a poor man from going to Prison, is much greater Charity than to help him out;
and I heartily wish, that this sort of Charity were more in practice, both here
and in other Countries, where they tell you of prodigious Numbers that are
every Year brought to their Hospitals and Charitable Houses, when it is much to
be feared, little Care is taken to prevent that Poverty, Misery and Necessity
that falls upon them; but is rather occasioned from the badness of some Laws,
or from the want of good ones.

Methinks it were greatly to be wished, that care were taken to provide work
for all our poor Debtors and Felons, that being cast into Prison, could not
there keep themselves without the Charity of such places. Nay, for our Felons,
I see no reason but they should be made to labor, though they could otherwise
provide for themselves: This would be a good means to prevent much of that
Wickedness which is practiced in those places.

It seems to me very unreasonable, that Prisons should be places of pleasure,
delight and choice; yet some such there are, into which, several persons of
good Estates, but very bad Consciences, remove themselves on purpose to cheat
their Creditors, and to spend their own, and other men's Moneys in Sloth and
Luxury, whilst their poor Creditors are fain to fare hardly, and many times to
live in Sorrow and Want. As these therefore should be wholly suppressed on the
one hand, so also those little Prisons about the Town, which in some respects I
may call little, because the Houses are not big, by reason of which, 20 or 30
shall be cast into one room, and that none of the bigest, and also because the
Actions are not great for which persons are sent thither, though it may be, some
of them have more Commitments and Discharges in a Year, than Newgate it self.
Into some of these Prisons I have known several persons cast for a debt often
Groats, and sometimes for less, where, if the person continue but a Night, his
Fees shall be 13 s. 6 d. to the Keeper and his company, besides 1 s. 6 d.
Garnish-money, 3 s. for the Writ, and 5 s. for the Arrest, with some other
Charges. It it is not very long since I had one of these Jaylors before the
Judges, for taking unlawful Fees, and other Exorbitant Practices; but before
any thing was determined in the Matter, the person made a Rope, and hanged
himself. It is a most lamentable thing, that these little Prisons are not
suppressed, or at least regulated, and a Table of Fees set up, both in them, and
all the Prisons of England, that so all the poor people may know what they have
to pay, and not be left to the mercy of a cruel Jailer, who rather than he will
abate any thing of his Demands, will keep a poor Wretch in Prison till he is
almost starved there, and his Wife and Children quite starved at home. I do not
lay this Charge against them all, some I have known to be more compassionate,
yet such I have known also, that upon the least Displeasure taken against a
poor Prisoner, have threatened to make Dice of his Bones, before he would abate
him a penny, and no doubt he would have been as good as his word. It Is in these
places that they eat up the poor of the Land, as a man would eat Bread; neither
are the Jaylers themselves sometimes more cruel, than the poor people are one
unto another, insomuch, that I have greatly wondered to see how violently they
will prosecute one another, it being most certainly true, which Solomon has
observed, That when the Poor oppresses the Poor, it is like a sweeping Rain,
that leaves nothing behind it; much of which Cruelty also would be prevented
by setting up a Court of Conscience in the out-parts of this City, as it is
already in London, to which all persons should apply themselves for any Debt
under 40 s. with very little Charge to themselves; by reason of which, the
Creditor would be much more like to get his Debt, and the Debtor better able to
pay him, than when five times the value of the Debt shall be run out in Charges
of a Suit, as many times I have known it, to the utter ruin of the Debtor, and
loss of the Creditor's Money.

And as for those Night-walkers, and other idle and vicious persons, that are
sent to Bridewel, and other Houses of Correction, it would be of great use,
that there were some Law to confine them to such places for a certain time,
according to the nature of their Offenses, where they might be taught to work,
and made able to get their own Livings, both while they were there, and when
they came out, as it is in Holland and other places; whereas, for want of such
a Law, these kind of people are no sooner put into prison, but they are bailed
out again, and if they do receive the Correction of the house before they are
discharged, it signifies very little, neither can it reasonably be thought, but
that they will follow their old Trade again, for want of a better; whereas it is
very probable, if they were taught a more honest way to get a Living, they
might leave off that wicked course of Life, which they had followed, and betake
themselves to that Employment they had learnt in Prison, or if they did not, if
ever they came in again, it might be for a much longer time, which would make
them at Leisure to repent their Folly, and careful to avoid the like again,
especially, if they were suffered to eat no more than they earned, and to do as
much work for 2 d. in the Prison, as they might have three pence for if they
were out, which would also help to bear the Charge of such places, which as I
am informed, is the way taken beyond Sea, with great Advantage to the persons
themselves, who are hereby brought to Sobriety, and also to such Houses. I have
heard the worthy President and some of the Governors of Bridewel, complain of
the want of such a Law, having observed, that of the vast numbers that have
been sent thither, of which many have been corrected, yet few in comparison,
have been amended, but as they have been soon discharged the House, so they
have soon been brought thither again, without any Alteration, except for the
worse. And how indeed can it otherwise be expected, these people having been
brought up to nothing of Labor when they were at Liberty, nor taught nothing
when they were under Confinement, by which they might provide for themselves,
will do it either by the old way they formerly took, or some other as bad,
rather than starve.

I humbly propose therefore, that the Women and young people might be taught to
spin well upon the double Wheel, or to weave Lace, or the like, and that the
men might be taught to beat Hemp, dress Flax, or comb Wool, or else to weave
Linen Cloth, etc. and to be taught these so well, that they might find
Employment in some of these ways, when they came out of Prison, which it is
like, many would rather take unto, than run the hazard of such another
Confinement, or by taking such a Course as would bring them to the Gallows. I
my self have found some people very hardly, brought to any Employment at first,
that by fair means have fallen to it, and the lazy Habit being got off, have
been more pleased with it than to live in Idleness, and have so continued for
some years. When this is effected, the person is in a manner out of danger: For
I dare say, there has been more lost through Idleness, than any other Vice
whatsoever; when people have no Work to do, or Employment to follow, their
first Attempt is to run into Debt of such as will be so mad to trust them,
which not being able to pay, they are run into Prison, from whence, if they get
out by the Charity of others, their next Trade is Begging, or it may be
Stealing, for which they come to be hanged.

I therefore would advise all persons who are so charitable as to release poor
persons out of Prison, to take especial care of those who have a Trade to
follow, and a House to go unto when they went out; otherwise it is very like the
Person is better where he is, and in less danger of doing Mischief, either to
himself or others: For, for want of these, the person being out, of Prison,
must either fall to begging, or that which is still worse, stealing, or cutting
of Purses; insomuch, that I have sometimes known, and heard often of persons
that have been taken out of one Prison for Debt, and in a short time thrown
into another for Felony. But that I may return to the Business I was upon, to
encourage the providing of work for the Poor, by means of which they may be
better able to provide Necessaries for themselves.

By so doing, all that have any Bowels of Compassion, will find themselves
greatly eased in their minds, and their Enjoyments of the good things of this
World, more sweet and pleasant to them, when they are not imbittered with the
sad thoughts of the Wants and Necessities of their poor Neighbors, who
otherwise will have no way to relieve themselves, but wretched Begging, or
wicked Stealing.

Besides that, they will be more secure in the Enjoyment of their Goods, by how
much there will be fewer persons that will have the temptation of extreme want
to make them steal, and be injurious unto others in their Possessions.

And lastly, to leave many things unsaid, all good Christians, who are serious
in the Profession of Religion, and hope of Eternal Life, must needs rejoice to
have a hand in such a work as this; because nothing can more confirm our hope
of having our portion among those to whom our Lord Jesus will at the great day
of Accounts say, Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc. then this, that we have
relieved the hungry, thirsty, naked and imprisoned, or have been a means to
preserve those that otherwise would have fallen into those Miseries and
Calamities.

POSTSCRIPT.
THus Sir, in compliance with your desire, and the desires of several other
Friends, I have exposed my private thoughts to public View and Censure, not
doubting, but all wellminded and ingenuous persons will accept of my good will,
tho they may not be satisfied with my reasons, nor yet in the management of the
Undertaking, which now for full five years has been carried on with some
difficulty, and very great pains, as any one must imagine.

This I am sure is the worst that can be said of it, That it has not yet been
brought to bear its own Charges. The reason of which, I have already given in
part: however this does greatly satisfy me, that every penny that has been
lost by it, either by my self, or those friends that have helped to bear it,
has been many times gained to the Poor, and to the Public; neither has the
loss been so great, as to afright any man that is able and has a good mind,
from undertaking the like: For in above 4000 l. laid out the last year, in the
management of the whole Affair, reckoning House-rent, Servants Wages, loss by
Learners, with the Interest of the Money employed in the Concern, there was not
above 200 l. lost, one chief reason of which I must attribute to the kindness
of several persons that took off some of the Commodities I made at the price
they cost me; and in particular, to the East India and Guinnea Company, who
gave me encouragement to make their Allabas Cloths and course Canvas for their
Pepper-Baggs, which in former times they use to have from other Countries.

It Is most certain, that unless a higher Impost be laid upon foreign Linen, it
will not be possible for us at present, to make it so cheap as it is brought
over, for our poor people will neither work so hard, nor can live so cheap as
generally the poor people of other places do; therefore we must be content to
lose something in this way, or find some other to employ our poor people in,
for employed they must be, as we tender the good of their Souls or Bodies; and
I am of Opinion, notwithstanding all that I have yet heard or read to the
contrary, that the setting up the Linen Manufacture would many ways be of
great Advantage to this Nation, although to provide against the worst, I have
made a good Progress in the Woollen Manufacture also, insomuch, that had not
the price of Wool so greatly advanced of late, I doubt not but by this time to
have made one of one; but of this I shall give no further account at present.

All that I have more to say, is to request such persons as have any Kindness
for my Undertaking, to assist me therein, by taking off my hands some of the
Cloth the poor people shall make, at the Price it stands me in, tho it be a
little dearer than they might have Cloth elsewere; I have met with some persons
so charitable, that not having occasion for any for their own Use, have bought
good quantities to give away to the poor, who have been as thankful for it as
for Money, there being many thousands that have not above one Shirt to their
Backs, and many that have none, insomuch, that within less than two years, I
have given away to Men, Women, and Children, above 3000, whose Bodies have been
greatly refreshed by them; and I doubt not but many of them have blessed God for
them, and prayed for their Benefactors.

I have heard many people say, they would be ready to help such as are
industrious: here are Objects to their own Hearts desire, that do all they can,
but cannot do enough to keep themselves from want, insomuch, that had I not
been enabled to give many of them money as well as work, when either they or
their Children have fallen sick, they might have perished through Want.

If any one shall desire thus to show their Charity to the poor, either by
buying the Cloth they make, or otherwise, what they shall freely contribute to
their Help and Relief, shall be faithfully given to them by theirs, and the
Poor's Servant,

Tho. Firmin.

FINIS.

