Imprimatur.

Jan. 13. 1669/70. Rob. Grove R.P. Domino Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

THE Real Christian, OR A TREATISE OF EFFECTUAL CALLING. WHEREIN The Work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ being opened according to the holy
Scriptures, some things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right
preparation for Christ and true closing with Christ, which have caused, and do
still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, are with due respects to
those worthy Men, brought to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there weighed, and
accordingly judged. To which is added, in the Epistle to the Reader, a few
words concerning Socinianisme, upon occasion of the Person of Christ, which is
touched in the Discourse. By GILES FIRMIN, sometime Minister of the Gospel in
Shalford in Essex.

To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no light in them, Isai. 8.20.

(...)., etc. Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.

London, Printed for Dorman Newman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Chirurgions-Arms in Little-Brittain. 1670.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL AND My much honored Friend, Mr. JOHN BARRINGTON OF REDGEWELL
SIR,
THe Subject of this Treatise, is the best or worst Salvian de guberna. Dei, l
2, 3, 4, 5.
of Men, a Christian. A name, though once so odious, that it was crime enough
to be a Christian, Athenag. Apol. p. 2, 5. Tertul. Apol, c. 2.
yea, to say Christianus sum, was the same way to cruel, but glorious
Martyrdom, Hieron. de Apollon, in Cotalog. Scrip. Eccles.
yet in our days many are content to own it; but whether according to the
name, they be indeed Anointed, is the enquiry (I fear) but of a few. It was
said of old, Fiunt, non nascuntur Christiani, Tertul. Apol. c. 17.
Christianus non generat Christianum: quia non generatio, sedregeneratio facit
Christianos, Augustine. de peccat. mer. cont. Pelag. l. 3. c. 9. (...), etc.
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
But now, men being born in a Nation where Christianity is professed, they
profess they are born Christians, many (if not most) knowing no other reason
for their Christianity. To undeceive these nominal Christians, has been the
labor of the Pulpit and the Press. Our works being something different from
the ancient Fathers, they labored to convert Heathens, we to convert
Christians. To this end serves the ensuing Discourse, though that was not my
principal motive to write, that work being done so well before, by more able
Pens, but because I observed some eminent Divines, while they declared, what
was required to make a sound Believer, have made such Requisites, as trouble
many, and cut off most of the sound, with the unsound Christians. Their
Assertions have been sometimes the subject of our discourse in private; which
after I had more seriously examined, for the sake of some troubled Christians,
I resolved to make my Meditations public, which now (much honored Sir) I have
made bold to dedicate to your self, being one whom (according to the title) I
judge to be a Real Christian: And though not born a Christian, in the sense
before, yet what Paul said of the unfeigned Faith in Timothy, that dwelt first
in his Grandmother Lois, then in his Mother Eunice, then in him, 2 Timothy 1.5.
the same may I say of that unfeigned Faith, which makes unfeigned Christians,
that dwelt first in your renowned Grandfather, Sir Francis Barrington, then in
your Father, Mr. Robert Barrington, the same I am persuaded dwells in you also,
and as Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. So you from a child have known the Scriptures; God
so blessing the endeavor of your godly Mother, a Gentlewoman so wise in her
government, so gracious in her conversation, so fervent in prayer, that before
she died, she lived to see eight of her Children (if not all, the rest dying
little ones) new born, and having a title to a more ancient and better
inheritance than Barrington-Hall, which (as I am informed by one who should
know best) has now above twelve hundred years paid rent to that Family, which
suffers no spot of dishonor by your being a Member of it.

Be your thoughts of your self now what they will; while I trace you in your
Conversation, I must judge of you as before: when after our unhappy Wars, you
were called, being young, to such a place, as made your favor worth the
courting by all sorts of men, who can say you did not then show yourself, both
a Gentleman and a Christian? As by your conversation in general, so in
particular, by your courteous and civil deportment toward all, doing as much
as might be offices of kindnesses to those who were then esteemed Adversaries:
(from whom at this time you receive the return of as civil respects.) Also by
avoiding those evils which commonly attend such places-

First, Pride: It being the Character that wise Observers gave of you, (and you
only) that your Spirit was not raised with your place.

Secondly, Covetousness: Refusing thousands of pounds which were offered you,
to effect businesses for others, choosing always to do things freely, without
taking one penny before or after the effecting of them.

Nor have changes proved the contrary, though fallen under variety of
temptations, which by the discovery of variety of Graces have but confirmed the
reality of the Grace of God in you.

For a public Spirit, that moved once in a large sphere, to be taken off from
employment, and shut up within the hedge of a Country Village, is no small
affliction, and I am sure none of the least you meet with; yet even here is
your spirit so active for the good of others, that your absence from us is soon
felt: witness the speech of one of your Neighbors, though but a plain man, Me
thinks the Town is not at home, while Mr. Barrington is out of Town.

As for my particular, though faithful friends are so rare, that Aristole cried
out, (...), O amici, nemo amicus: yet if I have a friend, and a friend be as he
says, (...), Ethic. l. 9. c. 4. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2.
Alter ipse, then such a one have I found in your self, having as much reason
to love you as Austin his Nebridius, of whom (as I remember) somewhere he
says, they had one Soul in two Bodies.

By this time I have given sufficient reason for my Dedication, desiring you,
honored Sir, to accept it as a testimony of the love and honor I owe you,
beseeching God it may be profitable both to your self, and to those into whose
hands it shall come.

April 4th. 1670. SIR, I am your Servant, and daily Remembrancer, GILES FIRMIN.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THey that read our English practical Divines, either they do not mind what
they read, or understand not what they read, (the case of too many I fear.) If
they do understand, they believe not what they read; if they believe, they
apply not what they read: If they do understand, believe, apyly, and experience
all they read in several Books of our eminent Divines, ( I speak not of all,
for some write so, that they leave nothing for Christians to stumble at) then
the Christians in England are much richer in Grace than I took them to be, and
much stronger than as you I find them to be: but if they understand, believe,
and cannot experience what they read, then they must needs meet with those
troubles which others have done, unless upon examining their works by the holy
Scriptures they have found ease, because they have found their works in those
particulars which did cause their troubles, not to agree with holy Writ: To the
Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, Isai. 8.20.
is a standing Rule, and blessed he God we have this to judge by. Of these
Books, some respect the Constitution of a Christian, some the Conversation of a
Christian constituted. The first sort are those, which have caused the most
trouble; some in the preparation of the Soul for Christ, amongst which are the
Works of the eminent Servants-of Christ, Mr. Thomas Hooker, and Mr. Thomas
Shepherd. Others in the work of Faith, or the closing of the Soul with Christ,
amongst whom chiefly is the reverend Mr. Daniel Rogers, As for that trouble,
which the holy men of God, Mr. Perkins, Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, with our
ancient Divines, have caused, through their description of Faith, that begins
to be removed in great part, our late Divines having cleared out the work of
Faith, in that manner, as it was not understood before: but for the former, I
meet with none as yet that have spoken to them, though their Works in those
particulars have caused great troubles among Christians, who through the high
respects they bear to the persons of these men, being holy and eminent, have
believed what they write must needs be the Truth of God in every particular. I
was something troubled at them my self at my first reading them, but upon
serious examining them, I began to question the truth of those particulars, and
having a little acquaintance with Mr, Shepherd, I wrote to him about that
particular of which I doubted, and gave him two or three Arguments against it:
He was pleased to write to me at large; his Letter deserves the Press, and had
seen it, were it not for one passage in it; his Answers to my Arguments did not
satisfy; what they are I shall give the Reader faithfully, without leaving
out, adding or altering one word: Preaching once abroad I closed up the Point
in hand, by applying it to what Mr. Shepherd had delivered, to see how those
two Doctrines agreed: A Gentleman and a Scholar meeting me some time after,
gave me thanks for the close of my Sermon: I asked him, why? he told me, he had
a Maidservant who was very godly, and reading of that particular in Mr.
Shepherd's Book, which I opposed, she was so cast down, and fell into such
troubles, that all the Christians that came to her could not quiet her spirit.
For Mr. Daniel Rogers, I have met with several Persons who have felt enough of
temptations about their Faith, and could not be resolved that ever their Faith
was trus, because of that which he had written: but two I took notice of
especially; One was a Minister of a gracious spirit, and a faithful Labourer in
the Lords Vineyard, Mr. John Glascock of little Canfield in Essex, who labored
much under temptations, from this Doctrine of Mr. Rogers. The other was a good
Woman, but under as great desertions as ever I saw one; there was another
Minister with me in the Room that came to visit her: I observed the Woman's
discourse well, and what answers she gave us; I perceived at last (though I did
not know whether the Woman had ever seen the Book) she was upon Mr. Daniel
Rogers Divinity, and so I told the other Minister, this is Mr. Daniel Rogers
Divinity: yea, said the Woman presently, I read it this morning in his Book:
long it was before this good Woman got out of this darkness. Another Person
given much to reading of good Books, and I hope made good use of them, spoke
these words to me, As for Mr. Daniel Rogers, and Mr. Shepherd, I am afraid to
read their Books, they have laid such blocks in my way. By these experiences
which I had found, the Books of these worthy men being in the hands of many
Christians, I thought there might be many whom I knew not, that had met with
the same affticting thoughts from them, which my self and others had done; upon
which grounds, and partly being moved thereto long since by some godly Divines,
I have brought their works, and with them my self, to the trial; professing, if
they be right, then must I go look for another work then ever yet I met withal
in my own heart: As to Mr. Daniel Rogers, what he met with in the close of his
life I was a little acquainted with it: He was a man of great parts, great
grace, and great infirmities: My Father Ward would often say of him, My Brother
Mr. Rich. Rogers. Father to this, married the Widow of Mr. John Ward, that
excellent Divine, of whom Doctor Whitaker would say, Give me John Ward for a
Text.
Rogers has grace enough for two men, and not half enough for himself: A most
woeful temper, or rather distemper in his constitution, which hindered much the
luster of that grace which was-in him: By one passage we may judge of his
grace; he dined one day at a Knights Table, what company was there I knew not,
but he had not that liberty to be seasoning his meat with savoury and spiritual
discourse, as he was wont to do; to sit at meals, and not one word for God, was
to him strange: The next day he comes to my house, the man was sadly dejected,
in such a manner, that those who fall into gross sins scarce know so much
sorrow: What is the matter, said I? This was the reason, that he was a man of
such a base dastardly Spirit, that he could not speak for God. I told him, your
Father would say, in such companies, if you cannot sow any good, you do well if
you can keep out evil. Much ado I had to get, up his Spirit. Though he was a
man of such grace yet in the last year of his life coming to my house, he threw
himself upon my bed in a great Agony, with this expression to me, Cousin, I
would change with the meanest Christian-in Wetherfield, that has but soundness
of grace. God did handle him strangely beat him about in such a manner, that
had it been another person I should have pitied him more than I could pity him,
who had troubled so many sincere Christians with his Doctrine, and being one of
such a Spirit, that such poor Creatures as I am, must not have lived by him,
nor had communion with him, had he not been sorely beaten, and kept under: A
quartan Ague had so shaken his head, that he scarce ever recovered it again. He
had some fearful apprehensions of death, and no wonder, when God was so dark to
him. I observed him often to make use of the saying of a godly man in his Town
(I think it was on his deathbed) To dye is a work by it self. When his turn
came to go off the Stage, I observed, his frame was very heavenly; several
times, as I sat by, he would cry out, O glorious Redemption! but for that full
assurance, and joys, which some, that had not the tenth part of his grace,
have expressed, he found not, as I understood by discoursing with him; but that
which he so much feared, he was not sensible of, for the Disease taking his
brain, in a fit he went off, and fell asleep. I have wondered sometimes to see
and hear, how joyfully some weak, poor Christians have entertained death, what
assurance they have expressed, when men of great parts, and eminent in grace,
have been more timorous: and as for some I have not much delighted to hear
their Assurances, nor their Joys; there can be no more in the Conclusion then
was in the Premises, if there be, the Syllogism is fallacious. A man's life
does but lay down the Premises, for death, the Conclusion: And to find great
joys, and great assurances of Gods love in death, when a man's life has not
expressed grace proportionable, I much suspect such joys and assurances. I do
value at a far higher rate blessed Austin's broken and repenting heart, with
the Penitential psalms about his bed, than the joys and raptures of these kind
of Christians, where grace in their life time has been but low: I hope the
Reader will not be offended at the little account I give of this man so eminent
in parts and grace. As for that description of Faith which that holy man, Mr.
John Rogers, has given in his Book, the first that ever I heard opposed it in
his own Pulpit, was his own Son, Mr. Nathaniel Rogers, a man so able, and so
judicious in Soul-work, that I would have betrusted my Soul with him, as soon
as with any man in the Church of Christ: when his own Son thus in his Fathers
own place opposed it, (as I have been informed) his reverend old Father, who
dearly loved him, stood by and heard him with great attention; the people, they
heard him with some amazement, and got him to preach over the Sermon again the
next Sabbath. Now though it is true, this Head of Divinity is cleared already
by more able men, yet being it is that wherein for many years I found trouble
my self, in reference to my own state, I hope it will not be unpleasing to the
Reader, to give him an account upon what grounds I was settled my self, after
many years enquiry. Honorable respects, I hope, the Reader shall find I give
to these men from whom I dissent, whose parts and grace I am sure I esteem far
beyond my own.

As to the Socinians, the thread of my discourse leading me to speak of the
Person of Christ briefly, I thought it not amiss to put in one or two things,
which I had been meditating upon, and which I found not in others; not
intending in the least any Controversy, but only to leave a word or two, as I
passed by, fearing that Doctrine did spread in England; but before I had
finished, I heard of public disputes, I heard of one, and saw another Socinian
book newly printed: I understood that they in Polonia sent over some of their
Scholars to learn our Language, and are lately returned: Now our Nation is like
to be filled with these Books, and it will be the spreading Heresy: I did ever
fear it, and now that which I feared is come to pass. The consequence of this
is terrible, for it overthrows our Christian Religion, raseth the very
foundation: God told the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The Serpent is not content with
bruising his heel, but now is endeavoring to put forth the utmost skill and
power he has to break his head: he has taken the right method, if he can but
null his Divinity, cut off that, and he cuts off his head.

What the thoughts of other Divines are about these Socinian Doctrines I know
not: for my own part I never blessed God for help in any Controversy as in
this: for the Popish Controversy, that is, for that part which is merely
Popish, wherein they stand alone by themselves, I ever thought it to be stuffed
with such pitiful dunghill questions (as Doctor Whitaker called them) that they
were not worthy for a rational learned man to spend his time and thoughts about
them: What should allure a man to embrace that Religion I could not tell, until
I did read the Mystery of Jesuitisme, then I saw there was something to
persuade a man given up to his lusts, to give up himself to that Religion. I
know there are Questions among them which deserve the thoughts of the most
able, learned Christian, but in those they do not stand alone: Others who
renounce Popery in a strict sense, do yet embrace those Doctrines, and have
fetched their strength from the Jesuits School. But the Socinians are as high
in those points as any other. As this is not a place, so neither have I time or
intention to meddle with that Controversy, only two or three things I will say
concerning it, knowing how some are troubled about it.

First, It implies no contradiction, nor is contrary to any principle of right
reason, that the infinite Creator, and Sovereign Lawgiver, in revealing his
Mind and Will; should give to his Creature Propositions, or Articles, to be
assented to, barely upon his Authority revealing them, though his Creature is
not able, by his created reason, to demonstrate how these Propositions can be
true.

I read indeed the Socinians affirming the contrary all of them in effect, and
in particular Schlichtingius, Nothing can be believed, which cannot be
apprehended and understood by reason, says he: And again, It implies a
contradiction, while he (that is, Meisner, against whom he disputes) affirms,
it exceeds the reach of reason, and yet owns it for an Article of Faith: But I
wish he had proved it, as he has said it. What Contradictions are, whether
Topical or Axiomatical, I know; but how this should imply a Contradiction (That
I assent to this Proposition of my infinite Creator, and Sovereign Lawgiver,
because he has spoken it, I believe it therefore, and receive it for an
Article of my Faith, though my Reason is not able to grasp it, or demonstrate
how it is true) I cannot yet understand: I challenge all the Socinians Logic
to make it good. That the Socinians can impose upon us Contradictions to be
assented to, and those gross ones too, is well known; Christ is a Dependent
God, a Made God; What is this but a Contradiction? A Dependent God is as true,
as Corpus infinitum. God may give his Creature a Command to be obeyed, of which
Command he gives no reason, nay, the Command appears contrary to reason, and
yet his Creature is bound to obey that Command. God commands Abraham to offer
his Son, Genesis 22.2. Whether it was his Intention, Decree, that Abraham should
offer his Son, was none of his duty to enquire into; a Reason for this Command
he gives none; What reason Abraham could find out for this Command, I cannot
tell. It appeared quite contrary to the light of natural Reason, and as
contrary to the Promise of God made to Abraham as could be: Yet the Sovereign
Authority of God was reason enough for Abraham to yield obedience to the
Command. Audeciam enistimo de bono Divini praecepti disputare; neque enim quia
bonum est, idcirco ausecultare debemus, sed quia Deus praecepit. Tertul. de
Panitentia.
If then the same Sovereign Authority gives me a Proposition, or Article (call
it what you will) to be assented to, believed, the Sovereign Authority of this
Prima Veritas, to whom Truth is essential, who cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. is as
sufficient a ground for me to assent unto it, believe it, though I am not able
to demonstrate the truth of it by my reason: And I do assent to, and believe
the truth of it, because he speaks it, as strongly, as if I could make never so
clear demonstration of it; this is so far from implying a Contradiction, that
it is a plain moral Contradiction, not to believe it. Must the Sovereign
Lawgiver reveal nothing for us to assent to, and believe, but what we can
grasp with our reason? Has he said he will not? Our Reason says, this is
sufficient reason, Thus says the Lord: And our Reason thinks it very well
becoming, that thrice dreadful Majesty, our Sovereign Absolute Lord, and
Lawgiver, who is truth, and cannot possibly lie, to give to his Creature
Propositions to be believed barely upon his Authority.

Yet a little further, That which is Supra Captum Rationis, what exceeds their
reason, that it cannot reach and comprehend, this they will not believe, nor
receive for an Article of Faith: upon this ground eight or nine of the chief
Articles of our Faith are rejected by these Ministers of Reason. Hence Socinus
says, Although the Scripture it self should speak any thing that fights with,
or opposes Reason, ( their Reason it must be) it must not be believed, that
the Scripture intends, or means as it speaks, but there is some other hidden
sense in that Scripture; (though Socinus speaks more broadly, Etiamsi Scriptura
dicat, tamen non esse credendum quod cum ratione pugnat.) Hence come those
torturings of the Scripture, those corrupt and vile glosses which they put upon
plain Texts, while they tell us the hidden sense that lies in those Scriptures,
which do plainly oppose their corrupt Doctrines. That any thing in the
Scripture is contrary to, or fights with sound Reason, we deny: No more of that
now.

But to return to Schlichtingius with his followers. I ever thought, and I am
sure it is true, that Christian, or Divine Faith, Nititur Testimonio Divino qua
est Divinum, I mean that Christian Faith, Quae locum habet in intellectu; it
leans, stays, rests and grounds upon Divine Testimony. So that Divine Faith
relates to Divine Testimony, it looks no further; when I assent to, or believe
a Proposition, a Testimony of God, because I see a Reason, if you will have any
other Reason than the Authority and Veracity of God, Faith cease: Did I not
believe God to be truth it self, so true as impossible he should lie, I would
not believe the Testimony of God, barely because he speaks it. But these men
destroy all Faith, they will believe no further than they can see with the eye
of their reason, and demonstrate the truth by their reason; but this is not
Faith. Divine Faith does not lean, rest, or stay upon my Reason, but barely
upon the Testimony of God. The assent which the understanding gives to any
Truth, for the Authority of the witness, or him that speaks, this I say
properly, because sometimes to believe is taken largely any way to assent to a
thing to be true; as we say, I will believe my eyes.
properly is Faith. If I give assent upon other grounds, it is not Faith. It
may be perceptio, experientia, vel scientia, vel opinio, according as are the
grounds or reasons of my assent, but not Faith. These Rationists know that
Testimonium is Argumentum inartificiale; hence they call for artificial
Arguments, they must see things in Artificio rerum, else they will not receive
them. But with their favor, we look upon the Almighty, to be so faithful and
true a Witness, that, Omnia Testimonia Divina sunt (...), imo (...), omnique
artificiali argumento certiora, omnique exceptione majora: So that to me this
great Rationist speaks but absurdly: If a Divine Proposition be not above the
reach of his reason, but his reason can comprehend it, then he will believe it,
and receive it for an Article of his Faith, otherwise he will not. For now it
is not the Testimony of God which he believes, and his Authority and Veracity
for which he believes, but the strength of his own reason is the cause why be
assents to such a Proposition, and receives it not as an Article of Divine
Faith, but an Article of Socinians Reason. Whence the Socinians must either
expunge that Topic of Argumentum inartificiale, which Reason will not suffer,
or confound artificial and inartificial Arguments, making the Membra
divisionis, which ought to be contraria at least, to be the same, which is good
Logic; for Argumen tum is distributed into artificiale and inartificiale. Not
that we wholly deny the use of Reason in the Divine Mysteries; we will allow
Reason a judicium Discretivum, but not judicium Docisivum, this we give wholly
to the Scriptures. Scriptura judicat de veritate sententiarum Theologicarum.
Ratio judicat de veritate connexionum, regulae consequentiarum pertinent ad
rationem: But the Socinians make humane Reason the Judge of all Theological
Controversies, to conclude this Head. If then God in the holy Scriptures
reveals and teaches me, that the Divine Essence is singular, or but one; yet
reveals again that this Divine Essence is predicated of three Suppositae, or
distinct Subsistences, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. How can this be, says
humane Reason, I cannot reach it, this is supra captum Rationis meae, what
then? Must I not therefore believe it, when God reveals it, because I cannot
demonstrate the Truth by my Reason? Let God be true, and humane Reason a Liar.
Essentia Divina licet sit singularis, refert tamen naturam universalis in eo
quod sicut universale de pluribus praedicatur, sic Essentia Divina de pluribus
distinctis suppositis aut personis contra ingenium aliorum singularium, and
tamen manet singularis: quia est de natura universalis, ut in iis de quibus
praedicatur natura ejus multiplicetur; ut natura humana multiplicatur in Petro
and Paulo, etc. That the holy Scriptures are clear in asserting the Divinity as
well as the Humanity of Christ, the Disciples of Mahomet Vide Hornbeck Sum.
contro. p. 131.
will acknowledge, if we own Paul's Epistles to be Canonical; therefore in
their Disputations with us Christians, upon that Point, about the Divinity of
Christ, they decline the Authority of Paul's Epistles, and say, they were
adulterated by the Christians: this is very strange, that Mahumetans can see
this, and the Socinians, that own these Epistles, and dare not say they are
adulterated, yet cannot read this. It is something, that we have these
Mahumetans determining for us, that those who own those Epistles to be
authentic, must own Christ to be God.

Secondly, There is no Article of our Christian Faith, which the Socinians
oppose, that is seemingly so contrary to reason, as is the measuring of an
Infinite Essence by Finite Maxims.

1. We deny that any Article of Faith which we maintain is contrary to sound
Reason, though it be above Reason; therefore I put in the word seemingly
contrary. Let that which measures be able to contain the thing measured: And is
not this the Logic of the Socinians? How do they judge of the Articles of our
Faith, how do they measure them, the unity of the Essence in the Trinity of the
Persons, the union of the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person, but by these
Maxims, by which they measure a finite Essence. In a finite Essence it is
impossible that one singular Essence should subsist in three distinct Persons,
therefore it is impossible it should be so in the Infinite Essence. To have two
distinct Natures unite in one Person, this cannot be; Therefore it cannot be in
the second Person of the Trinity: (Yet the Misleto and the Apple Tree are
united together, and are distinct.) The sum of their Logic is this, what
cannot be found in a Finite Being, must be denied in the Infinite Essence.
(...), we account a great piece of Sophistry in disputing. Certainly a most
gross absurdity to take Maxims fitted for finite Creatures, and limit the
Infinite Being unto them, when as Infinite and Finite differ toto Coelo. What
use these Maxims may be of, laying down first the Scripture for my Major, to
which I assent, upon the Authority of God revealing, I have touched in my
former Head, but cannot now insist upon it.

Thirdly, To give Divine or Religious worship to a Creature, is not only above
Reason, but is contrary to, and repugnant against sound Reason.

But this is the Socinians practice; Christ is but a Creature, a mere man, yet
to Christ do they give Religious worship, in so much that Socinus will not own
him to be a Christian, who will not worship Christ with Divine or Religious
worship. Let the Socinians name one Article of our Faith that is so contrary to
reason as this. I argue upon the Socinian Principle, which is, that all
Articles of Faith, all the Propositions in the Scripture must be brought to the
Bar of our Reason, yea, Socinians Reason, and there they must receive their
sentence, whether they be true or false, whether they are to be rejected or
received. Hence the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Eternal generation of the Son,
the Personality of the Holy Ghost, the personal union of the two Natures in
Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, Imputed Righteousness, the corruption of
our Reason and Will after the Fall, the Resurrection of our Bodies, the same
bodies which we lay down, these among others receive their sentence of
condemnation at this Bar, yea, though the Judge, Reason, be dim sighted,
corrupted, yet so it must be, Why? Because all these do not agree with Reason,
therefore they are all condemned. If Reason then must judge all, let us try
this at the Bar of Reason. I will only use one Argument that Christianus
Francken used against Socinus, being one of the same Opinion with Socinus, as
to the Divinity of Christ, and therefore looking upon him as Man only, would
not have Religious worship given to him, which Socinus did. Several Arguments
he has, to which Socinus gives miserable answers; and truly we may sit still,
till we see how Socinus and his party can clear themselves from being
Idolaters, which Christianus Francken, Francis David, with their party (who
deny Christ's Divinity also) do prove Socinus and his followers to be for
worshipping Christ with Religious worship, whom they deny to be God, and but a
mere Creature. His Argument is this. How great is the distance between a
Creator and Creature, so great ought to be the difference between the honor
which is given to the Creator and the Creature. But between the Creator and the
Creature is the greatest (infinite) distance, whether you respect the Nature
and Essence, or the Dignity and Excellency. Therefore, there ought to be the
greatest difference between the honor of God and the Creature. But the honor
which is chiefly due to God is Religious Adoration. Therefore this is not to be
given to a Creature: Therefore not to Christ, whom you confess to be a pure
Creature. This was his Argument, and now let Reason judge. I urged this
Argument, of giving Religious worship to a Creature, against a Socinian. The
answer he gave me was this, If it were the Pleasure of God to have it so (as it
was) then it ought to be so, and it was righteous and good it should be so.

To which Answer of his I reply: This Pleasure of God leads us to another
Question, An beneplacitum Dei sit prima regula Justiciae; which some affirm,
others deny. The Socinian by this Answer did affirm it implicitly, making this
to be a duty and righteous act, to give Divine worship to a Creature, because
it was the good pleasure of God to have it so; invincible Arguments to prove
that Thesss, would have been acceptable.

Secondly, What shall become of the Socinian Principle? Now you, Judge, Reason,
may sit alone upon the Bench, we shall carry away all the Court to another
Tribunal, the good Pleasure of God; and to this we are willing to go.

Thirdly, This good pleasure of his must be known by the holy Scriptures, in
which he has revealed his pleasure as to our duty. But then I will say with
your Master Socinus, If the Scripture does say so, it must not be believed,
because it is contrary to reason; therefore there is some other hidden sense in
that Scripture which must be searched out, this is fair dealing, I do but
measure to Socinus in his own bushel, for I am sure here is a Principle
contrary to Reason, and sound Reason.

Fourthly, I utterly deny it, that ever it was the pleasure of God, that
religious worship should be given to any mere Creature. Take Christ's word for
that, Matthew. 4.10. It is written (there is an old Law for this, God has
manifested his pleasure as to this point) Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Crellius makes great
use of this exclusive Particle only, in John 17.3. which he puts in the front
of all his Texts against the Divinity of Christ, because he said in his Prayer,
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God: Crellius putting the
stress upon the word only, proves that Christ excludes himself from being the
true God. By the same word, and as good reason, say I, does Christ exclude
himself from being the Object of religious worship: Let the Socinians say what
they can, I know what distinctions Socinus uses to help himself here; but
whence had he them? Out of the Turkish Alcoran, not out of the holy Scriptures
I am sure, they are wholly silent as to any such Notions; so that thence he
must have them, or they are the putrid Figments of his corrupt brain: But let
Francken alone with him, I will not multiply more Texts being now I am in an
Epistle to the Reader. Only one Text more which Francken urges against
Socinus, Isai. 42.8. My glory I will not give to another. So Isai. 48.11. here
God declares it plainly, that it is not his pleasure to give away the glory due
to him unto any other, he is peremptory against it. Francken urges the Text
tus, Religious worship is the glory of God, and God says he will not give his
glory to another: Therefore he has not given it to Christ if he be not God.
Socinus may scratch his head, but shall never be able to answer it. But one
word more concerning this Text, I think it will afford some thing against
Socinus and Francken too, denying the Divinity of Christ; (...)
the words are, I am Jehovah, that is my Name, and my glory will I not give to
another: What glory is here especially meant? That which he had mentioned just
before, Gloria Jehovitatis meae, as Calonius phraseth it; the glory of my
Deity, that name Jehovah, which is proper to me, this glory I will not give to
another. So Chap. 83.18. That men may know that thou whose Name alone is
Jehovah, art the most high, etc. Jehovah then is Gods Name, and his alone, and
he that bears this Name is the Most high over all the Earth. This glory he will
not give to another. But this Name Jehovah, is given to Christ in the holy
Scriptures, as Calonius in his learned Tract, Theolog. Not. and Rovel. p. 218,
etc.
De Nomine Dei Tetragrammato, has shown and defended them against all the
windings of that subtle Serpent in Crellius and his Companions; but were not
Christ of the same Essence, he should not bear the glory of that Name Jehovah.

Fifthly and lastly, I answer, It is very true, the holy Scriptures do clearly
manifest, that Divine worship is due unto Christ, and it must be given to him;
both natural and instituted worship, we shall find given to him.

But first, That this depends upon the mere pleasure of God I deny; as if God
might have otherwise disposed it, that no religious worship should be due to
him, unless that Thesis I mentioned before be true, That the good pleasure of
God is the first Rule of all Righteousness, which some do maintain, and from
hence argue, that if the Lord had so pleased, there should have been no worship
due to himself from his Creature; the Creature should not have needed to love
God above all, to fear him, trust in him, or serve him any way; pray unto him,
etc. only it was his good pleasure to have it so; but this makes all the
worship due to the Father depend upon his mere pleasure, and does not hurt our
Canse at all: whether that Thesis be true or no, does not now concern me.

Secondly, I answer: Religious worship is not given to him as a Creature, but
as he is a Creator, (God over all blessed for ever) for which there are Texts
plain enough, would but the Socinians hold to the Rules which they seem to
approve of, viz. Non esse recurrendum ad Figuras, donec absurditas Sermonis
proprie ita ut sonat intellecti monstretur. If Schmalzius would but hold to
what he says. Ludum and jocum e Scripturis facere pronunciat, qui absque
necessitate a (...) discedunt: Would but the Socinians hold to these Rules, we
shall find Christ to be a Creator, not of the new Creature only, but of the
Creature; the Scripture cannot speak plainer than it does as to this Point:
Colos. 1.16. confutes that Socinian corrupt gloss which they put upon those
Texts, which declare that all things were created or made by Christ, for the
Angels, I hope, had no need of any new Creation: Now if the holy Scriptures
must be believed, when they tell us Religious worship must be given to Christ,
who is but a Creature (as say the Socinians) though this be contrary to sound
Reason (yea, and as contrary to the holy Scriptures, which will call this
Idolatry.) Then I hope the same Scriptures may as well be believed, when they
tell us of one singular Divine Essence subsisting in three Persons, and of the
Humane and Divine Nature united in one Person, which things are above, but not
contrary to Reason. Our Reason at the best before our fall being but finite,
but since our fall corrupt and dim. For my part I cannot see how this practice
of the socinians can stand, but were. I of their opinion, I must go over to
Franciscus David, and Christianus Francken, and so I believe will our English
Socinians ere long, upon several grounds which move me to think so, but this
among the rest persuades me, because they are fallen off from some part of his
worship already, as I learn by the Socinians with whom I had discourse. For the
Saoraments it is true, the Socinians differ from others as to the use and end
of them: And they do differ among themselves about Baptism; Socinus did not
judge it to be a perpetual Ordinance, yet others of the Socinians do use it.
And in Transylvania, as Calo. Socinis. profliga. p. 851.
nius tells us, the Socinians do baptize with water, and that, in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that so it was decreed, in a Socinian,
Synod, hold Anno 1636. But as to the Lords Supper, I cannot see but they all
agree in that; and Socinus acknowledges it to be, Sacramentum perpetuum and
Universale. Now being this was the judgment of all of them, for ought I see, as
to the use of it, however they are erroneous as to the end of it, I asked him
what was the reason they did not administer that Ordinance: He answered: Though
Socinus was of that Judgment, yet they would follow Socinus no further than
they saw cause; But for the Sacraments, let those who feel the need of them
make use of them. To wit, such a God as they make Christ, such Subjects they
are to him. I thought the Institution and Command of Christ, with the worship
and honor which is given to Christ, had been grounds sufficient to command our
obedience, if we were attained to such a height of what I cannot tell, for
Grace I must not call it, that we felt no need of his Institutions: but it
seems his. Institution, Command, and worship in this particular are little with
them, if they feel any need they may use them. Obedience good enough for a
Dependent God. Now if men can thus dispense already with one part of his
worship and throw it by, I doubt not but upon the same principle they may cast
off the other part of his worship; and the Reasons urged by Francken and others
of that party are so strong, that they will at last prevail with English
unsound Christians, whom God for the abuse of his Gospel will (I fear) give up
to their own Reason; and since Reason they will have, Reason they shall have:
When the Religious worship of Christ is cast off, then the Turks will be every
way as good Christians as these Socinians, for they speak honorably of Christ,
and acknowledge him to be a great Prophet.

Bradwardin was a man sound in the Doctrine of the Trinity, De Causo Dei P. 29.
and the union of the two Natures in the Person of Christ, and in other
Articles of our Faith: And thus he speaks concerning these Articles, Scio
Philosophe, and confidenter me scire affirmo, quod non est Articulus aliquis
magnus vel parvus, de substantia fidei Christianae, quam Deus non prius multis
temporibus ante Fidei hujus exordium per Prophetas solennes, velut per quosdam
praenuntios revelavit, etc. non enim est Articulus Fidei Christianae, qui etiam
Philosopho judice non corrupto, non sophistico, non protervo: sed indifferente
solido, sobrio, and veritatis amico, efficaciter possit fundari in veteri
Testamento, in veteribus Prophetiis, sicut and constat antiquitus veraciter
contigisse. What kind of Philosophers the Socinians are in Bradwardin's
account, we may easily judge. Afterward p. 59.
he frames this Argument.

Whatever God has revealed and attested, that is true.

But God has revealed and attested the Christian Faith.

Therefore, The Christian Faith is true.

(The Christian Faith that Bradwardin means, is that which the Socinians do
oppose) then he answers to that, which some wanton cavilling Wits might object,
that he had not demonstrated that God has revealed this Faith; the answer is
too long to transcribe.

The Socinians I see are very angry with Athanasius, and look on him as if he
were the first Inventer of these Articles of the Trinity, and of the Divine and
Humane Nature united in the Person of Christ; making the world believe (if they
could) that none of the ancient Writers before him were of their Opinions: As
appears by Mr. Biddle's Quotations out of those Authors, whom he labors (by
the gloss he cast upon them) to make them speak his Doctrines, against the
Divinity of Christ, and the Trinity. Thus the Socinian Pamphlet, lately printed
and published by William Pen, tells the Reader, as I observed the little time I
had it in my hand. I suppose that Author took it out of Mr. Biddle. I shall
briefty give the Reader what I find in those Authors which I have, but not
transcribe all that I find to this purpose.

For Clemens Romanus, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, I find not much, the
occasion of that Epistle did not lead him to speak of the Verson of Christ, he
contents himself with the phrase of the Apostle, calling Christ as the Apostle,
Heb. 1.3. (...). p. 47.
The brightness of his (that is Gods, of whom he spoke before) magnificence,
being so much greater than the Angels, as he has obtained a more excellent
Name: The Angels are ministering Spirits, but to the Son he says, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee, set thou at my right hand, etc. I think he
intends his Divinity, in his second Epistle, of which only we have a Fragment:
beginning his Epistle, (...). And after, page 6. speaking of Jesus Christ our
Savior, says of him, (...). How far those words are from Christ's satisfaction
in his first Epistle, the Reader may judge: p. 64.
He gave his blood for us, and his flesh for our flesh, and his Soul for our
Soul. And for our Justification, (which concerns the Socinian Doctrine also) We
who are called in Christ Jesus, p. 41
are justified not by our wisdom, understanding, piety, or works which we have
wrought in purity and holiness of heart, but by Faith, by which the Almighty
God has justified all from the beginning.

The next are the Epistles which go under the name of Ignatius. In his Epistle
ad Ephesios, ad Magnesianos, ad Trallianos, ad Romanos, ad Philadelphenos; in
all these Epistles I read Ignatius asserting Christ to be God man, and giving
warning to the Churches to take heed of those, who said he was but mere man. I
will only write one Sentence out of this last Epistle. If any one say, there is
one God, and does confess Jesus Christ, but thinks the Lord to be (...), a mere
man, and not the only begotten God, the Wisdom and word of God, (what Word, he
tells us in his Epist. ad Magnesianos, (...), etc.) but thinks he consists only
of Body and Soul, this is a Serpent and Seducer, preaching an error for the
perdition of men, etc.

Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2. asserts the Divinity of Christ; and in his Dialogue
with Trypho he often asserts it, in so much that Trypho tells him, That Christ
should be God before the world began, and after to be born, though not as other
men, seemed to him not only a Paradox, but foolish: (...). Unto whom Justin
Martyr answers, page 267.

Irenaeus, Adv. Haeres. l. 2. cap. 43.
comparing man with the Son of God, says to man, Thou, O man, art not one that
is not made, neither did thou always coexist with God, as did his proper or
own Word. And in the third book, cap, 8. thus he writes, Never did any
Prophets, or Apostles, call any other God, or Lord, besides the true and only
God. To the same purpose he speaks in the ninth Chapter, and there Fevardentius
in his Animadversions upon the Chapter, has out of several places of Iraeneus
shown how opposite he was to this Doctrine of Mr. Biddle and the Socinians,
that he declares himself as erroneous in his quoting of Authors, as he is in
his Opinion.

Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of Christ the Word, Admon. ad Gentes p. 11.
says, He the Word appeared to men, (...), Peddagog. l. 1. p. 113.
He only is both God and man: In another place speaking of God and the Word,
(...), They are both One, Strom. l. 7. p. 702, 703.
that is to say, God. But in another place he insisteth largely upon this,
showing the Divinity, as well as the Humanity of Christ.

Origin against Celsus, l. 1. Celsus, says Origin, thinks there is no other
Divinity in the Humane Body which Christ carried about, than in Homer 's
Fictitious Fables; we affirm he does consist of the Humane together with the
Divine Nature. In another Book against Celsus: l. 2.
In that we do sharply accuse the Jews, that they did not believe their own
Prophets, who in many places did testify that he is God, God and Father of
all. Several other places I have noted in Origin.

Tertullian, De Carne Christi, acknowledges Christ has two Substances. And
again in the same Book against Marcion, he asserts the Divine and Humane Nature
of Christ. In his Book concerning the Trinity, and his Book against Praxeas, he
clearly holds forth, that Christ was God and man.

Cyprian thus, Jesus Christ God, and our Lord; De bono Potientis.
though the Son of God did not despise to take the flesh of man: Though
immortal, suffered himself to be made mortal. In his second Book against the
Jews, he brings several Scriptures to prove Christ to be God and man.

Arnobius, Contra Gentes, I have observed in five places maintaining the same
Doctrine of the Divinity and Humanity of Christ: His eighth Book I do not
reckon, because it is supposed not to be his.

Lactantius, in many Chapters of his fourth Took. De Vera Sapientia, does
manifest his faith plain enough, that Christ is both God and man.

These Authors I have, who all lived before Athanasius, if they say, that
Christ was inferior to his Father, or was subject to him, did receive from
him, etc. Who deny this? And does not the Soripture say the same, considering
the Humane Nature of Christ, the Offices he undertook, the state of a Servant
which he underwent; we ean easily tell how to understand these things, and yet
believe he was true God, as the Scriptures have declared, and these Ancient
Writers have believed. These things considered make me believe the Truth of
what Athanasius reports, Contra Arian. disput. 1.
That in the Council of Nice all the Bishops, as many as were there present,
when they heard Arrius Doctrine concerning Christ, they stopped their ears, and
all of them with a common suffrage condemned that Heresy, and Anathematized
it, saying it was strange to, and diverse from the Faith of the Church. So it
appears by the Quotations I have given out of the Ancient Writers from the
Apostles days, whence Athanasius, and that Council were not the first that
broached the Doctrine which we maintain as Orthodox; but they maintained the
same Doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles (as Bradwardin offers to
justify) had taught.

But I have done with this; hoping that God will stir up those to whom he has
given abilities, and have time for studies, to appear against these Doctrines,
so destructive to the Christian Religion, and tending so much to the perdition
of men's Souls.

As to this Treatise, I know it is that Subject upon which several men of
better heads and hearts than mine have already written: But that which is the
main thing in it, and without which I had no thoughts of ever setting Pen to
paper, I have not met with any man that has spoken to it; yet the consequence
is so great, that the soundness or unsoundness of our Conversion depends upon
it: Whether that which I have written be fatisfactory to the judicious Reader,
I must leave it, being willing to be taught if I have erred.

If the Reader be offended at the language, being so plain, I shall not be much
troubled at that, it has been ever my unhappiness, to prefer an Apodictick
Syllogism, before a Jingling Paranomasie; my business is with those who are
troubled about their Spiritual state whether it be sound or false; and Silken
language suits not those who are clothed in Sackcloth. I am much encouraged as
to this Point, by the style in which the Holy Spirit guided his Servants to
write, also by observing whom they were that God has made the greatest use of
in his Church as to bringing home Souls to Christ; neither Mr. Richard, nor Mr.
John Rogers were John Chrysostom; yet God honored none more in these parts of
England with Conversion of Souls than these men: Gallant language never did
Gods work that I have observed: what is it indeed, as to a man's Judgment or
Conscience? I write as I love to read; when I read Divinity Books, I look for
Divinity and solid Reason not for Language; that man to whom sound Divinity
will not be acceptable, unless it be clothed with embroidered language, had
best make sure that his heart be sound; these are not the Readers for whom I
intend my Discourse, being such, I believe, as never were acquainted with the
works, or troubled with those temptations of which it treats. Some Quotations
there are out of Latin Authors, which I have not translated into English,
supposing they would not be understood by most, though they were translated. If
God shall please to make my labors helpful to thy spiritual estate, let God
have the praise, and let him have thy Prayers, who is,

One of the meanest of Christ's Servants, GILES FIRMIN.

ERRATA.
By reason of the Authors remote distance from the Press, many faults have
escaped, which the most material are here taken notice of, and the Courteous
Reader is desired to correct them, as any other here not specified.

INtroduction Page 1. line 12. read them: p. 2. l. 1. r. allude. Treatise Page
2 line 29. read praeparationibus: p. 5. l. 10. dele all: p. 9. margent r.
(...)(...): p. 13. l. 15. r. signal: p. 16. l. 5. r. to: p. 18. l 7. r.
Mechanics: p. 19. l. 4. r. make: p. 23. l. 11. dele first: p. 27. l. 11 dele
his: p. 30. l. 28. r. so: p. 30 l. 31. r. Sculls: p. 31, l. 10. r. as: p. 32.
l. 25. r. only: p. 34. l. 13. r Joh. 16. p. 45 l. 8. r. Parson: p. 58. l 33. r.
his: p 91. l. 25. r. extrinsece: p. 98. l. 27. r. (...): p. 99. l. 28 r. as: p.
100. l. 24. r. own: p. 108. l. 23. r. it. p. 109. l. 9. r. it: p. 115. l. 4. r.
stick: p. 116. l. 9. dele it: p. 133. l. 19. r. volitum: p. 142. l. 10. dele
after: p. 156. l. 27. dele laid: l. 28. r. Egyptians were: p. 158 l. 21. r.
King: I ult r. attribute: p. 162 marg. r. ignorance: p. 162: l 36. dele not do:
p. 166. l. 26 r declaring assent: p. 177. l. 20. dele wretched, p. 178 marg. r.
suavitas: p 198. l. 16, 17, etc. concurse: p. 199. l. 3 r. me: p. 226. l. ult.
r. edification: p. 228. l. 14. r. latitudinarians: p. 235. l. 4. r. roll: p.
240. l. 27. r. save: p. 251. l. 10. r. is: p. 252. l. 11. r. she: 256. l. 11.
r. roll, and so often p. 282. p. 274. l. 31. r. to: p. 289. l. 35. r. election.

THE INTRODUCTION.
WHen God gave commandment to Israel, to appoint three Cities of Refuge, Deuteronomy.
19 2. He gave another Commandment to them, v. 3. To prepare the way to those
Cities: Upon which Commandment the Magistrates of Israel, every year, on the
fifteenth day of the month Adar [or February] sent out Messengers to prepare
the ways to the Cities of Refuge, to make them fit and broad, remove out of
them all stumbling blocks and offenses; they suffered not any Hill or Dale to
be in the way, nor water-streams, but they made a bridge over it, that nothing
might hinder him that fled thither. At the partition of ways they set up in
writing, Refuge, Refuge, (...)
that the manslayer might know and turn thitherward. If any man met the
manslayer, he was not to hinder him; but two or three of their wise men were
to be upon the way, that if they did meet with the Avenger of blood, they might
by lenitive words endeavor the appeasing of his wrath, and not fall upon the
manslayer, till the case were judicially heard.

Some Divines, I see, make Christ to be typified by this City of Refuge; if so,
methinks that which is spoken of John, Isai. 40.3. [quoted by all the
Evangelists] crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc.
ver. 4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
made low, etc. may well alude to this their preparing the way to the City of
Refuge. That the Apostle, Heb. 6.18. in those words, who have fled for Refuge,
does at least allude to this flying to the City of Refuge, I think may well be
admitted. So In tentum. Consugimus per Baptismum ad Christum. Lyra.
Grotius intimates, Confugimus tanquam ad Asylum, ut illi de quibus. Numb.
35.2. and Josh. 21.27. that is, We fly as unto a Sanctuary; as those in Numb.
35.2. and Josh. 21.27. who fled to the Cities of Refuge. Jacobus Cappellus thus
glosseth, Confugimus: A quo? a Deo. Ad quem? ad Deum, etc. We fly: from whom?
from God. To whom? To God; to wit, from an angry God, to a pacified God,
through the intercession of his Son; for then will a Refuge far most safe lie
open to us, when we fly to that promise of the Covenant of Grace, which he bath
declared in his Word, and confirmed by his Oath. This is very savoury.

Be this Refuge Christ, or God pacified in his Son, or the Covenant of Grace,
sure I am, that the way unto this Refuge has as much need to be kept clear
from stumbling blocks, offenses, or whatever might hinder the Soul under the
sense of its sin and misery, full of fears, in danger of death eternal, through
an angry God, or the Curse of the Law pursuing it, now flying for Refuge, as
there was need of that way to be prepared to the City of Refuge, to which the
manslayer was flying. But whether some eminent Divines, whose names are very
precious in the Church, have not laid some blocks in the way, which have
caused much trouble of spirit to laden and afflicted Souls, who have been
flying to Christ for Refuge, in the day of their fears and sorrows? Ask, and
experience will tell you. Let us see a little.

Here is a sinner whom God has awakened, has set his fins in order before
him. He that before could say, God is a merciful God, say these Preachers what
they will, now he feels and finds God to be an angry God, and one that is as
good as his word, one that will not endure iniquity, he will not clear the
guilty; and this poor Creature sees nothing but guilt and iniquity in himself,
no Creature under heaven so miserable as himself; to abide here he cannot, the
Law speaks nothing but death, and dye he must, if there be no other way to save
him then what he can find in himself: Hearing of Christ and a Covenant of Grace
revealed in the Gospel, for such poor sinners to run to; and hearing Christ
calling of such to him, Matthew. 11.28. the sinner answers gladly with them, Jer.
3.22. Behold, we come to thee, and now is hasting for Refuge. But one meets him
in the way, and speaks to him; How now sleepy sinner, what are you now awake?
what are those lusts of thine, wherewith thy soul was so delighted, become evil
things in earnest to thee? Is thy sweet morsel, which thou did hide so under
thy tongue, Job 20 12. become bitter? Is hell real? do you believe wrath indeed
is coming? do you think God is just, will be just, whatever you thought of him
before? All this is very true, says the sinner, I feel it all to my sorrow.
Well, what would you have, a Christ? God reconciled? his Love? Yea, says the
soul, this it is, you have named it, this will quiet my soul indeed, and
nothing else. But stay, says he, Are you come to this, Mr. Shepherd Sound
Believer, p. 154. in that Impression 1645.
to be quiet with the will of God, in case you think you shall never partake of
his Love; this you must come to, if you be rightly humbled and prepared for
Christ, unto whom you are now flying. Grace you would have, and God to work
Grace you desire; yea, carnestly, says the Soul, I would fain have God
manifest grace toward me. But stay, says he, What if God will not work Grace,
Mr. Shep. p. 140. p. 143.
nor never manifest Grace to you, will you not by sinking discouragements, and
secret quarralling resist God? It may be you will be above Christ, not under
him, and willing to be disposed of by him. O, I pray, Sir, what do you mean by
this, willing to be disposed of by him? This Mr. Shepherd has not so plainly
expressed; but observe what went before, with the thread of his discourse and
it is plain English, if he dispose thee to hell and damnation. Thus his Father
in Law, Mr. Tho. Mr. Hooker's Souls Humil. p. 112.
Hooker, that eminent man of God, in his Souls Humiliation, speaks it out in
plain terms, It Is harsh, and tedious, and long it is ere the soul be thus
framed; yet the heart truly abased is content to bear the estate of damnation:
[By the way observe, if it be long first before this be attained, then this
soul is a long time under preparation, and not yet come to Christ, according to
his discourse that he is upon.] Thus in several other places he has these
expressions, Ibid. p. 114, 116, 140.
The humbled soul is content, satisfied, and well-apaid, if God will leave it
in that miserable and damnable estate, into which it has brought it self. Now
when the awakened sinner, in his way to Christ, meets with these Lessons, and
begins to meditate upon them; must I be quiet though God will never give me his
love? Must I be content, though God will never work, or manifest grace to me,
or in me? Must I be content to bear the state of damnation, well a paid,
satisfied, though God leave me in it? O what work do these make in a poor,
distressed, lost, undone sinner? Here are blocks for me to get over; if these
things be true, I must never look to come to the City of Refuge, but must dye
in the way, and be damned for ever.

But suppose a man has got through the way, and is now come to the gate of the
City, to enter in, to close with Christ by Faith. Another meets him, Well
sinner, whatever Christ was before to you, now it seems he is of worth; now you
would have a Christ: Yea, with all my heart, says the distressed sinner: But
what is it in Christ you look at? you would have a Savior? Yea, and can you
blame me, is not his name Jesus? I would have him a complete Savior: Mr. Dan.
Rogers Gatechise, 1 Edit. p. 118.
I thought so. This is the main aim of most hearers, if they have faith, they
are sure to escape Hell; and if they have the conditions of faith wrought, faith
will follow: But, poor soul, tell me, if this be thy aim, wherein differest
thou from a drunkard, or a swearer?

God has tied himself graciously to such as do seek Him, p. 117.
not themselves: He assists and seconds them, who seek his glory above their
own salvation:

There is a mixt-self; Mr. Rogers Naan an,
and this mixed self is so dangerous a mischief, as to deprive the soul of all
her labor and hopes. Now what is that mixt-self? p. 129.123.
Several are mentioned: The fifth, is Self-love: When the soul so looks at the
Promise, as an object of immediate good to her self, and for her own ends and
welfare, not subordaining her own salvation to the glory of God.

So that, sinner, Mr. Shepherd in two or three places of his Sincere Convert,
speaks to the same effect, which I shall take notice of in its proper place.
here is the question before you enter into the City, or close with Christ, Is
it the glory of Gods grace which you seek, above your own salvation? If your
salvation be not aimed at in a subordinate way to his glory, Self love only
acts you, and that will undo you.

Good Lord, says the poor sinner, how shall I know this? I am glad of a
Savior to deliver me from Hell and wrath, which I so fear, yea, and willing to
be saved from my own heart, and lusts, and enmity against God, are drunkards
and swearers so too? if so, then I am lost indeed: while my soul is thus
pressed and oppressed with the sense of my undone, miserable, lost, sinful and
damned estate I see it is rich grace which only can save me through Christ, and
I shall for ever adore his grace; but whether the glory of it is now above my
own salvation, I fear it.

One block more lies in the way, sinner, there is no union with Christ without
Faith, and if no union, then no communion; do you then understand what this
Faith is? Mr. Perkins Catechize. 4th princip.
I must tell you, It is a wonderful grace of God, by which a man does apprehend
and apply Christ and all his benefits unto himself. But Sir, how does a man
apply Christ to himself? I tell thee, This applying is done by Assurance, when
a man is verily persuaded by the boly Spirit, of Gods favor toward himself
particularly, and of the forgiveness of his own sins. Thus also Mr. John Rogers
of Dedham, Treatise of Faith, p. 23.
who thus describes Faith, It is a particular persuasion of my heart, that
Christ Jesus is mine, and that I shall have life and salvation by his means:
that whatever Christ did for the redemption of mankind, he did it for me, etc.

Other things I have met withal in the writings of these holy men, which have
caused some trouble, and I may mention them afterward; but these are the
things which chiefly have caused sinking thoughts: If these things be true,
then, if we divide those, whom according to other sound notes we must judge to
be sincere Converts, into four parts, I believe three parts must begin their
work again. If Christians had minded these things, understood them, and applied
them to their own hearts, to see how they answered them, I doubt not, but they
would have found the troubles that others have from them: Again, had these men
been of the lower form in Christ's School, men but of common and ordinary gifts
and grace, they would not so much have daunted us; but being men so eminent in
gifts and grace, Master builders, hence our fears and troubles rise the more.
Surely the work of Regeneration, or effectual Calling, is not so easy, though
these things be left out; he that tries it, will find that which will make him
cry out with Ephraim, Turn me Lord, Jer. 31.18. yea, or else never turned. Why
then these blocks must be thrown in the way I know not. If indeed the holy
Scripture calls for them, then I will not call them blocks; but that is the
thing which in their proper place, I will, with reverent respect to these
blessed Saints, humbly examine.

THE Real Christian, OR, A Treatise of Effectual Calling.
CHAP. I. Concerning Preparations of the Soul for Christ, in General.
OUr worthy Divines have both by preaching and writing spoken much for
preparations of the Soul, Vide Sentent. Theolog Britan de 3. and 4. Anic in
Synod. Dord.
before it will close with Christ savingly, and that not without cause. That
abundance of Christians have a long time doubted of, and argued against the
truth of their union with Christ, for want of their sensible experience of
these preparative works, which they have learned and read, is well known to him
who has had any inward converse with Christians, if his own experience be not
a witness of it: How many years have some Christians here stuck, and could not
answer or help themselves. Hence, when they feel corruptions working, and their
hearts grow sluggish, not following after Christ as they should do, they impute
the fault to the want of these preparations. Had I tasted more of the
bitterness of sin in that legal work as others have done, sin would not have
been so sweet, so powerful as now I feel it, my heart would have followed after
Christ more close then now I do. It Is true, Divines have spoken and printed
some things to help Christians in this particular; but while they preach and
print of such strong convictions, such dreadful legal terrors, deep sorrows and
humblings, as being the common road through which men go that come to Christ,
then put in a few words to ease troubled souls; because they cannot find them;
alas, they little regard these words, being but particular exceptions from a
general Rule. That soul which is tender and very inquisitive after the
soundness of its own conversion, will not be satisfied unless it can find all
that in its self which other Converts have.

The scope of my book being to help and remove stumbling blocks out of the way
of a tender Christian, who would fain be sound, and get its work cleared out;
let me lay down my thoughts concerning Preparations in general, under these
following Positions.

First Position. It is the duty of all the sons and daughters of Adam, who hear
the Gospel preached, and Christ offered to them, to believe in, or receive
Christ, be they prepared or not prepared.

I say, it is the Duty incumbent upon them All: Not that it is their duty,
mediantibus preparationibus, if you be prepared; but not your duty, if you be
not prepared. So that my duty depends upon my preparation, not so; but I say,
though men be not prepared, yet they ought to believe it is their duty to
receive Christ. What men will do is another thing [I shall speak to that in my
next Position] but now I am speaking of what they ought to do.

If you ask me, of what use is this Position to a gracious heart troubled about
its state? I answer, If it be made good [as I doubt not but I shall make it
good] it is the best answer thou can give to the objections which thy
timorous heart, and a cavilling devil do make against thy believing in Christ,
or thy Faith, from the want of these preparations: no answer like it,
experience you what I say.

Satan, you have a long time been battering of my poor Faith, and beating me
off from Christ; but here Christ is offered to me, I am called to receive him,
is it my duty or not my duty to close with him? Yes, says he, I never denied
it was your duty, if you were prepared for him, as your own Ministers preach,
by conviction, great terrors, fears, sorrows, humblings, which thy unbroken
heart was never acquainted withal. But Satan, where does the holy Scripture
[by which I must be judged] put that condition, prepared, into the Command, to
make it my duty? I know very well why Ministers preach these preparations; but
do any understanding Ministers preach them as things antecedent, to make Faith
in Christ my duty? As for my Will, Christ has it, whatever my preparations
were: My soul embraces him as he is offered; his terms please me well. If I do
not believe, I disobey the great Command: Why then do you endeavor to beat me
off from my duty, by suggesting to me this my want of preparations?

Let me prove my Position.

1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ: Is the word prepared put in? Does it run thus, This is
his Commandment, when we are prepared, to believe in his Son? The next words,
and love one another, I hope this is not a duty depending upon our being
prepared: That when we are prepared, then it is our duty to love one another,
and not before: no more is our Faith in Christ our duty after we are prepared:
they are both joined together in the Text. Commands bind the Creature
immediately. Commands express our duty unto God, without Conditions. Promises
express the good Will of God to us, upon Conditions.

It is as much every man's duty to believe in Christ, when he hears him preached
and offered, as it is, to love God and our neighbor. But will any man say, it
is not our duty to love God and our neighbor, until we be prepared?

Object. The reason is not the same; those were our duties in the state of
innocence, before the fall.

Answ. The Argument signifies nothing. For it is not the state I am in, be it
innocence or nocency, that makes any thing my duty, but the Command of the
supreme Lawgiver. Take away the Command, there is no Obligation. But the
Command being given to fallen man, to believe in Christ his Redeemer, it is as
much his duty to believe in him in a state of nocency, as to love God in a
state of innocence.

2. Reason does as well dictate, that fallen, undone man, a slave, a captive
under sin, Satan and wrath, should fly to God, embrace a Redeemer revealed and
offered, as it does dictate, he should love his Creator in a state of innocence.

Object. But Christ's calls the weary, the laden, the thirsty, etc. which denote
a soul qualified.

Answ. What then? does it follow, it was not their duty, to believe in him, and
receive him, before they were laden, weary, etc? No man will love God as he
ought, with that love his people do, but there must be a great work first
wrought on the heart; but is it not his duty to love him before that work be
done?

To this purpose speaks Christ, John 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent. Those to whom Christ gives this answer, did
not appear to be men prepared, by ver. 26. yet this was the work of God, which
at that time they were bound to do; then surely it was their duty.

Secondly, That famous Text, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, etc. Here is a blessed
offer of Christ: but to whom, to the prepared ones? The Text says, Whosoever
believes in him. Surely it is the duty then of every one, to whom this blessed
offer is made, to accept him, and not to say, alas, I am not prepared, so this
offer belongs not to me.

Thirdly, The 18. ver. and 36. ver. of the same Chapter, He that believes not
is condemned already. If all men be condemned for not believing in Christ, then
all men were bound to believe it was their duty: This plea will not serve the
turn, to say, Lord, it was not my duty to believe in Christ, I was not prepared
or qualified for faith.

Object. This is the way to make plain Hypocrites, and has been the cause that
so many have been made; to wit, men jump out of a state of nature into a state
of believing, without any humblings, preparations, and hence have held for a
time, but fallen off at last, and that finally.

Answ. 1. I pray first, what do you mean by that state of believing, or by
faith? if you understand faith, as Mr. Perkins, Mr. Rogers, and the Ancient
Divines, it were dangerous indeed to talk of such faith without preparations:
but I do not affirm, yea, I utterly deny, that faith to be the duty of all men.

2. Show that man who did ever truly close with Christ, and grew an hypocrite,
or rotten at last, for want of preparations before his closing with Christ. I
would see such a one. I believe, yea, I am assured he never truly closed with
Christ; and this was the cause, not his want of preparation, that he proved an
hypocrite.

3. How many men have had great humblings, legal terrors, sorrows, in a high
degree, but never came to a sound work of faith in Christ: So that we cannot
put all in preparations, unless you will say, they never were so humbled, as to
be content to be damned [which is the thing I must speak to in its place] if
they were so humbled, then they truly closed with Christ. But, I hope, the
reason must be, because the Scripture says so; which we shall expect in its
place.

But in the mean time, if this Position stand, it will in part make against
this notion, and will be found to be the best help for those tender and
gracious Christians, who for many years have been kept doubting and disputing
against their faith in Christ, because they could not find these preparations,
which they hear and read so much of in Books: When as the work of faith it self
they dare not deny. Only Reverend Mr. Bound Believer p. 162, 173.
Shepherd does puzzle them in his Deseription of Faith, when he puts into it
the subject, that is, the soul of an humble sinner.

All the other four parts they can answer, which his Description treats of;
only this same humbling, as to these terrors, sorrows in such a measure [though
as to these some relief he has given] but especially, to be quiet without Gods
love, without manifestation of grace, to be content though God will never work
grace, to be content to be disposed of by Christ to Hell and damnation, as both
he and Mr. Hooker makes the humble sinner, in which faith is wrought, this it
is troubles them. For the present I only say this, Christian, I am sure God
has given thee a command, and that upon pain of damnation, that thou believe
in his Son; be sure you look to that: But let these holy men find out a Text as
clear, where he has given thee a Command, to be content to be damned, or to be
quiet without his Love and Grace, before you believe in Christ.

2. Posit. My second Position is this, Man naturally [especially if he be adult
before God works upon him] is not a subject fit or disposed to receive Christ
immediately, when offered to him; but before he will receive him, there must be
some work of the Spirit upon him, to prepare him, make him willing and glad to
receive him.

It is his Duty, he ought to receive him, according to my first Position, but
he will not: Wherefore Christian, if Christ has got thy will [if will be come
home, as Mr. John Rogers would say, the bargain is done, Revel. 22.17.
Whosoever will, etc.] do not stumble, nor trouble thy self.

The reason of my laying this Position thus is this; Reverend Mr. Shepherd,
Sound Believer p. 52, 53.
in answering of Objections made against the Doctrine of Compunction, from men's
experiences, who have proved good Christians without such compunction, says,
Many thousands are miserably deceived about their estates by this one thing, of
crooking and wresting Gods Rule to Christians experiences, p. 53. then gives
this Caution, In this work of Compunction we must not bring Rules to men, but
men to Rules, p. 52.

What Christians are these this holy man means? If they be Christians of a late
edition, when Religion was in fashion, and the fairest Card for a man to play
his game with, if he meant to rise; such as might have motions upon their
affections, whilst the dainties of the Gospel were disht out, and set before
them, as in those times nothing but chemical notions in Divinity would down
with many palates, and now had their tongues tipped with Discourses of
Free Grace, and some Opinions which served their interest: If these be the
Christians he means, I think they are miserably deceived indeed, who make such
men's experiences a mark for them to go by: Yea, if he mean others, who had
compunction, felt legal terrors, were cast down, and after raised up with much
comfort, by the Spirits application [as they apprehended] of an absolute
promise to their souls; truly I will not make these men's experiences a Rule for
me to go by, though they had their compunctions, and joys also; I pray God give
me better faith, or else it will go sadly with me; I will hardly give them two
pence for theirs, if they could sell it, for all their compunctions.

But if by Christians be meant sound Believers, and another experience do
truly answer their experiences in that which is essential to saving faith, I
cannot tell how men should be deceived so miserably in this; for the sound
Believer does answer Gods Rule.

Secondly, I grant, there is but one Rule to which all men must conform, who
shall go to heaven, i. e. Regeneration, or Faith in Christ, or Conversion: but
is there one Rule God has left, to which all men must conform, and by which
they must be tried, as to their preparing for Conversion, or faith in Christ,
and that Rule is Compunction? I pray observe, I speak of Compunction as it is
preparative, for that is it Mr. Shepherd is upon, and this is the fault he
finds with those, who suppose persons can be in Christ, or truly regenerated
[it comes to one] unless they be first prepared by Compunction: Now that which
is but in preparing, is not yet effected; it is in Motu, Fleri. While the
timber is hewing, there is preparing indeed, but there is no house as yet. But
then what shall we say to all those whom the Lord Regenerates in their Infancy?
I am sure Mr. Shepherd, Covenant of Grace opened, p. 26, 27.
nor Mr. Hooker [who says, Certainly God does work faith in the hearts of all
elected Infants that dye in their Infancy] will deny, but God does regenerate
some Infants. If he works faith in all elected Infants that dye, I hope he may
as well in elected Infants that live: Have we not very often known Children
grow up, and being under the nurturing of godly Parents [especially when a
wise, prudent and godly Mother, that knows how to keep her place in government,
join with a godly Father] have given evident signs of grace from their
Childhood? I have known such families, where all the Children have been godly,
and that began in their childhood for ought I could learn. O you Mothers, who
are always with your Children in the chamber, at the fire side, and have the
advantage to be dropping into them; when your Husbands must be abroad, you may
do much toward the saving of your Childrens souls, if you be godly, prudent,
and know how to keep Authority up. This I have observed, where the Mother has
not been godly and prudent, though the Father be godly, not so much good has
been done: If once the Mother has lost her Authority, she never, that I saw,
did good. We read, Prove. 31 1. of Solomon, The words which his Mother taught
him; it seems Bathsheba used to catechize and drop into her Son Solomon, Prove
4.3, 4. David did also instruct him; but David must be at Court, or in the
field in war; Bathsheba is with her Son continually, she carries on the work in
David's absence; whether Absalom, Amnon, or Adonijah's Mother did so, I doubt
it, the Scripture says nothing.

To return to our question, When was the time of Preparing these Infants for
Christ? It would be hard for Samuel, Timothy, and diverse others in Scripture
[for the most of those who are mentioned for godly men in Scripture, were so
from their youth, for ought we can find] Obadiah, Josiah, to find this
preparing time, when they were so humbled, to be quiet without Gods love,
content to be at Gods disposing for damnation, yea, or for legal terrors: I
know full well that those who thus are educated, do find both legal fears, and
sorrows also, but not as preparative to faith, (which is our question) for they
were regenerated before. Sometimes in the children of wicked men, such (at
least) as we cannot judge to be godly, there do such things appear, that we
must judge certainly God has wrought some good work in them: We read of
Abijah, (...) V. 3. He is called (...) V. 12. (...)
1 Kings 14.13. There was some good in him: how old he was I know not; but very
young he was; whether he had this preparing time is hard to prove. To say then
there is such a Rule laid down for preparative works, both words express the
youngest. The 70. have not this History. The Aloxand. Copy 3. read v. 3. (...).
V. 12. (...). So Drusius in his Copy.
that every one must pass through, before they can be regenerated, or have
faith, I cannot yet be convinced of it; unless you can tell me how Infants can
be prepared, according to Mr. Shepberds method.

Therefore, I say, in those who are adult, grown up to some ripeness of years
before God works, usually, it is so: but to say, that in every one of these the
work of Compunction is sensible, afflicting, as it is in some others, I dare
not affirm that neither. For Lydia, Mr. Shepherd answers, she might be a
Convert before, so nothing can be proved from her: Be it so, but what shall we
say to Zacheus, what was in his heart, when like a Boy he runs to climb up the
tree to see Jesus, I know not; but I question whether he had any thoughts of
that which followed, The third v. says, he sought to see Jesus who he was;
which words imply nothing of any gracious work on Zacheus's heart; only he had
heard men talk of one Jesus, and now he would see who he was.
Luke 19.9. This day is salvation come to this house. If Zacheus had been a
Convert before, would Christ have said, This day is salvation come: Surely it
was come before, when he was converted; but it appears it was not before this
day when he also is become a Son of Abraham: Where were those legal sore
Compunctions? The Samaritans, Acts 8.5, 8. there was great joy at Philip's
preaching, and faith too; but where are these sore Compunctions? That these
were real Converts, Acts 9.31. prove, They walked in the fear of the Lord, etc.
It is very much then, there should be a standing Rule for preparatory works,
and we read of so many Converts, and no mention of that Rule in practice.
Surely these examples in Scripture are not to be slighted: Because the rugged
Jailer, Acts 16. that spared not to execute what the persecuting Magistrates
gave him in charge concerning Paul and Silas, met with such work; and the Jews,
who crucified the Lord, met with such compunction, Acts 2. as made them cry
out, must there be a Rule from hence made, that All those who come to Christ,
must come under such sensible afflicting Compunctions?

But usually, or commonly it is so, when, as I said, persons be adult before
God works. That it is so, and usually must be so, experience does testify, and
we need not trouble our heads to find the reason of it. So blind are we in the
matters of eternity, such great thoughts have we of Creatures and
Creature-enjoyments, such slaves unto our lusts, our hearts so set upon our
iniquities, Hos. 4.8 [witness those terrible blows a man will endure before he
will part with them] so well conceited of our polluted righteousness, that did
not the Spirit of the Almighty set his power to work, open our eyes to see our
selves, sin, and creatures, and filthiness that is in our righteousness, in
which we so bless our selves, and disquiet the soul that lies so at rest in
Dalila's lap; Christ might call and call long enough, before we would come to
him: we may hear him indeed, but as the Country Proverb is, Hear as Hogs in
harvest; a similitude good enough for us, who are compared to Swine, 2 Pet. 2.
ult. though I know in some respects it holds not (which is not required in
similitudes.) Hogs in harvesttime, when they are gotten into good Shack, when
they at home call them, and knock at the trough, the Hogs will lift up their
heads out of the stubble and listen, but fall to their Shack again, home they
will not go, they are pleased where they are. This is the frame of our swinish
hearts feeding in the Shack of the world and our lusts; let Christ call, it may
be if there be some warm man at the work, that shows himself a workman, we can
lift up our heads and hear what he says, but to our shack we go again, home we
will not go to him who calls us, our swinish hearts looking upon the things
of the Gospel, that same holiness, but as sour swill; but the things of this
world, the lust of the flesh, lust of the eye, and pride of life, these are the
sweet grain. Absalom sends for Joab once and again, 2 Samuel 14.30.
but Joab is busy, has other matters to mind; but when he sets his
Barly-field on fire then he comes: And thus God, when he sends more then once,
but we are so taken up about other matters, we will not come; sometimes sets
our creature comforts on fire, or causes the sparks of Hell fire to be felt in
a man's Conscience, then God may hear of us. When the heart is set upon an
object, upon which it feeds with delight (as we do upon our lusts and the
creature) if you would take it off, give me a reason, says the will; and a
reason must be given, and such a reason as the will accepts. God works
rationally upon the rational Creature, suitable to its principles: if then you
can make the soul see the object it feeds upon is really evil, and at best but
vain, and can show it a better, so as the heart is convinced of it, then you
may take it off. This does the Spirit in the work of effectual Calling, as I
shall open hereafter.

Third Position: The ways of God in converting, or drawing the soul to Christ,
are very secret, and in preparatory works very varions.

What Bildad said to Job, Job 8.8, 10. Enquire I pray thee of the former age,
etc. So may I say, call to the Saints of old, ask the children of Abraham in
all ages; I do not say, enquire of painted Hypocrites, but real Christians,
will they not utter words out of their hearts (as Bildad said) which will
confirm this Position? The ways of God are first secret; the union of the soul
with Christ is set out by marriage, Durandus p. 2.
and it is called a mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. Mysterium est sacrum secretum, can
you lay open this secret before the Sun. Agur, among the things that were too
wonderful for him, Prove. 30.19. reckons this, the way of a man with a maid: the
mystical sense which Alapide gives I regard not. Most interpreters I see
understand this of a wicked man, The next verse seems to confirm this sense.
who is enamoured with love, or inflamed with concupiscence, and so to note his
witty solicitations, his artificial plots and cunning devices to win consent,
etc. yet I see others do not take it so, but think it may as well be understood
of lawful love, and said to be wonderful, both in respect of the rare and
wonderful uniting of his heart with the Maid whom he loves, and also in respect
of the wonderful means used by him for the getting and enjoying of her: This is
as true as the former, as experience witnesses: which is the true sense of the
words I determine not: but in allusion to it I can say, the ways of Christ
with the soul in effectual Calling; how he works in bringing of the soul from
its former lovers, how he wooes and draws it to himself, and makes it so gladly
to come up to married union with himself, this is too wonderful for me, and I
think for any one else to lay open; Know thou how the bones do grow in the
womb of her who is with child? Eccl. 11.5. we have our English Harvy's famous
De generatione Animalium, and we have our English Divines famous De
regeneratione Animarum: but did learned Harvy stand by and see how the God of
Nature wrought in that dark shop; when he carried on his work so far, he could
see his work wrought, but could he see the working? Is it not as true in
regeneration, though considering the term from which a man turns, and the term
to which he turns, and that this is done in a rational Creature: we may
certainly conclude, such and such things must be wrought before regeneration
can be effected; but how God works them, is a great secret: God has his path,
which the Vultures eye has not seen, Job 28.7. Why then should we trouble our
selves so much about the ways of Gods working, as look to the work wrought?

As God is secret, so he is various in his working.

Various, First, For Time. God is various in working.
Some who lived in a course of sin, who walked in the ways of their hearts,
and in the sight of their eyes, as Solomon Ironically bids the young man,
Eccles. 11.9. can tell the time, the day, the Text, the Sermon, the Minister,
when God put a stop to their course, opening their eyes, awakening their
consciences, made their sweet morsels turn bitter; others can tell the signsl
Providence of God, with which he was pleased to work, some sharp affliction it
may be he sent, and sealed instruction, Job 33.16 But others cannot tell the
time, when God began to work; and this have been to some a long time an
objection against the truth of their regeneration, because they cannot tell the
time of their new birth; as if all the regenerated persons in the Scripture
knew the time when God began to work; as if there were any ground in Scripture
for such a Position, All that are new born know the time of their now birth:
What Divine, that did deserve the name of a Gospel-Minister, did ever deliver
such a Doctrine? Does not God many times in insancy, in childhood, cast in the
immortal Seed, which being watered by the instructions and care of godly
Parents at home, who are dropping upon their Children ever and anon, and by the
lively Word preached, springs and grows up, the poor Christian knows not
how, Mark 4.27. Some Christians finding at some time more stirrings, and higher
workings, or new convictions of some sin, under the Ordinances, then they did
before, will from thence reckon the time of their new birth; when they are much
mistaken, God had begun it before. This is a mere vanity and devils delusion,
to trouble thy self about the time; look to the work that it be soundly
wrought, but I would never trouble my self about the time: Many can tell the
time, when God did awaken their Consciences, and set home sin upon them with
legal terrors; they can tell the Minister and the Text, but they could not tell
of a sound work of conversion, as the event has proved.

Secondly, Various, as for the beginning of the time, so for the length of
time. It is in the new birth, as in the natural birth; some are a long time in
travel, their pains not very strong; some their pains are long and strong; some
are but a little while in travel (like the Hebrew Women, Exodus 1.19.) and pains
sharp, but short; others, not so sharp neither. If we look at the beginning of
the Gospel preaching, how quick were the souls in their new birth? as I may
say, they were delivered, and up again, hail and strong in a few hours: I
cannot say that the Jailer was above one hour (if so much) in his travel under
the work of Compunction: the Text says, Acts 16.33. The same hour of the night
he took them, and washed their stripes: the Earthquake began at midnight, ver.
25. before day, ver. 35. here is one new born and lusty, for he was filled with
joy, ver. 34 So those in Acts 2. how long were they in travel? they must be but
a very little time under the work of Compunction; for to have three thousand
souls added in one day, ver. 41. baptized, and settled with comfort by night;
when Peter began his Sermon but about nine of the clock in the morning, ver.
15. we must allow but a very little time for Compunction. In Acts 8. little of
pain is mentioned among the Samaritans in their new birth, ver. 5, 8. Now
though the Lord, for the honor of his Gospel, the establishing and encouraging
of souls, and fitting of them for times of persecution at hand, was quicker
with them then with us; yet we see the Lord is very various for the length of
time even amongst us; some are not a quarter the time under their pains that
others are.

Thirdly, Various in his method; in some only legal works, terrors, fears,
sorrows, no mixture of Gospel with them; in others a mixture of both, Law and
Gospel, go together; one while legal works, then a little hope from the Gospel,
then legal again: those who have been bred up under clear Gospel preaching, and
the Lord begins his work, before they have abused it in that manner others have
done, these commonly have a greater mixture of the Gospel in their work; but
others, who either live in dark corners, where the Gospel is not lively
preached; or if men have lived under such preaching, but have played the
Wantons, and abused the Grace of God, those, when God works, shall know little
enough of the abused Gospel at first.

Fourthly, Various in the degrees: Some drenched in sorrows, legal workings and
humblings; some are but sprinkled; men soaked in sin, scandalous, such as have
sinned with a high hand, these drink deepest, say you, of this Cup: No, not
always so neither: God does not keep to this Rule always: Sometimes one who
has been more restrained, more civil in conversation, shall have more of legal
terrors, then those who have been open sinners. I could give instance in some
whom I have known, and may mention them in due place, and therefore I pass over
this.

Fifthly, Various, as to the continuance or carrying on of his work: Some the
Lord lays hold upon, and holds them fast, will not let them go out of his
hand, till he has done his good work in them, brought them home to himself,
uniting them to his Christ: others the Lord lays hold on, and lets them go out
of his hand again, they slip, as I may say, out of his hand, not against his
will, but according to his counsel; this may be once, twice. I was once called
by a Christian to go see a rare sight; and what was it, but a man who had been
three times in Gods hands under workings, and gave hopes of true conversion
every time, but the work came to nothing; the fourth time God laid hold upon
him, held him fast, and let him go out of his hand no more: this is rare
indeed. A Kinsman of mine (as I think) the third time God took him into hand,
before the work stood. I do not speak of stirrings men may have under the
preaching of the Word, which cause some resolutions for a day or two, and then
vanish as a morning Cloud, but of higher workings, when men give fair hopes of
conversion, and yet come no nothing. This I note not only to show the variety
of Gods working, but also to help against the secret workings of Satan in some
men's hearts. I found in one of my parish (and I doubt not but it may be so in
many others) when he came to dye, as I was questioning with him about the state
of his soul, it seems the Word had often met with him, and several times put
him to a stand in his sinful course, but when company came he could not
withstand them; thus it had been with him several times (though it did not come
up to that height I am speaking of under this head, to give fair hopes of
conversion) till at last, when Christ and Mercy were tendered to him in the
Word, he turned away all those offers, they could not concern him who had so
often played fast and loose with God: but now he might go on, and take this
course, and so it seems he did, concealing those thoughts in his own breast,
till at this time he revealed them to me. Oh that people would take heed of
dallying with God, while his Spirit especially is striving with their spirits
under means: Yet again take heed of giving way to those secret despairing
suggestionsof Satan, since we see God has taken men after the third relapse,
when hopes were given of true conversion, and made his work to stand.

Sixthly, Various in the way or means by which he works: Sometimes he comes
with a rushing Wind, some terrible threats like a thunderclap, which he sets
home; he saves them with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jude v. 23. The
Jaylors heart quakes as much as the Earth. Sometimes he comes in a most soft
Wind, as he did to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.12, 13. in a still small voice; he breaks
the heart melts the spirit of a man; and as Absalom stole away the hearts of
Israel, 2 Samuel 15.6. with his fair and affable carriage; so the Lord has his
way, whereby he secretly draws and wins the heart to himself, and this in a
more still way; the work goes on secretly, one drop follows another, till God
attains his end: Thus various in his working is the Lord. Search, and you shall
find these experiences true; some are much humbled and much comforted; some are
much humbled and little comforted; some are little humbled and little
comforted; some are little humbled and much comforted.

Fourth Position. For any man to make the way of Gods working with him, to be
the way to which he will tie up all others, is little better then high tyranny.

God has not tied up himself to one way; why must yours be the only way? Yet
this I have observed in some Ministers (men of great spirits and parts) who in
their preaching (may I not say also in printing?) have pressed upon people that
particular way they found God came to them in; because God did handle them
thus, therefore he must do so with all. One man is not a fair Copy, says Mr.
Shepherd; and this is very true. God takes a man of a high lofty spirit, and
batters him, with such or such workings: Must the same be found in all others?

Fifth Position. Though God is very various in the manner of his working, when
he converts or draws the soul to Christ; yet the work wrought is in all the
same; there is no variety in the work wrought.

That is, Conversion, or regeneration, is the same in every one without any
difference. God works other ways in converting Manasseh, then he did in
converting Samuel; but conversion is the same in Samuel that it is in Manasseb.
Run over the several varieties I have mentioned of Gods working, and name you
as many more, yet that which makes regeneration or union with Christ, is the
same in all; here all are alike. Less will not serve the turn in one then in
another, as to the essence of regeneration. Let your condition, as to
externals, be what it will, it is all one as to regeneration; be you learned or
unlearned, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, it is all one, converted you must be,
if ever you mean to see Heaven; and that which is regeneration in him who
handles the spade, the same, and no less is regeneration in him who swayes the
Scepter: Strait is the gate, etc. Matthew. 7.14. if it do not like you, let it
alone. The gate of Heaven is not like the gate at great Men's houses; if
Merchants come, they must come in at the little door; if great Men come, open
the great gates: no wider gate is opened for the rich Man then for Lazarus: If
this do not please you, find a better way if you can; but be assured, the
Almighty scorns your greatness, as much as you can his straitness.

Hence, since the work wrought is the same in all, let not Christians so much
perplex and trouble themselves, because God wrought not so in them as he did in
others, or because they cannot tell how God wrought in them, they cannot trace
out his path, for in his working there is much variety; but look to that in
which all must agree; look to regeneration, union with Christ, that the work be
done, no matter how God did it.

Sixth Position. To say of a man under Gods working, that he is but under a
preparatory work, and no more, is a difficult thing.

Who can say there is no more but preparation in such a person? Mr. Shepherd
makes his preparatory works to consist, 1. In Conviction; there he says the
light is clear, real, constant, p. 32. 2. In Compunction: fear, sorrows,
separation from sin, p. 65. 3. In Humiliation: taken off from self-confidence,
etc. p. 125. Is there a preparatory state, in which the soul stands for a time,
not as yet in a converted state? May not the Lord at the very first stroke
convey an immortal seed of grace into the soul? the light, which is so clear,
constant and real, as he says, may it not be as the Lightning which comes out
of the East and shines even to the West, Matthew. 24.27. so this shines into the
whole soul, will, and all affections, be so bright and clear at the first
darting in, that the Spirit withal quickens the will? We know grace at first
lies in a narrow compass, a seed, a Mustard Seed, is but a small thing.

Seventh Position. To work a man under preparatory works, to be as good a
Christian as he is, when he is actually united to Christ, seems very strange.

When Mr. Hooker preached those Sermons about the Souls preparation for Christ,
and Humiliation, my Father-in-law, Mr. Nath. Ward, told him; Mr. Hooker, you
make as good Christians before men are in Christ, as ever they are after; and
wished, would I were but as good a Christian now, as you make men while they
are but preparing for Christ. But he told him the reason why he thought God let
him thus preach, because he saw he had not long to stand, and so should do his
work all at once. Let but one observe well Mr. Shepherd's preparatory work, and
I think we shall find a Christian with a good measure of Grace: in my Letter to
him I said, I thought it strange that such an Act of Grace, or Obedience
(supposing it to be so, which yet I do not, till I see a Command for it) should
be performed by a person under a preparatory work to Christ, then which, I knew
none greater could be performed by one who is in Christ; for a man to be so
subject to the Justice and Sovereignty of God, that if he will deny him his
love, work no grace, dispose of him to damnation, he is yet quiet, contented; I
knew no Act of self-denial in the Gospel like it; yet this is under the
preparatory work of humiliation. To this he answers: I do not think this is the
highest measure of grace (as you hint) any further, then as any peculiar work
of the Spirit is high; for upon a narrow enquiry, it is far different from that
readiness of Paul and Moses, out of a principle of love to Christ, to wish
themselves anathematized for Isreal's sake; which is a high pitch indeed.

To which I reply. 1. As to the principle it is true, there may be some
difference; formally, the principle is not the same; yet this is a principle of
humble and gracious submission to the Justice and Sovereignty of God, and that
in such a point, as there is not another like it: Could I but get it in all
other things, I should think it an Act of Grace from God to give me such a
frame, though I be not content to be damned.

Secondly, Whatever be the principle, I am sure (according to the sense which
must be given of Paul and Moses, by this holy man) they, and the prepared soul,
or preparing for Christ, must all meet in the same end or place, i. e. in Hell.

Thirdly, But, with humble respect to Mr. Shepherd, are indeed the Acts of Paul
and Moses (supposing the sense of the words to be as he takes them) such Acts
of Grace as are required by God, and we bound to imitate? if they were Acts of
grace performed in obedience to a Command, then we are all bound to the same:
Of necessity then the sense of the words must first be made plain.

First, If the book written, Exodus 32.32. be understood of the Book of life, i.
e. of divine Predestination; and if Anathema in Romans 9.3. be taken in the
proper sense (and these must be so taken to make Mr. Shepherd's answer good)
then both these wishes are inconsistent with a man, as man, and with a
Christian, as Christian, as I shall prove anon: to talk of limiting Anathema,
the sense of it, as some would, because they saw what this included, signifies
nothing; if you fall a limiting, I will limit also.

Secondly, To me it appears further, it cannot be the sense; because God in
answer to Moses, ver. 33. tells him, Whosoever has sinned against me, him will
I blot out of my book. What out of the book of Divine Predestination? I am sure
Mr. Shepherd, nor those other Divines, will admit blotting out of that book;
the 34. ver. tells Moses, he will visit their sin upon them; and ver. 35. he
plagued the people. Surely God spoke in that sense which Moses did.

Cor. a Lapide indeed affirms upon the Text, It is lawful for the salvation of
many, for a man to wish his own damnation. As much as they are for the works of
Supererogation, I do not believe the Jesuit did ever heartily wish his own
damnation upon this account; yet if so, (these Jesuits are so crafty) he makes
his bargain so, that he will get by it; for says he, God will reward such a
generous and liberal soul, with heaps, and increase of love, grace, and other
gifts. Yes, God does use to fill those who are blotted out of the book of
eternal life, and accursed from Christ, with increase of Love and Grace. Let
him fry this.

Other Divines therefore do not understand the book of eternal life, or Divine
Predestination, See Mr. Coryl on Job cap. 24. v. 20.
but the Records of the Church, or Records of the people of Israel. The Jews
were wont to number their families, and take their names; and God commanded a
Record of the people of Israel to be written: Thus we read, David praying,
Psalm. 69.28. against his enemies, Let them be blotted out of the book of the
living, and not be written with the righteous: Would David pray to have any
blotted out of the book of Divine Predestination? Therefore by the latter
clause, the Church must be meant; they seemed once to be men of that Society,
but they have discovered themselves to be of another alliance, blot them out,
let not their names live in the Church. The 13. of Ezekiel. 9. seems to answer
this of the Psalmist, They shall not live in the Assembly of my people, neither
shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel.

To confirm this interpretation I add, first, In the tenth verse of this
Chapter, God bid Moses let him alone, that his wrath might wax hot against the
people, and I will make of thee a great nation. God is threatening to blot out
the name of Israel, cut them off, and promises Moses to make of him a great
nation: Nay, says Moses, I am so far from this ambition, to be made a great
nation, upon this condition, that I will let thee alone, that thy wrath may cut
this people off, that I rather desire thee to blot my name out of the writing
of Israel, that my name may not stand in that Record, as an head of thy people,
as now I am; but let me not so much as be reckoned for an Israelite, before thy
Name shall suffer thus.

Secondly, That God answers him, ver. 32. as I said before, that he would blot
out, etc. and did visit them, and plagued them.

Thirdly, From the Hebrew Text something may be gathered; the word which our
Translators render, I pray thee, is rendered, Now, (...)
by Arias Montanus and Pagnin: the word signifies both, I pray thee, and now: I
conceive our Translators render it. I pray thee, because now was once before,
in the beginning of the verse: but the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it also now
(...) nunc
. So Jonatham Targum render it now (...)
; Blot me now out of the book of the just, in midst of which thou have written
my name. The Alexand. The Chaldee Paraph. has the same word (...) in the
beginning of the verse also.
Gr. Manuscr. (...), blot me also out: but neither the Septuagint, nor this,
have the word, I pray thee, nothing that answers the Hebrew word. The Samaritan
Text has not this word in it, but it has another word in the Text; the
Septuagint and that Text agree. If the word be translated now, which may well
be, Moses being now in a great passion, his zeal raised for God, then this
sense does much confirm the interpretation: I am so little desirous to be a
great nation, that if thou will blot out the name of this thy people, blot me
now also out of that book thou have written, I do not desire to live any longer.

Munster comments thus upon the words, De libro scilicet vitae: vel, ut
Sepharadi exponit, De libro legis dele nomen meum, ne memoria nominis mei
habeatur in eo. To this sense also Gomarus In explicat. cap. 3. Apocal. de
libro vitae.
assents.

I think there may be something in this; the Text does not say, Blot me out of
the book of life, but out of the book thou have written; which to me hints a
difference between the book of Divine Predestination, and that book of which
Moses speaks.

As to Paul's Anathema, I think Mr. Caryl says well, That Moses and Paul were
moved with the same spirit of zeal for the glory of God in both their wishes:
and as Moses so Paul wished himself to be an Anathema from Christ, that is, a
person separated or excommunicated from the society or communion of the
faithful, and so no more to be remembered amongst the Saints; or to have his
name blotted out of the Church Records, though he had been so great a planter
and propagater of Churches; thus Mr. Caryl. Certainly Paul, whose heart was so
inflamed with love to Christ, Could not wish himself accursed from Christ, and
so an enemy to him, as anathematized persons are, 1 Cor. 16.22. besides the
impossibility of the wish, in Moses and Paul as men, there were great sin in
the wish: First, with that sense which Mr. Caryl gives, agrees Grotius upon
the Text; accursed from Christ, that is, From the Church of Christ, which is
called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 3.27. As it was the manner among the Hebrews,
for the Wives to be called by the name of the Husband, Isai. 4.1. This he
says, I would not only want the honor of Apostleship, but also to be the most
contemptible amongst the Christians, as those who are excommunicated: thus
Grotius. In Text.
Nor much different is Gomarus, who distinguishes between a temporal and
eternal Anathema; between Anathema simply so, and for ever: And secundum quid,
or after a sort; so shows it is a temporal Anathema, and after a sort, which
Paul wished, not the eternal: as Christ was an Anathema for us, but not for
ever: He quotes a passage in Nazianzen, Oration 44. in Pentecost.
wishing the same upon himself, in behalf of the Macedonians; who judged right
of the Father and Son, but held the Holy Ghost to be a Creature; his love and
affection was so great toward them, that upon condition they might join
together, and celebrate the Trinity in common; (...), etc. it is but (...).
Nazianzen commends them for many things in that Oration; he quotes this saying
of the Apostle, and doubts not to say with him as he did; but yet limits it, he
will not take the extent of the word. Learned Rivet says, Whatever be the
sense, we must not think that Moses and Paul did pray for any thing contrary to
Gods will, and absolutely and determinately contrary to their own salvation. He
inclines to that sense I have given, In Exodus 31.32.
thinking it does sufficiently argue the ardent desire of the good and
salvation of this people, to choose death, rather then the Nation of the Jews
should be rejected or blotted out. Lipomanus, whom he quotes, looks on it as an
Hyperbolical manner of speaking, to express the greatness of his affection
toward them, as if ( says Rivet) a Son that is very dear to his Father,
should thus intercede for his rebellious Brother; either pardon my Brother, or
kill me, and deprive me of my inheritance.

To conclude, before Mr. Shepherd's answer take me off, it must be proved, that
this is the sense of Moses and Paul, which he supposes to be true, but is
denied: Yet again, suppose it were so, I have not met with one Divine, who will
maintain that all Christians are bound to come up to Moses and Paul in their
wish: but both Mr. Hooker and Mr. Shepherd have made that whereof we now treat,
a part of the Souls humiliation and preparation for Christ, and therefore must
be found in all.

Eighth Position. Those works which are called preparatory unto Christ, do most
(if not all) of them, abide in the Soul after its union with Christ.

The hewing of the Stones and Timber which prepared them for the Temple, did
remain after the Temple was built; the hewing of Timber, making of Tennants,
Mortises, which prepare for the House, abide when the House is set up and
perfected; so do these works which prepare and make the Soul fit to close with
Christ, to be made his House, Heb. 3.6. Those works which Mr. Shepherd says
make the Soul preparatively happy. That clear, real and constant light, yea,
the legal fears (whether they come from the Spirit of bondage, or no, I now
dispute not) sorrows; that willingness that Christ should take away sin; that
humiliation, emptying the Soul of its confidence in any of its duties and
righteousness: and if that be a preparatory work, to make the Soul quiet
without Gods Love, and to be content to be disposed of by him to hell and
damnation; this, with almost all the rest, must abide after Union; only when I
say must abide, I do not intend it of legal fears, and legal sorrows; of these
I only say, they are found often in many truly regenerated, that are actually
in Christ; but for all the rest, they must abide.

Hence, from the beginning of the work of the Spirit upon an elect Vessel,
there seems to be a difference, between his work upon such a one, and that
which a Reprobate has.

Hence, if you have not what you desire in these works, called preparatory, it
is not too late, now to get, or increase them, though they loose that respect;
now to one who is actually in Christ, they are not properly preparatory.

Ninth Position. In order of nature one work must go before another; so
Ministers must preach and write (if they will keep to the Rules of Method) but
in order of time they may go all together.

Illumination must in order of nature go before Conviction, and Conviction
before Compunction, etc. but in order of time they may go together: the Spirit
of God at the same time lets in a clear light, convinces and strikes the heart
with fears, sorrows, etc. it is not thus, that the Soul is one week, or one day
under the work of Illumination, another comes under Conviction, the third week
or day comes under Compunction: I know there may be light and conviction many
weeks and years, when there is no Compunction: but it is not so, when the
Spirit of the Covenant is at work: How often have men come home from one
Sermon, with these works wrought? As for the work of Humiliation, whether that
be always at the first stroke, I do not determine, but shall speak to it in
its due place.

To conclude this Chapter, concerning Preparations in general: Let the Lord
begin when he please, let him work how he please, yet he so works, that first
or last, before God has done with thee, if thou live to be one of ripe
years, he will make thee see how all his Counsels open themselves; the
necessity, the truth, the glory and excellency of them, in saving thy soul. His
Counsel was to advance the glory of his rich Grace, free Mercy, the redemption,
the Righteousness, satisfaction of his Son, the power of his Spirit in
regenerating and applying redemption, and maintaining of his good work in thy
heart, with the throwing down of all thy conceited righteousness, abilities
whatsoever, that may lift up, and do lift up too many. O says the Soul, I see
all these, I feel it must be thus, my heart answers these Counsels of God. My
Reverend Tutor Doctor Hill (whose memorial is precious to me) laying his hand
upon his breast, would say, Every true Convert has something here, that will
frame an Argument against an Arminian; and that is very true.

CHAP. II. Of the first Work of the Spirit, Illumination.
WHen the Spirit of God, Genesis 1.2. moved (hovered or So Syrus reads it,
incubabat. (...) Incubuit ovis. Schindler. Rectius sentiunt, qui dicunt
Spiritum sanctum jucubasse confusis corporibus caeli and terrae, sicat gollina
incubat ovis; ut illa calore suo colefaciet and animet. Munslerus. Clarius.
Hinc (...), Lux, Lumen. A sto, manifestum, i. Clarum, apertum, quasi ad manus
foris stans. Perottus. Col. 119.
brooded) upon the Deep, which was covered with darkness, the first particular
work he formed out of that rude, great and general heap, was Light, ver. 3. So
the first thing the same Spirit works in the new Creature is Light; God, who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, etc. 2
Cor. 4.6. Paul was sent to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and turn them from
darkness to light, Acts 26.18. Illumination and Conviction seem to differ as
the cause and effect: it is by his Light that we do convince. Light brings in
such reason, proof, demonstration, that a man cannot evade the strength, cannot
reply, cannot except, then he must sit down convinced. But all things that are
reproved are made manifest by the Light [ or all things when they are reproved
of the Light, as the old translation, and the Geneva translation, so join (...)
with (...)] for whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5.13. Make this
manifest to me, says the man in dispute, I will yield. Light is brought in,
and that makes manifest. The Notion or Opinion that the Angel of Laodicea had
of himself, did differ much from that Opinion Christ had of him: I am rich and
want nothing, says the proud Angel, Rev. 3.17. but I know thou art poor and
miserable, naked, etc. But how shall this lukewarm Angel be convinced of it?
Let him but go buy eye salve of Christ (Gospel price) and anoint his eyes, that
he may see himself, then he will be convinced who speak truest, Christ or he.

The necessity of this work appears,

First, From that darkness which is upon all our understandings naturally.
Darkness was upon the face of the deep, Genesis 12. in the first Creation. It is
as true in the new Creation; the Spirit finds much darkness upon our Souls;
the Prince of darkness holds us under his power by this darkness that is in our
understandings. I do not mean only by this, but in great part: Ephesians. 5.8. For
ye were sometimes darkness: Ephesians. 4. Having their understanding darkened; that
is the reason why we walk so in the vanity of our minds, ver. 17. Neither is
this the condition only of those, who sit in darkness and shadow of death,
Matthew. 4.16. Where the medium is dark, as it was in the Egyptian darkness,
where no Scripture Light shines, but of those who dwell in Goshen, where
Scripture, yea, Gospel Light, shines clear, there is darkness enough in some
men's eyes; though the Sun shine never so bright, Bartimeus cannot see. When
Paul was converted, the holy Story tells us, Scales fell from his eyes when he
was healed of his blindness, Acts 9.18. Paul's understanding had scales of
darkness upon it, whatever he thought of himself while a Pharisee: Christ set
up a light there, the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9.
Elies sons, brought up under a godly father, and Priests also, so dealt in
things appertaining to God, yet sons of Belial, they knew not God, 1 Samuel 2.17.
Who then should know him, if the Priests who ministered before him did not know
him? though they had the Scripture Light, yet they were dark in their
understandings. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness to him, (no wonder then he does not receive them, if
his dark understanding looks on them as foolishness) neither can he know them,
(and why not?) because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Spirit
of God then must have his work upon the understanding, before a man can know
the things of the Spirit. The Tempter dealt with our understanding, or
intellectual part first: Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived
was in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14. Deceit belongs to the intellectual part.
Transgression follows deceit. The sin was completed in the will. Licet error
judicii, and electio voluntatis, duo sunt entia in genere naturae, unum
tamenens sunt in genere moris. Christ undoes the Devils work, and begins where
he began. Adam was now as Sampson with his eyes put out.

Secondly, God in Conversion or drawing to Christ, works upon a rational
Creature, and works upon the soul as such: He calls the will and affections off
from the objects to which they are glewed, to close with other objects: A
reason for that, says the will, and a sufficient convincing reason too, else
you may call long enough before I will stir: the will is (...), a rational
appetite: It is but Potentia caeca, it must have one to lead and guide it;
therefore does the Spirit set up this light in the understanding first. While
we are in our natural state, we think we have reasons sufficient for what we
do, in following our lusts, so that we wonder at others, think strange if they
run not the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. they seem to be irrational people,
else we would not think it strange; the carnal heart thinks it has all reason
on its side. God preserves the workings of all the faculties of the soul, not
the least violence offered to any one in Conversion: the will shall have as
good reason given it, to close with Christ, as ever it had to close with its
lusts.

Hence we read so much of Teaching. This deals with the understanding, sets up
a light there: They shall be all taught of God, John 6.45. the Father teaches
the Soul certain Lessons before it will come to Christ. Hence Christ is made a
Prophet, and that not barely to reveal the Will of God, as other Prophets did,
but teaches effectually also. That was the first office he executed, when he
declared himself to the world, began his public Ministry; and that is the
first office he executes, when he declares himself to the Soul in Conversion,
teaching, or enlightening the understanding. This is that David so often prays
for, Psalm. 119. v. 18. and in v. 102, gives that for the reason, why he had not
departed from the judgments of God, for thou have taught me. It is Divine
teaching which brings the Soul first unto obedience, and holds it fast in
obedience to the Commandment.

I shall lay down my thoughts concerning this work of Illumination, in several
Positions.

First Position. That illumination which is wrought in a soul converting, or
drawing to Christ, is such, as none but the Spirit of God can effect.

So thick is that Cataract which is grown over the eye of our understanding,
that none can couch it but God himself. Christ was sent, Isa. 42.6, 7. to be a
light to the Gentiles, so he illightens the medium; and to open the eyes of the
blind, so he heals the organ: he is the only Oculist, he has that eye salve,
Rev. 3.17. which heals the blindness of our understandings. He must be taught
of God, he must be (...), John 6.45. whoever comes to Christ. Cathedram in
Caelo habet, etc. as B. Austin several times says: He has his Chair in
Heaven, who teaches the converting Soul those Lessons effectually, which it
must learn before it can come home to God. Who teach like him? said Elihu, Job
36.22. none teach like him, nor none beside him, as to effectual and saving
teaching. Let a man be what he will as to his understanding, has he a head fit
for a Jesuit, he shall never learn the truth as it is in Jesus, unless he be
taught by him, Ephesians. 4.21. The wise and the prudent man, if but a natural (a
(...)) man, and of wants this Teacher, shall never be able to know things of
eternal concernment to his own salvation, Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 2.14. It is a
terrible Proverb, but I believe too true, Hell is paved with the souls of great
Scholars, and paled in with the bones of rich men. The things of God are too
low for great heads to exercise themselves about them; and the sovereignty of
God is so high, that he will not give them eyes to see, Deuteronomy. 29.4. But he
blinds their eyes, and hardneth their hearts, that they should not see with
their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and bo converted, John 12.40.
Holy Austin Do paccato, meritis, contra Pelag. l. 1.
, who was one of Gods Scholars, knew so experimentally the necessity of this
Teacher, that he could say, Let who will be the Teacher, Man or Angel, unless
Christ who is the eternal Light does irradiate the mind, man will not feel or
know the truth of what he hears.

And if he be the Teacher, no matter what the Scholar be, he will make him
learn: He makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. Let simple be such B. Austin
calls tardissimi ingenio, this Teacher makes such simple ones wise to
salvation; yea, sometimes not only such simple ones, but those whom (says he)
the Greeks call Moriones, (we call them Fools) and gives a notable instance of
such a Fool, Aug. Tom. 7. Col. 669. Edi. Prab.
who with great folly would bear, and put up all injuries offered to himself,
but if he heard any abuse, or blaspheme the name of Christ, he bare such a
reverence to Christ, that he would spare no such man, but would throw stones at
him: Thus he reveals to babes; even so Father, so it seemed good in thy sight,
Matthew. 11.25, 26.

Second Position. That illumination which the Spirit works in the elect
converting, or calling to Christ, differs Whether I should say it differs
essentially, and so the whole work of grace in the sincere Convert, differs
essentially from what the Hypocrite has, and not only gradually? I do not much
contend. I had rather make sure my grace be saving, let it differ how it will;
though I cannot satisfy my self in a mere gradual difference.

First, For take the knowledge of a Geographer, who writes of Countries which
he never saw, having never traveled beyond the smoke of his own Chimney, the
knowledge he has of the Countries is true; but is it like the knowledge of him
who has seen the Countries, and traveled in them? If such a one writes of the
River that goes up to Sevil in Spain, and tells me, when you get over the Bar
which lies at the mouth of the River, on the Star-board-side, as you sail up,
there stands a Castle, higher stands the Town of Saint Lucar, higher another
Castle, and a Monastery by it, higher the Chapel of Bonance, and still on the
Starboard-side, this man says true: But does he know these as I (though I do
not deserve the name of a Traveller) do, who have been in the Town, in the
Castle, in the Chapel, and seen them? Thus let the Hypocrites, who by hearing,
and reading, or common works, speak, concerning sin, Creatures, God, Christ,
Holiness, Gospel Truths; he will speak as sound truths concerning all these,
and seem to know them as well as the sound Convert: But does he see them as the
sound Convert, whom the Spirit enlightens and teaches them as they are? We see
by the effect, for one has his heart and conversation framed according to the
truth, and the other walks as if all these truths were falsehoods: Does the
knowledge which I have by my eye seeing those places, walking in them, differ
only gradually from the knowledge of him who learned it out of a Book?

Secondly, The work of Conversion is called a new Creation; Regeneration is
Creation, and Generation only a gradual matter.

Thirdly, Degrees do draw out the positive into a longer thread, but they draw
out only that which was in the positive; when the superlative has drawn it out
to the longest thread, it is still but the positive extended; the same essence
that was in the positive is here in the superlative: Draw the Hypocrite out as
far as you will, some make finer threads then other, yet it is but Hypocrite
still.

Fourthly, If so, then an Hypocrite differs from a Child of God, one Modally;
for gradus sunt modi entis, and no more.

Fifthly, Then the Hypocrite and Child of God, are both of the same kind; for,
gradus non variant speciem; yet the word makes but two sorts of men, Dead and
Alive, Darkness and Light, which differ more then any Degrees, take them where
you will.

Sixthly, We will suppose a man loves the world four degrees, he loves God but
three degrees, this man is naught; his love to God gets another degree, now he
loves the world and God equally, yet he is naught; but then his love to God
gets to five degrees, [he must rise by degrees, if Grace, as saving, consists
in such a degree] now the man is a godly man, for he loves God more then the
world: Let this man's love rise to six or seven degrees, as well it may: Yet
this we grant, degrees of love may be lost, too much experience proves this:
What abatements of love, what coolings, do many Christians meet with? The
seventh, the sixth degree may be lost, Rev. 2.4. Thou have lost thy first love:
The first love, that degree of love, not love simply, for doubtless, by what
the Lord testified of the Angel, he had yet saving love. Solomon lost degrees
of love sadly, and others also. Now if the seventh and sixth degree may be
lost, why not the fifth degree? what is there in the fifth degree to preserve
it self more then the sixth or seventh? I know not, if degrees be all: So it is
a very easy matter to fall to the fourth degree again, and loose all.


exceedingly from that light which any Hypocrite or unsound professor attains
unto.

The first is spiritual, practical, and saving, The other not so, but may and
does stand with perishing. To say there is no difference between the working of
the Spirit upon the understanding of an elect Vessel and a Hypocrite, till the
elect answers the Call, and so having union with Christ; now the difference is
made in the understanding, this I cannot embrace. To have a saving work in the
will, in order of nature, before there be any in the understanding, I think is
not rational: or, to say there is no difference at all as to the understanding,
between a sound and unsound Convert, but the difference is only in the will, in
that work which the Spirit puts forth in the heart, this is atheological,
and very absurd. To think that the Hypocrite, as to the light in his
understanding, and dictate of his practical judgment, is as good, and the same
that a sound Convert is; only this latter having saving grace infused into his
will, and the Spirit there dwelling, acts that grace, and determines the
will of the sound Convert to follow the ultimate dictate of his practical
judgment, and not so in the Hypocrite; and hence arise all the differences
between them; this I look on as an irrational figment. I oppose not all, but
must maintain by what I seel, as well as by what I read in Scripture, that the
will must be renewed, the stony heart must be taken away, and the Physical
determination of the will sanctified by the Spirit of God: but withal I
affirm, that there is saving light, saving knowledge in the understanding of a
sound Convert, differing from an Hypocrite: and I call it saving, not only a
posteriori, because there are saving effects follow this in the will, but I
call it so a priori, as it is the work of the Spirit of the Covenant in the
understanding of the elect Vessel drawing into Covenant: it is in its own
nature as properly saving, or accompanying of Salvation, as any Grace in the
will. Certainly that Teacher, John 6.45. makes his work, as Teacher, in all
those whom he draws to Christ, differ from what the Hypocrite has. Knowledge
is a part of the Image of God, according to which we are renewed, Col. 3.10.
then surely differs from an Hypocrites knowledge: Is the Image of God renewed
in the Hypocrite as to knowledge? I believe it not. The whole work of
Conversion is sometimes set out by Conviction, John 14. because Conversion (in
adult persons of whom we now speak) is wrought in us, secundum modum judicii;
then certainly there is some difference of the Spirits work in the intellectual
part. I know the Hypocrite, as to the notional light and knowledge of Divine
things, may be equal with, yea, he may far excel a sound Convert; he may be as
quick-sighted as an Eagle, as to the notional knowledge; but as to the
spiritual and saving knowledge as blind as a Beetle. Conversion (says the
Learned and Judicious Doctor Preston) New Covenant, p. 277.
) is wrought not always by making us know new things, which we knew not before
(which yet is true in some) but by knowing things otherwise then we did before:
This is a certain truth, and therefore a vast difference in the knowledge. To
conclude this head, let works of or in an Hypocrite be what they will, yet I
doubt not to say, the first flaw in the Hpyocrite is in his illumination; and
this lays the foundation for all the rest.

Third Position. When the Spirit of God does thus savingly illuminate the
understanding, he does at the same time savingly work upon the will.

The blessed Spirit does not work upon one faculty, or especially a leading
faculty, as the understanding is, alone; it does not one week work upon the
understanding savingly, the next week, month, or year, work on the will. It was
not long since I heard a Minister, and one of the best, handling the new
Creature: He showed us first what it was not, and there cut off all those
things or works which are found in Hypocrites; then he showed us in what it did
consist: This was first in the illumination of the mind to discern the
transcendency of spiritual objects. Secondly, In the wills embracing of, and
closing with those objects: This is the great work, and long it is, says he,
before those who are enlightened come to this; it must be a day of Christ's
power, (Psalm. 110.) when the Soul comes to this. Now though there was no danger
in this as to the hearers, yet for the Divinity I cannot believe it, that the
Spirit regenerateth one faculty so long before another, that a man has the
head of a new Creature so long before he has the heart of a new Creature. He
that has heard and learned of the Father (the intellectual work) comes to me,
John 6.45. an infallible Connection between the Fathers teaching, our learning,
and coming to Christ. I know it is a question moved by the Learned, Whether the
will be regenerated mediately or immediately? Some say, God in regeneration
does irradiate the mind with divine Light, and by this Light does infuse
virtues, and new habits into the will; as that celestial and lively heat, by
which all things below live and thrive, is transfused by Light: New Coven. p.
451.
[ No grace that any man has, but it passes in through the understanding,
says Doctor Preston.] Others say, Gods work in regeneration is as immediate
upon the will, as upon the understanding; nor is the will regenerated by the
mediat light of the understanding, but the will in it self is equally affected
and renewed by God, as the understanding is affected and illuminated by him:
this Opinion they think to be the soundest, especially if the understanding and
the will be not faculties really distinct; which, says Mr. Jackson, Justific.
Faith, p. 33. p. ^0.^.4.
he that has but Philosophy enough to serve from hand to mouth, will never
swallow down, that they are: And Durandus makes that his fourth Argument to
prove they are not really distinct, because then Deus posset causare velle in
voluntate absque hoc quod cognescere praecederet in intellectu; quod est
impossible, quia tune possemus amare incognita. That the will must not only be
moved, but renewed, Ezekiel. 36.26. Who is there that ever felt his stony heart,
will not assent unto it? And if that were the meaning of the first Opinion, as
if the Spirit did only illuminate the understanding, and then the will did
follow, without any other work of the Spirit upon the will, then I should
refuse that Opinion as erroneous; De Auxil. Disp. 51. n. 15.
but those Divines do not mean so. The will, says Alvarez (and it is honestly
said by a Papist) by our fall is more wounded and corrupted then the
understanding. Grace existing in the understanding (but what he means by Grace
there you may observe) is extrinsecal to the will, Disp. 76.
and therefore does not give to the will a sufficient principle to perform
works of holiness. This does prove the necessity of the wills renovation, which
is easily assented to. Grace in one faculty does not give power to another
faculty (corrupted as the will is more then the understanding) to work, says
he. But therefore, I say, the Spirit is ever present with the will, to renew
that, when it does so savingly enlighten the understanding, at the same time;
though I think it no error to say in order of nature, the work upon the
understanding precedeth, which agrees with a reasonable Creature.

And this I conceive is not only in the first work of Conversion, but
afterward in the gracious actings of the regenerated Soul, there is a presence
of the Spirit of the Covenant with understanding and practical judgment, and
with the will at the same time, as a first cause, determining of it now renewed
to follow the dictate of a sanctified judgment: That there must be a presence
of the Spirit in both, I think our sensible experience will teach us something;
of which more hereafter.

Fourth Position. This work of illumination makes the elect Vessel now coming
home to Christ to see things as they ARE.

The state in which the Spirit finds the elect Vessel, is a state of sin and
misery; under the bounds of guilt, power of its lusts, slavery to the Creature,
estrangement from, and enmity against God, a child of wrath: Now the Spirits
intention being to make the Soul answer his call, and so to come off from this
state in which it now lies, by this light let in to the understanding, he
makes the Soul see all these as they Are: A man may know things, but yet not
know them as he ought to know them, 1 Cor. 8.2. It is possible if you asked him
before, whether sin were not an evil thing? the Creature a vain thing? the
wrath of God a dreadful thing? he will answer yes, he he knows all these to be
so; and yet cleaves fast to his lusts, dotes upon the Creature, is careless as
to any real endeavors to get deliverance from wrath to come; the reason is, he
knows not these as he ought to know them, he sees them not as they are; if he
did, it were impossible he should carry himself as he does and be quiet. Let
then the Spirit of God come in with his saving light, and teach the Soul these
things as they are, then you shall see plainly by his carriage, the guilt of
sin, the wrath of God are terrible indeed: in is evil indeed, the Creature is
but vain indeed; the man knows these things, as Doctor Preston said, otherwise
then he did before. I think it was Oecolam padius.
I have read somewhere of a great Divine*, who being recovered from a great
sickness, said, I have learned under this sickness to know Sin and God. Did he
not know these before? Doubtless he could preach good Sermons concerning God
and Sin; but the Spirit, it seems in that sickness taught him these otherwise
then he knew them before. Sapiens est quires sapit prout sunt; this is a truth:
They who are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, Romans 8 5. (...),
sapiunt; they savor, they relish taste only such things, but they do not
taste them as they are; therefore they are but fools: When the Spirit makes the
elect Vessels wise, then he makes them taste these as they are. It is a certain
truth, never will the Soul turn from that term from which the Lord does call it
in Conversion, until it sees it self in that term as it is. The will turns
from evil only, and the Spirit of God will make it see evil, and feel evil to
purpose, by making it see these things as they are really in themselves: Exhort
one another daily, etc. lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin, Heb. 3.13. He that is deceived in a thing, did not see it as it is in
it self, for had he done so, he would not have been deceived with it. If sin
does thus deceive and cheat, then the deceived Soul does not see it as it is:
And this is the case of us all till that good Spirit comes to work, then what
strange and different apprehensions has the converting Soul of these things
over it had before.

Fifth Position. That which makes sin, creature, guilt, etc. to be known as
they are is, a clearer discovery of God to the understanding, whence it comes
to know God in another manner then he did before.

Sin and the creature are never known as they are, till God be known in some
measure as he is: And proportionable to the knowledge of God, the high and
honorable conceptions of God, so is our knowledge, and the conceptions we have
of the vanity of the creature, the evil of sin, and that misery into which we
have brought our selves; the Text is plain and full for this purpose, 3 Epist.
John ver 11. He that does evil has not seen God. See God? Can a man see God?
Yes that he must, or else will never be drawn off from sin: Moses endured, as
seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11.27. What cares Moses for all the pleasures
and honors in Pharaoh's Court, he slights them; what cares he for the wrath of
the King, though it be as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. Haman knew the
truth of it, Esther 7.7. Moses makes nothing of him; He (as one said of Mr.
Thomas Hooker, a man so awed with the Majesty and dread of God) would put a
King in his pocket. But how comes Moses to this frame? He saw him who is
invisible: This is Contradictio in adjecto, in one sense, but a great truth in
a spiritual sense: Moses saw by the eye of faith, or by the spiritual eye of
his understanding, to which God drew near and discovered himself (as no doubt
the Lord can do to our understandings) such Majesty and Excellency, such Glory
and Beauty, Job 40.10. in him, that he slights both the favors and frowns of
King Pharaoh: 1 These. 4.5. Not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles
which know not God: The Apostle plainly tells us, it is the knowledge of God
that keeps men from uncleanness: as for the Gentiles, it is no wonder though
they be unclean, they know not God, they see not him: but what knowledge this
is we may know, for Ely's sons (whom I mentioned before) who were Priests must
needs know God notionally, but yet they were unclean, 1 Samuel 2.22. Whence came
this? ver. 12. these sons of Belial-knew not the Lord. There is no act of sin
that a godly man commits but we may truly say, that man does not see God, at
that time. 1 Samuel 12 9. David is charged with Despising of the Commandment of
the Lord (even that which David, in Psalm. 119. tells us so often he esteemed at
a high rate, ver. 72. etc.) but in the tenth verse he is charged with despising
of God, because thou have despised me. He that despises a Commandment of God,
despises God himself, that is plain from this. But how came David to despise
the Commandment at this time? He did not see God at this time as he did at
other times; he had lower thoughts of God despised him, then the Commandment
bare no Authority.

That this sight which God gives of himself, is that makes us see sin and
creatures as they are, let but any Christian observe his own heart, under the
impetuous motions of imperious lusts, in the day of temptations; let the wind
of temptation blow out of what point of the Compass it will, a Christian under
these temptations keeps up all the notions he had before of sin, how evil a
thing it is, and how vain a thing the creature is, and runs to several Topics,
to fetch Arguments against these; he urges the same truths against these
lusts, and bewitching creatures, that he did when he was out of the temptation;
but all these Arguments do nothing, the temptation grows upon him, and gets
head, these Arguments at one time could do something, now they can do nothing;
he labors to get his heart awed with the greatness and majesty of God, against
whom these lusts rebel; he speaks the same truths concerning God that he did
before; but though he speaks them, yet he cannot see God, nor these truths
concerning God, at this time that he does at another time; hence the temptation
gets upon him still, the Christian discerns a cloud of darkness is got into his
understanding; I cannot apprehend of God, I cannot conceive of him, nor see
him, as I did before: It is with the Soul now as with us in Winter time, when
the Wind hangs Southerly, but does not blow hard to clear the Air, the Air
being hazy, filled with Vapors and Mists; men now will stand and look on the
Sun, it shows like a red body, though they know it is a glorious body, and talk
of it as such, and see it as such another time, yet now it appears not in the
glory: So it is with the understanding, when this eye is dimmed with the
vapors which arise from the dunghill of a man's corrupt heart, though it looks
on God, and speaks of God as before, yet through these vapors he cannot see
him in his glory: Now let but God draw near and scatter these vapors, help the
Soul to conceive of him indeed in his majesty and greatness as he is, that God
appears like a God to the understanding, then all these truths concerning him
are made real to us, and appear in their glory and this sight of him puts life
and strength into all the other Arguments against sin and creature, making them
really to us what they are in themselves; then the Soul gets above his
temptation. This is a sure truth, observe thy own heart, and thou will assent
to it. If God be great in thy heart, then the Creature is little; and never
does the creature grow great in your heart, but God grows little.

If any should tell me, the way you speak of here that Christians should take
in resisting temptation, is not the right way, that is, To run to our
Arguments; we should by Faith go to Christ. I know it full well: This is not a
place for me to treat about that: But, I hope, our going to Christ by Faith,
and improving spiritual Reasons against lusts and temptations, do not oppose
one another: The question is, how does Christ convey his strength to the Soul,
acting upon him by Faith in such a time: The giving of the Answer to that.
Question would soon take off the Objection: But this is not a proper place for
it.

To return to our Heads: It is this discovery of God to the Soul, which make
sin, guilt, and creature appear like themselves. We read in the new Covenant,
this is one branch of it, They shall know the Lord, Jer. 31.34. Hos. 2.20. Jer.
24.7. Why, did not Israel know God now? Ask Israel, What is God? Israel will
tell you, as many Children can from their Catechism. Yea, but this same
Covenant-knowledge of God is another thing; not as if the meaning were only,
they shall know God to be their God; that is another thing different from this:
There is many a poor Christian, that knows God with a Covenant knowledge, that
cannot say, I know him to be my God: Eternal purpose toward the elect now
breaking forth, and his intention being to draw the elect Vessels into
Covenant, the Lord begins the fulfilling of this Promise, some beams of that
Majesty are let in, and now take that wanton heart which played with sin
before, what say to sin now? do thou see him against whom this sin
rebels? Now take the profane heart, that could jest at, and scorn such
Ministers and Sermons which told him of the wrath of God (as that profane Poet,
abusing of a reverend Divine, upon this account, calls him, the Geneva
Bull-Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full.) But what say now to the everlasting
burnings, and devouring fire? Isa. 33.14. Do now think this wrath of God is
a thing to be dreaded or not? Oh now the Soul has other manner of
apprehensions concerning these things; it is a wonder that Christ himself did
escape a jeer, because three times in that ninth of Mark he tells us. Where the
worm never dies, and the fire is not quenched. How gallantly these Canary-Poets
will carry it, when that day comes, that Kings of the earth, great men, and
rich men, etc. shall hide themselves in dens, and in the rocks of the
mountains, and say to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, Rev. 6.15, 16. we
shall see. But oh the Atheism of our hearts. I thought it a sad answer a dying
woman gave me (though she did not jeer at hell) when I went to visit her and
being but a stranger to her, newly come to the Town, I treated with her
concerning her spiritual estate, and upon examination I found her a stranger to
Christ, had not the least savor or knowledge of any thing that concerned her
salvation; nor did she care to hear me speak about any such things, though I
saw she could not live many days: I could not but pity her, and with some
relenting I asked her, How will thou be able to bear the wrath of God? She
answered me roundly, I will bear it as well as I can; and this was all. But
this sight of God will cure this Atheism.

Sixth Position. This light or knowledge which God lets in of himself,
makes the Soul see sin in the evil nature of it, as well as in the evil
effects of it.

It is true, these latter do most affect, trouble, and wound the Soul at first,
especially in those upon whom God works when they are adult or grown up in
years, and have before lived in darkness, and under the power of lusts. As for
others, where God wrought in Infancy, or while young and tender, we shall find
in their youth they are more troubled about the power of their lusts, and their
fears of hypocrisy unsound bottoming, then they are with fears of Hell: but
though in the first working, the effects of sin, the wrath of God, hell,
damnation, loss of heaven, etc. do most afflict, yet not these only; there is
other evils in sin, besides these, which this sight of God discovers. For look
what it is in sin, which makesthe Soul sick, so far it will desire, and accept
of Christ the Physician to heal it. If a man looks on his lusts as good things,
were it not for Hell, then he cares for a Christ no further then as he delivers
him from hell, let Christ but do that and he will thank him, he will trouble
him no further; this is enough to serve his turn. The term properly from which
the Soul is called, is sin; then sin in the nature of it must be discovered by
this light, else the Soul will never turn from it: but if sin be really to the
Soul evil, as well as hell, (though at present, in this first work, hell may
most affect and trouble) then the heart is prepared to turn from it. But what
does make sin better appear in its nature, then the sight of God, against whom
sin is? Now the Soul must have a plaster as broad as the sore, redemption from
sin as well as from hell, still remembering, that this last is that which most
wounds and sinks the Soul in its first awakening.

Seventh Position. This illumination for the degrees of it, is very various,
both in the elect converting, and converted.

This light depends not upon the strength of men, natural parts: We shall
observe among Christians, that are weak in understanding compared with others,
yet the notions of God, of sin, and creature, which they have, are more clear,
lively, powerful and practical, then are the notions of other Christians
(really such I mean) that have greater parts and natural abilities. Let us
observe Children, whom God has sanctified from their tender age, and we shall
find this work of illumination; they have their notions and apprehensions of
the evil of sin, of the dread of Gods wrath; if we tell them, this is sin, God
will be angry, God will not love you, we see they understand these things, and
are affected with them; one Child will tell another Child thus, if he sees him
do a thing which he apprehends is evil: Who will say, these are not the
workings of the good Spirit in little ones, when as we see these notions grow
up with them? this Sun rises higher, as it does in all that are truly wrought
upon, it is not only an abiding light, but a growing light, though as the Sun
and air were darkened with the smoke that arose out of the pit, Rev. 9.2. So
this Sun is too often darkened, through the smoke that rises from our woeful
hearts, a bottomless pit of iniquity, yet it clears again.

Eighth Position. According to the degrees of this light, so are the degrees of
all following works in preparation.

The more clear discoveries of God, and from thence the clearer discoveries of
sin, the greater are the fears and terrors, the greater sorrows, the greater
hatred against sin; yea, I doubt not to say, according to the degrees of this
light, so are the different conversations of Christians; that some are so
eminent in holiness above others, so above the world, so awful, reverent in
their conversation, or in their worshipping of God, it is because some see God,
know God, in a more eminent manner then others do; and thus seeing of him, they
see every thing else which would draw them from God.

I have insisted a little more upon this head of Illumination, because I see
most Divines put so little in it, but all in the will, what the Spirit works
there: I grant it, great is the work of the Spirit upon the will, and I say,
great is the work of the Spirit upon the understanding; it is both scriptural,
rational, and experimental to him that observes, and traces his heart in the
workings of it.

CHAP. III. Of Conviction.
COnviction follows Illumination, as I said before; (...), est certu and
immotis argumentis ita convincere, ut consciontia errorem sentiat. Argumentum
demonstrativum objicere quod eludi nequeat.
there cannot be Conviction without Light: The Spirit is a practical Teacher;
he does not teach the elect now converting, notions about sin, and the state of
a sinner, but applies his doctrine to the person, thou art the man, this
miserable state is thine; when he heard the Minister before he could turn off
the Sermon, as not belonging to him; it may be he will say, the Person met with
such a one to day, and adds his Troth or Faith to it, but it did not concern
himself; or if it came so close that his Conscience tells him it did concern
him, yet he will have some shift to evade the power of the Word: but now the
Spirit comes to work, this trade ceases, now all is applied to himself. Nathan
to help David to see the greatness of his sin, sets up a light, by a Parable
(Ficta arguunt) nothing less then death must be the punishment if David be
Judge, 1 Samuel 12.5. but then Nathan applies the Parable, De te narratur Fabula:
David is couvinced, and Conviction brings forth Confession, with sound
Repentance.

Concerning Conviction I shall lay down a few Positions, and then shut up both
these Chapters together.

First Position. The work of the Spirit in Conviction is not ingeneral, that
the person is a sinner.

Those who are not Atheists in judgment (whether there be any such is much
questioned, and denied, though those whom Voetius mentions, and our times, Disp
l. 1. p. 218 219.
would make one conclude there are many such) in whom the sparks of natural
light are not quite extinct, and live under the preaching of the Word, and hear
others say they are sinners, are content to acknowledge themselves sinners; And
who is not? This is no matter of shame, being every bodies case, they are but
as their neighbors; they seem then to be convinced of sin; but if you come to
ask these persons, of what particular sin are they guilty? they know not one.
If you say this is not possible: Yes, I have found it in my own observation,
amongst those who have offered themselves to the Lords Supper, when I have
examined them, about the sense of their own sinful condition, fearing lest they
had no more then this general notion (conviction I cannot call it) that they
(as all else) are sinners; I have asked them, what particular sin they have
been guilty of, not that I desired to know their sins, I told them, but only to
know, whether there were any more then this general notion they had taken up,
that all are sinners. Hence they reported, I brought up Auricular Confession:
But this I found, not one particular sin could they give an account of: I went
over the ten Commandments, and told them how I was guilty, to see if by this
means I could convince them of any particular sin; but when I had done all, I
could not hear of any one sin they were guilty of. The same a neighbor
Minister, eminent in Gods work, found in a woman, who came to him, seeming to
be under great horror of Conscience, the woman cried out so loud, that he
desired her to restrain her self. But what is the matter: Oh she is a sinner;
and this was all for a good space of time he could get from her, she was a
sinner: He then asked her what sin she was guilty of? No particular sin he
could get from her: He then went over the ten Commandments, and told her how
he was guilty; but when he had so done, there was not one she was guilty of,
for he asked her in particular. I dount not but there are many thousands more
of this stamp, if we did but search into ignorant families, especially among
women, whom modesty, or rather the restraining Providence of God, has kept in
from breaking forth into open and gross vices. One woman I knew, who was indeed
convinced of one sin, if you will call it Conviction; how she knew it to be a
sin, you may easily conceive. One Lords day morning, the woman was spinning;
going to her next neighbor to fetch fire, her neighbor asked her, what she
meant to spin on this day? She asked her, what day was it? (it seems the woman
had forgot the day) when the woman told her what day it was, O, said she, have
I lived thus long, and never sinned against God, and must I sin against him
now? She was above seventy years, near fourscore, I conceive when she spoke
this; but so long, it seems, lived without sin, till this Lords day morning,
then she thought she had sinned.

Second Position. The Spirit convinces not all of the same particular sin,
though persons be guilty of the same sin.

I say, he convinces not all of the same in the first work, he will do
afterward. Sins are various, and so is the Spirits work in Conviction at
first; but this is sure, let him set home any sn, it shall be enough, he will
do his work by it; he does not always begin with that sin which is most
obvious, which one would think should be, Conviction there being easiest to
effect. I have marvelled to hear the sins that some Christians have told me God
first convinced them by; it is true, they were fins, but such as those who are
Christians, and we hope really so, do not much think upon: It seems God does
not judge of sins as we do; if he will show himself to a Soul, and show it any
particular sin it is guilty of, that Soul shall see evil enough in that sin to
cast it down: But let the Spirit convince of what particular sin he pleases,
he convinces themall of that in which all sin meets, of the punishment I mean,
that the wages of sin is death.

Third Position. Usually the Spirit in the first work, convinces the Soul by
that sin, in which the snner took most pleasure and delight.

Here Conviction is easiest effected, and this sin will the Spirit imbitter to
the Soul: the peccatum in deliciis, the sin which he hides under the tongue,
Job 20.12. this we hear of commonly in the day of Christ's power. Fleshly lusts
lie fairest in view; a man's natural Conscience can more easily work here. How
terribly has the Word spoken against Covetousness? what sin more common? but
how rare a thing is it to hear of a person whom the Lord convinces of that
sin, in his first work? yea, it were well if those who go for Christians were
convinced of it afterward; yea, when this sin has got such a head, that the
bones of the lust (as we say) stick out, others may see it, but how hard to
convince men of it: it is a common thing for men to bespatter one another with
this sin; and some I have observed most deeply guilty of it themselves, yet
they not covetous in their own opinion: for God to begin his conviction by
spiritual lusts, this is not so common, yet sometimes I have known it. I will
not enlarge upon this head, as I intend not upon any.

Fourth Position. The Spirit in the first stroke does not usually set home all
a man's actual sins, but commonly two or three kinds of sin.

Enough to do his work. By degrees he gives the Soul a view of all his vile
pranks: Sins forgotten, buried long ago, out of mind, he makes these revive,
come out of their graves, and appear to men; but to have them all come in at
the first, without a great support the Soul could not stand, but must utterly
sink; it cannot stand (in one sense) by what he does set home; but if all came
in at once, it would be overwhelmed: My transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou sowest up mine iniquity, says Job, chapter 14. v. 17. Did Job find it so?
Yea, and so do others, they are sealed up, and sown up; and such things are to
be brought forth again: So does the Spirit bring them forth; sins committed
twenty, thirty years since, come now as fresh to mind, with all the
circumstances, as if yesterday committed; but not all in the first stroke.

Fifth Position. That the Spirit in the first stroke. convinces all the elect
of original sin, I dare not affirm it.

That he does convince all [I speak of persons adult] first or last, yea, and
that early also, I doubt not of it, but to say he does it in the very first
stroke of Conversion, this I dare not defend. Mr. Shepherd moves the question,
Conversion p. 15.
Whether the Lord convinces all the elect at first of the sin of their nature,
and shows them their original sin in and about this first stroke of Conviction?
He answers, I doubt not of it. Paul would have been alive and a proud Pharisee
still, if the Lord had not let him by the Law see this sin, Romans 7.9. To what
he says after, I readily agree, that he does first or last, in a lesser or
greater measure, etc. but this does not seem to agree with the former, As to
his instance of Paul, because he was so convinced, ergo, All are and must be
convinced of it in this first stroke, I am not satisfied in the consequence:
yet it may be Paul's persecution was a sin more set home at first; this I
grant, if the state of a person be as Paul's was, one that rests in himself,
has good thoughts of his own righteousness, duties, and doings, and upon these
bears up himself, then no doubt, if God works upon such a one, in the first
stroke, he sets home original sin. It is hard to prove that those Converts in
the second of Acts were convinced of their original sin, at that time when they
were pricked at their hearts: the sin that Peter charged them with, was their
crucifying of Jesus, who was both Lord and Christ, ver. 36. and upon this they
were pricked in their hearts, ver. 37. That the Jaylour, Acts 16. was convinced
of this sin when he came in trembling to Paul, and put forth that question,
What shall I do to be saved? I dare not affirm it, because I know not how to
prove it. Convinced he was of sin, and that he was an undone condemned
Creature. And I hope it cannot be denied, that the Spirit of God may so set
home some particular actual sins, that shall make the Soul see it self in such
a lost and damned condition, that the news of a Savior will be welcome, and
glad it may enjoy him upon any terms. This we observe is the ordinary way of
the Spirit in persons adult, living in sins against light especially, he does
so set home sins and follow his work so close, that the sinner has not leisure
to turn aside to the bypath of his own righteousness [which he has none] and
duties, but is pursued so hard, that he is glad to fly for refuge to Christ,
though the sense of his original sin as yet has not seized upon him, as it
will afterward: and therein I do heartily agree with Mr. Shepherd, that first
or last God does convince His of original sin. Hence for any Christian to call
into question the truth of his Conversion, because he was not convinced of his
original sin, in the first snoke of Conversion, [though adult when God first
began to work] this is but a needless troubling of himself; but of this more
hereafter.

By this work of Illumination and Conviction, those vain hopes, wherewith so
many delude themselves, that their case is not so bad as some of these
censorious Ministers would make men believe, but they may do well enough: Their
quarrellings with the Word and Ministry; their extenuations of sin; their
shiftings of the Word from themselves to others, as not belonging to them; the
slight thoughts they had of a man in his natural state; the fickleness and
unconstancy of mind, whence nothing would sasten or hold upon them; these and
such like things are removed, and way made for further workings.

1. Hence. How far are they from Conversion, who have not attained to this
first work, no not so much as in the notion; they are not yet come to so much
light and conviction to see themselves sinners: that they are sinners they will
not deny, because you say you are a sinner, and all men say they are sinners,
and it is no shame to be what all men are: but if you come to any particular
sn, they know none they are guilty of, as I have given instance before; and
others I could mention, who having lived to above sixty years, when they have
been asked, How do you hope to be saved? have answered roundly, They have not
sinned against God in all their life: Others, They have kept the Commandments
of God; but for a state of sin and misery, they neither feel it, know it, nor
believe it.

2. Hence. What necessity is there of preaching the Law, to discover and open
sin, with the effects thereof, if this be the way of the Spirits working, to
convince first of sin, and Ministers be (...), 1 Cor. 3.9. workers with God,
why should not they work as God works? To preach the Law, in order to Christ;
to labor to make men that lie in their spiritual Lethargies to know and feel
their disease, that they may see the need of, and embrace the blessed
Physician; is not this rational? I think all men naturally stand under a
Covenant of works, and to make men know what that state is, I think is very
requisite, if ever we would make them feel the necessity, and know the worth of
a Covenant of Grace; yet I know not how it comes about, of late years this kind
of preaching is laid by: When I consider the people, then I can see their
reasons why they love it not; but when I think of the Ministry, I know not why
Ministers should so gratify the corruptions of people. So the Law were rightly
preached, I never knew it offend any godly and judicious Christian. I remember
my Father-in-law told me, that Bishop Vher having once an Ague, and being in
Essex, when Mr. Thomas Hooker preached, it so fell out, that my Father-in-law
went to visit him a little before his fit should come, they both lying on the
bed discoursing, I wish, said the Bishop, that Mr. Hooker were here to preach
the Law home to my Conscience: that fit they talked away; he missed it. By this
we may read the Spirit of that highly learned and pious Bishop. Thousands of
Christians have wished they had felt more of it, to Gospel-ends; but to slight
it as some, cry out against it as others, such will hardly approve themselves
to be persons well skilled in the work of Conversion. That some Ministers may
be imprudent in their preaching of the Law, and not carry it with that wisdom
that does become them, I deny not; but for the Principle it self, that the
preaching of the Law is necessary to make men know their sins, and their woeful
condition by sin, that thereby they may be glad to listen after, and embrace
the Gospel, I think this cannot be denied by any judicious Divine. In Physic
indeed we find, that those things which have gone for Principles for above a
thousand years, none so much as questioning them, within less then thirty years
are turned out of doors, very few of the ancient Principles standing; but if
men will do so in these great points of Divinity, they may prove themselves
Fools, but no spiritual Physicians. Mr. Saltmarsh in a book of his, which I
read many years since, but have it not now by me, gives these legal Preachers a
notable jeer; he tells his Reader, that these Preachers will preach Christ,
Gospel and Free Grace also; but they do by these, as some do by Wine, (at
Funerals or Baptizings) they offer it freely, and bid the people drink, but the
Wine being burnt, they give it so hot, that the people cannot, nor dare drink
it, for scalding their mouths: So do these, offer Christ, Grace, Gospel, very
freely, bid people take, and drink, but they have so heat the Gospel with legal
preaching, that they are afraid to meddle with it. Had there been as much Piety
and Truth, as there is wit in the jeer, I should have liked it well: I do not
justify men in their errors, want of wisdom, prudence, in preaching of the
Law, I condemn them as much as he, but for the Principle I do contend. To win
Souls to Christ, by teaching them the Gospel, and overflowings of Christ's
blood, without preaching the Law to convince men of sin, and make them see and
feel the necessity of Gospel and Christ's blood; to convince men of sin by the
Gospel first, this I look upon as very irrational and immethodical. Take my
mind under these heads.

First, It is not the proper work of the Gospel to convince of Sin, but of the
Remedy.

Paul tells us, he had not known sin but by the Law, Romans 7.7. By the Law comes
the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. For sin is the transgression of the Law, 1
John 3.4. The Law then must be preached, or Sin cannot be known. Paul does not
say he knew Sin by the Gospel, but there he found the remedy against Sin; as in
many of his Epistles we observe. Gospel, brings glad tidings.

Secondly, The Gospel convinces men of sin by consequence, but the Law
directly.

As if I see an Apothecaries Shop full of Physic, and a Physician there, I can
gather by consequence then there is sickness; else why is all this Physic
prepared? why Physician? though I see no diseased person, nor feel any disease
my self. Thus when I read of glorious Promises in the Gospel, and find Christ
the Physician there, I may well conclude, then there is Sin, and condemnation
for Sin, else what need of Christ, and these promises of pardon, and
justification through his righteousness. Yea, I grant also, by the Gospel, we
may argue, how great an evil Sin is, that must have such a Medicine as the
blood of Christ to heal it; but still this is by consequence. The Law tells you
directly, what that Sin is, and that condemnation for Sin.

Thirdly, Men may be convinced of Sin without the Gospel, but not without the
Law.

God has convinced many of Sin where the Gospel was not known, or not
understood. The Heathen had Convictions, Romans 2.16. by a Law not written. But
to have men convinced of Sin by the Gospel, where no Law was known, I wish Mr.
Saltmarsh would tell us where those persons are: Tell men of the Son of God
being incarnate, doing, suffering, dying, rising, interceding, and tell them of
his righteousness, obedience and blood, what will you convince men of by this
discourse alone, unless you first teach them the cause of all this? and then I
am sure you must teach them the Law; and this being opened and set home, will
soon teach them the meaning of the work of Christ in Redemption.

Fourthly, As the Gospel convinces of Sin only by consequence, so only in
general; but the Law convinces of Sin directly and in particular.

When the Gospel is first preached, what particular Sin does it convince a man
of? how does that make him appear to be guilty? but the Law will tell him his
particular Sins, and this must be done, else men will hardly come to a thorough
and saving Conviction that they are Sinners indeed. After men have had the
Gospel preached, and refuse to embrace it, then there is a particular Sin
against the Gospel, this is true; but I think never was it heard that any man
was convinced of this Sin against the Gospel, who was not first convinced of
Sin against the Law: what cares he for the Gospel, that sees not himself in
his sin and misery, and condemned under the Law? Grant it, that Repentance to
life, and Faith in the Righteousness of Christ imputed to our justification, be
not comprehended under the Law but the Gospel, so that impenitency and
unbelief, opposite to that Faith, are Sins against the Gospel, not the Law [as
a Covenant of works.] Yet before a man is convinced of his necessity of this
justifying Faith and Repentance, he must be convinced he is a Sinner, and so
need these; but this must be by the Law, which will convince him of his
particular Sins.

Let these Reasons sussice (though more might be added) to prove that the
preaching of the Law to these ends I have mentioned, is both Scriptural and
rational, and the contrary opinion is both against Scripture and reason. As to
Mr. Saltmarsh his jeer, though there seem to be wit, yet there is more
sophistry in his Similitude: For those legal Preachers did not make Christ and
Gospel so hot by their preaching of the Law, but by that preaching they
labored to make men's lusts so hot, that they might not any longer drink
iniquity like water; but their hearts being scorched with the apprehension of
the wrath of God due for their Sins, they might now be glad to listen to, and
answer that blessed Call of Christ, Let him that is athirst, come; and
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. By this I
hope it will appear, Mr. Shepherd had no just ground to suspect me to be
against the preaching of the Law, unto right ends, though I know many serious
Christians have gone many years troubled about the want (as they apprehend) of
these legal works; to whom, as I have spoken already, which I hope may give
some ease; so I have more yet to speak, toward their satisfaction, in due
place. I think it not amiss to give the Reader the close of Mr. Shepherd's
Letter to me in these words: Dear Brother, let my love end in breathing out
this desire. Preach Humiliation; labor to possess men with sense of wrath to
come and misery: The Gospelconsolations and grace, which some would have only
disht out as the dainties of the times, and set upon the Ministry's table, may
passibly tickle and ravish some, and do some good to them that are humbled and
converted already: But if Axes and Wedges withal be not used to how and break
this rough, unhewn, bold, yet professing Age, I am confident the work and fruit
of all these men's ministry will be at best but mere hypocrisy, and they shall
find it, and see it, if they live to see a few years more.

3. Hence. If this be the way of the Spirit in drawing the Soul to Christ, how
rational and necessary is it for those who indeed would have Christ, and would
have a sound work, to beg this Light and Conviction from God; to pray with Job,
(though I know the scope of Job in that place something differs) Job 13.23. How
many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.
It was part of that counsel Christ gave to the lukewarm Angel of Laodicea, To
anoint his eyes with eye salve, that he might see, Apocal. 3.18. What should he
see? Among other things, he should see himself to be wretched, miserable, poor
and naked, ver. 17. which for want of this work of Illumination and Conviction,
he did not see, and therefore mistook himself (as do most who are called
Christians) thinking he was rich, and had need of nothing: Was this counsel of
Christ good? Deny it if thou can: If it were good, then my Use cannot be bad,
for it calls for the same thing; that God would make thee see thy self, Sin,
Creatures, all as they are; What I see not teach thou me, Job 34.32. I am sure
none of us naturally see Sin and Creatures as they are, nor ever will, unless
God be the Teacher.

I know this counsel will not take with a carnal heart, though it be that which
converted Souls daily follow God for, to have themselves, Sins and Creatures
opened and discovered unto them as they are: Let Sin be Sin, and Creature be
Creature, and let me see the misery of being a slave to Sin and the Creature,
as I feel my self enslaved too much unto these daily. But for others, I know
they like it not; And what is the matter? Alas this would spoil all the sport;
should we once have Sin, guilt, and our misery discovered, we must never see
merry day after; and that which we fear, must follow, our Lovers and we must
part; and that we find a hard thing, yea, impossible, to bid farewell to those
lusts, companions and ways, which have brought us in so much pleasure and
profit in our days. These or such like were the thoughts of him, who would not
hear Doctor Sibbs, for fear he should convert him, he said.

We have been before you, and know your Objections very well, having had the
same thoughts in our own hearts against the work of God, which you have now
uttered, and so can tell the better what answer to give. I know it to be a
frequent Objection made against the work of God, That it makes men melancholy,
mopish, if not mad. I heard it once my self, being in company amongst some
Gentlemen and Scholars; one of whom God had pulled out; and being now under
this work, the discovery of his sinful and miserable estate, was dejected,
being before cheerful, and too too vain in his mirth, now was as sad; the other
Gentlemen, his Companions, threw this in his teeth presently, this is the fruit
of your Religion; when once men begin to be Puritans, they must loose all their
mirth and cheerfulness; now nothing but mopishness, sadness, and sour faces,
and were much offended.

But are you in earnest? Do you verily think, if God should indeed enlighten
you to see your self, sin, guilt, misery, that it would spoil your sport, and
hazard a divorce between you and your Lovers? Then if thou be a man, have
the use of thy reason, let us grapple a little, as I have felt your Objection,
so I can give you a feeling Answer.

First, You must and shall see your sin, self and guilt, do what you can, there
is no avoiding it; if as you are loath to see sin and guilt now, so you could
take a course that you should never see it, nor know the effects of it, then
you might have some reason on your side, why you so oppose this work; but this
is impossible, (...)
God will set men's sins in order before them, Psalm. 50.21. he will set them in
order; the word is used variously, sometimes for the ordering of a Table,
sometimes for the ordering of an Army: God will set them Rank and File, and a
terrible Army will this appear, Before thine eyes; turn thy eyes which way thou will, yet there shall thou see thy sins, you shall not be able to turn your
eyes from them; My sin is ever before me, said David, Psalm. 51.3. David did not
now seek to hide it, nor could hide it. Thus have those found it whom God
intends to save, by this discovery of their sin and guilt, bringing them to
repentance and embracing of Christ: And blessed is that sight of sin, when God
withal gives the sight of a Savior. Thus also have others found it in a day
of evil, often on a deathbed, when their sleepy Consciences come to be
awakened; now they can see their sins set in order before them, and hell
attending them; and a sad time it is, when the despised Ministers and
Christians are sent for, but know not what to say to them: I have found it a
great trouble what to say at such a time; one while our bowels move, hearts
relent, to hear poor Creatures that now lie under the fears of dropping into
hell every moment, what sad complaints they make, and how they cry out for one
word of comfort: on the other side, when we have known their lives, how the
Word, the Offers of Christ and Promises have been slighted, but now they see
their lusts forsake them, they must part, now they would be glad to have Christ
and a Promise, and how dare a faithful Minister apply any? upon what grounds
can he do it? It is a man's duty always to believe in Christ, that is true, and
that we must counsel them to lay hold on Christ: But what said one to me, who
had once been a zealous and profitable Preacher, but apostatized sadly; a week
before he dred, he put that question to me, What shall I do to be saved? Sir,
said I, it is a question you have answered many a time your self; you know what
answer Paul gave to the Jaylour when he propounded this question. Yea, said he,
but this, believing, I find a hard work: And it is indeed, though most think it
the casiest thing in the Bible; though they can do nothing else, yet they can
believe, yea, yea, while Conscience lies asleep; but when Conscience is awake,
and God sets all thy sins in order before thee, in an evil day, death drawing
near, now friend tell me, is it easy to believe in Christ? you will find with
that poor Apostate (my heart trembles while I think of him) believing is a hard
work indeed. It is nothing but a sleepy Conscience that makes Faith easy. Now
friend give me your answer; Is it best to see sin and guilt now, while you may
see a Savior also, or to see sin and a Judge hereafter, but no Savior? Sin
you shall see, as we say, in spite of your teeth, will you, nill you; O then
let me see sin and guilt now, O now with a sweet Savior, that I may have this
woeful sight past when I come to dye.

Secondly, Thou fear if thy lusts and Idol-creatures were discovered to thee
as they are in themselves, thou and they should part: there is, I confess, fair
probability of it; for certainly were a man thoroughly enlightened to see what
it is to be a slave to its Iusts, a vassal to the Creature, an enemy unto God,
a stranger from Christ, a prisoner under the Law, a drudge to the Devil, and
God an enemy to him, (which is the state of us all by Nature) no man living
could bear it, but would cry out for a Redeemer presently. But is it not then a
most irrational thing, that a man should be loath to see these things as they
are? Truth is the object of the understanding; we may say truly, Intellectus
vult verum, so it is in all things but in matters of eternity, a man's own
salvation; here he is content with falsehood, and afraid of truth: if a man
goes to buy Cloth or any other Commodity, he will endeavor to know the thing
as it is, views it well, and gets others to help him, if his own skill be
doubted; but for Sin and Creatures, in reference to a spiritual end, he does
not desire to see them as they are: it is just as if a man were bewitched with
a painted Hag, he is very loath to have the paint washed off, that he should see
her as she is, lest while he sees her wrinkles and deformity, he should loath
her, and cast her off. This is the case between our Souls, and Sin, and
Creature; O the power of Sin! O the witchery of the Creature! How rich is that
Mercy, how precious that Redemption, that delivers us from Sin-slavery and
Creature-bondage!

Thirdly, What is it that thou enjoyest in thy lusts that God does not allow
thee, remove but inordinacy? Art given to the pot? does not God allow thee good
Beer or Wine? Yes, sure you may have it with a good will, only you must not be
inordinate in drinking; you are hugely hurt truly, you may drink and enjoy the
comfort of the Creature, and bless your God, but not be drunk, or inordinate in
drinking. I have often thought of the Rechabites, Jer. 35. and would choose
rather to be Gods Servant, then Jonadabs Son: Does God lace you so straight as
Jonadab did his posterity, not allow them to drink wine, build houses, sow
fields, etc.? he allows these things, and much good may they do you, let but
him be served while you enjoy them, and good reason why it should be so. Art a
slave to thy unclean lust, that imperious and God-despising Devil? [ Because
thou have despised me, 2 Samuel 12.12.] I pity thee; whose hands are bands,
Eccles. 7.26. much stronger then the Philistines seven green Withs or new Ropes,
wherewith they bound Sampson, Judge. 16.7, 11. Ah, Sampson was faster bound with
unseen Cords: But has not God allowed thy own Cistern, the Marriage Bed, which
being sanctified by prayer, may be sufficient through his Mercy to quench this
thirst? What the vileness of the heart is, when it is hedged in by the
Commandment of God, here you must keep, is known too well, Romans 7.8. If the
temptation lie there, the wind blow in that quarter, if God steps not in with
his power, and interpose not between thy lust and temptation, it is not thy
Yoak-fellow, thine own Cistern, but stolen waters that must quench this
thirst, nor will they quench it, but inflame the more. O satisfy us with
mercy, prayed Moses, Psalm. 90. so I say, thy Wife and Mercy will satisfy, thy
Husband and Mercy will satisfy; but if Mercy be not joined, and the Temptation
blow strong, thou art gone, let thy Wife or Husband be persons never so likely
to give content in the opinion of others.

One nearly related to me, Almost sixty years since.
was Minister to a Company of English Merchants in Prussia; the chief of the
Company, whether he were called the Consul, or Governor of the Company, I know
not; but he was married; his Wife a proper and very comely Woman; but it seemed
did not satisfy him; he was enslaved to others, not so comely as his Wife, not
to be compared with her: his Wife took it sadly; my near friend being Minister
dealt with him; one thing he urged was, that of all men he had the least
temptation, having a Wife so comely, that few Women like her: He answered, Yea,
were she not my Wife I could love her: It seems, had she been his Whore he
could love her, he thought none like her; but because she was his Wife, hedged
in by God, now he did not care for her. I do not say what a heart had he, but,
good Lord, what hearts have we? Let God deal exceeding well with us, better
then that our corrupt hearts choose, yet if God has by his holy Will tied us up
to that which is better, and a man's own reason yield it to be better, Sin takes
occasion by the Law, and works all manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7.8. that is
best, which is cross to God. So true is that which that Divine Poet, Herbert,
has sung concerning this very Sin.

If God had laid all common, certainly
Man would have been the Incloser; but since now
God has impaled us, on the contrary,
Man breaks the fence, and every ground will plow.
O what were man, might he himself misplace,
Sure to be cross he would shift feet and face.
Still we see, God and we part only upon inordinacy. So we may go on in any
other Sin: Profit, Gain, Riches, are great things in men's eyes, and does God
deny these likewise to his people? It may be you will say, few of these
Precisians, Puritans, Fanatics (as now called) thrive in the world; we must
not look for Riches amongst them, in the way they take. And what, I pray, do
profit and riches follow all those who are strangers to God, and follow after
the world, that make Mammon their God? Do we not see the contrary? How many of
those, who have kept close to God, has the Lord blessed, and given them power
to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. when others have sunk and come to nothing? If a mean
condition be the common portion of his people, yet a little that a righteous
man has is better then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. Sure I am, The
blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and be adds no sorrow with it, Prove.
10.22. This is your Bible, you say, which we little regard; we will believe our
senses for all your Bible: and you may believe your senses, if you please, and
see, if you do not feel the truth of what our Bible says. There was one in
London, a Broaker, who was resolved for Gain, and had it seems a secret and
sinful way in his Trade to attain his end: Coming under the ministry of one,
with whom I was acquainted, and who told me the story, it seems the Word met
with him, and set Conscience upon his back, which made the man so troubled,
that he could not tell what to do to let go this secret way of gain, he could
not yield to that; to follow it, he could not with quiet, his Conscience did so
gall him; he comes to the Minister oft-times, and talks with him; fain would he
have found a way to conjure down his Conscience, that he might have gone on
quietly, but could not for a long time; he would follow the Minister sometimes
in the street, with these words, Good Sir, let me alone but one half year, and
then I will give up this course, Friend, said the Minister, I meddle not with
thee, I speak not to thee. But it seems the man found that true, that it was
not the blessing of God made him rich, and he found sorrow with his Riches; and
so have many hundreds more, while others have found Profit and Riches coming
in, with the enjoyment of God with them. So that still God withholdeth no good
thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84 11.

Fourthly, May not a man be as well without these lusts as with them? I appeal
to any man's experience, even thy self who make this Objection, let the
corruption be what it will. If a man be intemperate, following his pot and
companions one day, the next day he keeps sober, sollows his Calling, is he not
as well this day when sober, as yesterday when intemperate? Does he not see
intemperance may be spared, without any damage or hinderance to a man's
content? Take any other lust, is not the chaste person as well as he that is
unclean? Is not a man when meek, as well as when he is passionate and froward?
Does not experience teach us, there is no need of these lusts? How often have
Christians (and those that do not fall into sins to blemish their Profession)
been angry with themselves, yea, almost stamped with vexing: must I cross the
Will of so great and glorious a Majesty, offend so sweet a Savior, trouble my
peace, hinder my comforts, for that which I can as well spare as the dirt of my
shoes, have no more need of it, and yet this body of death how it clogs me.

Fifthly, We will grant it, that thy lust or idol, which thou so love, does
give delight to thy corrupt heart; but is the good so great, that it
countervails the evil that attends it? We say, and that truly, a man may buy
gold too dear; so may men buy pleasures and profits too dear: How quickly are
the pleasures of sin over? pass away in the act, some of the strongest of them.
Pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25. but the evil that attends sin has
the word Never attending it: The Worm never dies. Should a Prince give a
Subject leave to fill himself with what pleasures his heart could desire, his
mind invent, and enjoy them to the height the longest day in Summer, but at
night he must go lie in an Oven fiery hot; would any man choose the pleasures of
one day upon this condition? A plain similitude, but illustrates the thing in
hand. If thou should live the longest measure of time that any man has
done, and spend all that time in nothing but pleasures (which no man ever did,
but met with some crosses, afflictions, or sickness) but at the evening of this
life must take up thy lodging in the everlasting burnings and devouring fire,
Isa. 33.14. were those pleasures answerable to these everlasting burnings? An
English Merchant that lived at Dantzick, now with God, told us this story, and
it was true: A friend of his (a Merchant also) upon what grounds I know not,
went to a Covent, and dined with some Friars; his entertainment was very noble;
after he had dined and seen all, the Merchant fell to commending their pleasant
lives; Yea, said one of the Friars to him, we live gallantly indeed, had we any
body to go to hell for us when we die. Were the evils that follow sin no other
then what some feel, even in this life; and for many, their lusts have brought
them upon them; yet he were a fool, who would give up himself to the pleasures
of any lust to lie under such evils at last: What wants, poverty and misery
have some come to, who had once good Estates, but spent them in serving their
lusts? What torments do many feel in their bodies by the French pox, and some
from the Gout? which though many men who are temperate are afflicted with it,
yet some by their intemperance bring it upon themselves. One of our great men
(whose name I mention not) being much afflicted with the Gout, said, Could I
meet God, I would know of him what is the reason he does so plague me with the
Gout. Yet, said he who told me of it (and I think gave him the same answer) he
should not need to ask God the reason, he might see it easily himself; for he
would (I speak within compass, as he related it to me) drink a gallon of
Claret Wine in a night.

Sixthly, But what if you be taken off from your lusts and idols, and enjoy a
better content in the room of them, I hope you are not hurt? If this could be
made good, it were but rational indeed, you say; and if it cannot be made good,
say I, it were but an irrational thing to call thee off from them to God and
Christ. Were there no more then the escaping those woeful evils, temporal and
eternal, which do attend them, yet it were rational, because the pleasure, the
good bears no proportion with the greatness, exceeding greatness of the evils.
But the will I know is a hungry appetite, and will not be satisfied with
privative good, it must have pasitive good to feed upon, else it will not be
quiet. A man who is very hungry, and has meat before him to eat which pleases
his palate, if one tell him there is poison mixed with his dish, this will make
him abstain from it, because of the evil that will attend it; but this does not
satisfy his hunger; give me something to eat, says he: It Is the same with our
rational appetite, when set upon a lust, creature, or whatever is opposite to
God, tell him this will cost thee Hell, the eternal wrath of an infinite God,
it may possibly prevail so with some to abstain (though with most Hell
signifies nothing, Hell is but a Bugbear, a thing fit to scare Children
withal) but this does not satisfy, the will still calls out, give me
something to assuage my hunger, I feel emptiness, fill up that; yea, and it
shall be filled up, when we come to speak of the Term to which thou art called,
or else hold to thy lust and idol still; all that I say at present, till I come
to it, is this, Redemption from lusts and creatures fill with more solid
satisfying content and delight, then the enjoyment of lusts and creatures; unto
which Position I am assured, all those who have been slaves to them, but are
now redeemed, will set their hands.

As to the other part of the Objection, the mopishness and sadness which you
fear; we know this also, we have had the same Objections cast in, and improved
much by Satan and our carnal hearts against the ways of God; a stumbling block
it has proved to many young ones especially, and those of a more cheerful
temper; this Objection has been advanced, by the observation of others, who
are either under the work of Conversion newly, or under some desertions, or
under some vile temptations, which a Christian cannot master, which many times
cloud the faces, and sink the spirits of those, who are otherwise cheerful
enough; and partly from the carriages of some Christians, who are of a more
austere, morose temper, or rather distemper, which discourageth other that
behold them and converse with them: any thing shall serve to help a man to pick
quarrels with the ways of God; yet, I think, Christians duty is to avoid
whatever may cause any to stumble at them.

But to answer this Objection, as we can very well, having been under the same
quarrellings with Gods ways.

First, That sadness and fears should seize upon a person when he comes to see
himself under that woeful state of sin and misery, is this such a wonder? Is
this irrational? Would thou not have rational mirth? Then thou art a fool
indeed. What were you never sad in all your life? Were you ever upon the merry
pin? To meet with that man who was never in his dumps, as you phrase it, is a
strange sight; if ever sad, it was upon some evil apprehended: But, I pray,
compare that evil with the evil of sin and misery thou art under by Nature, and
see which is worst: Was it rational for you to be sad under an evil, infinitely
less, and is it irrational to be sad under this? Why then do you stumble?

Secondly, There is some mourning under the sense of sin, which if you were
acquainted with, you would not be shy of it, but you would think it a mercy of
God if you could attain more of it. Christians pray for a broken spirit, and
would bless God for such a kindness.

Thirdly, Choose you which of these two you will, a mourning time must be for
sin, either here or hereafter, there is no avoiding it; if your mourning begin
hereafter, you will not be in capacity of that Promise, He will wipe away all
tears from their eyes, Revel. 21.4. Take heed your weeping does not begin
there, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25.30. but no
wiping.

Fourthly, But to ease you a little more; you are mistaken very much in
thinking that Religion, in the power of it, only serves to make men mopish and
sad, though you do see Christians sometimes dejected. I grant it, when God
first deals with the Soul, or if he deserts the Soul, or if he lets it lie
under its strong combatings with potent corruptions, and denies to send in
answers of prayers, these are sad times with Christians; and is there not
cause? The Christian is rational in all this: what Faith may do in such times I
deny not; it is easy for them to talk of Faith at such times who are not
pressed with these loads; but still this is not the fault of Religion. It is
not Conversion or the power of Religion that makes them sad, but the want of
Religion and fuller Conversion; give them what they desire in Religion, and
they shall be cheerful enough; so that, they do not put Religion in sour faces,
whatever he said, that it may be has had as sour a face for a lesser cause,
since he spoke it. It were to be wished indeed, that others might not see the
dejected countenances of Christians, hide them always they cannot. If any
worldling or irreligious person have his countenance dejected for being crossed
in something he desires, as it is their lot oftentimes, this is nothing; but if
one that is set for God and Religion, do at any time show such a countenance,
by and by the fault is laid upon Religion. It is far from my thoughts to plead
for levity, frothiness, among Christians, I am afraid some take too much
liberty; but yet, I think, a cheerful, affable, courteous behavior in
Christians, avoiding that mopishness, austerity, morosity, which some
Christians express, especially toward carnal men, would better become the
Gospel, and convince men of the goodness and content that is to be found in the
ways of God: None rejoice more heartily then those who rejoice in the Lord, to
which Christians are so much exhorted; this joy is spiritual, heavenly. Yet
there is another joy lawful, as we are rational Animals, have bodies as well as
souls; these bodies call for many things; and whilst we do enjoy things that
support and comfort them, we may rejoice in the goodness God conveyeth by them.
Some Christians, that think we should rejoice only in the Lord, and are persons
of a more sour, melancholy temper, how offended are they if they see others
laugh? as if Risibility were an evil quality that befell us after our fall from
God; but surely being an essential property, having its emanation from the
rational Soul, even in our creation, it belongs to us as rational Animals; and
so Christians may laugh upon other causes (provided no sin be mixed) besides
that joy they have in God. Grave deportments, especially of Ministers and men
in places, I honor; but that a Minister must be always so grave, that he must
speak nothing to make others laugh (according to his Monkish Divnity) as if
gravity and cheerfulness ordered with prudence were inconsistent, receive this
who will. It was a notable answer old Mr. Richard Rogers gave to a Gentleman,
in whose company he was; the Gentleman told him, Mr. Rogers, I like you and
your company very well, but you are so precise. O Sir, said he, I serve a
precise God. It is very true, but cannot Christian cheerfulness stand with holy
and due preciseness? Austerity may awe inferior persons, but it will never
take with persons of good breeding, nor ever win to the Gospel. I heard that
the former A Gentlewoman since told me it was his Son Mr. Daniel Rogers, and
indeed it was like him, but I had it from one of his Relations, and question
whether he were so inward, with Mr. Knewstubl.
Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Knewstubs (who preached his Funeral Sermon) were once
riding abroad, Mr. Rogers riding before the other at some distance, there meets
him a person whom he knew, one of a good estate, but a carnal man, Mr. Rogers
rides by him, takes no notice of him; Mr. Knewstubs, riding after, meets him
also, and salutes him very courteously, and talks with him a little space of
time very affably, and so parted; when Mr. Knewstubs overtook Mr. Regers, he
asks Mr. Knewstubs, Why do you show so much familiarity to such a wicked man?
this is the way to harden him in his sinful course: To whom Mr. Knewstubs
answered, Ah my Brother, this kind of (austerity he meant) carriage, is not the
way to win wicked men to a liking of the Gospel and the ways of God, but
rather to beat them off. This was the sense of his answer, though for the very
words, so many years since spoken, there may be some difference. That Gentleman
I mentioned before, at whom his Companions took such great offense, when he was
under the workings of God in Conversion, being then sad, who before in time of
his vanity was as vainly merry, after God had settled him in good hopes of his
Love, he proved an excellent Christian, and now returned to his cheerfulness
again, but purged from former sin and froth; he grew so merry, that he feared
he was too merry: so he and I rode to old Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, and after
the Lecture, he puts his case to Mr. Rogers, and relating what God had done for
him, and now he was afraid he was too merry, to whom Mr. Rogers gave this
answer; take heed you mix nothing that is unsavory with your mirth, do not
break in upon the Word of God, or upon his Line, and be as merry as you will;
for it is the cheerful Christian that glorifieth God, and commends his ways
unto men. This I have observed, and it was the fault of this Gentleman's
Companions, to make a Jest to provoke laughter, they did not spare the Word of
God: Some so foolish, they will loose their friend and God too, but they will
not loose their Jest and laughter. The nature of man, as man, cannot but
incline to cheerfulness, unless some predominant melancholy humor, or cold
distemper of body, or other accidental evils, keeps him under; both as
Risibility is proper to man, flowing from the rational Soul, per emanationem,
in its purest estate; And as cheerfulness (especialy when not defiled with sin)
is the Sunshine of a man's life; A merry heart does good like Medicine, Prove.
17.22. and more good many times then many Medicines, which sometimes do little
good, through Heaviness in the heart of man, which makes it stoop, Prove.
12.25. Men are not always taking of Medicines, nor always upon the merry pin:
Yet to conclude my answer to this Devils delusion, I doubt not to affirm, there
have been and are many good Christians, who have been and are more cheerful in
their Journey to Heaven, then have been and are many who have stumbled at the
ways of God, are offended with them, looking upon them as good for nothing
else but to make men mopish and sad.

Thus much in answer to the Objections which the carnal heart makes against my
Use, which I draw from this Head of Illumination and Conviction; only before I
leave this Head, I must leave one Caution: This counsel, which the carnal heart
is shy of, many poor Christians are forward enough to take it; they are
following this Position hard: O that God would open their eyes to see sin; they
never yet saw sin enough; they fear they shall prove rotten Hypocrites for want
of this thorough discovery of sin; yet examine them well, and you will find a
good work in them, and it may be have their loads also; yea, some I have
observed have such loads, that they cannot lift up their heads or hearts in a
day of darkness, yet cry out they cannot see sin enough. It is a meditation
that I have thought of often, and I judge it to be a truth: God cannot discover
sin too much, if he will not discover his grace and Christ too little. Let him
please but to discover his grace and Christ, and then discover sin what he
please; but without this, the sight of sin is a dreadful sight. Let therefore
Christians take heed here, and not teach God what he shall do, lest you meet
with the same answer that Mr. Leaver did in the same case, mentioned by that
Learned and Eminent Divine Doctor Sibbs, p. 375.
in his precious piece of the Souls Conflict: God gave Mr. Leaver his request,
he did discover sin to him in the most ugly colors, he had such a fight of
sin, that he saw no comfort in his following days; and therefore thought it
fitter to leave it to Gods wisdom to mingle their portion of sorrow, then to be
their own chusers.

More Uses I might make of this Head, but I purposely break off to make haste
to the next.

CHAP. IV. Of Compunction.
THe Spirit of God having set up this Divine Light in the understanding, and
convinced the sinner what his state is, there is a sad report carried to the
Will and Affections, which now begin to be moved; the same Spirit accompanying
this Light, has his operation in the heart, as before in the understanding;
Acts 2.37. When by the Spirits working with Peter's, Sermon, they were
enlightened and convinced of their great sin in crucifying the Lord Christ,
presently Compunction follows; it was not some weeks or months after, but
presently Compunction follows at the heels of Conviction; why did they not
oppose, or dispute against Peter? No, there was one did so dispute within them,
that there was no opposing; men may have much illumination to know sin, and can
speak much what an evil sin is; they have Conviction that they are sinners, but
no Compunction follows that Conviction; but it shall not be so in the day of
Christ's power, Psalm. 110.3. when the Spirit comes to work on the Vessel of
Mercy.

That the heart must needs be much moved, appears upon these two grounds.

First, The greatness of the evil which now it is convinced of, and feels it
lies under. Let a man see and feel himself under the bonds of guilt, in danger
of hell, under the power of his lusts, enmity against God, and God a stranger
to him, let but the sense of this condition lie upon his heart, and let him go
on in his jollity if he can: What a woeful Creature does a man see himself now
to be? He envies the happiness of the beasts that are filled, and play in their
pastures. We have heard of him, who when he saw a Toad, stood weeping, because
God had made him a Man, so excellent a Creature, and not a Toad, so abominable;
the goodness of God then, it seems, as he apprehended it, made him weep: but
this man he meets a Toad, and he weeps also; but why? because he is a man, who
thinks his estate infinitely worse then the condition of a Toad, and if it were
possible to obtain it, would change states with the Toad, that has no guilt of
sin, fears no wrath of God, is not under power of lusts or creatures; God is no
enemy to it, which is his miserable state: We shall need no other man to
dispute with Doctor Twisse upon that strange position, of which I know no need
in that Controversy, Miserum esse quacunque miseria poenae magis est
eligibile, Vind. gra. l. 2. dig. 1.
quam omnino non esse. I have thought many times, had Doctor Twisse felt what
others have done, he would never have asserted such a Position: whatever a man
may say for such an Assertion in Aristotle's School, from some Philosophical
notions, yet in the Divinity Schools, those notions will be contemned, by him
who lies under the sense of his miserable, undone and damned state by sin, let
the Doctor tell him never so often he lies, as he does a few lines before:
Whether nonentity be eligible or not? or what truth there may be in those
notions taken in the abstract, I dispute not: what they are in the concrete, I
know full well: to dispute against sense is nonsense.

Secondly, It must needs be so from the scope of God in this work; that which
he intends, namely, to loosen the Soul from its lusts, to make it willing to
part from them, to turn from them, to himself: the strength of sin (as to the
point in hand) lies in that hold or room it has in the will, with the
affections of love and delight, which it gets by the pleasure and profit, which
it propounds and brings to the will and affections. Poor Christians in the day
of their temptations, when they are in combat with their corruptions, be what
they will, they find their wills, love and delight incline very much to those
corruptions, and hence conclude themselves to be Hypocrites; why I pray? they
suppose the work of Conversion and true mortification, leaves no will, no love,
no delight for sin; What no? then I would not care a rush for all the
temptations in the world, they would be light, and very easy to conquer, the
prevalency in these affections must be observed. But to come to our head; Here
is one way to loosen the Soul from loving and delighting in them, [what the
Spirit does Physically, I do not speak of] that these lusts, in themselves and
in their effects, appear to be the greatest evil in the world, therefore, not
to be chosen, not to be loved or delighted in. The other way, which helps this;
that-being apprehended thus evil; instead of love and delight working toward
them, there are other Affections acting, contrary to them, and while they are
acting, love and delight cannot so move toward them.

What affections those are is easily apprehended, by the evil tidings brought
to the heart, and against the truth of which there is no disputing; here is the
wrath of God, the everlasting burnings, which though they have not seized
actually upon the Soul, but are future, yet certain, intolerable, and very
difficult, if not impossible in his own thoughts to avoid; hence fears rise and
act strongly; if the thread of his life be cut, which may soon be, he is gone
for ever. As to the present state, he feels bonds of guilt, accusations of
Conscience, apprehends God is an enemy to him, Christ a stranger from him, he
under the power of his lusts, and enmity against God, which causes all this
misery; this causes sorrow to work strongly. Hatred, that lies at the bottom,
but that does not so appear as the other: Acts 2.37. Men and brethren, what
shall we do? the men speak as if they were afraid; so did the stout Jaylour:
Job 15.21. A dreadful sound is in his ears: What to make of those sounds or
voices, that some have heard, I know not: That Gentleman, who was my intimate
Friend and Companion, for whom I did verily think God had mercy, when he was in
the midst of his swearing and drinking with his Companions, upon one ground
which I mention not, he told me, that in the time of his sickness with the
Smallpox, when God did grapple with him, none but God and he, no Christian
came at him, he thought verily he heard these words spoken to him, No mercy,
which made him cry out sadly: How the Fancy works in that Disease I know well;
but here seemed to be more then a fancy, not only by the effects it had upon
him in his disease, but afterward; for when he was recovered, and so well that
he married, his Companions came and got him out again, but for being drunk any
more that he was not; but coming home, riding with his Companions, something
dark it was, the words came again, No mercy, and struck him so down, that his
Companions got him out no more, and after that the work went on to make a
through and excellent Convert. Another I knew, but I cannot say of him as of
the former, as Scholar he was, of pretty natural parts, bred and brought up
under excellent preaching, and in a place where he had the examples of
excellent Christians, so that he must needs have light, but proved a debauched
person, no lust came amiss to him; upon a time he sent for me to pray with him:
I went willingly; in my discourse with him he told me, that several times (not
once) as he has been going through the fields to see persons, he has heard
one call him by his Surname, and doubled his call, bidding him, Make haste,
make haste, time is short: he could see no body, when he looked who it should
be that spoke; this did so affect him, as it troubled him: he told me,
oftentimes when he was amongst his Companions, that he could not go on so
freely in his lewd practices, but I wish I could say it had wrought to
Conversion: his time was but short indeed, for he was cut off in the prime of
his years, within a very few years after he told me of it.

Concerning these fears and sorrows, which men of the world, strangers to
Conversion, call, melancholy, madness, and I know not what, send them to the
Physicians, and Apothecaries shop for cure, I shall not insist upon them; what
other Divines have at large written about the clearness, greatness, permanency
of these fears and sorrows, is well known; and to some so well known, that it
has caused great fears in them that their Conversion was never sound, because
they have not experienced those great and permanent fears and sorrows, they
preach and write of. Having spoken to Preparations more largely in my first
Chapter, (to which I refer the Reader) I shall add but a few Positions here,
and so come to the resolution of one Question about them, which I know those
who have been troubled about these preparatory legal works, will be willing to
read.

First Position. Though many times great sins produce, and great sinners meet
with great fears, great sorrows and terrors, yet not always so.

God does not keep this method or road always with men, as sinners; great
sinners great terrors, less sinners less terrors: Sometimes those who have been
less sinners then others by far, as to outward acts, and living in a course of
sin, have met with greater sorrows, fears, bruisings, then others who have been
greater and viler sinners.

Second Position. Great sinners, and men of great parts, great spirits, whom
God intends to make of great use, these are the men, the persons, who usually,
if not always, meet with great bruisings, terrors, fears and sorrows.

Observe the workings of God, and you will find it so; those who read Mr.
Bolton's life will see my Position made good, no wonder though the Lord bruised
him, and held him under as he did: Other Divines I might mention, but I shall
instance in Mr. John Rogers of Dedham; an old man, that used in his young time
to frequent the house of Mr. Richard Rogers of Wothersfield, would tell me this
story of him oftentimes, which my Grandmother, who was Wife to Mr. Rogers, told
him several times; Mr. Richard Rogers did send and help to maintain Mr. John
Rogers (being his Kinsman) in Cambridge; it seems, he proved so bad, that he
sold his Books and spent the money; my Grandmother moved her Husband to buy him
some Books, and send him to Cambridge again; she being a prudent Woman
prevailed: Mr. John Rogers spent his Books again; Mr. Richard Rogers then would
cast him off utterly; but my Grandmother renews her request once more, and at
last prevails, to send him again; then he held: that he was wild enough I
conclude from a speech of his own, which I mention not, and by a speech of Mr.
Richard Rogers, which he often used, when he saw what God had done for his
Kinsman, I will never despair of a man for John Rogers sake; it seems then he
was bad enough. God intended this man to make him of great use, and a choice
Instrument he was in Gods hand for conversion of many Souls, few men like him;
but God handled him accordingly, bruised him to purpose; he would get under
bushes in fields, pray and cry; became an experimental Preacher of legal
workings, making good what Bishop (then Master) Brownrig said of him to my
Father Ward, which was this, John Rogers will do more good with his wild Note,
then we shall do with our set Music: Those that knew his manner of preaching,
and actings in preaching, well knew what the Bishop meant by the wild Note; but
it was very true, though such actions and speeches in other men would have been
ridiculous, yet in him, being a man so holy, grave, and reverend, they went off
with as much aw, upon a very great and reverent Auditory.

Third Position, Great sinners do not always in their first Conversion meet
with great fears and terrors, but with great meltings.

Great showers fall without any thunderclap. I was with a serious Christian,
who before his conversion was as wicked a person as any in the Town where he
lived; the drunkards would use to call him Father; so bitter an enemy against
godliness, and godly men, that the Minister in that Parish was almost afraid to
go by his shop; upon a Sermon day, in order to preparation to the Sacraments,
the Minister being gone to preach, said this man, I will go hear what Wilson
(would not give him his civil title) says: the Minister being in prayer when
he came in, he gets into a seat behind the Pulpit, where rarely any sat, and
his heart began to give in prayer time; but when Mr. Wilson named his Text,
which was, John 5.14. Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee, this
bitter enemy to godliness, that did before so power in drink, did now power out
tears abundantly, could not lift up head, but sat weeping all Sermon time,
home he went a new man, his Companions came to him, but they found a strange
change, he was no more for their turn; on he went two years praying by a Book,
but that at last did not please him, he could not open what he felt and wanted
by his Book, he lays it by, and resolves, if he can speak but three words to
God, yet he would power out his Soul as well as he could, and open his heart
with his own words; then he told me, Satan set upon him with the most horrid
temptations, that he was in a sad condition; but as for those legal terrors,
though a woeful sinner, I could never learn by his words, that God made him
acquainted with them at first; he lived and died a precious Christian.

Fourth Position. Many Christians, after they have had some acquaintance with
Christ, and have given good grounds for their effectual calling have met with
far more terrors and fears, then ever they did at first coming home.

This is not the case only of those who have sinned after the example of David,
who, I believe, never knew what it was to have his bones broken at his first
coming home; I can learn nothing to the contrary, but that God began early with
him, it may be in his childhood, most probable, as most of the Saints recorded
in Scripture; but it has been the case of others, in whom God began as early
as in him. I doubt not to say, but most what, though not always, those who are
born of godly Parents, and brought up under their wing, especially if Parents
be prudent in government as well as godly, and the Ministry clear and quick, to
join with the Parents, that God casts in his seed of Grace betimes; and so he
does in some others, though not so commonly if Parents be wicked and negligent;
now though these may have fears, yet to have them so afflictive and terrifying,
at first, they have them not; but diverse of these have met afterward with
their loads; what reasons the Lord may have in his Sovereign wisdom, who knows;
as for some, the reasons we find. If fallen into a sleepy, lazy, slight frame,
or begin to dote upon, and follow after the world, to rouse them up he will
heat them; or to make them drive on the work of Assurance with more vigor; or
for other reasons which I might mention, but forbear; but let the reasons be
what they will, experience has proved it true: many again, of a more tender
spirit, watchful in their lives, and that keep up to a Gospel-conversation,
they go off the stage of this world, knowing little or nothing of these
afflicting terrors from first to last.

Question. How may a Christian come to be satisfied as to these preparatory
legal works, which our Divines have so much preached and printed, and the holy
Scriptures with reasons do seem to justify.

Answer. I hope what I have said may, if the Spirit of God speak the Word, give
satisfaction; yet I shall give you further the experiences of others, how they
came to be satisfied, who for many years could not get over this block, but
frequently were arguing against themselves, that they were but Hypocrites, and
their work unsound, for want of these legal preparations.

If you say, experiences of others are not a safe rule to go by, (...) Hippoc.
Aph. 1.
they may be deceitful, and the men deceitful.

I grant what you say, therefore I shall not give you bare experiences, but
their grounds; weigh those, and if they be not sound, I shall be thankful to
those who will undeceive me.

First, They had this testimony in themselves, Conscience bearing them witness,
that they were willing to give up themselves to the working of Gods good
Spirit; let him do what he would with them, only make them sound; they did not
bawk any legal workings, because bitter, sad, uncomfortable, would spoil their
sport, hinder their mirth; yea, so far from this, that they did follow God many
years, seeking of him to open sin unto them, and make them taste the gall and
wormwood; so that sin might be made bitter to them, Christ excellent and
precious, and their hearts thereby separated from those sins by which they had
offended: this frame for several years proved to be true.

Secondly, They found and observed by experience, that it was not in the power
of these legal workings and terrors, to take the Soul off kindly and soundly
from sin. If the Spirit indeed be pleased to hold and carry on the work, then
they are an excellent and rational means toward it; else though while the Soul
is actually under them, a man may be so scared, that he dare not follow his
lusts for this time. The dog may be afraid to meddle with his carrion, and
stands at a distance while he sees the oudgel, but will return to it again,
and so will these to their lusts, when these fears draw off. It is the work of
Redemption, the Cross of Christ, the Spirit of the new Covenant, not the
terrors of the old Covenant, which takes the Soul off soundly from sin. I was
once in shipwreck, about one of the clock in the night, in December, the Ship
was breaking upon the Rocks, there was a dreadful shout amongst some of the
Seamen, I shall be in Hell before the morning; but yet could be drunk within
three days after God spared them. I was told by a Reverend Divine, whose
Sister a Professor married, I knew the man's Relations; this Professor, it
seems, secretly followed his lust of uncleanness; after he had yielded to his
lust, it seems, he had such dreadful horrors, his Conscience did so tear him,
that he said, had he been thrown at the back of the fire, he thought he could
as easily have born that burning, as endure those torments he felt in his
Conscience: yet when these horrors went off, he followed his lust again; and
this was his course for some time; at last (as I have heard) after great
humblings, God redeemed him from his lust. How many times have Ministers lost
their hopes, when they thought God had made them spiritual Fathers of Children,
when they saw their hearers under these workings, yea, some under such great
terrors, that Town and Country rung of them, and at last came to nothing. I
have been told concerning Doctor Sibbs, that when he heard of persons under
such great legal terrors, he began to fear them, that they would not prove
sound. Terrors may suspend the actings of lusts for the present, but it is the
work of Christ to save from the love, and destroy the power of lusts: Therefore
they sought the more to Christ to have this separation from sin to be made
kindly and soundly.

Thirdly, They observed many Christians, who had not found these legal workings
as others had done, and therefore were doubting of the soundness of their
Conversion, yet in their Conversations were as, yea more, tender and afraid of
sin, humble, awful, spiritual, savoury in their Conversation, prizing and
following Christ in all means, then many of those who had found these legal
terrors in a high degree, and were esteemed for sound Christians also: whence
it is plain, legal terrors are not the things: if indeed it were an infallible
Rule, where there are great legal terrors, there is most soundness, and the
best Gospelconversation, then there were great reason why Christians should be
so troubled, who want these: but experience has proved the Rule to be false
and fallible.

Fourthly, They considered what were the ends of God in these legal workings:
the ends of God why he brings any under these terrors, are not for themselves,
but something else; that is, to make sin so evil, so bitter to the Soul, that
it may be vvilling to be separated from it, and so remove from this term, from
which it is called. Secondly, To make Christ highly precious, and make them
willing to come to him, and close with him upon his own terms: Gods end is not
to commend us to Christ, because so humbled, so terrified, but to commend
Christ to us: Had a man as many terrors as Judas had, if those ends were not
attained, he were not truly prepared for Christ: he that has the least of
those that any man had, yet if the ends be attained, he has that which the
Lord aims at, and as to preparatory work is sound: There are many Christians,
who have not found the tenth part of those legal, hellish terrors, which others
have done, yet have proved sound, and got to Heaven, when others,
notwithstanding their great hellish terrors, have at last gone to Hell: Thus
therefore they examined their hearts, and found,

That first, God had made them willing to part from their lusts and idols; and
if he would redeem them from them, make an eternal divorce between their Souls
and them, they would for ever bless his Name.

Secondly, They found, that Christ was made so precious to them, that they did
most gladly accept of Gods offer, and think it the best bargain that ever they
made, might they but enjoy him upon his own terms.

Fifthly, They confidered that great Command of the Gospel, To believe in Jesus
Christ, to receive him, which (as I have said before) makes it my duty to
believe in him, prepared or not prepared; they could not answer their neglect
of that Command, by saying, Alas, I am not prepared, therefore I must not, or I
cannot believe in Christ: This will not do; and therefore they must say, as
that good Woman on her deathbed to her Minister, examining her about her
Faith, the grounds of it (which at that time was understood to lie in
Assurance, and so she answered) O Sir, said she, I did believe, because I dare
do no other.

Sixthly, Some (for I do not say all have found it) have found, that though God
did spare them in the first coming home, as to legal terrors and sorrows, from
the guilt of fin, yet for sorrows and troubles arising from sin another way,
they have met with their hearts full, yea, full indeed, so full, that might
they have been their own chusers, they would rather have chosen a year lying
under that legal bondage, which has made them so often call into question the
soundness of their Conversion, then to lie so many years under those pressing
loads, which have made them weary of their lives. Whence let me give this
advice to Christians; Is thy heart light, too vain, frothy? beg of God to make
it serious, and study how to walk awfully and humbly before him; but do not
you, as some have been apt, almost to quarrel with God, for want of legal
sorrows and fears, if you have them not one way, you may have enough another
way: God may let out some lust upon thee, it may be that lust in which thou
tookest delight before, and with which thy heart was most defiled; which lust,
though God keeps thee so that it shall not prevail or get mastery over thee,
yet it may follow thee so impetuously and incessantly with the motions in all
thou go about, and hence cause such horrid vexations and afflictions to thy
spirit, that thou will cry out a hundred times with Job, chap. 7.15. My soul
chooses strangling, and death, rather then life: How pleasing have the thoughts
of the halter been under these loads? but take heed and dread these
temptations, as patiently as thou can, choose rather to submit to the
sovereign and righteous pleasure of God, under these sad and soul-vexing
buffetings, rather then to give the least ear to those devilish temptations of
self-destruction. But still, which is the advice I give, laboring for a plain
heart with God, do not you teach God what dose of legal workings and sorrows he
shall give you. It is with Souls that are sick of sin, as it is with those who
are bodily sick; most of these, when they send to the Physician, send him word,
they can take no Physic, that is, no Vomit, no purging Physic (they mean) but
desire him to send them some comfortable things, or nothing; this is the frame
of most of our Country people, when as they have ten times more need of Vomits
and Purges, then of Cordials. Some have sent to me (Physic being that, which
before I entered upon the Ministry I studied and practiced, and now, being
deprived of my Ministry, I am forced to practice again) for a rowzing vomit (so
they termed it) that might cleanse them thoroughly; but I have not made their
desires the rule for my administering Physic; had I done so, I had in an
ordinary way killed them, but I gave as I judged they were able to bear. Some
send no directions what the Physician should do, but leave themselves to his
judgment; let him send his Physic, they submit themselves to it, these are the
right Patients. Thus do sin-sick-souls: most, if they find troubles arise,
Conscience being a little awakened, presently, must have comfortable promises
applied, listen for such words from Ministers and Christians, when they have
need of other kind of Physic. Some they call for higher discoveries of sin and
guilt, that sin may appear like it self, and they feel more sorrows; and if God
should give them what they would have (unless his mighty hand did support them)
little do they know what may be the horrid effects. Others give up themselves
to God, do not teach him how much to give, but only heal them soundly, do his
work in them thoroughly, and let him take what course his merciful wisdom
pleases; and this is the right frame of a gracious heart.

What I have said may serve to answer the other case about sorrows for fin, of
which Divines have written, being another part of Compunction: The want of
sorrows have caused many sorrows in the hearts of many Christians: Let not the
Reader expect that I should enlarge upon this, for as I enlarge upon nothing,
much less shall I enlarge upon that, to which so many have spoken: Only a few
words.

First, I grant legal sorrows are of good use to prepare the heart, and make it
willing to part with its sins, and remove from that term from which it is
called in Conversion, but yet give me one ounce (as I may say) of Evangelical
sorrow for sin, rising from a Gospel-work and principle, before pounds of legal
sorrows, rising from slavish and hellish fears: How much of these sorrows, with
bitter exclamations against men's lusts, have been known, and yet not long
after, men could hug their lusts again? but sorrows which arise from the sense
of the enmity of sin against the greatness and goodness of God, against the
love and tenderness of Christ in that great work of Redemption, of which the
Soul has had some good hope and taste, and that it should deal so
disingeniously with this God, and this Christ, these sorrows being accompanied
with reverent filial fear and entire love, do not let the Soul ever close with
its lusts again.

Secondly, But art thou a sound Christian, and have not known what sorrow for
sin means? Surely thou art mistaken, thou wrongest thy self in saying so; call
over thy life, examine thy self, and thou will find it otherwise.

Object. It may be you will say, I have known sorrow for sin, but my sorrow
has not been like sorrow for other things; loss of Relations or Estate,
outward afflictions have caused greater afflicting sorrows then sin has done:
Others I see more tender hearted then I, they can mourn, power out tears, when
my heart is like the nether Millstone?

Answ. This Objection has had its Answer many times given, therefore I will
not stay upon it; the person to whom we speak is to be considered, a serious
Christian, who aims at, and drives on for sincerity.

First, The Schoolmen Aquin. Suppl. q. 3.2.1. Estius Sent. l. 4. p. 1. page
236. Valentia. l 4. d. 7. q. 8. p 5.
have distinguished about sorrows, and that distinction is approved by our
Orthodox, Learned and Godly Divines Ames de Consc. l. 2. c. 8. ^ 3. Dyke.
Repent. p. 46. Burges Rofin. fol p. 4^6.
.

Sorrow is intellectual, spiritual, or sensitive: Or thus, Sorrow is
considered, either as it is in the will, and so it is nothing else but the
displeasure and dislike of that which the understanding apprehends as evil:
Or as it is in the sensitive faculty of the Soul, common with us to the beasts.

As for intellectual, spiritual sorrow, or sorrow as considered in the will,
there is no true Child of God but does sorrow more because of sin, then for
outward things; their wills being sanctified abhor sin more then any outward
evil; but all do not feel such sensible smarting grief for sin in their
sensitive faculty, as they do for diverse outward afflictions; the more corporal
a thing is, the nearer is it, and more familiar to the sensitive faculty, and
so pincheth more there: He that has the tooth ach in a great degree, has ten
times more sensible grief then he that is in a deep Hectic Fever; but the
will dislikes the Hectic Fever, much more then it does the toothache.

Secondly, Sorrow for sin we labor to increase it, we pray for it, we choose
it, we grieve that we cannot grieve; but for other sorrow, when we act like
rational men, we labor to suppress it, shake it off if we can, take shame to
our selves, that we cannot more quietly and patiently bear the hand of God, but
should so sink and faint under his correcting pleasure.

Thirdly, In sorrow for outward things, we are merely Passives, that is, sorrow
comes in whether we will or no, it breaks in upon us, we cannot withstand it;
but in sorrow for Sin, we are Actives, that is, we desire it, choose it, call
for it, pray for it (as I said before) Whence we see, there is much more of the
will in sorrow for Sin, then is in sorrow for outward things; and certainly the
will is the great thing in Divinity; this implies it has the understanding
and judgment with it.

Fourthly, The Land-floods of sorrow for outward things, fall again, and
sometimes very quickly, unless we have set our hearts too much upon a Creature,
which is our Sin; these sorrows wear out; we can speak of such an affliction
that now torments us, the loss of such a Relation, three or four years hence,
and then sorrow does not so oppress us; but the little spring of sorrow for
Sin, is kept running during a man's life. If a Christian recalls a sin twenty
years since committed, and which troubled him then, he does find his sorrow
renew; though God has pardoned him, he cannot pardon himself.

The same may I say for Tears.

First, There may be loads of Sorrow upon the heart, when there is not one Tear
in the eye; this is well known; so that Tears are not the Index of great
Sorrows always.

Secondly, Tears that rise from a tender broken heart, are precious, but Tears
that flow from constitution of the body (as in most they do) signify little;
some have Tears at command. I have known persons of very unbroken hearts, stout
wills, who could pour out Tears at their pleasure. I speak of Christians.

Thirdly, Are Tears common with thee for other things? if so, and they be
strangers only when you come to sin, this deserves good attendance.

Fourthly, A man may have a more soft, tender, broken heart, who cannot shed
tears (at least not in that measure) he may be a better Christian then he that
can shed many tears; observation has made this good. I remember Mr. Thomas
Hooker, at a Meeting of about forty Ministers, put that question, What Rules
they would go by in admission of Members into Churches? Will you go by the
narration of the work of God upon them in Conversion? Or will you look at the
frame wherewith they make their narration? One, says he, comes and makes his
narration with many tears; another he tells you plainly what God has done, but
he cannot shed tears as the other, but yet proves the better Christian, said
he. To say no more, Tears are common to Hypocrites, and no infallible sign of
soundness of Grace: Many are kept humble and poor in their own eyes for want of
tears, when some (I fear) are proud of their tears. Mr. Shepherd says, More
are driven to Christ by the sense of the burden of an hard, dead, blind, filthy
heart, then by the sense of sorrows; because a man rests in sorrows most
commonly, but trembles and flies out of himself when he feels the other.
Sincere Convert p. 239.

So much in answer to that Question. The Reader now may see upon what reasons
those experiences are grounded.

For the effects of this work of Compunction, I shall but touch them briefly.

The first effect: A stop is put to the course of Sin; the man cannot run on so
freely in that way as before: Let this work be but common, and never carried on
to sound Conversion, but fall off again, yet so long as this work lasts, the
actings of Sin are forborne; there is something got into the cup, that does so
imbitter it, that whereas before he drunk iniquity like water, Job 15.16. now
it will not go down so pleasantly as it was wont to do; he cries out, as the
Sons of the Prophet, O man of God, there is death in the pot, 2 Kings 4.40.
there is indeed, Thou shall die; he tastes there: Now if his Companions come to
call him out, no, he tastes something he never did before.

Secondly, He begins to fall sick of his sin past, and of his present sinful
state he now feels himself to lie under, being bound in the chains of guilt,
and captivated under the power of lusts: now he begins to vomit up his sweet
morsels in confession of his sins: God sets his sins in order before him, in
Conviction; he sets his sins in order before God, in Confession; his shifts and
extenuations are no more heard; he loads himself with just aggravations.

Thirdly, Now he sees the force of those reasons which have been used by the
Ministry of the Word to persuade men to Conversion, to turn from sin to God;
there is weight in those Arguments which were little regarded before, and now
he begins to think seriously, there must be a Divorce between him and his
Dalilah.

Fourthly, His heart begins to be loosened from his Idols; and if God will now
separate between him and his fins, he does not now resist the work of the
Spirit, as before.

Mr. Shepherd makes Compunction to consist in three things. p. 65.
1. Fear. 2. Sorrow. 3. Separation from sin. [I conceive Separation from Sin is
more properly an effect of Compunction, then a part of it. Fear and Sorrow
produce this effect, make the Soul not to resist the Spirit, or not unwilling
to have his Sin and Soul parted.] p. 85.
So much loosening from sin as makes the Soul willing, or at least not
unwilling, that the Lord Jesus should take it away. This severing from Sin he
conceives to be a further stroke found in the Elect then in the Reprobate: p 98.
Fears and Sorrows were common to both; but this severing from Sin the Spirit
works in the Elect under Compunction. p. 86.
He bids us remember for ever that no more sorrow for sin, no more separation
from sin is necessary to thy closing with Christ, then so much as makes thee
willing, or rather not unwilling, that the Lord should take it away. And know
it, if thou seek for a greater measure of Humiliation, antecedent to thy
closing with Christ, then this, thou show the more pride therein, etc. Yes,
blessed Saint, we shall remember well what you bid us remember; for if such a
measure of fears and sorrows under the work of Compunction, as works a
willingness to be separated from Sin, and so much separation from Sin, as makes
us willing, or at least not unwilling, to close with Christ to take it away, if
this, I say, be such a true measure of Humiliation, antecedent to our closing
with Christ, that it is pride to look for a greater, [and blessed be Grace, we
can experience this very well] then I hope our Conversion and Faith in Christ
may be sound, though we have not arrived at that pitch to be content to be
damned; which is a great part of the next Chapter, treating of Humiliation.
Moreover, if this willingness to be separated from Sin, and to take Christ to
separate Sin and the Soul, be a distinguishing note between the Elect and
Reprobate under Compunction, and this is wrought by the Actual grace of the
Spirit of God, and therefore must be a fruit of Gods Love [for certainly all
sound Christians look upon their redemption from their lusts, creature, idols,
and enmity against God, to be the effects of Gods love, as well as redemption
from Hell, though this may more affect; for the whole Soul, and the whole of
the Soul, fly from Hell, and dreads that, but Sin yet remains in us] then how
the Soul must come to be content without the love of God, though he will never
give grace, never work grace, and this must be wrought by the Spirit too, as in
his next Chapter, I cannot understand it.

This willingness to be separated from Sin under the work of Compunction (and
so proper to the Elect in the work of preparation) Mr. Shepherd observes, is
not received by many worthy Divines, who think this belongs to Sanctification,
and is wrought in the Soul after union with Christ by Faith. I do indeed find
diverse able Divines to be of a contrary opinion to Mr. Shepherd, who though
they maintain preparatory works before Conversion, yet they think they are
common to the Reprobate with the Elect; and that no preparatory works have any
certain or necessary connection with the Form that is to be introduced; but they
are only material dispositions, which render the subject more susceptive, or
fit for the form to be introduced: as dryness in the Wood makes the Wood more
fit to receive the fire, but no more fire in the dry, then in the green Wood;
so nothing that has any saving distinction between the Elect and Reprobate
prepared; but Faith, answering the Call of God, and uniting to Christ, who is
our life, is the first saving distinguishing note.

This Question, fall it which way it will, makes no trouble to a sound
Christian in examining of its work; Separation from Sin must be, Christ only
can separate from Sin: The will must take Christ as King, and so must be
separated from Sin: So then, the thing be done, whether it were begun under
Compunction, before union with Christ, or after union, it matters not; the
truth of our Conversion depends not upon the priority in the Question: yet
(with submission to other learned Divines) I cannot see that Mr. Shepherd in
this point is mistaken, there seems to be clear Reasons on his side. For,

First, I cannot see how it is possible the Soul can hold married affections to
two, and those contrary. The Crown and the Bed admit but one. Can the Soul be
married to Christ while it is married to its lusts, at the very same time? Will
Christ admit this? Or will he not first have a Divorce to be consented to, at
least not resisted? How Christ should ingraft or implant the Soul into himself,
who grows upon the old Stock, and will not be cut off from it, I cannot tell.

Secondly, If a man be called from one Term to another, surely in order of
nature he must first turn from the Term in which he was when he was called,
before he can come to the Term to which he was called. In effectual calling,
the Term from which the Soul is called is not primarily and properly Hell; all
are willing enough to turn from that, [though some, Monsters of men, have it
often in their mouths, God damn me] but Sin, Creature-idolizing,
Inordinate-self, which Hell attends, this is the proper Term from which we are
called, and Hell is a strong Argument to make us attend to the Call, if that be
the wages of Sin; Must not then a man in order of nature first turn from Sin,
before he can turn to God? Can he come to this Term, and not move first from
the other?

Thirdly, Is that man rightly prepared for Christ, whose will does actually
resist him in the terms upon which he is offered? Is not Christ clothed with
all his Offices, with complete Redemption, the person to whom we are called,
and must he not thus be received? But if the will of man refuse to be separated
from its lusts, does it not resist Christ in his Kingly Office, and great part
of his Redemption? If the Soul be not made willing, or at least not unwilling,
(to use Mr. Shepherds notion) that Christ should come and separate Sin from it,
then I think it does resist him in his work.

Fourthly, Dr. Ames de praepa. peccat. ad Conversionem. These. 6.
Take up the similitude of dry wood, which that learned Author uses: Does not
the waterish moisture in the green wood resist the fire, and hinder it, that it
cannot act upon the sulphurous part in the wood? and must not the waterish
moisture be first removed, exhaled, and then the fire acts upon, and kindles
the sulphurous part? If you say, But there is na fire as yet in the dry wood, I
answer, The question was as to priority, which Mr. Shepherd is speaking of. And
though you say there is no fire in the wood, though dry, so no Grace as yet in
the prepared: To this Mr. Shepherd will answer: There are not indeed any habits
of Grace infused into the Soul as yet; but there is such an Act of Grace put
forth by the Spirit, to work the will up to this frame in the Elect preparing,
which he puts not forth in a Reproabte; this severing from Sin in this time, or
under Compunction, being made, not by habitual grace, but actual grace; that
is, says he, the Spirit does it immediately, by an omnipotent Act, by that
which is called actual actuating, p. 98, 99.
or moving Grace.

Pious and learned Rutherford, giving the sense of the Orthodox, concerning the
efficacy of Grace, Exercita. Apologet. pro Divina gratia, p. 436.
and actual predetermination, thus speaks: Quando nos docemus gratiam
praedeterminantem ex vi sua intrinseca inclinare voluntatem ad (...) consentire
potius quam ad dissentire, id tripliciter intelligitur. 1. Quod gratia efficax
impediat impetum and motum obliquitatis and irrectitudinis vitiosae, quae
libertati extrinseci adhaereat, and hunc sensum lubens admitto. Nisi enim Deus
actualem duritiem in actibus gratiae praepediat and praeoccupat, non video
qumoodo Deus auferat cor lapideum, Ezech. 36.26. 2. Sensus hic est, quod gratia
praedeterminans vi sua intrinseca penetret quasi ad profunditatem vitalis
inclinationis and impetuositatis electivae, atque it a primam (...) and impetum
naturae in liberate cohibeat, and voluntatem inclinantem ad angulum (ut sic
loquar) Borealem talis volitionis, and Dei praedeterminatio torqueat ad angulum
australem: hunc sensum falsissime nobis affingunt adversarii. 3. Quod Dei
gratia praedeterminans, non vi ita penetrans, sed insidens impetuositati
naturae, ita indeclinabiliter flectat voluntatem, ut modo admirando gratia
fortiter, and voluntas vitaliter and elective conspirent in idem objectum
numero, codem tempore, loco, and intensione; and voluntas sub illa Dei motione
non in aliud tenderet objectum quam in illud idem in quod libere se
inclinasset, hoe dato quod per impossible, nulla fuisset in Deo
praedeterminatio: ita tamen ut gratia prime and principaliten, id objectum non
aliud praedeterminet, and voluntas subordinate and dependenter, ex vi interna,
vitali, and imperiali, and electiva libertatis in illud idem objectum tenderet.
Hic etiam est verus sensus.

The first branch I conceive speaks much, and the third also, of what Mr.
Shepherd intends by his Actual grace; and opens, so far as we can conceive, how
the Spirit does it; it seems to be the binding of the strong man, Luke 11.22.
But when all is said pro and con, what if we say the work is very secret and
hidden; and what Zophar said to Job, chap. 11.7. Can thou by searching find
out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? may we not say the
same in this case? if we cannot find him out in other works, can we find his
works upon the spirits of men? Let us make good, that separation from sin is
wrought, that we willingly embrace Christ to that end; then whether he does it
by actual or habitual grace under Compunction, shall not need to trouble us.

I shall not make any use of this Head; for I see Mr. Shepherd, who has done
it before, and that very ably, his Works are in many peoples hands, so that I
shall spare the Reader that trouble: This only I hint, here is the second flaw
in the Hypocrites work, his will was never divorced from his beloved lusts;
while he was sick indeed, then he might cry out of it, as some have done,
calling Alehouses, Hell-houses; but it was only while he was sick: he that
has eat fat meat, which has corrupted in his Stomach, and now causes very
sick vomiting, bring him the fat meat while he is sick and vomiting, he loathes
the sight of it; but when once he has emptied himself, and the humor carried
off, he falls to his meat heartily again: So do many with their sweet lusts,
when Conscience has made them sick, setting home hell, and the wrath of God
for them, which cause horrid fears and terrors within; now if you offer him
lust, no, he cannot at this time entertain it; but when he has vomited well,
emptied himself by his confessions, and supposed repentance, abstinence,
engagements, promises to do better, and has now got over his sickness, it is
not long but he falls to his sweet morsels again. Something like him of whom I
heard in Spain, and I think it was while I was there, on Good Friday (as they
call it) he having whipped himself that day, (as their manner is) when they had
done all, comes into a house to put on his clothes; now, said he, I have made
quit for the old score, he had done penance, and all the former sins were
wiped off; now he would begin to whore again. Hypocrites unsound hearts have
their Good Friday, their whipping times, and then they are free for their
former trade. Look to this then Christian, whether the Divorce between thy Soul
and Sin be truly made, for here lies great danger: but no more of this Head.

CHAP. V. Of the Spirits work, in taking off the Soul from Self righteousness
and Self confidence.
THe Sinner by this time sees himself in a very ill case: And what is next? A
Principle within him tells him, I have sinned, and I must mend; a new leaf I
must turn; repent I must; and spares not for Vows, Promises, Engagements,
Resolutions, he is full of these: if he can but repent, mourn, pray, cast off
his former practices, and do better, then he hopes God will be pleased, and
Conscience quiet: That he can do something this way at this time he does not
much doubt it; so that though he be bad, he is not all bad, he has some good
in him; though he has no money, yet he has hands, and can work: and as some
that once had good means and lived well, if they be fallen into decay, yet if
they can by working or other means get a living, though a poor one, they will
not be beholding to others: So it is with the Soul, having had once a good
stock in Adam, though now fallen into decay, yet if it can by working and
labor find any living, that peace and quietness come in, it will not go out to
another to find rest: Thou have found the life of thine hand, Isai. 57.10.
which some interpret of the comfort they had by their going to the Assyrians,
who promise to strengthen thine hand with help and assistance, and so there was
no coming home to God: So it is with this Soul, if it can find life by his
hand, his working, reforming, and duties, he will not come to Christ for life.

I shall give the Reader my mind briefly.

First, Though man be now lost, miserable, undone, and has Convictions that
his case is naught, yet he has no such Principle in him naturally, that
carries him directly to Christ for healing.

This is obvious to any man, who has labored to be acquainted with the state
of the Souls of his people under his Ministry: Ask them, are they sinners? Yes,
they deny it not, who is not? But how then? How do you hope to be saved, and
get out of this condition? Let them alone, and let them tell their own story,
and open their minds freely to you; they will tell you many things they do, how
they live, how they carry themselves toward God and men; but I have observed
not one word of Christ all this while, no mention of him, nor of any thing he
has done; at last I have asked, What is Christ no body with you? O yes, yes,
Christ is somebody: when I had put the question to them, they have heard of
Christ, and they are called Christians, so they must say they have need of him,
else it were a shame; but had not I mentioned him, they had not done it: very
like to those Women, Isai. 4.1. Seven women shall take hold of one man, saying,
we will take our own bread, and wear our own apparel, only let us be called by
thy name, etc. So do most of those who are Christians (so called) they take
hold of him, that is, they make an outward profession of him, called by his
Name, they cannot tell what to profess else, it would be a reproach to them
else, (as those Women pleaded) in such a Nation as this: they do not like to be
called Jews or Heathen: but they eat their own bread, and wear their own
apparel; they live not at all upon Christ, they will not trouble him for that;
they have righteousness to cloth themselves, a web of their own home-made
cloth; they are beholding to him only for a name. This has not been my own
observation alone, but of other Ministers also, who have told me they have
observed the same in their people.

Yea, I have observed others, who in their sickness have had their Consciences
awakened, and now they were convinced, Hell and damnation were no phansies; at
this time we might talk with them: if ever Christ be in men's mouths, one would
think it should be now: but this I have observed has been the common language;
If God spare my life, I will not live as I have done, I shall not frequent such
company, I will take a new course, and many such words. But here are two
Questions. First, Grant it be so, that you do as you say, yet who shall answer
for the old score of guilt, who shall pay for that? Nay, for that God may well
set off, and quit scores, if they turn new men. Secondly, But for this new leaf
which you will turn, may one believe you? Will you promise it? Yes. Will you
vow it? Yes. Will you swear it? Yes, Any thing now they can do. When it has
been told them, your heart is deceitful, you promise a great thing, you have
need of a great power from Christ to help you do this; if you get into Christ,
then there will be ground to hope what you say and promise will be performed,
else not; alas, they can do all this without Christ. So far as I could judge by
their countenance and speech, they have seemed to be displeased with me, for
doubting of the truth of what they say, and telling them they will be as bad,
if not worse, if God should raise them up again, unless being got into Christ,
he undertakes the performance of what they promise. Men are very confident of
their own strength at this time, while sickness debilitates nature, and fears
of hell together keep down lusts so, that they do not now act as before; they
measure themselves by what they feel now, and by this state and temper they are
now under, engage for the future: One of our great Men being very sick, sent
for a very godly Minister, a man of prayer indeed: Who but this man now? Must
hardly stir from him: What promises and engagements did he make to this
Minister of reforming: the Minister told him, as I said before, what he would
prove: with great earnestness he would multiply his promises, yea, and you
shall see it, said he: Moreover, he wished the Minister, if he did recover, and
did not answer what now he had promised, that he should tell him of it: Not
long after they met together at dinner, and this sick man, who had made his
engagements for a new life, fell into his old unsavory discourse; offended
much the Minister; he soberly told him, My Lord, you have forgotten your
promise: he bad him hold his peace, for though it was true he had made God such
a promise, yet he did never intend to perform it. The Gentleman whom I made
mention of before (now with God) upon whom God wrought when I was many miles
distant from him, and knew not of it; so soon as I came home and saw him, he
led me into his Orchard, and told me what God had been doing; I observed a
great change in the man, zealous in his duties, left off swearing, and his
drunken Companions: I told him, Sir, God has done much for you; now the
business is, a right bottoming; take heed you do not bottom upon your self,
your changes, your duties, but be sure it be upon Christ; let your foundation
be laid upon him, then this will hold: What was the matter I know not, but
upon this he was much cast down, in so much (as he told me afterward) his Wife
wished he had never seen me: but I hope my counsel was not hurtful or needless,
and so he found afterward in the progress of his Christian course.

Further, to make good my Position, how opposite the heart of man is to Christ;
how men choose to live upon themselves, rather then to go out to him. I forbear
the names of persons; but one that had lived many years, I think almost all his
life time, in a Town, where Christ had been as clearly preached as in any Town
in England, and I think as long; when he was about threescore and sixteen years
of age, he came in to visit a sick Neighbor, a Christian friend of mine came
to see him also, and observing this old man there, whom he judged to be one who
lived upon his own stock, civility, good works, etc. he purposely fell into
that discourse, to show how many persons lived upon their duties, etc. but
never came to Christ; the old man sitting by the bedside heard him, and God
was pleased to convince that man, that he was such a person, who had lived upon
himself without Christ to that day; and would say afterward, had I died before
score and sixteen, I had perished, for I knew not Christ. Another man, lived a
civil life, kept his Church on the Lords days, went often to hear Mr. John
Rogers of Dedham on Tuesdayes, and so attended other Lectures; thus he lived in
a fine civil course, till he was about fourscore and seventeen years of age;
then the Lord opened his eyes, and showed him that he was not acquainted with
Christ at this time, and then revealed Christ unto him: he lived after this I
think four years; when any asked him, how old are you? he would answer, two or
three, and according to the number of years were from the time that he knew
Christ, for then began his life in his own esteem; all his years before he did
not live.

1. This agrees with Adam's principle; once it was so, we had life in our
selves, and needed not to go out to another for righteousness; we are all born
under a Covenant of works, till the Lord brings us under a Covenant of Grace;
and we would live by a principle that agrees with a Covenant of works.

2. This agrees with the pride of man's heart; We have heard the pride of Moah,
he is exceeding proud, Jer. 48.29. It may be truly applied to us all as to this
point; proud, yea, exceeding proud; poor as beggars, not one rag of
righteousness to cover us, but proud; no man cares to be beholden to another;
every man would be an Independent: Romans 10.3. The Jews went about to establish
their own righteousness, (...), they sought to make it stand; they have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God; would not submit, their
hearts too proud: Was this proper to the Jews only? No verily, it is common to
all the Sons and Daughters of Adam: Whence rise these disputes against imputed
righteousness, exalting of merits, works, etc. the bringing of men to walk
according to the light within them, i.e. which light within them, is all the
Christ that many know in these days. Yea, let a man that keeps a narrow watch
over his heart, and observes what rises there, tell me, does he not feel
sometimes in his life, what risings there are against this self-emptying
principle? Verily, man's nature loves it not, he hates it.

3. Satan helps here; he seldom or never troubles that person, whom he finds
living upon himself, with temptations; he labors to settle them in the way
they are in, keeps off all disquieting thoughts; if he cannot draw them into
that profaneness he would, then he seeks to undo them this way; if he can but
keep them from closing with Christ, well enough; he is sure of these; other men
may possibly meet with an Alarm from their Consciences, which these men seldom
do.

4. The life of Faith in Christ, is the most cross duty to flesh and blood of
any that God requires; let men think of it what they will, to be sure here is
the same holiness required, that the Law requires, and that is as cross to men's
lusts, as the Law can be; this is opposite to man's badness. Then it empties a
man of himself, all his conceited righteousness, duties, abilities, and this is
opposite to man's goodness: So that Faith is cross every way, hence the vile
heart frets against it.

5. As to the poor humbled sinner, of whom we are now treating, he is ashamed
to go to Christ, he sees himself in such a forlorn condition, he knows not how
to look Christ in the face, nor can tell how Christ should look on him; as if
the Prodigal, seeing himself in his rags, should be ashamed to see his Father
till he had gotten better clothes on his back: So does this, if he had
repented, mourned, changed his life, and he thinks, at least, he might come
better to Christ then now he can in this ragged condition.

Secondly, Though the convinced sinner has not a principle in him naturally
that leads him directly to Christ, but to self, yet all that are convinced of
sin by the Spirit, do not turn aside to settle upon themselves, their own
doings, duties, righteousness, instead of Christ.

All would do so, if the Spirit let them alone, but all do not so: this I add
to remove that stumbling block, which temptation may lay before some: who when
they hear or read of the Spirits work in taking off the Soul from sinful self,
in former Heads, and now of taking of it off from good self, under this Head,
and this must be done, else the Soul will never truly close with Christ; they
examine themselves when was this done in me; when was that distinct time after
my conviction of sin, that I settled upon my own duties, doings, repentance,
changes, etc. then the Spirit took me off? now, I say, this is not the case of
all in the work of Conversion: Commonly as is the light persons live under, and
as is the manner of the Spirits working. If persons live where Christ is
clearly and powerfully preached, the Spirits work also very quick, follows the
Soul close, that it stays not long in the birth, many times such persons turn
not aside into this by path, but are carried to Christ more directly; search,
and many experiences will tell you this truth.

Thirdly, Let the works of God in the former Heads be various, yet in this work
of self-unbottoming, taking off the Soul from its own goodness, righteousness,
abilities, all converted Souls meet.

The reason is this; unless this be done, the end of Gods call will never be
attained; his call will not be effectual: for no man will come to Christ for
life, John 5.40. Who can find life in one hand by his own duties and workings.
All the sin against the Law, as a Covenant of works, all a man's badness by
reason of this sin, is not so opposite and cross to Christ, as is this
self-righteousness, self-considence, a man's own goodness. Consider God and
Christ as being holy, so indeed sin directly opposes him; but consider Christ
as Redeemer, Mediator, High Priest, Righteousness, Jesus; so it is not sin, but
self-righteousness that is most directly cross to him; for not sin, but our
self-righteousness, nulls and makes void his Righteousness, and whole work of
Redemption: Man's nature had rather turn to God [if he must turn] directly by
himself, then turn to God by Christ: So that all believers meet in this work.

Quest. How does the Spirit take off a man from his selfconfidence, and
own-righteousness?

Answ. I shall give my answer very briefly under several Heads, premising this
first.

He who will stand upon his own legs, or seek to make his righteousness stand,
as Romans 10.3. the Jews would do, he must

First, Be able to make satisfaction for the wrong that sin has done; the
broken Law and he must agree.

Secondly, He must be able to subdue all the enmity of his heart against God;
all his lusts and corruptions he must mortify, and walk before God in a holy
frame continually: he that undertakes this, undertakes a hard task; if he
understand it, he will soon find either of them impossible, one as easy as the
other; choose which you think is the easiest. Thus then the Spirit takes him off,

First, By convincing him of the nature of sin, of guilt, what it is to have a
holy and just Law broken: What are all thy duties thou performest? What is thy
righteousness, though it were pure, which it is not, to satisfy the holy Law
of a Just God, which thou have broken so many thousand times, and have a heart
opposite and enemy to it? If thy nature were now holy, and all thy life from
this time holy, this is but thy duty, and so it was always. Can thy doing that
which is now thy duty to answer this day, make satisfaction for not doing thy
duty all thy life before? If a man be taken clipping the Kings Coin, or has
committed some one capital Crime, if he comes before the Judge and pleads, he
lived all his life time before clear from such Crime, and will do from
henceforth, it was but once that he did so; will this answer the Law? Will the
Judge acquit him? He did and does but his duty if he lived before, and will do
after as he pleads, he should have done so when he committed that Crime; the
Law calls him a Son of death, and dye he must for that one Crime. Shall then a
man, having a nature that hates the righteous Law of God, and tramples upon it
daily, think with a few pitiful duties, repentings, etc. to answer a thousand
and ten thousand breaches of the holy Law of his Sovereign? The wages of sin is
death, and dye thou must, unless a ransom can be found.

Secondly, By convincing him of the sin of his nature; he opens to him that
fountain of iniquity, that sinning sin; and if this be once opened by the
Spirit, it will take down the pride of any self-Justiciary; let him that
fecleth this, talk of his righteousness, duties, works, if he can; if he does,
I know what his language must be. When I read men denying original sin, I do
not wonder at all their proud Opinions, and self-advancing Doctrines: Whence
did these men descend? Not from our father Adam surely: there is talk now of
another World in the Moon; the inhabitants there came not from the stock we
did; certainly these men dropped out of that world, and therefore deny this sin
of our nature, they find it not in their nature: This I am sure of, say these
men what they please, I know nothing that does so abuse a man, beats him out of
himself, and all conceits of his own righteousness, that makes a man see
himself loathsome, undone, damned for ever in himself, as the discoveries and
sense of this sin of sins. Take a man who has committed the vileir actual
sins, could I suppose that man to be guilty only of them, and without this
original sin, I should not judge that man so sinful as he that is defiled with
this original sin, though by the restraining Providence of God he be kept from
breaking out into actual gross evils: I do more adore the riches of Gods grace
in pardoning this sin, then in pardoning any actual sin, except Adam's first
sin; yet his grace deserves to be adored for pardoning actual sins. Though
Christ did beat Paul down to the earth with that miraculous light and voice
which he heard, yet I conceive he had not beat him out of his Pharisaical
righteousness, had not another light discovered this woeful sin of his nature,
which makes the unspotted blameless Pharisee cry out and confess, In me, that
is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. Before there was no evil, now
there is no good: Thus I agree (as I said before) with Mr. Shepherd; if a man
(like Paul whom he mentions) have trusted to his own goodness, duties, honest
conversation, righteousness, and here have found his rest; if ever God show
mercy to such a one, then in the first stroke of Conviction, he rips up this
Monster; he shall need no more, I warrant him, to make him change his thoughts,
and make him see the need of another righteousness, and a strong Redeemer.

Thirdly, God may let the same corruptions of which he was convinced at first,
and which caused those fears and sorrows, to be working again, putting forth
themselves in strong motions, the feeling of which does almost sink his heart,
he thinks to Hell now he must go, for he finds his lusts are too strong for
him; though he has smarted for them, and thought he should never have any
thing more to do with them, yet now he finds his heart is naught, vile, wicked
as ever, and begins to despair; it may be in his struggling with his lusts, he
flabs, is foiled, if not carried away as before, and this kills him.

Fourthly, God may let more corruptions loose, that is, to be inwardly working,
that the man can see nothing but corruption, and cries out, he was never so
bad: Sin taking occasion by the Law, wrought in me all manner of coneupiscence,
Romans 7.8. Luther found temptations to all sins but Covetousness: Paul felt all
manner of Concupiscence: a common thing for Christians under the work to cry
out, they were never worse, never so bad.

Fifthly, God shows no acceptance of his duties, lets him find no peace or
quietness by them; but Conscience is still roaring at him, drawing up bills of
indictment against him still, charging him with fresh sins, which it may be he
had forgotten, or does still commit, so that the Soul finds no rest.

Sixthly, The Lord may and does many times withdraw his assistance unto duties,
that the man cannot pray nor mourn as before; is not so lively, but grows more
dead and blockish, hard hearted, as he conceives and feels himself. God is free
in his assistance and influences, he is not bound to give them; while the man
could pray and relent in prayer, his heart tender and mourning, he had some
hopes; but now his eyes are dry, his heart hard, cannot relent, now all is
naught; this cuts off all his hopes, and now must perish.

Seventhly, The Spirit sets home this Doctrine with authority, so that there is
no opposing, Without Christ there is no salvation: He that believes not is
condemned already, John 3.18. He that has the Son has life; he that has not
the Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. Thou think thou have this and that,
which will speak well for thee: Have thou Christ? If a Christless Soul, have
you what you will else, the wrath of God abides on thee, John 3. ult. Such
words are set home with that life, that there is no gainsaying: the Soul must
look out for a Savior, else all will be naught.

More possibly may be added, but I think these are the Heads, be they more or
less, by which the Spirit does usually drive the Soul out of it self. Some
Christians experience some of these, some more of them, some fewer: no matter
how many of them, or how few, if the Spirit uses any of them, they shall do
the work he intends.

For the effects of this work of the Spirit, what follows upon it, I shall
briefly touch them, but make no use of it, for the reason I gave in my former
Head.

First, The good opinions man had of himself are now confuted; the high
thoughts of himself are taken down; he sees now his money is but brass, not so
good: How highly did Paul value his privileges, his Pharisaical righteousness,
before Christ came to this work? What a low esteem had he of them all, after
this work that now we are upon? Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. thus it is with all true
Converts: had the man any opinions in doctrien proud and high, they were never
so confuted as now: did he cry up the great Diana of Liberum arbitrium, as most
do, [and we grant it to be Liberum, when the Son has made it free] now he
calls it Servum arbitrium, as Luther did, Jansen. Augustine. tom. 2. l. 3. c. 5.
p. 182.
and blessed Austin long before him, as Jansenius in his excellent Work does
manifest in several places, and says, he knows not what that new Writer means
(he does not name him) who says, Nomen servi arbitrii was never heard of in
the Catholic Church for fifteen hundred years; when as he makes it clear by
his quotations out of Austin, that he had called it so several times. Conses.
l. 8. c. 5.
Blessed Austin was not the man alone who complained of his Ferrea Voluntas;
here are others with him who feel it as well as that blessed Saint did. Had
the man slight thoughts of imputed righteousness, did he jeer at it as some
have done, and do still? his thoughts are changed, he is now convinced of such
a necessity of a perfect righteousness, that now imputed righteousness is the
most precious Doctrine of the Gospel, the very life blood of a Christian: the
Spirit has so disputed with him in this work of selfemptying, that now all the
Arguments in the Jesuits College he scorns them; he has sound it, felt it,
Lord, if thy free Grace do not save me, my free will I am fure will damn me:
Surely in the Lord (not in my self) have I righteousness and strength; in him
only must I glory, Isai. 45.24, 25.

Secondly, The second effect is this: by this work of the Spirit there is made
a further and fuller conviction of a man's misery. God drives the nail home to
the head: he was convinced of a miserable state before, but now it is confirmed
with a witness: for though by the former conviction he saw himself to be bad,
yet not so bad, it may be, but he might have some good: he thought he could do
something to help himself, set some good works against his bad ones; but now he
sees he was mistaken; he is convinced with Paul, In me (that is, in my flesh)
dwells no good thing, Romans 7. He does not say, there dwells but a little good,
but no good; he did not think he had been so wicked, so vile, void of any thing
that good is, though he had read, The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. yet he did not believe the Text to be true, till
his own heart became a Comment upon Gods Text, and proved it.

Thirdly, Now those Qualifications mentioned in the Gospel, Luke 19.10. weary
and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. are known experimentally: others can prate of
them, but this Soul feels them: Laden he is with the burden of his guilt, and
woeful wicked heart, a burden too heavy for him, Psalm. 38.4. The man labors
also under this, would fain get rid of his load, but he finds all is labor in
vain, no ease, no rest comes, but undone he is; not withstanding all the duties
he has done, or can do, now he is lost: though in his first conviction he saw
he had gone astray from God, and was going to hell, yet he thought he could
find the way home to God again by the compass of his own good duties,
repentance, and reformation; the new and living way he knew not, nor thought
there was any need of it: but now he sees he is bewildred, quite lost: when he
has walked a great while, he sees the Lake of hell fire before him still; a
way to hell he can find, but no way to God: Satan that Lion roars, Conscience
that affrights him in this Wilderness where he is wandering; and what an
afflicted condition that is, lost Souls experience.

Fourthly, Now is the Soul ready to listen to any one who shall direct him to
get out of this misery in which he feels he is involved: now the news of a
Savior is welcome, the voice of the Gospel is pleasant; now propound the
terms, say what you will, only save me from my sin and misery, and I shall
willingly accept of a Christ; the Soul now is rightly prepared for Christ. It
is a practice in some Towns, so long as the poor in the Parish have any thing
of their own in their houses which is money-worth, (except a bed or some such
thing) they will not take them into their Collection; but let them make money
of what they have, and maintain themselves with that, or make it over to them,
they must be poor indeed, before they come into their Collection. It is a truth
I am sure here, so long as the Soul has any thing money-worth, that it thinks
is worth, as Paul did, Phil. 3: as it will not come to Christ (so in this
differs from many who are willing enough to burden Towns, though they have
something of their own) so neither will Christ take them into his Collection,
or rather relief, for he collects nothing, he has fullness enough to relieve
all the poor of his Flock; but poor they shall be before he will take them. So
long as the Prodigal could common with the Hogs, fill his belly with husks, he
would not go home; he was first brought to the starving point: So it is with
Souls, if they can fill themselves, or find any sustenance from their husky
duty, they will not go home, through pride, or shame; but when brought to
starving, stay now Christ, born in Bethlehem, or house of bread: And is that
living bread becomes precious? Thus John has done his work, that is, To make
ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. Here we find this Soul, thus
far it is come, it is prepared for the Lord.

No, says holy Hooker and Shepherd, there is something else required to a true
preparation. For Mr. Hooker, though I had heard of his Doctrine, yet I had not
read his Book before I had read Mr. Shepherd, and had seriously considered him:
I see both the Father-in-law Mr. Hooker, with his Son-in-law Mr. Shepherd, go
both the same way, yet Mr. Shepherd writing last has done it more fully, Mr.
Hooker not putting forth his Book himself as I conceive: therefore I shall
attend Mr. Shepherd, especially being I wrote to him about it, and have his
Letter in answer by me.

Let us see then whither we have brought the Soul: the Spirit of God has
convinced it of its sinful, undone, miserable condition, has made it
acquainted with fears and sorrows rising from that Conviction, has beaten it
out of its self-confidence and self-righteousness, it is very poor in its own
eyes, he has made it willing, or not unwilling to be divorced from its sins
and lusts, glad to take Christ upon any terms, so it may have him: What is
next? Faith in Christ; close with him, poor Soul, say I, take him upon those
terms the Gospel tenders him, which thou say, and that truly, thou do
heartily submit to, and think it is the best bargain that ever thou made.
This Doctrine I dare preach to thee.

No says Mr. Shepherd, between those preparations and Faith in Christ, there
comes in one more, to make up sound preparation. What is that I pray? The Soul
in that condition must lie under God, to be disposed of as he please; quietly
contented to lie still at his feet, p. 125, 143, 150. But I pray what mean you
by this? That is, It must have no sinking discouragements, no secret
quarrelling, but content, quiet, though God will never work grace, never
manifest grace, never pity it, never help it, never succor it, never give it
his Love, p. 140, 154. In one word, says Mr. Thomas Hooker, if the Soul be
rightly humbled, it is content to bear the state of Damnation: Souls
Humiliation, p. 112. This then is another requisite to right preparation for
Christ, So Mr: Hooker Souls Humil. p. 145. expresses it plainly. p. 112.
that the Soul so prepared, as I have mentioned, be content to be without
Christ, and bear the state of damnation, if God will have it so. These holy men
tell us of damned Saints, what else to call them I know not: The Soul before it
comes to Christ has no goodness at all, nothing that we can call
Sanctification or Grace in them, by way of habit, these men acknowledge: yet
here I think is an Act, and a high one too, of Grace (if it must be by the Word
requiring it) before the Soul has Faith in Christ; such a subjection to the
holy Will and Sovereignty of God, that if he will deny it the greatest good the
rational Creature is capable of, and inflict upon it his dreadful wrath to
eternity, the Soul is quiet, contented, well satisfied with his pleasure. Can
any man call this any other but Grace, and it must be performed also from a
habit of Grace? Mr. Shepherd does not tell us this is wrought by actual grace,
without a sanctified habit. When Aaron heldhis peace, Levit. 10.3. David was
dumb, Psalm. 38.9. I think they did manifest Grace in their quiet subjection to
Gods Justice and Sovereignty: But what petty nothings were their trials, unto
this which the convinced Soul is now called to, and yet must have no Grace.
Either Nature or Grace must do this: not Nature I am sure, then it must be
Grace; and yet no Faith, no Christ, no sanctified habit of Grace in it.

Content, quiet, well apayed, satisfied, words which both these Worthies
express their minds by, are words that carry much in them, they imply not only
a non-murmuring, and devil-like fierceness flying out against God, as Mr.
Shepherd phraseth is, but they carry in them abundance more, something that is
positive; as will appear by both these Worthies.

Mr. Shepherd, p. 147. makes this his second Argument to prove his Position,
Why art thou quiet and still when God denies thee any common mercy? Is it not
because the Lord will have it so? Now look, as we say of him that hates sin as
sin, that he hates all sin: so he that is meekned with Gods good pleasure in
any one thing, because of his good pleasure in it, upon the same ground will at
least desire to stoop in every thing, etc. So if God will deny thee mercy, etc.
[By the way note, this must not be any grace, though the Soul has this frame
of heart, for he speaks of one as yet not come to Faith.] Now in this Argument
of his we shall find there is something positive, and more then a
non-murmuring. There are many outward common mercies which God has given to
others, and those of his own people, but denied them to me, which I could be
glad of, and think I should bless him if I had them; yet I do not only not
murmur against God, and quarrel with him, because I am denied them, but I am
very well pleased, quiet, and content with his Will in denying them; a
positive, quiet, well-pleased frame I feel: upon what grounds I am so content,
whether only upon the account of his Sovereignty, that I do not now express,
but may speak to it when I come to answer his Argument.

Mr. Hooker, p. 139, 140. showing us how the humbled Soul answers the Devils
Objections: I shall only give the sum of one or two; not willing to transcribe
all. 1. Satan objects, Do thou think to get mercy from the Lord, when thine
own Conscience dogs thee? Go to the place where thou have lived, to the
chambers where thou lie, see thy abominations: God hears not the prayers of
such vile sinners. The Soul answers, I have denied God, and he may well deny
me; and if the Lord will cast me away, and reject my prayers, I am content.
But, says Satan, this is not all, for God will give thee over, and leave thee
to thy self, thy lusts and corruptions, thy end will be worse then thy
beginning: thou shall call, and cry, and be overthrown; God will leave thee to
thy corruptions and lusts, they shall prevail against thee, thou shall fall
fearfully to the wounding of thy Conscience, scandal of the Gospel, and the
reproach of thine own person. To this the Soul answers, If the Lord will give
me up to my base lusts, leave me to my sins, and I fall one day, yet let the
Lord be honored, let not God loose the praise of his power and justice, and I
am contented if God leave me. [Blessed God, what Divinity is this?] But, Satan
replies, when God has thus left thee to thy sins, he will break out in
vengeance against thee, and get praise from that proud heart of thine. The Soul
answers, If the Lord do come in judgment against me, I am contented. Has the
blessed God left no other way to answer the Devil but this? Did the the Saints
of God, of whom we read in Scripture, answer the Devil only thus? We read of
some that have been under their temptations, but I remember not these answers.
But by what we read in Mr. Hooker, we may observe, this is not a bare
non-murmuring, a mere negative, but here is a positive habitual frame of
contentation to be left under the power and dominion of lusts, and at last to
be damned. One comfort is, I never read this Divinity in Gods Book, nor in any
other Divine but these: their holiness and abilities I do much reverence, but
their Doctrine is dreadful: we will go to the Scales of the Sanctuary and weigh
it. To follow therefore Mr. Shepherd, who p. 140. tells us of a double
resistance.

First, A resistance of the Lord by a secret (yea, and open he might have said)
unwillingness that the Lord should work grace. This resistance I acknowledge,
men openly manifest; and grace is that which God has commanded, it is his
revealed Will, and our duty: to resist grace, is to resist his will indeed.

Secondly, A resistance of the Lord by sinking discouragements, and a secret
quarrelling with him, in case the Soul imagines he will not come to work grace,
or manifest grace; they are not quitely content to lie at his feet, though he
will never give them his love, p. 150, 154.

Under favor, I conceive here is a fallacy, (...), in stating of the question.
For

1. Sinking discouragements, if God will never give Grace, but damn me.

2. Murmuring, and devil-like to grow fierce against God (as he phrases it.)

3. Contentedness, quietness, to be well apayed, satisfied, though God never
give me his love, but give me up to my lusts and damn me: these things, I say,
differ: so that it is a plain fallacy, for Plures conclusiones proponuntur, pro
una. But I will goon: For methods sake I will consider.

1. The Scriptures Mr. Shepherd quotes to prove it, and they will most shake
us, if his Scriptures carry his sense.

Secondly, His Reasons to prove it.

Thirdly, The experiences of Christians which he produces.

The Scriptures which he makes use of to prove his Position are these, Levit.
26. 41. (this he quotes more then once, being his chief) Lament. 3.22, 29, 30.
Micah 7.9. 1 Pet. 5.6. For the Parable of the Prodigal, upon which Mr. Hooker
grounds his Doctrine, before I had read his Book, and knew that to be his Text,
I had framed one Argument against Mr. Shepherd out of it, nor do I at all
shrink from it by what I read in him: For that I must desire the Reader to stay
till I come to my Anasceuastick part. For Mr. Shepherd's Texts, I hope the case
of Israel at that time, was the case of the Soul in question, viz. Israel was
now under the work of Conversion, turning home to God, who had called so often;
and now being under this work, and being made willing to come home to God,
Israel was or must be content, quiet, well apayed and satisfied, though God
will not receive him, never give him his Love nor Grace, but leave him under
the dominion of his lusts, and damn him eternally: those Texts must prove this,
else there is a fallacy near to Ignoratio elenchi: for the Texts do not
conclude, the question if they conclude not this.

But how shall we interpret Texts? must we not consider the coherence, observe
what the Spirit is treating about, and interpret it accordingly, pro materia
subjecta.

Now let us consider all the Scriptures quoted out of the old Testament, we
find Levit. 26. God having given his Statutes to Israel, makes the Sanction of
his Law, by Arguments suitable to a rational Creature. 1. He promises good
things if they will be obedient. 2. He threatens them with heavy judgments if
they will be rebellious; one whereof is most insisted upon in this latter part
of the Chapter, and the verse 41. quoted refers to this judgment, the
scattering of them among the Heathen their enemies: yet verse 44. When they
were among their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them,
etc. In the other Texts quoted they were under these judgments threatened.

Whence we observe:

First, All these evils threatened, and under which they lay, were external,
bodily, temporary: read the Chapter in Leviticus, read the Lamentations from
the first Chapter to the Texts quoted, and observe other verses in the same
Chapter, the next verse to the 29. which carries the fairest proofs, if the
question were the same, 30, 31, 32, 33, etc. so the verses after 39. which is
his other proof, read from the 29. verse to the 55. verse, where the matter
they complain of was not the question in hand, but external judgments, under
which they were humbled: yet we find in the 24. verse, this Soul saying, The
Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore will I hope in him, and raises up
it self by sweet promises afterward: And is this the frame of them who are
under the state of our question? So Micah 7. speaks of outward judgments, as
the eighth verse shows, which goes immediately before the verse Mr. Shepherd
quotes; and in the seventh verse the Soul could say, My God will hear me: quite
contrary to what Mr. Hooker and Mr. Shepherd have said: To that in 1 Peter 5 6.
the Apostle in verse 5. had been exhorting Believers unto humility, be clothed
with it: this respects the humble carriage of Christians one to another: he
gives a reason to force his exhortation, For God resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble: upon this follows an Illation, Therefore humble
your selves, etc. What was the question in the fifth verse upon which this
Therefore depends? Not the question in hand, I am sure: then how does it prove
the question? Learned Gerhard gives the Connection thus: The Apostle repeats his
exhortation to humility, and confirms the argument, which he brought to force
his exhortation, from the power of him that requires humility, and promises he
will exalt the humble. God has power enough to resist the proud, and exalt the
humble; therefore, be clothed with humility: This Connection the illative
Particle (...), therefore, proves, which shows this sencence is deduced from
the former: Thus he, Mr. Dicson makes the words the fourth and fifth reasons to
humility and mutual submission. The fourth, This humility and mutual submission
required, does not so much respect men as God, who has commanded this
submission. The fifth, The power of God ought to move you: So that I can see
nothing in this proof: suppose the illative particle, therefore, were left out;
take the exhortation absolutely, what is it to humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God? This, when the Lord has awakened you, made you willing
that Christ should take away your sin, (and so give you grace) must needs
follow: yet now you must be content, well apayed, satisfied, though he will
give you no grace, but give you up to your lusts and damn you: This is the
humbling of our selves according to Mr. Shepherd: I believe the Apostle Peter
never thought of such an interpretation when he wrote it: and blessed be God,
we have as a mighty God, so a gracious God, in Christ, to deal with.

Secondly, We observe, as these were external, bodily and temporary judgments,
so the people were actually under them; they were not under the threats of the
judgments, but the judgments themselves. So Levit. 26.41. expresses it
plainly, when they were in the Land of their enemies, If then their
uncircumcised hearts were humbled, and they accept of the punishment: What
punishment? This their scattering amongst their enemies. So in the Lamentations
and Micah: Make this agree with our question, the Soul must be actually given
up to its lusts, and actually damned.

Thirdly, They were such evils, that though they were actually under them, yet
they might have union with God, and live in communion with him; though
strangers in an enemies Land, yet not strangers to God. Thus we read of
precious Saints in captivity, Daniel, etc. So, The Lord is my portion, says my
soul, Lam. 3.24. My God will hear me, Micah 7.7. God would be a Sanctuary to
them, Ezekiel. 11.16. though scattered among Heathen: promise, He will not cast
them away, nor abhor them, Levit. 26.44.

Fourthly, These evils were means in the hand of God to bring them home to God;
when they tasted the fruit of their rebellion, it helped to bring them to
repentance: in a strange Land they learned acquaintance with God, when they
were strangers to him in their own Land: thus Ephraim found it, or shall find
it, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Thus God promises, Isai. 27.9.

Fifthly, They were such evils as they had gracious promises of deliverance
from them; and they have been in part (when the two Tribes, and a few of the
ten Tribes with them, returned) and shall be to the life fulfilled, when the
time of their ingrafting comes: Romans 11.15, 24, 26. When the Lord shall set his
hand. Again the second time, To recover the remnant of his people, Isai. 11.11.
When Judah and Israel shall be joined one to another in one stock, Ezekiel. 37.16,
17.

Sixthly, It is very true, many of those Saints did humble themselves, and
accept of that punishment, Daniel 9. Ezra 9.13 Nehem. 9.33. And as they, so
have many of the people of God, either attained or labored to attain a humble,
submissive, quiet spirit under such evils as these Texts speak of; not
quarrelling or murmuring, (if they do, they repent of it, are ashamed) they can
sometimes kiss the rod, put their mouths in the dust, profess it is mercy they
are living men, that God may deal worse with them; yet not in Hell, causes
blessing of God in all conditions.

But, I pray, apply these Texts and these things to our question in hand, where
the judgments are internal, eternal; where can be no union nor communion with
God; no means to bring home the Soul to God; from which no deliverance, when
actually under them, as they were, of whom those Texts speak, whence I see not
how these Texts prove the thing in hand.

Now I come to his Reasons, though one clear Scripture had been more then all
his Reasons.

First, Else the Lord should not advance the riches of his Grace: the
advancement of Grace cannot be without the humiliation of the Creature.

Answ. Cannot the Lord advance his Grace, unless the Soul now enlightened,
convinced, broken with fears and sorrows, emptied of it self, apprehending
nothing but hell and damnation in it self, having neither money to give, nor
hands to work, and finding nothing to fly to, but the riches of Mercy, and
freeness of Grace, with the Redemption of Jesus Christ, which now the Soul
prizes at a high rate; cannot the Lord (I say) advance his Grace now, unless
this Soul be contented to have no Grace, no Love of God, but be damned for
ever? Has the Lord said so? then I shall believe it: To what end was all that
work of the Spirit? was it not to make the Soul quite undone in it self, that
it might see, nothing but Grace and Christ can save it? Let us call to
thousands and ten thousands of Saints, who never heard of this Doctrine till
these two Worthies preached it: Let us call to those, who reading it are much
troubled, and cannot yield to it as true, that God requires it, what do you
feel within you? Is it not Grace, the free, rich Grace of God glorious in your
thoughts? Do you not cry out, Grace, Grace, as those Zech. 4.7? Are not the
riches of his Grace, and Redemption of his Christ, the Jachin and Boaz of thy
Soul, the pillars that bear it up, as they did Solomon's Porch? 1 Kings 7.21.
which if taken away, all thy hopes and comforts come tumbling down, as the
house upon the Philistines heads, when Sampson took away the pillars of it:
Speak, O you troubled, wounded Christians, whose hearts have sunk at the
reading of this Doctrine, do you not advance, and labor every day to advance,
and think you can never advance enough this freeness of his Grace, with the
Righteousness and Redemption of his dear Christ? Are not these wonderful in
your eyes? Blessed be God we have our senses, our feeling, our experience of
these things; yet we cannot tell how to be content without Gods Love, to be
given to our lusts, and damned eternally. Does not God advance his Grace, when
we feel we cannot live, but are miserable, undone, damned, worse then Toads
without it? We can never advance the riches of his Grace enough we do
acknowledge; therefore we desire to see our own vileness more and more daily,
that we may more speak the praises of this rich Grace. If God does not advance
the riches of his Grace in this way I have mentioned, I wish he had told us how
God does it: though we are poor weaklings, and fall short of that measure of
Grace he had, yet we shall set our sense and feeling against his lines, unless
he had brought us a word from God, that he cannot advance his Grace, unless his
Creature, after all his preparations of it, be content, quiet, well apayed,
satisfied (words Mr. Hooker several times uses) without his Love, Grace, given
up to lusts, and damned, we shall not believe it.

His second Reason. Else the Lord should not be Lord, and dispose of his own
Grace, but a sinful Creature will have the disposal of it.

Answ. I deny the Consequence. Unless I be content, quiet, well satisfied
without the Lords Grace, he is not Lord of his own Grace: Does Gods being
Sovereign of his Grace depend upon my being content without it?

But I answer secondly, That there is such a Truth, that the Lord is Sovereign
of his own Grace, that he will have mercy ou whom he will have mercy; we must
acknowledge and tremble at it, though we know many men cannot digest it: but to
teach that Sovereignty in this place, to a Soul under this work, brought now up
to the great sense of the want and high prizing of it, I think it immethodical.

To preach it, I say, in the calling of the Soul home to Christ, under the work
of Conversion (which is our question) is no Apostolical preaching; Mr.
Shepherd, nor any other, ever found that in Christ or his Apostles preaching. I
put that question to old Mr. Daniel Rogers, Whether it were the duty of
Ministers to preach the Sovereignty of Gods Grace, to give it where he will,
when we are upon the work of Conversion, or effectual Calling, and the Soul
under that work? He answered, To preach the Sovereignty of his Grace, in
triumphing over all the guilt and vileness of the broken hearted sinner, that
lies under the sense of his sin, is proper preaching of it: This is very true,
but this is not Mr. Shepherd's sense.

How sparing is holy Writ in this great point? but how abundant is it in
setting out his Goodness, Grace, Mercy toward poor sinners, who feel the want
of it, and would gladly embrace it upon his terms?

Let us observe the Apostle in his practical Catechism, the Epistle to the
Romans, when he had opened the state of every man by nature, in his first,
second, and part of the third Chapter, quite outed him, and shown where our
remedy lay, how we came to be justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed,
and reconciliation through his blood, in the end of the third, fourth and fifth
Chapters; and touched the Doctrine of Sanctification in the sixth Chapter; the
spiritual Combat in the seventh Chapter; excellent privileges of Believers in
the eighth Chapter; then indeed upon the occasion of an Objection that might be
made about the Jews, in the ninth Chapter, he opens this Sovereignty: but the
Apostle does not use to preach this to awakened Souls, as Mr. Shepherd does,
and Mr. Hooker, while under the work of Conviction, Compunction, etc.

For Mr. Shepherd's Similitude, which he brings to illustrate his Reason (but
illustration and probation are different things) from a Beggar coming to our
doors, asking alms, and will have what he desires, else he falls a quarrelling
with the Master of the house, draws his knife: What says the Master? Away
proud Beggar, shall I not do with my own what I will? etc.

Laying by this quarrelling, drawing the knife, and so that devil-like
fierceness against God, which Mr. Shepherd mentions, (and which is another
question, this must not be I acknowledge) I shall, with this holy man's leave,
give him a Similitude, which answers the case and Scriptures more aptly then
his does.

For the beggar, if one man does not relieve him, another may, and save his
life. But let us suppose, first, There is but one man that can relieve a poor
man in a miserable, painful, starving condition. Secondly, This rich man calls
this poor man to his door. Thirdly, Promises him, if he will submit to such a
condition, he will relieve him, and save him from perishing. Fourthly, He
commands him to come. Fifthly, Threatens him if he will not come: Now for this
poor man to go and beg at his door, and declare that he does and will submit to
his condition, and to have a servant of the house come and tell this poor
beggar my Master is Lord of his own goods, may do what he please with them, you
must be content to starve and dye: if the beggar quarrels with the servant,
yea, and Master too, I cannot blame him. For the Reddition or Application of
the Similitude, the case is the same; Man has dealt vilely with God, brought
himself into a miserable, undone and damned condition; God has made the man
sensible of this his state, and lies under the burden of it. God, who is rich
in grace, and only able to help this man, calls him to his Son, whom he has
sent to redeem such miserable Creatures, and by Christ he calls him to himself.
Secondly, In calling him, he offers to him, if he will come and submit to his
condition, he will save him from his woeful misery perfectly, give him his Love,
Grace, Pardon, Image, etc. Thirdly, He commands him to come to his Son.
Fourthly, He threatens him with damnation if he will not come Fifthly, He
promises, covenants, and sets seals to his Covenant, that he will do all for
him in the second Head, upon that condition. This man now finds the Lord has
wrought in him a willingness to submit to the condition; oh with all my heart
do I yield, if thou will give me what thou have said. To have a servant now
come and tell me, the Lord is sovereign over his Grace; true, he can pardon,
sanctify, etc. but he will dispose of his Grace where he pleases; you must be
content to have no Grace, but be damned for ever: though it is true, I would not
fly like a Devil against God, nor draw my knife, yet I will quarrel with this
servant, and tell him his Master is of a sweeter nature, and told me otherwise,
bad me come, and promised he would save me, if I did come to his condition,
which I heartily submit to.

Whatever thoughts people have of God while they are filling themselves with
their lusts, and dead in sins; yet when once people come to be awakened,
Conscience roars, people then are apt to have ill surmises and hatd thoughts of
God; the Devil will throw them in fast enough, we had need keep up as good
thoughts of God as we can in the hearts of awakened sinners.

This answer may serve to another kind of argument like this, p. 148. when he
says, It is the greatest pride, when the Soul will be discontent and grow
sullen, because God denies it not small things, but treasures of Grace, Mercy,
Christ, and all that he is worth: This he illustrates from a Beggar that must
have a thousand pounds, etc.

To which I answer: I grant they are wonderful things indeed; but considering
the infinite fullness of himself, and the fullness of Christ's purchase, it is no
more for God to give me them, then to give me the bread I eat every day: God
may give his Grace, Mercy, Love, Pardon, to millions of men more then are in
the world, has been, or shall be; and when he has so done, not one farthing
the poorer. I am the poorer by a penny if I give a penny; less then these will
not serve the turn, our misery is so great. Be they never so great, his sweet
heart intended them; his Christ has purchased them: He has pleased to promise
them, Covenants and Seals to give them upon condition submitted to: He calls
me, commands me to come and take them: He threatens me if I do not: No pride
then at all to be discontent, disquieted without them. Does God call me thus,
command me to seek the lesser things of this world, and threaten me with
damnation if I do not pursue them? The case then is not the same.

In page 147. I find another Argument, I think he intends it for one, and I
would leave nothing untouched, which I see may carry a show of an Argument in
it; it is that which at first I noted: Why art thou quiet and still when the
Lord denies thee any common mercy? is it not because the Lord will have it so?
Now look, as we say, him that bates sin as sin, he hates all sin; so he that is
meekened with Gods good pleasure in any one thing because of his good pleasure,
upon the same ground will endeavor at least to stoop in every thing: So then,
if Gods pleasure be to deny thee mercy, etc.

I answer: If this Argument be well looked into, I think there is a fallacy
appears in it. If you lay it thus, If the Sovereignty of God, in denying me any
one common mercy, be the ground which makes me quiet and still in want of it;
then if Gods pleasure be to deny me another common mercy, upon the same ground
I will still be quiet: So there may be some use of what is added, be that hates
sin as sin, hates all sin; for all sin is of the same nature, transgression of
the Law, enmity against God: So all common mercies, as common, are of the same
nature; none argue special love: But this Argument speaks not ad idem for your
Argument runs from common mercies to saving special mercies; these are not as
sins qua, sins of the same nature, enmity to God; but these differ infinitely
quite of another nature: So that to argue, because I am quiet with the will of
God in denying me common mercies, ergo, I must be quiet, contented with the
will of God, though he denies me special mercies, will never give me his Love,
Grace, but damn me: This is (...), a fallacy.

Secondly, It seems by this Argument, that all the reasons, or the only reason,
why we are content, and ought to be content when God denies us any common
mercy, is the sovereignty and pleasure of God; for this is the reason
expressed, and none but this. That the pleasure of God does much, and ought to
do much among Christians, I deny not; but that this must be the sole reason, as
if no other reason should quiet us, I understand not this Divinity: With his
leave, I shall give him other reasons why I am content and quiet, though God
denies me some common mercies, since it is his pleasore freely to give me
himself, his Christ, his Love, his Grace, his Pardon and Peace, which are sure
mercies; therefore I desire to be quiet and content, though he has denied me
many common mercies; and let me say this (with honor yet) to that holy man,
that the will being a most hungry appetite, and good, being the meat that must
satisfy it; and this is Gods own work to make the faculty: then if the will be
hungry, and sharp set after any common mercy, that it tastes as good, and very
good for it, then if the temptation blows hard, it will be impossible to make
that man quiet, contented, but either he must enjoy that particular good, or he
must find some other good counterpoizing, nay, overcoming and conquering that
good, and what is that but God himself in Christ. Sovereignty does not satisfy
the appetite, in it self simply, it is no good for the will to possess; but the
love of the Sovereign God, which gives the will union with God, this is
heavenly food for this appetite; and this will do, when this good God will give
out himself to the Soul, and make the Soul know it.

What the Sovereign God might have done with his Creature I deny not; but it
has pleased him graciously to deal with man as a rational Creature, giving him
commands, and does many times give this reason for obedience, I am Jehovah; but
yet withal, he gives Argumeuts suitable to the will; there is good for it. How
often is that Argument used to israel, That it may go well with you and your
Children? How many promises of good? How many threats of evil, from which the
will flies? Then fly from disobedience. Let us observe the twelfth of the
Hebrews; what Arguments the Spirit of God does give to quiet Christians under
afflictions, want of common mercies: Is Sovereignty the only Argument there
insisted upon? Search and we shall find others, and but little of that, if any
thing at all: Verse 3. an example from Christ our Lord and Head what he
suffered: ver. 6. the love of God, Whom he loves: ver. 7. Childrens fare, He
deals with you as Sons: ver. 8. Else Bastards: ver. 9, 10. Our own fathers
after their own pleasure; here was a fit place to have added, so God for his
pleasure, his sovereignty: but the Spirit opposes, God chastises us for our
profit, to make us partakers of his holiness. These are all quieting Arguments;
so that for my part I do not find the Scripture speaking after Mr. Shepherd's
manner, who has infisted upon nothing but only Sovereignty, except his first
Argument.

I find no more Reasons in Mr. Shepherd; there is one which I have in my mind,
which may carry some strength in it; I will set it down, though I see it not in
these holy men's Books, and make their case as good as I can.

Either you must murmr and quarrel against God, if he will not give you his
Love, and Grace, but damn you: or else you must be content, though God will
never give you his Love and Grace, but damn you.

But you must not murmr and quarrel; ergo, you must be content.

To this Argument I answer: I deny the disjunction: there is no necessity that
one of the parts must be true: or I deny both the parts of the Proposition; for
I would neither murmr, quarrel, or fly out against God; nor will I study to
be content, to be given up to my lusts, denied Grace, and be damned.

Quest. If you ask me, what will you do then?

Answ. I answer: The Lord has made me see what a finful and miserable Creature
I am in my self, and has made me feel how unable I am to help my self, being
nothing in my self but sin, misery, rebellion, emptiness, wants: the Toad more
happy; yet in the Gospel I see he has revealed his Chaist: he offers Christ to
me, calls me to receive Jesus, who delivers me from wrath to come, 1 These.
1.10. Who gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, 2 Tit. 14. From
this present world, Gal. 1.4. Christ himself calls me to come, Isai. 55.1.
Revel. 22.17. tells me, he will not shut the door against me, nor cast me out
if I do come, John 6.37. He promises if I do come I shall not perish, John
3.16. Gods will and command is, that I do believe in him, John 3.16. 1 John
3.23. It is obedience to believe in him, Romans 1.5. and 16.26. Obedience of
Faith. He threatens me, if I believe not, with his wrath, John 3. last. When I
was in my infancy he took me into Covenant with my godly Parents, and powered
clean water upon me in my baptism, Ezekiel. 36.25. signifying and sealing up to
me the blood of Christ with his benefits, if I answer the condition of his
Covenant.

Now his offer I most thankfully accept, his call I willingly answer, his
promise and covenant I adore, his command I desire to obey, and do obey, his
threat I dread and tremble at, his institution of baptism I look not on as an
empty thing, a vain fancy; but sticking to my Fathers Covenant, and heartily
willing to answer the condition; I with humble reverence plead that Covenant
and my baptism with God, what he then engaged. I know God is Sovereign of his
Grace, but how that comes under, offers, calls, commands, threats, promises,
seals, I cannot learn; therefore I take up my thoughts about what is revealed,
and what is my duty, neither quarrelling with the Sovereignty of God, nor
studying at all how to be content to be damned.

Let not the Reader be troubled, though I mention my godly Parents with my
baptism; thinking thus, alas, my parents were not godly, I cannot make use of
my baptism: Yes, yes, Christian, thou have room to plead it, make use of it,
though they were not so; the force of it deponds upon Gods institution. I
marvel what use Mr. Hooker and Mr. Shepherd would have us make of baptism,
(they being so strong for Infant Baptism) if we must study to be content to be
damned.

His third Head is drawn from his observations of Christians, the experiences
he has seen, when Christians have been brought to his point, to be content and
quiet without Grace, without Gods Love, and so be damned: He says, p. 140. I
have seen it constantly, that many a chosen vessel never has been comforted
till now, and ever comforted when now. So p. 154. The Lord has kept you (and
it may be a long time) from sight and sense of his peculiar love: one would
wonder why the Lord should hide his love so much from those to whom he does
intend it; the great reason is, because there is in many a heart desirous of
his love, and this would quiet them if they were sure of it: but they never
came to be quieted with Gods will, in case they think they shall never partake
of it.

So then it seems, if they did come to be quieted without his Love, they should
have the sense of his Love, because the great reason that hindered was removed.

I wonder that Mr. Shepherd, being not only a very holy man, but so able a
Divine, should let such a Logical fault slip, and not take notice of it; if you
ask what? Ignoratio Elenchi: I pray, what is our question? What is the Head
that now he is upon? It is the Souls humiliation and preparation for Christ: he
is not come at Faith yet in Christ till the Soul comes to this. Hence Mr.
Hooker tells us, p. 145. Before this no Faith can be infused into the Soul: so
far as the heart is from this contentedness, to be at Gods dispose [what that
is, read p. 112, 140.] so far it is from true preparation for Christ. Here Mr.
Shepherd gives us the experiences of Christians who were ever comforted now,
and never comforted till now: So again; now they come to have the sense of his
Love: this he has seen constantly, he says. But, I pray are comforts and the
sense of Gods love the same? the next things to preparation for Christ? I
thought (and I am sure so thought Mr Shepherd) that between preparation and
comfort, union with Christ (the ground of comfort) should have come in: Is it
because you are weary and laden, therefore, Rest? Mat. 11.23.
Coming to Christ comes in between weariness and rest. But Mr. Shepherd, if he
will prove his question by experiences which he has constantly seen, must
prove, that he ever saw Christians were rightly prepared for Christ, and never
rightly prepared for Christ till they came to this contentedness, to be damned
if God will have it so: But his experiences tell us of comforts, and sense of
Gods love: So true it is that, -- Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. We know it
is a long time indeed before many Christians attain to comforts and sense of
Gods love, after they have union with Christ, and that is more then preparation
for Christ. Reverend Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Shepherd, would have done well to have
satisfied the Church of Christ, whether in their own experiences upon their own
hearts, they found this work they preach to others, and were assured of it,
upon infallible grounds, they had no Grace till then. I knew a woman of Mr.
Shepherd's Church, who told me, as Mr. Shepherd writes, that she could never
come to settled comfort, till she came thus to be content without Gods love,
(no doubt but a man may trust his heart when it tells him so:) I knew the woman
several years before as good a Christian as when she told me this: but at that
time there was no talk of being contented to be damned, if God will have it so,
as now she had told me: believe their hearts who will, I shall never believe
mine if it tell me so. Moreover, if Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Shepherd, had found
this in themselves, in their very first Conversion, they must prove, that God
must go the same way in all whom he converts, from Divine Authority; else, as
said Chap. 1. It is tyranny, to tie up every Christian to the way God wrought
in me, that so he must work in them. Once more: Mr. Hooker tells us, without
this work there can be no Faith, in more then one place; yet in that Piece, put
out in defense of the right of Believers Children to Baptism, he undertakes to
prove, that God works Faith in Infants: But are Infants also contented to be
denied Grace, and be damned, if God will have it so, before God works Faith in
them?

As to quarrelling, discontent, and impatience, if God denies his Love and
Grace; because it shall not trouble us when I come to give my Arguments against
Mr. Shepherd, this being another question, I shall speak a few words here: I
said before, as I will not study how to be content without Grace, and be
damned, so I would not quarrel; impatience with God I will not justify: O no,
I will and do beg pardon of my God; I do admire and adore his Patience and
long-suffering toward me, that he can bear so with my frowardness, it shall be
his eternal praise: But O how hard a thing is it, when Souls are pressed and
oppressed with temptations long and strong, whether from apprehensions of
guilt, wrath, and lie looking and listening for a little favor from God, but
none come; or are pestered and plagued with the perpetual motions of some
imperious lust, that dogs them every day, year after year, long time together;
and though the Soul prays, begs, uses all means, yet can get no relief from
God, who could with as much ease remove it as I can move a finger, and will
not; but here lies the lust striking at the root of Grace, and makes the Soul
question whether there be one spark in it or no: I say, how hard is it now for
the Soul to keep from impatience and quarrelling? Jonah and Jeremiah could
quarrel, Jer. 15.18. and 20.14, 15. for things of less concernment then
damnation, denial of Grace, and Love of God; these were not their questions: If
they so impatient, no wonder though these be, though none should be.

2. Though impatience and quarrelling for want of Christ, the Love of God, and
Grace, be not good, yet if we examine such a person well, we may find a work of
Faith even by this impatience; for does not this impatience arise, because the
will has chosen, and love has set it self upon a desirable object, which
because the Soul cannot obtain as it desires, it grows impatient, being crossed
in that which it chooses and loves? Thus Christ, complete Christ, the Love of
God, Grace, Holiness, are the desirable Objects of this Soul; and because this
Soul cannot enjoy them as it would, therefore it quarrels, and grows impatient,
because it is crossed in its choice and love: But is not there a work of Faith,
where the will has thus chosen Christ, etc? Yea, it seems, the choice of the
will and love are acted to a good degree, for we do not grow impatient for
being crossed in our object, but when the will and affections run out much
after the object: So that though here be an infirmity, yet it is such an one,
as we may gather Grace from it. Treatise of Affections, p. 151.
I remember Mr. Fenner, speaking of Zeal, says, it is the impatient part of
the Affections; and speaking against luke-warmness under that Head, says he,
Thou may pray to God for Grace, to heal thee of thy deadness, but though he
do not heal thee thou can bear it; but if thy affections were so far hereto,
as to be zealous, they would be impatient, thou could never endure it. There
is a difference between this and what Mr. Shepherd has taught us. Thus sure it
will be for any part of redemption, which the Soul is set upon with zeal to
experience; impatience will beapt to move, if the will be long crossed. How
often have we Parents born with our Children in sickness and pain, though they
have been impatient and froward? Alas, the Child is sick, full of pain; And
what is our sweet God? What is our patience to his? but especially when this
impatience is, because the Soul cannot enjoy his Christ, Love, Image and
Holiness, to walk with him?

3. Grant it, that this quarrelling and impatience against God, in denying of
Christ, his Love and Grace, be sinful, and ought not to be; as the poor Soul
will not justify quarrelling, yet if it does overtake the Soul, will Mr.
Shepherd conclude, as it seems he does, with Mr. Hooker, that the Soul is not
rightly prepared for Christ, that sound Faith cannot be infused, till it be
content to be disposed of to Hell, if Gods will be so, though all the
forementioned preparatory works be found, and the will brought to accept the
terms of Christ? For persons that God works upon, when adult, where these are
not found, viz. Conviction of sin, and sense of the evil of sin,
self-emptiness, a lost condition, willingness that Christ should separate
between its soul and sin, allowing the rules I have given before, I will say,
that person is not rightly prepared for Christ; for where there is no
conviction of sin, no fears and sorrows under the sense of the evil of sin,
where no willingness that Christ should separate between the Soul and sin,
where men have righteousness and abilities of their own, I am sure that man
will never take Christ upon Christ's terms; but will they say, though all these
be, and the heart be willing to take him upon his terms (as, blessed be God,
many thousands have felt it, and do find it, though they have found
impatiencies and quarrellings (being denied) too often break out) yet they are
not rightly prepared, but their work is false, erroneous, unsound, because they
find quarrellings and impatience? I would not be the man that should preach
such doctrine; I would throw away my Pen before I would write it, before I
would condemn so many thousands of the generation of sound Believers. To
expunge Job, Jonah, Jeremiah, out of the number of Saints, for their
quarrelling and impatience against God, I dare not, nor other Saints for these,
or other infirmities, supposing they be but infirmities: yet I see Mr. Hooker
has cut off all from Faith and true preparation for Christ, because men have
not attained to a higher pitch then non-quarrelling.

Before I come to the Anasceuastick part, let me set down how the Soul under
this sense of this misery and sin (the sight of the hell he sees in himself)
carries it self.

First, It looks on it self without a Christ and love of God through him, as
the most miserable Creature on the earth; O that I could out change with a
Toad, that I were but in a state so good as that is; real groans, no Rhetorical
strains.

Secondly, It pleads for nothing with God from it self; it can tell God of
nothing but sin and misery; a sink of abomination, that it finds in it self.
Mr. Shepherd, both in his Book, and Letter to me, is often up with this, the Soul
sees it self worthy of no mercy: if that had been all Mr. Shepherd and Mr.
Hooker meant, their Books would never have troubled me nor others, as to the
point of preparation. Merit is a Monster in the Arms of Mercy: how much more
will this Soul say, who sees nothing but a hell in it self? Worthiness of
Mercy is a contradiction; worthiness in us destroys the being of mercy.

Thirdly, Though it cannot bear the least spark of wrath, yet it cannot but
judge and condemn it self, and justify God, what he might do with it, if he
will deal with it according to justice, under a Covenant of works: while it is
about thus to do, sometimes his joints tremble, and coldness, a quivering comes
over the heart, afraid to speak out his words in self-condemning, for fear God
should take his words out of his mouth, and condemn him accordingly out of his
own mouth.

Fourthly, He magnifies God for his patience, that he did not take him long
since in his way of sinning, cut him off, and send him to that place where no
mercy is known; but God had been just. This patience of God affects his heart.

Fifthly, He stands and wonders at that mercy, how God can possibly love such a
one, blot out all his guilt, justify him, that is the strangest word, and
translate him from being the Devils nasty sty, to make him a habitation for his
holy Spirit.

These things are found; but to come to such a positive habitual frame of
Contentation, to have no love of God, no Grace, but to be given up to lusts and
damned, if God will have it so, I dare not own it.

Only here, that I may leave nothing to trouble any tender Christian, when I
say these things are found, my meaning is not, that they are found in all
before grace or union with Christ; for, as I said, some the Lord sanctifies in
their infancy, others he drops into insensibly under the means; the seed of
Grace is cast in, they cannot tell when nor how, but the Lord got into them by
degrees: There may be clearer discoveries of a man's sin, vileness,
loathsomness, after a man is in Christ; as Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall you remember
your ways, etc. and loath your selves. Then, when? Read the 25, 26, 27. verses
before, and so on. Then you shall loath your selves; grows sick of himself; his
stomach turns when he views himself. This is truth.

Secondly, In all these there are degrees; some have had stronger lusts then
others, acting, rebelling, and there is reason they should feel more; though
that which makes the truth in all to be known, is the sense and sight of
original sin, the workings of that in the heart, the woeful defilement it makes
in all a man does, the steam, the vapors that rise from that nasty dunghill;
hence a Christian abominates himself, ashamed to come into the company of
Christians, though none know any thing of these inward motions but God and
himself.

Now then I come to my Argument for the negative part; and before I frame any
Argument, I should move one Question, and desire humbly an answer from these
holy men, had they been living, or from any other Divine, who will maintain
what they have written, it is this: I see Mr. Shepherd is often up with these
words, If the Soul imagines God will never give or manifest Grace: If it thinks
God will never give it his love: My Question is this.

Quest. Ought this Soul prepared thus far, as Mr. Shepherd has laid down, to
entertain such thoughts, admit such imagination, suppositions, If Gods will be
so and so, that will give no Grace but damn? So Mr. Hooker puts these Ifs in
often?

This Question I would gladly be refolved in: I know such thoughts will be apt
enough to rise from our own hearts, and the Devil is not wanting to help us to
them; but ought this poor Soul, now under this work, to admit them, or cast
them out? The man does well or ill in listening to such thoughts, imaginations,
suppositions; to be sure here is no indifferency, in an individual Act also: If
he does well, then it is because the admittance of these thoughts ( I imagine,
I suppose, I think God will never give me his Grace, Love, but will give me up
to my lusts, and damn me) is agreeable to a Word, to the Will of God revealed;
I pray name the Text.

Secondly, If the Soul do well to admit them, how then can the Soul believe the
reallity of God in his offering of Christ, a Jesus, calling of the Soul to him
to embrace him, commanding him to believe in him, and threatening him if he does
not accept him? Can I believe God is in earnest, real, in what he offers, etc.
when at the same time I am bound to think, suppose, imagine, he will never give
me Christ, Grace, Love, but give me up to my lusts and damn me? Let them untye
this knot.

If the Soul does ill in admitting them, and ought to cast them out, then we
need no Argument to oppose this Doctrine, it will fall of it self; and these
two Worthies might have helped poor Souls in chiding them for admitting such
thoughts, and put a better way to answer the Devil into their mouths, then by
that dreadful Divinity (if it be Divinity) Mr. Hooker has taught us, which I
mentioned before. Yet for a few Arguments.

Here I must take the Question into pieces; for I said there was a fallacy in
stating it; to put three different Conclusions for one. As to quarrelling, I
have spoken to that before, so that two remain.

Quest. 1. Whether sinking discouragements under these imaginations and
thoughts, that God will never give me his Love, never manifest or give me any
Grace, be a resistance of Gods Will?

Mr. Shepherd has affirmed it, and therefore preaches Contentation, etc. as
before. This I conceive is a truth, That sinking discouragements under such
thoughts, since God has sent a Savior, and manifests what his will is, by
calling, offering, commanding, promising, threatening, sealing, as before I have
instanced, in this respect they may be said to be a resistance of his Will: but
this will not help Mr. Shepherd, this overthrows his affirmation.

The question then is, What Will does Mr. Shepherd here mean? The Learned have
distinguished of the Will of God (not as if God had more wills then one, as
some would fasten upon us) that is, either the voluntas, signi vel beneplaciti,
which Strangius, following Channier, had rather call voluntas, (...), and
(...); this distinction only has place here for his Antecedent and Consequent;
Absolute and Conditionate will, be they true or false, have no room here.

The will of his pleasure then Mr. Shepherd must mean, yea, and does so express
himself in terms, in several places: but the question again is, How shall we
come to know this Will of his? where is it made known? Learned Rutherford tells
us, Voluntas signi, Exercite. Apolog. p. 202.
respectu sui objecti est propriissime voluntas; nam quod Deus praecipit, vult
and approbat ut rem bonam and sanctam: quod vetat improbat ut malum: and ab
aeterno decrevit, ut illa res sit bona, etiam voluntate beneplaciti and
decernente: ideoque objectum omne voluntatis signi est voti tum voluntate
beneplaciti, etc. What shall we say to Gods Command to Abraham to sacrifice his
Son? If Mr. Shepherd will have us look here for this Will of God, in his
command, promise or threat, then we know where to find it: If these sinking
discouragements under these thoughts be such an object, as the will of his good
pleasure has manifested his dislike by forbidding them, then Mr. Shepherd has
said right; but that Text we never read as yet; so that he must mean only his
secret Will, that we may suppose, imagine, to be his Will, though it be not
known or revealed.

First, But then we desire Mr. Shepherd would direct us to the Text, where any
persons were branded for resisters of Gods Will, when that Will of God was not
known or revealed, or could be known. I think the Word brands them for
Resisters only, who opposed his Will when he had declared it.

Secondly, God has given his Son, sent a Savior, and declared his Will to the
life; all may know it, it is sounded with a loud Trumpet, that I must believe
in him; he declares it by call, offer, command, promise, threat, seal, if I do
not embrace his Son, my Savior and Lord, now I am sure I resist his Will most
wickedly; but if I ought to entertain thoughts, surmises, suppositions, that he
will never give me Christ, and must be content with this will of his, because
(say you) it is possible it may be his will, none know: here is obedience to two
contrary wills: we must set the Will of God at variance with it self. If he
will say, I ought not to surmise so, nor entertain such thoughts or
imaginations, but reject them, and embrace Christ, whom I am called to receive;
I thank him for saying so, for then I shall not have any cause for such sinking
discouragements, and so shall not resist the Will of God by them: these sinking
discouragements, upon such imaginations, are properly a resisting of the Will
of God revealed in the Gospel, as they hinder the Soul from closing with Christ
offered, etc. as before.

Thirdly, If sinking discouragements under these thoughts be a resistance of
Gods Will, then supporting encouragements under those thoughts that God will
never give me his Love, Grace, but damn me, are obedience to his Will: the Rule
of Contraries will help here. Then I request these two Worthies to give us some
of these supporters.

That they do: And what, I pray, are they; Be content and quiet though God will
never manifest Grace, never give you his Love, never pity you, never succor
you, though he will give you up to your lusts, and damn you; yet since he shall
have the glory of his power and justice, you must be content, well apayed,
satisfied. These are the bladders put under our arms, to keep us from sinking
under these discouragements: I fear these bladders are filled with gunpowder,
as Bishop Ridley's friends gave him to him to help him; whether these will help
poor Souls. I much doubt: these Supporters, while we lean on them, prove Spears
rather to run into our very hearts; as he said of the Egyptian Reed, If one
lean on it, it will go into his hand and pierce it, Isai. 36.6. But blessed be
the Lord we know better encouragements. In Isai. 33.14. we read of sinners in
Zion crying out, Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? Who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? It seems they were terrified with these
thoughts: but Mr Shepherd would almost make us believe it were a habitable
place; for sinking discouragements under the thoughts of it, when the awakened
sinner imagines God will thither send him, he calls a resistance of Gods will.
But O thou blessed Saint, who art now got to thy rest in Heaven, is it possible
for a Soul to entertain these thoughts as his portion, and must he set down
contented, and not sink? Sink? yea, sink, and sink, and sink again; Who can
stand under them? What is the wrath of the Almighty become a burden
supportable, that you cry out against sinking discouragements? Because Sampson
could carry a way the gates of Gaza, can every Philistin do it? they would
break any man's back else. Because Christ has carried the gates of Hell for
poor believers, can we bear them, the thoughts of them, and not sink? What
did thou mean, O gracious Saint, to write such words? These thoughts once, a
little while upon occasion of this passage, began to take hold of me; the
little time they lasted, made me a little to understand those words concerning
Christ, Mark 14 33. He began to be sore amazed: And what shall I say, John
12.27. O what did our blessed sweet Savior meet with at that time? by the very
little taste I had a short time, I perceived what was in his Cup: amazed
indeed, and not know what to say; it is impossible any Soul should live under
these thoughts if they seize on him to purpose; unless God will make a Monument
of him, as Spira: but to be without sinking distracting discouragements, let
him that can clear himself from them.

Quest. 2. Whether quiet Contentation under these imaginations or suppositions,
that God will never give or manifest Grace, his Love, but leave the Soul under
its sin, and damn it, be a condition requisite to the right preparing of the
awakened sinner for Christ?

I put both Mr. Hooker and Mr. Shepherd into the same Question; for though Mr.
Shepherd has not put in the word damn, yet he has done that which amounts to
as much; for if God will never manifest or give Grace, never give his Love,
never pity or succor, leave men under sin (all which he has expressed p. 140,
147, 154.) what is next but damning? And Mr. Hooker has expressed it plainly,
with these words, Content, quiet, well apayed, satisfied.

I might have stated the Question, Whether it were a condition requisite to
sound Grace, for a sound Christian at any time? I think as much at one time as
at another: but since both of them have put it under preparation, and Mr.
Hooker has said, there can be no right preparation for Christ, nor Faith,
infused without it, therefore I limit it to the work of preparation.

What I have said to such suppositions and imaginations, the Reader may observe
before. For the Negative I offer these Arguments.

First Argument. That condition which neither Christ himself, nor any of his
Apostles, in their preaching and calling home of Souls to Christ, did ever
require, that condition is not requisite to true preparation for Christ.

But quiet Contentation under these thoughts, that God will never give me his
Love, Grace, etc. but damn me, is a condition that neither Christ, nor any of
his Apostles, required in their preaching and calling home of Souls to Christ:
Ergo, this condition is not requisite; and by consequence ought not to be
preached by any Gospel-Minister.

The Major neither of these holy Men will deny; who will acknowledge easily,
that Christ was faithful in his house as a Son, Heb. 3.6. and so were his
Apostles as his Ministers; they would not omit any thing in their preaching
which was requisite and necessary for sound Conversion: To imagine the contrary
were monstrous impiety.

For the Minor: Let those who will affirm it name the Texts where Christ or any
of his Apostles did ever require this condition; I will put in the Prophets
also; name the Texts I pray: That there are conditions required by Christ, I
grant; not as putting any worthiness in the person, for the conditions make
them see their own vileness and unworthiness, they all tend to this, to make
the Soul willing to embrace him; that is their end, men else will not care for
Christ. Thus we read of weary, laden, Matthew. 11.28. Sick, Matthew. 9.12. Lost, i.
e. sensible of it, they see it, feel it, and know what the state is, for all
are lost in respect of Adam's fall, so were the Pharisees as well as Publicans,
but they were not sensible of it, they could find a way to Heaven, to God, by
their own righteousness and works; Luke 19.10. Thirsty, John 7.37. Revel.
22.17. yea, he comes to Whosoever will, the same verse: if but willing, these
conditions we find; and these conditions may be very well, yea, have been found
in thousands, who never heard of such a condition as we are upon. Where is this
condition expressed, as these I have mentioned, You that are quietly content,
and subject to the Sovereignty or Justice of God, if you think he will never
give you Grace and his Love, never pity you, but leave you to your lusts and
damn you; you who can be content to be at Gods disposal thus, come you to me.
If it be so necessary, that without it no true preparation, no faith (as these
holy men say) then there is as great necessity that Christ and his Apostles had
as clearly expressed it, as those conditions which I have quoted: but I know
nothing in the Gospel like it. Indeed Mr. Hooker thinks yes, and found his Text
in the Gospel, which therefore in the next Argument we will consider.

Second Argument. That condition which is not to be found in Gospel-Converts,
or in the patterns of Gospel-Conversion, that condition cannot be requisite to
true preparation.

But this condition in the Question, is not to be found in any Gospel-Converts,
or patterns of Gospel-Conversion: Ergo, it is not requisite.

The major is true: for a condition so necessary, as without it no faith,
surely we should find it in some Converts; yea, it must be in all. Will these
Worthies say, this condition was found in the Converts in Acts 2. in Acts 8. in
the Jaylour, Acts 16.? I think they will not affirm it; when they cried out,
What shall we do to be saved? Did Paul or Peter tell them, Are you quiet,
content subject to the will of God, in case you think he will not save you, but
damn you for ever, never give you his love? If you be so prepared, then I will
tell you what you shall do to be saved. Here was a fair opportunity for Paul,
and so for Peter, to declare what was requisite to true preparation: but here
we have not the least syllable like it. Whence if what these two Worthies have
preached and printed be right, then though Paul says, Acts 20.20, 27. He had
not shunned to declare all the counsel of God, I shall be bold to say, Paul was
not faithful; for here is a condition so requisite, in their esteem, that
without it there can be no right preparation for Christ, no Faith: and Paul did
not teach the Jaylour, nor Peter his Converts, one syllable of it.

Object. But it is to be found in patterns of Gospel-Conversion, as in Luke
15.19. Where the Prodigal professes he was not worthy to be called a son, make
me a hired servant.

Answ. Very good; this is the Text Mr. Hooker grounds all his discourse and
doctrine upon; let us therefore examine it: Who is meant here by the Prodigal,
I shall not insist upon; whether one that is a Child of God, but has
apostatized from God, and is now returning home to his Father again, as some
Divines, and I think Mr. An. Burges somewhere so expounds it: or whether those
Publicans and Sinners in the first verse, at whom the Pharisees quarreled: I
am sure it cannot be meant, as one of the Ministers in London of late times
(whose name I spare) but if he be living he has cause to be humbled for his
blasphemous interpretation, to make Christ this Prodigal, and so tortured the
whole Parable most abominably, as one of his own Parish, who heard him, and
labored to justify him, told me. But I will not labor in this; only if the
first be meant, then Mr. Hooker's notion fails; for if a Child of God, then he
had faith, and was before prepared, though now he apostatized wretchedly: but I
will yield it, to be meant of a sinners first coming home to God; and for the
preparatory works they are very plain; only for coming to Christ, or to God by
a Mediator, there is nothing of that; what our nature is while under the power
of sin, how delirant, mad, (when he came to himself.) the shifts the Soul will
make before it will come home to God, feed on husks with the Hogs, till ready
to starve, before it will come home: meditation, or consideration of his
Fathers house, resolutions to return, confessions, humblings, self-judgings,
these things are clear; in his self-judgings let us observe what he says, and
how Mr. Hooker paraphraseth upon it. I am not worthy to be called thy son, make
me as one of thy hired servants: upon which Mr. Hooker thus, p. 79. He is
content to be at his Fathers disposing; he does not seek to be his own carver,
and say, if I may be my Fathers Steward, etc. then I will go home: no, if I can
but get into my Fathers house, though it were to be a drudge in the kitchen, I
will dye rather then go away any more. So again, p. 98. He does not say, if I
may have half the rule in the family, I am content to live with you; no now he
is content to be any thing, if he can but get into his Fathers house, etc. This
is the sum, and upon this he grounds his Doctrine. Very good: But I pray let
the Reader observe, though the Prodigal were content to be any thing, scour
kettles in the kitchen, as Mr Hooker says, yet still the Prodigal would be in
his Fathers house, where was plenty of bread, for his starving condition; this
Mr. Hooker acknowledges: Now this is no news, we bless God we can experience
this, how the Soul, in the sense of its vileness, dare not call God Father; to
think of being a Son, it dares not, oh this is too high a condition; will but
the Lord list me among his Servants, take me into his family, that I can but
get within the door, that he will but own me for one of his family-upright
Servants, O what rich mercy will this be, I shall adore it for ever: We know
the meaning of this, but do we read the Prodigal saying thus? Nevertheless,
Father, if thou will not take me into thy house, own me for a hired servant,
though I scour kettles, but wilt shut the door for ever against me, never
pity, never succor me, give me not one bit of bread, but let me lie without
doors in bitter frosty nights, there eat my own flesh, starve and dye; yet
since I have so offended thee, played the Prodigal, I am content, well apayed,
satisfied in bearing thy wrath: This we must read in the Parable, else Mr.
Hooker's dreadful doctrine has no text or foundation to stand upon: and we
bless God it has not; for still it is the Fathers house, and bread the Prodigal
desires, Mr. Hooker acknowledges, and the Text is clear enough; but a
Contentation, to be left in sin, given up to lusts, shut out of doors [Heaven]
and dwell in the everlasting burnings; never to be pitied; no Grace no Love of
God; as these have taught us: not a syllable of this in the Parable.

Third Argument. If the end of God in preparatory works may be, and have been
attained without this condition, then this condition is not requisite. But Gods
end in preparatory works may be and has been attained, without this condition:
Ergo, It is not requisite.

For the Antecedent: What is the end of God in those works? Is it not to make
the Soul to see its need of Christ, and now come up to his terms, and accept
him? Is not this owned by all Divines? Let Mr. Shepherd speak, p. 138. The next
end of humiliation is faith, or coming to Christ: So then in his Answer to the
Question, What measure of humiliation is here necessary? Thus he answers: Look
as so much Conviction is necessary which begets Compunction, and so much
Compunction as breeds humiliation: so, so much humiliation is necessary, as
drives the Soul out of it self to Christ. Very good, then Christ is the
business in all this work.

For the Minor: That this end may be attained, and has been attained without
this condition, I appeal to thousands, and ten thousands of precious Believers,
who never so much as heard of this dreadful condition, till these holy men
printed it. Yea, if men can attain to such high pitches, to be content,
satisfied without the Love of God (I do not mean a careless content, I do not
call that a high pitch) Grace, though given up to lusts and damned, so long as
God has the glory of his power and justice; I think these may be more like,
not to be driven to Christ, then those who cannot endure to hear of content and
quietness without the Love of God, without Christ, without Grace and Holiness:
examine it well, and this condition speaks not one whit of better preparation
for Christ, but a subjection to the Sovereignty and justice of God, if it be
attainable. In order to which I add the next Argument.

Fourth Argument. That condition which is cross to the nature of man as man, to
a Christian as a Christian, cannot possibly be a requisite to Faith, and right
preparation for Christ.

But such is that condition in the question. Ergo.

This is a certain truth which I will justify, that, in all Gods Bible there
is not one duty that God requires of his Creatures, which is contrary or cross
to his Creatures bappiness. Name one. I know the duty of self-denial, relations
goods, liberty, life, honors, name, etc. must all be parted with, when the
truths of the Gospel call for them for Christ: very true; but still I am happy,
for I have God and Christ for my portion. But this condition cuts off all
happiness.

First, It is contrary to man as man. I know God requires many duties contrary
to the corrupt nature of man, so all holiness, all duty is cross; but to
require such a duty as destroys the very nature of man, as he is a rational
creature, it is most absurd to fancy such a duty. Voluntas de necessitate
appetit finem ultimum, Aquin. quest. disput. p. 302, 303.
ut non possit ipsum non appetere. It is determined by a natural inclination to
its ultimate end, that is, blessedness; it cannot but necessarily (not with the
necessity of coaction) desire and court after blessedness: So that it is
impossible for any man to will not to be happy; he must cease to be a rational
Creature in so doing. The Soul then under this work stands convinced without
any contradiction, the will is fully carried after the dictate of the practical
judgment, that in union with God, lies my blessedness; attain but this once, I
have the thing I am so necessarily inclined to; here is my summum bonum, in
union with him who is summum bonum; to enjoy him, love him, delight in him, and
bless him for ever.

But to be content without the Love of God, to be cast out from him and damned
for ever, (which content cannot possibly be without an elicit Act of the will)
is for a man to be willing to be separated from his chief good; make a man will
not to be happy; make a man will the summum malum, the greatest evil that can
befall a rational Creature; things impossible; there is no suspension of the
Acts of the will about its ultimate end Blessedness; will or nill it must: nill
is impossible, then will it must; the will is carried out with the greatest
vehemence that a Creature can be carried out here: while then the will does
necessarily (yet libere says Aquin.) and vehemently court blessedness, at the
same time, it must be contented, satisfied, and what is that but willing? to be
without it: where the will does nolle with the highest vehemence, and that from
a natural necessity also, can there be content, satisfaction, etc?

Object. If you say, though Nature cannot do this, yet Grace can do this.

I answer: First, But there is no Grace yet, for this must be before there can
be any Faith, says Mr. Hooker; it is but a preparation to it, says both he
and Mr. Shepherd.

Secondly, What can Grace do? destroy that which is essential to Man as a
rational Creature, and yet leave him a man, how absurd are these things?

Secondly, This condition is not consistent with a Christian as a Christian:
What is a Christian, but one that being united to Christ, does now live by the
Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. both his life of Justification and
Sanctification? but to be content to be without Christ, without Juflification,
without Sanctification, and remain under his guilt and power of lusts, if Gods
pleasure be to have it so (a strange If, a strange supposition) this is
contrary to the being of a Christian.

Object. But, say you, we affirm, the Soul must desire and choose Christ,
endeavor and labor after him and holiness.

Answ. Very true: but at the same time he must will also to be without him and
holiness, unless you can tell me, how a man can be content, well apayed,
satisfied, without any act of the will; if any act then volition or nolition;
if nolition makes a man content, well apayed, satisfied, then my reason is
gone, and all men's also; if volition, it is the thing I aim at. It is the will
of God, as respecting, or related to such an object, wherewith I am content.

Fifth Argument. That condition, by preaching of which a Minister cannot draw a
Soul awakened under sense of sin to Christ, that condition is not requisite in
that preparation to Christ.

But by preaching of the condition in the question, Ministers cannot draw Souls
to Christ. Ergo, it is not requisite in preparation.

The Major is plain: Gospel Ministers must endeavor to win Souls and draw them
to Christ; they are Ambassadors for him; they woo for him: the Father draws,
and the Soul comes, John 6.44. the Soul comes as surely as if it were drawn
with many Horses and Ropes; yet it comes, there is the freedom: to draw by
coaction of the will, God does not, cannot; so Ministers they must endeavor to
draw Souls: with what Cords is the question? I believe the condition in the
question will not be found to be one; all the former works in preparation did
but tend to this end, to take off that renitency, resistance of the Soul,
whence the Soul would not come, Christ will not force a Match: take the Soul
come to that degree of preparation I have mentioned, and now with all its Soul
it would get a Christ if it could, come to him, ay with all my heart, draw and
I come. I will help draw you, Thou know how thou have played the rebel
against God, now you feel the smart of it: it is true, now you would have
Christ, the Love of God, Grace, these things would cure and ease you; but I
must tell you, God is Sovereign of his own Grace, gives it where he pleases,
and if he will have the glory of his Power and Justice upon you, and deny you
Christ, Grace, Love, and damn you, you must be content, quiet, satisfied, and
willing to be at his disposal as to this point. O how sweetly does this Cord
draw to Christ? it may prove a Cord indeed, but not to draw the Soul to Christ,
(for there is not the least spiritual Logic in it to draw the Souls to Christ)
but to help to hang it: however reverend Mr. Hooker thinks it is the only way
to save from the halter: let those that will try it; blessed be God for the
Cords of the Gospel, of which, I am sure, this is none. Is this the way to
beget good thoughts in the Soul, of God and Christ? that must be one way, if
ever we intend to draw to Christ. This is wooing with a witness, to tell the
Soul this story.

Sixth Argument. That condition which clasheth with the Duties God requires of
his Creature, that condition is not requisite in preparation.

But that condition in the question clasheth with the Duties God requires,
(being actually put, it keeps them from performing their duty.) Ergo, That
condition is not requisite.

The Major is plain enough: People must not be kept from doing that which is
their duty at all times. God calls me to Christ: it is my duty to go to him.
God offers Christ to me: it is my duty to receive him. God commands me to
believe in him: the highest disobedience that can be not to obey. He threatens
me with his wrath if I do not believe: I must be damned then if I do not
believe in him. God promises me, if I believe in him, I shall have his Love,
his Grace, be saved: My duty is to believe his Truth and faithfulness: in my
Baptism God sealed his Promise and his Covenant: it is my duty to make use of
it, to look to my condition under that Covenant, and believe Gods truth,
goodness, faithfulness in it: In all these my duty is to believe, God was real,
that he did not offer, call, command, promise, seal one thing and mean another;
God did not mock me, nor dare I mock him. On the other side, Mr. Shepherd and
Mr. Hooker tell me, it is my duty to be content, satisfied without Christ (for
if I must be content to be without Gods Love, Grace, and be damned, then I must
be content without Christ) if God will have it so: But, say I, Gods will
appears contrary, he tells me my duty plainly in all those Heads. There is an
imagination, a supposition, set against as plain duties as any in the Bible.

Some thing of this Argument I wrote to Mr. Shepherd; his answer to it is this;
I do not think that any man in humiliation for sin is to be carelessly content
and quiet (nor did I so understand Mr. Shepherd) that God should dispose of him
how he will, as caring for nothing, but humbly and meekly, quiet and content he
should, as unworthy of any thing (had worthiness been the thing we should soon
agree) which latter may well stand with earnest seeking after Gods Love, and
Gods threatening the Soul if he do not: as Christ that was content to drink the
Cup, yet earnestly prayed against it: and this answers another scruple, viz.
that if a Christian must be so far humbled, as not to resist God when he comes
to do him good, nor yet to quarrel in case it thinks the Lord may cast it off,
then how can this stand (say you) with Gods Command, who bids us seek his
favor, or with his threatening if we do not?

This is all the answer of this reverend man, I omit not one syllable.

In which I desire the Reader to observe; that for the word quarrel, it was his
putting in, not mine; for I did never intend to justify, that a Creature
should quarrel with his Creator; though we read of those in the Scripture that
did so, in the day of their temptations: but this was their infirmity: This, as
I have shown, was another question, and I have spoken to this before.

Also he may observe, that I have not mistaken the sense of the question,
disputing against careless content: For then I would not have called such a
Soul a damned Saint, if such a thing be attainable: Yet a strange Riddle, if
the thing be attainable in this Soul, under that preparation we have mentioned,
and the question speaks of, that the highest Act of quiet subjection to the
Justice of God, which no rational Creature can imagine the like, can be
performed by one where there is no Grace as yet.

So that there is nothing added in Mr. Shepherd's answer to my Argument but
only this, A man may earnestly seek for the favor of God, and yet at that time
be quietly content to be denied if his pleasure be to deny it: this he proves
from Christ's earnest prayer against the Cup, yet content, etc. This is all I
have to reply to.

Now to this Answer I reply: It is very true, that a man may pray earnestly for
favor from God, or favor of God (taken in a large sense) and yet at the same
time may, and I will add ought, at the same time labor for a quiet, meek,
contented frame if God will deny it: but this hits not my Argument:

I argued thus: Here is a Command of God lies upon me, my duty is to answer it:
Here is a threatening of damnation, if I do not perform my duty: yet at the same
time here is a duty lies upon me, to be quietly content without the duty, which
I am commanded, and threatened if I obey not: one duty clasheth against the
other. As Grace is my duty, I must have it, or damned. It is your duty, says
Mr. Shepherd, to be quietly content, though God will never give you Grace, at
the same time. It is my duty to seek my union with God and his Love, he is my
summum bonum; if I have him not I am damned. It is your duty to be quietly
content without your summum bonum, without God, without his Love, if he will
have it so. So it is my duty to believe in Christ, else I am damned if I obey
not. It is your duty to be quietly content without Faith and Christ, if God
will not give him to you, says Mr. Shepherd: So that I cannot see where the
strength of my Argument is touched at all.

For his proof from Christ: Let us see if the case be parallel.

First, To drink that dreadful bitter Cup, was the design and intent of God in
sending of his Son, and the intent of Christ in coming: Thus John 12.27. when
his Soul was so troubled that he could not tell what to say but this, Father
save me from this hour; he adds, John 18.11.
But for this cause came I unto this hour: he should loose the end of his
coming. And is this the intent, the design of God, to send all men into the
world to damn them if he please?

Secondly, Christ undertook this work freely; he was at his own choice whether
he would or not. He gave himself, Gal. 1.4. Tit 2.14. For this cause I came
John 12.27, Is the case so with us?

Thirdly, He was able to undertake it, he did go through with it, drunk up his
Cup, the dregs of it, blessed be his Name, left nothing in it for his poor
people to drink of it; Hence Luke 22.15. With desire have I desired this
Passover, his last, when he should be made our Passover, that was next. Is it
so with us?

Fourthly, True, Christ did pray to be delivered from it; when he came to smell
the Cup, it was so horrid, that the human nature flew back, as if he had
repented of his undertaking: but Christ was not bound to pray that prayer,
there was no duty in it, obedience to a Command (which is my Argument) but only
the human nature, amazed, astonished at the dread of what he was now going
upon, would have saved it self: it did discover the reallity of his humane
nature, but no sin in it: whence I leave it to any judicious Reader, whether
there be any thing in this Answer to take off my Argument.

Seventh Arg. Lastly, I will not draw my Argument into form, but this I would
say, blessed Lord, what mean these worthy men? do we find the sons of men to be
so eagerly set after thy Love, after thy Grace? are men so disquieted without
thy Love, and thy Grace, that we must now go teach them, that they must be
quietly contented and satisfied, if they suppose thou will never give them thy
Grace? How long may thy poor Ministers preach, and mourn at last that they
cannot get one, persuade not one in a year to care for thy Love, to regard thy
Grace? Instead of quarrelling with thee, because thou will not give them thy
Love and Grace, they quarrel with us, because we stir them up to seek it, and
threaten them from thee, because they neglect it: So that certainly of all
doctrines this doctrine might have been spared. Mr. Shepherd, p. 97. speaking
against some, says, Are we troubled with too many wounded Consciences in these
times, that we are so solicitous of coining new principles of peace? The same
say I, are we troubled with too many disquieted Souls for the Love of God, and
the manifestation of his Grace, that we must invent a new way how to quiet
them, not new principles of peace, but new principles of trouble;
heart-stabbing principles; to be content without Gods Love, Grace, to be
content to abide the state of damnation; to tell the Devil, that if God will
give me up to my lusts, and damn me, yet so he has the honor of his Power and
Justice, I am content.

Blessed be God, for revealing his gracious name, his Christ, his Gospel,
Covenant, Promises, Seals, we can find better principles for disquieted Souls
out of these, than this new one, which I never read in any other Author but
these.

So much for these worthy men (as to this point) whose persons as I knew, so
their eminent graces and Ministerial abilities I do most highly honor; it
being my greatest trouble in this, that I must oppose those whom I do so much
honor. But Truth and the Lambs of Christ must be regarded. Amicus Socrates,
Amicus Plato, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Faith in Christ. How the Spirit draws the Soul to him.
THe awakened Sinner by this time is loosened and made willing to turn from
that term from which he is called. The next thing is to consider the term to
which he is called, to which he must turn: Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. was the sum of Paul's preaching to
the Ephesians. God the proper Object of Repentance, Christ of Faith; Christ
then is the mediate Object of Faith in effectual Calling, God the ultimate.
Christ, I mean, as Mediator, as Christ, God in our flesh; for as God he is the
ultimate: Who by him do believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21.

The heart of the Sinner thus prepared (as I have opened) he is now enquiring
if there be any way to get out of that state of sin and misery, emptiness of
all good, and wants, which he feels himself in: the news of a Redeemer is
welcome: Is there such a one? Yes. What is he? Is he able to do the work? May
one rest and confide in him? Yes, he is a Savior and a great one, Isai. 19.20.
Mighty to save, Isai. 63.1. May he be had? Yes, for he calls you. What are the
terms upon which he may be had? They are but equal, good, such as when you come
to understand them, you would not have them changed.

A Redeemer must be, that the Soul is convinced of: there is no coming to God,
a consuming Fire, a just Judge, a holy God, whose Law I have trampled under
foot, and that Law curses me to Hell; but I must have one to undertake for me;
besides, I feel such a hell of filthiness within me, such rebellion in my
heart, that if I be left alone I am undone: Price and Power must be, or I must
perish. As then in that term from which the Soul was called, the Spirit let in
Light, which discovered the evil of that state, Conviction accompanied that
light, and fears and sorrows followed that Conviction; thus the affections with
will did avert, fly from, and turn from that evil; but how to help it self it
could not tell, feeling nothing but sin, weakness, and emptiness, no
righteousness, no ability in it self: So now in this term Christ and God, to
whom the Soul is called; the Spirit enlightens the Soul to see the Son, ( Every
one that sees the Son, John 6.40.) to understand him in his Person, Offices,
work of Redemption; it shows him the adequate fullness in God in Christ, to
answer its desires and will, the loss of whatever the Soul stuck at, which
hindered it from turning from that term from which it was called: the Spirit
convinces the Soul of the truth of all this goodness discovered; it convinces
the man also, that there is a fair probability of his enjoying this Christ;
yea, convinces him it is his duty to come to him; and now he will add a worse
sin to all the former, if he obey not the Command and Call of God. This suitable
and adequate goodness being thus discovered, and the will renewed, now the will
and affections move strongly toward this Christ, that by him the Soul may come
to this God; there remaining nothing, but propounding of the terms and
agreement to them; which the man being thus far prepared, and enlightened to
see the Gospel, will renewed, and Spirit still acting, drawing in order of the
first cause, he does most willingly and freely come up to the terms, and takes
Christ for my Savior and my Lord. Do not mistake, Christians, when I say my
Savior, I do not say the Soul is assured that Christ is my Savior. It is one
thing for a Soul to receive Christ for my Savior and my Lord, (which all sound
Believers do) another thing to be assured Christ is my Savior and my Lord,
which many Believers cannot attain unto, at least not till a long time. But of
this more fully hereafter.

I shall but briefly touch these Heads, because they are commonly taught and
found in many Books: Only to remove move a block here; if any should think, you
have been a long time upon the work, what, have you more still before we come
at Christ? Alas, when was this enlightening and conviction now you speak of
wrought in me?

First, I pray remember what I said in my first Chapter about Preparations in
general; how the Lord sanctifies many in their infancy, and are trained up by
Parents, that have any Religion in them, in the knowledge of Christ, so far as
their catechizing can help; and many from their childhood are savingly
acquainted with the knowledge of Christ their Savior, as they are with their
sinful and lost condition in Adam.

Secondly, If the Lord wrought upon you, when you were adult; yet living under
the clear preaching of the Gospel, you had the knowledge of Christ in the
notion; you thought you knew a Savior so well, that you had him pind on your
sleeve, you might have him when you list: but as it was in the former work, you
knew the notions of sin and misery, before the Lords work on you, and it may be
there were no new notions let in, but a Divine light, which made you see those
notions you had before after another manner than ever you saw them before, that
now your sin, misery and creatures appeared like themselves: so you may have
the notions of Christ, his Person, Offices, Redemption, before you could tell
these truths before: but you never saw their truth, necessity and glory, as now
you do, under the Spirits working. How quickly had the Jaylour the knowledge of
sin, and of Christ, and received him? A very few hours, if it were two, is more
than I can prove.

Thirdly, Though you have not observed, nor can observe, the distinct times of
these distinct workings, yet the work is done, and so done, as we write. You
must have light first to know Christ, his person, what he is, and his work, and
God in fullness and goodness; you must be convinced of the sufficiency in Christ
and in God to answer all your wants, necessities, desires; your understanding
must be brought to assent to all this as true, else you will never receive nor
trust Christ, nor will your will and affections ever go out after God and
Christ: So that whatever you can observe for distinctness of the Spirits
working, which is very secret; yet thus it is, and we must preach and write, as
things are in nature, methodically, or else we shall be wild Preachers.

So that here is no matter of trouble, if the Lord has enlightened you, and
convinced you in the knowledge of Christ, no matter when it was, nor how it
was: the work is done.

Concerning the nature of saving Faith in Christ, wherein the essence of it
lies, great has been the controversy between Protestants and Papists; great
the difference between Protestants themselves: Divines of late years have
cleared up the nature of Faith more than ever: yet I shall make bold to to cast
in my Mite, it being a thing wherein I was exercised for many years my self, as
to my own state, not being able to find by the Books which then were extant
what it was; but if that were Faith, and saving Faith, which Mr. Perkins, Mr.
John Rogers, and others had described, and what my godly Father had taught me
in my Catechism, viz. that Faith was a sure persuasion of my heart, that
whatever Christ has done belongs to me as if I had done it, (he had learned
it from some of those ancient Divines) then be sure I had no Faith: When I
heard Ministers preach against unbelief in Christ, or faith in him, I could not
tell what they meant by faith or unbelief; nor do I know to this day, when I
hear some men, what they mean by unbelief. Doctor Ames in his Medulla Theolog.
l. 1. c. 2. These. 14.17. cap. 27. These. 17.19. was the Book that first gave me
some hopes I might have Faith. A reverend Divine (whom I have mentioned in my
Epistle to the Reader) assured me, that what I found, and related to him, was
saving Faith, It is an ill thing, that in a thing of this moment the Trumpet
should give an uncertain sound; Ministers should be clear in their preaching.

As ye have received Jesus Christ the Lord, Colos. 2.6. Gospel-faith, I
conceive, is here described by the object of it. The person clothed with his
offices, Jesus Christ the Lord, By the Act received. As ye have received his
Doctrine, say some, there is a truth in that, they do receive his Doctrine who
do believe in Christ: though Grotius would have the word in the Text, (...), to
be Vox propria discentibus, whence he interprets, Jesus Christ the Lord, the
Doctrine of Christ: Yet in Matthew. 1.20, 24. it is twice used of Joseph's taking
Mary to wife, where Joseph took the person of Mary, and so does the Soul in its
married union with Christ, Faith unites the Believers with the person of
Christ: Union respects the person, Communion the benefits; Union is ever first.
Hence Doctor Davenant well, Here is a great emphasis in this manner of
speaking; for it is to be observed, that he does not say, as ye have received
the Doctrine of Christ, or concerning Christ, but as ye have received Christ
himself: for by Faith we do not only perceive the Doctrine of Christ, but also
receive our quickening Savior, and lay him up in our hearts for our salvation:
Thus he.

Christ clothed with his Offices; so I understand the words: thus the Angel,
Luke 2.11. there is indeed the Greek word, (...), not this Hebrew word Jesus;
but yet this Savior is by the Angel called Christ the Lord: The quarrel the
Jews had with him was not about his name Jesus but that this Jesus should be
Christ the Lord: Let his name be Jesus, they had others of that name before;
but the name Jesus, with that Notation which the Angel gave of it and which
they saw believing Jews and Gentiles did embrace, this they abhorred
afterward, in so much that they would not pronounce it; but if they did
unawares happen to pronounce it, then they would punish themselves with a blow
on their faces, and use another word like it, (...), which by an Apocope they
framed out of two words, (...), Deleatur nomen ejus, Let his name be blotted
out; to see the hatred of this poor people against the Lord Jesus, the Lord
hasten the removal of the vail. But in the time of his being in the flesh
amongst them, that which they opposed was, that he should be the Christ, the
Messiah; this was such a crime, that whoever did say he was the Christ, it was
matter of excommunication, they put him out of the Synagogue, John 9.22. Others
of the false Apostles would not stand much at that, but might yield it he was
Christ, but not Lord; they would not set up him only Lord of their faith and
lives, but they set up the Servant Moses with him, he must be joined to him,
Non praedicabant Christum Dominum, sed Mosis conservum. Davenant ibid.
this the Son, nor his holy Apostles would endure.: hence we have it so often
that these three are put together, Acts 2.36. God has made that Jesus, whom ye
crucified, both Lord and Christ, says Peter: the last words were the
Controversy, We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, says Paul:
so 1 Cor. 8.6. thus Paul in his Benedictions uses the words, The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, eight times.

The essence of Faith lies in receiving this Person in his Offices, Jesus
Christ the Lord: John 1.11. we have the word receiving, the same Verb, (...),
in our Text, but in the twelfth verse, (...), the simple Verb: Whence Grotius,
Hinc idem est, (...) and (...)

To this receiving four things are required, its made up of Acts 4.

First, Knowledge of the Person and his Offices, his whole work: what I am to
receive I will know; the Soul and Christ, by receiving him, enter into a
married union; it is mystical, but real: Will a Woman receive that Man to be
her Husband whom she knows not? John 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Men cannot believe in him of whom not
heard, Romans 10.14. Every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, John
6.40, There is a seeing the Son, understanding, knowing him well, before there
will be any believing on him to salvation. First see, then believe. Thus he
began in the term from which he called you; thus he does also in the term to
which he calls you: the work is rational: no more, only touch it.

This knowledge is of his Person, Offices, and work of Redemption; for he must
be received with all: the Soul shall not be mistaken, let it know what it must
receive. The Person: such as is the Person, such is the valor of his Offices,
and of all the work he has done. He who has his state of sin and misery laid
open to him to purpose, Conscience awakened, guilt lying heavy upon his Soul,
and feels the rebellion of his heart, a hell of corruption within him, will
never venture his Soul with one who is but a mere Creature: no power merely
created can do that for him, which he feels must be done, or he must perish.
God in our flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. it must be that must make a Redeemer for him, or
else he must lie in his bonds for ever. Here the Socinians Jesus and our Jesus
differ infinitely: what the Apostle says concerning his Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15.14. If Christ be not risen, our preaching is vain, and your faith is also
vain; the same I say concerning his Person, if he be but man, a mere Creature,
let him die, and rise, and ascend, both preaching and faith are but vain; a
mere man is not a Rock, a precious Cornerstone for Faith to build upon: Flesh
is too soft, too sandy, to lay such a weight, the weight of a guilty captivated
Soul, under laid lusts, creatures and devils, upon. The Egyptians use men, and
not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit, Isai 31.3. What then? They
will fail when you come to trial; Woe to them that go down to Egypt, v. 1. They
were reproved much, and accounted fools, who went down to Egypt, to put their
trust in men, in flesh, for outward, temporal safety, and shall we trust upon
one who is man, and no God, flesh, and not an eternal spirit, for the eternal
safety of precious Souls?

It were improper for me, considering the scope of my Book, to enter upon this
discourse, though this is the main pillar of our Christian Religion; if this
go, all goes: it is a mercy to weak Christians, that God keeps off Satan from
troubling of them here: thousands go out of this world to Heaven, and never
meet with one troubled thought about it: yet I fear this Doctrine spreads much,
but it must be amongst those who never had the load of guilt and sin lie upon
them, it will not easily down with those persons who have felt them: I shall
say no more about it, only suggest to the Reader a notion or two which I have
had; when I read that Text, John 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. when God will set forth any of his Excellencies, his
Attributes, they appear so glorious, that they swallow up, they confound the
understanding of the Creature, it cannot reach them, they set him into
amazement, and there leave him. If God will show forth his Power, his Wisdom,
his Goodness, that God is so powerful, so wise, so good, he makes a world, and
how are our understandings confounded, amazed, when we comtemplate these
Attributes, appearing in the Creature, they are indeed God-like: Would any man
demand a demonstration of the patience and long-suffering of God? Let him but
consider the horrid wickedness, Atheism, blasphemy, uncleanness, with all the
abominations in England, and then tell me, if his patience and long-suffering
be not God-like. So if God will set forth the Attribute of his Love in a gift,
and put his so to it, that he so loved, that gift must be such a thing, that
his Love therein demonstrated may be like his other Attributes, God-like, such
as confound, amaze, swallow up the understanding, as do the other Attributes;
for if the understanding can grasp it, it is but a mean pitiful business, not
at all becoming a God, especially when he puts his so to it, so loved. Then let
us view his gift, and see whether this gift demonstrates Love, to be God like,
comparable to his other Attributes. The gift is an Only bigotten Son: But what
is that Son, God or man, or God-man in one Person? Why? He is but a man, flesh
as we are, only his miraculous Conception of a Virgin, had not our sinful
nature, he lived a holy life, and died to confirm his Doctrine, and to show,
that all who live as he did shall be happy as he is; being now risen, but
raised by God, not by himself, and ascended into glory. A goodly business, an
excellent gift to set out the love of God by; had his Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness in the Creation been no more than this, the invisible things of him,
the eternal power and Godhead, Rom 1.20. had never been seen to convince a
Heathen by the light of Nature. His miraculous Conception, what is in this?
Adam's forming out of the earth was infinitely more miraculous: But this Son
had no sin; no more had Adam when God made him; and though he did live without
sin, that is little, the Angels do as much. That he died: so have many Martyrs
more, as bad deaths and worse, to bear testimony to the Doctrine of God, and
God will raise them also. So that if the gift of God be no more than the
Socinians Jesus, we will never wonder at this love of God: the Text may well
leave out the so loved, for this is not love, to set out a God by; our
understandings can easily grasp this, being a pitiful small gift: this is not
as he said, a gift like a thing: I must give like a King. But now for God to
send his only begotten Son (therefore of the same essence with the Father, as
Children are of the Father, else no Son) the wonderful, the mighty God, Isai.
9.6. 1 Timothy 3.16. to take on him (then he must have a praeexistence, for non
ens cannot take) the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2.16. to redeem the seed of Abraham;
that he must be made of a Woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem them
that are under the Law, being made himself a curse, Gal. 4.4, 5. Gal. 3.13.
This is a gift indeed; this argues love like a God indeed. The Creation does
not more demonstrate his power and wisdom to be infinite, than this gift
demonstrates his love to be infinite; he may well put so to this love: this
confounds, swallows up the understanding, sets it in amazement, and there
leaves it, as do the other Attributes of God; this love bears a full proportion
with his other Attributes. The Socinians Jesus debase God, and make his
Attributes of love unbecoming God. The Socinians make great use of Matthew.
28.18. All power, etc. But that was Gods love to his Son, as he had been a
Servant, and done his Fathers work, this is part of his wages; but his love to
us is in the gift of his Son, and his dying for us: Romans 5.8. there look for
the so loved.

Again in 1 Pet. 1.12. we read, (...) propriae usitatur de iis, qui studio
intuendi, and penitius introspiciendi se inclinant: quique summ^ studio omnia
explorant, ac diligenter fixis oculis intuentur.
Which things the Angels desire to look into: the word (...), to look into, is
used of John, John 20.5. and of Peter, Luke 24.12. when they stooped down and
looked wishly, to see whether Christ were not in the Sepulcher; and in James
1.25. Who so looks into the perfect Law, which the Dutch translate thus, he
that narrowly looks; for such looking the Law requires; it notes a curious
prying into that which has some veiled or secret rarity in it. Grotius says
the Apostle has a respect to Exodus 25.20. where the Cherubims, the
representative Angels, were made with their eyes looking down to the Mercy
seat. What our Lord said to the Multitude, Matthew. 11.7. concerning John, What
went ye out into the wilderness to see? so may I have leave, with honor to
those blessed Creatures, to say, What is it ye bow your selves to see? What is
it you are curious to pry into, a Socinian Jesus? You see but a man; yea, but
he is a man, whose conception is wonderful in the womb of a Virgin. But the
forming of the woman of the rib of the man, and Adam out of the earth, is a
thousand times more wonderful, than the forming of a man of the seed of the
woman, which concurs to all generations of men. But he is without sin: So are
ye, and so was Adam once, and though now we are fallen, yet considering that
body of death within, and the temptations that arise from thence, and without,
from Satan and World, it is a wonder that so many Saints walk so holily as they
do. But he preached the way to Heaven: And this was preached before by Moses
and Prophets, as well as by the Socinians Jesus: Enoch, Abraham, the
Patriarchs, knew the way to Heaven, and were Pilgrims here, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15,
16. But he died to confirm his Doctrine: So have thousands of Martyrs. But he
was raised again the third day: The Socinians Jesus could not raise himself;
but if God raised him, so shall all the Saints be raised as well as he; the
time, on the third day, makes nothing; to raise the bodies of Saints, dead so
many hundred of years since, is a wonder infinitely beyond the raising of a
Socinians Jesus, the third day.

And this wonder is to be performed by our Jesus, John 6.39, 40, 44, 54. This
work is too hard for the Socinians Jesus, therefore are the Socinians as faulty
and erroneous in the Doctrine of the Resurrection: Corpora haec quae nunc
circum ferimus resurrectura non credimus, says Smalcius. Now where is that
Mystery? where is that manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. O ye blessed
Angels, that ye are so desirous to look into, and find out? Here is no such
rare Invention in this Socinians Jesus, to take up the thoughts of a man with
admiration, much less of Angels. But to see God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. to see the second person in the Trinity united to that holy thing
conceived in the womb of the Virgin, to see him made under the Law, yea, made a
Curse, to see him made sin who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. last. For God to find a way how to
justify a sinful condemned wretch, and yet he be just, true and holy, none of
these Attributes suffer, and yet Mercy triumph in saving a sinner; yea, that he
should find out a way to give his offended Justice greater satisfaction, while
he shows mercy in saving sinners, than he could ever have received, either by
the confusion or annihilation of them: to see him reconciling a world of
obstinate and rebellious enemies unto himself; and all this by the blood and
righteousness of our Jesus, God in our flesh: to see him incorporating Christ
and his Church, things in their own distinct natures as unapt for mixture as
fire and water: here is a mystery indeed, here is manifold wisdom of God
indeed, worthy to set the blessed Angels on work to find out, worthy to set
heaven and earth admiring: And now we can see good reason, why it is said,
Worship him all ye Angels, Heb, 1.6. But the Socinian Jesus has no such matter
of wonder, nor any reason why Man or Angel should worship him.

To conclude, Our Jesus is he, whom his Father has exalted to give repentance
to Israel and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. Does he forgive sins on earth,
Matthew. 9.2, 3. and in heaven too? Does he give repentance also? Then he must
give a new heart, a new spirit; then he must take away the heart of stone, and
give a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. else he cannot give repentance: If he can
create a World, Col. 1.16. and uphold a world by the word of his power, Heb.
1.3. If he can create new hearts too in giving repentance, and preserve them;
Jude ver. 1. Preserved in Christ, so as none shall pluck them out of his hand,
John 10.28. then without controversy our Jesus must be God man; for a Socinian
Jesus, that is but mere man, can never do these things.

Let the Reader excuse me though I have gone beyond my intentions, When I wrote
this I did not know the Socinian heresy did spread so as since I have; that it
did spread secretly I knew, but that it should be openly maintained, and books
printed, I heard not till I had done.
for I had no thoughts to have written one line upon this subject; but that
hearing how the Socinian doctrine spreads, which stubs up our Christian
Religion by the roots, I thought it not amiss to add a few meditations which I
have had besides those I saw in Books, and it is possible this book may fall
into the hands of some who are troubled with these temptations, and have not
other books to help themselves.

And now I proceed: The Spirit, I say, enlightens the understanding to know him
in his Person, Offices, and work of Redemption, whom the Soul is to receive;
Phil. 4.9. Those things which ye have learned and received: there must be
learning before there can be receiving. The high-way-hearer did never receive
the Word, which it seems the stony ground did, Matthew. 13.20. Why did not the
high-way-hearer go so far as the stony ground? The Text says, ver. 19. he did
not understand the word of the Kingdom, which it seems the other did, but did
not set down and consider what it would cost, Luke 14.28. Hence John 6.45. who
has heard and learned of the Father comes to me. He that comes to Christ
receives Christ: Now what goes before this coming? The Father teaches it
semes several Lessons concerning Christ, the Soul hears, and because he has
such a Master he learns; then follows infallibly that Souls coming: Isa. 53.11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many: by our knowledge of
him. Divine knowledge taught by the Spirit, is the first thing to make up
justifying Faith. Verba notititae apud Hebraeos, etc.

But alas how ignorant are the greatest of those who are called Christians (and
must be called so, else they take it in great scorn) of the Truths of Christ?
how little do they know of his Person, Offices, or his work of Redeniption? put
questions to them, what sad answers would they give? Sermon upon Ignoramus.
The story which blessed Pemble gives us of that fine civil man, who had heard
three thousand Sermons, yet when on his death bed came to be examined about his
knowledge, is very famous; how he understood Christ you may read by his answer.
Essex has been a famous County for preaching, yet one that I know in my
Parish, being asked, what is Christ? he could not tell; Is he God or man? I
cannot tell, but I think a Spirit. Another on his deathbed, about sixty years
of age, when told him what Christ was, what he had done, suffered, fell a
wondering, as if they were things he never heard before; yet catechizing
besides preaching was set up in the Parish. Little do we know what ignorance is
in people.

Secondly, The second thing required to the receiving of Christ, is the Assent,
which the understanding gives to all the propositions concerning Christ, his
Person, Offices, and works of Redemption, as being true: though propositions be
known, yet if not assented to as true, they are not received: I may know
abundance of propositions or opinions of other men in Divinity, Philosophy,
Physic, but if I do not do, not assent to them as true, I never receive them:
Thus when the Soul gives its assent to all those things as true, Christ is
received into the understanding, the intellectual part; and the ground of this
assent, being because he who is the Prima veritas says it, because of the
authority of Gods Testimony, who reveals it, Fides Historice differt a Fide
Historiarum.
this makes that which we call Historical Faith, or Dogmatical Faith. Though
this assent alone is not enough to make a saving reception of Christ, yet it is
in saving Faith, and that without which it is impossible there should be any
saving Faith: The Spirit convinces of righteousness, John 16.10. Thus he
carries on his work by Conviction under the Gospel; so clear and strong in his
arguing, that the understanding cannot but assent to what he teaches: it is
more for the Spirit to convince of righteousness, than to convince of sin
(unless of that particular sin of not believing in Christ) for in his
conviction of sin, our own natural Consciences quickly strike in, and help do
the work; but for this Righteousness of Christ, natural Conscience can do
nothing in it.

Concerning Dogmatical or Historical Faith a few words; Divines in their
Disputations against the Papists have spoken not so highly of it, as it may be
it deserves, because saving Faith differs from it: commonly amongst us it is
very much slighted; what a tush do many make of it, to my knowledge. Hence
some, and those not of the lower form of Christians for knowledge, when they
heard what books our Divines, Doctor Stillingfleet, and Mr. Baxter, have
written in defense of the truth of our Christian Religion, have said, they
wonder they should busy their heads about such needless subjects: When I read
over Alvarez de Auxil. some years since, and met with his 49. Disputat. upon
that question, Vtrum homo per solas vires naturae possit omnibus mysteriis
supernaturalibus sibi propositiis and explicatis assentiri tanquam revelatis a
Dee, assensu certo and firm, ex part credentis? When I had read his four
Conclusions upon the Question, how he denied it, that man could not do it, my
opinion then about Dogmatical Faith not being so high though never so low as I
see some men's is, I a little wondered at this Popish Author; but since I have
met with that, which does sufficiently confirm me of the truth of what he
says, and I shall ever honor him the more for what I then read in him: while
men take all upon trust, are carried in the crowd, set quiet, no temptations
trouble them, how light do they make of that, which if ever they come to be
sifted, winnowed in the fan of temptations, they will find to be matter of
worth: Dogmatical Faith is with them but of little worth, because the
Dogmatical Faith of most is nothing worth: Let their principles be searched
into, how little of that Faith will be found to be divine Faith. Lay by these
principles, that we have been in possession of these Truths, concerning Christ,
his Person, his Offices, his Redemption, for sixteen hundred years; this was
our Grandfathers and Fathers Religion; it is the Religion of our Nation, all
men are of this Faith, our King, Rulers, our Ministers who teach us are all of
this Faith: I say, lay by these principles, which are too short to make a
Divine Dogmatical Faith: What other reasons of their Faith can the greatest
part of those who are called Christians, and do assent to these Truths, give
you? How do men generally condemn the Jews, I wish these men would read Mr.
Jackson's third Chapter of Sect. 2. of Justifying Faith, cry out upon them as
the basest people under the Sun, because they did not believe in Christ, and
receive his Testimony, which in their esteem was the easiest thing, and had
they been living then, they would have believed in him? I do not excuse the
Jews, what they might have learned by observing the Prophets (which few of them
read) and the works which he did, John 22.24. he gave them sufficient ground
for their faith. But though I do not excuse the Jews, (who yet had a pretty
hard work to believe, in my opinion, and I tremble at Gods Judgments) yet thou
that can thus easily condemn the Jews, show thy self to be a proud, a
foolish, an ignorant Gentile: If thou have not learned this, That Faith is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Every Act of Faith, if it be Divine Faith, even this
of assent to these Divine Truths concerning Christ: It is given you to believe,
Philip. 1.29. even this very Act is given. Temptations will learn men to
interpret Texts. Though the Jews had the Prophets, and Christ his preaching and
Miracles, yet Christ tells us, John 6.65. No man can come unto me, except it
were given him of my Father: And in ver. 44. he says, None come unless the
Father draw him.

Object. You will say this is meant of saving Faith.

Answ. I deny it not; but observe the next words, They must be all taught of
God; men must hear and learn of the Father before they come, ver. 45. That
teaching, hearing, learning, which are before coming, belong to the
understanding; and this I am sure is one effect of that teaching and learning,
that he causes the understanding to give this assent: Hence then Dogmatical
Faith in those who come to Christ, if Divine Faith, is the Fathers gift.

That this Faith is not such a slight thing as men make of it, let me show it a
little further.

First, What was the way the Tempter took to overthrow our first Parents, and
us in them? Observe it well, you will find he struck at this Faith of Assent,
this Historical Faith, Genesis 3.1, 4. Yea has God said, ye shall not eat of
every tree of the Garden? He puts the question, and tries their Faith, whether
they did believe that which God had said to be true: he tells the woman, ver.
4. Ye shall not surely die: Just cross to God, this which was the hedge to keep
them from the Tree, he labors to pull down, and he does that by weakening their
faith, in giving assent to the Threat of God as being true: having once done
that, he quickly attained his design: The woman could assent to him, though not
to God,

Secondly, What Faith was that in Peter (for faith it was the Devil aimed at,
appears by Christ's speech to him, Luke 22.32.) that Satan struck at? Observe
it, and it was this Historical Faith: Peter, Matthew. 16.16. had made a good
confession of Christ, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. So again,
John 6 69. Thinks Satan, this Peter is a brisk fellow, very forward in his
conressions, it I can but get leave of God, to get him unto my san, I will try
what he is, whether he will hold to this confession, it may be he will not be
of the same mind, though he thus now confess, and profess he will dye for him
and with him: When Peter followed his Master, and stood amongst the Servants,
Matthew 26.69. to the end; now was the time of winnowing Peter, Luke 22.31. and
now is that faith of his to be tried; for so says Christ, I have prayed thy
faith fail not: when the Servant told him, thou wast with Jesus, Mat. 26.72. he
denied with an oath, I do not know the man: What not know him? This is strange.
When Christ put the question to his Disciples, Whom do men say that I the Son
of man am? Matthew. 16.13. and when, ver. 15. he put it to his Disciples to
answer the question, were not you the forward man, that answered for all, who
he was? And at another time, John 6.69. did you not say, We believe and are
sure that thou art that Christ the Son, etc. it seems you did know and were
sure who he was, and what not so much as know the man now? If your faith were
not so strong to maintain your confession of him before these, but it flabs,
must you lie so abominably, to say you do not know him? and bind it with an
Oath and Curse: So that Peter is far from assenting to that truth, which before
he confessed.

Thirdly, What Faith was it the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews did so
fear, lest the Hebrews should fall from it? Observe it well, and you will find
it to be this Historical Faith, concerning Christ, his Person, his Offices, his
Sacrifice, that he was the body, the substance of all the ceremonial legal
shadows, which doctrine they had assentted to, but under temptations were in
danger to fall from it; and so all persecutions in the Church did arise from
their Dogmatical faith; persecutions did all endeavor to evercome that Faith,
in all ages and persecutions of the Church. If Dogmatical says once fall,
saving Faith cannot shand: therefore Satan struck so at this Faith in the
Hebrews, and all the Churches. Hence again those whisperings of temptations,
not in times of persecutions, but at other times, Titubabit sides si vacillat
Scripturarum Divinarum Authoritas. Aug. de Christ. doct. l. 1. c. 37.
Are those Scriptures you read the Word of God? Are you sure of it? Is there a
God? Are you sure of it? Christians at first startle to meet with such motions,
these are horrid things indeed; at the first onset it may be Satan draws of,
not follows too hard, afterward comes again, and follows his motions a little
more; at last, not only from Satan, but from the unbelief and atheisine of our
own hearts, the Soul comes to be so pestered with them, that they make him
almost distracted; and now he that before made a tush at Dogmatical faith, is
fain to pray hard that God would hold his faith to the Scriptures, and
strengthen his poor battered Historical faith, and can now tell by experience,
O I see all Divine faith is the gift of God.

These thoughts have made me move this question with my self.

Quest. Whether there be not a great difference between the Historical faith of
a true Child of God and other men? The Child of God gives his assent, and the
man, who is not a Child of God gives his assent to the same Propositions which
the other does?

Answ. I have determined in my self, certainly there is a great difference,
though both give the assent to the same Truths.

First, Because the Child of God was taught by God his Father, John 6.45. It is
another kind of teaching he has than others have; the Spirit, as the Spirit of
the Covenant, instructs him: Now as by this teaching he sees those divine
Truths after another manner than others do, so he assents to them after another
manner; he has stronger Convictions than others have: Where there is a
different efficient in this point, there will be a different effect.

Secondly, The Child of God does experience, and presses still daily more and
more for his experiencing of those Truths to which he does assent: So his
experience returns this, an addition of strength to his assent.

To conclude this Head: Christians do not make light of Historical faith, O
pray that God would give you more of this faith, and streng then it mightily;
by that time you have paid as dear for it as some others have done, you will
value it at a great rate: Pray, I say, read good books that may help you; but
above all, let me commend this as the surest and most approved way to help you,
labor to experience Christ in all his work of Redemption; the more you grow
here, the stronger grows your faith of assent; you will be more able to ward
and bear off Satan's blows, and answer the Objections which arise from thy
unbelieving Atheistical heart: you may find Arguments, and help your self to
deal with an Atheist, by reading of books, and in that you will do well: but
you will never be armed sufficiently against Satan, the unbelief and Atheism
of thine own heart without this. When I was a Boy, I never cared to play at
Cudgels with him who was left handed, and looked a squint with his eyes, I
could not tell where to have him, I might receive a blow where I was not aware
of him; for others I did not much care, unless too big for me to beat my
Cudgels to my head. For Atheistical men, you may make a shift to hold up the
Cudgels against them, by what Arguments you can invent, and read in Authors,
though sometimes they are so impudent, bold and subtle in arguing, that they
would seem to beat your Cudgels to your head; but from my own woeful heart, and
squint-eyed, left handed Satan, I have felt such blows come, that no Atheist
without me could strike; I may read books long enough before I should find an
answer to these Arguments: when a man has experienced the Redemption of
Christ, the Promises, the new Covenant (for there are the blows given, not
about the Commandments, for there is a light within, our Reason, which helps to
confirm the equity and reason of the Command) this man has a Weapon both for
defense and offense: of this experimental feeling of the power of Christ's
Redemption, I can say as David to Ahimelech, 1 Samuel 21.9. when he had asked
Ahimelech for a Sword, he told him, he had none but the Sword of Goliath; David
said, There is none like that, give it me. So say I, there is no Sword like
this to enter into the field against Atheism, Lord, give it me: our High Priest
Jesus must give it us. I shut up this Head with this Rule. That man who has
the Gospel written upon the fleshy-tables of his heart by the finger of Gods
Almighty Spirit, that man has the best Argument to prove to himself, that the
Gospel written in paper withink, is the Word of God.

Thirdly, The third thing required to the reception of Christ is, the
approbation of him as good, the best good, such a good as exceeds all that good
which the Soul found in that term from which it was called, Christ is not
proposed as an object of bare and naked truth to be assented to, but as a
sovereign and saving truth, to do good to men: The desire of all flesh, Hag.
2.7. When the Soul was called from the term in which God finds it, it was
called from good; so it apprehended it, and approved it; were it the pleasure
of his lusts, this was bonum jucundum, this held him fast: was it profit, this
was bonum utile: good there was, be it true, be it false in it self, it was so
to him, and this held him fast, made the work so difficult, so strange to him
why he should be called away, he is well where he is; now the Soul must have
such good in Christ ( to whom he is called) laid open to it, as do
counterpoize, nay, out-bid and excel all that good which he found in the term
from which he was called, and the Judgment, the practical Judgment (not only
Absolutum, but Comparatum) must approve of it to be so too, else the Soul will
never be soundly taken off from that term from which he is called, nor ever
close truly with Christ, never receive him to whom he is called. Christ must
come into the will, he must be received there, else he is never savingly
received; but if he comes there, the will must be certainly informed that he is
good, and so good, to answer whatever he calls for there, or else he shall
never be admitted there: Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. It is not only
the question of wicked men in the good they seek after, but it is the question
of every man as man, every man's will is enquiring after good, Medul. Theol. l.
2. c. 5. These. 13.14.
one good or other. Doctor Ames says true, Objectum materiale Fidei est
immediate aliquod Axioma sub ratione very: sed illud in que principaliter
terminatur Fides, de quo and propter quod assensus praebetur illi axiomati per
fidem, est ens incomp exum sub ratione boni. Principalis igitur terminus in
quem tendit actus credentis, est res ipsa quae in axiomate praecipue spectatur.
Let the understanding assent never so much to all these things concerning
Christ as true, if the Judgment does not approve of them as good, and best
good, Christ will never be truly received. God in his working maintains the
faculties of the Soul in their actings, as he made them. Approbation belongs
properly to the intellectual part; for before any man can will a thing, it is
presupposed that he esteems it to be good, in the judgment of his
understanding, and this is to be approved. That the will must be renewed, I do
not at all question, whether the Lord does it immediately or mediately by the
understanding; I had rather feel the renewing, than dispute which of these two
ways God does it: but sure I am, if he renews the will, then he renews a
rational Creature; If his people be willing in the day of his power, Psalm.
110.3. Yet the day of his power is not a day of forcing the will, which cannot
be done by God himself; it must cease to be a will then. Possum, volo, malo,
have no Imperative Mood; then to be sure the understanding and judgment must go
before. To fancy, that by the Spirits renewing of the will immediately, Christ
shall come to have the chief room in the heart, though the practical Judgment
did not (with all circumstances and things considered) approve of him as the
chiefest good, is but irrational. When then the Spirit does show to the
understanding, in a Covenant and saving way, the excellencies of Christ, the
fitness of him to answer the state in which the Soul now sees it self under
sin, misery, emptiness and guilt, which most affects the Soul, to see one so
fitted for him to help him, and enough to satisfy him; when he shows him the
Table spread in the Gospel, and set with those dishes, which suits his hungry
Soul, as ever did Feast suit his sensitive appetite, ( Isai. 25.6. Prove. 9.1.2,
3, 45.) the Judgment immediately approves, and the Spirit in that very instant
in the will inclines it as the first cause, and the will determines as the
second cause, as freely, as if there were no presence of God there, for it acts
according to its nature. To think that God works only upon the Understanding
and Judgment, and lets the will alone; or that he works upon the will alone,
and not at the same time upon the Understanding, are notions which no rational
man will receive.

The fourth and last Act that compleats this receiving of Christ, and makes it
saving, is, the will consenting, choosing, or embracing of Christ, as God
propounds and offers him, that is, Christ his Person clothed with all his
Offices, and complete work of Redemption. Thus and no other ways is Christ
propounded and offered; thus and no other ways must and does the will embrace
him, in consenting, choosing, I embrace him.

God does not offer Offices and Redemption without a Person, nor a Person
without Offices and Redemption, nor a Person with one or two Offices, and part
of Redemption, but complete, as he has appointed him a fit Savior, as fit as
can be: less will not serve, more is needless: who receives Christ his Person
with Offices right, receives him with complete Redemption; or to receive Christ
with his complete Redemption, is to receive him with his Offices; so that here
is no cause of stumbling. Thus then you have it:

First, The Spirit enlightened the lost sinner, to understand and see Christ,
in his Offices and work of Redemption, how fit he is, how suitable for such a
Soul in this condition.

Secondly, The Understanding being convinced, assented to all this as true.

Thirdly, The Judgment approved of Christ thus offered, as not only good, but
the best good for me, all circumstances considered.

Fourthly, Then says the will, I choose him, give me him, thus and no other
ways, for in Christ thus offered I am satisfied.

This Soul has rightly received Jesus Christ the Lord. What deceits there may
be in this, I shall touch in its proper place.

I put in consenting or choosing, if any should quarrel with me about consent,
as if it did properly pertain to the understanding and not to the will, as some
of late had rather call this act complacentia than consensus. I would nor
trouble my self about it, only because consent has commonly by the Schoolmen,
and other Learned men, been appropriated to the will, therefore I put it in; as
appears by Aquin. Sam. 12. q. 15. a. 1.
Vasquez Ineandem quaest.
Valentia and De cauta Dei, p. 741.
Bradwardina, that the will does come in to make up a saving reception of
Christ, this I aim at; and sure I am, that choice, election, belongs to the
will, if consent does not; but it was wont to be said, assent to the
understanding, consent to the will.

That Christ can be received savingly, and not into the will I think will
hardly go for sound and saving doctrine: And if so, then sure I am he cannot
come there but by chaice or consent. I know Vasquez, though he be peremptory
that consent Substantialiter belongs to the will, yet makes a difference
between consent and election, ibid.

Exercit. Eth. 16.
Herebord, in answering to an Argument which supposes Faith to be only in the
mind or understanding, tells his Adversary, that Amesius, with other famous
Divines, especially the English Ames Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 2. These. 2, 3.
Divines, do place Faith in the will, and make knowledge and assent but
conditions of Faith that went before it: but the common opinion of most, place
(says he) Faith both in the understanding and the will. Mr. Jackson, who will
not own any real distinction between the understanding and will, and so does
not appropriate Faith to the understanding or will, yet says he, Such as do
acknowledge a real distinction between them, Justific. p 35.
or in their acts, should rather place it in the will, because the objects of
it are rather moral than merely speculative; nor can we ever understand them
aright, but we must understand them as good to us. With this agrees that which
I quoted before out of Amesius: Objectum Fidei est immediate semper aliquod
axioma sub ratione very: sed illud de quo and propter quod assensus praebetur
illi axiomati per fidem est ens incomplexum subratione boni. In the next Thesis
he gives the reason: Actus enim credentis non terminatur ad axioma sed ad rem,
fatentibus Scholasticorum clarissimis. Ratio est, quia non formamus axiomata,
nist ut per eade rebus cognitionem babeamus. Principalis igitur terminus in
quem tendit actus credentis est res ipsa, quae in axiomate praecipue spectatur.
See him also in Medul. Theol. l. 1. cap. 2. Those. 2.3.

First, Let us consider the state the Soul is now in, it is under the sense of
the greatest evil that a Creature can be; it is not the assenting to truths
which does heal him and remove his evil: Let him receive a thousand truths, be
they never so spiritual, they leave him under his evil still; but it must be an
object that is good, conquering and removing all that evil which he feels that
heals him; then Faith does not heal him, but as it brings in this good object,
and it must then be brought into the will if good, and as good.

Secondly; Faith is set out by coming frequently, John 6.44, 45, 65. etc. men
do not use to go on their heads; but surely the will must come, else there will
be no coming to Christ: Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let
him drink of the water of life freely, Revel. 22.17. You will not come to me
that you may have life, John 5.40.

Thirdly, Faith is set out, by trusting, costing, leaning, staying to and upon
another; (...)
all these we shall find belong to the will, to the vital part, and not the
intellectual properly; all of these implying it is some good, they trust, rest,
stay, lean upon another for. I do not quote the Texts, they are known to him
who observes and understands the Scriptures.

Fourthly, Faith is the great condition of the new Covenant of the Gospel, we
are justified by Faith, saved by Faith. Shall a man be interested in the
Gospel, shall he be justified, faved, by an Act which concerns the intellectual
parts only, and leave out the Will, the vital part? That Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3 17. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10.10. I know the heart does often express the whole soul;
and so it does here, but not the understanding, without the will. Faith has a
great room in man's Soul, which produce such great effects.

Fifthly, By believing the Soul is married to Christ: Married union is made up
by Faith: this marriage is often mentioned in the Gospel, Romans 7 4. Revel.
19.7. Ephesians. 5.32. 2 Cor. 11.2. But can Marriages be made without the wills of
both parties consenting? Is not that question first put, Will thou have this
man for thy wedded Husband? Does she not answer, I will, or else no Marriage?
This is as true in the spiritual Marriage. There can be no union without the
will receives him.

Sixthly, God offers Christ, a Person with Redemption: Do we receive a thing
offered with our understandings or wills? With the will sure.

As to that Objection, One Grace cannot be seated in two distinct faculties; I
intend not to trouble my self about it, since it must first be proved, that
these faculties are so really distinct, which Scaliger Exerc. 307. sect. 3, 4,
15. Vind. Gra p. 201. 205.
, Durandus, with many others, deny: Hence blessed Pemble, being of the same
opinion, against the distinction of these faculties (as was Mr. Jackson) says,
We do not appropriate Faith either to the understanding or the will, nor yet
refer it to both as unto two distinct faculties; but we place it immediately in
the whole intellectual nature, whether of man's Soul, or of Angels. If these
faculties be found and proved by Philosophy to be distinct, whence is the
impossibility of one grace being in two faculties proved? Not from Scripture I
am sure, for that gives faith to the whole Soul. And why must it be thought
absurd in Philosophy to say, the same thing may in diverse respects be referred
to diverse subjects, as these subjects are not altogether separated, but
conjoined among themselves? What says Bonaventure, quoted by Vasquez, of
consent? Bonavent. existimat consensum esse, concordiam quandam actus
intellectus judicantis, and voluntatis praeoptantis, and adutramque facultatem
intellectus and voluntatis pertinere. If consent may belong to two faculties,
why may not faith as well? 12. q. 15. a. 1.
Vasquez concludes well of consent: Consensus denotare videtur, concursum
voluntatis cum intellectu, ad sentiendum idem, quod intellectus sentit. Nor
does Aquinas deny, but that one virtue may be in two faculties, or powers,
accordingly he tells us how it may be 12. q. 56. a. 1. Quaest. Disput. page 314.
. B. Austin says of Liberum arbi^ium, that it is, Facultas voluntatis and
rationis: So it belongs to both faculties. 12. q. 56. a. 1. Quaest. Disput.
page 314.
Aquinas answers, that Austin says so because, Ad Actum liberiarbitrii homo
ordinatur per utramque potentiam, licet non immediate: Agreeable to what others
say, Libertatis ex^r^itium and usus est radicaliter, vel directive in
intellectu, formaliter in voluntate. But however this Objection has nothing in
it, of divine strength, to weaken what we have affirmed.

Fides qua creditur est habitus Intellectuus. Voluntatis.
Doctor Ward, Detem. p. 180. See Leyden Profession, Synopsis Disp. 31. These.
15.16.

To leave these knots, and come to our plain work; we have left Faith seated in
the will: this is the thing which is contended about, who shall have the will,
Lusts and the Creature, or God and Christ? I have seen a practice at many
dinners made at Marriages, after the Offerings are made, the Brides Gloves are
thrown upon the Table, and then two of the young men, who will show their
gallant spirits, offer for the Gloves; one offers so much, the other offers
more; the other offers again, and out-bids him; so they go on till one lays
down so much that the other will not out-bid him, then he that offers most
carries away the Gloves in triumph, the standers by applauding him; the Gloves
not worth a quarter of the money that he has laid down, only he has shown
his gallantry, got some credit, a friend to the Bride, this contents him. This
something resembles the way of God and Christ with the will, in opposition to
Lusts and the Creature: Flesh and Christ offer for the will, who shall carry
it: the Soul being prepared, as before we have shown, there is a great
advantage which Christ has in his offering for it why he should carry it.
Pleasures, profits, riches, honors, are the great things with liberty and ease
from troubles, which Flesh does offer for the will: Yea, says Christ, but who
shall save thee from that wrath which is coming upon thee, and which now thou
art sensible of will befall thee, for being a slave to thy flesh, thy lusts,
the creature so long? that wrath being infinitely more evil, than is that good
which Flesh offers: I offer them deliverance from wrath to come, 1 These. 1.
last ver. this is fair bidding for the will, that lies under the fears of this
wrath, if God does but cut asunder the thread of life: But if this be but only
prirative, and you must have positive good to satisfy your hungry appetite,
let Flesh offer: Flesh offers fair promises, and what it does is more by
promises than performances. Christ, who is the Yea and Amen of all promises, 2
Cor. 1.20. he offers, exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. and
will perform all to a word, as he did to Israel, Joshua 23.14. 1 Kings 8.56.
Flesh offers pleasure, Christ offers Redemption from fleshly pleasures, thy
Soul shall not any more be a slave to it, I will make thee free indeed. John
8.36. Thou shall feel what a pleasure it will be to have these chains taken
off, and to be above thy lusts. Thou shall drink of the rivers of my pleasures,
Psalm. 36.8. even the pleasures of my Love and Grace: stay but a while with
patience, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Flesh bids ease and liberty
from trouble, Christ bids Peace in Conscience, peace in Heaven, pardon in
bosom, John 14.27. and 16, 33. Flesh bids riches, Christ bids unsearchable
riches, Ephesians. 3.8. Flesh bids the love and favor of great Persons, Christ
bids the love of his Father, and his love, John 14.21. To conclude, to beat
Flesh quite out, says God, I give thee my self, I give thee my Christ,
whatever Flesh bids, make the best, it is but temporary, what I bid is eternal,
2 Cor. 4 last. The Soul being under the work of the Spirit, is enlightened to
see all these things in their reallity, and enabled to understand the glory and
good of them, and thus the Lord carries away the will in triumph; he has
out-bidden the Flesh; the blessed Angels, they rejoice at this work, Luke
15.10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents. But what have thou gotten, sweet Savior, that thou art so pleased
in thy victory? Psalm. 110.3. What? I have got thy will: A huge booty, Lord, not
worth the taking up, nor worth the ten thousand part of what thou have offered
to win it; thou have but pulled trouble upon thy self in getting it; now thou
have a sinful, wretched, guilty, peevish, froward, polluted wretch to pardon,
to cleanse, to take care of, one that will try thy patience; small reason why
thou should triumph in thy winnings: Be it so, yet my Father has the glory
of his Grace and Mercy, I have the glory of my Love and Redemption, I see of
the travel of my soul, and I am satisfied, Isai. 53.11. To eternity then, let
thy Fathers Grace and Mercy be adored, thy Love and Redemption admired.

Thus it is Christ's out bidding of Flesh and the Creature which strikes the
main stroke in the answering of the Call. And now the will being renewed, and
the Spirit present in this work, to make clear to the will, the will comes off
most sweetly, freely, never acted more freely, with more sweetness than now,
though still there lie a corrupt old Adam, that is cross to this, but at this
time it is so overpowred with Grace, that it appears not in the actings of
it; and the dominion of it is for ever broken.

Jansenius moves this Question, Jansen. Aug. tom. 3. l. 4. c. 1. Caelestis
quaedam and ineffabilu servitus, etc.
Quid fit medicinale Christi Adjutorium secundum Substantiam? Or thus: Wherein
lies the efficacy of that which the Schools call gratia efficax? What is it
that makes it so? He answers in blessed Austin's words, Victrix delectatio, an
overcoming, a conquering delight: or thus in his own words, It is nothing else
but a certain heavenly and unspeakable sweetness, or spiritual delight, by
which the will is prevented and bowed to will and do whatever the Lord commands
it to will and do. He spends eleven Chapters in proving, that this conquering
delight, and heavenly sweetness, which the Lord lets in to the Soul, is that
which makes Grace to be efficacious in Conversion, and in overcoming any
temptation: he that reads his Chapters will find how experimentally he writes:
Now if by this conquering delight, and heavenly sweetness, he understands the
joy, the rest, the sweetness the Soul finds in possessing the Object which it
loves and desires, as when God shines upon the Soul, and gives it to know his
Love; this is rarely found in the first Conversion now, though in the
Gospel-Converts it was known, to commend the Gospel, in the first preaching of
it, to fit them for sufferings for it. The Apostles being to travel up and
down, could not abide fixed with them to help them; but yet a conquering, an
out-bidding Good, having a pleasing sweetness attends it, the Lord does present
to the will, which draws the will sweetly after it, and makes Calling to be
effectual, and without it there can be no sound Conversion; by this the Soul
sees a reason to move to this term, unto which it is called; for all that
pretended good, which held the Soul fast in the term from which it was called,
is all answered, out bid, and conquered.

This Victrix delectatio, B. Austin makes so much mention of, because he had
found it in his own experience, how the Lord took him off by it, when he was
under that great Conflict how he should part with his lusts; Christ threw them
out, Confess. l 90.12
and came in thy self, more sweet than all pleasure, then, says he, of a
sudden how sweet was it for me to want the sweetness of those trifles; and
those which before I feared to loose, it was now my joy to let them go.

Thus Stella interpreting those words, Luke 14.23. Compel them to come in,
speaks most excellently: How does the Lord compel men to come in? Two ways,
says he.

First, By showing to the will such good, that the will cannot but desire it.

Secondly, By removing and hiding all evil; and whereas the object of the will
is good, God can represent to the will so much good, that the will cannot but
love that good which it sees; and this is no compulsion of the will: Quia
voluntas naturaliter fertur in bonum.

Thus we have the two last things which I opened, as required to a true
receiving of Christ, proved: and here let me only leave this word to many
Christians, who when they read of such a mighty power that God puts forth in
the day of Conversion, or of Faith closing with Christ, Psalm. 110.3. Ephesians.
1.19, etc. they apprehend God puts forth some strong Act, whereby he bends or
bows their wills, and makes them by mighty power of his, as it were by force,
to come up to his terms in offering of Christ, and they have not felt such a
force or powe, but have found their hearts so willing to accept him upon those
terms, and blessing God for ever, may they but have him for their Jesus, and
God for their God, it is the best bargainn that ever they made: hence not
feeling such a power as they imagined, their faith is not found. Now this is a
gross mistake, yea, though God wrought upon thee when thou were adult, and
had played the Rebel against him before in thy life, following thy vile
lusts, when God has been preparing of thee before, and thy will renewed
(whether mediately, by working on the understanding first in order of nature,
though in order of time together, or whether immediately, I dispute not, though
I incline to the first) thy heart comes up most freely and sweetly to thy
closing with Christ, as if there were no power at all put forth upon the will
by God, because by out-bidding of all thy lusts, and setting before thy hungry
will, such a Gospel-Feast (as I mentioned before) and helping of thy
understanding clearly to see it and taste it, though he does still concur with
the will, it comes off as freely as ever it did in making of a bargain in which
thou were sure to gain a thousand pound, without any such sensible reluctance
and resistance at that time: That thou will find rebellion and reluctance
enough afterward, against the ways of Christ and holiness, I deny not, and
too much, enough to make thee groan; yet still thy will holds the same toward
Christ, who destroys the dominion of that rebellion, though he does not remove
the trouble of that rebellion.

As for that mighty power which the Gospel speaks of in those who did believe,
let others judge as they please, yet for my part I do not think it is meant
only of that power which God puts forth upon the will, but upon the
understanding also, in causing that Faith of assent, which so many Christians
make light of; for to have the Jews, who had been trained up above a thousand
years (that Church) under Moses Discipline: all those things commanded by God,
and they bound to observe them; to have so many Scriptures speak as if that
Administration should be for ever; and to see Christ in the flesh so low in his
state of Humiliation, crucified, etc. for these to lay by all the ceremonial
worship, to entertain this low despised person, to look on him in whom they
could see no beauty why they should desire him, Isai. 53.2. not only as man,
but God in our flesh, (the Jews understood him right, John 10.33. and Matthew.
9.3. and had not Christ been God, he would have rejected it with abhorrency, as
being a horrible sin, as bad as the Jews made it, for one to make himself God,
who was not so) to renouce their own righteousness, and venture their souls
only upon him For the Gentiles, Ephesians, etc. who had always been nursed up
under dumb Idols, but their forefathers Religion, upon the preaching of a plain
fellow, Paul, and other Apostles, to believe on the true God, renouncing their
false gods; and not only so, but which is much more, to believe on one Jesus
Christ, a despised crucified person, one whom they never saw, to believe him to
be God-man, to fly to his righteousness and blood, venture their immortal souls
and salvation upon him: So to believe these Truths, to assent to them, which
were the ground, why they left Idols, Lusts, and embraced Christ and holiness,
in spite of persecutions: though the Jews and Gentiles did see miracles, which
did help to confirm the Doctrine of Christ, yet I must say, it was a mighty
power of God, to make them assent to and believe these Truths, being so
supernatural, some so much above, though not contrary to reason, and also cross
to flesh and blood. Though I will not contend about the question, whether the
power of God were more in making their understandings to assent (I speak of
those who were sound believers, not others) to those Truths, or their wills to
consent and embrace the goodness held out in those true Propositions? Yet I
will affirm, it was a mighty power of God; and well might it be said, It is
given you not only to believe, but to suffer, for those Truths, which you do
believe and assent unto, Phil. 1, 29. Neither was this the mighty power of God
only then, but it is now also; and some have felt it under temptations, though
most make nothing it, because it has been a Religion owned above sixteen
hundred years, our Fathers Religion, and all the Nations hereabouts of the same
profession; all which are poor grounds to make up Divine faith. The first news
I had of this temptation was, when above twenty years since, being about the
Mediterranean, and lay in danger of Turks, who then were exceeding strong and
busy: In case I should be taken by the Turks, what have you for your Religion
to make you give assent to your Gospel? The Turks, and those who profess the
Mohammedan doctrine, are far more numerous than Christians are; have been in
possession of it a thousand years, and much of this stuff was suggested;
whence I saw presently, and have since many times learned by experience, that
those grounds upon which most Christians go, will signify little to bear up a
man in day of temptations: and still I must and will say, to work up a Soul to
such an assent, as is Divine faith, in a day of temptation especially, there is
required a great power of God. It is true, God does not let many of his weak
(as to Intellectuals I mean) people be tried here, yet the Truth is real,
although God spares you, and do not slight it.

If then after this discourse you ask me, What is saving Faith in Christ?

I shall answer: It is that Grace whereby we receive Christ as he is offered to
us in the Gospel, and so resting upon him Salvation.

By receiving I intend that Act of the Will, which I mentioned in the fourth
Head, yet including the other in the understanding, I shall open it by a plain
Similitude presently. As he is offered, etc. he that receives him not as he is
offered, does not receive the Christ that God in the Gospel offers, but a
Christ of his own making. I said, it was the Person of Christ clothed with all
his Offices, or complete Redemption. This reception makes the union. Having
thus received him, now rest upon him for salvation: by salvation is understood
all the benefits of Christ, which are salvation begun, prepare and make fit for
salvation to be completed in glory: thus we rest upon him, for pardon,
justification, peace, holiness, mortifying of corruptions, support against all
temptations, grace to perform duties, and perseverance in all these: There are
abundance rest upon Christ, or trust to him for salvation, therefore I said, so
resting: How is that? As you received him: How did you receive him? As God
offered him: This must be looked to, else your resting upon Christ is but in
vain. But this so resting takes in communion.

To open this by a plain Similitude of marriage. Such a person first offers
himself to a Virgin, seeks her good will and consent to take him for her
Husband; the person being not well known to her, she tells him, Sir, you are
but a stranger to me, though I have heard of your name, yet I have no such
knowledge of you as to give answer to so weighty a question; give me time to
enquire after you, that I may know whom I marry, if I should give consent: This
is but reasonable, says he, and bids her do so, She sets her wisest and most
faithful friends on work to enquire after him, for his estate, temper,
conversation, etc. The business is, what good she is like to have in taking
him: if those whom she entrusted, being wise and faithful, bring in full and
clear testimony, that the man is, for person, temper, education, estate and
conversation, such a one as she may be happy in; now she has knowledge of him,
now she assents to the truth of what her friends report to her, being wise and
faithful, and assured that he is true and real in his offer, he does not mock
her; her judgment approves of him, as one fit to make a good Husband: Then her
will consents and takes him. When the public Minister (as it ought to be and
was in Commonwealths well governed, and Churches) comes to marry them, his
question is, Will thou have this man, etc. She answers, I will: Then he ties
the marriage knot. Here is union, they twain now are become one flesh; he has
taken her, and she has taken him into marriage covenant and union. She now
being united to him, rests upon him, trusts to him, goes to his purse for
whatever she wants, she lives upon him, this is communion in his goods.

Thus it is in the spiritual Marriage; the poor awakened sinner hears that
Christ offers himself unto it: if it be one who never heard of Christ, as
Jaylour, and those Christians converted from Heathenisme, then Paul must speak
to him the Word of the Lord, Acts 16.32. If others have heard the Name of
Christ, have general notions of him, while they read the Gospel, or hear it
preached, the Spirit joins with it, as it did with Paul, and teaches the Soul
the knowledge of Christ; that the Soul sees Christ and knows him so as it
never knew him before, though it knew some of the same notions. The Spirit
teaches the goodness of Christ, this the Soul needs; the same Spirit assures
the Soul of the truth of what he teaches, and draws the understanding to
assent to all this Doctrine as true. But if the question be, Is Christ real
and true in his offer to such a vile wretch as I am? He assures the Soul, from
the Offer, Call, Command and Promise of Christ, that he is true, and does not
mock it. Assent is given here also. The Judgment approves of Christ
exceedingly, no good to him, I am happy for ever in having him; now the Soul
having thus heard and learned of the Father, John 6.45. both the excellency,
goodness, and truth in all: now the Will comes off freely, take him? ay with
all my heat. The door is opened to Christ, who stood knocking, Rev. 3.20. He
has opened the heart of Lydia, Acts 16.14. The will thus taking him, and
giving up it self to him as thus offered, union is made; Christ and the
Believer are become one mystically; upon this follows communion; the married
believing Soul rests upon him, trusts to him for all its wants, till Christ
has brought the Soul to his Fathers house, and to himself in glory.

This is Faith, Christian and saving Faith, that which will carry thee through
if thou have it, and improvest it, daily spending upon Christ his Stock, who
has never the less, do you and all Believers spend what you can. Whether thou
have attained as yet to that assurance, that this Christ and all his benefits
are thine; If thou have a stormy and dark Voyage, and can not see the Sun,
many sad fears I know thou may have, and sorrows enough, yet this faith will
carry thee safe to Heaven at last. It is by grounded assurance that thou art
comforted, but it is by this faith thou art saved. Which that I may make good,
let me prove, that this says, which I have described, is Gospel or saving
faith. And before I come to that, let me speak to one Question, which will help
to the clearer proof of what I have affirmed, if that be removed.

Quest. Whether the essence of saving Faith does lie in a particular persuasion
and assurance, that Christ with all his redemption is mine, that I shall have
life and salvation by his means?

Or assurance of Gods favor to me in particular, and forgiveness of my sins?

Thus we have been catechized, thus we read in eminent, holy men,
master builders, against whom though we may argue, for Truths sake, and for the
support of thousands of true believers, yet for their abilities, holiness,
Gospel simplicity, spiritualness, I fear few of us shall ever reach them: their
memory is precious. Definitions give the essence, or else they tell you
nothing. The question lies in that particular persuasion, assurance that Christ
is mine, that my sins are forgiven, as our ancient Divines have affirmed: our
later Divines have spoken exceeding well to it: yet give me leave, upon the
Reasons I before mentioned, to cast in my Mite.

That the essence of saving Faith does not lie in that particular persuasion,
or assurance, that Christ is mine, and my sins forgiven, I thus prove.

First Argument. That is not the essence of saving Faith which Gospel Ministers
cannot press all men to, but they must press most to believe a Lie.

But to press all men to particular persuasion, or assurance, that Christ is
theirs, forgiveness theirs, is to press most men to believe a lie.

Ergo, Particular persuasion or assurance that Christ is mine, forgiveness
mine, is not the essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain: Gospel Ministers, who preach the Gospel of Truth, and him
who is the Way and Truth, and cannot lie, Tit. 1. must not preach that, or
press people to believe that, which if they do believe, as they are pressed,
they must most of them believe a lie; this were horrible. Now Gospel Ministers
are to press all men who hear the Gospel to believe in Jesus Christ: This is
the Commandment of God: For this they are threatened, if they do not believe in
him, with the wrath of God. Christ is offered to all, whosoever believe in him.
The Texts I have given before.

Object. Ministers are to press all men prepared to belive in Christ.

Answ. First, But what if not prepared? Is it not therefore their duty? If it
be not their duty, then I confess all men must not be pressed to believe in
him; but then I hope unbelies in them is no sin, because faith is not their
duty, because not prepared: So unbelief in Christ shall condemn only those who
were prepared for Christ, but did not believe in him.

Mr. Shepherd gives this as the fourth general Reason of man's ruin, Sincere
Convert, p. 266.
false Faith. Of this I doubt not, false faith in Christ is the cause of the
destruction of many Christians: but for those words of this reverend Author, We
cannot rap off men's fingers from catching hold on Christ before they are fit
for him, need a little examining; for some poor Christians will soon apply this
to themselves: Catching hold of Christ, is meant faith; this is plain from the
thing it self, and the Head he is upon. Some men should have their fingers
rapped off from catching hold on Christ, but Ministers cannot do it: What is
the reason their fingers should be rapped off? Not the error in their catching
hold, but because they are not fit for Christ: then it seems they ought not to
catch hold on Christ, it is not their duty; for if it be, then their fingers
must not be rapped off, but guided and helped in laying hold. Secondly, Till
they be fit: But what is that fitness? Is it not preparedness? And when
prepared? Is it not when made willing to lay hold upon him, and take him as he
is offered? because they will not else come to Christ for life, John 5.40. By
this expression he plainly shows, that it is not men's duty to believe in Christ
till they are fitted: which upon the former Reasons I deny. I see not one
Scripture or Reason given to prove what he infinuates: what men will do is one
thing, what men ought to do another. Besides, the end of preparing is to make
men come to Christ, and lay hold of him; if now the Soul will venture upon
Christ, catch hold of him, take him as God tenders him, (then they are fit I
think) why must their fingers be rappped off, if their error be in catching
hold? that they do not take Christ right, let the falseness of their faith in
catching hold be discovered; but not say it is not their duty, because not fit:
For fit, or not fit, is every man's duty to whom the Gospel is preached, to
believe in Christ, as much as it is his duty to repent.

Secondly, I answer to the Objection: if a man be prepared for Christ, yet if
there be no necessary connection between preparation and saving faith, as Doctor
Ames, Mr, Pemble, and many of our able Divines affirm, then it will not follow,
that because men are prepared, therefore they ought to believe Christ is
theirs, forgiveness of sin theirs.

It is one thing for a man to be prepared, to lay hold on Christ, another to be
so prepared, to say truly, Christ is mine: between preparation for Christ, and
the Souls saying Christ is mine, there must come in another Act, as the ground
of this, such an Act, as Christ will own this Soul to be his, and that is, the
reception of him upon his terms; if Christ will say, this Soul is mine, then
may that Soul say, Christ is mine; but not else to any true comfort.

The Minor needs no proof: for Ministers in pressing all men to believe Christ
is theirs, forgiveness theirs, is to press most men to believe a lie, is so
evident to them that look on their Congregations, that it does not deserve
Arguments so much to prove it, as tears to lament it.

Second Argument. That which makes the essence of saving Faith to lie or
subsist only in an Act of the understanding, that is not the essence of saving
Faith.

But to make the essence of saving Faith to lie in a particular persuasion, or
assurance that Christ is mine, forgiveness mine, is to make the essence of
saving Faith to lie, or subsist only in an act of the understanding.

Ergo, The particular persuasion or assurance Christ is mine, etc. is not the
essence of saving Faith.

The Major I proved before, in proving that saving Faith takes in the will: the
heart, that is, the will is the subject of it, according to some Divines. If
the whole Soul, as Mr. Pemble and others, to be sure the will is included, that
cannot be shut out; for the reception of Christ into the will, is that which
chiefly denominates Faith saving.

The Minor. But this particular persuasion or assurance, that Christ is mine,
and forgiveness mine, is but an Act of the understanding giving an assent to
this Conclusion or Proposition as true, upon such Premises laid; but here is
no act of the will, such I mean, as we have opened in the reception of Christ;
there may be an act of the will indeed, as the will may move the understanding
to assent; as we say, You may believe me if you will; but that act of the will
terminates there, and is not such an act as we have mentioned: Our ancient
Divines use to oppose doubts to faith commonly; but to what faculty does
doubting pertain, I pray, but to the understanding?

Third Argument. That which is not cross to the corrupt heart of man, nor does
directly empty a man of himself, that cannot be the essence of saving Faith.

But the particular persuasion that Christ is mine, the assurance my sins are
forgiven, is not cross to the corcupt heart of man, nor does directly empty a
man of himself.

Ergo, The particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine, is not the
essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain. The works of Faith, or the grace of Faith, is as cross to
the corrupt heart of man, as any Grace required; the second branch proves it;
for it does so empty a man of himself, it empties him of his evil-self, and
empties him of his good-self, which other Graces do not so directly, (I mean as
to good-self) and what has a man more to be emptied of? Were not Faith so
cross, it should not be called so much the gift of God; nor the faith of the
operation of God, Col. 2.12.

The Minor. But this particular persuasion and assurance Christ is mine, etc.
Is,

First, Not cross to corrupt nature. For it is that which any carnal wretch,
that owns there is such a one as Christ, and that he is a Savior, would have:
Christ is mine, forgiveness mine, who will refuse it? Nay, we find men are
aforehand here with the Ministry: Does the Minister preach of Faith? People
have it: How hard a matter is it for Ministers to unbottom men from their false
grounds? When you have preached one Glass out, turn it again, preach another,
yea, and twenty hours more if you will, you shall never move them from this
good hope and persuasion that Christ is theirs: it were well if men could be
taken off from these groundless persuasions and assurances: so that to be
persuaded and assured that Christ is theirs, this is not cross to their nature.
And if Mr. Shepherd had meant this, in men's catching hold of Christ before they
be fit, that is, their persuasions and assurances Christ is theirs, then would
I heartily have joined with him, that men's fingers had need be rapped off from
catching hold of Christ, in this sense, till they be fit.

Secondly, Not does it directly empty a man of himself. By consequence a man
may gather such a Truth, or Proposition; If Christ be yours, then you are
emptied of self, i. e. of that self which stands in opposition to Christ,
because faith in Christ does thus empty a man of this self; but the particular
persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine, does not empty a man directly of
this self; for observe many of these who have this assurance (as they conceive)
and whom you cannot beat off from their deluded and deluding persuasions, they
do not know what it is to be emptied of self, but are under the dominion of it.

Fourth Argument. That is not the essence of Faith which is not found in all
sound Believers.

But the particular persuasion or assurance that Christ is mine, is not found
in all Believers.

Ergo, It is not the essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain. What it is that makes Faith saving must be found in all
those who are sound believers, else they are not sound believers, it is
impossible they should be sound. Definition tells you, quidres sit, what is the
essence of a thing; where the Definition is not found, the Definitum cannot be
found. Man is Animal rationale (if you will have it, as De origin errat. c. 3.
de salfa Sap. l. 3. c. 10. de ^ra Dei c. 7.
Lactantius, he is Animal Religiosum; he seemed to doubt, whether the common
definition would serve turn, that he is a Rational creature, because he saw so
many sparks of Reason in other Creatures: And truly if that definition he true,
abundance of men, and those who seem to have in their own esteem most reason,
are no men, for they are no Religious Creatures, but plain Atheists) but to
keep to the common definition, then a reasonable Soul must be found in all that
are men, else it is impossible there should be a man. This definition agrees to
the Child in the Cradle, as well as to the Judge on the Bench, to Solomon in
his Nurses arms, as well as to Solomon on the Throne, though then his Acts of
Reason were high. So must this assurance or particular persuasion that Christ
is mine, be found in all believers, though Infant-believers, if sound, else
they are no believers.

The Minor is too clear; this assurance is not found in all sound believers. He
that will cut off all from being sound believers, that have not this particular
persuasion and assurance that Christ is theirs, must, as David said in another
case, Psalm. 73.15. If I say, I will speak thus, behold I should offend against
the generation of thy children; so must these cut off the greatest part of the
generation of sound believers; they are but few in comparison of the unsound,
take them all in; but if you exclude them who have not the assurance, you will
leave a pitiful remnant indeed. This our holy ancient Divines saw in their
experience and trading with Souls; hence they were forced to make distinct
sizes of Christians, and degrees of Faith: as Mr. Richard Rogers makes several
degrees of Faith: 1. The weakest and least measure, The seven Treat. p. 71.
when there is no assurance in the believer, and yet inseparable fruits and
tokens of Faith. 2. When there is some assurance wrought in the believer at
some time, but in a weak degree. 3. Has assurance for most part accompanying
it, though not all alike. Yet in page 23. he had set out Faith by assurance,
and said, that is the Faith which uniteth to Christ. Now how can these things
possibly hang together? when as he, and so holy Perkins, will own many for
sound believers, in whom there was no assurance, and yet it is that assurance,
as he says, by which men do apply Christ to themselves, and which uniteth men
to Christ: where there is no assurance, there can be no application of Christ
and his benefits, no union with Christ; it is as possible, as there can be a
man, and yet no reasonable soul. Hence no assurance, and yet a believer is near
a contradiction; for assurance makes a believer; yet here is a believer and no
assurance.

Fifth Argument. That cannot be the essence of Faith, which must have another
Act of saving Faith to antecede it, before it can exist.

But this particular persuasion or assurance, that Christ is mine, must have
another act of saving Faith antecede it, before it can exist.

Ergo, It is not the essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain. For that is but the consequent of another act, which must
have another act antecede to its existence; or it is but an effect of it: then
we must have our eye upon that act which gives the existence.

The Minor is plain. Before this particular persuasion or assurance can exist
in any man, that Christ is mine, there must antecede this act, That I have
received and embraced Christ, as God does offer him in the Gospel. If this act
does not antecede, and be true, all my particular persuasions, that Christ is
mine, are but so many delusions. So that this particular persuasion is but a
consequent, or an effect of saving Faith, which was in the heart before.

Sixth Argument. That cannot be the essence of saving Faith, which is not
always constant and abiding, so long as man is a Believer.

But the particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine, is not
always constant and abiding so long as I am a Believer.

Ergo, It is not the essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain, For the essence of a thing cannot possibly be missing, and
yet the thing be, the essence must be constant, though there may be many
changes in the thing. Let a man be never so sick, or let him have such sore
eyes, that his sight is so impaired that he cannot read, yet he is a man still,
his essence is constant: So though a believer may fall very sick spiritually,
as God knows we have sickly times, let his eye be so dim that he cannot read
his evidence, Christ is mine, but concludes the contrary, thinks verily he
reads other lines, God has written bitter things against him: Does he
therefore cease to be a believer? No verily, that which is the essence of faith
will be found in him at that time; essences are not fluctuating, come and gone,
but abiding so long as the things essentiated by them are.

The Minor is too plain: Acknowledged by our ancient holy Divines; sense has
proved it, and does prove it, to Christians sad experience, they cannot always
say, Christ is mine, my sins are forgiven, some scarce all their lives; they
tremble, they dread to speak it; yet such as have truly received Jesus Christ
the Lord, if they can say it to day, ask them to morrow, they cannot say it
then, yet as sound a believer now when cannot say it, (though not so
comfortable a believer) as when he could say it.

Seventh Argument. That cannot be the essence of saving Faith, which is not
pure Faith, but at best a mixed act of faith and sense.

But the particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine, is not pure
Faith, but a mixed act of faith and sense.

Ergo, It is not the essence of saving Faith.

The Major is plain. Faith and sense differ much, Blessed are they who have not
seen and yet believed, says Christ, John 20 29. Faith leans upon a Divine
testimony, a Revelation of God, merely, it bottoms upon that; but sense looks
into a man's self what it finds there; therefore these being so different,
cannot make up the essence of faith: The essence of Faith is not extracted out
of a Syllogism, made up of a divine testimony and my sense.

The Minor is plain: For whence rises this particular persuasion and assurance
that Christ is mine, forgiveness mine? Is it not the conclusion arising from
two premises that went before, of which one must be made up of sense, spiritual
sense: He that believes in Christ is justified, or is united to Christ, Christ
is his. This indeed is de fide, we know it by revelation, we have Gods
testimony for it.

But I believe this minor proposition; how do you know that? It must be by a
man's retiring into himself, and there taking a view of his own heart, examining
what God has done there, how he has drawn the Soul to Christ; which I know,
the mind of man, illuminated, sanctified this Spirit of man, the candle of the
Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27; with the Spirit
of God helping of it against all those darkning Objections which Satan and his
own timorous heart raises, may experience find out, and that certainly, and so
draw up this conclusion, therefore Christ is mine, my sins are forgiven; the
conclusion is certain, that Soul is not deceived; there may be a firm assent
given to this conclusion. If so, then says learned Ward, De fide justific.
cap. 33.
Rectissime dicitur assensus-fidei specialis, cui nec subest aliquando, nec
subesse potest falsum, non minus quam fidei Catholicae. Here I shrink,
certainty I acknowledge, not a wavering conjecture; but to have it, special
Divine faith, and to be as certain, as this proposition, That he that believes
in Christ is justified or pardoned, of which I am sure it is true, non potest
subesse falsum, this is hard to yield to. The minor is certain, with the
certainty of experience, or experimental knowledge, he says, experience and
faith are different things: How then is the conclusion certain, with the
certainty of Divine Faith.

The conclusion must follow the weaker part; and I think my experience is
weaker than Gods testimony; then let the conclusion follow my experience, and
so be certain with the certainty of experience; and if so, then be sure, the
particular persuasion and assurance Christ is mine, cannot be the essence of
saving faith. For there is no faith at all in that conclusion. However make the
best of it, it is but mixed.

I find that learned Author twice asserting, that divine propositions, p. 33.
and 205.
de fi de; being more obscure and less evident, they are therefore the weaker
(eo nomine deteriores) because of the Inevidentia in this Divine proposition,
He that believes in Christ the Mediator, his sins are forgiven, therefore
there is a Debilitas, a weakness in this proposition: whence if the Syllogism
be formed.

He that believes in Christ Mediator, his sins are forgiven. But I believe in
Christ Mediator, (which I know by experience.) Therefore my sins are pardoned.
Here the conclusion must follow the more ineyident, and so the weaker part,
which is the Major.

Pace tanti viri, here we must dissent: I would not have it said, that ullo
nomine, a Divine proposition, should be deterior, than other Scientifical
propositions. That stout Champion Bradwardin arguing against some Philosophers,
who presumed they could know God fully, and deriding of Christians, because
they believed something concerning God, which they knew not how to demonstrate
by way of humane reason; after he had proved that God was infinitely more not
known than known, he bids the Philosophers cease deriding Christians for
believing some things divinely revealed concerning God, and his works, which
they knew not how to demonstrate, De causa Dei, p. 29.
but knew how to defend them from their contradictory demonstrations; then,
says he ought not this to satisfy any Christian, yea, or profane man, for a
Demonstration, Deus dicit? Jehovah says, it is a Demonstration sufficient in
Bradwardin's esteem and certainly if it be as impossible for God, or the Prima
V^^^^^^, to be untrue, or false, as for fire to be cold, or Sun (...) dark;
then if he says it, there is as much strength in that proposition to command
assent from our understandings, as in any proposition of which you can make
demonstration by any humane reason. (...), etc. Dialog. can. Triph. p. 224.
Justin Martyr says, the Prophets did not compose their Writings by
demonstration, but were Witnesses worthy to be believed of truth, far above all
demonstration; then certainly a Divine proposition cannot be the weaker part of
a Syllogism, which the conclusion must follow.

Again, why does this learned man say, that Divine propositions, de fide, are
more obscure. I mean, ex hypothesi, that it be yielded that it is a Divine
Proposition, as this proposition which he propounds.

He that believes in Christ the Mediator his sins are forgiven.

What obscurity is there in this proposition more than in the next?

But I believe in Christ the Mediator.

Is the obscurity as to the proposition, whether this be an Article divinely
revealed? Then the minor is but in vain. I would never trouble my self to know
whether I believe in this Christ Mediator or not: But is that yielded it is an
Article of Divine faith?

Is the obscurity in the word believe? Then the minor must be as obscure: Is it
in the object of this faith, Christ the Mediator? That is a Mystery indeed,
his person, and his work; but still the minor will be as obscure; for the minor
Proposition assumes the Tertium argumentum out of major Proposition, and
disposes it with the subject of the question; and if it be obscure there, it
must be so here. In the next words cannot be the obscurity. But this I am sure
of, in the minor that I believe, there may be obscurity, rising from a person,
where though there be light, yet there is also much darkness: but in God there
is light and no darkness, not so much as the shadow of a lie.

Again, whereas the learned Author says, Propositions de fide are more certain
than Scientifical propositions. If they be more certain, then my assent unto
such Propositions must needs be more certain. If the question then be, to which
of these Propositions

He that believes in Christ the Mediator, his sins are pardoned.
I believe in Christ the Mediator.
Can I give the most certain assent? To the first surely, being a Proposition
de fide: then that must be the stronger of the premises, and the minor is the
weaker, which the conclusion must follow.

The learned Author says, that the minor, I believe in Christ, must be de
fide, because it cannot be known (quoad modum) without the irradiation of the
holy Spirit, which irradiation (for so I think he puts infallibiliter certa and
vera in the ablative case to agree with irradiatione) is infallibly certain and
true.

Here we have something that is obscure: What is this irradiation of the Spirit?

Reverend Mr. Bolton mentions several cases and times, Gener. Direct. p. 326.
in which the Spirit does suggest and justify to a sanctified conscience, with
a secret, still, heart-ravishing voice thus, or in like manner, thou art a
Child of God, thy sins are pardoned, thou art one of them that shall be saved.
That it is with a voice always, he does not say, but that the Spirit does so
break in upon a Soul in a secret, strange, but clear manner to that Soul, does
so persuade the heart of Gods love, and that it does exceedingly ravish it for
that time, I doubt not of it.

But first, They are but rare Christians who meet with these dainties.

Secondly, This voice of Mr. Bolton's, and so this way of assurance, is without
any Syllogismes. The question is not, which part the conclusion must follow,

Thirdly, Satan sometimes is transformed into an Angel of light, and as he can
play his game in filling precious Souls with fears and darkness, so he can, no
doubt, help an unsound heart to ravishing comforts, persuading them they are
the Children of God. One I knew, who was under terrible lashes of Conscience,
upon a sin of theft; Ministers and Christians came to visit him; the Soar being
opened by Confession, the man was filled with such divine comforts, expressed
himself at that rate, that they were amazed: the Minister, an able man and
holy, not being acquainted with such dainties, though it were the last day of
the week, when he saw the man under these ravishments, altered his course,
chose another Text, to show how the Spirit of God was able to raise a Soul, as
low as Hell, even as high as Heaven in a short time; they had there the
Instance of it: Yet the good Christians, who lived in the family, (it was a
Gentleman's family) told me, they could discern no work of Grace in this man
afterward. So that here we have cause to look how to clear our selves from
Enthusiasme. And if the question be seriously put, How shall I know this voice
to be the voice of the Spirit of Christ? If you say the Spirit cleared that
when he spoke it: Will not the other say so of his Spirit? Must we not come to
examining of the work of Grace, Faith, Conversion? for be sure the Spirit of
God speaks only to such; our Spirits must bear witness also; and that Mr.
Bolton adds as a note to distinguish this voice of the Spirit from a
delusion, Ibid. p. 328.
that this witness of the Spirit ever goes along with the testimony of a
renewed Conscience, Romans 8.16. and so follows this under several heads, to
help resolve the Christian who is truly troubled about it, and would not be
mistaken about that testimony of the Spirit, though he answered before with
Ambrose, The Holy Ghost does never speak unto us, but does make us know that it
is be which speaks. I doubt not of it, but as the Sun clears it self, so does
the Spirit when he speaks.

But yet a few words: Our Spirits bear witness: that our spirits may do so,
there must be a concourse of the Spirit of God with our spirits to help them do
so: (...) course of God as the first cause in all Acts, qua Act, (...) a
special gracious concourse in this Act: for what (...) the darkness,
corruption, deceit, confusion, jealousy, fears arising from hence, our
spirits, though renewed, will never be able to bear witness, that we are the
children of God, as experience sufficiently declares: but when the Spirit does
by his concourse help our spirits to bear witness, this witness is formally the
act of our spirits, and so far, we cannot call it special faith. But the
question is, Whether besides this first witness (which I believe is the highest
that most Christians attain to) is there another testimony of the Spirit,
distinct from this concourse of his with our spirits, by which he enabled our
spirits to witness, which is the testimony of him purely as the first cause,
not making up the effect with the second cause, as he did in the witnessing of
our spirits? This I perceive Mr. Bolton affirms; for he calls that secret voice
the testimony of the Spirit. And, faith he, when our renewed Consciences have
upon such and such grounds born witness, etc. then the Spirit of God, as
another witness, secondeth and confirms this assurance by Divine Inspiration.

Though these dainties I could never taste, yet I have met with some (but very
rarely) that have: Some have told more stories, what comforts and assurances
they have had by absolute promises, brought to them, and set home by the Spirit
of God, whom I regard not: But one I have met with, whom I much honored, one
of the lower rank in the world, no great headpiece, though of good competent
knowledge, in practical things, he lived up to his knowledge, you might see Mr.
Rogers seven Treatises practiced to the life in him, which as it made me much
to value him, so I did the more attend to this story he told me.

As to the testimony of his own spirit, he had several times, examining himself
by the Word preached and read, found that witness: but one time being under
affliction, and could not sleep in the night, he fell to examining of himself,
what should provoke the Lord to follow him with affliction, as it seems he had
done, being but low in the world at best: after examination, he lights his
candle, goes to reading in his Bible; having done, puts out his Candle, laid
by his Bible, and composed himself to rest, if God would give him any sleep:
but, faid he, while I was thus trying to sleep, there came from God a Text
which he had not thought of, Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name, shall the
Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, which was set home, with
that life and power, with such expressions as these, all is healed, thy sins
all pardoned, God and thou reconciled, no enmity now between God and thee, etc.
that he was filled with such joy and comfort, that he was not able to have born
it, if God had not drawn back. He did not tell me of any voice he heard, (nor
does God need our ear) but these expressions were as real and clear to him as
if any man had spoken to him. This was that which all his life after he lived
chiefly upon; though every morning at his first awakening, this was his work to
look to his evidence, examine himself, and so kept the testimony of his own
spirit: Thus lived and died a precious Saint.

Two things were observable in this man; one was as to the witness: that in it
there was no attendance to the condition expressed in that Text, for it is
there, To you who fear my Name: That he did fear his Name, that was certain:
but I asked him, Did not the Spirit clear the Condition? He told me, there was
no attendance to the Condition at that time, but only here was assurance of
healing by the Sun of Righteousness, pardon, love, etc. had not this man both
before and after this proved the Condition, and been a close walker with God to
his last, I should not so much have regarded his comforts from this Text.

But a second thing I wonder at more, and there he and I differed. That which
made him to regard this so much was, that it was a Scripture he had not in his
thoughts, or had read at that time; for, said he, had I been meditating upon it
before, and so had comfort from the Text, I should not have regarded it so
much; that was the emphasis, that it was a Scripture he had not thought of.
Whence, according to him, the greatest assurance is when the Spirit sets home a
Promise to a man, which Promise was not in a man's mind, he was not meditating
upon it; for if he had been in meditation upon it, he should not so regard it.
This Divinity, I told him, I dare not preach; for I doubt not, but if the
Spirit will please to witness, healing, pardon, love, peace, by a Promise, that
I was meditating upon, it is as sound, sure and good, as if he does it by a
Promise, I did not think of. Hence we see experiences of eminent Christians
must not be in every point our rule, for in my discourse with him he always
set the Accent there, and so that if it had not been a Text not thought of, he
should not have so much minded it, at least not so much, But sure his great
comforts he would have minded.

Well then, that this was the testimony of the Spirit, I doubt not; it was
clear to him, by the Sun that then did shine into his heart. Here was no
syllogism.

First, May we not say, his assent to this testimony was special faith? I
conceive we may grant it. The testimony came with such light, and
self-conviction, that he could not deny but it was the testimony of the Spirit
immediately. Now if I be convinced clearly it is his immediate testimony, I am
bound to assent to his testimony, which is here, Divine special faith.

Secondly, But this I hope is not the assurance and particular persuasion,
which holy Perkins, and holy Rogers mean? If so, the number of true believers
will be but few indeed; I have known many, and do now know many, whom I
question not but they are sound believers, but never knew what this kind of
testimony meant; yet have and do know what the testimony of their own renewed
spirits mean. Hence quaere, whether that (...), Romans 8.16. be not ordinarily to
be meant of that concourse of the Spirit with the Spirits of believers, which
while they are clouded and darkened in their self-examining, and know not what
to make of themselves, the good Spirit scatters those mists, and helps the
believer to see the work of faith, and the frame of grace, which he has
wrought in it; and thus helps the Soul to witness, and is a witness with it.
For if it be meant only of the Spirits witness, as Mr. Bolton describes it,
and this good Christian found it, that witness I find very rare amongst those
with whom I have conversed: To have comforts by promises applied now and then,
I deny not; but this was in an eminent way.

Thirdly, Nor do I think this was the irradiation which learned Ward intended;
because, as I said, here was no Syllogism, which he is upon. Nor, I think, is
this that our Divines mean by their special faith, in opposition to the
Papists; for they will yield that a man may have the assurance of his pardoned
estate, and being in grace, by a certainty of faith, if God will please to give
him that assurance by a special revelation. De Justific. l. 3. c. 3.
As Bellarmin yields, and quotes abundance of his Authors, agreeing to the same
Opinion. What to call this, but a special revelation, I cannot tell: for here
was no ratiocination on his part, but now composing to rest and laying by those
thoughts, in came the Spirit of God after this manner, immediately bearing down
all doubts before him, and assuring him he was pardoned, and in favor with
God. But as to assurance, if all the Papists will yield what Gregory de
Valentin. tom. 2. disp. 8. q. 4. p. 1. does, I would never quarrel with them
about it.

Eighth Argument. That cannot be the essence of saving Faith, which leaves a
true Belieuer sinking under the sense of his sin and misery without support.

But this particular persuasion and assurance Christ is mine, etc. (affirmed to
be saving faith) leaves a true Believer under the sense of sin and misery
without support.

Ergo, It is not the essence of saving faith.

For the minor first. Here is a Christian, and one, whom if you examine as we
have opened the work of faith, can give some good answer to it: this Christian
is under the sense of his own vileness, guilt, and wretchedness, ready to sink:
I pray how will you support him? Thus, though thou art guilty, vile,
abominable, yet there is enough in Christ to heal thee, pardon thee, redeem
thee, and reconcile thee to God: yea, says the Soul, I doubt not of it; but
how shall I get him? How? by faith, that is the way the Gospel tells us. Ay
but, says this Soul, I cannot believe: What no? Do you know what faith is? A
particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine, and that my sins are
pardoned, etc. Ah, says the Soul, if this be faith, I am damned indeed,
Without are unbelievers, Revel. 21.8. I must be without indeed, for I am sure I
am an unbeliever now: A persuasion Christ is mine? that my sins are forgiven? I
cannot reach such persuasion or assurance, had I this faith, there were an end
of my troubles: but now you tell him what faith is, and if no faith, no Christ,
and to be sure he has no faith, if this be the faith which uniteth to Christ;
so you do but plunge him deeper into despair, while you go about to support
him: yet that he is a true believer, the notes which these worthy men give of
one, are found in him.

The major is clear. True believers have right to comfort and support; they
ought to be supported: Strengthen the weak hands, confirm the feeble knees,
Isai. 35.3. but miserable Physicians will they prove, that go about to heal
their wounds with this plaster,

More Arguments might be added, but these I hope are sufficient to prove, that
the definitions of our forefathers, which they gave of faith, was not clear.
And so Christians may be eased as to that point, not cutting off themselves
from true faith, because they have not attained to that particular persuasion
and assurance, that Christ is theirs.

Having removed this, now I shall prove that to be saving faith which I have
opened. As for the other contest between the Papists and us, about the general
assent to Divine truths, etc. though, as I said, to have that assent to be
Divine faith, is another manner of thing, than many Christians take it to be;
yet as that was never my own doubt, nor of others with whom I converse, whether
that alone would make up saving faith, (being easily convinced of the contrary)
therefore I leave it.

Faith in Christ then, is the receiving of Christ as he is offered in the
Gospel, and so resting upon him alone for life and salvation.

How Christ is offered in the Gospel, what this receiving is, I have opened
before, and must not now repeat again; but shall briefly prove this is saving
faith. I shall run over the heads of Arguments.

First, This is that which the Scripture tell us is faith, Col. 2.6. John 1.11,
12. where we have receiving of him expressed, Matthew. 12.21. In his Name shall
the Gentiles trust: thus nothing is more frequent, than to have faith set out
by trusting, resting, staying, rolling ones self or burden upon God or Christ.

Secondly, According to this definition, Christ has possession of the whole
Soul, Understanding and Will.

Thirdly, This is that faith which all men are commanded to have: This faith
Ministers may and must preach to all men, and charge them with it, and that
without a lie.

Fourthly, This faith is directly cross to flesh and blood; God has his ends
directly, not implicitly, in giving his Christ; His Servant is exalted,
extolled very high, Isai. 52.13. Man being emptied of himself, Christ is
received by this faith: the Soul goes out of it self, and fetches wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, redemption from him, 1 Cor. 1.30. This Soul
glories in Christ, in rich Grace, now God has his ends; man is debased,
Christ and free Grace are exalted. By saying, Christ is mine, my comfort is
exalted, but not the ends of God directly, though implicitly they are, if it
be true what the Soul says, because this act of faith, which directly exalts
him, went before it.

Fifthly, No other definition has been yet given, wherein the saving nature of
faith in Christ has been truly opened; De Nature. and Gra. l. 2. c. 7.
not the general assent to Gospel Truths. Soto thus states the Question: Fides
Catholica, Christianae familiae necessaria, utpote qua Christiani censemur, non
est specialis illa quam indubitato credit quisque, ac constituit sibi remitti
peccata propter Christum, and esse in gratia Dei; sed illa potius persuasio
Divina atque assensus, quem debemus, praestamusque Deo; omnium in genere, quae
ab ipso sunt Ecclesiae revelata, per Christum, per-quae ejus Prophetas,
Evangelistas and Apostolos: inter quae and promissiones ipsae divinae
connumarantur. Neither of these are true; the latter is deficient: and, as I
said, because it troubles not our Christians, and they are easily resolved in
that point, I let it alone: nor is the first true, that I have opposed in my
former discourse: He that has no other faith but this, I am persuaded and
assured Christ is mine, and that my sins are forgiven, shall never see Christ
with comfort. That assurance (though true) may comfort me, but cannot save me;
for it does not the saving work of faith.

Lastly, This faith is found in all true believers, and at all times.

First, It is found in all true believers, not one that is found but has it;
take it into pieces, and leave out one piece of it, and see if you can make
sound faith, First, take the object, What do you receive? The Person of Christ,
with his Offices and complete Redemption. What is that Person of Christ? God
man. Do thou receive a man only? Take thou such a Jesus, he is no Savior
for me; he is too poor to pay my ransom, too weak to do my work. I find our
Jesus calls for denying of Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Lands, Life, etc.
Luke 14.26. Mark 10.29. all must go, else can be none of his Disciple: The
Father calls for no more but All: Jesus calls for as much, for my Names sake:
then I hope he gives as much as the Father does: if he deprives my will of all
these goods, then he must have good far beyond them all to satisfy my will,
else it is an unreasonable Command, and the will can never come off rationally,
but may justify its refusal to come to him, because being by nature, from a
principle God has put into it, inclined to good, to blessedness; here is good
denied, and not better good come in the room: but if the Divinity of Christ;
his Satisfaction, his imputed Righteousness, his Grace whereby we live, and are
enabled to persevere in Grace, be denied; I do not see that good in Christ
which is able to fill up my will. But you take Christ God-man you say; but do
you take one Office, or some part of his Redemption, leave out some Offices,
leave some Redemption? tell us what it is, and you will soon show your self to
be unsound. Do you receive him, and not trust, rest, rely upon him for all
redemption? or can you find redemption in any other besides him? It is a sign
you feel no great need of him.

Whence in answer to that Question, What is the lowest degree of Faith? For my
part I know no lower degree than this definition I have given; for that Soul
which comes not to this, I know not how to call him a true believer: Let any
man give me a lower definition of Faith which is saving, and I will yield him
to be a believer according to that definition. I know very well there are
greater degrees of strength in the acts of receiving and trusting, resting.
According to the greater degrees of discovery of our sinful, miserable, guilty
state, the greater discoveries of Christ, in the necessity we have of him,
glory, excellency, and worth in him; according to the degrees of quickening
grace infused and the degrees of the influence and concourse of God with the
will: but still as the least Child is a reasonable Creature, so the least
believer truly so, is united to Christ, married to Christ: If union and
marriage can be without that faith as I have opened, then I will yield there is
a lower degree than that definition, and I shall renounce mine as false.

Secondly, It is in believers at all times. Take those who have lost their
assurances, and lie bemoaning themselves in their dark desertions, examine them
softly, prudently, you shall find them at last yielding to this; though when
you come to gather up your discourse, and so would conclude their faith for
them, then they may shuffle, thwart, and call back something they have yielded,
when they come to see what you drive at. Sometimes they will give no answer at
all, or deny all; frowardness does too often attend these dark fits. Take other
Christians, unless it be in the very heat of their Combat, when corruptions are
raging, when they know not what to say of themselves, but they are plain
Hypocrites; let but the storm cease, they will give you a fair account of this
work: for as union with Christ always hold, so this faith always hold, though
not discernable to themselves always; yet others may help them to spell their
lesson, and find it out, when they cannot.

But it seems we have not as yet got a sound definition of faith; the reverend
Mr. Daniel Rogers has put in one thing which creates much trouble to
Christians, as you may see in the Epistle to the Reader. Mr. Shepherd, though
he speaks not the same words, yet speaks the same sense, in his Sincere
Convert, p. 123. where inviting the Soul to take hold of Christ, he thus
speaks, Go to him, and take hold on him, not with the hand of presumption,
and love to thy self, to save thy self, but with the hand of faith and love to
him to honor him. His ninth and last way that he numbers among the nine easy
ways to Heaven (as men think) all which lead to Hell, seems fully to speak the
same thing with Mr. Rogers, which you may compare with him in the beginning of
this book. Ninthly, Sincere Conv. p. 160.
The way of self-love, whereby a man fearing terribly he shall be damned, uses
diligently all means whereby he shall be saved: here is the strongest
difficulty of all, to row against the stream, and to hate a man's self, and then
to follow Christ fully. Here he has left the Reader in the dark sadly, not
telling him, what he meant by rowing against the stream, hating self, following
Christ fully; but withal, here is enough to sink a poor Christian, that if a
man fears terribly he shall be damned, and uses diligently all means whereby
he may be saved, this is but a way of self-love, and a way to Hell; self must
be hated. These two places fully agree with Mr. Rogers. One head more he has,
which needs an Interpreter: The pining and devout Hypocrite, Ibid. p. 37.
that being pursued with the fear of hell, labors for just so much holiness,
as will save him only, and carry him to heaven at last. If he labors for it,
and attains so much holiness as carries him to heaven at last, I am confident
he shall not be condemned for an Hypocrite. What, or how much is that just so
much holiness as will carry a man to heaven?

According then to these two Worthies, in the work of faith, and the Souls
closing with Christ, it is not a man's salvation (which is love to himself, and
self-love is but a way to hell) which the Soul must aim at so much, but the
honor of Christ, and glory of Gods Grace above its own salvation.

To carry on our work the more clearly, I will handle two Questions briefly.

Quest. 1. Whether the Soul, in closing with Christ in effectual Calling, may
not lawfully and safely aim at, and eye its own salvation?

Quest. 2. Whether the Lord requires, to the truth of saving Faith, and closing
with Christ in the work of effectual Calling, that we eye and aim at the honor
of Christ, and exalting of the glory of his Grace above our own salvation?

These two Questions will take in fully what Mr. Rogers and Mr. Shepherd have
delivered as to this point, where I pray take the state of the Question aright.

The question is not, whether the glory of Gods Grace, the honor of Christ, be
not things above our salvation? that is easily yielded, I know none so simple
to deny it: for Gods glory is his ultimate end, and our salvation is but a
means to this end: yea, though salvation be sometimes called, or put for the
end, yet it is but finis medius, which in respect of the ultimate end is but a
means: So then that is not the question. But the question lies here, whether
in faith answering the call of God, in its first union with Christ, does God
require, that now we look that we receive Christ, to exalt that glory of his
above our own salvation? For thus Mr. Rogers and Mr. Shepherd have both carried
it.

For the first Question, I shall not need stand upon that, it is so plain, to
any man who has read the Gospel, that he is stark blind that cannot see this,
that believers in Christ may aim at their own salvation in receiving of him:
Only this same word, self love, is a suspicious word, and Mr. Rogers
(especially) with Mr. Shepherd, have spoken so much against it, that they make
poor Christians afraid: Now it is true, self-love is the great cutthroat, it
damns thousands, if not all. I touched this before, and will repeat it yet once
more, for the support of poor Christians, and I will lay down this Rule
concerning self (and will by the wisdom of God defend it against any man that
has a mind to oppose me.)

A Rule. Never did God declare against self, or call a man to deny himself, in
that which did hinder his own salvation and happiness, lying in union and
communion with God by Christ. Did I hear any man preach a duty to Christians,
in answering of which duty I saw clearly, my self, my happiness, my salvation
were cut off and hindered, [placing my happiness (as I said) in my union and
communion with God by Christ] I would be bold to tell that Preacher he lied:
God never gave him a Text to preach such Doctrine: I know he has given me
Commands to deny my self, but in those Commands obeyed, my self (that is, my
happiness and salvation) is preserved safe and sound. If the Reader thinks by
my writing, that I am warm, in this business, I am so indeed, for it has been
a vexation to me to hear precious Christians, in the days of their
despondencies, when I have been endeavoring to help clear out to them their
work of faith in Christ, and they could not deny, but such a faith as I have
mentioned, they had found, then they would turn me off with this, It was their
own salvation they aimed at, and this was nothing but self: So that to receive
Jesus Christ, God in our flesh, in all his Offices, in his complete work of
Redemption, resting, trusting, relying upon him only, for all redemption and
blessings of the new Covenant; and this declared to be true by a
Gospel-conversation, this has been esteemed as little, having nothing in it to
bear up a heart; but why I pray, because I aimed at my salvation, which is no
more but self-love: I wish I could have preached all my people into such
self-lovers, I would have ventured my Soul for theirs if they had miscarried.

Very briefly then to the Question.

First, Do not all the Promises in the Bible regard a man's self. Do they not
contain in them, and speak good to us? Does not the whole new Covenant speak
good for our selves? Does not the Lord every where call us, and draw us to
obedience by promises of good to self? Did you ever read your Bible, and not
read this?

Secondly, Did not the Lord in those blessed thoughts of his heart in eternity,
when he decreed to give his only begotten Son, make, thy self, thy salvation to
be the design of that gift? John 3.16. Did ever read the Evangelists, and the
Apostles, and not read this? I know he has another design, his own glory; but
yet salvation of poor man was such a thing, as without him Christ had not been.
I know very well there is a question, whether the second Person in the Trinity
had not been incarnate though man had not fallen? And I read Barwardin, with
other learned men, inclining to the affirmative, giving their Reasons, which I
think may easily be answered; this is but an airy speculation: Sum. 3. p. q. 1.
a 3.
Aquinas speaks more rationally and according to Scripture, in which we ought
to rest.

Thirdly, Was not this the end of Christ his Offices, and all the work he did
on earth, and does still in heaven, To bring many sons to glory? Heb. 2.10. Did
he not come to seek and save those who were lost, Matthew. 18.11. Was this the
very business of Christ, and yet thou stand doubting of thy says, because
thou aimest at thy salvation? May not I aim at that for my self, which Christ
does?

Fourthly, Is not thy salvation the end of thy faith? 1 Pet. 1.8. And (that I
may join several heads together) that which thou art commanded, To work out
with fear and trembling? Phil. 2.12. Have not read the price? Nay, it is the
unvaluable worth of a Soul, Christ himself being the Judge, and how he sets
thee to look after the salvation of it, Matthew. 16.26.

Fifthly, Was not that the work of the Spirit in the work of preparation, to
make thee feel thy misery, through sin and guilt, that fearing the wrath to
come, thou might flee to Jesus to deliver thee? 1 These. 1. last.

To conclude, Art thou afraid thy faith is not sound, because thou did aim at
thy salvation? I will be bold to tell thee, thy faith is unsound, and thou
did never close with Christ truly, if thou did not close with him for thy
salvation: Thou poor abused Christian, did not receive Jesus? Did not the
Father call thee to Jesus? If you never received Jesus, you never received
Christ as lyet: I pray what is Jesus? What does this signify? Is it not a
Savior? Good Lord, that ever Christians should be so abused, blinded, by a
Devil, that they should not see, that it is impossible for them to receive a
Christ, but they must receive Jesus Christ, they must receive a Savior, and
yet make their faith worth nothing, because they aimed at their own salvation:
Will you be for ever fooled thus? Come, come, friend, leave your cavilling,
your simple, silly, foolish quarrellings, I tell thee, Christ is a glorious
Savior, and will have abundance of glory in thy salvation: And where is Christ
like to have it most, but in those, who being most sensible of their horrid,
vile, undone and miserable condition through the guilt of their sin, and
slavery of their hearts to their lusts and creatures, and being enlightened to
behold the glorious and great salvation, Heb. 2.3. which Christ has wrought,
do with admiration of this Jesus and his salvation, receive him, embrace him,
upon his own terms, that they may obtain complete redemption and salvation by
him: the more thoroughly sensible they are of this great salvation they have by
him, and aim at in him, the more will they admire him.

Object. This is to love Christ for his goods: we should love Christ for
himself, not for his goods; thus we have heard Ministers preach, and Hypocrites
may love the goods of Christ.

Answ. Must we love Christ for himself, not for his goods? I pray what wise man
was it taught you this? Who taught you to divide the object of your love, when
as God has joined Christ and his goods together? I mean by his goods, all the
benefits of communion, all the good things that believers united to Christ are
to partake of: Did God offer you a Christ without goods? Is not the whole
Covenant of Grace, are not all the Promises, of which Christ is the Yea and
Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. the things in which the Lord offers to jointure the Soul,
upon the Marriage of his Son? Whence then came this Divinity? Not from Heaven.
Yet sometimes I have heard such passages like to this, when men will seem to
let people know they have more skill than others in the mysteries of
Conversion, they must strain themselves to speak something new, though it be
nonsense. I know full well Christ is to be loved for himself, and believers
are taken with the Person of Christ, he is and shall be very glorious in their
eyes; but to say, and not for his goods: this is just as if a woman were taken
with the person of a man, but this person has no goods, nor the woman any, and
so when they are married, they must either work hard, beg, or starve: Christ is
no such person, if he were, whatever these men say, I suppose he would have but
few to believe in him; you may preach long enough before you will draw Souls to
him. It is not the Person of Christ which does immediately answer the Soul, and
help it under the misery it now lies. If a woman be ready to starve, or
pinched with cold, ragged, etc. it is not the comeliness of the man's person
that will feed her, or cloth her, but his goods. When Christ called the Angel
of Laodicea, Revel. 3.18. to come to him, he tells him of gold and white
raiment, these are goods: It is righteousness, peace, pardon, justification,
holiness, etc. which are fit to answer the condition of this poor Soul now
called to Christ, these are his goods. Why then are these blocks thrown in the
ways of poor Christians, to trouble them in their self-examinations?

Object. But Hypocrites love the goods of Christ, and would be glad to partake
of them?

Answ. Speak at length, I pray, make what you object clear, that we may know
how to understand you: Hppocrites love all the goods of Christ, and would
willingly have them: Say you so? Does an Hypocrite love all the goods of
Christ? all the benefits of communion? all the new Covenant? Does he love them
all? Is his love real and entire to these? would he have them all? Speak out
plain, that we may know your Divinity, and is not that Hypocrite willing to
embrace and receive the Person of Christ, that he may have all the goods of
Christ which he loves? I pray show me that Hypocrite: Why do we speak so
darkly, when we have to deal with Souls so often in the dark? Who are more apt
to take up such sentences, than poor upright Christians, who are afraid of
Cheats? I know Hypocrites will be glad of some of the goods of Christ, some
part of his redemption, what is this to the work we are upon? The difficulty
lies in the next question, to which now I come: What the state of the question
is, see before.

These things we grant.

First, That the glory of Gods Grace, the honor of Christ, are above our
salvation.

Secondly, God has his Grace glorified in the Souls first closing with Christ,
and shall have the glory of it to eternity. Christ has his honor, and shall
eternally be exalted by the believer. In the very first receiving of Christ, he
does wonder at the Grace of God, he admires the Love and Redemption of Christ,
and does so all his days while he lives, and shall do so for ever when days
end.

But the pinch lies in this word Above, in such a time, or such an act; that
is, that in the first act of faith, in the answer of the call, in the uniting
of the Soul to Christ. Now the Soul must see and examine it self, whether it
sets up this Grace above its own salsation? As for Mr. Shepherd's words, Take
hold on him, not with the hand of presumption [what he means by this, he
opposes the hand of faith, I think, to it] and love to thy self, to save thy
self, but with the hand of faith, and love to him, to honor him: This passage
is so strange, and so his ninth way to hell, that I could not believe that ever
Mr. Shepherd did deliver such Doctrine; Sound Believ. p. 193.
but if the Printer says true in his Title page, that this fourth Edition is
corrected and much amended by the Author, then I should believe it: but I have
some cause to doubt it, upon these two grounds. First, I compared this with his
Sound Believer, where he tells us what is the end of faith; in which there is
not any such words as these, nothing like them; nothing of Mr. Rogers notion;
nothing different from what I have delivered, but he and I fully agree. Christ
himself and all his benefits, is the end of faith coming to Christ; and I hope
salvation is one of those benefits. Secondly, I do not believe it, upon Mr.
Shepherd's own words in his Letter to me, which are these, without omitting or
adding a syllable, That which is called the Sincere Convert, I have not the
book, I once saw it; it was a Collection of such Notes in a dark Town in
England, which one procuring of me, published them without my will or privity;
I scarce know what it contains, nor do I like to see it, considering the many
(...) Typographica, most absurd, and the confession of him that published it,
that comes out gelded and altered from what was first written. Thus you have
his own words faithfully transcribed; this Letter was dated October 27. 1647.
the year, wherein the Printer says the book is corrected and much amended by
the Author, is, 1646. Let any man then judge, how this book was corrected and
amended much by him. In short therefore as to that book, for the general part
of it, the book is very solid, quick, and searching, cuts very sharply, it is
not a book for an unsound heart to delight in, I mean, in those places where he
agrees both with Scriptures, and other able Divines, and of these make use: but
for the other passages, which do not agree with either, (as there are some in
it) I will let them go, as being none of Mr. Shepherd's, and not trouble my
self with them, and wish no Christian, that is tender and sincere, to trouble
himfelf with them. This I put in, because I hear that book has caused much
trouble to gracious Christians; had it been to Christians in name only, unsound
believers, hypocrites, I should not have troubled my self about it; for I know
it is not for their tooth: therefore though I had thought to have spoken to
more things in it, which are just cause of stumbling, yet henceforth I will
meddle no more with it; his notions there do cross what he has himself
published in the Sound Believer. I remember my Father Ward made this
observation upon him to me, When Mr. Shepherd comes to deal with Hypoerites, he
cuts so desperately, that we know not how to bear him, made them all afraid,
that they were all Hypocrites: when he came to deal with a tender humble Soul,
he gives comfort so largely, that we are afraid to take it. I let that reverend
Author then alone, he is one on our side, in his Sound Believer, which he
himself put forth. I have then only Mr. Rogers to consider; who has given no
Scriptures, or Reasons, that I can find, to prove his Assertion; some Texts he
may name to prove what I readily yield, but they-prove not the question in
hand, therefore I have no Arguments of his to answer, butto produce a few
Arguments against his Doctrine, I shall take up one of my former Arguments, and
improve it against this notion.

Arg. 1. That which neither Christ nor his Apostles did require of
Gospel-Converts, as requisite to their saving Conversion or Faith, that is not
to be required of Gospel-Converts now.

But the eying of the glory of God Above our own salvation, was that which
neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever require of any Gospel-Convert; as
requisite to their saving Conversion or Faith.

Ergo, The eying of Gods glory Above our own salvation, is not to be required
of Gospel-Converts now, in order to saving Conversion or Faith.

If it be not to be required, then it is needless, then no such danger for a
man to loose his Soul for want of it, as he tells us.

The Major is plain: He that will require more to a faving work of Faith and
Conversion than Christ did and his Apostles, does implicitly charge them with
want of skill in conversion of Souls, and had best become a Teacher of them.
This is little less than blasphemy, you say, and I may leave out little less.

The Minor: This lies upon Mr. Rogers to prove: Name the Texts, where ever
Christ preached thus, or any of his Apostles; he may name Texts where God
declares, that the end of all his good things bestowed on Vessels of Mercy, is
the glory of his Grace: we yield the Texts as fast as he can name them, and we
will give him a Reason also, He that is the first Efficient, must be the last
End. It is to set up another God, to set up another ultimate end. We will be as
free as he can be for Texts and Reasons to prove this: but this is not the
question, Let him name the Texts, where Christ or the Apostles teach Converts,
that in their conversion, or believing in him, they must look to this, that
they set this glory of his Grace Above their own salsation: we read of Christ
complaining, that the Jews would not come to him that they might have life,
John 5.40. but never read, that he required of them, or blamed them, that they
did not aim at, and set up the glory of Gods Grace Above their life: in that
Text life comprehends salvation, and all benefits of communion: Those who are
thirsty, calls them to him, and promises them living waters; many such Texts,
but not one word of this stumbling notion: when they in Acts 2. were under the
work, did Peter teach this doctrine to those Converts? When the Jaylour came in
trembling with that question, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. Does Paul's
and Mr. Rogers answer agree? Let Mr. Rogers answer him: Ay Jaylour, you are now
come down, as jolly as you were a few hours since, and now you would be saved;
the way to salvation is faith; but look to this in your faith, that you set up
the glory of Gods Grace above your salvation, that it be made but subordinate
to his end, else that same self will ruin you, for all that shaking now upon
you: but Paul speaks no such thing: so that either Mr. Rogers has troubled
poor Christians needlessly, or Paul was a very unskilful Pilate, that did not
give warning to poor sinners, enquiring after their salvation of this
Souldamning selvish rock,

Take the Prodigal, who is set out for a pattern of a Soul converting or coming
home to God: What was the turning Argument? There is bread enough in my Fathers
house: Bread then is the business for a starving Prodigal; Salvation for a Soul
under sense and sentence of damnation. Ay but Prodigal, you must set up the
praise of your Fathers kindness, love and mercy, in taking you into his house,
and giving you bread, Above your bread, and life thereby preserved. Ah, says
the poor Prodigal, I shall praise my Fathers love and mercy, if he does; but
whether above my life or bread, at this time, I cannot stand to decide that
now, whether I do or not; pinched I am, almost starved I am, ready to famish,
O, I pray, give me bread. Is not this the case of this poor Soul now, in a
miserable, starving, dying, damning condition there is living bread, Jesus
Christ to be had, with thee there is forgiveness, Psalm. 130. Oh give me this
bread, this Christ, and with him peace, pardon, redemption, grace, salvation
from that misery now I feel: Yea, says Mr. Rogers, [but not Christ nor his
Apostles, blessed be God] salvation you may have, if you set up the glory of
Gods Grace above it. O says the Soul, I do admire his Grace, and shall adore
it, but whether I do above it now or no I cannot tell, I am pinched for a
Christ, and for all the benefits he brings to lost undone Souls, such as I am,
give me him.

When Seamen fear Rocks, or Shoals, they go to their Plats, and look there
whether they give notice of any Rocks or Shoals, if they do not in places well
known, where Ships go frequently, on they go: Once it was our case, falling
into a Current, where the water foaming, some suspected Rocks; to the Plats
they went, and found no mention of any Rocks there, on we went boldly, and no
danger. Conversion of Souls is a work wherein Ministers trade every day, Mr.
Rogers, Mr. Thomas Hooker, Mr. Shepherd, have given us warning of Rocks, here
is a selvish Rock will split the Soul, says Mr. Rogers: We reverence the
graces and abilities of these worthy men; but are there Rocks? Let us go to our
Plats the holy Scriptures; Christ and his Apostles have gone this way
oftentimes before us, and knew where dangers lay sufficiently; Do they give
notice of these Rocks, which these worthy men do? Not the least mention of any
such things: then let Souls go on boldly, O do not trouble them, and scare them
with more fears than need; they will have fears enough of a shipwreck rise from
other Rocks, though we do not make new ones.

Arg. 2. That which no Christian can possibly make out whether it be so or no,
that cannot be (a condition) required to saving Conversion or Faith.

But this condition, that I set up the glory of Gods Grace above my own
salvation, is such a condition as no Christian can possibly make out whether it
be so or no.

Ergo, This condition is not requisite unto saving Conversion or Faith.

The Major is plain. To put such a condition which cannot be known, is a mere
vanity; in vain are all our examinings whether we be in the Faith or no, if
there be a condition required to saving Faith, which never was nor can be
proved; the Word of God puts no such conditions; if Mr. Rogers will make use of
Moses and Paul, as Mr. Shepherd has done, and take them in that sense he does,
then not only, the exalting of his glory above our salvation, but salvation it
self also must go; the Soul must not eye its own salsation, but choose
damnation, a thing impossible.

The Minor I must prove.

If it can be known, then my salvation and glory of Gods Grace must and may
come in competition; so that both cannot stand together, but one I must part
with. As the glory of God must be above Father, Mother, Wife, Houses, Lands,
Liberties, Life it self; the Scripture says, these must be hated, i. e. not so
loved, but must be let go, and parted with, when Christ and his Gospel calls
for them; when Christ and these, the glory of God and these, have come in
competition, they could not stand together, one must be above the other. This
may be known, and has been known thousands of times. Christians prepare for
this if they be wise, and desire strength from Christ to help them to it: But
does Christ say, he that forsakes not Father, Mother, Life, and his own
eternal salvation? This was never put in, nor can be put in, because man's
salvation, and the glory of Gods Grace, are so inseparably linked together,
that one cannot be without the other. Grace is in God, Mercy is in God
essentially, without man's salvation; but the glory of Grace and Mercy is not
without man's salvation; because unto glory, among other things, manifestation
is required: Salvation is such a necessary means unto this end, the glory of
Grace, that take away this means, salvation, you take away this end, glory of
Grace: so that it cannot be known: I may think this and that, but I can prove
nothing: and for ever blessed be God, and blessed that Grace of his, which has
so joined them, that they cannot be parted, and so this notion not being to be
proved, it shall not need to trouble us, though Mr. Rogers has caused trouble
enough by this block of stumbling.

Whereas he tells us, this self-love is so dangerous, that it will deprive the
Soul both of her labor and hope. I add.

Arg. 3. Self-love does never prove destructive to a Soul till it cross a
Command of God.

But this self-love, in closing with Christ, according to the Gospel, for my
salvation, though I cannot tell whether I aim at the glory of Gods Grace Above
it, is not cross to a Command of God.

Ergo, This self-love is not destructive to my Soul.

The Major is plain. It is Disobedience to a Command which only destroys the
Soul, crossing of the preceptive Will of God, when self sets up something
against God; that good which I choose and seek for my self, and God stand
Opposites. Thus self-love setting up something against God, places it self
Above God in his Command.

The Minor: But man's salvation, and the glory of Gods Grace, cannot be made
Opposites; this is plain, for no man can possibly seek the exalting of Gods
Grace, but he must seek his own salvation: So that there lies an absolute
necessity that I must thus love my self, as to seek my own salvation, else
there is an impossibility of my serving this end, the exalting the glory of
Grace. Hence this word, Above, the setting up or loving any thing above God,
has place only there in Scripture, where the thing set up, or loved by my
self, may stand in opposition to God; then self-love proves destructive indeed.
But where does Mr. Rogers find this Command in Scripture, that though the Soul
does so seek its own salvation, as it willingly embraces Christ upon his own
terms, yet that in believing and closing with him, it sets up the glory of Gods
Grace above its salvation, and so self-love, not obeying, but crossing this
Command, ruins the Soul eternally? Let any man observe the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, how they preached, and see through the whole Scripture, if
this were not their way to draw men to repentance, to believing in Christ, with
these Arguments of salvation, and good things to us: but as for the glory of
Gods Grace, that honor which he has in our repentance, in our believing, that
is mentioned nothing so much as the others; though he has glory it is true in
it, and will have it more, yet that Argument is little inculcated; but to
command or move with this, the setting up this glory above salvation, I find it
not: nay, we see how vile we are, that though the Lord does follow us, and
press us to repentance, to faith, to walking with him, from Arguments that
concern self, our own salvation and happiness, yet how little did these
Arguments, and do they at this day prevail? O gracious condescension of God! O
vile heart of man! Did Mr. Rogers, and do Ministers now find that people are so
eagerly set to seek their own salvation according to the Gospel? Do crowds of
people come in so thick, that he had need stave them off, and keep them out,
with this puzzling notion? I am sure I could observe no such thing when I lived
by him, though there were some, blessed be God, in the place, yet more would
have been welcome, I am sure very few in his latter days came in, if any. From
this observation of the way of preaching, which the Prophets, Christ, and all
his Apostles took, I have wondered what our Ministers of late did mean, that
they could not be content to preach as the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles
did, but must thus puzzle, perplex and grieve the spirits of Christians, who
truly close with, and love Christ, with their strains and notions, which
neither Prophets, Christ, nor his Apostles, ever delivered. God from eternity
did intend the manifestation of the glory of his Mercy (mixed with Justice in
our for ever blessed Surety) in some persons: This is the end he propounds, and
this end this efficient, who propounds it will take care that it be brought
about; it lies upon the Efficient who propounds it to himself, to effect it;
in order to this end, he creates man (though creation serves for a means as
well for the manifestation of Justice as Mercy) in a pure estate, makes a
Covenant with him, leaves him to his own will, permits the fall (I purposely
avoid disputes about the fall, but permission I think will not be quarreled
with, though I know what disputes there are here also) being fallen, See
Bradward. de causa Dei l. 1. cap. 33.
he sends a Redeemer, gives faith in him, justification, pardon, holiness,
renewing of nature, rewarding faith and obedience (continued in to the last)
with salvation and glory. All these being means to bring about this end, the
manifestation of the glory of his Grace, mixed with Justice. All these means
lie in the Efficients hand, one way or other (for he did not concur to the
fall, as he does in other means) so to order them, that be sure he fails not of
the end he propounded: God cannot send a Redeemer, give faith in him,
justification, peace, pardon, holiness, perseverance in all, with salvation to
crown all, but his end must of necessity appear; so that he cannot fail of his
end. The believer, pardoned, redeemed, sanctified, saved, does give him the
glory of this Grace, and serves his end; the Efficient has his end: In the
work of faith, and obedience, walking with God, there I set God above my self,
above my own will and lusts; so in parting with any thing that is lawful to
enjoy, any creature comfort, when it comes to be opposite to God, here the
glory of God is above me; here lies my duty: this serves as means to that end;
this is his gift, he is the principal Efficient as the first cause, though
formally: Faith, Repentance Obedience be my Acts. But to bring in this as a
duty in my first closing with Christ, that I set up this end, (manifestation of
his Grace) above my salvation, I cannot find this in Scripture. The first Agent
looks to, and takes care for his end. There are several persons have conspired
to take away the Kings life, their treason is discovered; the King is willing
and resolves to make manifestation of his clemency and mercy; upon the Traitors
petitioning to him, promising loyalty to him for the future, he freely pardons
them; in pardoning of them, he does clearly manifest his clemency and mercy:
all men know (as they could say of the Kings of Israel) and say, the King is a
merciful King; he bears the glory of it; the pardoning of the Traitors is a
means to his end: it was the King ordered the means, though he did not put in
this clause, See that you exalt my mercy above your life: His end did not
depend upon this, whether they did exalt his mercy above their lives? (Alas
poor men, their lives are dear to them, and they do exalt his clemency) No he
has his end, all the Kingdom bears him witness, and other Nations by him, that
he is an exceeding merciful King, and deserves praise. So it is here, the
attaining of Gods end does not depend upon this, that I ser up the glory of his
Grace above my salvation; for he has his end in saving; heaven, earth, and
hell must all confess, as does the saved Soul, the pardoned Traitor, cry out,
O the depth of the riches of the Grace and Mercy of this God: but for the word,
Above, I let that alone and not mind it.

Arg. 4. If Repentance towasds God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts
20.21.
be conditions sufficient to put a man into a state of salvation, then the
exalting of the Grace of God above my salvation is a condition needlessly added.

But Repentance and Faith are sufficient. Ergo.

For the Consequent: To add more than the Gospel requires, to put a man into a
state of salvation, is needless, yea, it is boldness for any man to do it, it
is in effect an adding to the word; as if God did not know what were
sufficient, but we must teach him; and if needless, then there is no danger of
this self-love destroying the Soul, as is asserted by him.

The Antecedent is true: Repentance and Faith are conditions sufficient; so
says that Gospel which reveals our salvation:

To say the Consequence is fallacious, because this condition, of setting up of
the glory of Grace above our salvation, is contained in them: Say in which?
Define them both, and see if we can find it.

For Faith in Christ. That we said, is that saving Grace whereby we receive him
as he is offered in the Gospel, and so rest upon him alone for salvation. This
definition agrees with the Scriptures, and is not at all deficient; we have
proved it before: having opened how Christ is offered, and how Christ is
received, etc. it is not contained in this.

For Repentance to life; the essence of it lies in the Souls turning from all
sin with grief and hatred of it unto God. I will not set down a large
description of it: Our Catechism gives it. Now how can that condition be
contained here, being, I am not to turn from my own salvation, this is no term
from which I am called: I must turn only from sin. God requires no more as to
the term from which I turn.

Arg. 5. Lastly, This Condition of setting up the glory of Gods Grace above our
salvation, must be had in Heaven: Therefore to require it here, and that upon
this penalty, the loss of our Souls for want of it, agrees not with solid
reason.

Quest. Why do you tie it up to Heaven?

I answer: So long as the means to an end is incomplete, imperfect, so long the
end, to which that means tends, is but imperfectly attained: Now so long as
believers are in this world, with a body of death within, temptations from
World and Satan without, lying in so many dangers and fears every day, that
many times the Soul knows not what to say of it self, but thinks it shall one
day perish, this heart of mine will undo me; temptations without drive so hard
against the Soul, the means as yet is very imperfect, though the Soul sees it
is Grace only through Christ which can save it, and thinks it shall magnify
his Grace if he will save it, yet it fears often, it will not be its portion;
hence as yet God has not his end, or but very little; but when the Believer is
got into Heaven, out of the Gunshot of all temptations, when it is secure and
safe for ever knowing danger any more, salvation is perfected, and the means to
Gods end completed: now begin the Songs, to the praise of the riches of Grace
and the Lamb, to be sung, and shall be sung to eternity: now God has his end
completed, Grace in our salvation, and above our salvation for ever triumphing.

If the authority of Mr. Rogers, being a man so eminent in abilities and grace,
do make you think it must needs be true; for such men's Opinions as these do
prevail exceedingly upon Christians that are not able to examine Doctrines:
then take his Opinion which I had from his own mouth; for as I preached against
this Doctrine, when I lived by him, so I conferred with him about it, and wrote
down what he said to me in the Margent of his Book when I came from him, his
words were these.

The Soul in its first coming home to Christ, does seek its own salvation;
after union with Christ it seeks the honor of God, and its own salvation
subordinate to it. It must first have a good savor of God; it must first have
tasted of his love before it can come to this: That is, to exalt his glory
above its own salvation. But this saying and his Books do not agree.

For if so be the Soul must have union with Christ first, and in its union does
and may seek its own salvation, and must have a taste of Gods love (he must
mean by this favor and taste a secret intimation of his reconciled love, some
good evidence of it) before it comes to this setting up the glory of his Grace
above its own salvation; how is it, that this self-love (in not subordaining
its own salvation to Gods glory) which will deprive the Soul of all its labor
and pains, as he says, so dangerous, that it will undo it? how is it, I say,
that this is found in a person united to Christ? yea, and there lies till the
Soul gets a taste of the love of God? This I cannot understand: How long is it
before many poor Souls can get a taste, and how little of it when it comes, how
short a time does it stay? Bara-hora, brevis mora.

Thus I have endeavored to remove those blocks, which were laid in the way by
these eminent men, whom I do so much honor; they have been a trouble to my
self, as to my own state, which has made me to examine them, and weigh them in
the balance of the Sanctuary, which must determine all questions, and sit
Judge upon all our writings: the men being holy, able, and experienced men,
made me more to fear; had they been young men, in the heat of their affections,
I should not have regarded them: as I saw one book (the Authors name I forgot)
who gave such signs of hypocrisy, that will cut off many a gracious heart, but
I saw by his picture at the beginning, he was but young, and so did not regard
him: How far that I have written may tend to the satisfaction of those Souls,
who have been or are troubled with these doubts which have been raised by these
worthy men, to the troubling of the peace, and evidence of many gracious
Christians, I leave to the judgment of judicious and experienced Divines. I
bless God, for my own part I am at rest as to these doubts, (though I have been
disquieted by them) unless I meet with better Scriptures and Arguments then yet
I have done.

Having then opened the work of Effectual Calling, and shown how the Spirit of
God prepares the Soul for Christ, and unites it to Christ; I will now make some
improvement of the whole by way of Application, though in this I intend to be
but short, by reason there are so many excellent books printed, and men of such
eminent gifts so excellently skilled in Gospel work, that had it not been for
these doubts, which I know have troubled diverse, and for some of them, no
Divines that I knew had spoken to them; though I found by discourse with them,
they were not of the same judgment with these reverend men; I say, had it not
been for this, I would never have set pen to paper; for I know not, for
substance what I can write, that has not been written by more able pens; yet
variety of gifts may please the Reader, and help on his spiritual edification.

From the whole work then I will conclude, if this be effectual Calling, and
that which makes real Christians, Then

First, The number of Real Christians is but small, whatever those, who are
called Christians, think.

Secondly, The number of Real Christians is greater, than those who are Real
Christians, giving judgment upon themselves in particular, will believe. I
shall handle both these Conclusions.

The Schools have divided their Doctors into Nominales, and Reales. The great
Doctor of the Church, has divided his Scholars, into Nominal and Real
Christians. In the Schools, the Real Doctors ( Thomistae and Scotistae) do
exceed the Nominal Doctors ( Occamistae) in number: but in the School of
Christ, the Nominal Christians exceed the Real Christians abundantly: Many are
called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but not according to
his purpose, Romans 8.28. therefore their calling is not to purpose, they answer
not the call of God. Let but the discourse we have been upon be seriously and
truly applied to men's hearts, how few answer it? Though we leave out what Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Rogers, have cast in, to make the work much harder,
and have endeavored to make the way so plain and straight, that the lame or
weak Christian may not stumble in it, Jer. 31.8, 9. This differencing of men
into nominal and real Christians, makes real differences: Why should we not
judge charitably of all men? Would Ministers only preach divine Truths to
inform men's understandings, but never meddle with application of them to men's
hearts? would they, if they must reprove sin, reprove it in general, deal with
no man's particular lust? would they not meddle with Uses of examination, but
let men alone there? would they not sort out men thus, to make some ignorant,
some profane, some civil, some hypocrites, and some sincere Converts, but
jumble altogether, judging charitably of all, they should be very good
Churchmen, able Scholars, and never fear trouble from men, whatever they may
fear from God, to whom they must give their account? But if Jeremiah will go
about to take away the precious from the vile, Jer. 15.19. as his Master
commands him, then let Jeremiah expect nothing but vile treatment, even from
those who must be called the Children of a precious Abraham. That which
heightens the enmity more is, that upon this applying, distinguishing,
examining, and searching into men, the number of true Believers, such as shall
be saved by Faith, is made, by the Opinion of these peevish and censorious
Puritans, to be but small. How much more praise worthy were those charitable
Latudinarians, Huberus and Caelius Curio, mentioned by Doctor Twisse, Vindic.
Gra. de criminat. l. 2. p. 1. the first wrote a Book concerning the Promiscuous
election and predestination of all men, yea, of the final impenitent unto
eternal life: the latter (sometime Professor in Basil) wrote a little Book,
concerning the largeness of the Kingdom of Heaven, therein endeavoring to
prove, that the number of the elect, and those who are saved, is much greater
than the number of reprobates. How come we to want these pieces in England? But
I suppose we may spare them, having such Latitudinarians at home. I was told by
an understanding Christian, and he told me it so for truth, that I might
believe it, the Minister was laboring to comfort his hearers against the fears
of damnation; Many men, said he, keep a stir about hell and damnation, but do
not fear, do we not read, John 3.16. God so loved the world? Art not thou a man
in the world? Why do you fear then? The Text says, God so loved the world. A
notable Clerk to make a full point at world: though this man did but bungle,
yet, I doubt not, many there are who would make good, if they could, what these
men aimed at. That few should be saved, is a hard saying, Who can bear it?

But to make good my Inference, or Conclusion: The number of Real Christians is
but small.

Let us but consider how those who are called Christians answer the two Heads
we have been upon; Preparations for Christ, and receiving of Christ, or union
with Christ: What preparations have we observed in men for Christ? Some
preparations there are, and they are know very well; when a man has a Child
born, he prepares a barrel of strong beer, if he be but a poor man; others
prepare some bottles of wine; withal they prepare good meat, and good junkets;
the Child then is Christened, made a Member of Christ in its baptism; then home
they go, and eat up their good meat, and drink up their liquor, before
prepared, it is well if none be drunk; and this is the preparation and union
with Christ, which many thousands of those, who are called Christians, know,
and they know no other preparation for Christ, or receiving of Christ, but
this: when they grow up to years, they go to Church as Neighbors do, they must
be Christians, because they know not what to be else, they must go whether the
crowd carries them; if you will call them Christians you may, but know no more
of Christ, saving the Name which they hear a Minister talk of, than a Heathen:
As their Parents made them Christians, so because it is the fashion of the
Country, they will do as their Fathers did by them, and their Neighbors do by
theirs, if they have Children. I have given instance of one in Essex, a County
famous for the Gospel, who of late years coming to my Father Ward to baptize
his Child, my Father asked him, Why will you have your Child baptized? He
answered, because others had their Children baptized. Then asked him, how many
Gods there were? He answered, Ten. Then asked him, how many Commandments there
were? (supposing his mistake) He answered, Two. Which is the First? He
answered, Salvation: The Second I know not, but he gave him a Second. My Father
asked him, if he gave him these answers to cross him? The man answered, No
truly Mr. Ward, if I knew how to answer you better I would. The civil man, whom
Mr. Pemble mentions, was but little better. If Ministers did but enquire into
the knowledge of all their Parishioners in England, they would soon find I have
spoken but the truth. Thus for want of Catechizing, and Gospel-Discipline,
abundance of Christians, so called, differ but little from Heathens. Others,
though not so grossly ignorant, but can tell many truths concerning Christ, They
profess they know God (they are then Professors) but in works deny him, Tit.
1.16. Nomine Grammatic us, re Barbarus,

But as to the preparatory works which we have gone through, how few are
acquainted with them. Some it may be will deny any such preparation for Christ
as necessary, and think it was only the Opinion of Mr. Hocker, Mr. Shepherd, or
it may be two or three more such rigid men; but surely that man is little
acquainted with the Scriptures, or with the Writings of the ablest practical
Divines, besides our Divines at the Synod of Dort, who deny it: De Causs Dei,
l. 1. cap. 35, 36, 37 38, 39.
the Popish party will not deny it, when especially they can talk so high of
men's preparing and disposing themselves for Grace, with whom their own
Bradwardin has dealt sufficiently and solidly in confutation of them: [Surely
God has his people in this mystical Babylon; he must be very censoreous who
reads Bradwardin, and Jansenius his August, besides others, who will not yield
it.] But to return to those who deny preparatory works: I pray what is the work
of a Minister? Is not it to labor to bring home Souls to Christ, and being
brought home, to labor to build them up in Christ? This is the sum of a
Ministers work. If you deny preparatory works, you will deny half the work of a
Minister. For does any Minister think he shall ever persuade people to come to
Christ, and receive him, upon his own terms, who were never thoroughly
enlightened to see their miserable state they are in by sin, and convinced that
this is their state? Will they ever come off from this term from which he calls
them, unless they feel the evil and burden of sin so, as to cause fears and
sorrows? Will a man thus far wrought on, if he can set up a trade of duties,
and felfrighteousness, and find his life in these, eyer come home to Christ? He
that thinks he can do his work soundly without these, understands little of his
work, and less of any saving work upon his own heart. But how little of this
working do we find amongst Christians? How few enlightened to see, and
convinced of their own finful and miserable state, as it is? How few under this
sense and conviction through the fears and sorrows accompanying this
conviction, cry out, what shall we do to be saved? Such cries, such questions,
how rarely do Ministers hear from those who are called Christians? As for
self-righteousness, and duties, if men can but set up a form of worship, keep
from the gross sins of the times, their conversation but moral, nay now, you
must not question these men's Christianity, none are sound or real Christians if
these be not: yet these are but course sieves, the Hypocrite it may be can tell
you he has experienced these preparations, we must sift him in a finer sieve;
so that by the unacquaintance of the greatest part of Christians with these
works, we shall find few are real Christians.

Object. But did you not tell us before, that God begins his work, and lays
his foundation, in the Infancy of many? How can they experience these
preparatory works, as your self before have argued?

Answ. I recall nothing of what I said; but in answer to your Objection I say,

First, Such do show this work of Grace in their childhood as they do grow up;
observe them, and you shall see such actings, that will give good grounds to
hope God has begun the work of Grace.

Secondly, Few, if any of these, living to years of understanding, and hearing
of these things, but it has been a trouble to them, and made them question
themselves, whether they had Grace, because they have not found them.

Thirdly, None of them all, who live to riper years, but do experience all the
preparatory works, though in them, I conceive, the work does loose that
relation, as preparatory, because they had Grace infused into them in their
infancy or childhood: So that I will not contend about the word preparatory, so
the works be found. Tell me that Real Christian (let God have begun his work
when he pleased) that is not enlightened to see, and convinced of his sinful
and miserable state, that has not known fears and troubles because of it; has
not been made willing, that Christ should separate him and his sin; that is not
taken off from resting in his own duties, reformations and doings: They do all
experience these, let the Lord work them when and how he pleases. But for
others, where the work begins in riper years, there they are known more
distinctly, and properly preparatory, though God has his variety of working
even amongst such also. Hence preparatory works I did not at all oppose, nay, I
maintained them, only my scope was to help Christians who were in the dark as
to their own work, searing they were not sound and real Christians, because
they had not experienced those workings as others had.

Try those who are called Christians by the next thing we were upon, their
receiving of Christ, when prepared for him, see if the number of them be
greater than we mention. Receiving of Christ, what is that? Do you mean Faith?
Yes, I do mean Gospel-faith in Christ: nay, then your Conclusion which you
drew, that the number of Real Christians was but small, is very false. For your
preparations, we cannot say much for them, but for faith in Christ, we can
speak enough for it; all the Ministers in England shall not make us believe but
we have faith, ay and it may be will swear by their faith they shall not.
Define faith which way you will, they are for you. If you will call it an
Assent to what Truths soever God reveals, etc. in a laxe way: they do assent to
their Bible, that it is the Word of God; that all which is contained in it is
the Mind and Will of God; they did never doubt of it in all their lives; and it
may be will say, it were no matter though he were hanged that does doubt of it:
but if you come more close to tell them, what the ablest of the Popish party
tell us is required to make that assent to the divine and supernatural
Mysteries revealed, to be Divine faith, not only they, but many others, who
make light of Dogmatical faith, had need examine again whether their faith be
divine. De essentia Fidei Christianae est, ut innitatur primae veritati
revelanti tanquam rationi formali credendi: De Auxiliis Disp. 49.
And adds presently, Ad eliciendum talem acium necessario requiritur speciale
auxilium praevenientis gratiae: Gods general concourse will not serve the turn,
says Alvarez; both of these parts he proves partly from Aquinas and Austin. In
this point Alvarez to me appears very Orthodox, and according to him, I doubt
not to affirm, there is but little Dogmatical divine faith in Christendom,
though many Professors make a tush at it. But if we grant they have this faith,
such as it is, yet this is not enough to make saving faith; then we are to seek
still; and that is proved by our Protestant Divines against the Papists,

If you say, as our Fathers, That faith is a particular persuasion that Christ
with all his benefits are mine; they have this faith also, and so assured of
it, that let the Minister preach himself hoarse, he shall never persuade them
of the contrary; but if we examine them upon what grounds our Fathers taught
this persuasion was built, there but few will answer.

If you say, Faith is a receiving of Christ as he is offered in the Gospel, and
so resting upon him alone for salvation; the latter part of this they
understand, and that is the faith which men of more knowledge than the common
rout have taken up. I remember a young Gentleman, who had been catechized by
his Mother, a right Gallant he was, went to visit an old Usurer that lay on his
deathbed, the rich Usurer seeing that now he must dye, began to be a little
troubled, and having heard of says, could not tell what to make of it; the
young Gentleman could tell him, It was to trust upon Christ for salvation; this
helped the Usurer, he could not well tell whom to trust else, and now trusts
Christ. It is very well, Christ it seems shall be worth the regarding at last:
but as we read, John 2.23. Many believed in the Name of Christ when they saw
his miracles: but in the next verse the Text says, Christ would not commit
himself to them: What not to believers? No, though they will believe him, he
will not believe them: so though these can trust Christ, he will not trust
them: This is a fine Religion, that men shall set up Mammon, and serve that
Idol while they live, follow after the ways of their own hearts, slight the
offers of grace, despise holiness, and yet trust Christ for salvation; if such
can find him their Savior, they understand faith better than all the Divines
in England.

But this we find, that faith is easy to come by. Whatever men want, yet there
is no man wants faith: you may convince men that they are swearers, drunkards,
etc. but you shall not convince them that they are unbelievers: though they
know nothing of the preparations for faith, yet they have it; but where they
got is not the question: though they cannot pray, or walk so precisely as some
Puritans do, yet they can believe as well as the best of them: they need not,
nor do thank God for this Gift, they were never beholding to him for it: Faith
is the easiest duty in all the Bible. Take faith to be, as these men understand
it, nothing but trusting Christ for salvation, how little do they understand
this act of trusting of Christ? while Conscience lies asleep, sin and guilt do
not stare a man in the face, now it is an easy matter to trust Christ for
pardon and salvation; but when God awakes that sleepy Lion, sets a man's sins in
order before him, as be sure he will do, here or hereafter, then men shall find
it is not so easy a matter to lay their hands upon the head of the Scapegoat,
Levit. 16.21. to unburden their guilty laden Souls upon Jesus Christ, whom now
they can so easily trust: No, no, friend, thou will rather sink under thy
burden than take one step toward Christ, and commit thy guilty Soul to him,
how hard will that act of faith be, which now is the easiest, as I said, of all
duties in the Bible. Thus have they found it, who yet have received him upon
his own terms, as he is is offered in the Gospel, and thus receiving him, trust
him for pardon and salvation; but in the days of their fears arising from
their guilt, there lay pressed under their loads, but could not roll their
burdens upon Christ, without Grace from Heaven assisting them to put forth this
act of faith, for which they magnify God, when enabled to do it.

By this then that I have spoken, my first Conclusion stands firm, that the
number of Real Christians, such as shall be saved, is very small, whatever
those who are called Christians imagine: yet because you shall see it is not
only the judgment of a few peevish censoreous Puritans, let me give you the
judgment of three Popish Authors: Alvarez Do Auxil. disp. 43.
has stated this question, Whether at least of believers more be elect or
reprobate? He draws up his answer under three conclusions, the last is this,
That even of believers, there are more reprobate than elect. The Jesuit Cornel,
a Lapide In Matthew. 7.14.
undertakes to prove the same thing by several Arguments, and quotes a terrible
passage of Chrysostom in his Sermon to the people of Antioch, where he was
Bishop and well beloved, and he speaks of Believers, says the Jesuit;
Chrysostom's speech was this, How many do you think of those who are in our
City (of Antioch) are saved? It will be grievous, or harsh, what I am about to
say, but yet I will speak it: Among so many thousands [and the Jesuit conceives
there might easily be a hundred thousand or more in Antioch] one hundred will
hardly be found which shall be saved, and I doubt of them too; He gives his
reason, from that wickedness he saw in the young sort, the sloth, want of zeal
in old men, etc. it was a wonder they could bear this, and did not stop the
mouth of that golden Mouth. Cardinal Cajetan comments so upon the ten Virgins,
Matthew. 25. that it would make one tremble to read him: This Parable (says he)
does not treat of all Christians, but of those who by their works do profess,
they study after a continued progress to the Kingdom of Heaven; for these had
Lamps shining, that is, their good works did appear, (therefore those
Christians, whose evil works are manifest, are not here meant) they went out
not to meet a Judge, but friendly and honorably to meet with, entertain and
receive a Bridegroom. But of these, five were foolish. Terribilis Sententia, a
terrible sentence (says he) that but a half part of those, whose good works
and studies to meet the Bridegroom do shine forth, is saved. This is a terrible
sentence indeed, the Cardinal writes as if he were affected with it; and who is
not, that is not shut up under unbelief? I have then a Popish Archbishop, a
Romish Jesuit, a Cardinal, confirming my Conclusion, beside our English
Puritans; those who will quarrel, let them answer what they have written.

For my second Conclusion. Real Christians believe the first Conclusion,
without any dispute; and they so believe it, that the number should be much
less, if all which they say of themselves be true: They know Christ will shut
out half those (as Cajetan observes) who appear to be real Christians by their
Lamps, and they shut out themselves. Many things there are which make poor
tender Christians determine hardly upon the question concerning their own
state; and many times, when other Arguments are answered, this now mentioned,
namely, that but five Virgins were wise, the number of the saved ones so small,
this sticks so close, that they know not what to say; that they should be
enrolled in this little number, their hearts tremble, they dare not entertain
it, the mercy is so unspeakable. But it is not my intent to meddle with all the
things that trouble Christians: I shall confine my self to the discourse I have
been upon. Out of these two Topics, Preparations for Christ, and Faith in
Christ, have Satan, joining with the darkness and fears of their own hearts,
helped them to dispute against themselves, the truth of their conversion, for
many years: Yea, what other Objections are made from the workings of their
corruptions which they feel rebelling in them against the Will of Christ: they
reduce all to these heads: I never was right prepared for Christ: I never yet
saw sin in its right colors: lours: I never felt that spirit of bondage, those
legal terrors and sorrows, as I ought to have done; hence fin is no more
bitter, Christ and holiness are no more precious to me: sin and I were never so
separated in that work as ought to have been, hence it cleaves so close unto
me, and has such power over me at this day,: here also they lay the blaine,
when they cannot find their hearts running out in love after Christ, as they
should have them, and would have them; yea, all their errors and miscarriages
in their after works, they reduce to their errors in this first work: it being
a sure Rule, An error in the first concoction is not mended in the second.

I shall not repeat what I have before written, but desire the Christian Reader
to look back upon what I have said about Preparations, and especially my Answer
to that Question, How a Christian may satisfy himself concerning those
preparatory legal works:

Here I shall only add these few Heads very briefly.

First, It is very true, legal fears, terrors and sorrows are very good to help
loosen the Soul from sin, to imbitter sin, to make the Soul see the necessity
and excellency of Christ, prize him, and love him accordingly.

Secondly, It had been well for many Christians had they experienced them more
than they have done; light hearts, apt to be frothy, vain, and running out to
the utmost line of lawful liberties.

Thirdly, Legal terrors and sorrows will not of themselves kindly nor soundly
take off a Soul from sin: such persons who have been plunged in them, have
returned to their vomit again after them.

Fourthly, Soms Christians, who have experienced them in a small measure, have
walked more awfully, tenderly, with a more mortified Gospel-conversation, than
other Christians, who have had them in far greater degrees, and yet have true
Grace.

Fifthly, Christians who have had great legal workings, and attained sound
Grace after them, have found and complained of the rebellion of strong
corruptions, and the same things which other Christians complain of, who have
not found the legal workings after their manner; but they cannot say, that
these things they complain of, and which make them fear the soundness of their
work, arise from want of legal preparations; they have had enough of them: Why
then should the workings of those corruptions, etc. be resolved into the want
of legal preparations, fears and sorrows, and you for want of these legal
workings, question the soundness of your faith and conversion? For you might
have had those legal workings as others have had in a great degree, and yet
make as great complaints of these inbred corruptions, and other evil frames, as
now you do.

Sixthly, Great legal workings, with great Gospelgrace following: the
remembrance of the legal works past kept up fresh, the glory of Gospel Grace at
present seen and felt, make Christians set a higher price upon Christ,
morefearful of sin, and so legal workings become very helpful and subservient
to a Gospel-conversation all the days of a man's life.

Seventhly, A frame of holiness wrought in the heart; the Spirit of Christ
there dwelling, keeping and acting it: the glorious Majesty of God discovered;
the love and sweetness of Christ really tasted, and out-tasting all the
sweetness of sin and creature; do most kindly and soundly take off the Soul
from sin and creature: Let us labor then to experience these things more, and
not run to legal terrors, which can never soundly and surely do the work,
though they may prepare for the work.

The next thing that makes many real Christians exclude themselves from the
number of Believers is, their want of faith, they have no faith: And why no
faith? Because they have not that particular persuasion that Christ with all
his benefits are theirs: they cannot say, they dare not say, Christ is mine, or
that my sins are forgiven: when they hear of unbelief, they know of no unbelief
but this, when persons do not believe, or cannot believe, that Christ is
theirs, and their sins are pardoned: when they hear how great a sin unbelief
is, and what terrible threats the Word of God has made against unbelievers,
they apply all to themselves: What pangs have some Christians, yea, men of
great parts, and Ministers, been under, when they read that, Revel. 21.8. But
the fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their parts in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone? applying the Text to their fears, doubts,
unbelief, because they could not believe that Christ and his benefits were
theirs. And no wonder if Christians did thus conclude against themselves, if
faith in Christ be no other than that particular persuasion and assurance, that
Christ Jesus is mine; that I shall have life and salvation by his means; that
whatever Christ did for the redemption of mankind, he did it for me, etc. Those
that had not this definition, had not the thing defined, that is, saving faith:
Hence they might exclude themselves from the number of Believers. Now though
this be in great part taken off, since Ministers of late have cleared the
nature of faith in Christ, better than it was before, yet still it is that
which keeps many Christians under the old doctrine, being not yet forgot of
many, and the latter not so clearly understood by most, of which many Ministers
may be in fault, for if they be not clear in it themselves, how can they preach
it clearly to others? But if that be saving faith in Christ which we have
opened, and are assured it is saving, how many thousands will be found to be
real Christians, sound believers, who according to the old definition of faith
were cut off from that number? Ask Christians, Have you this particular
persuasion, that Christ is yours, that whatever he did for the redemption of
mankind he did it for you? and that your sins are pardoned? They will shake
their heads, answer you with a sigh, O no, I wish I had it, I cannot come to
that grounded assurance and persuasion. Ask them again, Has not the Lord made
you sensible of your sin, guilt, misery, wretchedness in your self? Has he not
revealed such excellency and fullness in Christ, that now you feel your Heart
willing to receive and embrace him for your Savior and Lord, Prophet,
High Priest and King, and so commit your self to him, to have all his work of
Redemption applied to your Soul, trusting and resting upon him alone for life
and salvation? They will answer you sometimes with an awful jealousy of their
hearts, I would have it so, if my heart deceive me not: sometimes more roundly,
ay with all my heart and soul: Yea, this work is found in them; and unless it
be in a day of great darkness, desertion, or vile sinful temptations and lusts
working, pend them up close in examination, and they have been forced to yield
it, though sometimes they would eat their words again, if they could tell how
to do it. And I pray what do you call these, in whom this faith is found? are
they not real Christians? are they not not sound Bellevers? I am sure these are
the Believers, the Christians, that must be saved, and shall be saved, and none
but such who have this work. If it were possible to conceive a man to have a
particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is his, that his sins are
forgiven, and yet want this work, his particular persuasion and assurance shall
never same him.

Quest. But are there not deceits? May not men be mistaken, thinking they
receive Christ aright, and trust in Christ for salvation, and yet never
received him aright, nor rest upon him for salvation, so as ever to find
salvation by him?

Answ. Yes, no doubt there are deceits, and many are mistaken. How many have
been deceived in their particular persuasions and assurances that Christ was
theirs, and pardon theirs, but it is to be feared, not only lived, but died
Christless? It was a sad word, what Christ said to the foolish Virgins, Matthew.
25.12. Verily, I say to you, I know you not. O Lord, what a dreadful saying is
this? What, not know them? They made account they knew him, what did their
Lamps else signify, and their going forth to meet the Bridegroom? Israel shall
cry unto me, my God, we know thee, Hosea 8.2. But if God answer Israel, I know
not you, Israel will be in a sad case.

Quest. But hew shall we discover these deceits? this is of moment?

Answ. It is of moment indeed, if a man be deceived here, he is undone to
eternity, unless by the discovery of it in this life (...) be awakened to look
out for faith (...) and 2 Timothy 1.5. But sad it is to (...) where so common and
dangerous as (...) and eternal concernment; and (...) careless of deceits. If a
man be to (...) forty shillings per annum, let but a man give him (...) of some
deceit that may be in the Title, lot but one intelligent man but once hint such
a thing, he has said enough, the man now looks about him; tell the same man,
there are great deceits in men's faith, repentance, and that he has a deceitful
heart as well as any, therefore look to your faith, make sure work, the
salvation of your Soul lies upon it; he answers you with a tush, look you to
your self, let me alone with my faith, I shall do well enough I warrant you. Oh
the power of Atheism.

But in answer to the question: I shall premise two things first, and then
endeavor to give the Rules how we may find out the deceits of our hearts in
receiving of Christ. The first thing I premise is this.

First, It is a very dissicult thing to find out the truth of our receiving of
Christ, or of our faith, that it is right and saving, especially when the Soul
is but newly under the work of conversion. I know God can discover it at first
if he please, as, no doubt, he did to the Jaylour, and the Primitive Converts,
in the dawning of the Gospel, and lying open to persecutions; but it is not now
so common. An Hypocrite in his green estate is hardly discerned by others, or
by himself. If you ask me how long that green estate may last? Truly I can set
you no time, but some longer, some shorter: yet with some it has lasted so
long, that I scarce know what to say or write, I am so amazed at the Apostasy
of some, that I have heard of, not very many miles from us, after many years
(thirty years) green and flourishing profession, with a conversation so exact,
so close, that other precious Christians have wished, O that my condition were
but as this man's; yet in old age to decline to sensuality, loose their savor,
go out like a stinking snuff, Trees twice dead, Jude ver. 12. These Apostates
would do us a kindness, if they would but faithfully unfold unto us their
secret ways of hypocrifie, how they began to Apostatize, that we might learn
and tremble; indeed we do tremble, because we see their falls; did these but
return again home to God, they would then tell us all; but here is the misery,
the Apostasy is final, they fall back with a perpetual backsliding, both from
God and his people, return no more, and hence we loose this benefit. Time it
will cost, I say not how much, and strict observation of the ways of a man's
heart; he must not be a stranger at home, that will get an answer to this
question: we say of a man, I will winter him and summer him, eat a bushel of
salt with him, before I will trust him for a bosom friend: there are those who
have spent many Summers and Winters with their own hearts, and it has cost
them some salt tears, but can hardly tell whether they may trust their hearts
at last: we say of some men, they are such subtle deceivers, that they will
cheat a man though he stand and looks on them: And what more deceitful than a
man's heart, though a man looks on it 'twill deceive him, unless he be very
circumspect, but without diligent observation it will be impossible to find it
out whether it be sound or not in its closing with Christ.

Secondly, No man need be deceived in this great point unless he will. This to
some at first may seem to sound strangely, but I doubt not of the truth of what
I say: though the heart may deceive the best Christian, as to some particular
acts which he is to put forth upon occasion; as he thinks he will be thus
patient if such a provocation comes, and will quietly suffer if trials come,
etc. but yet as to a man's state, whether converted or not, closed with Christ
truly or not, I say, there is no man deceived here unless he will: were men
willing indeed to search and find out hypocrisy, were they in earnest to find
out that Faux which would blow up their Souls, and ruin them to eternity; were
they willing to find out undeceiving Rules, and apply such Rules to heir hearts
without deceit, without conniving or favor to any particular Idol that there
would be set up, I doubt not but they might find the deceit, if there be any
lodged, that would cheat them as to their state, and undo them for ever: but
this is our misery, though we will not say we are willing to be cheated, yet we
are not willing to take the pains that we may not be cheated; loath, with David,
to put our selves into Gods hands to be searched, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O
God, and know my heart, etc. for doubtless God would then make us know our
hearts, so that we should not be eternally cheated by them.

In your enquiry therefore keep your eye intent upon two things.

First, Upon the Act, Receiving, how you did rereceive. Secondly, Upon the
Octject, what you did receive.
In one of these two Heads we shall find out the deceit, if there be any, in
your closing with Christ.

For the first: I shall show how the real Christian receives Christ; and
opening this, I shall show what makes the heart unsound; for Rectum est Index
sui, and obliqui.

First, The Real Christian closes with, embraces, or receives Christ
advisedly, he deliberates, ponders, observes well what he does. It is a
spiritual Marriage; she is but a fool who will give her consent, to take such a
person for her Husband, before she has advisedly considered the person she is
to take, and the match she is to make: Rashness, inconsiderateness, do very ill
in these cases: An error of the person nullifies the match; this is not the
person whom I intended: Non consentit qui non sentit: They were wise Virgins
who went in with the Bridegroom, Matthew. 25. And in this, among other things,
they show their wisdom, that they did advisedly consent to the Marriage; they
knew what they did, they had weighed Reasons pro and con. In that glorious
Marriage-covenant which God promises he will make with Israel, (such a Promise
as never as yet was fulfilled, no not begun as yet, but shall be gloriously
solemnized here upon the earth, as the verses that go before and follow show)
in his description how he will betroth Israel unto him, he mentions this
amongst the rest, I will betroth thee in judgment, Hosea 2.19. Several
Interpreters give their judgments upon this Judgment, whom I leave: Mr.
Buroughs (a man of a Gospel Spirit, and so the fitter to deal with a
Gospel-text) seems to me to hit the joint: Thus he; In Judgment, i. e. there
shall be good reason for what I do (says God) that which I now do, in
betrothing thee unto my self, shall not be out of rashness, it shall not be
done unadvisedly, but with understanding, with good deliberation, I know what I
do in it, and what glory I shall have by it: This is on Gods part: Then there
must be Judgment also on our parts: I will put into you a judicious heart, to
choose me out of Judgment: Thus he, quoting the Text which I made so much use
of, John 6.45. Taught of God. This is very rational, since Judgment is of so
great concernment in Marriages, and God does carry on all his work by
Conviction. The stony ground received the Word, Matthew. 13.20. But how, not
advisedly, there were flashes of affection, Anon with Joy receives it. Here is
joy, but where is the deliberate, advised Judgment, that is not mentioned.
Anon, (...), statim, by and by, or as some, presently, with joy receive it: We
always suspect such Matches as are made up of a sudden, before there could be
sufficient time to advise and consider. It is true, Christ is such a Match, as
there needs no advising, or deliberation, to know whether the Soul shall do
well if it does consent to his offer; but as he marries a Rational creature,
that ought to do all things with judgment, and in regard of our treacherous
hearts, there is need of this deliberation: hence the stony ground, or hearer,
when he came to hear of persecution, flies off presently: the same word (...),
as he received the Word presently with joy, so when he hears of persecution,
ver. 21. presently he is offended; he did not know it was such a Gospel as had
persecution attended it; Where is his joy now? Nay, joy and Gospel both are
gone: What he did, it seems it was presently, both coming on, and flying off:
what he did then was not done advisedly.

Secondly, The real Christian closes with, and embraces Christ freely: forced
Matches are like never to do well, nor will Christ force any; the sound
Believer gives his consent freely and willingly: A Contract, or Match, made up
by fears and scares, is no true one: There are indeed many times fears and
scares in the preparatory legal work, which do more properly tend to loosen the
Soul from its lusts and idols, from which he is called: but to choose Christ
merely out of fear, and because I am scared with hellish horrors, as if Christ
were not worthy the choosing or regarding, were it not for these which I dread
and lie in danger of, this choice or embracing of Christ will not hold. It is
true, the Jaylour came to the Apostle in a scare; but surely he did not take
Christ in a scare; no he saw reason for what he did, and did it freely,
willingly, there was much joy in the family, in consideration of what they had
done, Acts 16.34. in embracing of that Christ whom Paul taught. It is an ill
thing when the woman shall say, or the man, I had him or her against my will;
but my Father would have it so, and if I would not have him, he would give me
nothing; a wise Parent the whilst, to force his Child against her will; though
she did say I will, when she came to the Marriage, but had her Father let her
alone, left her to her freedom, I would never have had him, says she. I have
heard of such Marriages, where the Child, only in obedience to Parents, cross
to her own judgment and freedom, have taken such a man to her Husband, to
please Parents, but never had good day after; Christ abhors this: Thy people
shall be voluntaries, (as some translate it, or voluntarinesses) in the day of
thy power, Psalm. 110.3. Castellio * says true when he tells us, God does not
compel men, Ad animi justitiam; but in this he says false, when he makes
Justification to be, animi justitia, or justificare is justos facere: God,
says he, will have true and voluntary Jews, whom he may commend; but he should
not do so, if he did compel them against their wills. And this, says he, was
signified in the Structure of the Tabernacle, which was the figure of the heart
of a man, the Sanctuary or Temple of the Holy Ghost: Now that was made of gifts
freely offered by the people, no man was forced or compelled to offer what he
did, though in other points the Law did compel men.

[* Dialog. 3. de lib. arb. p. 151. Ad hanc (i. e. justitiam) haminem divinitus
allici, and impelli fatemur, sed cogi pernegamus, says Castellio, ibid. Allici
is not sufficient: What means he by impelli? So p. 153. Existimo Dei Spiritum
esse quendam quasi ventum animos impellentem, and ad obedientiam flectentem.]

If Castellio would only oppose compulsion, we say the same, only the question
is, How comes the will to be made thus free? That it is free in its closing
with Christ, it is not forced, nor can be forced, as to its elicit act, nor
will Christ ever accept of a sorced Match, this we acknowledge. If God commends
the voluntary Jews, and so voluntary Christians, then the voluntary and free
Christians will commend his free Grace, Nos volumus, sed ille facit (non cogit)
ut velimus; many people do receive Christ, embrace him (at least as they think)
but in scares; any thing while under fears and horrors. I was once sent for to
a Gentleman, who lay at an Inn, who was under some trouble of mind, as I was
told; I knew no reason why I should be sent for, there being other Ministers in
the Town more able, and my self but a stranger at the Inn: when I came into the
Chamber, I found the man in dreadful horror, his carriage toward me was such
as I abhor my self ever since at the remembrance of it; the man was under the
terrible apprehensions of a damned estate: what sin was then set home upon him
I know not: to enquire into his particular sin, was not I thought convenient: I
never saw his face before, nor never after but once in a Church three days
after; seeing the man in this Agony, just like the Jaylour, I could not but
speak to him as Paul did, opening the work of faith in Christ, what it was: I
could say nothing to him by way of question, if he were willing to embrace him,
etc. but he yielded in all things to me, nothing came amiss now: but I feared
then it was but in a horrible scare: I could not learn what was his name, nor
how to enquire after him, what became of this work. The Merchants goods shall
over board in a storm (not because he hates them) to save Ship from sinking,
himself from drowning, though when the storm is over he wishes he had them
again with all his heart. A man that is drowning will catch hold of a sharp
Sword, though it cuts his hands, to save himself, if that will save him. If you
will say, men by these scares and fears may be made very willing to embrace
Christ for their Savior from these evils which they so fear. I grant it, this
is one thing that moves the will in the real Christian to embrace Christ, the
privative good, it shall enjoy by him, delivering of the Soul from wrath to
come, and none ever did close with him, but had an eye to this, and this most
affected also when it comes first to him; yet in this is a free and willing
choice, for here is good to be enjoyed; but if this be all, and the Soul sees
nothing else in him, I doubt this will not hold; when these fears grow off, the
heart will back again, and be weary of its Match.

Thirdly, As it is an advised and free, so it is a full choice, understand me
rightly; by the word full I do not mean such a perfection, as if the whole of
the Soul did so close with Christ, and embrace him, that there were nothing in
the will cross to this reception of Christ; for we are but in part renewed,
though we are quickened, Ephesians. 2.1. yet so quickened, as there remains a body
of death behind, Romans 7.24. and the unrenewed, dead part will never make this
choice: but what Philip said to the Eunuch, Acts 8.37. If thou believe with
all thine heart. So here the Believer chooses with all his heart: Such is the
prevalency of the will in its choice, that there is not many times so much as
any actual resistance of the unrenewed part felt, to oppose this choice; but as
if there were no such thing as a corrupt unrenewed part to oppose, the whole
Soul comes off fully in the choice of Christ; the heart is not divided, there
is not a heart and a heart; as in those hypocritical penitents, Jer. 3.10. Her
treacherous sister Judah has not turned to me with her whole heart, but
feignedly. Here was no full turning, the whole heart went not after God, but
was divided, and to be sure God had the least part. As in repenting, so in
believing, the whole heart comes to Christ. If a rich person, and every way an
object of love, should ask a poor woman, will thou have me for thy Husband? and
is in earnest; as if Boaz should have put that question to Ruth, what would
have been her answer? Yea, with all my heart; there is a full choice: So does
the Soul answer to this question, will thou have Christ; Yea, with all my
heart, the best bargain that ever I made. The fullness of the choice is felt in
this, that this choice is made with complacency, the heart is exceedingly well
pleased, delighted, satisfied in its choice, and finds it self at rest in
Christ. What David said, Return to thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116.7. This Soul
says to it self, can I but get this Christ, that I have real union with him,
and he once undertakes for me, I shall then be at rest, I am satisfied fully
with him. What the Father said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, Matthew. 3.17. The believing Soul says, This is my beloved Savior,
with whom I am well pleased. The Father is pleased, and the Believer is pleased
with Christ.

Fourthly, It is a firm, constant, abiding choice, or reception of Christ: Take
the Real Christian when you will, yet you shall find he holds to his choice;
when he is wurried with his base temptations, that labor to draw away the
will, yet here he holds; no, I do not repent me of my choice. Take him under
his dark temptations, when he apprehends Christ will not receive him nor choose
him, yet he does receive and embrace Christ. It was an advised, free, and full
choice, therefore it proves a constant, firm choice: It was not in a scare,
when I was forced, and that scare being removed, now the will goes off again
to its former lovers: It is so indeed in the unsound Christian, but not in the
real Christian. When persons have lived together in a married estate thirty
years, have seen the infirmities of each other, if the question were then put,
suppose you were now to make your choice, where would you choose? If the answer
be heartily made, I would choose where I did before, the same choice I made then
I make now, that Match, that choice was well made. Let Christians live in
married covenant with Christ thirty and thirty years, when they have
experienced not the infirmities of Christ, in whom there is none, (though he
experience ours sufficiently) but the troubles they meet with from within, from
without, the infirmities which Paul mentions, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. upon the account
of keeping close with Christ, and walking with him; if then you put the
question, if you were put to your choice now, Where would you choose? Who should
be the beloved of your Soul? You should soon hear the answer, they would not
stand long, as if they were in doubt what to say, what Christ said of Mary,
Luke 10. last. Mary has chosen the good part which shall never be taken from
her: As that which Mary had chosen shall never be taken away, so Mary's choice,
and every sound Believers choice with her, of that part, is not taken away, nor
shall be changed: That was one reason why God says in the forementioned Text,
Hosea 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever; there is no more parting, no
Divorce, because he did betroth her in Judgment: It was a judicious choice, the
judgment is constant, and the choice is constant.

Fifthly, Lastly, It is such a receiving, embracing, or choosing of Christ, as
grows stronger; if so, then it must needs be firm and constant.

The reason of this lies here, when a Christian once comes to be acquainted
with the Christian Race and Conversation what it is, and observes the workings
of his wretched, vile, treacherous heart, he is driven to such plunges ever and
anon, that he knows not what to do or think, his temptations, perplexities, are
so multiplied, that his necessities of Christ do more appear; there was a
necessity of Christ, and excellency in him, which the Soul saw at first; but
now necessities are branched forth into many particulars, which were not all in
view at first; that the Soul feels its necessity of Christ more and more; and
as it feels its necessities, so finding in Christ, that fullness and fitness
in him to answer all these necessities, troubles, perplexities, and that Christ
in his Marriage-Covenant is engaged for them all, it lies upon him to secure
the Believer against whatever comes, this opens further the excellencies of
Christ to the Soul, and causes the will to embrace and choose him yet more,
that thus the choice grows stronger: I did not know this, I did not think of
this at the first, says the Soul, but now I see I am the most pitiful Creature
without Christ, none so bad: These new various particular exigencies and
streights, which the Believer meets with, clear up, and discover Christ more
unto him; for the real Christian knows none but Christ to run to when he almost
ready to run out of his wits; temptations blow in so hard from every quarter of
the Compass, that the man is ready to sink, give up all, and conclude
desperately upon himself; but when he comes to understand, and meditates upon
it, how Jesus Christ has undertaken for all, even for that which I feel now,
and knows not which way to get over, this makes him to cleave to Christ the
more, and embrace him yet the more strongly.

The second thing is the Object, or what you do receive, Jesus Christ the Lord,
Christ clothed with all Offices, not one too much, nor one too little; the
real Christian cannot spare one, and desires no more: Christ is so fitted for
my turn, says the Believer, by being made Prophet, Priest and King for me,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption for me, that I know not
what I could desire more, nor could I be healed, recovered, redeemed, if he
were made less; so that God and the real Christian are agreed upon terms: Were
I to make my terms, says the Believer, I could not tell how to mend, or how to
have other propounded than God has made and propounded to me already. But let
me take this into pieces, for here also shall we find deceits lie: See how the
real Christian receives his Object, and by it we shall discover the Christian
only in name.

First, The sound Christian receives the Person of Christ: Union is with the
Person of Christ; though this must be first, yet I would not put that block in
the way of poor Christians: Did you embrace the Person of Christ first? Had you
union with him first before you did meddle with his goods? Alas, many poor
Christians are not so distinct, they cannot tell what they did first nor
second; but it was Jesus Christ with all his goods which they felt the want of;
they were lost, undone, had need of a Savior, and willing also to receive him,
Christ and Lord; this they can tell; but yet if you ask them, What is Christ to
you? If you put the question, as they did to the Spouse, Cant. 5. v. 9. What is
thy Beloved more than another Beloved? the Believer will answer, though he
cannot tell what the Spouse meant in that description of Christ by particular
parts to set out the beauty of his Person, yet she can say with the close of
the description, ver. 16. He is altogether lovely.

In Marriages, union is with the person, not with the goods; hence if the
person please not, (as some will say, if I had her money, take her person who
will) such Marriages will meet with miserable miscarriages, because that with
which the person is united pleases not, and there being the greatest tie,
there proves the greater affliction. Christ has riches unsearchable, Ephesians.
3.8. might but an unsound heart have some of the riches of Christ, as to his
Person it matters not, take him who will; but the real Christian is taken with
the love of his Person; nay, no found Christian can rest without God himself,
Christ himself, the goods will not satisfy, no not all the good things God or
Christ gives distinct from himself, because God is better than his goods,
Christ is better than his goods; therefore the understanding being savingly
enlightened, to know God and Christ, and the will renewed, as good is its
Object, so the best good is its Object; if there be any better good than other
discovered, the sanctified hungry will must have it: but God and Christ are
discovered as better goods than the benefits of communion, therefore the will
cannot rest, but in the union with, and enjoyment of himself; all the blessings
of communion, being either such as make a relative or real change in the
Believer, gracious habits, which make the real change, are but Accidents or
Adjuncts; these do not satisfy. If holiness, the Image of God, be good, then
God, whose Image holiness is, is better: If reconciliation with God be good,
then God himself is better: If Christ be the Peacemaker, then he is better
than the Peace it self; if his Righteousness be good, then he himself is
better, else his Righteousness could not be so good. So that in this
substantial good, God himself, Christ himself, does the will of a real
Christian take up its rest.

Secondly, From union with the Person, we come to communion with his Benefits,
or to his Offices: Consider first his Priesthood, or those benefits which make
our Relative change.

First, What say thou to imputed Righteousness, to the blood of Atonement,
to Christ our High Priest and Sacrifice, to him who knew no sin, yet was made
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him? As for the real
Christian these are glorious things in his eye, these the Gospel truths and
tidings, which cause such amazement in the thoughts of a sound Believer, while
he meditates upon them, how such a one as he should stand at the Bar of God,
and be acquitted, yea, pronounced just and righteous, by a Holy and Just God;
that such a one as knew no righteousness, but was all in sin, should be made
the righteousness of God in him, that he who knows what enmity lies naturally
in his heart against God, and knows how infinitely God hates sin, and how
terrible his wrath is, and will be against sin, should now have God his Friend
and Father, and Christ a High Priest to be always pleading his cause, then
thoughts fill the heart with admiration and astonishment, a pardoned,
justified, reconciled estate; What tongue of man or Angel can speak the
blessedness of it? If Castellio can flout at imputed righteousness, yet he
might have learned to write truth: Where did he ever read any of our Divines,
who maintain, yea, must and will exalt imputed (not putative, as he scoffingly
calls it) righteousness? Interpret that Text, 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. as he glosseth,
and imputes to us, thus, Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, De obedien.
praestand a p. 232.
nor effeminate, etc. but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. that is,
says he, God does not impute these sins though they abide in you still; you
are fornicators as before, you are adulterers as before, but these sins are not
imputed to you; We abhor his putative Comment. Where did he ever read a Divine
of ours [ I presume he aims at Calvin, who takes washing for justification in
that Text; but he might have read Calvin there saying, Sanctificat vitiosam
naturam spiritu suo, reformando, ita sanctificatio ad regenerationem pertinet:
Calvin's Comment is quite cross to what he puts upon him] that took sanctified
for non-imputing of sins? Why did not he there tell us the difference between
sanctified and justified in the Text, if justification be only to make just, as
he contends? They were such, but they are justified, so the Lord does not
impute the guilt of their sins. And they were sanctified, and if made holy,
then they were no more fornicators, or adulterers, as he fancies the doctrine
of imputation leaves men, as to inherent righteousness, and it found them
before effectual Calling, men of sedate, quiet tempers and constitutions,
rational heads, bookish men, given only to study, never acquainted with
self-emptying workings, loads of guilt pressing, dark desertions, violent and
strong temptations, are fit men to take up Arms, against the most precious
Gospel truths, riches of free Grace, imputed Righteousness, the blood of
Atonement, cut off Christ in his Priestly work, and set up a Dagon of
self-righteousness, a Castellian perfection, (imperfectly proved) Diana of man's
free will (which we grant is free in part, when made free by Grace) and if this
be the fruit men make of their learning and tempers, etc. we thank God for our
temptations. If we had nothing else but self-righteousness and persection to
boast of, woe to our Souls; but blessed be God for our High Priest, for imputed
Righteousness, for the revealing of a Covenant of Grace. What David said of the
Covenant struck with him, This is all my salvation, and all my desire, 2 Samuel
23 5. the same say we; for take away imputed righteousness, the righteousness
of God-man; take away the blood of Atonement, even the blood of that Saerifice,
God in our flesh; take away the Covenant of Grace, in which the free Grace of
God is resolved to triumph over all the guilt, enmity, sins, lusts,
hypocrisies, slavery, of the vessels of mercy, by pardoning, justifying,
cleansing, healing, and yet be just; take away these, I say, then fare well
blessedness, peace and comfort; and though I cannot say welcome, yet misery,
wrath and sorrows will come, and they who can find another way to escape them,
must be wiser than men or Angels are, yea, wiser than God himself. Pardon is a
good word in the opinion of all men that think there is any sin, and no man
will refuse it: Justification by imputed righteousness may be very well liked,
by a laxe, careless and vain Christian, who either in opinion will deny (as
some) any inherent created righteousness or grace in us; or be their opinion
what it will, do not much regard it, to find the work of Grace in them; as I
have known some crying up the righteousness of Christ to our justification,
their tongues could speak of nothing but this, how pure we were, so that God
could see no sin in his people, [not to see it, that is, not to impute it to a
justified person in Christ, we owned, but that was too low, not enough, God
could see none] but inherent righteousness, was never made mention of: and if
the question were put, But how shall I know I am in this justified state? Their
answer was, For that you must look to it; and that was all the answer that ever
I heard them give. Thus I say, for a laxe Gospeller, the notion may please him;
but for a man from the sense of the imperfection of his inherent righteousness,
the sin, the mixtures that cleave to his own duties and performances, from the
high estimation he has of Gods righteousness, Romans 10.3. The righteousness
which is through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9. in earnest, to say, Surely in
the Lord have I righteousness, Isai. 45.24. In him, who is Jehovah our
righteousness, Jer. 23.6. In him do I glory, Isai. 45.25. Making mention of thy
righteousness, even thine only, as David, Psalm 71.16. says: Though in another
sense [yet Calvin says, Calvin in Text.
that B. Austin does a hundred times make use of this Text to overthrow the
merits of works, and did plausibly oppose this righteousness which is freely
given of God, against the meritorious righteousness of men] this frame is not
found in all Gospellers; this the proud heart of man will not set up; and upon
this for a guilty, self condemned Soul to rest and roll it self, it cannot, in
a day of sin appearing, unless as faith is the gift of God, so this act of
says be given from above. But still upon this imputed Righteousness, blood of
Atonement, Christ his High Priest, does the real Christian venture and lay the
stress of his Soul, if these crack I am gone. Examine Christian, do thou
experience this in thy heart feelingly?

Secondly, This Jesus Christ is the Lord; as he was received before for our
High Priest, so he is received for our Lord and King, if we receive him right
as all real Christians do: Zech. 6.12. Behold the man [God directing it, says
Grotius, Pilate fitted these words, or applied them to Christ, John 19.5.
Pilate says to them, Behold the man] whose name is the Branch, [ Messiah is
his name, says the Chaldee] ver. 3. even he shall build the Temple of the
Lord, (both the material Temple, which Joshua and Zerubbabel could not without
him, and the spiritual Temple, the universal Church especially) and he shall
bear the glory, (all the glory and excellency of the Church is in Christ, the
Head of it, the glory of rearing up and building a Church to God in the world,
is a burden too heavy for any but Christ to bear; he builds it, and wears the
glory: Munster and Clarius interpret this glory by Revel. 19.16. On his Vesture
was written, King of Kings, Lord of Lords) and shall sit and rule upon his
Throne: (Christ is King, Psalm. 2.6.) and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne,
(Christ a Priest, Psalm. 110.4.) and the Counsel of peace shall be between them
both. Here is the glorious Conjunction of the two Supreme Dignities, the
Kingdom and the Priesthood in Christ's most excellent Person: The Prophetical
Office, says learned Pemble, is not mentioned, which it may be is but an
Appendix of his Priesthood. What is meant by these words, Between them both,
some between the Jews and Gentiles? this I like not; some between Zerubbabel
the Prince, and Joshua the Priest: But 1. Here is no mention of Zerubbabel. 2.
Both the Crowns were set upon Joshuah's head, ver. 11. 3. The Branch, ver. 12.
was to sit on the Throne and rule: De Dieu I see differs from all; he shall sit
and rule upon his Throne; he will not have it translated, super thronum suum,
but super thronum ejus; by ejus, meaning Jehovah: So by them both, or those
two, he understands the Branch and Jehovah: But what then is meant by the
Counsel of peace, he does not interpret. Cor. a Lapide thus, Either, says he,
between both the Thrones, the Kingly power and Priesthood, or the Prince and
the Priest, q. d. In Christ shall be the greatest consent and concord, between
the Prince sitting upon his Kingly Throne, and the Priest sitting upon his
Pontifical Throne, because he shall be both, and shall conjoyn both the Dignity
of the Pristhood and Kingdom in himself: This is something, but not enough: Mr.
Pemble better, Counsel of Peace, an allusion to the former government of the
Jews State, wherein the King and Priest, several Officers, did take counsel one
with and of another, for the maintenance of peace and prosperity in the Church
and State: Now likewise the Churches peace should be wrought, though not by two
several persons, yet by virtue of two several offices meeting in one: Christ
purchasing all peace to his Church by his Priesthood, and maintaining and
defending it by his Kingdom: the effect which the conjunction of both Thrones
and Offices in Christ does produce is peace and reconciliation with God, with
safety and deliverance from our spiritual enemies; thus Mr. Pemble agreeing
with Junius. To these I shall only add Diodati and no more: These two offices
in Christ, shall perfectly agree one with another, though they seem to be very
different; the one having the administration of Justice to command and punish,
the other of mercy to expiate and pardon: but Christ shall expiate and pardon,
that he may be obeyed when he commands, Psalm 130.4. having brought men again
into Gods favor, to make them receive his Spirit, which enclineth them to a
voluntary obedience, and shall command in pardoning, viz. he shall enact the
Law of the Spirit, as much or more binding then the literal Law; thus he. This
comes up to what I aimed at in the quotation; thus I conceive, Peace or
reconciliation between persons at distance is not properly made up till both
parties be agreed. Christ on his Priestly Throne, as he offers himself a
Sacrifice expiatory to his Father, satisfying of his Justice, makes up the
breach on Gods part. Christ on his Kingly Throne, delivering us from our
spiritual enemies, as Mr. Pemble, and let me add, our enmity against God, by
giving his Spirit to incline us to voluntary obedience; by enacting the Law of
the Spirit, as Diodati, does heal or make up the breach on our part: thus the
blessed Counsel of peace is made up of both these Offices in Christ, and now it
prospers; God reconciled to us, our wills to his. The sum then is; Christ
sitting on both the Thrones must be received, and so trusted to, rested upon,
if peace (comprehending all spiritual prosperity, as peace among the Hebrews
was used to signify prosperity) be ours. What Christ upon the Throne ruling
does toward the outward peace of his Church, I do not now speak, though I am
sure the Church shall enjoy outward peace from hence also, and that in a
glorious manner as yet on the earth; but I let that alone: this is the peace we
most need which I am now upon: spirittual inward peace with God and our
Consciences.

Christ sitting upon the Priestly Throne, the former Head spoke to; now I am to
speak of Christ sitting and ruling on his Kingly Throne, and see whether he be
so received.

Quest. But here one Question: What is it to receive Christ as Lord?

Answ. B. Davenant on the Text, Colos. 2.6. thus comments; The Colossians, and
so all true Christians have received Christ the Lord, both of their faith, and
of their life, neither will they suffer any rules of Faith or Christian life to
be imposed upon them by any other. This is a great truth, and spoken like a
Christian who owned Christ for his Lord only; but this does not take in all:
whether Christ did make any new Laws, added new Commandments, is a great
question between us and the Socinians: I will not at all meddle with it; yet I
will venture one Argument against Socinus here.

If Christ be a Lawgiver, then he is God, Jehovah. But he is a Lawgiver;
Ergo.
That he is a Lawgiver, Socinus yields. The consequence I prove, James 4.12.
There is One Lawgiver, etc. not two Lawgivers: One God, and Man the other,
James 2.8. He speaks of the Royal Law; given under the old Testament: Jehovah
gave the Law; Christ then as God, Jehovah gives the Law binding the Conscience,
able to save and to destroy, as in the Text, and so is the Object of Divine
worship. One only Law giver, the Dutch read. This I am certain of, the
receiving of Christ, as King, as Lord, is not meant only of receiving him as a
Lawgiver, as giving Commands to be obeyed: and thus it may be many Christians
understand it, when they hear they must receive Christ as Lord and King, that
is, I must obey his Commands, be subject to him; which though it be a truth;
yet if this be all, we are but in a sad case, we have received Commands enough
to sink us: considering the vile enmity of our hearts unto them, how opposite
they are to the holy Commandments, we need no more Lawgivers, or Laws to damn
us for breach of them. The Question is, How shall my vile heart be brought
about to obey these holy Commands? this blessed King, how shall my will ever be
made subject to him?

2. Therefore Secondly: To receive Christ King and Lord under a Covenant of
Grace, is to receive him not only as a King, to give me Laws morally, but I
receive Jesus my King efficiently, to incline my will, bow my heart, and to
enable me to be subject to him, and obey his Commandments; this is the King
under a Covenant of Grace which we chiefly look at, and thus I conceive he is
chiefly to be looked upon; for thus (not by giving Laws) does he heal us: all
his Offices tend to healing, to redemption; but giving Laws is no healing, no
redemption; they may make our sore worse, our bondage: but what the Apostle
says of him as a Priest, Heb. 7.26. Such an High Priest became us, etc. so I
say of him as a King, Such a King became us, not only one who has authority to
give us Statutes, but power to cause us (not force us) to walk in his Statutes,
Ezekiel. 36.27. and to this does Mr. Pemble, Diodati and Junius agree, upon that,
Zech. 6.23. Christ sitting and ruling upon his Throne: He delivers us from our
spiritual enemies, gives his Spirit to incline us to voluntary obedience,
enacts a Law of the Spirit, as they said before: were it not thus, poor
Christians must go look for their comfort where they can find it, when
obedience to Commands is pressed, and holy walking with God required. To this of
Zechariah does the speech of Peter, Acts 5.31. agree, Him has God exalted with
his right hand (Christ then is upon his Throne) to be a Prince and a Savior
(both his Offices, as in Zechariah) to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins. This exalted Savior on his Throne gives forgiveness of
sins: this exalted Prince on his Throne gives repentance to Israel. If Christ
as a Prince only gives Laws, he gives no repentance: for to gives Laws, is not
to give repentance. Christians then in the work of faith, or union, receive
Christ, such a Prince, and Lord, as gives repentance to the Soul who receives
him; he gives what Ethraim and true Converts pray for, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou
me, and I shall be turned. Such a King then we receive as has power over our
wills and affections, to incline them to obedience, rules them, and yet saves
their liberty, makes us freely and sweetly to obey what is commanded by him: Do
causa Dei, l. 3. c. 29. p. 738.
We say with profound and pious Bradwardin, Illum nolo pro Deo nostro habere,
qui non sit omnipotens in agendo: qui non habet omnipotentissimum Dominatum
super meam debilem voluntatem: qui non posset omnipotentissime facere me velle
and facere quicquid velet, etc. quinimo constanter and libera voce dico: Illum
nole pro Deo meo habere, cujus beatissimam voluntatem, ego miser peccater
possum facillime, a summa arce suae dignissimae libertatis detrudere, etc.

This receiving of Christ our Lord and King, gives ease to a poor Christian,
that lies under the sense of his perverse will, his crooked nature, that cursed
fountain of sin within him, when he hears duty required, and the holiness of
the Command urged: it is the office of this King whom I receive, To work in me
both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. To make (...)
to go in the path of his Commandments, Psalm. 119.35. He is made of God to us,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

The real Christian willingly, freely, receives this King: the Office likes
him, he is well pleased with it; yea, so well pleased is he with it, that a
great part of his comfort depends upon it. Christ were but half a Redeemer to
him, not so glorious, so beautiful to him, were he not such a King, To destroy
the works of the devil in him, 1 John 3.8. and redeem him from all his
iniquities, Tit. 2.14. The believer answers his temptations from guilt of sin
with the Priesthood of Christ; he answers all his temptations from the power of
sin, with this Kingly power of Christ; were I left alone to grapple with my
corrupt heart, strong lusts, and the worlds temptations, I must give up all
hopes and comfort, and resolve to meddle no more with Religion, says the
Believer.

See then, Christian, how thy heart answers here, and let me advise thee to
look to two things in the receiving of Christ as Lord and King.

First, When the heart is not so well pleased with this; but yet rather than I
will not have Christ for my Priest, I will have him for my King: rather than I
will not have him for my Savior, to deliver me from hell, I will have him for
my Lord: You had best look to this, keep your eye upon your heart, for here may
be a deceit that will undo all: I do not say absolutely there is the deceit as
yet, for I know at the first, fears of hell, wrath, guilt, work strong, and a
Christian under the sense of these will yield too much, rather than to fall
under that misery which he fears: Now if this be the sense of thy heart, that
it looks on the receiving of Christ as King, to be a hard term; but as we say,
of two evils choose the least, so the Soul will choose this evil, rather than
hell, which is the worse: so that Christ as King is not looked on as good, the
work that he does, in turning out of lusts and idols in thy heart, and subduing
thy will to his will, working up thy Soul to an obedient, holy conversation
before him, and walking with him, this is not pleasing, it would not be chosen
if I knew how to help it, but I submit to it, rather than to go to hell, though
it be a hard condition: now look to your self, for if the fears of hell once
draw off, if Conscience come to be quieted again, that no trouble be felt: the
next news we may fear will be, thy heart will go back to its old lovers again.
I know this is the great Argument to make the Soul at first coming home (in
those whom God works upon when adult) to accept of Christ as Lord and King,
that it may have him for a Savior, and God may carry on the work more
afterward, and so make the Soul see an excellency in Christ as King, as well
as Savior; so make Christ appear yet more lovely and higher prized; this
Christians know experimentally: therefore at first I do not condemn it; but
yet, I say, look to thy self, for if all that God has made Christ to be, for
lost man, do not please thee, if less than complete Redemption will ferve thy
turn, Redemption from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Redemption from all thy
iniquities, Tit. 2.14. Redemption from thy vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Redemption from the earth, Revel. 14.3. If less than this Redemption were
better in thy esteem, look to thy self, for thy faith will prove but feigned.

Secondly, Thou receivest Christ Lord and King, thou say, as well as Savior
or Priest. Take heed of generals; we have a saying, Dolus latet in
universalibus, if true any where, it is true here; for this is such a deceit as
ruins thousands in their supposed faith, and closing with Christ: Ask them, do
you receive Jesus Christ for your Savior and your Lord? Yes, they do so: but
this only in general.

Quest. But how shall we find out this deceit?

Answ. Bring down this general into particulars, and then we shall find
rottenness enough. I will but name a few Heads, not all, you may enlarge.

First, Carry this Lord to thy particular bosom lust, to thy special
creature-idol, see, is Christ Lord there? have received him King, to subdue and
cast out that special lust of thine? be it the sin of thy constitution, or the
sin that attends thy calling, be the lust what it will, the Peccatum in
deliciis, the Benjamin of thy Soul, in which the life of the old man is bound
up, I could part with all but this: Is it an ambitious, a vainglorious lust?
Is it an unclean lust? Is it a covetous worldly lust? Is it a bibbing, a
potting lust, or any other? Try here, Christian, for here have many Professors
been woefully deceived, they have received Jesus Christ the Lord, yea, in
general; but, as in Grammar, when a general Rule has been laid, presently
comes in the Excipe's, so in these Professors, Christ is received King and
Lord, Excipe, except in this particular lust, this particular idol-creature,
upon which the heart is set. As in London, though such a one was Lord Mayor of
London, yet there were some particular privileged places in London (if I be
not mistaken) exempted from his jurisdiction as to Arrests, that his Sergeants
could not execute his Authority for arresting men in such a place: Thus it is
with some, yea, too many Christians, they will call him Jesus Christ our Lord,
thus they receive him, but yet have their particular places, they have their
special lusts and idols, which must not come under his arrests, nor subject to
his Authority; but Christ will never own it, that he was received as Lord,
though Men may say to him, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7.21. where such limitations are
put to his government, there are no such privileged places granted by him;
though such a faith as receive him in general, and yield to his Lordship in
many things, may ferve for an outward profession, yet it will not serve for
salvation: here then, Christian, fearch, the Apostle has told us, what is that
Trinity which our carnal hearts worship, 1 John 2.16. Lust of the flesh,
(sensual pleasures) lust of the eyes, (covetousness, riches) pride of life,
(ambition, honors;) here may we find the special lust and idol, which every
unsound believer exempts from the Lordship of Christ: for pride in apparel,
this seems to be too low for one to make an idol of, but any thing the vile
heart will set up. One woman, and Wife to a Minister, whom I knew well, in the
day when her Conscience was awakened, went to her Press, or Trunk, where her
clothes lay, and took them up, These were my gods, said she, which I set up:
the woman's vanity ran out that way; I fear she is not alone as to the sin, it
were well if she had more with her, that are sensible of, and humbled under
that sin.

Quest. How shall I find out my particular, special lusts andidol, how may I
come to know it?

Answ. This is none of my Text, nor will I be guilty of that for which I so
much blame others: were I to handle that subject, I would fet down ways how
you may find it out, if you do not know it already, which is something strange
for that person, that keeps a narrow watch over his heart, not to observe and
know which way his corrupt heart runs out; yet I have learned, that such a
thing is possible, if the corruption be a spiritual lust, and if there be
something else that much takes up the heart. I knew one, an eminent Christian,
a man, as in years so in grace, learning and abilities, much my superior, a
man yet of a clung, penurious, having, close spirit, Cousin german to a worldly
covetous lust, the bones of it stuck out so, that people did generally observe
it; I spoke of it to an eminent Minister, and asked him if he did not observe
it? Observe it, said he, yes, it is plain enough to observe: yet this man for
secret duties with God, for spiritual, heavenly converse in company, such a
one, as few like him; his spirit battered and kept under strangely: One time
walking with a very serious Christian, much his inferior, a mean man in the
world, he asked him, and desired him to deal faithfully with him, what
corruption he did discern in him, which might cause the Lord thus to hide the
light of his Countenance from him, and tell him plainly of it: (this argues the
uprightness of the man:) the man being much his inferior, but wise and very
godly, giving him his due respect, asked him, Sir, do you not take notice of
such a corruption, and instanced in that which I mentioned, and handsomely
informed him of it: He made this reply, Truly I never took notice of it, nor
observed it by my self. If you would then know it, and do not, do as this good
man did, get some inward, judicious Friend, to deal plainly with thee; a
Christian Friend may observe that by thee; of which thou do not take notice
thy self: This is all I will say to it in this place; I will not meddle with
more than the subject I am upon leads me to.

Quest. Is it not possible there may be a corruption in my heart, which at this
time I do not think of, nor feel working, which may afterward appear and prove
my strong, masterly, special corruption? And if so, I know not when my faith is
sound, nor whether I have received Christ for my King?

Answ. It is possible, and has been found so by woeful experience, especially
where the work began betimes; when Christians come to such years, to such
employments, to such states and conditions in public places, to such
conditions of life, in all which changes are made, there rises up new
corruptions, which had not the opportunity to show themselves before, and make
heavy work in the hearts of poor Christians: When a man has been wurried with
one corruption which has cost him much sorrow and pains, thinks he, if I can
but get over this, I hope, my journey will be pretty comfortable; I do not
observe any other lust that has so much power, but I think I can more easily
grapple with. Well, that corruption is taken down, he is in a great measure
quiet from that which cost him so much trouble; but in the room of that there
rises another: O Lord, says the Soul, this is worse, this is stronger than
that; and now the Soul knows not what to think, but concludes its state is his,
which Christ mentions, Luke 11.25, etc. Where the unclean spirit being cast
out, the house swept and garnished, he takes to him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself: thus it is with me, thinks the man: A sad Text, and too
true of some, who are swept and garnished with idols of self-righteousness, and
formality of worship set up in them, who prove more desperate enemies to
Gospel-faith, sound Believers, and real power of godliness, than are many
drunkards and unclean persons: but as to the sound Beleiver, who apprehends
this to be his condition, from a new upstart lust, that crawls out now the warm
Sun of occasion and temptation shines upon that side of the dunghill of his
corrupt heart, this is his comfort, that Jesus Christ, whom I received for my
King and Lord, he will be my Redeemer from this lust also: I choose him, and
apply his Lordship to this; he has engaged against whatever it be that should
come in between me and him, to make my heart unsound and rotten: If then they
do rise, as they will, unexpected, yet if thine eye be upon them, and can
carry them to Christ, and do not say, O spare me in this, but let this lust
feel the power of thy iron Mace, Psalm. 2.9. deliver me from this enemy too
strong for me: Can please thy self in thinking, Christ is engaged for me
against it, he will undertake it for me, and help me through his strength and
redemption to be above it? Thou may yet conclude, thou have truly received
Christ for thy Lord, though new corruptions (which had the seeds in thy heart
before) do rise up and trouble thee.

Secondly, Carry this general to thy particular relation, see what does this
King there, what authority bears he there: Thou have received Christ, thy Lord,
thou say; thou art a Husband, or a Wife, a Father, Mother, or a Child, a
Master, or Servant, has this Lord any thing to do there? has he any Rules for
these Relations to observe? (or any other Relations more public than I have
mentioned) If I be a Father, where is my honor? If I be a Master, where is my
fear? Mal. 1.6. Show then thou have received this Lord, by endeavoring to
yield obedience to the Rules of thy Lord, in thy particular relation: But what
sad work will this Rule make among many Professors? The man can talk of faith,
has very good knowledge, can pray at a meeting of Christians, a man of
excellent parts, but a churlish Nabal, a Tyrant, rather than a Husband, and his
heart it may be not truly closed with the wife of his youth, let her be
studious to please him, tender over him, all her care, respect, obsequiousness
toward him, cannot obtain a loving tender conversation from him, but carries
himself like a surly, imperious blockhead. Take such a woman, she is a
Believer, she has taken Christ for her Lord, goes to Sermons frequently, and
private Fasts, you must look upon her for a Christian, she can talk very well
of good things; see her in her relation of a Wife, is Christ her Lord there?
does she manifest that submission, that reverence to her Husband which her Lord
calls for? This Doctrine, I have observed, by some will hardly be born; it is
strange to see what Wives some are, how clamorous, froward, how far from being
Sarahs Daughters, how usurping authority over their Husbands, they must not
dare to do any thing but as they will have them, for fear the house be too hot,
or the dumb devil possess them; yet these must be accounted Christians, they
have received Christ their Lord. It was a worthy speech I once heard from a
Lady, a very comely person, well bred, of a good Family, her Husband a man of
no sweet temper, but too blockish; in our discourse some words falling, which
tended a little toward her duty, intimating some difficulty that she must
needs meet with in the discharge of her place; she quickly perceived my
meaning, and answered me, it was no difficulty to her, I have the easiest part,
said she, to perform; my duty is to obey, his duty is to love; not but that the
Wifes duty also is to love, Titus 2.4. and so was she, as loving, as dutiful,
answering the Apostles charge there given, proving by the discharge of her
Lords command in her particular Relation, as well as in other points, that she
had truly received Jesus Christ her Savior and Lord. As for Children, it were
a comely sight, to see profession of faith in Christ adorned with dutifulness,
obedience and honor toward the Father, and especially toward the Mother: It
was a custom not long since, but now it is almost worn out, for Children going
to bed, and in morning, to ask their Parents blessing upon the knee; that
Ceremony did much tend to keep up Parents superiority, and keep Children in
mind of their duty: since that has been left off, most Children have left off
that reverent respect they owe to Parents. For Servants, those who do answer
the Lords Rules, let them have their commendation, but never I think was there
such a complaint of Servants, since the Gospel was known, as is in these days:
To shut up this Head, I do not say, but some have a hundred times more
difficulty to quit their places than others have; with some it is nothing, but
others have temptations enough, especially in the relations of Husband and
Wife; some I do heartily pity, when I see what strange kind of Creatures they
have to love, scarce one good quality in a Wife; He that can err always in
ber love, Prove. 5.19. I count him an Orthodox man for such an error; I know no
Orthodox error but that: I think they have obtained great mercy from the Lord,
who can thus love unlovely objects: So on the other side, what imperious
Tyrants have some Wives to obey? what pitiful Idols have some to reverence? I
do not look on a Christians grapling with, and getting above his special lust,
to be an easy matter; I do not think it so easy to discharge the duties of
particular relations, especially for some; but this I say, he that is not so
loosed from his special lust, that he receives Christ as King, to make an
eternal separation of that lust from his Soul; he, or she, that makes not
conscience of the discharge of the duty of their particular relation, be it
Husband, Wife, Child, or Servant, etc. it is the thing they are laboring
after, humbled under their miscarriages, and improving Christ to this end; if
these things be light with any person, not worthy the regarding, let your
profession be what it will, you did never yet truly receive Jesus Christ the
Lord, and your faith is but vain.

Thirdly, Carry this general to thy particular Calling; see how Christ is Lord
there: What diligence do thou show there? What care and conscience do
thou express there? Your Lord has Rules for men's particular Callings: Do you
know what they are, and does your heart stand in aw of them? Do you lay his
Rule to your buying and selling, to your commerce and dealing with men? There
are other Rules, but I only instance in these: Alas, these are low things, say
you: Then, say I, they are easily observed by you, I hope, if they be so low in
your esteem: but I have found some as high as they have been in their Gospel
notions, and very frequent at private Fasts, yet very tardy in these low
things. Diligence in our Callings is a thing that light of Nature, as well as
light of Scripture, does teach: Some think it a high attainment in Religion,
that they can go up and down to duties, to meetings, though through their
laziness and idleness in their particular Callings, their families at home do
suffer; Trencher-Christians, that serve their bellies by good discourses: Those
who have Estates, and can spare the time, it is well done: Those who work the
harder, rise the earlier, as the old Essex Christians would do, that they might
enjoy an opportunity for their Souls, without detriment to their Families, have
acted like Christians indeed: but some I have enquired after, and find a habit
of laziness and idleness has taken them, but they must go for very good
Christians, because frequent at Fasts: I like not this Christianity. An
honorable and virtuous Lady was once commending of her Gardener to Mr. Dod
(that holy man) what a good man he was, how much good discourse he had, how
helpful to others in the family, to teach them to read, etc. But Madam, said
Mr. Dod, what is this man in his particular Calling? for God looks on us as we
are in our particular Callings. Here the good Lady could not then give any
answer being new come, but forced soon after to turn him away, being an idle
Jack. I do not speak of a Christian at his first coming home, when his
Conscience being newly awakened, and his danger felt, that now he bestows more
time in holy duties than afterward: Nor do I speak of any poor Christian, that
may be abused by their own darkness, and Satan's subtilty: As one good woman,
because the Text says, Pray continually, 1 These. 5. she could never be
satisfied, but must be in secret at prayer and reading, and the family
neglected, her children not dressed, but went forlorn; Christians could not
take her off, till at last Mr. Richardson (that holy and learned man, who wrote
the Comment upon Ramus) hearing of it, and having occasion to go that way, went
into the house, and seeing the children how they went, spoke with a loud voice,
and very terribly, Is there no fear of God in this house? and other words to
this purpose, which concluded there could be no true grace, where there was
such negligence in the particular place where the woman was set: The poor woman
hearing this language, comes out of her private Room, from her duties, with
trembling, and now was taught another lesson, if she would prove her grace, to
show her diligence and care in her particular place, where God had set her, and
carry on that, with her duties in secret: but this is not the case I am
speaking to. As for the other part, the care and conscience, the equity,
righteousness, which men show in all their dealings, these things are often
spoken to; I forbear to enlarge upon them; but wish that persons, whose heads
are taken up with high Gospel notions, would credit their profession with
righteous hands, according to that Rule the Lord left us, Matthew. 7.12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so (just so) to them: A Rule little applied to the actions of them, who will
yet say, they have received Christ for their Lord: What your high Gospel
notions are I cannot tell, and do as little care; but I can tell this from our
Lords mouth, This is the Law and the Prophets; such a Law as binds you, and
according to that Authority must you act, deal, trade, live with men, if your
faith in our Lord Christ be sound.

Fourthly, Bring this general to some particular Actions and Cases in your
life, when your gain, profit, ease, liberty, begin to be hazarded; let us
suppose the action to be questionable, whether it may be done, or not: Do
thou now let Conscience have fair play? do not labor to hoodwink it, that
it may not see? do with a naked breast before the Lord, willing to
understand the mind and will of thy Lord, whom thou have received (as thou
say) search, pray, enquire, that thou may know what is his will, and what
he will have thee do? Art willing to see light, the true light, or art afraid
the window should be open, lest if the light should come in, it should
determine thy actions so, that profit, ease, liberty must go? Do shrink at
this, art shy of this? Do read only one part with much seriousness, which
speaks what you would have to be true, and not as seriously search and examine
the contrary, for fear light should dart in, and then Conscience and you could
not be quiet? I know I speak of a close thing, a hard business, to have a heart
so sincere, so awed with the Authority of our Lord, that the heart is very
willing to see light; open all the windows, let light come in, fall back, fall
edge, as we say, this is the will of my Lord, to him I resign up my will, let
come of it what will. I know Christians meet with hard tugging here; yet how
can a man carry this evidence, that he has received Jesus for his Lord, who is
not willing with a plain heart (without seeking evasions, and distinctions,
which he may justly question whether his Lord will own or no) to search and
find out what the will of his Lord is? I am sensible of difficulties here; I do
not write with a magisterial spirit; but yet the Rule I must own, and I do not
know one sincere Christian that will deny it: He that does truth comes to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, John
3.21.

Fifthly, Carry this general to particular frames of heart, slightness,
formality, hardness of heart, deadness, coldness: I know who will rise up here
presently, and tell me, now you hit me, now you have found out me: No, it may
be not, thou art not the person whom I mean, who art so sensible of these, and
to whom these frames are not only sins, but plagues. I know too well how
commonly these things, slightness, formality, etc. get in upon Christians; yet
I cannot call them frames of slightness, etc. because the real Christian will
not endure such frames upon his spirit; he is not right with himself, when he
feels these distempers upon him, if through some temptations they have gotten
head upon him: How hard a thing it is to keep up a warm serious frame in the
things and ways of God, unless a Christian be warmed with influences from
Heaven, conveyed through Ordinances, I know too well: but when a man lies in
these frames, can content himself in them, let him look to himself, for he is
serious and real somewhere else, which will shake his closing with Christ, and
right receiving of him for his Lord.

6. Lastly, I shall conclude with this, though I thought such a thing might
have been spared, for it will not reach all, but some. What opinion have thou
of thy Lords Institutions? I am sure this Lord has set up Ordinances in his
House, Divine institutions. There is his Ministry, and the work which he has
called and ordained his Ministers to do. Is he your Lord, have you received him
so? and can you find your Lords Institutions, and trample upon them? Men are
now grown so spiritual, that they can live above Ordinances, yea, and above
your Lord too, if he be your Lord, which I much doubt. Tell not me of your
spirituality; I tell thee, if thou have truly received Christ thy Lord, then
all thy Lords Institutions in his House are reverently received by thee, thou
have a high esteem of them for his sake who did appoint them, else you make
your self to be the Lord, and not him: Whose Image and Superscription is this?
said Christ, Matthew. 22.20. to them who sought to entangle him, if Cesars, then
give to Caesar the things that are Cesars, etc. So say I, whose Superscription
is there upon the Gospel Ministry, upon Baptism, the Lords Supper, Church
Discipline? Is it not the Lord Christ's? I look not on him as a sober Christian,
that dare deny it. Let then the Lord Christ have what is his. It was a very
unsavory speech (if true) of one, whose name I spare, and very unbecoming a
Minister, let his notions be as high as they will, calling Baptism and the
Lords Supper Low Ordinances: Was it fit for a Servant to call the Institutions
of his Lord low Ordinances? We do bless him for his Institutions, he appointed
nothing in vain in his Church: But this is our misery, since the Orthodox have
rectified the doctrine of good works and Sacraments, Charity, good works, and
Sacraments, come to be slighted by a Gospel-glutted generation: I do not intend
Infant Baptism alone, when I mention Baptism, for the Anabaptists do set up
Baptism, if they do not put too much upon it; the Ordinance they keep up,
though as to the subject of it, there they differ; I intend not to meddle with
the Opinion. Only this I may say, the Christians, who were baptized in their
Infancy, upon the account of Gods Covenant with his People and their Seed, have
generally ( I speak of good Christians) made so little improvement of the
Covenant and their baptism, that it is no wonder, though some men rise up
against the baptizing of Infants, God thereby giving a check to their
negligence therein: But Christian, if thou have not been so good a husband as
thou should have been, will thou therefore cut off all the seed of believers
for thy sake, and deny them that privilege and advantage the Lord has given
them? If you say, what advantage is this to them? If you do not know, I will
tell you what some have found, when in the time of their temptations, and
darkness, they have been beaten out of all, and could not tell what promise to
apply or fasten upon as theirs, then they remembered, God was my Fathers God, my
Mothers God, in Covenant with them, and with their seed, Lord, I hold to my
Fathers Covenant, or my Mothers Covenant; I choose thee for my God, as thou were
my Fathers God, or my Mothers God (if one be a believer, 1 Cor. 7.14.) thou
have given me the Seal in my baptism: I hold to the Seal: the things thou
did there signify and seal, I prize, I embrace, I plead for, that blood of
Christ that may purge my Conscience from dead works, that I may serve the
living God, Heb. 9.14. that thou would pour that clean water upon me that I
may be clean from all my filthiness, and from all my idols, that thou would
cleanse me, Ezekiel. 36.25. If thy Institutions have any thing in them, (as it
were vile profaneness, to imagine thou should set up any vain thing in thy
Church) then I bless thee, that thou have prevented me thus in my infancy, and
have given me an advantage so lay hold upon thee, which now I desire to improve
and plead; here have some found footing, this it is has brought in stay and
support, with resolution to cleave to the Lord in this Covenant and Ordinance,
when they could not tell where else to fasten: So that I conceive, as they do
very ill, that mind not this their privilege, nor improve it, so they do ill,
that cut off their Children from this privilege, that they cannot improve it;
whatever thy Child is now ( I suppose you cannot say of those few who are
rebaptized when adult, that they are all godly, no, we see the contrary) what
do thou know, but God may awaken him, and then it may be an advantage to
remember the Covenant of God with his Father and his Seed, and that God has
entered into Covenant with him in his baptism; but I must insist no more upon
this Head, but conclude, if Christ indeed be received thy Lord, then thou will
have an honorable esteem of all thy Lords Institutions, and thou will as
reverently observe them, else thou art not right.

Thus I have done with that which I intended: If you say, these are old things,
we have heard and read them before: I intended not to give you new notions, or
high strains; but though they be old notions, yet they will serve to discover
new Hypocrites, let their new notions be as high as they will; there is never
an unsound believer, but by what I have said he shall be discovered: Thou that
can slight them because they are old, can thou answer them all? bring them
close home to thy heart, let Conscience speak: How many of our high flown
Gospellers, whose ears are itching after new things, are found basely to fall
short of old Truths in their practices? How abominable is this to a sincere
Christian? It was a saying of that eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Daniel
Rogers, to me, O Cousin, I find so much in the old Truths, they are so
spiritual, so hard, that till I have reached and learned them, I will never
listen after new. But I leave these, and turn to the humble and sincere
Christian, to whom after I have spoken a few words, in answering two or three
Questions, I shall put an end to my work.

Now Christian, what says thy heart to what thou have read? can you experience
what has been said? I do not ask you if you find no difficulties, but come off
with ease in all points; if you find your heart come off with ease, I am afraid
you do not understand what I have written, and I should the more suspect you:
for if your heart be indeed set upon the work to clear out, and prove the sound
work of faith in closing with Christ your Savior and Lord, you will find you
have an old man, a dead body, a corrupt principle yet within you, and a Devil
without you, that will cause the work shall not come off with so much ease: I
will allow you fears, jealousies, surmizes, doubts, whether there be, or ever
will be, a sound work of faith, from what thou meetest with, in thy heart, and
yet shall like you never the worse for that: the question is, where art
Christian, how far art come? I have endeavored to take away what may trouble a
sincere heart, and yet have laid the work sound to cut off an Hypocrite: Have
thou applied these things to thy self which thou have read? If thou do not
apply, to what end do thou read this, or any other book? But if thou have
applied, what answer does thy heart give thee? If the day be stormy, cloudy and
dark, give in thy answer another time; when being more quiet and still, thou
can weigh the things that have been written, and thy heart, in a just
balance, then say how thou find: Having then considered what has been
written concerning preparatory works to faith, concerning the nature of saving
faith, how it receives Christ, and what it receives: Have viewed him in his
Person, in his Offices, Priestly and Princely? Have taken the general Head down
into particulars, and considered them? Do say, yes, I have? and all things
being thus considered (supposing difficulties, temptations, and hard work,
which you have told me I must look for from my own heart, and be sure I find it
true) I can humbly say before the Lord, my Soul has thus received and embraced
Jesus Christ my Lord: And if you ask me what I am doing? I answer, I am
endeavoring to live by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. whom I have
thus received, that my Soul may experience him in the execution of all his
Offices, in the application of the complete work of Redemption; that as my
union with him is my life; the consideration of what God has made him, and how
he stands engaged in the new Covenant, is the support and stay of my life; so
the experiencing of all this, may be the joy of my life, thus far I am come;
the Lord then carry on his work; yea, Faithful is he who has called you, who
also will do it, 1 These. 5.23.

And now Soul, what hinders but thou may say, My Beloved is mine, and I am
his? Why do not draw up the conclusion, then Christ is mine, forgiveness of
sin is mine; having laid such premises, which will of necessity enforce this
conclusion? Here Christians many times fly back; that which is the most
ridiculous thing in the art of reasoning, that is, to yield the premises and
deny the conclusion, or not yield it, every boy laughs at it, being so absurd;
this absurdity is found no where but among Christians, in their concluding upon
their spiritual state and interest in Christ, as those who have to deal with
troubled and dark Christians do commonly experience.

Quest. Whence rises this, what should be the reason, that when Christians
have yielded to that, which will certainly conclude them to be in Christ, and
that Christ is theirs, that forgiveness of sin is theirs, (according to our
Fathers definition of Faith) that yet they cannot come to assent to the
Conclusion, Christ is mine, Pardon is mine?

As in what is said before, He that believes in Christ, that receives him as
he is offered, and so rests upon him for life and salvation, for all the
benefits of communion, Christ is his (for he is united to him by this faith)
Forgiveness is his; this they yield. But I do believe in Christ, I do receive
Christ as God offers him, his Person, clothed with all his Offices, and I so
receiving, do trust to him, rest upon him, for life, salvation, all the
benefits of communion: when you have well examined them, take them in cool
blood, they will say, I dare not deny it, but I must yield it: the first they
yield, for the Scripture says it, that is, faith, no denial there: the second
they must yield, their own Confciences force them, they must speak against
their Consciences, their experience and sense testify this, yet dare not draw
up the Conclusion, Therefore Christ is mine, forgiveness is mine.

Answ. In answer to it: may be you will say, because they are simple
Mechanics, they have no skill in Logic, if they had, they would soon see the
gross absurdity they commit, such for which the boys would hiss them out of
the Schools: but friend, you are mistaken, that is not all the reason, those
who know what belongs to syllogizing as well as you, and know that it is a
gross absurdity, to yield the premises and deny the Conclusion, yet they cannot
do it, or are afraid to do it: There are other grounds whence this rises, as
experiences have proved.

First, From the greatness of the things a man concludes. If once I conclude,
Christ is mine, what will this imply? Then God is my God, his Love is mine,
Peace, Pardon, Justification, Adoption, all the benefits of the new Covenant,
yea, Heaven, Glory, all are mine, for in Christ all the Promises are Yea and
Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. I must conclude all these, which are so infinitely great in
themselves and my esteem, and which is yet more, how few are they that ever
shall partake of these things, and must I be one of these few, to whom these
great things do belong? I dare not apply them, I tremble at the Conclusion: The
greatness, the glorious splendor of the Sun; dazles the eye, the eye cannot
look on it, so do the greatness, the glory of these things, the eye of a man's
reason, puts by the actings of Reason, that it cannot conclude here as in other
things: When Jacob's Sons told him, Joseph is yet alive, and is Governor over
all the Land of Egypt, Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not, Genesis
45.26. the old man had not heard of him above two or three and twenty years
together, but supposed he was dead long since, he could not believe them, the
news was too good, and too great for Jacob; they told him a lie before, when
they made him believe he was dead; so that this conflict between hope and
doubt, joy and fear, but fear prevailing (partly from the greatness of the
thing they spoke of, and partly because of what they told him long before of
his death, whence he could not believe them) put old Jacob into a swooning fit.
It is the same with this Believer, tell him Christ is yours, pardon is yours,
God and all that he has purposed and promised for his elect-believers all
yours, you make the heart of the believer to faint with the report of these
great things, he cannot believe you, nor dare conclude himself, whatever the
premises infer.

Secondly, The fears and jealousies that are upon the heart, though it does
yield to, and cannot deny the minor Proposition: Regeneration, union with
Christ, are great works: to be a wise Builder, a wise Virgin, is hard, few
attain to this; I have a naughty, treacherous, deceitful heart within me; and
though it is true, while you thus urge me, and follow me up and down, in your
trials and examining of me, yea, whilst I try and examine my self, I cannot,
but as I find my heart at this present, by all the searches I can make into it,
I must yield to what you ask me, I dare not deny this work; yet I fear there
may be something lurking that I do not yet see, some secret hppocrisie lies
yet undiscovered: he that is known to be a liar, who will trust him, or believe
him, though at this time he does speak truth? My heart is known to be a liar,
God has said so, Jer. 17.9. and I have found his Word true; how then can I
choose but fear, there may be something at bottom, that as yet I know not? Thus
you shall have Christians stand, when you have so pent them up, that they
cannot but yield to you; yet, say they, I fear, I fear, and that is all you
shall get from them; but to draw up the Conclusion, no, by no means, they
cannot do that.

Thirdly, Though the Soul does assent to the minor Proposition, yet his assent
unto it is not so strong and firm to force the Conclusion, that Christ is his;
or that he is a believer: as his Assent to the minor Proposition in the state
of unregeneracy, was to force this Conclusion, that he was miserable, and in
that state must perish, or that Christ was none of his.

Frame the Argument thus.

He that is an enemy to God, and God to him, under sin, under unbelief, a child
of wrath, he is in a miserable perishing state.

But I am an enemy to God, and God to me, I am under sin, under unbelief, a
child of wrath.

Therefore I am in a miserable and perishing condition.

Here the Premises, and the Assent to these Premises, is so strong, that the
Conclusion is forced so as no resisting.

The Major is so plain, that there is no opposing it.

The Minor, where the pinch lies, in concluding our good estate, here in our
proving our miserable state, is as strong as the Major; for the same word of
God tells us, it is the condition of us all by nature, Col. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.16.
2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Romans 8.7. and 11.32. Gal. 3.22. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 3.23. Whence
the Assent I give to the Minor, is not only from the sense of sin and enmity
which I feel in my self, which Assent is yet stronger, for I am sure here
cannot subesse falsum: but besides this, I Assent to it by a Divine faith,
because by necessary consequence from these Scriptures it follows, That if all
men are so by nature, then though my name be not in the text, yet I am sure I
am included in the text.

But in drawing up my Conclusion for my saved state, the Minor Proposition,
upon which the stress lies, I cannot assent to it by a Divine faith, as I did
to the other, because it is not contained in any Text, that I do believe, and
may be forced out of the Text by necessary consequence. Again, to say I am as
sensible of sincerity, of saving grace, as I am sensible of sin, therefore I
can as truly assent to the Minor from what I feel, that I have sound faith, as
I did assent from my feeling, that I had and have sin; this the heart will
shrink at, and is afraid to speak so boldly, though it may be truth, that he is
sensible of Grace.

Thirdly, When a Christian by close examination is pent up to give answer, yea,
or nay, whether he have not so received Christ, or such a work of faith is
wrought in him, as you by opening it, and questioning of him, would persuade
him; Arguments pro and con being weighed, the Arguments for the Affirmative,
that such a work is wrought, prove the heavier, and cast the scale in the
judgment of his own Reason, and Conscience, which he must not belly, which does
witness, and his own feeling testifies this in him. But then here are two
things: 1. Though the Soul does assent to the Affirmative, yet he sees much
lie in the other Scale for the Negative, which makes his assent that it is not
so strong. 2. He does answer to what is in him, according to his feeling, or
spiritual sense, what work is actually there, and if he denies his own feeling,
then Conscience will tell him he lies; and it is a vile thing to deny the work
of God which he feels. But this Proposition, Christ is mine, pardon is mine, is
not a work in him, it is not felt by spiritual sense and experience, as the
other is, and therefore he less minds that, as being in no such great danger of
denying a work of God in him, or having Conscience tell him he lies, in denying
what he feels, and cannot but experience is wrought in him.

Fourthly, The Christian upon trial and examination answers to the question, as
he considers the work of faith in its causes, or essence, a priori, and so
commonly when you examine, is it not thus? you open the nature and essence of
faith to him, and he viewing of his own heart, tells you, if I know any thing
of my own heart, I have thus received, I do thus cleave to Christ, rest and
roll my Soul upon him, for all benefits of communion, and execution of all his
Offices; but for the experiencing of these in my heart I cannot: I have looked
and longed to find Christ ruling like a King in me, and acting like a Prophet
in me, and so as a Priest for me: Now the want of these experiences shake his
assent which he gave before, while he considers faith in the causes. Certainly,
says the Soul, if I had rightly received him, did I truly cleave and trust to
him, I should experience the virtues of his Offices, as well as the woman found
virtue flowing from him when she touched the hem of his garment, Matthew. 9.20.
Now if the want of these make him almost to eat his words, the assent he gave
before, though still the Soul would hold that, for says the man, were I to
begin the work now again, that a new I were to believe in Christ, I could not
tell how I should receive him, adhere to him, roll upon him otherwise than I
do, and have done already [note this Christian and hold it] so that it will not
wholly let it go, but hold it; yet if the want can so shatter his assent to the
minor Proposition, to be sure the want of these experiences will trouble him
so, that he dare not assent to the Conclusion: A man must have experience of
Christ before he can say, Christ is mine.

Fifthly, Suppose, says the poor Christian, I should draw up the Conclusion,
and say, Christ is mine, my sins are pardoned, and if this should not be true,
where am I then? has not this been the case of many a hypocrite and unsound
believer? have not they thus said, and thus believed, and after all prove
rotten? and may it not be my case as well as theirs? for they appeared to have
more than I have: these examples make the real Christian to tremble, he dare
not speak or think such high things, for fear his fall should be more dreadful.
How Satan can work in all these, I do not mention, I will not multiply Heads.

Sixthly, To draw up this Conclusion, Christ is mine, forgiveness is mine, will
require the assistance and testimony too of that good Spirit; when he helps the
Soul to make his Syllogism indeed, the Soul shall be able to draw up his
Conclusion, according to his Premises. He is called the Comforter, and this his
Office none can perform but himself; if others help, it is a he conveys himself
by them. Such is the work of Conversion, from the first work of Illumination to
the last; all the things that come within the compass of a real Christian, they
do all depend upon the Spirit of God: Men shall know, it is not their great
learning, high parts, etc. that can do any thing belonging to a real Christian,
without the Spirit of God: His work does not depend upon the greatness of men's
abilities, God has no need of them; yea, we find, that as great parts hinder
men from sound conversion, (that is a low thing, fit for Mechanics) so where
men have by the work of Gods Spirit attained to saving Grace, their great parts
have been great hindrances to their settling and comfort: Many a poor sincere
Christian, whose natural abilities are but low, shall be able to draw up the
Conclusion and walk in the comfort of it, that Christ is mine, when other great
heads, though they have Grace, shall not be able to reach it; their excellent
parts do but help them to be the more acute Disputants against themselves,
snarle, and baffle themselves: No flesh shall glory in his presence, 1 Cor.
1.29. Hence we have known great Scholars, able Divines, have been glad to
confer with, and listen to the experiences of plain Christians in these cases:
Thus the eye has need of the hand, 1 Cor. 12.21. yea, of the foot.

Seventhly, Many Christians must have their settling, and assurance come in
their way, which they have set down; they chalk out Gods path for him; they
must have their comfort and evidence, as such a Christian had it; may be in an
absolute promise, without any condition expressed, (this was the only way of
evidencing which some cried up, and all assurances that came not this way were
not valued) this would take up some paper to handle that question, which did so
unbottom many serious Christians; it would be too long to treat of it here: but
thus diverse have lain looking for, and listening after such a word, set home by
an impulse of the Spirit, and all other ways of evidencing are neglected: to
draw up a man's evidence by syllogizing, taking first the word, then applying
that word to my heart, and if my heart answers the word, then conclude, thus or
so of my condition; this was cried down, as being no sure or sound way of
evidencing: Hence many poor, but sincere Christians, were afraid, and dare not
go this way to work: This has made sad work I know where.

Lastly, Some Ministers have preached it, and their works published have
declared it, that Assurance is no saving Grace; it is comfort, but not grace:
and now there is no great danger though they do want assurance; for they want
not grace, but want the comfort only of their grace, in wanting assurance: So
they may do well in the conclusion, though they want comfort at present: it is
want of saving grace, not comfort, which will ruin them. This will occasion
another Question.

Quest. Whether a Christian upon self-examination, or examination by others
judicious and godly, being convinced, so much at least that he dares not deny,
but God has wrought the good work of Faith in him, ought not now to conclude,
Christ is mine, and my sins are forgiven?

I speak of such a Christian, who has been examining himself by what has gone
before, or by any other Book, or Rules, which are sound and unerring: Some
their Rules are false, and most men judge by false Rules; but I am speaking of
a real Christian, who is careful of his Rule, and as careful in the applying of
his heart to the Rule. Amongst these in discourse, we meet with some, who
manifest too much frowardness, pettishness, whom I much mislike and suspect:
others of a more humble, meekened, reverent frame of spirit, willing to subject
to any way of God, and would conclude if they dare, but they fear they should
be too bold, and thus out of fear are kept from their conclusion: these are the
Christians I aim at: and observe the stress of the question lies in the word
ought; it is not what they may do, but what they ought to do, making it a duty
incumbent upon them: and if that can be made good, though that be yielded,
assurance is not grace; yet they are not at liberty to turn off the conclusion
as they please.

Answ. Our Fathers, who defined Faith by a particular persuasion and assurance,
etc. had here a mighty advantage; for their assurance is grace, and those who
had it not must want saving grace, for they wanted faith, without which no
salvation; and this, I believe, did put on many Christians, that they dared not
to deny the conclusion, that Christ is mine, forgiveness is mine, because
therein lay their work of saving faith, and the contrary to it was unbelief,
the great Gospel damning sin. Few Christians then, and many now, I believe,
knowing no other faith but this, or unbelief, but what is contrary to this.

Hence rose that Position, which has been so stiffly maintained, If a Christian
should fall into a scandalous foul sin, yet he must not let go his assurance of
his interest in Christ, of the love of God, but that he ought to hold firm.
Very true, if faith be the particular persuasion and assurance, that Christ is
mine, then it ought to be so; for every man's duty, and so his duty, is to
believe; he must not be an unbeliever, though he has fallen: But what danger
lies in this? Some rotten bold Hypocrite may be will say, he holds his
assurance at such a time; but show me that real sound Christian that ever did
so, till by sound repentance, and laying hold upon the blood of Atonement with
true faith, he had recovered himself, and made up his peace with God. When thou
art converted strengthen thy brethren, said Christ to Peter Luke 22.32. rising
from scandalous great falls, is as it were another conversion, or a now
conversion, a man shall meet with works now more terrible, it may be, than in
his first conversion: Neither David, nor Peter, knew such at the first
conversion, that they did in their rising from their scandalous falls. But no
more of this now.

Before I come to try whether we may determine affirmatively upon the Question,
I would take off an Objection, and premise two or three things.

The Objection runs thus, If assurance be no grace, then I ought not to
conclude, according to the Question, I am not bound to any thing but what is
grace.

The Consequence and the Reason of it, here given, I deny.

Though assurance be not saving grace, yet I may be bound, and it may be my
duty, to conclude according to the Question: there are many things which are my
duty to do, yet the doing of them is not saving grace: to pray, to partake of
the Sacraments, to hear the Word, etc. they are my duty; but praying,
receiving, hearing, are not saving grace: the principles that move me to these
duties may argue grace; the manner of my performance of them may be gracious;
but the doing of the things do not argue grace; yet I am bound to the duty, as
well as to the principles and manner of doing: not to do these duties argue no
grace, say the bastard-spiritualists of our times what they please: Let them
tell God one day they were so spiritual, that they had no need of, but were
above his Ordinances and Appointments, see if this will satisfy their Judge,
for such contempt of his Institutions. Thus to apply this, my drawing up this
Conclusion, that Christ is mine, and that my sins are pardoned, may be my duty,
which I may be bound to assent unto, though it be no saving grace; a man may
from a gracious principle draw up the Conclusion, and graciously possess it,
and that he must do, if possels it at all.

The Things which I would premise are these.

First, Though it is true, the Spirit of God must put to his assistance, and
must be the chief Actor in the drawing up the Conclusion, and setting the Soul
in the comfortable assurance of it; yet this does not take it off, but it may
be my duty as well to draw up this Conclusion: This I put in to take off that
Objection, which some may have, and many no doubt have it, lie secretly within
them, this is the Spirits work and so look no further to any act of theirs, but
only to listen for some kind of revelation, whisper, or some such secret word,
as Mr. Bolton mentions, which I quoted before out of him, without making use of
their examination, and spiritual reason upon that self-examination. If the
Spirit of God does not put to his hand in all the works we do, and duties we
perform, we make bungling, untoward work: but this does not take off my
obligation, nor my endeavor to perform those duties. My duty is one thing,
what that free Agent will help me to do is another thing: I am to attend my
duty, and look to him for his assistance. It is the same case here. Do our duty
(if it prove a duty) and wait for the Spirit in doing it; He witnesses with
our spirits, Romans 8.16. While we are doing our duty, and our spirits witness,
the Spirit of God does co-witness: What do you know but he may do it now.

Secondly, The drawing up this Conclusion, as to the degree of the strength and
clearness of it, is very various among Christians, some do it more strongly and
clearly by far than others: but what then, if you cannot come to their degree,
will you endeavor nothing at all? or is your little, though weaker, nothing,
because it is not so strong, so clear as his? I do not doubt, but in many
Christians, where this work of examination, heart-inspection, is kept up, but
the Conclusion is in some small degree, a supporting degree, drawn up, and
might be more, did they apprehend, or could be convinced, that there lay any
duty upon them as to this work,

Thirdly, Though Christians when they have labored and ventured to draw up the
Conclusion, and found sweetness in that Honey comb, cannot hold it long, but
loose it again, to morrow it may be they are at a loss; this does not argue
that thou did err in drawing up the Conclusion, nor take thee off at all from
they duty, to labor to conclude again; yea, if thou loosest it a hundred
times, yet endeavor to conclude again. Alas, says the Soul, I had it once, I
could humbly say, Christ is mine, it was so sweet unto me, but now I have lost
it: What news you tell us, as if no body knew it but your self; find out if
thou can, Christian, how thou came to loose it, if you be sure it be lost;
may be it is only in a degree, the Spirit (the free Agent) withdrawing for a
time: but if this be thy frame to search out causes, if any such be blameable,
and laboring to come up again to conclude again, if it be a hundred times (as
I said) I shall like your condition better than I have liked some, who have
attained to a high pitch of assurance, from an absolute promise set home by the
Spirit (as they think) or any other way; and hence they say, Once the Lords and
ever the Lords; whom God once loves he always loves; and thus have rested upon
such a revelation, or call it what you will, that gave them their full
assurance, at such a time, but their future conversation has not been so
answerable to such high assurances, not so tender, awful, holy, as those who
could never speak of such high assurances, in such ways as these Christians do.

Now for a few words to prove, that a Christian, who upon self-examination, or
examination by others judicious and godly, being convinced, so much at least
that he dares not deny, but God has wrought the good work of faith in him,
ought to conclude, Christ is mine, and pardon is mine.

First, Something he must conclude, else to what end is his self-examination?
Either then he must conclude, Christ is mine, and pardon is mine, or the
contrary, Christ is not mine, etc. For him to conclude, Christ is not mine,
pardon is not mine, is to give the lie to the Word of God, and conclude that to
be none of Gods Word. I pray, Christian, go along with me, and wind out if you
can: I say, thou give the lie to thy Bible; for though it is true, I cannot
prove from the Bible by necessary consequence, that I am a Believer, as I can
prove I am an undone Sinner, and unbeliever naturally, from the Scripture,
though my name be not in it: but this being cleared, I stand convinced, and
dare not deny the work of faith in me; now for me to deny that Christ is mine,
or pardon mine, is to give the lie to the Word of God; for you say and suppose
a man may be a believer in Christ, and yet not justified, nor united to Christ,
and so Christ his, which is directly against the Word, Romans 3.26. That he might
be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Acts 14.39. By him
all that believe are justified from all things, etc.

Yet once more: If the Bible tell us this is saving faith, you upon
examination, or others skilful in the work, help you to examine, and there you
find that which agrees with that work mentioned in your Bible for saving faith,
if you will yet deny that you have saving faith, or that you are a believer, I
cannot see but that implicitly at least you give the lie to your Bible; for
that which your Bible says is saving faith, you cannot deny but you have it,
yet deny you have saving faith, or are a believer. Christians should be more
careful in their denials.

Secondly, That which all Christians are exhorted to, that is a duty belonging
to all Christians. Exhortation implies a duty: I ought to do what I am exhorted
to: But all Christians are exhorted, to be assured of their state in Faith,
Union with Christ, 2 Cor. 13.5, Effectual Calling and elation, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Therefore such Christians, as the Question speaks of, are bound to conclude,
and not left to their liberty, whether they will conclude or not, that Christ
and pardon are theirs. This also to me is clear, that the Apostles giving such
charge and exhortations to all the Corinthians, and all the believing Jews, by
their examination, self-probation, diligence, to make sure their calling,
election, that Christ was in them, and they in the faith; the Apostles did not
intend, that men's assurances could not be had but by absolute promises, and
such as a Christian did not think of before set home, or applied by the Spirit
in that way which some have found, or by revelations, secret whispers, or what
some have mentioned; for self-examinations, and proving of our selves, and our
diligence, have no efficacy, or tendency, to produce such an effect that comes
that way: And it should seem by them as if these evidences, or assurances
(though much differing in their strength and clearness) should be more familiar
with Christians, though not always alike, but depending upon our humble and
reverent walking with God, and meet it is that it should be so, that those who
would enjoy that comfort should walk sutably to it.

Object. But my duty is terminated in my examination, proving of my self,
whether I conclude or not.

Answ. That is not true; you have not proved your self, till you have
concluded: What are you? Are you a believer or not? Are you in Christ or not?
or is he in you, which is all one? This you must know and prove, this you are
bound to, which must be by concluding upon your examination: for then has a
man performed his duty in examination, when he comes to the end of his
examination: you are to examine and prove your selves to this end, to see
whether you are not in the Faith, Christ in you, that you are called and
chosen; now you have performed your duty, and not till now: We will suppose (as
no doubt but there were such amongst them) there were some unbelievers and
Christless persons amongst the Corinthians, they were bound also to examine and
prove themselves: now if these did not upon examination and proving themselves,
conclude themselves to be unbelievers, and out of Christ, and now look out for
sound faith, and interest in Christ, these persons did not answer their duty,
nor perform what the exhortation called for, though they did examine: so on the
other side, nor did the true believer answer his duty, till he concluded he was
in the Faith, and Christ in him, that he was called and chosen.

Thirdly, If Christians ought not to conclude their state, accoridng to the
Question, then examination were a vain thing, and Christians called, and bound
to that which is but a vain duty, for there is nothing comes of it. God has
given man a rational Soul, set up his candle and light within him, made able to
reflect upon it self, try and know what is in himself, it is able to draw
Conclusions from Premises: hence when the Lord sets him upon examination, he
sets him about a rational work, to which he has fitted and enabled him. If by
it he be able to see the Minor proposition, convinced so as he dare not deny,
but such a work of faith (if this be true faith which you have opened, as I am
sure it is) I do feel in me, why then is he not as able, and ought he not to
infer the Conclusion, and so perform the duty of examination, which is very
profitable, and not vain as those Christians make it, who can come to the Minor
proposition, and cannot deny it, yet wave the Conclusion; when as examination
respects the Conclusion, and has not its scope and aim till it determines
there.

Fourthly, Rejoicing in the Lord, thankfulness, and praise, are duties to which
all Christians are bound; the Scripture calls upon them in several places, to
perform these duties. The drawing up this Conclusion upon the formentioned
Premises, is that which is the ground of all these duties; when the Christian
can say, Christ is mine, my sins are forgiven, God and I are reconciled, this
Soul, and only this Soul, is fitted indeed to perform these duties Let once a
Christian have his eyes opened to see, and Conscience awakened to make him
understand his misery, let that man rejoice in the Lord, let his mouth be
filled with thanks and praise if he can, so long as he cannot tell but God is
his enemy, and Christ a stranger to him; no singing of Sions Songs in Babylon,
the Harps then hang upon the Willows. Not yet in Hell, this I acknowledge is
matter of thanksgiving to a Christian in this condition: but if you name all
other things outward in this world, take other things, in Church, as
Ordinances, Church Priviledges, these signify nothing to him; Reprobates and
Hypocrites have enough of these, such whom God will never love; tell him of the
Gospel, a Redeemer manifested, precious Promises, the more is my torment; says
he, that there are such things, and I have no part in them: Let him have what
he will, he looks on all, unless God be my God, and Christ be my Christ, and I
am his, but as husks of mercies, and God has but husks of praises. If then
Christians be bound to these duties, then they are bound to this duty, which
only qualifies them, makes them fit to perform them: now the man rejoices in
God, now his high praises are in his mouth, now for any mercy outward, inward,
he can give thanks, I have it in love, I have God and Christ in it; yea, now
for the Rod, he can yet rejoice in the Lord when under it, while he sees it is
in his Fathers hand, and knows he means him only good, Conscience bearing him
witness, that he has not broken with God, to provoke his anger. What advantage
this is to all the course of a Christian, whether in doing or suffering, I do
not instance; I name only such as depend, if not wholly, yet chiefly, upon this.

To conclude then, since Christians are not left to their liberty, to determine
or not determine of their states; certainly those Christians that upon serious
examination of themselves do endeavor: 1. Chedientially, to draw up the
sonclusion, I say obedientially, in conscience of the duty they owe to God; (as
that person I mentioned before, who told her Minister on her deathbed, I did
believe, because I dare do no other.) 2. Humbly, in sense of their own
vileness, baseness and unworthiness; let the things be as great as they will,
if God will be like himself in freely giving, and the Son in purchasing great
things, what is that to you. 3. Thankfully, wondering at, and admiring, as I am
sure you will wonder and admire at this Grace of his: those Christians, I say,
that thus endeavor to draw up the Conclusion, they do quit themselves more
like Christians, answer their duty, and show a more humble Spirit, and reverent
awe of God, than those, who out of a pettish, froward and quarrelling kind of
humor, set themselves to oppose whatever the most judicious, experienced and
godly Christians can say for their establishing and comfort.

Object. The thing I am as willing to endeavor to do as you would have me: But
what if I do conclude Christ is mine, and pardon is mine, and I should be
mistaken, how then? How woeful were my condition?

Answ. First, All the Christians in the world, that ever were or shall be, may
make this Objection; so no Christian should ever have drawn up this Conclusion,
that Christ is mine, etc.

Secondly, How did our Christians in our Fathers times, when they taught them,
that Faith was the particular persuasion and assurance that Christ is mine,
that my sins are forgiven? This Objection was as full against them as me: and
as they apprehended Faith to be, no body should have believed, if this
Objection be sufficient to keep them off.

Thirdly, Is it a duty or not? You are bidden to examine and prove your self,
To what end? Do but say that, and we shall know what to say to you: if a duty,
then you perform an Act of obedience, and say, were it not for obedience, Lord,
I dare not do it; but since it is disobedience if I do not endeavor, I will
then beg of thee, help me to draw up the Conclusion, that now I may be able to
say, Christ is mine, and pardon is mine.

Fourthly, The consequences will prove whether a mistake or not: see how this
works, if the heart by it be drawn forth in more love to God, joy in God, awful
reverence of God, humble and holy walking with God, uprightness for God,
stronger life of faith upon God, more quiet submission under God; I say, if
these be the consequences, that the Conclusion drawn up works this way, fear no
mistakes, all will do well in the conclusion.

Object. Since it is thus, Tell me when may I truly conclude and say, Christ is
mine, and pardon is mine? When may I apply the precious Promises that carry
these rich benefits in them to my self, without deceiving my self?

Answ. The Question is answered already, in what has been said to that
experience which we often find in Christians, scarce any thing more common;
when as upon serious examination of themselves, or when others have helped them
to clear out their work of faith, so as they dare not deny it, but stand
convinced that God has done it; whereas now they should conclude, then they
are in a state of faith, that Christ is theirs, and pardon is theirs, because
the Word of God says so, which is the ground of the conclusion, yet they fly
off and dare not conclude. But yet to give you another answer, and it shall be
the same which Mr. Shepherd gives to a Question like it.

Quest. Sound Believer p. 211, 212.
When may a Christian take a Promise without presumption, as spoken to him, and
given to him in particular?

To this he answers: The Rule is very sweet but certain; when he takes all the
Scripture, and embraces it as spoken to him, he may then take any particular
promise boldly; my meaning is, when a Christian takes hold and wrastles with
God, for the accomplishment of all the promises of the New Testament; when he
sets all the Commandments before him, as his Rule, and Compass, and Guide to
walk after; when he applies all the threatenings to drive him nearer unto
Christ, the end of them; this no Hypocrite can do; this the Saints shoul do,
and by this may know when the Lord speaks in any particular unto them; Thus he.

This Rule is sure, and will deceive no man, if he do not deceive himself in
the application of the Rule; look you to that Christian, and you have a full
answer to your question.

Object. Is that part of his answer right, which teaches Christians to apply
all the threatenings to drive them to Christ? Does this agree with a true
Christian to be acted with threatenings? Is not this slavish, and unworthy of
him who has ever tasted of the love of God, that he must be driven to Christ,
to duty, and taken off from sin, by threatenings, fears of hell, etc.

Answ. His Answer stands right, no error in it: as for the Objection, it is
that indeed which many Christians suspect themselves by, they fear they are not
right, and question whether they may make use of such Arguments: some
Christians cry it down very much, I have heard, as if it were not a principle
or practice consistent with Christianity: therefore I will speak a few words to
it, and but briefly. And thus I pass to some of those things which cause
trouble in the conversation of a Christian constituted.

Here let us distinguish between a man, 1: Who is actually under these terrors
and fears of Hell, or other judgments, from an awakened Conscience that lasheth
him sorely, under which fears the man is a mere Passive, they arise in him
against his will, and are upon him against his will, shake them off as yet he
cannot; and while he is under these, he dares not but perform duties, he dare
not follow his lusts, or vain companious, being acted and moved from these
fears he now lies under, will he, nill he.

And Secondly, A man who is not actually under them, not a mere Passive, his
conscience does not terrify him as the other; but he as an Active or Agent,
makes use of this Argument, Hell, judgments, and wrath of God to keep under
that vile corrupt part which would be rebelling against God, and carrying on
his Soul to sin; also to towze up his lazy heart to duty, and to press after
Christ more, to get evidence of his interest in him: thus to be moved, and a
man to endeavor to move and stir up himself to duty, to follow Christ, to keep
down the rebellious risings of a corrupt principle within him, is well
consistent with true Christianity, and not unbecoming him who has tasted of
the love of God. This is,

First, Rational: It agrees with found reason.

Secondly, Seriptural: It agrees with the holy Scriptures; and I hope this is
enough.

I say it is Rational, and that upon these Grounds.

First, Christianity does not at all destroy Reason, the faculties of man, as
to their essence, are the same after Christ, union with him; which they were
before he knew Christ: Now it is essential to the will, to be moved with good
or evil; to choose good, to fly from evil: To have the will taken off from any
thing because there is great evil attends it, this is but rational, agreeing
with man as man, especially if the evil be infinitely greater than the good in
that which it would choose; this is common in our practices every day, and we
think him void of reason that does not act thus: Sin moves a Christian by some
good it proffers. My Soul, take heed, says the Christian, what thou do, how
thou consentest to this motion, for the wrath of God, hell and damnation attend
this sin, I charge thee meddle not with it, as thou dreadest and would avoid
the wrath of this terrible God. Is not this rational and becoming a Christian?
Is not hell, is not the wrath of God an evil for the will to fly from? I know
there is another evil in the nature of sin, and a Christian can and does make
use of that also; there are likewise more Arguments, but a Christian may make
use of this also. Only (which I might have premised) I would not be understood,
as if this were the only Argument of a Christian, that kept him from sin, or
that moved him to duty. Nor 2. that this is always an Argument actually made
use of, for so do not Christians, it may be, a good while together; but I speak
of what a Christian may make use of amongst other Arguments, and sometimes is
forced to do, when no other Argument will prevail, against the imperious
violent workings of some strong corruptions, and glad if by any Arguments he
can prevail; yea, what a tush soever you make at this, the Spirit of God must
quicken this Argument, and set it home, else it will not do. It is well if all
Arguments can prevail, well had it been for David and Solomon, if by Arguments
from Hell they had been preserved from their horrible falls, let these
Christians contemn it never so much.

Secondly, Self love is a principle implanted by God in nature: Self-love I
know sounds ill, but self love regulated-may be, yea, must be; Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, is the rule for, or sum of the second Table. I must
love my Neighbor, I am bound to that, you say: But how must I love him? As thy
self; as thou love and should love thy self, so love thy Neighbor: Then
surely I am bound to love my self, as well as I am bound to love my Neighbor,
for my self-love is the example, or rule, to inform me how I must love my
Neighbor; when I see my Neighbor about to commit sin, or that lives in sin, I
may lawfully dehort him from sin, from this Argument of hell, the wrath of God;
as he loves his own Soul, take heed of this course, for it will bring the wrath
of God upon him, and lay him in hell; this is but rational, who can say the
contrary, to move him from self-love: Surely the same may I apply to my self,
from that love which I owe my self: I sin if I do not love my self.

Thirdly, Though this Argument from Hell be servile, looks something like a
slavish temper, yet the principle which makes a Christian to use it may be, and
most what is, Love: Thus the love I owe to God, to Christ, and to an obedient
conversation before him, that I may not displease him, makes me improve all
Arguments, whertby I may keep my heart in the ways of God, and keep out all
sin, that it may not come in to displease him: As then I use other Arguments,
so I use this also, any rational Argument, that may have a prevalency upon my
heart, that I may walk in those ways, and please that God whom I love.

Fourthly, It is consistent with a child-like temper, to fear his Fathers rod,
and tremble at his Fathers wrath, yea, and to take heed of doing that which may
displease his Father, and provoke his anger so as to use the rod; he may be a
loving Child to his Father notwithstanding this; and doubtless it may as well
stand with a Christian spirit and temper, thus to be afraid of the wrath of
God, and by it to be deterred from sin: that base nature that as yet is not
sanctified (as we are but in part here (whatever Castellio says) had need have
this dreadful rod held over it, to keep it under. If then it be rational, then
it may well consist with Christianity, for all Gods ways are rational; what is
irrational, or contrary to sound reason, cannot be imputed to his ways, which
we are called to walk in.

Fifthly, Adam in his pure estate was moved to obedience from a threat; of
which more by and by.

Secondly, It is Seriptural: and if it agrees with Scripture, we little weigh
what men, yea what Christians, say to the contrary.

First, Christ himself (we need no better warrant) moves with this Argument;
but whom does he move? Luke 12.4. I say unto you, my friends, Christ is moving
of his friends, (I call you not servants, etc. but I have called you friends,
John 15.15.) be sure Christ will not move such with any Argument but what is
consistent with, and worthy of his friends; I will forewarn you whom you shall
fear; Fear him, which after he has killed has power to cast into hell: But
will this Argument become a friend? He repeats it, Yea I say unto you, (not
only to others that are but servants, but you, my friends) fear him, ver. 5. So
Matthew. 10.28. I know the distinction of punishment into paena damni, and poena
sensus, is very true and Scriptural; and though some apply it here, that the
punishment of loss, in hell, the loss of Gods face and favor, vision of him,
which is the chiefest part of hell, may well be feared, and is consistent with
the highest degree of love, and that is principally here meant; be it so, yet
it is not only meant; for Christ makes no such distinction here, but hell is
it which he mentions, and shows it consistent with his Disciples, his friends
(not Judas only) and if with them, then with any Christians to fear him, who
casts into hell, and by this to be preserved from the slavish fear of men in
doing their duty.

Again, that Argument wherewith Christ moves his Disciples (for to them he
speaks, Matthew. 16.24. after he had given that sharp rebuke to Peter) to
self-denial, and taking up the cross, is in a manner the same; for it is the
loss of their Souls, ver. 25, 26.

Secondly, The Apostles moved with the same Argument, Heb. 12.28, 29. To whom
does the Apostle speak? To those that receive a Kingdom. What duty does he call
them to? Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear. But with what Argument will the Apostle move these Christians
to this duty (which is a large duty comprehending all)? For, our God is a
consuming fire. Our God from whom we receive this Kingdom he is thus, therefore
look to your God as a consuming fire, is an Argument for those who receive a
Kingdom to make use of, to hold their hearts in a reverent frame of obedience
toward God all their days.

Thus the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5.6. and Col. 3.6. he is dehorting of dear
children, ver. 1. and those who are risen with Christ, from several lusts,
sensual and spiritual: and this Motive he uses to urge his dehortation, That
for these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.
Upon which words Bodius says thus, Although Arguments, a dextris, such as have
an attractive power, sweet and alluring, should be sufficient to make believers
and regenerate persons to avoid any sin; yet such is that corruption that lies
in us, like fire raked up in ashes, ready upon the blowing of temptations to
break out. Such are the allurements and provocations which we meet with in the
world amongst those with whom we live. Such are the subtle reasonings of our
carnal hearts, and wiles of Satan, etc. that we have need not only of those
sweet Arguments by which we are allured, sed and (...) ac terrificis illis, but
also those violent and terrifying Arguments by which we may in a manner be
compelled to our duty.

To the same purpose speaks the Apostle Peter, 1 Peter 1.17. And if ye call
on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. Believers, regenerate
persons, as he calls those, ver. 3. are exhorted to pass the time of their
sojourning here, even all their life time in fear: But what causes this fear?
The consideration that he whom they call on, and call Father, is a Judge, and
will judge persons, yea every one, respecting no man's person according to his
work. What is the Sentence this Judge gives? We know well. I could name more
Texts, but these are clear and sufficient.

Thirdly, Holy men in Scripture have been moved with this Argument, they dare
not meddle with sin: Job 31.23. giving an account of this carriage toward the
poor, the fatherless, etc. he dared not to injure them, or deny them what was
necessary, and what was his duty to perform: What moved this upright,
God-fearing-man? For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of
his highness I could not endure: Yet Job was one who knew his state to be sound
and safe, that his Redeemer lived, and that he should see him, etc. Though that
of David, Psalm. 119.120. be spoken in reference to the judgments of God, how he
deals with the wicked, yet it may very well be brought to prove what I am upon;
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. Before
David before spoke of love, in this verse of fear. Though these affections
differ much, says Calvin on the words, yet if we consider well, by what
rudiments God brings us to the reverence of his Law, we shall see they do well
agree: Neither is the mortification of the flesh a thing so easy that a man
will consent unto it, unless he be compelled by violent means, etc.

If the judgments we see here executed have such an effect, then what we know
are coming, the eternal judgments, should much more cause this trembling, and
be a means to keep us from those sins which cause these judgments. Habakkuk
chap. 3.16. trembles, lips quiver, rottenness enters into his bones, etc. The
threats which he heard, ver. 2. caused this, and made him lay in aforehand,
though a man of such faith as few of these have, I doubt, who do slight this
Argument: ver. 17, 18. Noah is moved with fear, Heb. 11.7. and prepares an Ark.
If holy men were so struck, so awed with these judgments, did they make light,
do we think, of those eternal judgments? Bodius conceives, that though Paul was
a man acted with love as much as any man, For the love of Christ constrained
him, 2 Cor. 5.15. yet in the same Chapter, ver. 10. having spoken of our
appearing before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. Knowing the terror of the
Lord, ver. 11. That terror of the Lord did move him, not only to labor to
persuade men, to help save others from the dreadful judgment coming, But it did
move him also to run the race set before him constantly. Surely he that thought
it an Argument to move other Christians, did make use of it himself. I shall
add no more to this Question, but say, it were well if some, who talk
altogether of love, had not lost (if ever they had it) Gods fear.

By the Answer to this Question we may a little call into question, that high
Divinity which many have published, yea, and given it for a note of a true and
sound Christian, of one who is a Son, p 532. Theilog. notur and revelat. p. 568.
and not a Slave, viz. for a man to worship and serve God for the love of
himself, though there were neither Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward. I meet
with this Divinity in several persons, I shall name but three. Clemens Alex.
Strom. l. 4. has many lines to this purpose: of our late Divines, Calonius, an
angry Lutheran, but for whose labors against the Socinians, and that
particular piece of Crellius de Deo uno patre, I bless God. He answered
Schmalrius (that gross Heretic) well enough, and might have answered him full
enough, though he had not added this note of distinction between Servants and
Sons. Servants, or Mercenaries, worship God for reward, or fear of punishment:
(if these be all the motives, they are Servants and Mercenaries indeed) Sons
from the mere study of the glory of God, so that if there were neither reward
nor punishment, neither heaven nor hell, nevertheless for the praise of God
alone, they would consecrate and give themselves up to the worship of God. This
I hope agrees with the Scripture, but not one that he names. I care the less
than for these two, for no Scripture quoted by either of them to prove it: but
there is a third person who moves me more than these: As for Calonius, I only
say to him, what I find him frequently alleging against us, and some who are
truly Heretics, and it stands in the front of his Answers, This is (...), and
we must not be wise above that which is written. 1 Cor. 4.6. So he reads the
words.
I am sure though this Divinity be written in Calonius, Clem. Alex. and others,
yet it is not written by the Prophets or the Apostles, we shall fear the less:
but the other person is our learned and holy Perkins, whom I much value; and
that he has put it down for a Catechetical head, supposing this to be a
fundamental truth; this is more than the other: about the end of his fourth
principle the question is moved.

Quest. What follows if in any temptation he be overcome, and through
infirmity fall?

Answ. After a while there will arise a godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9. Matthew.
26.75.
which is, when a man is grieved for no other cause in the world, but for this
only, that by his sin be has displeased God, who has been to him a most
merciful and loving Father.

Quest. What sign is there of this sorrow?

Answ. The true sign of it is this, when a man can be grieved for the very
disobedience of God in his evil word or deed, though he should never be
punished, 1 Pet. 2.19.
and though there were neither Heaven nor Hell.

By these men Christians are put to try their Sonship, whether Sons, or Slaves;
also to try their repentance and godly sorrow; here is the only cause and the
true sign set down, whereby they must try themselves; you repent, you are
sorrowful for offending of God; you worship him, you serve him, though there
were neither Heaven nor Hell: give in your answers Christians, you are sure
thus it is with you, and you can trust your hearts, that they say true, if they
do say as these Divines have said before. Calonius to prove his Assertion
brings in Antigonus his judgment, who taught his Scholars this kind of
Divinity; and tells us out of Menasse Ben Israel, that Zadok and Baytos, two of
Antigonus Scholars, did misinterpret their Masters Doctrine, as if their Master
denied any other life after this, and from thence took occasion to deny the
immortality of the Soul, and from this Zadok rose the Heresy and Sect of the
Sadduces; thus he: Of these Sadduces we read often in the Gospels, and in Acts
23.8. The Sadduces say there is no Resurrection, neither Angel, nor Spirit.
Were there neither reward nor punishment, Hell nor Heaven, I believe the number
of Sons, and such Penitents, would be but very few. Sadduces would not be
esteemed Heretics. Such Doctrine would produce, if not vile Herefies, yet vile
practices.

This Doctrine turns out all the Promises, and all the Threatenings out of the
Bible, as to Believers, and sets up such Divinity as came not into the thoughts
of God to declare to the Sons of men. Strange, that when man was in his pure
estate, no sin yet had crept into his Soul, yet then when God gives him a
Commandment to obey, he, to keep man to obedience, adds this threat, Thou shall
dye. And that now when sin has got in, and has still such a hold even in
those who are regenerate, Sons, and do truly repent, and besides sin dwelling
in them, live amongst such varieties of temptations to draw forth sin which
Adam never had, that now persons must be put to try their Sonship and godly
sorrow by this, that though there were neither Hell nor Heaven, yet they would
serve God and repent, is very strange. Yet farther to answer these worthy men.

First, I grant that the true Children of God do walk with God, they do serve
him, worship him, they do repent when they fall, without being moved with
Arguments from Hell or Heaven being actually in their thoughts; the excellency
of God and Christ, the love they bear to him, the content they have and find in
pleasing of him, the beauty they see in a conformity to his holy Will and
blessed Image, carries them on, without having Heaven or Hell, reward or
punishment, actually in their eye, but what my vile heart would do if there
were neither Heaven nor Hell, reward nor punishment (as these men say) I cannot
tell that: what Calonius and holy Perkins found in their hearts I know not; but
I am sure many find their hearts so vile, so out of frame many times, that let
them use all Arguments, from the right hand and left, unless the Spirit of God
comes in and quickens them, and puts to his power, they will not all do to keep
the vile heart in the path of Gods Commandments.

Secondly, I grant that is a true sign, as Mr. Perkins says, if persons do as
he says in their godly sorrow; but if there be no other sign but this, and as
he says, for no other cause but this only, then I know not how we shall be
sure of our repentance, or Sonship, until I saw and were sure there were
neither Heaven nor Hell, and then saw what my heart would do; whatever it may
say now it would do, I dare not trust it.

Thirdly, The only cause, says Mr. Perkins, is this, Because by his sin he
has displeased God, who has been to him a most merciful and loving Father.
Very good: Wherein did God show himself to be so merciful and loving? Was it
not in delivering him from the misery (for mercy always suppose misery) he had
brought himself into? And is not guilt, hell, and damnation, a part of that
misery? It seems then the man being delivered from hell, calls God his loving
and merciful Father, for redeeming his Soul from death; and from this love and
mercy of God to him, if he offends, he mourns and grieves, and would do though
there were no hell; and by this judge his state: But had God been looked upon
so merciful and loving if he had not delivered him from Hell, and given him a
Title to Heaven? I doubt not: So that when a man is sure of deliverance from
the one, and Title to the other, now he repents and serves God, though there
were neither one nor the other: This is the Divinity I cannot understand.

As to the Texts Mr. Perkins quotes to prove his Doctrine: that of 2 Cor. 7.8,
9. it proves not at all his point, it mentions godly sorrow indeed, but what
was the only cause of it, it treats not of; it does not say the Corinthians
were so sorrowful though there were neither Hell nor Heaven: Nay, in the fear
which it wrought, ver. 11. I do not know how Mr. Perkins will prove, that the
thoughts of the wrath of God, of Hell, might not be some inducement to that
fear.

As to Peter's bitter weeping, Matthew. 26.75. which is his next, it proves no
more than what I yielded at first: the look of a gracious Savior upon unkind
Peter, who had boasted so before that he would dye with him, and not deny him,
but now deals with him after this manner, this breaks Peter's heart; this
argues that unkind dealing against love manifested, breaks a heart, and nothing
like it: But still in what is this love manifested? John 6.68. Peter knew, Thou
have the words of eternal life; the Christ, the Savior: had there been neither
Heaven nor Hell, I question whether Peter would have left all, and followed him.

As to 1 Peter 2.19. the only Text he quotes for his second Answer; the Apostle
exhorts Servants to be subject to their Masters though froward; his reason, For
this is thank worthy, if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief
suffering wrongfully. By Conscience here is meant no other but that good
Conscience before God, which makes Christian Servants sollicitously careful,
lest by their disobedient and rebellious carriages against their Masters, they
should offend God, who had given command to Servants, to be obedient and
subject to their Masters: but as the Lord had given command to Servants, so he
promises them upon obedience, That of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
the inheritance: but on the contrary threatens them, But he that does wrong,
shall receive for the wrong which he has done, Col. 3.24, 25. So Ephesians. 6.8.
another promise is made to them: Does this Text prove, that Servants, because
of the duty they owe to God, should and do give obedience to Masters, though
there be neither reward nor punishment, Hell nor Heaven? I see nothing in the
Text like it. And these are all the Scriptures brought for this high Doctrine.

On the contrary, how easy it were to give examples out of the Scripture of
those, whom neither Antigonus, Clem. Alex. Calonius, nor any other shall deny,
were Sons, and eminent ones also, who were moved with the reward, with heaven,
and glory coming; but these are known to any who are acquainted with the
Scriptures. I never dared to preach such Doctrine, or put persons upon these
trials, lest in so doing I should reflect upon the infinite Wisdom of God, as
if he were not wise enough to know how to govern his Rational Creature. It is
true, from that absolute Right he has over us in our Creation, he may give us
a Law, and require obedience without making any promise of reward to encourage
to obedience, and his Majesty deserves it: but his design was to exalt his
Love, Grace, Mercy, Faithfulness, Truth and Goodness, which are excellent
perfections in God, as well as Sovereignty and Holiness: therefore he is
pleased to invite us, allure us to obedience, by promises of great reward,
reward like a God; he deters us from disobedience by terrible threats (thereby
making way for the clearing of his Justice.) This is the method his Wisdom
thinks meet to take in governing men. Now we must teach men, that those who are
moved with such rewards, promises, punishments, threats, as the Sovereign
wisdom thinks meet to govern his Creatures by, these are Mercenaries, Slaves,
but they who serve him, though there were none of all these, neither Heaven nor
Hell, these are Sons: Should I have taught people thus, if any one had told me,
I dealt boldly with Gods government of his Creature, I could not have told how
to have defended my self against it. Though I do say, and blessed be God we
know it, that Gods people are not driven on always with actual thoughts of
Hell and threats; nor are they drawn on always with actual thoughts of that
glory God has promised and prepared; but the reverence they bear to his
Majesty, the pleasure that lies in obedience and communion with him: the love
they bear to him and to the Lamb, these are the principles which move and act,
yet not without the other, employed, and lying at the bottom, though they be not
distinctly minded at all times: neither can I tell how to free it altogether
from some kind of absurdity, to say, that God having been a most merciful and
loving Father to me, should be the only cause of my repentance and godly
sorrow, though there were neither Heaven nor Hell; and yet if we search into
it, therefore is God a most merciful loving Father, because he has delivered
me from guilt and hell, and has brought me into a state of Sonship (he being
my Father) and so has given me a title to an inheritance in heaven.

Thus Christian I have done with that which I intended, in giving you a
description of a real Christian, without any high strains, or new notions, and
endeavoring to take off what has caused trouble to my self, and others, which
I found in those whom I do highly reverence: soundness in the work I have ever
desired, since I grew acquainted with the vileness of my own heart; but
curstness, sharpness, stumbling work, to cause troubles, fears, sinkings, in
poor Christians that were sincere, and did press after sincerity, I could never
endure. How these real Christians should walk, I need say nothing, they have
their Rule before them, and so many excellent practical books are written for
the ordering of Christians conversations, that I think no more can be said, or
need to be said, if what is already said were well applied and improved: would
but these worthy men be pleased well to weigh all they write, what men of
eminent parts and grace write, it passes for current with poor Christians,
that it is all the Command of God, if it does concern duty to be done, which
right Christians oftentimes more mind than any thing that concerns their
comfort, and if they cannot come up to answer that duty, presently they are but
hypocrites, and never knew a sound work of conversion. It is an easy matter
for men of vastabilities, large affections, who have received a Benjamins mess
from Christ, influenced from him daily, and possibly never knew what it was to
lie groaning ten or twenty years under the burden of strong corruptions, and
combating with their discontented spirits, rising from debts, long sickness and
pains, poverty, cold, hunger, unequal yoaks, debasements from a higher
condition of life, I say, it may be easy for such men to write systems of
practical Divinity, how Christians should walk in their conversations, and
because they can reach them, think others must too.

But two things I should request of these worthy men, whose persons I cannot
but honor, and their works I must highly commend, for the scope they aim at is
very high and honorable, they endeavoring to wind up Christians to a high
strain of godliness ( I mean some yet living.)

First, That though there are in these days in England a company of as proud,
high flown, self conceited Professors, blown up with the apprehensions of their
own abilities, as ever England bare, nay, never the like, and so these have
need of a rowzing and sharp Pen; yet remember there are also a company of poor,
trembling, laden Christians, sitting in darkness; others with the conflicts
they have with long and strong temptations from within, from without, are
almost quite discouraged, and beaten out of all hopes; what the Word commands
us to preach and write we must do so, let sin, corruptions, discontents, etc:
have no better language than the Word gives them; lay on duty, press to duty,
we crave no favor here; only let us preach and write as those that feel the
burdens of tempted Souls, [The Ladies hand does well with the Lions heart in a
Chirurgeon] it is an ease to a laden Christian, worried with his temptations,
(let them rise whence they will) when he hears a man preach, or reads an
Author, that speaks with some compassion, as one that felt in his own
experience what it is to be under temptations; reprove the sin as much as you
will, but pity the Christian who is conflicting against it, and cannot get
victory. Some Ministers ( I know it, for they have said it) never had so much
as a temptation to that corruption, which others for twenty, yea, thirty years,
have continually been assaulted with, has made them spend their days with
grief, and years with sighing, as David says, Psalm. 31.10. It is true, I can
conceive what a terrible pain he must suffer, who has a great ragged stone
crowding from the Kidney, through the Ureter into the Bladder, but yet I cannot
tell what it is like him who feels it. Ministers, and other Christians, may
think that such or such corruptions and temptations are strong (yet I observe
some have not so much judgment) but no man knows what they are, as those who
lie under them, those who feel them, and are combating with them. Of all
Christians, give me the tempted Christian; those who have experienced all kind
of temptations. Some men, their infirm bodies, their constitutions and
employments, take them off from some violent corruptions and temptations, that
other men's bodies, constitutions and employments expose them to: let me hear
and read these latter sort preach and write of such corruptions and
temptations. Some men have their comfortable yoak-fellows, their
Creature Comforts about them, health, and if sickly, yet they have attendances,
and all things that may help to support them; they are in the same station that
ever they were, they owe nothing. Other persons have their unequal yoak-fellows
cross and wretched, it may be much pain, and sickness, and poverty added to it,
were aloft, now are low, were full, now empty, the Creditor calls, writes for
debts to be paid, the man would fain pay, would not dishonor his Profession,
but has not enough to pay, by many pounds worse than naught: let me hear and
read these latter sort of men preach and write of Christian cheerfulness,
heavenly mindedness, and contentation in all conditions: yet here also may be a
great difference, for God may give in that to one, that he does not to another;
and besides, the condition of one Christian may be very different; some it may
be always poor, and to him it is nothing so hard to walk comfortably under it.
I knew one good old Christian, one going to see him, found him roasting two
Crabs, a piece of brown bread, and a pot of water, this was his Supper, and he
cheerful; this was very good, but he was always low. A Minister I knew, who
having kept a Fast with another Minister, at night for his Supper had only a
Pudding of meal and water, a mess of plain grewel, his drink a little changed
from water, this was his Supper; the good man found it a hard matter to be
contented, the other Minister had his good things to refresh him. Another
Minister inviting me to dinner, we had a dry Pudding, as the other Minister,
and salt fish, (not like your London fish) only we had mustard, and here (said
the good man) we are better on it than Christ was, for though we read he eat
fish, yet we read not of any sauce he had, and we have mustard to our dry fish;
our drink was good Adam's Ale, spring water, this was our dinner, and well
content. God can give in if he please: Now though Ministers must preach of
contentation in all conditions, yet I had rather hear these Ministers preach,
and read their books about contentation, than those who know nothing of these
temptations. It was a good speech of a gracious woman to an eminent Christian,
who told me of it; she was under a hedge picking up sticks in a cold morning
(as I remember) the man passing by, and speaking to her, calling him by his
name, said she, O pray, that God would save you out of straits. You Christians,
who set by your warm fires, think of these Christians, let not Ministers or
others reprove or rebuke too sharply poor Christians under these temptations,
though they do not quit themselves as they should do.

The second thing I should request of these Worthies is this, that what duties
they urge upon Christians, and in such a manner, that you do as it were make
them no Christians, if they answer them not: if you will make what you say a
true distinguishing note between sound and unsound Christians, then put such
Texts of Scripture to prove the duty you urge to, and that for the performance
of it in such a manner as you urge, that you are sure will carry it: make it
clear from the Scriptures you quote, that this as you preach and write is the
Command of God. I deny not but the things are very good, that I read in the
excellent works of some men, if Christians can reach them, but are they
absolutely necessary, that if a Christian reach them not, he is not a good
Christian? I wish I had seen clear Scriptures for some things I read, and
pressed with vehemence of Spirit. If I meet with a particular practice of one
Saint in the Scripture, shall I presently take that Scripture, and make it a
ground, to preach that all Christians are bound to that practice? David says,
Psalm. 119.148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in
thy Word: That is, says Piscator, Expergiscor ante excubias. The Comment that
goes under the name of Jerome thus glosseth, Non eum lux soporatum reperit, sed
vigilantem strenue: and circa divina eloquia oculorum spiritualium intention
meditantem. Diodati thus, I have awaked of my self in the night, before I have
been called upon by the watchmen, etc. Shall we hence gather, that all
Christians are bound to awake before daylight, to break their rest, that they
may meditate in Gods Word? Some Christians indeed have had such Meditations
upon it, that they were bound to it, because David did it, and it has caused
trouble to their spirits: What work would this make amongst Chrstians, some
through their cold and moist brains, others through hard labor, others who
find such want of sleep, esteem it for such a common mercy if they can get it,
their heads fit for nothing if they want it. Being once in company with an
eminent Divine, and the best Casuist that ever I met with, he put a question to
us (there being several present) about the performance of a Christian duty; as
I remember, he told us the Question was sent from some foreign Divines to be
resolved from the Scripture: the duty is practiced by most (at least true)
Christians ( I believe) in England, which might occasion the sending of the
Question hither, supposing that Ministers did preach it as the duty to which
Christians are bound, and I think they do so: What the Question was I will not
set down, lest any should take advantage by it: I meet with a reverend Author,
who has pressed Christians with much vehemence unto meditation in such a
manner as he sets down, who has censured such men for ridiculous persons who
move such a Question; his Book was published before the Question was sent: if
they be ridiculous persons, let them answer for themselves: but as to the
question, said this Divine, my practice has been, is, and I am resolved ever
shall be according to the Question: but if you urge this for a duty to which
all Christians are bound, that they must thus perform it, give your Texts of
Scripture: We that were present thought, that Scriptures might be easily
produced, and did so; but upon serious examining of them, we were convinced,
they were not clear enough to bind the practice as a duty incumbent upon
Christians, as the question was propounded: yet for my part, as he said, it
has been, is, and shall be still my practice; withal I called to mind, that
my own Father, during the time I lived with him (unless it were on the Lords
day) did not perform the duty, what he did after I cannot well tell; but yet he
was a man who kept his secret communion with God, had a heart for God, and
tongue for God (as sometimes being a Gown-man in a Corporation, he had occasion
to appear for God) while he lived in the world, was above the world; when he
came to leave the world, he would several times send up short prayers to his
Father, When will thou send thy Servant to fetch me home? With a smiling
countenance he entertained Death, having some fore-tastes of what he was going
to possess, by that expression of his, I shall have as much glory as ever I can
bear. When he was dead, his Minister, who wrote to us the news of his death,
said this of him, He lived much desired, he died much mourned for: Yet this my
godly Father would scarcely be esteemed for a serious Christian by some, for
not performing that duty according to the question, though, I suppose, a year
or two before his death he did take it up, but then I was far distant from him.
This is that which I aim at in this example, that when we urge duties upon
Christians, so to be performed, and upon the performance of them after the
manner we set down, or non performance, we will conclude them sound or unsound,
serious or slight Christians, let us be sure to give clear Texts that prove,
God commanding the duty in that manner as we lay it down, and urge Christians
to the performance of it.

I grant Meditation is a duty that all Christians (adult) are bound unto; yea,
so much a duty, that I know not how a person adult can be a Christian without
it. I know not how a Christian can order his conversation without meditation,
how he can examine himself without meditation, how he can improve the Sermons
he hears, and Books he reads without some meditation; but the question is for
such meditation, set down after such a mode, viz. That every day as duly as we
pray, so we set apart an hour or half hour for the duty of meditation, and more
especially in meditating of the Joys of Heaven, and making it for that time
our whole work, and intermix other matters with it no more than we would do
with prayer. This I see is the meditation strongly urged upon Christians, a
duty very hard I am sure, and if our salvation lie upon this being performed
after this manner as this learned and reverend Author has set down, then most
Christians that I meet with, forty to one, and those whom I esteem good
Christians, must never come at Heaven, but must to that dark place. If I should
humbly desire a Text or two from holy Writ, to prove, that is the meditation
that God requires of Christians; if the reverend Author will answer me, it is a
ridiculous question, as he has said in another case, I must be silent.

For the object of this meditation, the Joys of Heaven; it must be supposed as
they must have a Title to Heaven, so they must know, and be assured of their
Title to Heaven; there must be no dark Cloud between them and Heaven, but all
clear, who thus can daily have their meditations fixed upon Heavens joys, for
one hour or half an hour together, without any other thoughts intermixing
themselves: of this number I believe there are not half the Christians in
England. Heavens Joys? Good Lord, say many poor Christians! we meditate more
upon Hells sorrows than Heavens joys, while we lie under the sense of our
guilt and damned estate, and though we pray and follow after God (we think) yet
we can hear no good word from God, we can apprehend nothing but anger, no
peace, this sinks our hearts. Others, they have so much to do with the Hell of
corruption they feel in their hearts, and the daily conflicts they have with
their lusts rising from thence, which does so press them down with sinking
discouragements, the seventh year, and seventh again, have not been a year of
release to them, that the Joys of Heaven little affect them: What tell you me
of Heaven, says this person? tell me of redemption applied, let me know Christ
and him crucified experimentally, let me feel and find a hard heart softened, a
proud heart humbled, a filthy heart cleansed, a froward heart meekened, a
slight heart awed with the reverence of God, an hypocritical heart made
upright, a dead heart quickened, a heart enslaved to, and bewitched with the
Creature, set above the Creature; let me feel my Bible, the things we talk of,
written upon the fleshy tables of my heart, this would be joy, a heaven to me.

This would secure me in two things.

First, That there is a Heaven, which the Atheistical thoughts of my heart
sometimes would question.

Secondly, That I have a title to it.

Ministers may teach Christians what objects they should meditate upon, but the
thoughts of Christians will run there where they are most pinched. Other
Christians if they be not held down with the former, yet they may be so
oppressed with sad thoughts arising from debts, debasements, unequal
yoak-fellow, long sickness and pains, with poverty attending, it may be several
Children about them, and a grumbling Husband, because the Wife does not work to
maintain them; some from cold and hunger; that these are like the Israelites,
when Moses told them comfortable things from God, Exodus 6. from the 6. to the
9. ver. but in ver. 9. They hearkened not to him through anguish of spirit.

But oh say some, this is their want of Grace, want of Faith, meditation of the
joys of Heaven. Very well said, and I hope you are one that have been in the
same condition, owed more than you were worth, had a Family to maintain, the
Creditors called, and you were one very careful that the Gospel should receive
no dishonor by you; you are one that have been aloft, and now are low; you are
one who have been under long pains and sickness, with poor Children about you,
a grumbling Husband, and when you rose out of your sick bed, had two or three
small sticks to make a fire to warm you, had nothing but a little oatmeal and
water, or some such mean thing to nourish you; it may be your sick stomach did
desire such a thing, but had nothing to get it: you have known what it is to
have an unequal yoak-fellow, that daily follows you with unhandsome carriages,
and you under all these have born up bravely by your faith, above sinking and
afflicting thoughts, and solaced your Soul with the joys of Heaven; if it be
so, magnify mercy, and yet pity those who would walk with God uprightly, and
do for the main, but have not yet attained to that measure you have; but if you
have not been under these conditions, and experienced what the temptations are,
if you will teach them their duty how they should walk, do it, but yet let it
be with compassion; the poor body will complain, we live an Animal, as well as
a rational and spiritual life; and though I know God can send in that which
shall lift up a Soul above all discouragements under these conditions, yet that
all Christians under these conditions, have such influences of grace and
comfort from God, always abiding by them to do it, (though sometimes a glimpse
they meet with) I do not find it.

Secondly, As to the fixing of the thoughts upon such an object, so as no other
thoughts intermix themselves, more than they should in prayer: I have nothing
to say against it, if this be the duty, that we must separate so much time for
these thoughts or meditations only. What others find of intermixing of thoughts
in prayer I know not, but this I know, who has cause to be ashamed and humbled
for such intermixings: had we not a High Priest to bear the iniquities of our
holy things, I know it would go ill with some body. When the mind of a man is
like a Spannel that runs before his Master, one while he keeps before him in
the path, presently he is hunting on the other side the hedge, then into the
path he comes again and runs a while, by and by gone again; thus the mind one
while attends the business it is about, presently it slips aside to other
matters, then in again; but to hold it firm, fixed in the work, always in the
path, this some body finds hard: But when we come only to thinking, meditating,
who will fix this Quicksilver? The Bird hops off one bough to another, stays
long on none; this vanity and inconstancy is a wretched distemper, and this
makes the duty of meditation so hard. If the heart be laden with sorrows, or
filled with fears, it can fix the mind upon the Objects which cause these fears
or sorrows; if it be enlarged with joy, delight, it will fix on the Object that
causes it: so if love and desire be greatly drawn forth after an Object, it
will fix the mind upon the Object: Voluntas imperat intellectui quoad
exercitium actus. Impellit intellectum ad considerationem. But the affections
must be much enlarged, else they will not fix the mind. Hence many Christians,
I do not mean such as bear the name only, but real and serious Christians, if I
have any skill to judge, by the inward acquaintance I have with them, and
observation of their conversation, have complained much, and said, they find
this to be such a hard duty, when they set themselves apart only to think and
meditate, that they cannot perform it, after that manner which Divines write;
not out of a corrupt spirit and enmity to the duty, for they are very willing
with it, and try to do it, but cannot fix their minds, and make them hold to
the thing they propound: but for secret prayer, there they make up what they
cannot in meditation. And in truth the prayers of many Christians, what are
they but their spiritual meditations expressed in words to God? But if other
thoughts should come in, are they as sinful, as in prayer, wherein we deal with
God immediately in Divine worship?

Thirdly, For the time allotted for this duty, one hour, or half an hour. To
hold the mind fixed one hour, or half an hour together, without any other
thoughts intermixed, about Heavens Joys, or iudeed about any other Grace, what
say poor Christians to this? Has the blessed God revealed this to be his will?
has he set down the time how long Christians must meditate? What if a
Christian cannot hold his mind fixed a quarter of an hour, what if not half a
quarter, does he break any Command, or Rule of God form editation? I know very
well the Scripture speaks of meditating in the Word day and night, but the
meaning of that Text, I hope, is not according to this duty of meditation which
is urged in this manner: Many poor Christians, who cannot meditate of Heavens
Joys, or other Graces, half an hour, nor quarter, without thoughts
intermixing, do yet labor to meditate in the Word both day an night, Psalm.
1.2. that is, endeavor to have their conversation framed according to the
Word, both day and night. I honor much that holy man, whose name I have
forgot, but he was Minister either in Wales, or near Wales; the same man it
was, as I remember, whose conversion was so observable; two Livings he had
before his conversion, but discharged not his duty to one; being at a Fair, and
buying something at a Pedlers Stall, he rends off a leaf of Mr. Perkins
Catechism to put the thing into which he bought, and reading a line or two in
it, God set home something out of it, which did the work; presently he parts
with his best Living, kept the least, and proves a faithful Labourer in Gods
Vineyard. This holy man was observed, by those who lived in the house with him,
to keep Fasts alone; and they observed this was his manner, sometimes to walk,
then fall down upon his knees to prayer, and was not at prayer but a very short
time, may be five or six minutes, then walk again, and pray again a few
minutes, and thus spent his day in meditation and prayer. This man I much
honor that could do thus, and so I do those who can meditate, if two hours or
ten hours, but to set down times how long men should meditate, I know no ground
for that.

First, I conceive (under favor) meditation is then rightly performed when the
affections are wrought up unto a sutableness with the object I am meditating
upon: Would I meditate upon the vanity of the Creature, to which I see my self
enslaved too much; if I can by meditation come to see the vanity of it, by the
Spirit of God assisting me, that I find my affections are more loosened from
is, get more above it, and take up more in God, I conceive meditation has in
its measure attained its end. If it be any lust or sin that I would see the
evil of it, if the Spirit helps me in meditation to see the evil of it, so that
I fear it, I tremble at it, my will turns away from it, and begs grace and
strength against it, a heart to hate it, meditation has its end. If my Object
be God, Christ, Grace, Holiness, and I would see the good of these, if the
Spirit assisting me, I come so to see the good of these, that my will chooses,
love, desire, run out after these with an unsatisfied spirit till I enjoy
these, or if I cannot come to the enjoyment, yet my affections and will pursue
those, I think meditation has its end. In meditation I see the object as it
is, I affect as I see, and follow as I see and affect in my endeavors
(allowing here various degrees both in the sight and affections, yet so as the
prevalency is on Gods side) I conceive this person has in his measure
performed this duty. Now let this meditation be performed how it will, let it
be in what length or shortness of time, what is that to the essence of the
duty? If a man can thus meditate as he sits in his house amongst others; if as
he walks in the streets about his other occaons; if as he is at his work in his
calling; if as he walks in the fields, or rides, or in bed; so the end of
meditation be attained, though he does not separate himself only for
meditation, as for prayer: if this meditation for the time be not a quarter of
an hour, or half quarter, but often in a day (as those who are plagued with
their hearts, followed with temptations all the day long, are put upon these
meditations frequently) will not this meditation answer the
Scripture-meditation, unless we separate our selves one hour, or half an hour
to meditate, and that upon the Joys of Heaven? If not, let us hear a
Scripture-reason to prove it. For those who are able to contemplate and solace
themselves with the Joys of Heaven, if it be ten hours together, I only say,
they are the happier men, and have great cause to bless. God for such a mercy
given to them. But when I come to impose duties, as meditation, etc. upon
Christians, to be performed by them in such a manner, and for such a time; and
their soundness or unsoundness, seriousness or slightness, is determined
according to their performance, or nonperformance, according to that manner
which I set down, surely I had need bring clear Scripture proof to warrant what
I impose, and not speak or write that which shall perplex many sincere
Christians, and make them call all their work into question, because they come
not up to what I deliver.

Of the same opinion concerning meditation, was that judicious and able Divine,
Mr. Nathaniel Rogers, of whom I made mention in my Epistle to the Reader, a man
of solid judgment, a close walker with God, and awed with the reverent fear of
God, who could not be persuaded to publish any thing, being troubled with an
Haemoptysis, or spitting of blood, he thought it would kill him if he should go
about such a work; this excellency he had in his work, that as he was very
sound, clear, and searching, so he was ever very tender and careful that he
spoke nothing which should perplex or trouble a poor sincere Christian: Having
handled a Christians daily walk with God, which he did to the life, and which
deserved the Press, as well as any practical piece of Divinity that is printed:
I observed he omitted that Head of meditation which I waited for. I asked him
in private why he did not preach upon it, as others had done, and that in such
a manner as now we are speaking of, as if meditation were not rightly
performed, unless men did separate themselves unto this duty daily, as they do
to prayer, besides that meditation which they had, as I instanced before? To
which he answered: It is true, men had printed so, but he could not prove it
out of the Word, and he did not love to impose that upon the people of God,
which he could not find God himself to impose. That meditation was a duty was
not the question, and so instanced how and when Christians might meditate: but
the question was as to such a way and manner of performing the duty, which some
Divines had set down, putting the stress in the performance of it after such a
way and manner, binding all Christians to that, as if the duty were not
performed, unless so performed, this he could not prove, therefore would not
preach it, but omitted it.

Secondly, I conceive the fixedness of the thoughts in meditation, to hold long
upon such or such a Subject which we would meditate upon, depend.

First, Upon the tempers and constitutions of men. Some are of a temper
inclining to Melancholy, which temper renders men more fixed in what they
fasten upon in meditation, be it what it will. If the humor be predominant it
fixes men too much: Others are of a more volatile, hot constitution, which
temper cannot fix as the other can.

Secondly, It depends upon the strength of the Invention: For a man to dilate
upon a Subject in meditation, as he must, if he holds long and fixed, it cannot
be if his Invention be weak. Hence that worthy Divine, who makes the Abridgment
of Mr. Rogers seven Treatises, upon that Chapter of Meditation (as I remember,
for I have not the Book, though once I saw it) teaches men how to help
themselves in meditation, by carrying the Subject they meditate upon through
Ramus Topics. Hence for men of vast parts, large inventions, and of a more
fixed melancholy temper, to be longer in meditation than others, is no wonder.
Hence also many Christians who cannot separate themselves to meditate an hour,
or half hour, yet can tell how to improve the Sermons they hear, because in
preaching the Ministers invention has helped their inventions, giving them
Light, Arguments, Motives, etc. which move upon their wills and affections, and
help them to pray and follow God to teach them to profit. I say, many
Christians can do thus. But what shall we say to many plain hearted Christians,
who go with a sincere frame to hear Gods Word, and profit by it, set themselves
to observe, and lay up for themselves, but sometimes through the imprudence of
the Ministers lading the hearers heads with many heads, what with darkness,
being not clear in what they deliver, what through want of method, or
tediousness in preaching, many poor Christians can bring away nothing; they
hear something which they think they will lay up, then they hear more, and that
they would lay up, and thus while they are greedy to catch and lay up the Word,
while they lay up one thing, they loose another, and in conclusion loose all;
their weak memories being not able to retain what they hear and would lay up,
but while they catch at much, and would lay up much, they loose all, then they
complain of their unprofitableness, and dullness, none so bad as they: How can
they meditate upon that which they do not remember? Yet diverse of these good
Christians, it was not their giving way to sleepiness so much, or want of
attention, but weakness of understanding and memory that hindered.

Thirdly, It depends upon the strength of habitual Grace received, and the
influences which that habitual Grace has from the Spirit of Grace. Men who
have received great Grace, and whom the Lord does influence daily with second
Grace, those who are exempted from those woeful sinking troubles and temptations
which others labor under; those who have benign kind Aspects from God, these
may hold longer, and delight more in meditation, than those whose Grace
received is but little, and influence of second Grace but little, every day lie
groaning and oppressed under vile temptations or corruptions, can see but
little, if any thing, of Gods favor toward them.

For some men God kills the fatted Calf, ( Luke 15.) puts on the Robe, the
Ring, they have their Music, when other Christians may say (as once a good
Christian did, though not in a murmuring way as the elder Brother) the Lord was
never pleased to give them one Kid to rejoice. How heartily have we seen poor
people at the door feeding upon the Scraps, which these within at the Feast
have left upon their Trenchers? How thankful would some poor Christians be,
might they but enjoy the scraps of other Christians, that is, such things as
they neither ask God, nor thank God for; yet though they have begged them ten
years, and ten twice told, could not prevail with God for such favors. These
may meditate indeed, but what do they meditate? Thy heart shall meditate
terror, Isai. 33.18. They do so, they meditate terrors, sorrows, despondencies:
Alas, little do we know what others go through, and it is impossible we should
know, unless we were in their conditions, and felt what they do: So that the
question is not, whether a man be poor or rich, a servant or free, as if they
who are rich and free, might as well hold their minds fixed long in the
meditation of the Joys of Heaven, as they can spare time better than the poor,
or the servant, to hear a Sermon.

What God enioyns, what he commands, that must be pressed, there is no speaking
of that; but what we enjoin, what Rules we give Christians, and urge them to
the observance of them, as being-much conducing to the leading of a holy life
and conversation, if Christians can reach them, I humbly conceive much prudence
had need be used here, lest we deal like some imprudent Schoolmaster, that
has a Boy who is willing to be a Scholar, his Master sets him a long and hard
Lesson, which if the Boy can learn, it will prove the Boys part to be good,
that is true, but if the Boy be not able to learn, it sets him down with
discouragement, if not take off his mind from being a Scholar.

It is but a profane spirit, which thinks the holiness, the conversation which
God requires in his Word, is only fit for Ministers, that have nothing else to
do but sit in their Studies, mind their Books, and contemplate. Yet again, if
all sincere hearted Christians, most of which for their natural parts and grace
are but ordinary, and in comparison of some but weak, involved also in family
cares, perplexed with other cares, which unavoidably attend some men's
employments, tired with the troubles and labors of their particular Callings,
tormented with the thoughts of debts, and how to keep clear with all men, which
things those who sit only at their studies, and can choose their company where
they please, when they have a mind to go abroad, cannot understand, nor any
others but those who are actually in such conditions; If all these Christians
(I say) can put in practice all those Rules, which some men of eminent parts
and grace have charged upon Christians, as helps to attain that which God has
commanded and enjoined, then, I say, there are better Christians in England
than I was aware of, or do ordinarily meet with; yet I meet with many, whom I
cannot but judge that they are sincere hearted Christians, and will to Heaven.
To argue thus, I can observe all these Rules, therefore other Christians may
observe them all, will not follow in practical Divinity. I had much rather be
tied to Gods Book, than to some good men's Books, whether ancient or modern,
especially in some particular cases of practice; in which I doubt not to say,
that some while they go about to take men off from sin, they do but lay a snare
for the Devil to make use of, to bring men into sin. When Esau bad Jacob put
on, that Jacob, his Wives, Children and Flocks must go Esau's pace, Genesis 33.12,
13, 14. Jacob answers him, My Lord knows the Children are tender, and the
Flocks and Herds with young are with me, and if men should over-drive them one
day all the Flock would dye, etc. Certainly in driving the Lords Flock there is
wisdom to be used; there are Children, and those who are with young in his
Flock, and to over-drive these, if it does not produce their death, yet it will
cause great discouragement. He that leads Joseph like a Flock, Psalm. 80.1.
leads his people, as Jacob led his Flock: Isai. 40.11. He shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young. The sum is this, says Calvin on the Text: God in
governing his people will be mild, gentle, placid, merciful, that those who are
weak he will not urge them beyond the measure of their strength. With whom
Forerius agrees, Gently lead them that are with young, as Jacob did his Flock,
says he, he will not drive them too fast, nor make them take great journeys:
The words commend to us the care, the prudence, and love in Christ our Lord;
and I shall ever wish (says Forerius) that the Ministers of Christ would
manifest the same. When they would have the Disciples of Christ put upon hard
duties, Matthew. 9.14. Christ auswers them, ver. 17. Men do not put new wine into
old bottles: The meaning is, says that solid and learned Mr. An. Burges, No
Minister that is wise will suddenly press high and more sublime duties to those
that are yet weak, Spirit Refin. 2. part, 187.
and through custom and education are not fit to receive such strong meat, but
they must be prepared by degrees. With whom agree, Doctor Sibbs, Mr. Buroughs,
Cornelius a Lapide, and others. There are many new Creatures, who are old
bottles, not able, I fear, to hold that new Wine which some pour into them;
they are but children, weak, yet crying after Christ, and are so all their
days; they are with young, traveling and bringing forth, as those under
terrors are, Dr. Goodwin Child. Light, p. 224.
in the pangs of a loaded Conscience, as it were in Fits of breeding, or in the
travail under some affliction Dr. Reynolds Ps 110. p. 226.
, they are loaded, pressed and oppressed, unfit to walk or go, through sinking
temptations and bitter afflictions: In the little Flock of Christ, many will be
found of this number, who will sit down discouraged, if they cannot go that
pace their Shepherds drive them.

I had some other things in my thoughts which concerned this sort of
Christians, supposing while I did read the works of men eminent for grace and
parts, with which God has blessed our English Nation abundantly, Satan might
deal with them, as he has dealt with others before, take occasion from some
things written, to fill some with perplexing thoughts, and put others upon some
practices, in which they shall wurry and tire themselves, and when they have
done so, be never the nearer. But I have exceeded already, and gone beyond what
at first I intended. Leaving this work for more able men, and well acquainted
with varieties of temptations.

I shall add no more, but, Blessed be the Lord for the discoveries of the
riches of his Grace in a Covenant of Grace: Blessed be the Lamb, upon whose
blood this Covenant is founded, and of which he has undertaken to be the
Mediator and Surety: Blessed be that good Spirit that brings our Souls under
this Covenant, and keeps us in it. This is all our salvation, this is all our
desire: Those who can find salvation any where else, let them take it. But by
the faith of this we live; in the strength of this will dye.

FINIS.
These Books, with several others, are printed for, and to be sold by Dorman
Newman at the Chirurgions-Arms in Little Britain, near the Hospital-gate.
Folio.
THe Exact Politician, or Complete Statesman: By Leonard Willan Esquire.

Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa; Or the History of the Cardinals of the Roman
Church, from the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the present
Pope Clement the Ninth, with a full account of his Conclave. Written in Italian
by the Auth. of the Nipotismo di Roma, Eng. by G. H.

A Relation of the Voyage and Residence of Charles II. K. of Great Britain,
etc. in Holland. By Sir W. Lower, Knight.

Memoires, of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths of those Noble,
Reverend Personages that suffered for the Protestant Religion, and the great
Principle thereof. By David Lloyd A. M. sometime of Oriel College in Oxon.

Mr. Knox his History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland.

A Treatise of Justification. By George Downam, D. D.

Spencers History of Ireland.

Brathwaites English Gentleman and Gentlewoman.

Austins Meditations.

Review of the Council of Trent.

Babingtons Works.

Jermin on the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes.

Quarto.
THat excellent Piece of Mr. George Swynnocks Christian man's Calling, in three
Volumes.

Faiths Universal Usefulness, with the excellency of a Spiritual life. By Mr.
Matthew Lawrence of Ipswich.

Mr. Elborough's Sermon on the Fire.

Gospel Remission. By Mr. Jer. Buroughs, lately extant.

The Virtue and Value of Baptism. By Mr. Zach. Crofton.

Mr. Durham's Exposition upon the Canticles.

Doctor Hamptons Sermon before King James.

Lesley's Sermon tending to Unity.

Hampton's Threefold State of man.

A Sermon before K. James. Hist. of Gentle Craft.

Dod and Clever on the Commandments.

Souls Sentinels. Spi^ers Elogy on Sir Arth. Chester.

Octavo.
THe Life of Cardinal Woolsey, L. Chanc. of England, etc.

A guide to Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Maids, how to behave themselves in all
Estates, Relations and Conditions. By Hannah Wolley.

A guide to the true Religion. By J. Clapham, M. A.

The Christians great Interest. By W. Guthry, late Minister of the Gospel in
Scotland. The fifth impression.

Justification only upon a satisfaction; or the necessity and verity of the
satisfaction of Christ, as the alone ground of remission of sin, asserted and
opened against the Socinians. By Rob. Firgirson, Minister of the Gospel in
London.

The Pastors Love to a loving People. By M. William Thomson, Minister of the
Gospel in London.

A Synopsis of Quakarisme, or a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. With a brief Refutation of them. By Thomas Danson, sometime Minister
of the Gospel in Sandwich in Kent.

The Laws and Canons drawn up, and agreed upon by the General Assembly or
Meeting of the Head of the Quakers from all parts of the Kingdom.

Phanatick Primer for the instruction of little ones, in order to perfect
reading. By H. Adis.

Rebukes for sin by Gods burning Anger. By T. Doolittle.

The Life of Doctor James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all
Ireland.

A most comfortable and Christ. Dialogue. By W. Cooper.

Spare Minutes, or resolved Meditations, and premeditated Resolutions. By
Arthur Warwick.

Clarissimi Viri Adriani Heereboordi Philosophiae professoris Ordinarii
Disputationum de Concursu Examen a Jo: Stearne M.D. Institutum ad Amicum suum
Jo. Rawlineum.

An excellent Oration of that Learned J. Raynolds, DD.

Archers Jests.

Sejanus.

Heaths Transubstantiation.

Owens Epigrams.


