THE QUESTIONS Between the CONFORMIST AND Nonconformist, Truly stated, and
briefly discussed. Dr. FALKNER, the Friendly Debate, etc. Examined and
Answered. Together with a Discourse about Separation, and some Animadversions
upon Dr. STILLINGFLEET's Book, ENTITLED, The Unreasonableness of Separation.
Observations upon Dr. Templers Sermon Preached at a Visitation in Cambridge. A
brief Vindication of Mr. Stephen Marshal.

Sed hoc nimis doleo, quia multa quae in Divinis libris saluberrima praecepta
sunt, minus curantur, and tam multis presumptionibus sic plena sunt omnia, ut
gravius corripiatur qui per octavas suas terram nudo pede tetigerit, quam qui
mentem Vinolentia sepelierit. August. Epist. 119.

Cum Apostolus testetur, mysterium hoc iniquitatis suo etiam tempore agi
caepisse, hinc intelligimus, opiniones omnes, and Traditiones, a Sacris
Scripturis dissidentes quas Pontificis urgent, tanquam a Patribus acceptas, ad
Apostasiam hanc, quam praedixit Apostolus, esse referendas. Downham de
Antichrist. p. 151.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over
against the Stocks-Market, 1681.

THE Reader may please to take notice, that this Discourse was drawn up long
before (now) Doctor Falkner took his Degree, else I had given him his Title.
And so something of Schism was spoke to before the Epistle to Dr. Stillingfleet
could be written.

To the Reverend, and my much Honored Brother, Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Dean
of St. Paul's.
SIR,
I Hope it is no offense unto you, though you be a Dean, Unreas. Separat. p. 62.
that I call you Brother, since you have taught the Press how to speak soberly
and amicably, calling us Dissenting Brethren; this is better language than
Sots, Rogues, Fools, Knaves, Rebels, Schismatics, which we read and hear from
others. As for Rebels, if they be all Rebels that break the Kings Laws, I
believe the King will have but a few loyal subjects. He has Laws against
Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoring, Sabbath breaking, and these are agreeable to
the Law of God, (besides Laws about Hares, Partridges, Pheasants, and against
Papists, etc.) we see men can live in opposition to these Laws, yet these are
not called Rebels. But if the Laws of men concern the House and Worship of God,
concerning which God himself has given us his own Laws, to which all Princes
and men are bound, and unto which all their Laws ought to be conformable, (as
we shall hear your self speak presently) but that conformity we cannot see, and
therefore dare not assent and consent, etc. now we are called Rebels,
Schismatics, and what not? Aug. Epis. 119.
Thus it was in pious Augustines time, and this he complains of.

Sir, speaking of your Church, you tell us, p. 302. Our Church is founded upon
a Divine Rule, viz. the Holy Scriptures, which we own as the basis and
foundation of our faith; and according to which all other Rules of Order and
Worship are to be agreeable. 2ly. Our Church requires a conformity to those
Rules which are appointed by it agreeable to the Word of God.

Twice you tell us, agreeable to the Word of God; to which we agree also, this
being the affirmative part of the second Commandment, that all things in our
worshipping of him, be agreeable to his will and word.

Now, Sir, had you proved that all the things imposed upon us had been
agreeable to the word of God, you had put an end to this Controversy. But
though I honor and love you for the great service you have done to the Church
of Christ against the Papists, yet in proving the things Imposed upon us to be
conformable to the word of God, I humbly conceive you fall very short,
therefore are we still Nonconformists. Several things are imposed upon us, but
in your whole Book I find not one Scripture you produce to show the agreement
of them with it. Till then, our Separation is reasonable.

That Schism is a great sin, I agree with you, and wish Christians were more
convinced of it than I see they are. But the Questions are,

1. What is schism? 2. Who is the cause of schism?

For the first: Sir, I presume you will grant that the separation against which
you preached, and now printed, do suppose, there was a union with that body
from which you tell us we are now separated. For how can there be a separation
from that to which we were not united?

Now, Sir, I think by what you have said, to remove the mighty stumbling block
(as you call it, page 359.) of the Cross, there will be found many thousands in
England who were never admitted into your Church, and if not admitted into it,
then not united to it as such a Church; no members of your body: how then can
you charge them with this sin of separation from it?

Thus then, Sir, you speak of the Cross in Baptism, p. 351. when the Minister
uses these words. We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock,
and sign him with the sign of the Cross, etc. the Minister now speaks in the
name of the Church, We receive, etc. then follows as the solemn rite of
admission, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross. All public and solemn
admissions into societies, having some peculiar ceremony belonging to them. And
so as Baptism, besides its Sacramental efficacy, is a rite of admission into
Christ's Catholic Church, so the sign of the Cross is into our Church of
England, in which this Ceremony is used, without any prescription to other
Churches. Thus you have interpreted the Cross.

Whether this will satisfy Mr. B. I leave it to him, it does not me; the
Imposers of that Ceremony in their Canons, do not tell us that it is the Rite
of admission into your Church but by this ceremony the Infant is dedicated to
the service of him that died upon the Cross. And that Book being of public
authority, must carry it.

I had thought that in our Baptism we had been Dedicated to the Father, Son,
and Spirit. But it seems this is not enough, you annex to his words, Another
sign to dedicate us to the service of Christ that died upon the Cross. This,
Sir, I hope you will prove to be agreeable to the word of God, as you told us,
your Impositions are. I am very ignorant of the Text that proves it, and you
have named none.

But this is not the thing I aim at; it is your interpretation I mind, and from
it I gather, that you and all others who charge us with separation from your
Church, must prove, That we were received, and that by this rite of admission
(the Cross) into your Church, which you call the Church of England. This is
clear from your own Interpretation, and also from the page before 350, where
you illustrate it from the Independent Churches; Thus,

Suppose, say you, an adult person to be baptized, and immediately after
Baptism to be admitted a member of an Independent Church, and the ceremony of
this admission to be, holding up of the hand, in token of his owning the
Church Covenant, etc.

Now, Sir, let me suppose (as you do suppose) that the Pastors of the
Independent Churches should baptize several persons, but never admit them into
their Churches, by this ceremony of holding up the hand; let them baptize many
thousands, and these thousands choose other Pastors who are rightly qualified,
and ordained by Prayer, Fasting, and Imposition of hands of the Eldership: The
Independents cannot charge these Churches with schism, and separation from
their Churches, for they never admitted them by that ceremony and rite of
Admission, of holding up the hand into their Churches.

Now, Sir, apply it; for about twenty years there was public Baptism
administered, but not by your Liturgy, much less with the Cross. How many
thousands do you think in the space of so many years may be baptized, none of
these were ever admitted into your Church by those words, We receive this
child, etc. and sign him with the sign of the cross. But of many such do our
Congregations consist, who were never your members; why then do you call them
separatists from you?

Besides, Sir, your Liturgy admits of private Baptism, and then no such
admission by the Cross, and abundance have been thus baptized without it, to my
knowledge.

For my own particular, I cannot tell whither I was so admitted, my Parents
never told me so; and for my godly Father I am sure he hated humane inventions
in the Worship of God. I was born, they told me, in winter time, extreme for
cold, the house half a mile from Church, and I being their only Son at that
time, it is a question whether they would carry me forth in such an extreme cold
season so far. As for the Church-Register, that (nor any other that ever I saw)
specifies nothing of my being admitted into your Church by the Cross; but only
of my being baptized; but that say you, (and truly) is into the Catholic
Church. No Registers then recording, who were so admitted, it will be hard
matter for these who are ancient to prove their admission into your Church, and
if we were not, I know not how we can now be admitted. For this Rite of
Admission is used only at Baptism, unless we will yield to be Rebaptized and so
to be admitted by the Cross, this you will not admit no more than we.

We read of the Apostles admitting of many believers, God added to the Church,
Act. 2. ult. but never that they used this rite of admission, the sign of the
Cross; only this is our happiness, we are more wife, more holy, greater lovers
of Christ, than ever the Apostles were, (though we profess we are built upon
the foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.) that their examples are
too low for us.

Besides, Sir, is it not meet that when children come to years of discretion
they should then be called before the Church to declare whether they own their
Baptismal Covenant, and also their admission into the Church they are reputed
members of, as you say, the Independents require their Children to own the
Church Covenant? let them now be members of the Church by their own consent.
Truly, Sir, if it come to that, since we read what your Canons say of the
Cross, and how it is abused in Popery, and how strange this is to the
Apostolical admission, we should not like it.

But are not children members of the same Churches with their Parents? though
we think so, yet this is nothing to the practice of your Church. For as in your
administration of Baptism, the Parental Covenant, (Abraham and his seed) which
is the ground of the Administration, is wholly omitted; so the Parent he must
stand by as if he were a Heathen; the business is only with the God fathers,
and Godmothers, an invention of Higinus Bishop of Rome, about 144 years after
Christ, who first added these to Baptism; a person of no great worth, of whom
it is said, Nihil praclari, de gubernatione, and factis ejus commemorari
potest. So much cause have I to beg pardon for my defects in the education of
my own Children, that I would not be Sponsor for the child of the best friend I
have in England. But however this is not it, but the sign of the Cross, with
such words, that makes the admission into your Church.

2. Q. But if there be a Separation, or Schism, the question is, who is the
cause of it?

A. Schism must needs be theirs, whose the cause of it is, says Bishop Land,
in which you justify him, Ration. Account, p. 324, 325.

I humbly conceive, that whoever imposes other terms of Communion than Christ
has imposed, he or they are the cause of the schism. We do not, say you,
necessarily separate from all Churches that have errors or corruptions in them,
supposing those errors and corruptions be not imposed on us as conditions of
communion, Ibid. p. 332.

I pray do not think that we suppose you impose such gross things upon us, as
Rome imposed on you: No, Sir, we bless God for that great advance which was
made by our first Reformers. But whereas you say you retain only such innocent
Ceremonies which were in use before the Papal power grew to that height:

I pray, first, are you sure that All the Churches did use them? 2. Did they
use all that are imposed on us? I know they used others; but did they use to
tie up their Ministers to such syllables in prayer, or else must not pray? Did
they kneel at the Lords Supper? we know the contrary, etc. 3. Did they impose
these as conditions of Communion? But grant there were such Ceremonies, and
other things as now imposed upon us, I will say of them, Downh. de Antichristo,
p. 151
what Bishop Downham says of the opinions and traditions differing from the
holy Scriptures, which the Pontificians say were received of the Fathers, they
are to be referred to that Apostasy the Apostle foretold, 2 These. 2.3. when he
said the mystery of iniquity already works, v. 7.

And I pray, Sir, since the examples and practices of those Churches, are made
so much use of against us, let me give you my thoughts in a similitude of your
own.

In your Epistle to your Rational Account, etc. dedicated to the King, you tell
his Majesty, that the Church of England in the late confusions suffered an
Eclipse, but since his Majesty's Restoration she has recovered her luster,
etc.

Sir, we observe when the Sun rises, it does not suddenly go into an Eclipse,
but gradually, so that common people do not mind it until the light of it be
sensibly obscured; so, nor does it come out of its Eclipse suddenly at once,
but gradually; but it will not cease its motion till it appears in its glory.
It is the same with the Gospel Church, it did not presently, suddenly fall into
that dark Eclipse, which it suffered under the Antichristian Papal power, but
it got into it by degrees, the Churches not discerning it; the mystery of
iniquity wrought, it is no fancy of mine, but the Apostles express words. The
subtle serpent, he wrought among the Churches under fair pretenses; in the
second Century some addition made to Worship and Government of the Church; in
the third Century more; in the fourth Century more; so increased the Eclipse,
still under fair reasons, till the Serpent had got the man of sin into his
Throne, and the Prediction fulfilled. So has the Churches coming out of the
Eclipse been but gradual, in Doctrine, Government, Worship, by our worthy
Reformers; but as the evil spirit deceived then, by Gods permission, to bring
about the Prophecy; so the Spirit of Christ in the hearts of our first
Reformers wrought powerfully, and so does the same Spirit still work, and will
work, till the Church be quite out of her Eclipse, and comes to be satisfied
with the Sovereignty and Wisdom of Christ declared in the simplicity of the
Gospel; let men call it schism, fanaticism, or what they please.

But, Sir, you tell us of Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Giffard, etc. worthy
men, (I grant they were so, and honor them much) and Nonconformists, who
condemned Separation from your Church, and no more was imposed than in their
time, and this takes up a great part of your Book.

Sir, while some excellent men at home conformed, but groaned under the burden,
(as I remember Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, an eminent Saint, though he did
conform, I never saw him wear a Surplice, nor heard him use but a few prayers,
and those I think he said Memoriter, not read them; but this he would do in his
Preaching, draw his finger about his throat and say, Let them take me and hang
me up, so they will but remove these stumbling blocks out of the Church.) How
many thousands of choice Christians, plucked up their stakes here, forsook
their dear friends and native Country, shut up themselves in Ships (to whom a
prison for the time had been more elegible) went remote into a howling
Wilderness, there underwent great hardships, water was their common drink, and
glad if they might have had but that which they had given at their doors here
(many of them); and all this suffering was to avoid your Impositions, and that
they might dwell in the House of God, and enjoy all things therein according to
his own appointment. But what cared your Church for this; let Gods people groan
at home, suffer abroad, they shall do it rather than your Church will part with
a few trifles, as your own Mr. Carre calls the ceremonies. Sir, is this the
spirit of the true Spouse of Christ? But as I said, the same Spirit will work
which acted those holy men, till the Church be totally out of her Eclipse, what
ever those worthy men you mention have said.

But to speak more close, I deny that the state of your Church now, is the same
it was then, when these worthy men condemned Separation from it. For,

1. There are many thousands now in England, who were never admitted into your
Church, were never members of it; then they could not condemn these as
Separatists from it. This I have proved before from your Interpretation of the
sign of the Cross. It was not so in their time.

2 The Liturgy and the Homilies were then brought in out of necessity, because
of the want of gifts; now it is imposed in scorn and opposition of gifts. By
what some of your Archdeacons have spoken in your Courts, and others, we can
conclude no other, than it was composed to bring over the Papists to your
Church, and for several years the Papists did frequent your Divine Service; but
now it was imposed with such words (as in my next) that it was made an engine
to turn Protestants out of your Church. A Member of that Parliament that made
the Act for Uniformity, visiting his Sister, a Lady (who told it me) related to
her what they were about; she disliked their Act, and told him, I see then you
are laying a snare in the gate. Ay, said he, if we can find any way to catch
the Rogues, we will have them.

3. Then they were not required to assent and consent, etc. but now it is
imposed with these terms; and I am confident that diverse who have subscribed
with these terms, do but lie.

4. It Is true we have the same 39 Articles, that was before; and those Articles
were assented to, and assent required in that Church. Rational Account. p. 54,
55.
But now you have told the world that Bishop Bramhall gives the sense of the
Church of England thus: viz. She does not define any of these Questions as
necessary to be believed, etc. Neither do we look upon them as Essentials of
saving faith, etc. Neither do we oblige any man to believe them, but only not
to contradict them. And this is the opinion of the Grandees in this your
Church; this would have been abhorred before.

5. As those 39 Articles were believed by that Clergy, so they did defend them,
and Preached them; but this Clergy can both print and preach against them, I
mean the great and sound Doctrines in them, (I do not say all of them.) I put
the question to one of your Clergy, and asked him in earnest what he thought of
this Clergy as to the Doctrine of the Church of England contained in these
Articles? he answered me, Divide them into three parts, he thought two of the
three were fallen from it.

6. In that Church there were abundance of godly plain-hearted Ministers, whose
Religion was not confined to a Pulpit, but walked among their people as became
Ministers, seeking the good of their souls. I deny not but God has some such
now; but for the generality of them, I say nothing my self, only I can tell you
what others have said. A learned and pious Divine, so far a friend to
Conformity, that I doubt not but he has subscribed; he told me, Though your
Church would give him a Living, he would not take it, because he would not have
such an occasion to bring him among your Clergy. And discoursing with another
of your Clergy, (whom for learning, wit and piety, I do honor) about Mr. A's
Book, and his Dialect, which you call uncomely writing, said he, Truly we have
such a frothy, vain Clergy, gone off from that solidity and gravity that become
Divine things, that if Books come not out in this dress, they will but scorn
them; but in that Book, besides wit, there is good matter. Pridentem dicere
verum, etc. This was his sense of Mr. A's Book.

But. Sir, if such as these be thrust upon us, must we own them for our
Ministers? What, Sir, will you deny the peoples power of Election, which the
Papists grant the people had till Charles the Great, or till Lewis his Son,
about 830 years? See, I pray, Pamelius his Annotations upon these words of
Cyprian, Epist. 68. Quando ipsa (plebs) maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi
dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. How could a man write plainer for
the peoples power of Election? But our Protestants tell us, that only from the
time of Frederick the second, who died Ann. 1250, or there about, were the
people excluded from the power of choosing Pastors, and it was the deed of
Gregory the ninth, as Krantzius reports.

7. That Church did believe and prove the Pope, etc. to be the Antichrist,
Rome-christian to be the Whore, Apoc. 17. thus the Bishops, and our Professors
of Divinity, etc. but I can meet but with very few of this Church of that
opinion. Dr. Hammond the Oracle of this new Edition of the Clergy, cannot find
him in the 2 These. 2. nor in Apoc. 17. the Pope is an honest man with him.
Bishop Bramhall tells us, Our contest is not with the Church of Rome, but the
Court of Rome. I find that you have declared: 1. That the Church of Rome is a
true Church. 2. That they retain the fundamentals of Religion. 3. That
salsation is to be had in the Church of Rome. Lay all together, here is a fair
Bridge laid to go over to Rome. To say, that God has his people under the
Jurisdiction of Rome, is one thing, Apoc. 18.4. but to say the Church of Rome
is a true Church, is another thing; a Wife and a Whore differ.

8. In that Church Reordination to the same office was never heard of, but
exploded, as it is in all Churches else; but in this Church it is imposed.

9. There was no Oath taken, nor Covenant made with the great God, to reform
the House of God, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the word
of God; this ought to be, though the Covenant had not been made; had the things
imposed been according to the Word of God, this Covenant had bound us to them;
that Covenant will not be beaten out of the hearts of them, who know God, and
fear an Oath, what ever other persons make of it; the least then men can do, is
to abstain from those things which were once cast out, as being unconformable
to the word of God; and shall those people have no Ordinances for fear of a
separation?

10. In that Church, Quakers were not known; but under this Church they swarm,
that raze the foundation, and destroy all Gospel Ordinances. And many people
being offenced with your imposition, and disgusted with your Clergy, lay in
great danger of being carried away with them; and I doubt not abundance had
gone, but that by our Preaching and administering all Ordinances, they have been
kept close to Gospel truths, Gospel Ordinances, and Gospel Ministry. The
Quakers and Papists are not so hated by your Clergy, as we are.

From all which I conclude the Cause is not the same; and had Mr. Ball, Mr.
Hildersham, etc. been living in our days, they would, I doubt not, have done as
we do.

But then we are charged with bringing in of Popery, and this takes up several
leafs of your Preface.

Heylin (one of yours) tells us indeed, I persuade my self, Geograp. in Quarto
Edit. page 470.
had the Reformed party abroad continued an allowable correspondence in some
circumstances with the Romish Church, as the Church of England does now, it had
been far greater, and less stomacked; and this was the censure of Monsieur de
Rhosny, when he observed the Majesty and decency of our Church Service in our
Cathedrals.

On the other side, Harding, Bristow, and Carrier, seducing Jesuits, assured
themselves that they might yet convert England to the Catholic Church, whose
Service and Ceremonies she yet retained. Nor do I see any such alteration made
in this Edition, but if Pope Pius the 4th. and Gregory the 13th. offered to
confirm the former, and the Council of Trent, affirmed they might do it, then
the Pope may do this, for ought I know.

But how do we bring in Popery? Pref. p 7.
you tell us out of Bishop Sanderson, the first way is, by pulling down
Episcopacy, etc.

But, Sir, Bishops are restored, and you tell the King the Church of England is
out of her Eclipse; that she shines in a firmament above her Adversaries: I
pray, Sir, what is the matter that now Popery is coming in as a flood upon us?
cannot these Bishops, the English Banks, keep it out? I say nothing how
strongly they act in Parliament against it, the Kingdom talk enough of it.

I pray, Sir, tell us what have you Conformists done more against Popery than
the Dissenters have done?

1. Have you prayed earnestly against it? so have we.

2. Have you Preached against it? so have we.

3. Have you Printed against it (as you have done excellently, and we thank you
for it) so have ours. The first Book I saw was Fiat Lux. I saw a second
Impression, and wondered I heard of no answer from your Church; Dr. Owen was
the man that answered it, Ann. 1662. so long ours have appeared.

4. Have your Clergy kept their monthly Fasts four or five years, foreseeing
what now is coming upon us (if God prevent it not)? so have several of our
Ministers, with the hazard of our Estates and Persons by Informers, from whom
you were free.

5. Did you the last year (at least for the chief part of the year), beside
your family-prayers, set a part sometime between fix and seven in the morning
one day in the week, to pray purposely that God would deliver this Nation from
these bloody Papists, and their cursed Idolatry, and Doctrines? etc. so have we
in several Counties, and laid the same charge on our people.

6. Do you think you shall be put to defend our Legal right to the Protestant
Religion by what I am loath to mention, the sword)? since the Lollards-Tower,
the Bishops Cole-house, etc. are out of date, they are too thirsty, and must
have larger draughts. I believe there will be no distinction then between a
true Protestant Conformist, and us, therefore we must join with you.

Why then do you charge us with bringing in of Popery? I desire your Church
would not put us upon temptation; we wrong them not in their Tithes but charge
our people to pay them exactly; and do not grudg us the little that we have to
bring us in bread. I thank God I am not very lazy in my place, but if you will
give me twelve pound per Annum for my stipend, you shall have it, and thank you
too. But I bless God I may work for so good a Master.

A little more as to our Communion with your Church: Sir, some of us have lived
in Gods House, where we saw the Government has been carried on by Officers of
his own appointment, according to his own Rule, and what a majesty have we
beheld in it! Admonitions, first privately, then publicly by the Elders,
continuing in this course of admonishing, to try if they could bring to
repentance, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, as the sin has been, and they
in prudence saw reasons. (I have known them waste half a year in this course)
When nothing would do, but they must come to Excommunication, how wisely did
they govern the Brethren to bring them to declare their consent 2 Cor. 10.6.
obedientially to their Elders, (for they deny the Government to be
Democratical; nor will I own the Fraternity to be the first subject of the
Keys. In the beginning it was not so, as our Lord said in another case, Mat.
19.8. and to the beginning we must go) and your Primit. Government of Church.
p. 147.
Thorndike speaks excellently to this, why the Congregation ought to be
concerned in this. Now when all were agreed, how dreadful was the sentence!
what pale faces! how many tears did it cause in the Congregation! a solemn
sight to behold the Church putting the person out of the Congregation, Terrible
as an army of banners, Cant. 6.1^. I have often thought of the Text since.
After this, how excellently did the Church walk toward an Excommunicate
person, to bring to Repentance? And what rare effects have I known of this
Ordinance, without any Writs de Excommunicato capiendo; alas these could never
effect what I have known, to the humbling of such a person. And now, Sir, do
you think that we who have seen these things, can join with your Church, where
this Ordinance so majestical, so terrible, is so horribly profaned? I pray,
Sir, pardon me though I stand off from it. But I pray, Sir, why do your Bishops
excommunicate those who were never of your Church? why do they not
Excommunicate the French, or Dutch? True, they live under your Laws, but your
Law is, they must be admitted by the Cross, and being Infants, could not help
it.

As to your Discourse about particular Congregations, and Diocesan Churches, it
is not my purpose to meddle with it; only I desire you to tell me why a Pastor
of a single Congregation may not be as fit to govern that Congregation, as your
single Bishop to govern a thousand Congregations, as it is with your Church?
where did the Apostles ordain, but one single Pastor to a Church? we have eight
Churches recorded in the Epistles, and the Acts, but we read in them all
several Elders to carry on Church-work. As for Timothy and Titus, being Bishops
in our controverted sense, enough has been said about them. Strange that we
should have twelve Apostles beside Paul and Barnabas, many Elders and several
Evangelists, and but two Bishops (who were Evangelists too) recorded in holy
Writ to be the pattern for the succeeding Bishops; when, where, and how, those
two were made Bishops, we cannot find.

And for the large Diocesses, so large, that it is impossible for a Bishop to
perform the Duties the Lord requires of a Pastor to one quarter of the Diocese:
Page 203
The Petitioners for Reformation in King James's reign, tell his Majesty, That
in Augustine's time there were in one Province under Carthage, of the Catholic
and Donatist, Bishops above nine hundred. Of the Catholics part there were
present 286, and absent 120 by reason of sickness and old age, Episcopal
Churches void 60, in all 466. Of the Donatists there were present 279, absent
120, Churches void 60, in all 459. These come near the matter, make him but
Episcopus praeses, and as to Officers and Churches I may come to agree with
you, leaving my brethren to their judgments.

Several other things I took notice of in your Book that may easily be
answered; as the perplexing scruples you mention, page 384, 385. (If we must
baptize only by the Parents right) that men must run into. No, none at all.

But, Sir, did you not forget your self very much, p. 393. when you tell us the
differences between the Popish Ceremonies, and your Ceremonies? viz. That yours
are appointed only for decency and order? Sir, do not your Preface to your
Ceremonies tell us another story, viz. of a significacy in them to put us in
mind of our duty? 2. Of an aptness in them to stir up our dull minds to our
duty? Here is some efficacy in them to help to the performance of duty,
stirring up dull minds; these do not much differ from the efficacy you say the
Papists give to theirs for the purging away some sorts of sins. I think both
alike.

As for your French Letters; who told le Moyne what he writes page 404. That we
believe that a man cannot be saved in the Church of England? I never heard such
a word from any Dissenter, nor ever had I such a thought. Certainly none of our
Bishops would write such a line to him. So that this must be the figment of a
French man's brain, which we abhor; for the story he writes, p. 409. of a
Nonconformist that he heard preach; I could tell him a story of one of our late
Bishops ten times worse, but the Press shall not know it; but you shall.

Sir, I have given you a few of my thoughts, reading over your Book, while my
Papers were in the Press, (which have lain by me several years) and must tell
you I am not yet satisfied with the title of your Book, viz. the
Unreasonableness of Separation, etc. To your Prayer in the end of your Preface,
I heartily say, Amen, Amen.

SIR, I am your Servant to love and honor You, G. F.

THE QUESTIONS Between the CONFORMIST AND Nonconformist, Truly stated, and
briefly discussed.
IT was not without the ordering of Divine Providence that the day which the
Imitators of the Heathens (...), did consecrate to their St. Bartholomew,
should be the day on which the blood of so many thousand Protestants was poured
out in France, and the day also on which so many hundreds of Gospel Ministers,
to whom Christ had given both will and skill for his work, success in his work,
were turned out of his work in England. The crime both there and here which
they found, was the same the Princes found against Daniel in the Law of his
God. A day of gladness it was to many, but not to all upon the same ground. One
Conformist, and a man of note, tells a Captain under his Majesty, since his
Return, that he was glad so many Ministers refused to conform; the Captain
would know his reason: he gives it thus: Had all Ministers conformed, people
would have thought there was nothing in Religion, only a thing to talk of in
the Pulpit, and serve a State-design, for these Ministers will turn any way the
State turn: But by their giving up their livings, and exposing themselves and
families to outward evils, rather than they would conform to things imposed not
agreeable (as they apprehended) to the Gospel they preached, they have
convinced men there is reality in Religion, and given a check to Atheism. This
was the substance; and to be sure he was not more glad than I was, when the
Captain told me his Discourse.

How zealous yet some have been to bring us over to Conformity, the many Books
published for it, and against us, have declared. Some of which have come to my
hand, but all were not written with the same Spirit. As they came to hand, so I
perused them, to see if I could find any thing to convince me. And whereas
there are five things imposed upon us, 1. The Liturgy, with stinted forms of
prayer. 2. Mystical Ceremonies. 3. Subjection to such Episcopacy. 4.
Reordination. 5. Renouncing the Covenant. I applied my self to the three first
Questions chiefly. For if it can be proved that these are agreeable with, and
conformable to the Laws of God, as the Friendly Debate, and Dr. Templer, would
persuade their Readers, then Reordination may be admitted, and the Covenant
renounced.

As to the two first Quest. Mr. Carre was the first man I met with that argued
for them; after him I met with the Friendly Debate; next, with the Serious and
compassionate Enquiry, etc. (Dr. Goodman, the Author as I hear, Nemine
contradicente), but last of Mr. Falkner, a man of an excellent spirit, whom I
shall honor, and one that has said more than all before. Before he came
forth, I had drawn up my answer to all the former, and was loath to throw away
all I had done, because I saw there were some things in these Authors which Mr.
Falkner had not, else I would wholly have attended him; but where I saw they
all agreed, there I considered them conjunct; where one had what the other had
not, there severally.

As to the third Quest. something I found in a piece Entitled Samaritanism. As
to the Learned Dr. Stilling fleet, by throwing down the Jus Divinum of any form
of Church Government, he prepared the way for our subjection to such
Episcopacy, if his principle be sound.

For the serious and compassionate Enquiry, I found little in that piece as to
our questions, unless a man were so simple to take fine words for strong
arguments, and Rhetoric for Logic. For his Discourse about schism, I shall
consider it in its place. But the chief things I observed in him, were his
odious comparisons between the Conformist and Nonconformist, begun at p. 21.
and continued some pages His slighting that worthy Father blessed Austin; the
contempt he throws upon the Synod of Dort, which I did never expect from the
pen of a Son of the Church of England. But I see this Church of England, and
the famons Church of England, are not the same. I need not say any thing, there
is an acute pen has given him so full and solid an answer, that I ver expect
to read his Reply.

To what he says, page 3. That the Nonconformists blame the Doctrine of the
Church, viz. the 39 Articles are not so punctual in defining the five points
debated at the Synod of Dort, etc. I think I may say, I have been in the
company of as many Nonconformists as that Author, but I have not heard them
blame the Articles therefore. But this fault I have heard found, and do find,
that we are commanded to affent to the 34, 35, and 36. Articles with the same
faith we do to the fundamental Articles of our Faith and Salvation therein
contained.

I thought among the Confessions of Faith, these 39 Articles were looked upon
as the Confession of the Faith of the Church of England; but I find it
otherwise now; for Dr. Stillingfleet in his defense of Bishop Laud, p. 54.
being pinched by the Jesuit, (who in this point is not answered) tells us, The
Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, but such as have the Testimony of
the whole Christian world in all Ages, acknowledged to be such by Rome it self.
And in other things she requires subscription to them, not as Articles of
Faith, but inferior truths, which she expects a submission to in order to her
peace and tranquillity.

Afterward p 82, and 104. He distinguishes between the internal assent of the
mind, and the external act; the Church does not require the first, but the
latter.

To confirm his saying, he quotes Archbishop Bramhall, often expressing the
sense of the Church of England, as to her 39 Articles, thus: Neither does the
Church of England define any of these questions as necessary to be believed,
either necessitate medii, vel praecepti, which is much less; but only binds
her Sons for peace sake not to oppose them. And in another place more fully, We
do not suffer any man to reject the 39 Articles of the Church of England at his
pleasure, neither do we look on them as essentials of saving Faith, or Legacies
of Christ and his Apostles; but in a mean as pious opinions, fitted for the
preservation of unity; neither do we oblige any man to believe them, but only
not to contradict them. Thus the Archbishop. And this is not his opinion alone,
but generally of the Grandees of this Church, as an intelligent and sober
Conformist tells me.

When I read these lines first, I read them again, and again, to see if I were
not mistaken, they were so strange unto me at the first reading; when I saw I
was not mistaken, I turned to the beginning to see who did License it, and was
amazed when I saw the name. According to this, Cerinthus, Pelagius, Arius,
Socinus, Turks, Jews, yea Vaninus, may all subscribe the Articles, and be Sons
of the Church of England, if they can but keep their tongues from contradicting
them, though they do not believe one of them. Though I am a Nonconformist, yet
I am such a friend to the Church of England as to her Doctrine, that I abhor
these lines, and charge that Bishop Bramhall with doing wrong to the Church. It
seems when other Churches abroad read these 39 Articles as the Confession of
the Faith of the Church of England, and suppose we do believe them to be true,
they are grossly mistaken, it may be we believe not one; the Church do not
oblige her Sons to it, but only not to contradict them. They are deluded, the
Church reproached, and God is mocked.

Several things I could say to the disproving of this sense; but to what worthy
Dr. Stilling fleet has said, I should desire him to name that Book of public
authority to warrant what he says.

1. The Kings Declaration prefixed for the confirmation of them, and with that
I question not but the Bishops did agree The Declaration expressed. With the
advice of so many of our Bishops, etc.
, makes no such distinction of superior and inferior Truths, but speaking of
all the 39 Articles jointly taken together, thus declares: The Articles of the
Church of England do contain the true Doctrine of the Church of England
agreeable to Gods word, etc. requiring all our subjects to continue in the
Uniform profession thereof. Again, requires all Clergy men to submit to every
Article in the plain and full meaning thereof; and shall not put their own
sense and comment to be the meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the
literal and Grammatical sense.

Again, does not the fifth Canon say, Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that any
of the 39 Articles are in any part superstitious or erroneous, or such as he
may not with a good conscience subscribe unto, let him be Excommunicated, ipso
facto.

Lay these both together, and how can we receive his Interpretation.

Besides, does the Church not care though her Sons be such gross Hypocrites?
Does not Reason and Religion teach me first to try, examine, and to believe the
thing to be lawful before I practice? Whatever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14
23.

I know two Conformists, one is known to be a right Son, the other is
suspected; neither of these do wear the Surplice; the reason is the same for
both, neither Parish had provided one; when they came to the Court, the right
Son has nothing said to him, though he did not practice; the other was
suspended. Was it not the internal assent that the Court regarded? it was that
saved the true Son.

Are we not commanded unfeignedly to assent and consent to all things in the
Common Prayer Book, in which are several Creeds? and you tell us, the Doctrine
of your Thirty-nine Articles, contained.

To conclude this Head: of old he was esteemed a true Son of the Church of
England, who was tite to the 39 Articles, subscribing to them in their Literal
and Grammatical sense, as the King required. Now he is reputed the true Son of
the Church, who does but submit to these three articles that respect the
Ceremonies, Rites, Episcopacy, etc. let him for Doctrine be an Arminian,
Socinian, Papist, no matter how corrupt.

I would have lest Dr. Goodman, or whoever it was, that was the Author of the
serious and compassionate Inquiry, etc. till I had come to his stating of the
Questions, but that I find him, p. 67, 69. giving one cause, which he imputes
to us, worthy the taking notice of; and the speaking to it here, will save me a
labor afterward.

A great part of this Nation, says he, having been leasened with Jewish
superstition, or Jewish Traditions, has thereby been indisposed to an uniform
reception of the reformation of Religion held forth by this Church; and thus
does charge us with Judaism, quoting Cartwright, Ainsworth, and H. Broughton,
who were great Students in the Rabinical writings, and they leavened us, p. 68.

This is very strange, when as if he will please to read over Mr. Falkner, he
shall see how much he uses these Rabinical writings, and Jewish customs to
confirm the Liturgy, and Forms of Prayer, and the Rites and Ceremonies of this
Church. Yea, Christ himself is not spared, but he is made a Conformist to the
Jewish customs, different from the Law, to prove our conformity. Thus Scaliger,
and out of him Mr. Carre, and Mr. Falkner. That I was studying how to give
answer to this head of argument in these men; and this it seems is charged upon
us.

To clear our selves then from this, and to give answer to the other men, I
grant,

1. That the Jews had many Rites, Traditions, and Customs of their own; some of
which the Holy Page od record. But for their Oral Law, Traditions, etc. they
were not committed to writing till the reign of the Emperor Antoninus, and not
perfected till the year 219 after Christ, says Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. p. 52.
some say more. Now how shall we be infallibly certain, that what Traditions
they then wrote were exactly the same, which they were in Christ his time,
above 200 years before? in such a space of time how easily may things vary?

2. We are infallibly certain that our Lord was an enemy to the Elders
Traditions; how then these should be brought in to prove the lawfulness of the
things in question, I know not.

How will you infallibly prove the Church of the Jews in the purest time, did
tie up it self to Forms of Prayer in public administration? which though it
could be proved, will not serve the turn, as we shall see when the question
comes to be stated.

3. Suppose Christ used some actions at his Supper like to the Jews, must he
needs borrow them from the Jews to be conformable to them? I hope he did not
learn to bless and give thanks from them.

Homer and Hesiod, some say, lived before Isaiah, or about his time; Hesiod
has expressions very like that of Isaiah, in the description of Tophet,
Analet. Sacr. p. 425.
Isa. 30.33. as if the Heathen drew with the same pencil, says Doughtie. But
did Isaiah borrow from Hesiod? the same Author instanceth in many things more,
and did the Penmen borrow (or rather the spirit that inspired them) from the
Heathen? Because Plato has an expression something like to Paul's distinction
of the outward and inward man, must Paul needs borrow it out of Plato, as
Nerimbergius would have him?

Thus some have affirmed that John took up his Baptism from the Jews baptizing
of Proselytes, when others have shown that the Jews took it from John, when
Christ put the question, Mat. 21.23, 25. The Baptism of John, whence was it,
from heaven or men? Why did they not answer from the Elders Tradition; it seems
it was the counsel of God, Luke 7.30. whatever these men say: and Joh. 1.33. He
that sent me to Baptize.

Whence I shall desire that leave to lay by all these Quotations out of
Scaliger, Seldom, and other Rabinical men, as signifying nothing to the
Questions in hand. We must have Scripture, and Scripture reason, in matters of
God.

Here Dr. Goodman proves us to be guilty of Judaism, telling his Reader, p. 69
this is their grand Hypothesis, That nothing is lawful in the service of God,
but what is expressly prescribed in Scripture. Such an Hypothesis I never saw
yet in any of our Nonconformists Books. I will yield him more. As,

1. Not only express Scripture, but necessary consequence from Scripture; but
then it must be necessary consequence.

2. Where the Lord has lest us only a General Rule, and has not tied us op to
Particulars; let but the Particulars carry in them the nature of the General
Rule, as the species includes the essence of the Genus, and we will yield them
too.

Yet this Doctor can tell his Reader, that this of express Scripture is the
Characteristical Doctrine of that party; and that we graft our Christianity
upon the scock of Judaism. Were the Jews tied up to express Scripture in all
they did about the Worship of God? I think the Jews had as much liberty then,
as we have under the Gospel. I shall give but one instance, though I could more.

The Passover was a solemn Ordinance of God; now in Exodus 12.8. there is a
command given to eat it with bitter herbs; (...)
we supply the word herbs; but the word is only bitterness, or Res amarae. The
Chaldae, Arabic and Samaritan keep the Hebrew word without any addition of
herbs. Here is only a General Rule given, but what those bitter things should
be, whether herbs, roots, etc. there is no determination. Hence then, I might
go into several houses at that time, where they had prepared in one house such
bitter herbs as Sichory, Wild Lettice, (which they say they used); in another
house Wormwood, and Horehound; in another Centory, Germander; in another bitter
Almonds and Gentian, etc. so mention twenty more differences, yet if
Bitternesses were observed, the rule was kept. Again, shall these bitternesses
be boiled or raw, beaten into a sauce like our Mustard, as Scaliger says the
Churoseth was? here is nothing determined; be sure there be bitternesses, and
the general Rule is kept.

Again, here is no mention made of drink; but to have a Lamb and unleavened
bread eaten, and bitter things, and not drink, it had been a dry Feast, fit to
choke them.

Again, the Lamb must be roast; but how, must it be without a Spit, (as we use
sometimes) or with a Spit? and if so, whether with a Spit made of Iron etc. or
Wood, and that of a Pomegranate tree, as a Learned man supposes, who can tell?
there is nothing determined or expressed, and I prefume that Learned Author was
not there to turn the Spit.

Again, it must be roast, but must the fire be made of wood or coal, or turff,
or other combustible matter? not a word of any such thing. Thus I might reckon
up many more circumstances; that I wonder at this Author, and another of his
party answering for their Ceremonies, telling us, This is the difference
between the Law and the Gospel, that under the Law all ceremonies and
circumstances, are exactly prescribed, not so under the Gospel. How true this
is, the Reader may judge.

Leaving then this Author a while, let us come to the stating of the Questions;
and for the first about Forms of Prayer.

Mr. Carre begins his Book, and states the Question thus:

1. Forms of Prayer are lawful; thus it was stated in the Commencement-house
when Dr. Fern was Vicechancellor, and moderated.

I yield it, being my own practice to compose Forms for my Children, and for
others who could not express themselves in fit words in their families before
their servants: and what then, what is this to our business?

2. For the Ceremonies.

The Church has power in circumstances: and who denies it?

3. For Government; some Episcopacy is lawful.

The Proposition must not be universal, for then we shall setch in a Universal
Bishop, which as yet our opponents do not like. Make it particular, for my part
I yield it.

I shall therefore now give the true state of the Questions, and then leave it
to the judicious Reader to see, whether any one argument the Conformists use,
conclude the Questions.

For the First about imposed Forms of Prayer, the question is this:

Quest. The Question about Forms Prayer stated.
Whether the Lord Jesus has given such power to any ordinary persons (Civil or
Ecclesiastical) to compise and impose their Forms of Prayer upon his Ministers
in the Gospel Church, whom he has sufficiently qualified for his work, unto
which he has called them; so that in their ministration and worshipping of God
by prayer, his Ministers must be tied up to those very Forms and Syllables, and
not vary from them?

Let me open the Question.

1st. That Christ is Lord of his House, King of his Church, having the only
power over it to institute what he please, no Christian will deny.

2ly. True Ministers of the Gospel are his Ministers; they have their talents
and abilities from him, their call and authority from him; Their Laws and
Doctrine what they must preach, and how they must order all things in the
Church, from him. They have a promise of his Presence, and unto him must they
give an account of their work.

3ly. These Ministers being his, are sufficiently qualified; in one sense it is
true, (...), 2 Cor. 2. 16. who is sufficient? but yet again Timothy is charged
that those whom he takes into the Ministry be (...), sufficient men. Praying
and Preaching are the two great works of a Minister, Act. 6.4. to declare the
will of God, to the people; and to open and present the wants of the people
unto God is their business; and whom Christ sends of his errand, he fits them
for both, or never sends them, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. He prepares gifts for his.

If your Forms of Prayer will make a man sufficient, I know not who shall be
insufficient if he can but read well.

4ly. These are Christ's Ministers in the Gospel church. I hope it is no strange
thing to put a difference between the Ministers of the Old and New Testament,
Gal 4.1. 2 Cor. 3, etc. that the Spirit is given by Christ's Ascension in a
greater measure both as to gifts and grace, to the body of the Gospel Church,
than to the old Church, has been unquestioned Divinity by the Conformists.

5ly. For ordinary persons to impose, such as cannot, dare not lay claim to an
extraodinary Mission as the Prophets and Apostles had. Yet the Apostles never
imposed their Prayers on the Churches.

6ly. For these to tie up Christ's Ministers to words and syllables in Prayer
from which they must not vary. This is the practice indeed; but this is the
question, by what right this is done?

What I have heard in answer to it, is, that the Church allows our own Prayers
before and after Sermon.

1. Whether the Church allow it, I cannot tell; the genuine Sons of the Church
say no, and will use only the Canon-prayer. The Archdeacon in his Visitation,
did dehort the Ministers from the use of their own prayers, with these words,
Though I do not command, nor enjoin you, yet I advise you to it; it is more out
of fear, it would cause such an Odium among the people, should they take them
off from their own prayers wholly in places where there is any knowledge; in
ignorant places they use none at all but the Common Prayer, as I have certain
intelligence of diverse places. The Fathers of the Church in their Conterence
with the other Ministers at the Kings first coming in, thus express themselves:
Account of the Proceedings, etc. p. 19.
We heartily desire that according to this Proposal great care may be taken to
suppress those private conceptions of pray ers before and after Sermons. As the
Judges are the Interpreters of Statute-Laws, so surely the Bishops of the
Canons. Now it is clear, they would take away all but Book-prayer. The judgment
of Bishop VVren, and Bishop Cozens is well known.

2ly. But if superiors being but ordinary persons, have power to impose their
Forms at Baptism, the Lords supper, etc. all but before and after Sermon; is it
because their power of imposing is limited by God? where I pray? certainly by
what power they take away the use of our own prayers before and after
Sacraments, they may before and after Sermons, and that we see they desire it
might be done, but that they fear the consequence.

Let us come to their reasons for this: One they draw from the Scriptures, and
that is worth twenty others, if they do not fail in the managing of it. Mr.
Carre, Mr. Falkner, and the rest that meddle with Liturgies, instance in the
Form of blessing, the Priests had from God, Numb. 6.23. the many Prayers and
Praises in the Psalms, in the Old Testament.

To which I answer, 1. I wish these Gentlemen would cast the argument into
Form, and see how it will conclude the Question.

The Question speaks of ordinary persons; and here is God himself commanding
Aaron, and giving him a form of words, to which Aaron must conform or sin. For
others, here were extraordinary persons inspired by the Holy Spirit; These are
part of the Canon into which our Faith is resolved, part of Scripture; and so
given by the inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. This argument reaches not the
question.

The Fr. Deb. par. 2. page 354. tell us, that Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Ezra,
Daniel, used the words of Solomon.

What then? I pray conclude the question. Besides, as if we denied Ministers to
make use of Scripture-expressions, into which as I said our Faith is resolved.
We commend such prayers. I have heard a Nonconformist pray, and that for a
convenient space of time, his prayer was composed almost all of
Scripture-expressions, but so aptly, that I could but wonder at the gift, and
yet I perceived he did not tie himself to a Form.

But were those under the Old Testament tied up to words and syllables imposed
upon them by ordinary persons, and might not, or did not use their own gifts?
prove that, else you are beside the question. Besides our question speaks of a
Gospel Church, which that was not.

But P. 2. p. 354, 392. the Fr. Deb tell us, Christ used the same words three
times.

Sir, I pray cast this argument also into form, see how it will conclude the
question. As if we thought or ever said, that every time a Minister pray, he
must have new expressions; or denied that a person under a heavy load upon his
spirit as our blessed Lord had then, might not unload his grief to God in the
same expressions.

The Jesuit Clare tell us, Arraign. of Conver. Jew, p. 105. Fr. Deb. p. 360.
that the custom of praying so often upon Beads, is warranted from this example
of Christ, using the same words three times; it proves both alike.

The Fr. Deb. tell us, p. 360. A man may be a good Minister, and yet want the
gift of extemporary conceptions in prayer. In the requisites for a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. this is not required nor expressed, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and
Romans 12.6, 7.

Answ. I pray, Sir, how came the word Extemporary to be foisted into the
question? Have our Nonconformists so stated it? every true Bishop is able to
pray so, as to present his own and the peoples wants and necessities before the
Lord; whether he does it by extemporary, or premeditated conceptions, is none
of our question.

2. No wonder though the Apostle did not express it; a man I hope is first a
Christian, before a Bishop; and if but a Christian, he can pray, much more if a
Bishop. Prayer was one part of the Apostles work, Act. 6.4. I question much
whether the Apostles had a stinted Liturgy then.

3. Though we have but a little learning left, yet we understand a Synecdoche;
the principal work, Teaching, is there expressed, but other work is
comprehended.

This puts me in mind of a Scholar I knew, of good natural parts, but of a
profane spirit; upon a time he takes along with him another of his Companions
to hear him, and gets into a Pulpit to try his faculty. When he had done, he
tells his Companion, I could make a shift to preach as well as any of them, but
a Devil on it, I cannot Pray.

4ly. When the Apostle wrote to Timothy, 1 Epist. 2.1. I exhort that
supplications, prayers, etc. be made for all; he intended that prayer was a
work incumbent on a Bishop. But here I find Mr. Falkner, p. 109. with Dr. Ham.
making this Text to warrant the composing of Forms of Prayer. The words (...),
may be taken in that sense So he.

But 1. Paul was as able to compose as Timothy, why did not he as an Apostle
set him a pattern?

2ly. Suppose Timothy should compose, how will he prove that he imposed them on
the Ministers, who were able to pray without them? how this would agree with
Paul's Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. these gifts were for Pastors and Teachers, as
well as Evangelists.

3ly. The Syriack Translation will not admit this notion, for that reads the
words thus, That thou offer supplication to God. It being Timothy's, and
Ministers duties, not to compose prayers, and impose them on other Ministers,
but to pray, etc.

4ly. I pray what difference between these words, (...), in this Text, and
(...), etc. in Act. 12.5. Prayer was made without ceasing? the Church was
instant and earnest in composing Forms of Prayer; this it seems is the sense;
what is there more in (...), than (...), to force such an Interpretation?

5ly. It seems then by (...), a phrase often used by the Apostle John; we must
understand to compose a form of sin, and (...), to compose a form of
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.22. when Peter said of Christ, He did no sin; (...), we
must understand he did not make a form of sin; implying he might sin, but did
not make a form. So Jam. 3.18. (...), make peace, that is, make a form of
peace. So Paul, 2 Corinthians. 11.7. (...), have I sinned? that is, have I made a
form of sin? we read have I committed an offense?

The next Scripture-argument I see they all make use of, is the example of John
the Baptist, who they say gave to his Disciples a form of prayer.

Ans. 1. Suppose John gave them a Form, make the argument into Form, and see
how it concludes the question.

2. It was necessary for John to teach them how to pray at such a time, the
Messiah being about to manifest himself; so that their prayers might be
suitable to the Dispensation they were under. But,

3ly. Were John's Disciples Ministers of Christ called by him to office?

4ly. Did John tie up his Disciples to words and syllables, when his Disciples
were grown up in their understanding, and had gifts of their own? Though I gave
my Children Forms of Prayers when they were young, I now expect they should
pray without those Forms.

This argument is yet too weak.

The last argument I find out of Scripture, is the Prayer our Lord taught his
Disciples. All make use of this.

A. Let us hear the strength: If Christ gave his Disciples a Form (which is
part of the Sacred Canon) and tied them up to these words, etc. then ordinary
persons may impose, etc. a very stout argument! Christ's and your authority it
seems are equal. His is part of the Canon into which our Faith is resolved, so
it seems is yours. This Christ did when his Disciples were but weak in gifts
and grace, for Christ had not yet ascended.

But still two things must be proved:

1. That Christ gave them this for a Form; a perfect Form, as I hear it often
expressed.

2ly. That Christ tied them up to these words and syllables, as you do to yours.

For the first, That it was perfect for the end Christ gave it, I doubt not;
that is, to give us a summary of Prayer, what we should pray for. I shall quote
but two or three that you will say were no Nonconformists. Maldonate the
Jesuit, on Mat. 6. Non his necessario verbis, sed hac aut simili sententia;
quoting Austin and Beda for his judgment; but proves it best from Christ and
his Apostles, that did not use those very words in their Prayers. Grotius on
Mat. 6. (...), i.e. in hunc sensum; non enim praecipit Christus verba recitari,
sed materiam precum hinc promere. And on Luke 11. very fully, Doce nos
compendium rerum orandarum, neque enim eo tempore syllabis adstringebantur.

These men then judge the matter, the Oranda, things to be prayed for, to be the
intent of Christ, but not to tie us up to those syllables, as you do to your
Forms.

If that will not serve, then I will urge the very literal sense, When you
pray, say. It Is not, When you pray or say your Prayers, then say this; but when
you pray, say. So that I should use no other prayer when I do pray, but this.

If that will not do, yet it binds that always when you pray, this you must
say; but when? at the beginning, end, or middle of my own prayer? Here is
nothing. And your Conformists do not say it at the end of their prayers, before
and after Sermon too; in that I think you are to blame.

That this Form of Prayer our Lord left us is perfect, as to the end he
intended by it, I easily yield. But if by a perfect form, they understand such
a form of Prayer, as contains in it all the parts that are requisite to Prayer,
and therefore called a perfect form, as the opinion and practice of many would
make us believe, I cannot easily yield to that.

Prayer is commonly thus described, and I think very fully and truly. It is an
offering of our desires to God for things agreeable to his will in the name of
Christ, with confession of our sins, and thankeful acknowledgment of his
mercies.

Here are four things expressed, as requisite to make up a perfect Form of
Prayer: They are parts Integrantes, or Constituentes of this Totum.

1. Confession. 2. Petition. 3. Thanksgiving. 4. The offering up of all in the
Name of Christ.
As for Petition, (which to speak strictly is prayer in that part we present
our desires), this is very fully expressed in our Lords Prayer, and in this
respect it may well be called a perfect Form. For there is nothing we can
rightly desire, but it is reducible to one of these six Petitions, and
contained in them, as Conclusions are in their Principles.

But let us come to some other Parts.

To offer up our Prayers to God in the Name of Christ, is an essential part of
a Christians prayer, Joh. 14.13, 14. and Joh. 16.23, 24. God brought his people
to pray toward the Temple; so did Dan. 6.10. and Jon. 2.4, etc.

But this part is neither expressed nor contained in this Form of Prayer. If
any Heretic will deny that we are to pray in the Name of Christ, convince him
out of this Form of Prayer if you can.

For confession of sin; I grant it is tacitly implied in that petition for
pardon of sin; we do confess by consequence we are sinners, and have sinned, in
begging pardon.

But confession of sin, and petition for pardon of sin, are two different
things, yea differ exceedingly; a man may pray, as most men do, for pardon of
sin, from a principle of mere natural self-love; but confession of sin is a
thing man cares not for; even good David was not very forward to it at one
time, Psalm. 32.3, 5. much of a gracious spirit may appear in confession of sin.
Now one would think that this being one part to make up prayer, it should be as
plainly expressed as other parts are, being a principle to which all
Confessions different for Aggravations, Circumstances, etc. should belong and
be reduced, as it is in Petition. And as it is in the Commandments, we reduce
many sins and duties to these Commandments, but the Command to which they are
reduced, is plainly expressed, and not tacitly only implied in another.

So that I conclude with Grotius as before: It is a thing often observed, men
that in their conversation live in open rebellion against God, while they are
about Divine Worship, they carry themselves so prosanely, that one would think
these persons do not believe there is a God to worship; when they should attend
to the Word preached, they are talking, or jeering, or sleeping; at the
Ministers prayer, sit on their tails as if no such ordinance in hand; but if
the Minister come to the Lords-Prayer, then clap their Hats before their eyes,
and mumble over the words; and now I hope they have worshipped God well. But I
leave it, let men use it, or not use it, at the end of their prayers, they
shall not offend me.

I have done with all the Scripture-arguments I meet with in all their Books;
Par. 1. pa. 64.
the Fr. Debate I see in that place where he produces the Form of the
Lords-Prayer, tells his Reader, That the Nonconformists will not give the title
of Saint to one of the Apostles, for no other reason that he can conceive, but
their good Dames and Masters do not like it, they will not offend their tender
ears.

Sir, since you profess your self to be such a master of reason, I pray give a
reason why we may not as well say Saint Abraham, St. Samuel, St. Daniel, etc.
as well as St. Paul, St. John, St. George, or St. Patrick forsooth? do the holy
Prophets deserve so little in comparison of these two last Saints?

2ly. And I pray give a reason why we may not as well say Matthew, Mark, Luke,
Paul, etc. as well as Clemens Romanus, Polycarpus, Ignatius, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Athanasius, etc? which Authors I see seldom put the Epithete
Saint to them. Ignatius in one Epistle six times calls him Paul without Saint.
Sometimes I have met with (...), sometimes (...), but not with (...), so
commonly; though I do not deny but they may use that Epithere too, and I not
see it. But did these Fathers forbear this word Saint, so as not (at least
always) as you do to use it, because they would not displease their good Dames
and Masters? or was it because the art of Canonizing by the Triple-Crown was
not then known as it is now? with whom it seems, as in other things you are
pleased to symbolize, so in this.

The next Head are their Reasons why these Forms must be imposed. Now as to all
their Humane reasons in these cases concerning God. I shall not much weigh
them. For there is no man will set up his Inventions in Gods Worship without
Reasons; Jeroboam will not set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, but he has his
Reasons, 1 King 12.26, 27, 28, etc. He is a fool indeed that has no reason to
give for his act.

I much applaud one sentence of the Schools in this case, and it had been well
if they had kept to it: Sacra scriptura, est lex Ecclasiae, fidei mensura,
Regula intellectus, Humanae ratiocinationis fraenum. I will yet take a view of
their Reasons that are of moment.

One I find in the Fr. Deb. Par. 1. page 93. It is so lawful to use a form of
words in prayer, that it is in a sort necessary; we can have no security that
the service of God will be performed well without one. The best of men though
their hearts be full of good desires, may from some cause or other, want such
words as are fit to express their meaning; hence may use words rude, slovenly,
obscure, etc.

Mr. Carre has one like to it, only he does not put the word necessary to it.
Necessity I grant is a strong reason.

Ans. Rude slovenly words, are such as I do not remember I have heard; once I
heard an expression that was not so becoming, and the person being told of it,
reformed it, and never used it more; a better way to deal with persons, than
impose and tie up to syllables.

2ly. Will not this reflect upon Christ very much? Either,

1st. He did not foreknow the infirmities of his people.

2ly. Or though he did, yet he knew how to help them, or pardon them, and yet
accept of their service.

3ly. Or if he did foreknow them, and by a form of words imposed, all these
infirmities might be prevented, his Worship secured, and better performed than
now it can be without a form, Heb. 3.6.
then Christ was not faithful in his House as a Son; that would not provide for
a thing necessary in his House. The limitation after a sort necessary, will not
serve the turn, but it must reflect upon his honor.

Could not he have commanded his Apostles to compose one Liturgy that should
have served all the Churches in the world? So it had been one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, and one Liturgy, and then that trite, but pitiful reason from
Uniformity had been answered; As if that unity Christ requires in his people
and worship, could not be preserved, without Uniformity in words and syllables.

3ly. But there are some men, even of your Conformists a few, whose words when
they have liberty to use their own gift, are so apt that the Devil himself
cannot find a rude or slovenly expression, why must Forms be imposed upon such
men?

4ly. We must have a Form before and after Sermon too; for something may fall
out which may cause rude and slovenly words in those prayers, and so have
nothing but Book-prayer.

5ly. We must take away all Preaching too, and use only Homilies, for fear of
rude, slovenly words, and unhandsome expressions in Sermons; where be sure they
are too common with some. (How many Sermons in Conventicles Dr. Goodman heard,
that he can charge them upon us, as he does in his odious Comparisons, p. 21,
22, etc. I know not, I suppose he never heard one; may be I can tell him of an
expression of one of his Bishops, and that in print too, that was not very
handsome for a Sermon.)

But if he denies this, because we may write down our Sermons and read them, as
commonly you do; truly that does not always serve neither. But however I reply,
so may you compose your own prayers, and write them down, and read them, as you
do your other prayers imposed, and so prevent slovenly words.

6ly. Suppose we meet (as often we do) with cases, which when we come to spread
them before God, your Book-prayer has no words at all. What shall we do now?
our own words we must not use, they may be rude and slovenly; and for your
Forms, there is none suit the case in words at all? it seems we must let the
case alone.

Fr. Deb. p 96, 97. urges this argument, It is as lawful to use a Form of
Prayer in prose, as in verse; but here you do not stick at it, when you can
sing David 's Psalms translated into English Meter, though the words be mean,
uncouth, and the sense often mistaken.

Ans. Where lies the strength of your argument? if in the uncouth words, for
this cause, and the sense changed, I have not used the Psalms by Hopkins and
Sternbold many years. Others are used generally by the Nonconformists.

2ly, Prayer or praise offered to God in verse, require some art to make true
Verse, and fit Rhyme, suitable to English ears; every one who has the gift of
Prayer, has not the gift of Poetry.

3ly. The people being to join in singing, and lift up their voice on high, if
they do not know before hand what to sing, will make mad work; there cannot be
joint singing without a Form, so that it is necessary. But in prayer their
hearts are only to join and give their Amen. If the Pastor be the mouth of the
Congregation, and the Service public, belonging to a public person.

4ly. But it seems they are David's Psalms, composed by a Prophet, 2 Samuel 23.1,
2, 3.
part of the Canon; and what was done here, was by the Commandment of the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 29 25, 30. and 35.15. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. So that still, Sir, your
consequence is denied, the question not concluded.

But page 94. All Churches in the world have had their public Forms, Fr. Deb.
he tell us.

I pray add, and those imposed by ordinary men, and all the Ministers tied up
to them, else you miss the question.

I pray, Sir, speak low, the little word All makes such a noise that it
troubles. What, the Apostolical Churches too? Will you prove to us invincibly
that the Liturgies which go under the name of Peter's, James, Marks, Andrews
Liturgies, are genuine, faithfully theirs, and not spurious? Learned Mornaus De
Eucharist. cap. 2.
has spoken so much to these, and so convincingly; also Crit. Sacr. L. 1. cap
3.
Rivet quoting Bellarmine against them, that I wonder any Protestant should
name them to patronize their Liturgies.

If All Churches, etc. what is the reason that Mr. Falkner dare not venture
above thirteen hundred, and Mr. Carre, but twelve hundred years, and leave
three hundred years of the best times of the Church next to Christ, in which
they dare not affirm there were any Forms imposed? Of which a word hereafter.

To conclude this: If foundness of Doctrine, purity of Worship, and a
conversation in some measure becoming the Gospel, be any true notes of a Church
of Christ, then there have been, and I know are such Churches where no Forms of
Prayer are composed, much less imposed upon the Ministry; that it was but a
bold assertion of him to say All Churches had them.

I find no more in Mr. Carre, nor the Fr. Debat. I see Mr. Falkner has summed
up five Reasons, which have been used by others most of them.

His first, The security of the Worship of God. This we had before. His second,
That needful comprehensive petitions for all common and ordinary, spiritual and
outward wants, etc. with fit Thanksgivings, may not be omitted, etc.

Ans. Surely, Sir, he is but a mean Minister that cannot do this without a
Book; though I know there is a vast difference in gifts, yet there is no true
Minister but is able in some good measure to do this; the different
Congregations are to be considered; some men's gifts may serve for some places
well, that will not for others.

His third, That the affections and hearts of pions men may be more devont,
etc. when they may consider beforehand, what particular prayers they are to
offer up.

Ans. Who are further off from these, and care less for them, than your most
truly pious men, who walk most with God, such as can pour out their souls
before God in prayer, (I speak of private men) in another manner than most of
your Ministers can do; how have I heard them complain of these as deading their
spirits! That truly, Sir, your argument from pious and religious hearts, was
quite beside the business; they are your formal Christians, who sooth up
themselves in their outward performances, that are the most devout at these.

But, 2ly. since I see you have twice quoted the Liber Ritualis in the Bohemian
Churches on your side, and against us, let me give the Reader an account of it
out of Comenius, the same Author and Book which you quote.

When a Minister is ordained, the Ritual-book is given to him, (so far you say
true; but then he goes on, which you conceal); this Ritualbook the common
people were not to see; when the Minister died, the Book was returned to the
Elders again. Not that the Ministers were bound up to those words and syllables
in the Book. (says Comenius) but they were left free. (This is quite against
you) He goes on, By this means the hearers were made more attentive, and
greater admirers of the grace of God. For to rehearse only Forms, or things
prescribed what will there be to excite attention? Quite cross to you. The
reason why they suffer not the people to have these Books, is, that the people
might not slight or despise them. Had the people the Books (as ours the
Common Prayer Book) they would more observe whether the Minister read right,
etc. says Comenius. Thus we see when we go from the Scriptures to Humane
Reasons, how Reasons clash against one another.

Comen. in Annotat. ad Rat. Ord. and Discipl. Frat. Bohem. p. 100, and 101. who
adds more that makes against you.

Something I may say as to the Walacrian Classis, whose judgment Thus in the
Dutch Churches, Minister preces vel dictante spiritu, vel certa sibi proposita
formula concipiet. Har. Syno. Belg. Cap. 11. Canon 21. Apollon. p. 172. Comment
on Exodus 28. Def. of B. Land, page 102.
you produce against us, it is true what you quore; but withal if you please to
read the latter end of the first Paragraph you will find them rejecting the
ceremonies and forms of public worship in England, introduced in these latter
times. And in the second Paragraph, condemning Forms of Prayer and public
worship, though materially well disposed, if imposed as absolutely necessary,
and essential parts of Divine Worship, with a certain tyranny and violent
command upon the consciences of men.

I could also quote Rivet, whom you quote on your side for Ceremonies; he
mentions your Surplices in England, which you retain ex reliquiis Papismi; and
says, if you do it in imitation of the Jews, or for some mystical
signification (which you do) then it is not to be born, says he; In his pious
and learned Homily de Orig. errores, grounded on the 2 Cor. 11.3. he says,
Men's departing from the simplicity of Christ, is the original of all error.
Christ's wisdom is too low for men. There you will find something more. Dr.
Stillingfleet according with him in this, tells the Jesuit piously and truly:
If your Church had kept to the Primitive simplicity and moderation, the
occasion of most contreversies in the Christian world had been taken away. I
may say the same for England.

I will not deny but you may quote many against us. But, 1. I am of that Faith
concerning Churches which the Church of England is concerning General Councils,
Act. 21. when General Councils are gathered together (for so much as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed by the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometimes have erred in things pertaining to God, etc. even
good men may err. We know but in part.

2ly. We have Churches, if there be any true in the world, that are against
these things; so that here is the Testimony of Churches against Churches.

3ly. The Holy Scriptures are the Rule of all Churches to which they ought all
to conform. Wherefore Constantine said right, and as became a Christian, in the
Council of Nice, Let us take our resolution of questions out of the Books that
are Divinely inspired. To be sure they do not err.

Mr. Falkner's fourth Reason, From the difficult parts of Church-offices, of
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, there a Form is needful, etc.

Ans. He that does not understand the nature of those Ordinances, and is not
able to unfold them to his people, is not fit to be a Minister. Christ does not
send fools of his Errand; he has provided for those whom he sends. Now if they
do understand them, and be found in the Doctrine of them, (which is best known
by Confession of their Faith) they may be able to compose prayers suitable to
the Ordinances.

2ly. Or if such be composed for your Tyrenes, when they first come into the
work, must they needs be continued when they are grown more able? the ablest
and oldest men in England must be tied up to words and syllables, as if they
were still Novices.

3ly. Truly, Sir, you must not much boast of your Form in this Administration;
for the Parental-Covenant which is the only foundation of the administration of
that Ordinance to Infants, the God of Abraham and his seed, this is not at all
taken notice of in your Form. Besides many other things which I shall not
meddle with now, for I do not aim at your Liturgy more than any other in my
discourse.

5. His last reason, To be an evidence to other Churches, and future times,
after what way and manner we worship God, etc.

Answ. 1. But, Sir, cannot that be done unless we leave them the words and
syllables of our prayers, to which we were continually bound up? will not the
Confession of our Faith, and a Directory for Worship, (if the Assemblies
Directory be not sufficient, I pray let your party mend it) do this
sufficiently?

2ly. If this reason be forcible, was it not as strong in the Apostolical
Churches, and much more than now? Why did they not leave their Liturgies that
all Churches after them might know their way and man ner of worshipping God?
all their words in prayer? So name you but one argument that was not of as much
validity in the Apostles time as now. Uniformity, prevention of errors, of rude
and slovenly words and expressions, and what else you please. Then do but bring
us forth their Forms which they imposed upon the Churches, and give us but
infallible ground for our faith to believe, that these they were, and no
alteration in the least, then Sir, we shall listen to your reasons.

From other men I have heard other arguments: One I heard from a Learned
Physician, who had it from Bishop Sparrow in a Sermon, and was much taken with
the strength of it. Suppose, said he, their own prayers were better than the
prayers of the Church, yet obedience is better than sacrifice. Saul 's
obedience had been more acceptable than the fat beasts he spared for sacrifice.

The strength of this argument let us see: Here is a King commanded to give
obedience to God immediately, and that absolutely without any question. Our
case is, we are called to give obedience to Superiors, but creatures; and that
in such things which concern God immediately; concerning which the Lord has
given us Commandments, to which all Superiors are as strictly bound, as that
King was to Gods command. Shall not we then first try whether Creatures
commands agree with the Creators commands? must not obedience to the Potter
take place of obedience to the potsheard? if not, then Ephraim did well when he
willingly obeyed the command of Jeroboam, Hos. 5.11. and Israel did well, 2
King. 17.8. in obeying the statutes of their Kings. Whence in matters of God we
are bound to try all things; though the Commands be not sub codem gradu, yet if
we suspect them to be sub codem genere, let us have leave to examine. But in
short, were it not for God, we could with as much ease give obedience to men's
commands as you can. But this instance is against the Bishop.

2. If there be a Betterness, and we deny to give it to God, then give us leave
to take heed of the curse, Mal. 1.14.

Another common saying is this: All your conceived prayers are Forms to us:
Ergo, these Forms are lawful.

Ans. So is every man's Sermon; a man may make one Sermon, and in that
comprehend all that is requisite to a man's Salvation; but if a man should only
read that Sermon every Lords day, you would discern a difference between this
Form, and the Sermons you hear daily, and think him worthy to be cast out of
his Ministry. All men's speeches are but Forms in your sense.

2ly, Therefore you do but Ludere Homonymia in the word Form. In every effect
there must be a Form, though hard to find out. But Prayers composed of
Confessions, Petitions, etc. in such syllables, words, sentences, to which men
are tied up in the Worship of God, this is the Form in question. I grant by
these, your Prayers differ from others, and so you make a formal difference. So
we can allow there will be Forms in every man's Prayer.

3ly. A man that improveth the gift which Christ has given him, resting upon
the promise of the Spirit to help his Infirmities, he does as he ought. Let his
Prayers seem what they will to you, they are not Forms according to the
question, he is not tied up to syllables, but has his liberty to vary
according to the subject matter before him, Occuring Providence, and spirits
assistance.

The Scripture grounds which have made me judge this unlawful, are these.

1. That Text, Ephesians. 4 8, 11, 12. Christ when he ascended, gave gifts unto
men, v. 8. and these men amongst others are Pastors and Teachers, v. 11. the
end of these gifts and officers, For the perfecting of the Saints, etc. v. 12.
True indeed these gifts differ very much in men. So the 7th. v. tells us, But
unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. But though the measure differ, yet so much is given to every Pastor and
Teacher, let him but be saithful in the improvement of it, as shall serve the
end Christ intended. Thus Romans 12.6. Having gifts, etc.

I am sure among these gifts the gift of Prayer is one so requisite in a
Minister, and so common to all true Christians, yea to Hypocrites. But this
practice renders Christ's act but various, and crosses him in what he did, and
does in giving gifts; for though he does give them, they must not use them, nor
improve them; why then did he purchase them, and give them? it seems he gave
gifts, to one or two in a Nation (composing of Prayers is not the work of a
multitude), to compose Prayers, and these must be imposed on all the Ministers
in a Nation, with a stamp of Authority; though Christ has given gifts to all
his Ministers, and many of them as able, and more able than are the Composers
and Imposers; but their gift must lie dormant, they are tied up to words. It
was a silly answer he gave, They may use their gifts at home. The Text confutes
him.

2ly. That Command, 2 Timothy 2.2. that Timothy look to it, that those whom he
admits into the Ministry, be faithful men, and able to teach others; is any man
so absurd to think that an ability to pray for others is not included;
remembering 1 Timothy 2.1. Act. 6.4. and a gift so common to all Christians? But
this crosses the Command; for though they be never so able to pray, they shall
not use their gift or ability, but be tied up to other men's words and
syllables. Why not before Sermons, as before Sacraments? give us a Text. But
your own party think even those prayers are taken away, or wish they were, even
before Sermon.

3ly. As Christ purchases and gives gifts, and requires gifts, ability in
those whom he calls to his work, so no doubt but he will require an account of
the use and improvement of those gifts. That Ministerial gifts are comprehended
in the Talents given forth, Mat. 25.15. I think no understanding Divine will
deny; in the 19 v. he will reckon with them. What account then shall we give
for this, when one Talent we neglected, contenting our selves merely with other
men's words?

4ly. It renders the promise of the assistance of the Spirit in prayer, Romans
8.26. but vain in great part. The Spirit in prayer helps our Infirmities, not
only in the manner of our prayer, but even in the matter of our prayer; the
(...), for so are the words (...) the Quid oremus, this infirmity the Spirit
helps; but now you will spare the Spirit that trouble, for the (...), the
things and words are all set down to a syllable.

Obj. The Fr. Deb. (falsely so called, for neither Author nor Book answer the
title) part 1. p. 88. tells us, The Spirit of God does not now suggest to any
of us when we pray the very matter and words which we utter.

Ans. 1. That the Spirit suggesteth All the words and matter, I easily deny;
but that the Spirit does help his people in the very matter of their prayers,
the (...), I must own it, or give the lie to the Text.

2. Let me appeal to the experience of praying Christians, Ministers and
others; when we have been called forth in our Ministerial work, or at other
times to pray; that was the work lay before us: when our hearts have been
oppressed with some temptation, our spirits quite down, dead, and flat; the
thoughts of our duty a terror to us, because we found no ability to it; we
could not tell what-to say unto the Lord, we wanted words, we wanted hearts, we
wanted every thing, but to our work we must go, we could not avoid it. Well,
when we have been entered into our work, have we not found a supply afforded,
our tongues untyed, our hearts enlarged; words and matter have come flowing in;
such sentences, words and matter as were never in our minds before, yet very
apt and pertinent; melting and warming, that the best prayers ever we made have
been at such times, when we have gone most pressed with the sense of our own
inability? though it be not always so (the Spirit is a free agent), yet at
these times, whence could it come but from this good Spirit? Shall he lose his
glory?

3. I thought that praying men use beforehand to pray for that good Spirit,
for a presence of Grace, (as to the spiritual manner of our work) and a
presence of assistance as to the matter of our work, being conscious to our
selves of the truth of the sayings of that great Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.5. and 2.16.
how the Spirit inspired the Prophets, we enquire not; but that he helps our
Infirmities in our Duties, show me the sace of that Minister that fears the
Lord, who will deny it, and does not feel the want of him.

Having these Scripture-grounds, I go on to Arguments deduced also from
Scripture.

4. That practice which nourishes Ministers in their laziness and
sluggishness, is certainly an unlawful practice.

But this practice of Composing and Imposing these Forms, etc. according to the
question, do so: Ergo, Ministers duty is, to stir up the gifts of God which are
in them, 2 Timothy 1.6. but that duty now as to the gift of prayer is laid by.

The Fr. Debat. tells us, Part 1. page 124.
That some of the Nonconformists are for Liturgy, but they think it not
convenient for men of their parts and gifts:

Truly, Sir, when our hearts are in any trim becoming the duty of prayer, we
find it a very great hindrance to be tied up to the Forms of other men; we
cannot open our hearts, nor spread before the Lord our desires in other men's
conceptions; we cannot work with their tools. But when laziness, despondency,
and unbelief prevail, it is as convenient as may be for men of our sinful
tempers. I could tell you something of the experience of my own carnal heart as
to this point; but I find you are a person that jeer at the experiences of
Christians, and therefore let it alone.

5. We are to pray for spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14.1. I hope not only for
extraordinary gifts: Every good and perfect gift, Jam. 1.17. tells us whence it
comes. Then for a gift of Preaching, and a gift of Prayer. But why should we
pray for it, if when the Lord has given it, we must not use it, but be tied up
to other men's Forms?

6. If you may impose Forms of Prayer, then you may impose Forms of Preaching;
so leave us nothing but Forms of Prayer and Homilies to read; as indeed they
came in both together. We have Forms of Preaching in the Scripture, as you have
of Prayer; by what authority you take away one, you may take away the other.
Your Humane reasons that I have met with as yet, will as strongly argue for
Forms of Preaching, as of Prayer.

When this argument was urged in the Commencement-house, the Respondent yielded
it. But Dr. Fern being then Moderator, thought this was too gross, and so
denied the consequence, Because in Prayer we spoke to God, but in preaching to
men.

But the Doctors answer was invalid; for in prayer we represent, and are the
mouth of a people of Infirmities; we are but persons of Infirmities. Here
Infirmities are but like us, the Lord expects no other from us, Romans 8.26. The
Spirit helps our infirmities in prayer. But in Preaching we speak from God, we
come in his Authority, and require Faith and Obedience to what we preach,
therefore here we had need have a care what we speak; for now we come with,
Thus says the Lord.

7. Diversities of Gifts and Operations, are the Spirits work and glory, 1 Cor.
12.4.6. Diversities of Kinds, and of Degrees in those kinds; this diversity is
seen in the gift of Prayer, as well as in other gifts. As to have in one
Lord's Day many thousands of Ministers confessing of sins, petitioning for
mercies, pardon, purging, healing; praying also for Kings, etc. they all aim at
the same thing in their Prayers; but the words, sentences, whereby they express
the conceptions of their minds, and desires of their hearts, how various are
they? the same Spirit that gave this diversity of gifts, assists them in the
exercise of them. And it is his glory which is taken away, while these
thousands of Ministers are tied up to the same syllables in their Book.

This multi-form unity (if I may so call it, for here are various expressions,
different sentences, yet all tend to one and the same thing) has better ground
for it in Scripture than Uniformity in syllables.

8. What want of wisdom, care, or grace, yea want of all, this (with your
Ceremonies) charges upon the Apostles, all men may see; you pretend much
wisdom, and care of Gods worship in these things; were the Apostles so
defective in wisdom and care, that they could not foresee the usefulness of
these things in the Church, and appoint them as well as you. And that, when
there were the same reasons that you urge for them now, in their time? We are
built upon the foundations of the Prophets and Apostles; and take them to be as
wise as any of their followers.

To conclude, how honorable is this for the Ministry? I will take a boy of
eight years old, and teach him to read with a grave tone, a thing easily done,
and this boy shall be able to perform all your Ministerial Offices, excepting
Preaching, which he may easily procure once a month, and he at other times read
but Homilies. As did that Priest who was my Predecessor, (only one Minister for
a short time between us) that for fifty years could do no other but read his
Book, (except one Sermon, and that a strange one.) Yet he a Minister of the
Church of England, takes the maintenance, and lets the people provide a
Preacher at their charge, he contributing something, as that I suppose the Law
would force him.

Mr. Falkner I see labors much in giving us an account of the practice of the
Jewish Church, and the Christian Church.

For the Jewish-Church, whatever was their practice, it will not reach the
question. But however, how will Mr. Falkner give us infallible proof, that the
Jews in the purest time of their Church State, did compose Prayers, and imposed
them upon the Priests and Levites, who were able to officiate without them? If
he prove not this, (which he is never able to do) all that he has writ about
them, signifies nothing to the proof of the question, and all that labor is
but lost.

For the Christian Church:

1. Can Mr. Falkner give us an account infallibly of the practices of all the
Churches after Christ for the first four Centuries? are the Infallible records
of them all come to our hands? I thought we fell short abundantly of the
records of all the Churches, there might be many for ought he knows that used
no Forms.

2ly. It is possible that he may find several Pastors, or Bishops that did
compose their own Forms. But,

First, Can he prove they used only those Forms, and did vary at no time? as
was the practice of several of our old Divines, that had their Forms of Prayer
before Sermon, (but of their own composing) and varied after Sermon according
to the subject matter they had been Preaching upon. So did improve that gift
they had received from Christ before and after Sermon.

Secondly, He must prove they Imposed these Forms of theirs upon other
Ministers able to officiate without them, and tied them up to these syllables,
else he misses the question, and his labor is but lost there too. Neither of
these has Mr. Falkner proved.

The 23 Canon of the third Council of Carthage, which some write was Anno 395,
others 397, others 399, at which were 44 Bishops, and good Austin amongst them,
thus ordered:

No man shall use those Forms of Prayer which he has composed for himself,
till he has communicated them to more able Brethren. A Canon of a Council
carries very much conviction with it! what was the practice there abouts, more
than any thing Mr. Falkner has produced? By this it appears that the more able
Brethren did not first Compose the Prayers of those who were less able. 2ly.
Much less did they Impose them on those who were able, and it may be more able
than themselves. Mr. Carre wrote more warily than Mr. Falkner, who dares not
venture beyond twelve hundred years. This Canon interprets Tertullian's meaning
to be against Forms, better then Mr. Falkner.

How long after this, the question arose about Ambrose and Gregory's Liturgies,
and into what a corrupt state the Church was fallen, when Imposition began, Mr
Falkner knows well.

For that instance which Mr. Falkner brings p. 107. to prove Forms to be in use
from Constantine's composing of Forms of Prayer for his Soldiers; Whence he
thus argues:

It is not probable that Constantine the Emperor would have composed Godly
Prayers for the use of his Soldiers, if such Forms had not then been used in
the Christian Church.

Let us see the Logic of this, and how it proves the Question.

1. Constantine composed Godly prayers for his Soldiers: Ergo, Some one Bishop
or Bishops, or Ministers composed prayers for Gospel Ministers. How does this
follow?

Constantine did well; and it may argue some did use Forms, and who denies it?
But does it follow that Ministers did tie up themselves to Forms? I hope
Ministers and Soldiers in a proper sense differ.

2. Constantine did thus: Ergo, we may impose our Forms upon able Ministers.
How does this follow? nor would Constantine impose his Forms upon his Soldiers,
able to pray without them: Can Mr. Falkner prove it?

Once more. Had there then been Common Prayers composed to which the Church did
tie up her self, would they not have composed one or two prayers for times of
War? they did not deserve the name of Common Prayers, if that was omitted; and
if they had done it, Constantine we all know bore such respect and honor to
the Church, that he would have used those prayers before his own, not lay by
them, and compole others. As our King now commands the Liturgy of this Church
to be used in his Armies at Land and Sea; there being prayers for War, etc. So
that to me this instance of Mr. Falkner is rather against him.

To put an end to this first question: How lawful a Directory for Worship, and
some Forms of Prayer composed for the help of young Ministers at their first
coming into the Ministry Thus they who composed the Liturgy for the
French-Church in Francfort, say, Hae formulae serviunt tantum rudioribus,
nullius libertati praescribitur.
, who it may be at first are not so able in all offices to express themselves
in prayer, (...), before a multitude of people; how lawful, yea how useful this
may be, I do not deny; but for these Ministers to content themselves with these
Forms, and not labor to improve and increase their Talent, I think it is sin
against him, who has given gifts, who requires gifts of all those whom he
sends, and to whom they must give an account how they improved and stirred up
the gift he bestowed upon them; never did Christ send that man into his work,
upon whom he did not bestow a gift of Prayer.

How far the Congregational Divines have allowed of Forms of Prayer for some
Ministers, may be seen in that acute and learned Divine Mr. Norton of
New England, to which Book Mr. John Cotton, Dr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, and Mr.
Simpson, have prefixed their Epistles, in a high commendation of the Book.

For other particular Offices, I shall not follow Mr. Falkner, Respon. ad
Apollon. p. 137, etc.
for I had no aim at the Common Prayer Book more than other Forms; but if the
Imposing of Forms according to the question, can be proved from Divine Writ, I
should yield to several things he labors to justify; only in Baptism there
are four things I should desire satisfaction in, and more must be said then Mr.
Falkner has yet spoken.

CHAP. II.
WE come now to the second Question concerning Ceremonies. Quest. 2.
That the Church has power in circumstances of Divine Worship, I have before
easily yielded. The Independents have declared it, witness the aforesaid Mr.
Norton in the same Book, p. 133, who helps us a little to understand
circumstances. I shall only transcribe his own words: Adjuncta cultus, licet
non praescribuntur in particulari, determinantur tamen in generali, multiplici
ratione, (How near we and the Friendly Debate shall come, we shall see anon.)

1. Respectu materiae: non sunt cultus ipse, ne dum circumstantiae a cultu
separabiles sed inseparabiles, ut tempus locus.

2. Respectu finis: omnia ad aedificationem fiant, 1 Cor. 14.26.

3. Respectu modi: omnia decenter and ordine siant, 1 Cor. 14.40.

4. Ex natura ipsarum rerum, and circumstantiis occasionalibus; anne natura
quidem ipsa nos docet, 1 Cor. 11.14. Vbi agit Apostolus de virorum and
faeminarum decenti habitu, in conventibus publicis Ecclesiasticis.

Porro determinantur aliquo modo in particulari: nempe ut fiant tali modo, qui
circumstantiis omnibus consideratis, est maxim conveniens adificationi.

Si nullus sit error hominis in hac circumstantiarum determinatione
constituenda, constitutio illa, habenda est quasi simpliciter divina. Thus Mr.
Norton.

By this we may see the modesty of Dr. Goodman, that can tell his Reader so
confidently, that this is our grand Hypothesis, and the Characteristical
Doctrine of the Nonconformist party, That nothing is lawful in the service of
God but what is expressly prescribed in Scripture. The contrary to which he
might have read in this Author, and in others, I question not.

But whether Ceremonies be but such circumstances, or only circumstances, is
the question. Let me state the question.

The Question concerning Ceremonies stated.

Q. Whether Man may institute Doctrinal-ceremonies, (or means for a spiritual
end) impose them upon the Church, annex them to Gods own worship, yea so, that
without the use of these, God must have no public worship performed to him?

That this is the true state of the Question, observe the Preface to the
Ceremonies in the Common Prayer Book, and the practices of men.

They tell us in the Preface, The Ceremonies they have retained, are not dark
and dumb ceremonies, but are so set forth, that every man may understand what
they mean, and to what they serve, and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind
of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special
signification, whereby he might be edified.

Hence we may observe: 1. Man owes Duty to God; this is expressed. 2ly. Because
the wise God has not ordained means enough to put us in mind of this our duty
to him by his Command, Threats, Promises, and his Ceremonies in both the
Sacraments, men will institute Ceremonies to signify and represent to us this
our duty to him; this is plain; for it is expressed to be the end of these
Ceremonies.

3ly. These Ceremonies are so clear, point out and speak so plainly (not dark
nor dumb) our duty, that any man may understand what duty or grace they
signify.

4ly. Whereas our minds are dull to our duty, these Ceremonies help to stir up
our dull minds to our Duty; and so stirring up, they help to edify us.

These things are clear in the words of the Preface, no denying them; and in
this they speak more, and commend more their Ceremonies, than ever the great
God did speak of his.

When I have urged the Conformists with these words, they would fly off from
them; what care they for the Preface! But in so doing, do they show themselves
rational men? does any wise man read a Law or Statute of men, and not look into
the scope of the Law, the Preface to the Statute, so understand the mind and
aim of the Legislators? Do they show themselves such Christians as they ought
to be, by shutting the window for fear light should shine in to hinder them
from what they are resolved to do? Let the Conformists consider it.

To proceed: 2. That these Ceremonies are imposed upon the Church, and annexed
to Gods own worship, is so visible, that there needs no more words about it.

3. That they are so annexed, as without these God must have no public worship.

Witness, first, Bartholomew-day, upon which day so many hundred Ministers were
turned out from their public worshipping of God, because they would not
subscribe to them.

2ly. Witness the Parish where I was Minister (and diverse others) where for
several weeks, yea months, the Church-doors were shut up, God had no public
worship, because I would not conform to these Inventions.

3ly. Witness a Parish in Suffolk before the unhappy Wars began, while Bishop
Wren there Domineered, because there was no Surplice in the Church, the
Church-doors were shut up two Lords-days, no public worship performed to God
until they got a Surplice to annex to his Worship.

So that the stating of the Question cannot be denied. Now let the Reader
observe that worthy Mr. Falkner, and tell me which argument of his from
Scripture concludes the question.

If it were no more but the first part, I thought it had been only in his power
to institute means to a spiritual end, and impose them on his Church, who is
able to make a connection between the means and the end. But it seems men's
Ceremonies are so clear, bright, and speak so plain (being not dark nor dumb,
as they say) that they can teach men, and help them on to their duty, and
spiritual ends, without the Spirit of God; or else the Spirit of God must
truckle and come down, and make use of their means, because they have appointed
them, which I am sure he hates.

Do Kings stand upon their Prerogatives? shall any man dare to set his own
Image upon Copper to have it pass for a farthing in a Commonwealth? and yet
shall men be so bold to set their stamp or institution upon a ceremony, as a
means to a spiritual end, impose this upon the Church? What is this but to
incroach upon Gods Prerogative? will he not require it?

But so to annex them to Divine worship, that God shall have no worship without
them; I wonder how such thoughts could enter into the hearts of such men as did
own the true God, and believed him to be a jealous God, and the Holy Scriptures
the Law of that God.

Let me proceed to the further clearing of the Question!

First, These Ceremonies are humane Institutions, depending only upon the will
and pleasure of man. So that all natural Ceremonies, such as are found among
those that have nothing but the light of Nature to instruct them, as lifting up
the eyes, or hands: Bowing of the knees in prayer, etc. found among Heathen:
These are excluded this question.

For these Ceremonies in the question have nothing but some particular men's
wills for their ground.

2ly. These Ceremonies have an Ordained signification; though the things in
themselves may have some aptness to signify something, yet they do not
actually signify, without the Ordination and Institution of man.

As in Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, though there was some aptness in the
Elements to signify, yet they did not actually signify till the Ordination
and Institution of Christ.

Such was the washing of the hands, De Oratione.
and putting off the Cloak before Prayer in Tertullian's time, which he charges
with superstition.

Such was the girding of their garments about their loins by the Priests in
France in Divine Worship: Carang. p. 150.
Concerning which Pope Caelestinus the first, wrote an Epistle to the Bishops
in France, charging the Priests with superstition; telling them they might as
well hold a burning light, and a staff in their hands, these having their
mysteries and signification as clear as the other. For as in the girding of the
loins, chastity; so in the staff your Pastoral Government; In the
Light-candles, the light of good works shining before men are held forth; yet
Caelestinus reproves them, and charges superstition upon them: I am sure then
these deserve the same.

Things that signify by civil custom, as the vail did the Woman's subjection, 1
Cor. 11. in those times, have no place in this question; the vail was in use
many years, even among Heathens, before Christ was incarnate.

3ly. These Ceremonies are ordained to signify some spiritual duty we owe unto
God.

4ly. They are means, helps, to our spiritual edification; being very apt to
stir up our minds to our duty.

5ly. Lastly, they are appropriated to Divine Worship: yea so, that God shall
have no worship if these be not admitted.

Out of this we may make a description of a Ceremony of the Church of England.

It is an outward sign ordained by men in the time of Divine worship, to
signify some special grace or duty we owe to God; unto the performance of
which, and our edification in so doing, this outward sign is a mean; by its
special signification and aptness to stir up our dull minds.

Before I proceed, I observe Mr. Falkner brings many quotations out of
antiqutiy, to strengthen his discourse about Ceremonies, and with these many
are taken; but for my part I weigh them not at all, they signify nothing to
me. For the Spirit foretold, Apoc. 17.1. there should be a great Whore, etc.
That the Whore there mentioned, is the Pontifician or Papal power now at Rome;
or thus, Rome Chriftian, not Rome Ethnic, I am ready to prove it, if Mr. The
Whore got not into her Chair per saltum; but gradually, as the Churches grew
more corrupt.
Falkner deny it. That Whore then must be, else the Prophecy must be false,
which cannot be. But had all the Churches of Christ, and that of Rome, which
was once a chaste Spouse, kept close to the Rule of the Scriptures in Worship,
Government, and Doctrine, it had been impossible for that Whore ever to sit
there.

Hence the wise God leaves Ministers to their own wisdom, and they thought they
acted very wisely, when they added this and that in the worship of God; and
formed their Church Government according to the civil; and thus acting freely
and wisely as they thought, they brought about by degrees the Decree of God,
the Whore is set in her Chair as freely as if God had no Decree about her, nor
revealed any Prophecy concerning her. So that all Mr. Falkners and others
quotations, do but serve to show us how the Churches acted to bring that Whore
to her Chair, and so sulfil the Prophecy; suitable to what Bishop Downham said
of Traditions. See the Title page.

But though Mr. Falkner give us these Quotations, is he or any man now able to
give us a perfect account of the practice of All the Churches in those times?
some, it may be many, were far enough from these practices.

After Bartholomew-day our Church-doors being shut up for a long time, I went
to hear the Priest in the next Parish. He, I found, was teaching those few that
he had present (before there used to be a great Congregation) and grounding
them in conformity; and informed them, that as God was pleased to institute
significant Ceremonies in his Church, so the Church thought it meet to appoint
her Ceremonies.

When I heard this, that Text Zach. 13.7. came into my mind, where God speaking
of Christ, calls that man his Fellow. Indeed for him who is God-man, to be
called Gods Fellow, we can see a reason; but how dirty sinful men come to be
his Fellows in taking upon them to institute their Ceremonies in his Church,
because he had done so, I could not understand the reason of this.

Bishop Davenant on Col. 2.20. speaks notably to this point; it is too long to
transcribe all: The sum is this:

If you be free from the Rites that God did prescribe, then are you free from
the Traditions of men: It is a most wicked thing they should impose this yoke
upon you, and you are most foolish to submit your necks to it. For God would
not have abolished the Ceremonial Law instituted by himself, that a new one may
be invented by men.

So he goes on more fully than I transcribe; though still he would have
Ceremonies for Decency and Order. But this is not the state of the Question,
for the Preface tells us other things, wherefore these Ceremonies are invented
and imposed. Yet that of Decency will not serve the turn: of which more
presently.

But to return to that Priest who was thus instructing his people; the truth of
what he said, and what is now in practice, you may see in this Parallel.

1st. God takes things indifferent in their own nature, and ordains them to
signify some spiritual grace, or duty of man toward God.

This cannot be denied of seve ral Ceremonies under the Law.

2ly. God appropriates these to his own Worship; the Priests must put off their
garments when the Worship is ended.

3ly. Gods Ceremonies, though they had some aptness to signify, yet did not
actually signify, but by his Institution.

4ly. Gods Ceremonies, though in their own nature Indifferent, yet being
commanded by God, are now necessary.

5ly. Gods Ceremonies were so instituted, that no Priest must dare to minister
without them, Exodus 28.43.

6ly. God punishes the Priests, and that severely, if they observe not his
Ceremonies, Exodus 28.43.

1st. Man takes things indifferent in their own nature, and ordains them to
signify some spiritual grace, or duty of man which he ows to God.

2ly, Man appropriates his Religious, Doctrinal Ceremonies, to the Worship of
God, and there only used.

3ly. Man's Ceremonies, though they had some apmess to signify, did not
actually signify, but by his Institution.

4ly. Man's Ceremonies, though in their own nature indifferent, yet being
commanded by humane Authority, are now necessary. This is their language.

5ly. Man's Ceremonies are so instituted, that no Minister shall perform the
Worship of God without them. God shall have no Worship without man's Ceremonies.

6ly. Man punishes the Ministers of the Gospel severely for not observing his
Ceremonies; Casting them out of the Lords work; spoiling of their goods;
Imprisonments, Excommunications, etc.

Thus Man runs even with God; but if Mr. Carre gives us the true notation of
Superstition, that which is supra-statutum; if here be not superstition and
very great boldness with God, I am much mistaken.

Mr. Falkner once or twice tells us, though he allows such Ceremonies, yet by
no means will allow too many, for then they would be burdensome.

But, Sir, if your Ceremonies have such a virtue in them to stir up our dull
minds to our duty toward God, where there is one, I pray give us ten, our
hearts are dull enough, and we want helps, if these indeed be helps.

He tells us p 419. That all Ecclesiastical Constitutions must be in themselves
certainly lawful.

By lawful I hope you mean agreeable to the Law of God; make but this good, and
they shall certainly be obeyed. But this is the thing we much desire, which Law
of God do these agree with? I see and hear enough of the 1 Cor. 14. ult. but
that this Text will warrant Ceremonies thus instituted by men in the Worship of
God, I must see and hear more than ever I saw or heard to this day.

Bellarmine and Vasquez, I see, make much use of this Text for all their Popish
Trinkets; and Bellarmine tells us, that Holy garments, lighting of Wax-candles,
and their other Ceremonies, may be as well proved from this Text, as bowing the
knee in Prayer. But the Jesuit wanted a Candle here I am sure.

I have often wondered how men of Learning, that had read over the 1 1th and
the 14th Chap. of this Epistle, where we may plainly see what the Apostle
points at, by his reproving the undecency and disorder in their Congregation,
should make this Text a ground to set up humane Ceremonies of Doctrinal or
Moral signification, in the House and Worship of God.

I shall add but a sew words:

1. Decency and Order are no spiritual graces; for though the holiness and
majesty of the Worship of God, is in some measure violated without them; yet
they are in themselves but external circumstances, common to Civil actions,
Civil Courts and Societies, where undecency and disorder are blamed, and must
be avoided, as well as in the Worship of God.

2ly. Come to Decency, how they serve for Decency I know not. I think light of
Scripture, light of Nature, and common approved Civil custom should be rules
for Decency, not men's bare wills. For then some men will appoint such
Ceremonies of such a color, and such a Form; and he says the worship of God
cannot be decently performed without them. Another appoints Ceremonies of a
contrary color, and different Form, and says the Worship cannot be performed
decently without them. So many Heads and Wills, so many Rules for Decency,
that we shall never know when the Worship of God is performed decently. For the
Woman to be veiled, as the note of her subjection, was the civil custom before
the Worship of God was known in Corinth; for the woman now to lay it by, was
undecent.

3ly. That is decent, the contrary to which is undecens; but for a Minister to
pray without a Surplice is not undecent. You know how many foreign Churches
will not use it; what then? is the Worship of God therefore performed
undecently in all those Churches? Nay, appeal to your own Sons; the chief
Gentleman in my Parish, and a Son of your Church told me, I think you are as
decent and more decent in your Gown and Cassock, than you are in a Surplice. I
have spoken with several Ministers, Conformists, and they all tell me, they
would not care if they were all thrown out of the Church; only they are
commanded, therefore they use them. But were they such things as without which
the Worship could not be decently performed, they would not speak so slightly
of them, and wish them thrown out; they are men of reason, fit to judge of
decency.

4ly. Decency is of necessity, it must be; the command and reason for it are
clear; then we must have a necessity put upon these, if Worship cannot be
decently performed without them.

5ly. Decency is as necessary in the Pulpit, as in the Desk; I hope there is
the Worship of God in Prayer and Preaching as well as in the Desk; but always I
saw the Surplice put off, when the Minister ascends the Pulpit, unless a
Sacrament were to be administered.

6ly. Decency is necessary in our Family Worship, must we then have a peculiar
garment to put on when we pray in our Families?

7ly. They cannot be used to signify Decency; for the thing signified by any
outward sign or ceremony, does not come into my eye, but my understanding; but
if Decency lie in the whiteness and fineness of the Linen, I see it with my
eye.

As for Order, I know not how these help here; what disorder there was in the
Church of Corinth, Chap. 11.33, 34. declares; and what disorder among the
Prophets is intimated Chap. 14.33. there was very great reason for this Rule;
but I hope very good Order may be in the Church without a Surplice, or Cross,
or Kneeling.

Mr. Falkner tells us, p. 391. that the Surplice properly signifies the
reverence we owe to God, and the high esteem we have of his Ordinances. This
Text then for Decency must be laid by.

The next Text I find in Mr. Carre, is 1 King. 8.64 Solomon's Altar, For which
he had no word.

A. This is Bellarmine's also, who joins Jacob's new Ceremony, Genesis 28.18. but
yet says, Dee quidem impellente, sed non express mandante, novam Ceremoniam
excogitavit; that is sufficient, but for this of Solomon, Bishop Hall says it
was by command and instinct from God. Diodati, that he was divinely inspired.

I would have added more, but Mr. Falkner lays this extraordinary case by as
not cogent, p. 309.

Mr. Carre's next, They had no command for building of Synagogues.

I answer, But they had commands for their holy Convocations on the Sabbath
day, Levit. 23.3. Place must be a necessary circumstance, they must meet some
where. Levit. 26.31. God threatens their Sanctuaries in the Plural number; some
Hebrews interpret Synagogues. Hence Psalm. 74.4, 8. they burnt All the
Synagogues. The Temple is mentioned distinct, v. 7. Sanctuary, in the singular
number. This before their last Captivity; it may well refer to the Babylonish,
not to Antiochus.

Mr. Palkner, p. 311, as I see Mr. Carre and Bishop Morley in his Letter
against Mr. Baxter, and all our Conformists, make use of Christ's discumbing at
the Passover, to show Christ his conformity to the Jewish customs, departing
therein from the first Institution. Bishop Morl. page 29.
words are these: It is certain that Christ and his Disciples sat at the
Passover, and this no doubt was according to the Jewish Church at that time;
but it is as certain that this was not the manner according to the first
institution, which was to eat it standing. Read Exodus 12.11. thus he proves we
ought to kneel at the Sacrament, though Christ and his Apostles sat.

Answ. Twice we have the word certain, and it is certain there is no such word
as standing in the Text, which I have read several times, as he bids us.
Harmon. c. 129.
Jansenius says, they might have their loins girt, feet shod, staff in hand,
and yet sit, and sitting at that time might be their manner as he thinks from
Genesis 43.33. Surely the Jews did not tear the meat from the bones like dogs; how
then they could hold their staves in their hands, and cut their meat when they
were in haste, I cannot well tell

2ly. It is very observable that the Jesuits, Maldon. and a Lapide, and Gerhard
the Lutheran, and the Calvinists abroad, are more wary what they write
concerning Christ, than are our English Conformists; for they all conclude that
Christ kept the Passover according to the Law, not Jewish customs. If Josiah
gave such charge, 2 King. 23.21. That the Passover be kept as it was written in
the Book of the Covenant; Shall Christ come short of Josiah? Hence the Jesuit a
Lapide agrees with Gerhard and Calvin, that Christ eat the Passover standing,
but his discumbing was at the other Supper.

3ly. Most of the Learned that I see, as Jun. Tremel. Rivet, Beza, Scaliger,
Paraeus, Piscator, Grotius, Ainsworth, Diodati, etc. do all agree, that God
appointed the gesture of standing; only for that first Supper in Egypt, as all
the other circumstances noted in Exodus 12.11. all setting forth persons in
haste, but were never used after, when they came to rest in Canaan. If they did
so. I doubt not but it was according to the mind of God; but indeed there is no
gesture mentioned in the Law that I read of. Nor shall all the Rabinical men in
the world make me believe that Christ would depart from the Institution of God,
to conform to any Jewish custom; must we needs cast a blot upon Christ, to
justify our own inventions?

I know no man that makes sitting essential to a Sacrament, as Mr. Falkner
supposes, p. 474. and as strange is his next supposition of a Feast without
Bread or Wine, (or Ale or Beer with us.) For our parts, it is all one to us, sit
or kneel; but that we find as it was a Supper, so it was a Supper-gesture
Christ used with his Apostles, there is no other gesture recorded; what gesture
our Lord used when he blessed the Elements, I do not inquire, we stand or kneel
in Prayer; but the Text says, Mark 14.18. They sat and eat at his own Supper,
as well as at the Passover; for ought I can read the Scripture mentions this
gesture only at his eating. If you can find any Evangelist speak otherwise,
name him. I doubt not, were there any such controversy or question among the
Mahumetans, and their Alcoran did speak but so much for one side, as our Bible
does in this, they would give so much honor to their Alcoran to determine the
question on that side which it did most favor; but it seems we cannot give
that honor to our Holy Bible, as the Turk will to his Alcoran.

2ly. It is all one to us to sit or kneel; one gesture is as easy as the
other. Till Transubstantiation was hatching, kneeling was not commonly known in
the Church, but for some time of the year it was forbidden; much less was it
contended for: and such punishments inflicted upon them who refuse it, as
amongst us. The Popish party blame us for kneeling, denying their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

3ly. That your Kneelers worship Christ in and by the Elements, the great
contenders for kneeling have confessed, Page 167.
as the Author of the dispute against English Popish Ceremonies, have shown out
of Dr. Burgess, Dr. Morton, and Paybody the Bishop of Edinburgh, Archbishop of
St. Andrews, upon which he undertakes to prove that kneeling in the act of
receiving the Lords Supper is Idolatrous.

Mr. Nichols urged the same, Treasure out of Rubbish, p. 65. See more there.
that kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper, being a bodily
religious adoration of God before a creature, with respect unto it, having no
special allowance from God, was unlawful; when this was urged before Bishop
Morton, he found more favor from the Bishop than we can.

4ly. Reverence in Gods worship we do commend as much as any. I wish sometimes
that which men call Reverence be not Idolatry. But was David such an irreverent
person, when he sat before the Lord in Prayer, 2 Samuel 7.18, 27. all the
Versions hold to the word sat, and that at this time when his heart was
enlarged from the sense of Gods love. Cannot I pray reverently, when I lie upon
my bed? and may we not as reverently receive the signs of the Lords body and
blood, while we sit at his Supper? Cannot we know our own hearts? Who more
profane in their conversation, and despisers of the commands of Christ, than
most of these, who can kneel at Sacraments? Upon the same ground, i.e.
Reverence, the Church of Rome will not put the Bread in the Sacrament into the
peoples hands (though Maldonate grants for a long time the Church did so) but
into their mouths forsooth, Multo plus habet reverentiae, Mat. 26.26.

But it is far from my intention to produce any new arguments against these
Ceremonies, when there are so many produced by Dr. Ames Didochevius, and diverse
others. It is very observable what Mr. Schol. and pract. Divin. 2 par. p. 93,
94.
Jeans an acute Schoolman and Conformist in former times, who censured the
Nonconformists as sharply as any, and wrote against them, while he had read but
one side, as he says, and was a stranger to what the Nonconformists could say
for themselves, their adversaries representing their objections and answers so
weak, and ridiculous) has left upon record. When the Parliament began, he
intended to write a full vindication of the Discipline and Ceremonies of the
then Church of England, to which end he read all such Books of the
Nonconformists as he could procure: Upon the perusal of them, says he, I soon
found that their adversaries most disingenuously misrepresented all that they
said; that they refused to join issue with them in the state of the question;
that they came not up to an ordinary grapple with them with their Arguments;
and that they seldom regularly replied unto the solutions which were given to
their objections; and this (says he) quickly produced an alteration in my
judgment, and I believe it will do so too in all that will make such an
impartial search into the matter as I have done.

This is the ingenuous confession of that learned man, making excuse for what
he had written against the Nonconformists.

I shall shut up this with the judgment of the learned and pious Whitaker, as
I see him quoted, by Maccovius upon this question.

Q. Theol. loc. Q. 43.
Whether when we receive the Lords Supper, should we kneel, stand or fit?

A. Respondet Whitakerus, says Maccovius, to kneel does not only exclude the
Rites of the Institution, but does much violate the second Commandment
concerning shunning Idolatry.

To stand about the Lords-Table, does partake of the Rites, and detracts
nothing from the Institution.

But to partake, sitting is the most convenient, because by this neither are
the rites of Institution violated; nor does it attract danger of superstition,
or Idolatry; but this gesture is commended by the example of Christ himself in
the first Institution, and of the Apostles after the Institution. Thus he; with
whom Maccovius agrees.

Before I go any further, let me make use of one thing I meet with in the Fr.
Debate, part 2d. page 397, 399. this Author finding fault with us, because we
charge these Ceremonies, as being additions to the word of God, contrary to the
command, Deuteronomy. 12.32. (yea, Sir, I own the argument) he answers us: These
words, says he, from the old separate Mr. Ainsworth, you restrain to worship,
when as the Text speaks of the whole Law. v. 1. Judicial as well; but the Jews
never thought that no particular Law might be made agreeable to the general
Law. And again, p. 421. To save Christian Liberty, (says he) in matters of
worship, Gods Law has only given us general rules, whereby things are to be
ordered in the Church; according to which our Governors are to make particular
Laws, and we are to obey them.

I answer, as to Mr. Ainsworth, whatever were some of his private opinions, his
learning and piety command respect. Whether the Judicial Law be there included,
I now list not to examine. This you have affirmed.

1. There are some general rules which the Lord has prescribed in his word, or
general Laws.

2ly. Our Governors may make particular Laws.

3ly. But those particular Laws must be according to, and agreeable with (both
which words you have used) the general Law of God.

As when men cut little Creeks to bring water to a place, they let in the water
in the great River into these lesser Creeks. Page 61.
Dr. Templer's similitude of gold being beaten out, aims at this. Now let
Conformity stand or fall, according to this saying of our adversary.

1. Then produce you that general Law of God, wherein he gives liberty in
general to ordinary Ministers in his Church, to compose and impose their Forms
of prayer upon all his other Ministers whom he has given gifts sufficient for
that office, and tie them up to their Forms and syllables in their
Administrations. Upon this general Law your Church in England have made your
particular Law, and imposed your Forms. The French Church have made their
particular Laws, and imposed their Forms. The Dutch theirs; and so on. I pray,
Sir, keep to the state of the question.

2ly. Produce the general Law, where God has given men that power to invent,
institute, and adjoin Religious mystical Ceremonies to his worship. Upon which
general Law, Rome makes her particular Laws, and impose hers; the Church of
England makes her particular Laws, and imposes hers; the Lutherans make their
particular Laws, and impose theirs. (I hear but of few of other Protestant
Churches that have such Ceremonies, if any at all), and without these God shall
have no worship.

3. For the third, I know not whether this Author be of that mind, that God
has left us only a general Law for the Government of the Church, but appointed
no particular Form of Government, as the learned Dr. Stillingfleet has
asserted.

But for the two former we expect this Author to tell us where we shall find
those two general Laws.

That common Evasion, Though these things be not according to the word, yet
they are not contrary to the word, will not serve the turn. Yea this Author
quite overthrows that distinction.

For he tell us, Our Governors particular Laws must be according to, and
agreeable to the general Law of God.

A Law is a positive thing, so are Governors particular Laws, then so must the
general Law be. To say not contrary to the word, what Law is this? Non ens is
no Law. How can these particular Laws be said to be according to the Law, and
agreeable with the Law, when no such Law can be found? If the Law can be found,
then that distinction is but vain.

Though this Author has said enough, yet because this distinction is so common
in their mouths; I will but add a few Scriptures in which we shall find an
injunction laid upon us, that in matters concerning God, our duty toward him,
we look that all things be according to his word.

The first Text is, col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy
and vain deceit, according (though we read after, that makes no difference,
(...) with an Accusative Case, secundum) to the Traditions of men; according to
the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ.

Expositors differ about those words, vain deceit: I shall not trouble my self
nor the Reader about them; but by Traditions of men, I see generally they
understand those superstitious customs which have only man's authority for their
institution, such as the Pharisaical Traditions. So Anselm, etc. but Baldwin,
Davenant, Beza, Gomarus, Diodati, apply them to the Popish worship.

What the rudiments of the world are, Gal. 4.9. explains. This is certain, the
troubles the Apostles met with in the Churches, arose from these three heads.
Philosophy, Superstitious Traditions, and Moses Law. Now all these are opposed
to Christ; if they were according to them, and not according to Christ, then
they were contrary to Christ.

The second Text, 1 Timothy 1.3. That they teach no other Doctrine: upon which
words Dr. Featly glosseth thus: Timothy was to forbid any to preach, not only
Doctrine that was contrary, but that which was beside that which the faithful
had received from the Apostles. And are not the things in question beside that
the faithful received from the Apostles?

The third Text, Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe what I have commanded
you. If he has commanded these things you impose, they shall be observed, but
not else. Thus ran the Apostles Commission; but we have found an art to
interline the Commission, and what is not expressly contrary to my command,
teach them to observe that also. This interlining was under a hedge; should an
Ambassador thus interline his Commission, it may cost him dear.

The Author of the Fr. Deb. here demands of us What command we have to take a
Text and gloss upon it? to pray before and after Sermon? to sing David's Psalms
in English Meeter.

I see this Author will play at small games rather than stand out; he will join
with the Quakers for an argument.

1st. But, Sir, remember first your own words, a general Law will help to serve
our turn as to Prayer. We have a command for it; the time when, left to our
prudence. We think when we are to preach the Word, it is a fit time now to
confess sins; to beg pardon for sins, that they may not stand in the way to
hinder Gods blessing; crave for his presence with us, and assistance of us in
our Preaching etc. so after Sermon to bless him for mercies, and to beg for his
watering of the seed sown, etc.

For a Text: Why did not this Author put the question to Christ, what command
he had to take a Text and gloss upon upon it, Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19. Also why
Ezra; or the Priests, Ezr. 8.8. take a Text, give the sense, and apply it? We
have a command to teach the word, 2 Timothy 4.2. To teach to observe what Christ
commanded, Mat. 28.20. Shall we not then take a portion out of that word? Shall
we not take that command, and open that word, first explain it to their
understandings, then apply it to their wills and affections, as does the
Apostle, Heb. 3. his Doctrinal part, in Chap. 4.1. the application of it: how
shall we show our selves Ministers of the Word, but this way? shall we take a
Text out of our own brains?

For Psalms: Why did you not ask me for a command to read the Psalms in
English? The Romish Priests will put this question: Is there not a command to
sing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs? Col. 3.16. Were not David's Psalms of
old commanded to be sung? 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and 35.15. and the authority we may
learn, 2 Samuel 23.1, 2, 3. The Jews sung then according to the Poetry of the
Hebrew Language; and some have observed several verses in David's Psalms run in
Rimes in the Hebrew. Our English Songs according to the course of our English
Poetry run in Meeter, so we sing in such verses as are suitable to our English
ears. If you will teach us to sing a better way, we will follow your way.

De metro Psalmorum testatur Josephus, L. 2 Antiq. Jud. cap. 14. and l. 7. cap.
12. and Hieronymus in Prefatione Chronici Eusebii, says Sobnius, Tom. 3. p. 68.

The fourth Text, Mat. 15.9. with Mark 7.7. In vain do they worship, teaching
for Doctrines the commandments of men.

To this Mr. Falkner answers, p. 361.

1. This Tradition did not refer to the order of the public Worship of God.

Ans. I hope it was never the worse for that; it is well they let the worship
of God alone, which you do not.

But says Mr. Falkner, The question between Christ and the Pharisees was,
whether it was to be admitted as a Doctrine, that eating with unwashed hands
defiles a man?

Ans. So the question between you and us is, Whether this be to be admitted for
a Doctrine, That men may institute Religious, doctrinal, or mystical
Ceremonies, and annex them to the worship of God? You teach this Doctrine first
as a general Law, and then you bring it into practice, by instituting and
commanding yours by a particular Law. I know not where you and they differ,
only they let Gods worship alone, you say, and you do not.

His second answer is, that Christ observed the Prudential Rules.

Answ. But, Sir, do you make Prudential Rules, and these Religious, mystical
ceremonies, all one? for what you have said of Christ at the Passover, I shall
add a little more to what I have said already; but because Christ sat in the
middle of the Doctors, as others sat, hearing and asking questions, Luke 2.46.
hence to argue Christ's conformity to Jewish religious mystical Ceremonies, is
very strange, for a man of your worth and learning.

At the end of that Section I see you condemn the Popish Ceremonies, Many of
them being Sacramental, and designed to be operative of grace, and spiritual
help

But I pray, Sir, do not you say as much of yours, when you tell us that yours
signify such spiritual duties, and have such an aptness in them to stir up our
dull minds to our duty, Treasure out of Rubbish, p 43.
and help to edify us?

And do not you make them Sacramental? It is one proper end of Sacraments
(says Mr. Cotton) by striking of the senses, by outward representative
Elements, to teach the understanding, help the memory, stir up the affections,
excite devotion. -- And after, The Scripture expresses the nature of a
Sacrament, rather under the name sign (than seal) which consists in the
Analogy which is betwixt a sign determined to signify, and the thing
signified. This is so true, that I have known Christians who not out of a
principle of cavilling, but from a desire to help their Faith in the use of the
Sacraments, that have questioned whether they were seals, and have wished for
other arguments than usually we give them, to help them in their doubts,
looking on them as not cogent that we give; but for signs, they questioned them
not. Thus in our Ceremonies, 1. Here are signs. 2. Here is a spiritual thing, a
duty we owe to God, signified by them. 3. These signs are not dark and dumb,
but so set forth that every man may understand what they mean or signify. 4.
They are apt means to stir up our dull minds to what they do signify, and help
to our edification. I think you speak plain enough.

There is as much given to them as was to Gods own Ceremonies, which did
signify spiritual graces and duties they owed to God. Yea something more. All
may understand what yours signify; and they are not dark nor dumb, but fit to
stir up dull minds.

That they contain external worship also in them, and so are as Bellarmine
says of them, (and these you took from the Papists), Ceremoniae sunt pars
quaedam cultus Divini.

Divine and true worship, I think may be thus described, It is some act
commanded by God, in which we do reverently acknowledge his excellency,
immediately serving, and having communion with him therein: whether that act be
such as we immediately offer up to him, (as Prayers, Sacrifices, etc.) or such
as we offer from God in his name unto his people, as Preaching and Sacraments,
etc.) some give other descriptions, but I think this will hold.

This Worship having the Authority and Command of God to warrant it, is true
Worship. If it has not, but only man's invention and authority, it may be
called Divine worship in one sense, but it is Willworship, superstition, and
false.

In teaching, is worship: In vain do they worship me, teaching, etc. Mat. 15.9.
It is me they pretend to worship, this was in teaching; but the worship was
vain.

God teaches us two ways: 1. By his Word. 2. By Signs. By the last the
Pharisees taught spiritual things by their washings; as God taught by his
washings in the Law, so do you teach us by your Ceremonies; and it seems very
lively. Now all actions whereby spiritual duties are taught in Gods solemn
worship, are acts whereby God is worshipped; and such acts are worship; as all
acts whereby he is obeyed, are obedience.

Some argue thus: Those external Ceremonies whose proper use is the honoring
of God, are external worship; but the Ceremonies in question are such: Ergo.
Others thus:

All external Ceremonies in their nature formally elicited from Religion, are
external worship; but such are the Ceremonies in question: Ergo, they are
external worship. So that Bellarmine spoke plainly and honestly, when he calls
them parts of Divine worship. Hence I see not how the distinctions Mr. Falkner
makes about significative signs, do help at all; but we are still as high as
God was, and plainly add to his word.

The Text in the Old Testament, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
I think no man so absurd to limit it only to that particular case in the 19th.
ver. but this is a standing Rule in all cases concerning God, and our duty to
him. According to this word, hence Bishop Hall thus Paraphraseth, If any man
speaks either without, or against this word, it is because he has not the
true light of grace and understanding in him. Apply this to both the Questions,
and tell us according to which word do they speak.

The last Texts, those famous Texts, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Prove. 30.6. and Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish. Addition speaks defect of wisdom in
the Lawgiver, that he is not wise enough to govern his Creatures, nor how to
provide for his own Worship, but we must supply the want of his with our
wisdom; and intrencheth also upon his Sovereignty.

To these Texts Mr. Carre, and Mr. Falkner, answer different ways: Mr. Carre,
p. 56. tells us, This we count superstition, supra statutum, to add any thing
to Gods Law, or to be too strict in tying our selves to more than God requires
of us. But foreseeing how this Text will be turned upon the things imposed, he
with the other Conformists plow with the Popish Heifers, using the same
distinctions that Vasquez, Bellarmine, Cor. a Lapide, used to defend their
fopperies.

There is a preserving and corrupting addition; a circumstantial and an
essential addition; the two last he condemns; i. e. the corrupting and
essential addition.

To which it is answered: 1. To your preserving addition; it is a corrupting
addition, because it is addition. Deny the Genus, and you deny the Species.
Addition is denied. Particular Laws exactly answering Gods general Law, are no
additions.

2ly. Find us such a distinction of detraction, or diminishing, and show us how
there may be a lawful detraction from the word. Addition and diminishing are
equally forbidden in the Text.

3ly. There is no preserving addition brought into the Worship of God, but
there is another wisdom and will brought in besides Gods: Mr. Carre tells us of
additions, the better to enforce the command, the better to perform the service
of God. We read of a betterness that does accede to the Worship of God by men's
inventions and additions; does not this reflect upon the Lawgiver, that he
has not sufficiently provided for his own Worship? Let but his Worship be
performed according to what is written, and there will be no want found of any
thing besides what is written.

4ly. No addition could so properly be called a preserving addition as that of
Vzzah's staying the Ark to preserve it from falling, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. who could
use this distinction better than he? De Gubern Dei. l. 6 p. 203.
but that would not save him. Upon which Salvian thus writes: Denique Oza ille
Levites Dei, quid contra mandatum coeleste fecit, quod vacillantem Arcam Domini
sustinere tentavit? nihil enim hinc erat lege praceptum, and statim dum
sustinebat extinctus est. Non quia ut videtur ad speciem, contumaci aliquid,
aut in officiosa saltem mente commiserit. sed ipso officio inofficiosus fuit,
qui injusta praesumpsit. Salvian knew well enough the Law about the carrying
the Ark; but in this case when the Ark is in danger of falling, what Law is
there, else Vzzah would not have touched it? He aims at this to prove that
there is nothing belongs to God ought to be esteemed light. Good intentions
here will not serve.

5ly The Pharisees in their washings, etc. did but signify that holiness,
purity, cleansing from sin, which God signified in the washings he commanded.
So they did but enforce the command, as Mr. Carre says.

For his second Distinction, circumstantial and essential addition: Essential
additions by no means he will admit, that is indeed against the Text. But,

1. Mr. Carre told us before, that Solomon built an Altar more than ever God
appointed. And Mr. Falkntr will tell us anon, that David would build a Temple
of his own head, and God never appointed it, they had no warrant for these, but
these were essential parts of the Ceremonial worship. By these then we may make
essential additions to the Worship of God; these were the highest pieces of the
Ceremonial worship, for the Altar sanctified the Sacrifice; and for the Temple
it is well known.

2ly. I cannot see how the Church can add any circumstances of her own creating
to the Worship of God. If she may make one new circumstance and add to the
Worship of God, she may make a thousand, and be changing every week if she
will, I know no word to forbid her.

But still I cannot see how Ceremonies, such as are in the question, can be but
circumstances. For,

1st. No circumstance has a mystical signification of any spiritual grace or
duty. If it has a spiritual signification, it is by some superadded Divine
Institution; then it cease to be a circumstance. Place in it self is a
circumstance, but such a place as the Temple, is more than a circumstance, it
is essential to Ceremonial-worship by a Divine Institution.

2ly. The Ceremonies of the Law which signified that purity, holiness, etc.
that ought to be in Saints, were not circumstances; and these do the same.
These Ceremonies imposed upon us are not circumstantial, but Doctrinal, and of
Moral signification.

3ly. Circumstances cannot well be said to be subject to circumstances, where
then shall we end? but mystical ceremonies are subject to time, place, order,
decency, etc.

4ly. Circumstances are common to civil actions, as place, time, order,
decency; but these Ceremonies are annexed only to the Worship of God.

5ly. Circumstances are necessary, inseparable from the Worship of God, as time
and place, order and decency ought to be; they are inseparable, virtute
praecepti; but these are separable, and of no necessity. Peter Lumbard puts no
necessity in the Popish Ceremonies, as you may clearly see in his inquiring
into the nature of Baptism, Lib. 4. D. 3. c. 1.

6ly. Circumstances depend not on the bare will of man; but these Ceremonies
depend wholly on man's will.

7ly. The ordering of circumstances in particular, is not determinable in the
Holy Scripture. I do not say what the infinite wisdom of God could have done;
but upon supposition of the bounds which God did set to his written word.
Circumstances are many, and so changeable, that to set down the ordering of
every particular circumstance that must occur in the Church and Worship of God
to the end of the world, would have hindered our Pocket Bibles. Individua sunt
Infinita. But for significant Ceremonies, all the Mosaical Ceremonies were set
down, to the pins of the Tabernacle; and if God had liked Ceremonies as we do,
he could have set down twice as many as Popery affords.

8ly. These mystical ceremonies are external worship, as I said before, but so
are not circumstances.

Mr. Falkner evades these Texts in Deuteronomy. 12, etc. telling us, as the Author of
the Er. Deb. that the Text concerned the Judicial Law as well. This I have
spoken to before.

Also he tells us, That diverse things referring to the worship of God, Page 360.
were allowably, under the Jewish dispensation, ordered as matters of decency
and expediency by humane prudence.

But, Sir, this reaches not our Question; we are inquiring for a warrant for
such Ceremonies as your Preface, and our Question from thence, treat of; else I
yielded before, that the Jews were not determined in every particular
circumstance. But M. Falkner refers us to a former Section, where he had
instanced in such things. At p. 311. I find there he begins,

First, With the discumbing gesture at the Passover, which they changed from
standing. To this I spoke before.

2ly. He instanceth in the white garments that the Levites did wear, 1 Chronicles.
15.27. For which there was no direction given in the word; yet the Scripture
speaks of the allowableness of these Levitical garments.

Answ. 1. But the Question is, Whether these Levitical garments were ordained
by men to signify a spiritual duty they owed to God, and were to stir up their
dull minds to their duty, and to edify them? If not, they reach not the
Question; but of this not a word in Scripture.

Sanctius (1 Samuel 2.) conceives, and others with him, that these were not holy
garments which Samuel while a child did wear, and David also wore when he
danced before the Ark, who was not of the Priests Order. And certainly they
knew the garments of the Levites to be according to the mind of God, else they
would not have dared to have used them, when God had so lately made a breach
for want of due order; they had ways to know Gods mind that we have not.

2. For the Levites.

1st. They were of the same Tribe with the Priests.

2ly. Their work was about the holy things of God, as was the Priests.

3ly. There was nothing determined about the apparel or garments of the Levites
by God, Numb. 8. neither for matter, whether linen or woollen; nor for the
color.

4ly. But yet black color was not, I conceive, allowable about the Temple
worship. The bread of Mourners, Hos. 9.4. was but unclean; hence the Text,
Deuteronomy. 26.14. and that of Aaron, Levit. 10.19. when there was such a cause of
mourning, did not eat. God required cheerfulness in his worship and service,
Deuteronomy. 12.7. Whiteness was the color that betokens cheerfulness in all sorts
of persons, Eccles. 9.8. Let thy garments be always white. We find a threatening
against the Chemarims, Zephan. 1.4. those black Priests, Atrati, because
clothed in black. So Schindl. Pagn. Buxtorf. Vatablis, Drusius, Jun. and
Tremel. God had appointed white in his Priests and Worship. Lay all these
together, and we may see good reason why the Levites chose white garments; and
so David partly for lightness, and the joy, now dancing before the Ark. So that
this instance does not yet prove the question. Besides, I do not see how the
carrying the Ark, or David's dancing were parts of Worship.

His third instance, the Altar of Witness made by the two Tribes.

But I know not how this reaches the case, for that was not intended with any
respect to Divine worship; the ten Tribes feared it, and sent their messengers
about it; but the two Tribes protested against it, they had no such intent,
Josh. 22.29. God forbid, etc. There was no worship, and our question is about
Religious humane Ceremonies, appropriated to Worship.

His fourth Instance, the Temple it self designed by David, and approved by
God, 1 King. 8.17, 18.

Ans. 1. If this be followed, then you will tell us that something essential to
the Worship of God may be invented by man (as I touched before) will you, Sir,
affirm it? I am sure the Temple was essential to their Worship.

2. Place is but a circumstance of worship; if the place were more splendid and
sumptuous, it was but a place still. But I pray did David intend to build a
place to have that mystical signification that the Temple had? prove this, I
pray, else you reach not the question; there is nothing of this appearing in
the Chapter. David was moved from the zeal he bare to the honor of God; the
want of this the Lord reproves, Hag. 1.4, 9.

3. David did ground his design upon Deuteronomy. 12.10. When he gives you rest from
all your enemies round about, etc. then there shall be a place which your God
shall choose. To which Text 2 Samuel 7.1. answers, When the King sat in his
house, and the Lord had given him rest round about from all his enemies, etc.
then David is thinking to prepare a place; so that David had ground for his
enterprise; only he was mistaken as to his enemies, for he had much War after
this, and that Solomon renders as one cause why he could not build the House, 1
King. 5.3. And in the 4th v. But now the Lord my God has given me rest on
every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent. So that
David and Solomon had respect to that Law.

4ly. I know no error in it, if I should say God also inspired David. God had a
great council, a decree of his to reveal to David, of building him a House, and
of Christ to come of him after the flesh, Romans 1.3. Act. 13.23. he puts David
upon it, (having also declared his purpose before in the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.10, 11.)
and takes occasion from this love of his to God, to open his love and decree
toward David, that God did inspire him.

Bradwardin does intimate, de cause. Dei, l. 1. c. 25. those words in the fifth
verse. Shall thou build me, etc. Diodati thinks to be words of admiration,
rather than reprehension. And the 7th. v. Spoke I word, etc. God had often said
in his Law, that he would choose himself a place, but had not expressed where or
when it should be; and therefore lovingly admonishes David to wait for this
expression. Thus Diodati. But this still intimates that David took the word
for his ground. Hence Psalm. 32.5. Until I find a place for the Lord. David
uses the same word which Moses does in Deuteronomy. 12.11.

His next Instance is in the Synagogue-worship, in which they were left in some
particulars to their own prudential determinations, which the Christian Church
is not. Instance is given in their Synagogal Officers, admitted by imposition
of hands, when neither their office and authority, nor their admission were
determined in the Scripture. For their Ordination by imposition of hands, this
he proves out of Mr. Seldom. For their power and office, he proves that Christ
owned it, Mat. 23.2, 3. Though the Scripture had determined nothing about it.

Ans. This, Sir, belongs to another question, viz. Whether in the Jewish Church
(and if there, then why not in the Christian Church) Christ did approve of any
Officers in the Church, that were not of Gods, but Humane appointment, to
preach his word Authoritatively? this is a very considerable question, but it is
not ours at this time; so that this is not ad idem.

2ly. Yet as to the thing it self: Imposition of hands upon men set apart to
office, was no Humane Invention; that, Sir, you know, it was Gods own
appointment. But whether all that taught in the Synagogues were first Officers.
2. And those that had only man's authority for th eir Institution: 3. And these
had admission by Imposition of hands. These are different questions, and here
we must have Scripture Light to convince us; as for Mr. Seldom, we regard him
not, nor Scaliger, whatever he says of our ignorance, which Quotation of yours
out of him, I observed well when I read him. We are upon things that concern
God; Humane Quotations, and so whatever you bring from Fathers and others, I
look on them as a Cipher; as the Cipher may stand, it signifies much, and as it
may stand, it signifies nothing. First give me a Scripture, then give me Humane
testimony suitable to it, and it signifies much. Yea, if there be a Scripture
not so clear and plain as some are, yet may fairly carry such a sense, and
there be not another Scripture that does plainly oppose that sense, here the
practice of the Churches next to the Apostles, and so long since, shall carry
me into that sense. Which I desire the Reader to consider and judge of my
opinion, because I shall make use of it afterward; but all men's opinions, and
Churches practices, without a Scripture, are but a Cipher before or without a
figure to me, they signify nothing. I know very well that Jews and Gentiles
too have a nature that is cross to God in every Commandment; our enmity will
not let any command escape, but even in his Instituted Worship where there is
the least temptation, there it will show it self, it is not handsome enough as
God appoints it, unless we like Apes may dress it. If Seldom and Scaliger could
have given us the practices of such a Church where this root of enmity was not,
then I should have listened to them very much.

But to the Argument:

1. That all those who did teach in the Synagogues were Officers thus
constituted, as Mr. Seldom tells us, I suppose Mr. Falkner will not affirmit;
the example of our Lord, Luke 4.16, 17, etc. so of Paul, Act. 13.15, 16. shows
the contrary. Grotius we can believe, for he speaks with the Scripture: De
Impor. p. 374
says he, Notandum in synagogis Judaicis unicuique exercitato in sacris
literis (erant autem ferme omnes, exceptis (...), Page 375.
qui mos hodie apud nos viget) concessum fuisse sacras Literas Interpretari.
Afterward he gives us the difference between the Interpreters of the Law in
the Synagogue, and of the Gospel in the Church: In synagoga docebant quotquot
(...), habebant (...), in Ecclesia, probati quique, and honorem testimonio
adopti ut Tertullianus loquitur, i.e. (...). So that according to him they were
not Ordained. The reasonof the difference he also gives thus: Not only because
the Preaching of the Gospel is of more moment than the expounding of the Law,
but because in the Christian Church the Preachers of the word are likewise
dispensers of the Sacraments, but the Masters of the Synagogues administered no
Sacraments, no not Circumcision. This is cross to Seldom. I shall yield to
Grotius, having Scripture on his side, the other not. All that teach in the
Christian Church are Ordained; not so in the Synagogue.

2ly. Weems, exp. Cer. Law, 122.
As to the Pharisees: all the Pharisees were not Teaching-Pharisees; not
Porushim but Parushim. Some were but Laick-Pharisees, as we may call them,
says VVeems. Now since all of them were not Teachers, and it is agreed by the
Learned that many of the Priests and Levites were Pharisees; and Gerhard proves
from several verses here, that these were such, no private persons, but persons
in Office; and he with Beza and Hammond ground this Text and Command of Christ
upon Numb. 11.16. they had Divine Institution.

3ly. Nor will we refuse to hear those who preach the Gospel soundly (as if
they expounded the Law truly, Christ would have them heard) though we judge
their Ordination mixed with corruption, or doubt whether they be rightly
called; their Ordination being questioned, either because some are Ordained by
such, who as such are no Officers of Christ; and others without Imposition of
hands.

4ly. Dr. Lightfoot understands this Chair de Cathedra Legislativa, and tells
us that Christ here asserts the Authority of the Magistrates, and exhorts to
the obedience of them in lawful things. And Grotius seems to incline this way;
and if so, this is not to the purpose.

His second Instance is, the habit of the Prophets; a rough or hairy garment.

Ans. But was this annexed and appropriated to Divine Worship? or was it that
garment they wore daily, where ever they went? so a Minister in his Gown and
Cassock, if you will make a civildistinction, I like it very well; but this
touches not the question; for the Garments in the Synagogal Assemblies, out of
Suetonius, we little regard them, if they were used for a Religious mystical
signification (which does not appear, and so reaches not the question); if so,
you may tell us of the Fact, but our question is, de Jure.

His third Instance is, from the decent gestures commanded and used in Nehem.
8. and chapter 9 Standing up, etc.

Ans. We like decent gestures very well; and if that were all, we will stand up
at the reading of the Law, of the Gospels and Epistles too; we shall make no
difference, being all Divinely inspired. Yea, if that will content you, and our
health will bear it, we will set uncovered too during the time of holy Worship;
which in these times is so much in practice, and expected, over it was in Queen
Elizabeth's time, though I do not like the ground of their uncovering; but the
52 Injunction shows it was their allowance and custom in Sermon-time to sit
covered; else why do the Injunction require that at the naming of Jesus, men
should uncover their heads? If they sat always uncovered, how could they
answer this?

His last Instance, is their adding of Baptism, or washing, to Circumcision,
initiating their Proselytes.

Ans. I have read indeed of such a practice taken up in the latter time of the
Jews, in imitation of John's Baptism; but still, Sir, we want one thing, and
this God approved of; how prove you that? quo jure? by what Divine warrant was
it done? If you intended to show us your reading, that is one thing; but if you
intended to convince us, you know this is not the way; for you do but prove the
Jews had as carnal hearts as we, unless you can show us that what they did in
Divine Worship was agreeable to that Rule, which is the Law to them, and to us,
by which we must all be judged.

Next, Mr. Falkner comes to Natural Worship, and shows their customs about an
Oath, which I shall take into consideration when I answer the Fr. Debate, where
I find an argument against us from hence.

His next, the Rites (as he calls them) of Memorial, Stones set up by Samuel,
Jacob, Joshua.

Ans. But how do these reach the question? If they at London will erect a
Monument that Posterity may know where that sore Judgment of God (as Samuels
was Mercy) in the deflagration of the City began. If Laban and Jacob will make
a heap of stones in the place where they swear, though it may be neither Laban
or Jacob ever came to the place again to see these stones, what are these to
our question? so that of Joshua; what signification of an Oath is there in a
stone lying on the ground? they may remember, that in this place Joshua made us
swear. The stone serves for a Witness that there was such a part of Worship
there celebrated. If Joshua had called men of other Nations to hear the
Covenant, and witness what they swear, what would you make of those witnesses
to force the question in hand?

The Stone was a witness on both sides, Josh. 24.27. for it has heard all the
words of the Lord which he spoke unto us; as well as of their engagement to
God. The Stone did not signify the Oath.

His next Instance is in the use of sackcloth and ashes, etc.

Ans. But were these invented among the Jews, and used by them only in a
Religious way, or were they common to others, Heathens as well as Jews, to show
by a civil custom their submissions, fear, sorrow they were under, lying low
before their superiors; or noting an afflicted state? The servants of Benhadad
come to Ahab with sackcloth on their loins, 1 King. 20.31, 32. these were no
Jews. The King of Nineveh, Jon. 3.8. cause men and beasts (more than we read of
among the Jews that I remember) to be clothed with Sackcloth. God threatens
Moab with Sackcloth, Jer. 48.37. The Prophet Joel in the name of God, Joel
1.13. calls to the Priests to lie in Sackcloth. Do but you show us as much for
the questions in hand, and we shall be satisfied.

When Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.19. put ashes on her head, was it upon a Religious
account? Who taught the Heathen King of Nineveh to sit in sackcloth and ashes?
Jon. 3.6. did the Church of the Jews, and he obeyed them? Still these conclude
not the question.

As for the indifferency of the things which Mr. Falkner next mentions, I shall
leave that, till I have considered his other Scripture-arguments, for that I
only regard.

He passes on to the New Testament, where I see Mr. Carre, Dr. Stilling fleet,
Mr. Falkner, and all of them agree in urging the Holy kiss, the Love Feasts;
and Dr. Stillingfleet adds the Deaconess, which are alterable Rites, though
Apostolical, and laid by, even by the Nonconformists.

But this still will not prove the question, unless you will do it thus: If we
may detract from the word, then we may add to the word (both are forbidden) but
you detract from the word. As indeed this is Omission, the other is positive.

But I pray, Sir, do not you argue from our sin (if we be guilty) to justify
yours. For if they be indeed of Apostolical Institution, we will take them all
up again.

For the Love Feasts, that they were of Apostolical Institution, especially as
joined to the Lord's Supper, I find nothing to persuade me to it. Feasting was a
civil custom for the maintaining of love, long before any of the Apostles were
born. The Apostle finds them in use, but 1 Cor. 11.22, 34. he finds fault with
them, and takes them away from the Lords Supper. Calvin and Beza both affirm
the same. If some Churches did retain them, yet not all. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
giving us an account how they performed the worship of God on the Lord's Day,
makes no mention of this, though he does of the Lord's Supper. And for Feasting
after Tertullian's fashion, if we administer at noon time; the poor
Nonconformists use to have the poor of the Church to dine with them. So that
this reaches not me.

So for Kissing, men kissing men, and women kissing women, which you say was
meant by their kissing, not men kissing women. This also was a civil custom a
thousand of years before any Apostle was born; how then this should be called
an Apostolical Constitution I cannot understand. Our civil custom is to give
the right hand, or the hand, and signifies the same that kissing does; the
Apostle modifies a civil custom of their own; and we stand obliged to the same
duty the Apostle intends in it, even Love without Dissimulation.

For the Deaconess, if it were indeed an office required in all Churches, I
think we have done ill to omit it. If the Council of Laodicea, Can. 11. did
remove the Deaconesses, as some think, we regard no such Councils. The Churches
of Bohemia did keep up that Office, as Comenius relates.

That it was an office, properly so called, I question; The Deaconess was not
ordained, as were all Church Officers, and that with Imposition of hands; they
who omit Imposition of hands, let them answer it. Danaeus says, Non tam fuit
munus hoc publicum quam subsidium aliquod a Diaconis quaesitum, she was a help
to the Deacon in such thing as were not comely for a Deacon to meddle in, if
the Sisters of the Church were sick. As to this point, in Churches rightly
constituted, the Deacon takes so much care of the sick, though poor, that as to
the Nurse, Food and Physic, there is no want, this I know by good experience.
2ly. Danaeus thinks they were helpful at their Love Feasts to wash, dress, etc.
this end is easily answered, they being removed. The third was in the
entertainment of strangers, washing of feet, as in those Countries was their
custom; but in our Countries, where there is no such custom, wearing shoos as
we do, and not so hot a Climate, and here all are Christians nomine tenus, that
end and use is laid by. The first use then only remains, which is answered as I
said before.

Dr. Stilling fleet, he tells us dipping in Baptism is out of practice.

Ans. It is but very lately then; a Gentleman told me he well remembered the
dipping of Infants; the Common Prayer Book does not lay it by, but that leaves
you to use it, or sprinkling. I thought Baptizing had been the command. Can
there be no Baptizing but by dipping? will he affirm it, that the Baptizing of
the three thousand in Act. 2. and the Jailer and his Family, Act. 16. was by
dipping? It is all one to me whether by dipping or pouring of water, Ezekiel.
36.25. What Mr. Falkner would gather from the praying and prophesying
uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.4. I know not, it is our practice he knows, though I have
seen a French Minister Preaching with his Hat on; would he have it that Paul
from a private spirit did give this Rule contrary to the practice of other
Churches who had used to pray and preach covered? For Order and Decency, which
Mr. Falkner mentions, I never opposed it; nor does this concern our question.

For the Decree mentioned in Act. 15 which Mr. Falkner produces, if that had
been well observed, much of our trouble might have been spared. The Apostles
and Elders, with the direction of the Holy Ghost, Imposed only things
necessary; that necessity was antecedaneous to the Decree, either necessary in
themselves, as abstaining from fornication, etc. or necessary by a positive Law
of God long in force, and which the weak believers could not understand to be
repealed, nor did most I believe of them so see it, till the Temple it self,
the Head of all was destroyed. The Apostle James at verse. 21. gives the reason,
Moses (says he) is read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day; to hear Blood so
often for bidden in Moses (yea this near to the seventh Command given to the
Sons of Noah, Genesis 9.4. which Laws if a Heathen did not observe he was not
permitted to live among the Israelites) and now to see the believing Gentiles
eating of blood, etc. what a horrible offense had this been, and hinderance to
the Gospel? Hence the things were first necessary, Ergo, the Decree; but not
necessary only because of the Decree. Blessed Austin speaks very well to these
Ceremonies, Epist. 19.

This is a good Rule for Imposers, Primum in uno quoque genere est mensura
reliquorum, Impose only necessary things.

For those who refuse to eat blood at this day from that Decree, I think they
err very much. Let them observe Levit. 17.11. the reason of the Command; and
tell me whether they deny the blood which makes atonement for our souls to be
shed.

That Decree then commanded no positive duty, as our questions do, but a
forbearance of some things in point of scandal, which God had forbidden.

The last Scripture I see Mr. Falkner mentions, is Christ his washing of Peter's
feet, a Jewish Paschal Rite.

Answ. As to the washing, being a thing in civil use in those Countries, and
not in ours, if the thing Christ intended in it to which we are strictly bound,
will not serve, though we use not to wash feet according to the mode of those
Countries, we will take up that also, rather than omit any of his Institutions.

But that Christ used it as a Jewish Paschal Rite, that is another question,
and brings me on to the consideration of an argument Mr. Carre and others out
of Scaliger make use of to prove Christ his Conformity to Jewish Ceremonies, as
Christ his dipping the sop in the Charoseth, a sauce they made. His washings,
etc.

Ans. Here would fall in several things to consider, but I must not meddle with
them.

As to this Sop, Grotius and Maldonate deny that Christ dipped the Sop in the
Charoseth, but in some other sauce at their common Supper. Yet I question
whether they had any other Supper beside the Paschal Lamb; a whole Lamb would
serve thirteen of us to sup well, though our Climate be colder; I see Piscator
and Beza incline to my thoughts.

2ly. But if the sauce Charoseth were made of Cichory, Lettice, and other
bitter herbs, as Scaliger says, and aliis nescio quibus, and with him agree
Capellus, then Christ kept to the Institution; for the Law was only general,
for Bitternesses; but neither is this sauce yet proved at Christ's Table.

3ly. For washings, there were Civil, Religious, and superstitious washings;
let Scaliger prove that Christ conformed to the Superstitious washings: They
did bless God for the washing of hands, and then washed their hands. We know
how conformable Christ was to them in washing of hands, but this is washing of
feet: More prorsus insolito, says Gerhard Great debate there is among Divines
when this washing was, whether before, after, or in Supper time. Drusius finds
such a knot here, that he that can untye it, shall be to him Magnus in Oculis.

4ly. This washing of Peter is recorded in Joh. 13.5. at that Supper; now what
if that Supper were not the Paschal Supper? then all that Scaliger and Mr. Car
with others have built upon it, falls to the ground.

I had my eye upon those words in the first verse, (...), before the feast of
the Passover; which made me think the Supper mentioned in the 2. v. could not
be the Passover; there being nothing in those words from the first verse to the
second verse to force a man's reason to conceive that those words, Supper being
ended, in the second verse, to be meant of the Paschal Supper; but I was
fearful to declare my thoughts, Gleanings out of Exodus 1. S. 19.
till reading Dr. Lightfoot I found him fully of my mind, denying any Charoseth
at this Supper, etc.

Having such a man on my side, I will prove his and my opinion as well as I can.

Our Bibles in the Margent refer us to Mat. 26.2. now to know what time that
was John means, when he faith, before the Passover, Joh. 13.1. Matthew tells
us, it was two days before the Feast of the Passover. So does Mark 14. chapter 1.
but where is Christ at this time two days before the Passover? Mark tells us,
Chapter 14.3. at Bethany; neither Matthew nor Mark tell us whether it were Dinner
or Supper, but that he sat at meat; but John tells us, Supper being ended.

2. While Christ is at Bethany, the chief Priest and Scribes were consulting
how to take him, Mark 14.1, 2, 3. and Mat. 26.2, 3, 4, etc. now from this
Supper goes Judas unto them, who were now consulting to bargain, Mat. 26.14,
15.

3. I doubt not but there was some space of time between Judas bargain made
with the Priests, and his delivering Christ up to them the Text is plain, Mat.
26.16. And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him. So that he had
not opportunity so soon as he had sold him, Luke 22.6. He sought opportunity to
betray him. But when then did he make his bargain? when Satan was entered into
him, Luke 22.3, 4, 5 when did Satan enter into him? After the sop Satan entered
into him, Joh. 13.27. What Supper then was this at which Judas received the
sop? not the Passover; for the Priests consulted how to take him two days
before the Passover, while Christ is at Bethany; but the opportunity which he
had been seeking to make good his bargain, he found it so soon as Christ had
eaten the Passover, instituted his own Supper, and was gone forth; then that
could not be the time he made his bargain; so the sop could not be at the
Passover, for then you will make the time of his bargain and delivery to be
almost the same, contrary to both the Texts.

4. When Christ bad Judas, Joh. 13.27. That thou do, do quickly; the
Disciples thought the meaning was that Judas having the Bag, he bad him buy
those things we have need of against the Feast, verse. 28, 29. What Feast was
that? the Passover no question; so says a Lapide, Ad emendum necessaria pro
instante Pascate. But if this were the Paschal Supper at which Judas received
the sop, then what need to buy against the Feast, when the Feast was past, and
Christ knew he was now to die?

I see but two things that trouble me, but the same doubts are moved by
Gerhard, Maldonate, and a Lapide, who interpret this Supper of the Passover as
others commonly do. To which doubts they have given answers, and their answers
will serve me better, than if I should interpret it as they do of the Paschal
Supper. As yet then Christ is no Conformist.

Having done with these men, now to our good friend the Author of the Friendly
Debate, in whom I find something more, p. 102. he tells us, We use Ceremonies
in Divine Worship, as in an Oath, laying the hand upon the Book, kissing the
Testament, which are outward signs accompanying swearing though they belong not
to the essence of it.

A. 1. I have heard of some, and may be there are more than we are aware of,
who will lay their hand on the Book, kiss it, and do it readily, because they
think they do not swear, and so regard not what you say to them; but if you put
them to lift up their hand, as we read in Scripture they did who swear, they
would not do that, because then they thought they should swear indeed; though I
do not justify these persons in this, yet if an Oath be of consequence, it
deserves to be looked into. A Lawyer tells me he has seen it, and a Gentleman
tells me has sworn in the Court by lifting up the hand; whether the Law binds
only to this form of laying, etc. I know not, but I could never yet learn the
meaning of this form of swearing. If the Christians did it in Chrysostom's time
upon the Book of the Gospel, and the Jews upon the Book of the Law, as Mr.
Falkner says, to be sure we find the Scripture mentioning more than one Form
of swearing. Sometime Abraham lifts up his hand, Genesis 14.22. another time we
find him, bidding his servant put his hand under his thigh, Genesis 24.2. that is,
my Master made me swear. Thus Israel makes Joseph, Genesis 47.29 31. put his hand
under his thigh. So the giving the hand under Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.24. is by
some interpreted, that the Princes swear unto Solomon; as we take the Oath of
Allegiance to our King; the custom of several Countries is various in this
point, in which we are indifferent; though I know some refuse to swear at all;
unless it be by lifting up the hand; but the Scripture has not so tied us up,
we see.

2ly. But that he says these signs belong not to the essence of an Oath;
certainly he is mistaken; these signs have a causal influence into the effect,
the Oath. For, he that gives the Oath does not swear; the person to whom the
Oath is given, swears not by words; then take away these signs, and where is
the Oath?

Again, p. 220, 221. He tells us of Ceremonies the Parliament appointed, and
Ministers used in giving the solemn Oath and Covenant.

As first, Tho whole Congregation uncovered.

Ans. Then it seems they were not against decent gestures. It was in a solemn
piece of Worship of God, at the administering of Baptism, the whole Congregation
sit uncovered, and who opposes it?

2ly. Standing, and very meet, not to sit when they are thus dealing with God
in such a solemn manner; we like reverent gestures well in these cases; the
Parents stand at the Infants baptizing, there is a Covenant made.

3ly. It is the right hand; this and not the left, is attributed to God, Psalm.
17.7. and Psalm. 98.1. where it is not determined which hand in Scripture we
will take, which hand our superiors please; but if manuum fortior est dextra;
why not that?

4ly. The hand must be bare; If the hand must be lifted up, let us see the
hand, not the glove. If Vaninus were to swear, it may be he has under his
glove some writing that he owns no God at all, as he and his Disciples taught;
so others might have something quite cross to the Covenant that did swear the
contrary, be the Covenant never so holy and past dispute, as some did question
this. These are but trifles.

But p. 106. he tells us, (and this is that which Mr. Falkner and all make use
of, as an argument against us), The things commanded are indifferent, and
remain so after they are commanded in their own nature, no necessity put upon
them. Upon which, to illustrate the strength of his argument, and show the
Knavery of the nonconforming Ministers, (for they must be the persons in the
Reddition whom he intends) he gives his Reader an elegant similitude, Part 1.
page 107.

If you (says he) who are a master in your family, will have your servants
come in to worship God at such a time in the Parlor, not in their Frocks, in
which they rubbed your horses heels, but in their Liveries, this is but
reasonable; it is indifferent in it self, all one to God whether the hours be
ten or eleven, but you appoint Ten; whether in the Hall or Parlour. If your
servant would not come in at Ten, or into Parlor, (being thus indifferent) were
not this servant guilty of contempt, and faulty? If your servants were such
fools, and cannot understand common sense, they are the more to be pitied; but
yet those Knaves that abused their simplicity, and instilled these principles,
deserve to be punished, and put out of his service, etc. I leave you to apply
this case, etc.

Ans. This apt similitude of the Frock, whereby the Fr. Deb. would illustrate
the Knavery of the Nonconformists, puts me in mind of a story which a
Conformist and neighbour-Minister told me, being about four years standing in
the College of Dublin, when the thing was done. A Laundress bringing home a
Scholars Linen, instead of his Surplice, leaves him a Smock, (I suppose
unwittingly), Dr. Chapel was then Provost (if that be the title they give the
Head) of the College; if it were that Chapel, who was fellow of Christ's
College in my time, he was a severe man indeed, and fit for Bishop Laud's
purpose. The Bell ringing to Chapel early in Wintertime, the Lad puts on the
Smock (and why not? for I suppose the significancy lies in the whiteness)
instead of the Surplice; when he comes into Chapel, the paultry boys were fain
to stop their mouths with their Surplices till Service was done, lest they
should laugh outright; but when Service was finished, there was no little
noise made in the Chapel. The Doctor hearing it, sent to know what the matter
was? answer is returned; the Lad is sent for, he makes his excuse; but that
would not serve his turn, the Lad was punished I forgot to ask the kind of
punishment); as for the Smock, he sends for an Officer that belonged to the
Kitchen, and caused a fire to be made, and there burnt the Smock. Had the
Doctor ordered it to be burnt to Tinder, and not to ashes, he might have made
as significant a Ceremony of it, though it was black, as his white Surplice
was. And I may say of it as it is said of these Ceremonies, they are so set
forth, that every man may understand what they mean.

I commend you Sir, this is like a Disputant, you have maintained
Eartholomew-day very stoutly. But Sir,

The Nonconforming Ministers are not the Knaves, as your Reddition make them;
they hate the Frock, it does smell so of the Jades in the Stable at Rome; they
will by no means come into the Parlor with the Frock; so that he that wears the
Frock in the Parlor, is either the Fool or the Knave, according to your Logic.

2ly. We call them Knaves who cheat the persons with whom they deal. I do not
call you Knave, I have learned more moralily than so, which you so much talk
of; but that you have cheated your Reader, I shall make it appear.

1. With that piece of Sophistry called (...), here are Time, Place, and
Livery, i. e. your Surplice, put together as if there were no difference, when
as we deny it. Time and Place are but circumstances, inseparable from the
Worship of God; hence it is all one to us, whether nine, ten, or eleven of the
Clock; whether in the Hall or Parlor; if it be best for edification, or
convenience of the Church, we are very indifferent; but the Livery has a moral
signification, ordained by men for another end, to put us in mind of our Duty
to God, and a means to stir up our dull minds to the performance of it.

2. Here is Ignoratio Elenchi, your similitude does not touch the state of the
question; the question speaks of one thing, and your similitude argues another.

That by this Livery you must understand some Ceremony, and if any, the
Surplice, must be the Argutum, is plain, for that suits a Livery best; and
something you would argue, as you declare when you bid the Reader make the
Reddition. In this sense your similitude is very apt, it does represent a
Livery indeed, but I pray who gives this Livery? we can well distinguish
between what comes through Rome, and that which is Romish. Why do you speak so
against that Woman in Rev. 17. since you wear her Livery?

But to this indifferency, that the use of them is indifferent, I suppose you
will not say; you declare your mind plain enough; They are indifferent, and so
remain after they are commanded in their own nature, no necessity put upon
them. To Mr. Falkner and this Author.

I pray tell us what Ceremony you can invent that is not indifferent in its own
nature; tell us of one Ceremony that is necessary in its own nature.

1. All Gods Ceremonies were indifferent in their own nature, not one
necessary; let but God recall his Positive Law, I will put on all the High
Priests garments, and make use of any Vessels of the Temple, etc. Pray, Sir,
name that Ceremony which in its own nature is morally good or evil.

2ly. Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, as to their own nature are but
indifferent, unless you will own Transubstantiation; his positive Law make them
necessary, both necessitate praecepti, and medii. When the Elements have served
their use or end, the Sacrament's over, we eat and drink what remains, as other
drink, etc. you make yours a means to edification, as well as Christ does his;
and so much necessity of command lie upon them, that all the Ministers (whom
you call Knaves) that will not use them, be the Ministers never so able and
holy, they must be turned out of their Lords service by your verdict, as they
are.

3ly. All the Popish Ceremonies are indifferent in their own nature, and may
plead as much for the use of them all, as you do for yours. Yea, take their
Pictures; being in a Papists house, I saw the Picture of a very Old man, I
thought nothing of it, the Cloth, the Paint or Colors, the Effigies, the
frame, were all indifferent in their nature; but when one told me that Picture
was to represent the Ancient of Days, then I understood sin enough in it.

4ly. The Papists put no necessity upon their Ceremonies, as witness their
Master Lombard, that tells you Baptism, i. e. Water applied in the Name, etc.
the Elementum and Verbum, meeting together, make the Ordinance perfect without
any Ceremony.

But since they are thus indifferent, as you say, and Mr. Carre blaming us for
making a Schism, because of these, which he terms thus, Trifles, poor needless
things, such as scarce come nigh to touch the fringe of Christ's vesture. But to
us they appear sinful; and did we not so apprehend the things imposed upon us,
but that we might be acceptable and pleasing to God in our Conformity to them,
we protest in his presence who searches our hearts, and will judge both you and
us, we would not stay one day from Conformity. The Question is, Whether you may
better lay by these things, and not impose them, being so indifferent, or may
we better take them up, who at least suspect them to be sinful, and cannot with
a clear conscience yield unto them?

Are we more guilty of schism that will not take up these things because we
apprehend them from the word to be sinful, or you, that will not lay them down,
but impose them, though you say they are indifferent? I challenge Mr. Falkner
and all the Conformists to answer it before God.

If the things imposed be but indifferent, as all the Conformists say, then Mr.
Falkner meets with an argument of the Nonconformists; it is urged says Mr.
Falkner, p. 434. No such indifferent things ought to be imposed, but to be made
the matter of mutual forbearance, according to the duty charged upon
Christians, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8.

Here Mr. Falkner bestows about 32 Pages to take off the Argument, and to give
us the mind of those Chapters.

It is very true, Sir, the argument has been used by the old Nonconformists,
and in particular I knew it urged by one, and the 13th v. of the 1 Cor. 8.
pressed hard upon the Prelate Laud in his Visitation; to whom the Prelate gave
this answer: True, when Paul was alone, and spoke alone, thus he said; but
would Paul have said so, if he had been in a Consistory with the rest of the
Apostles? my friend made no reply, but held down his head, supposing thereby he
might make the Prelate recall his words; this answer was becoming an
Archbishop, and worthy of Laud! To be sure he silenced my friend.

Only this, Sir, let me say, they used the argument upon your Hypothesis, that
the things are indifferent; but though we grant the things considered
absolutely, or abstractedly in their own nature are indifferent; yet consider
them in their use, we look on them as sinful.

To examine all that learned Mr. Falkner has written, would be tedious and
needless, for I should yield to him in many things, had not the state of the
question been mistaken.

Briefly therefore I will consider the case the Apostle had before him, and
apply our case to it.

The Lord having in the old Law forbidden diverse meats, and commanded the
observation of diverse days, when Christ the substance, the body was come, these
shadows vanished. Some Believers in Christ understood this; they knew, though
once they were under a Law, yet at this time they were indifferent, and so they
knew their liberty. Others, because the Law was so express, the observation had
been many hundred years, the words for ever added to those Laws, they could not
yet understand what the stronger Christians did. The Apostle guided by the
Spirit of Christ, charge these stronger Christians not to judge, despise,
refuse, or offend these weaker Christians; but to receive them into their
hearts, into Church Fellowship, and all Church communion, and not perplex their
minds with those doubtful disputations or reasonings, but wait, and bear
tenderly with them, till the Lord shall reveal that truth also unto them.

For our case; the things in question are no necessary circumstances of Divine
Worship, as time, place, etc. which are necessary attendants of Worship, and
Antecedaneous to any act of man's will; but such as have their dependence upon
man's pleasure only. Hence you tell us, you may change them when you please.
Those things fell under the command of God; and so not these, unless as
forbidden by the general Law of God, as those meats were by particular Laws.
For a man, a creature, to institute a Doctrinal, Religious Ceremony, to teach
men their duty they owe to God; ordain it as a mean to help, stir up their
minds to their duty, and annex this to the worship of God; yea so as there must
be no Divine Worship unless this Ceremony be used, it is such high boldness, it
does so touch the Lords Prerogative, and tacitly so charge him with defect of
wisdom, as if he had not appointed means sufficient to teach his Creature, but
we must supply his defect by adding to his word; that let superstition speak
never so smoothly, as it always comes with some pious end in the mouth, it is
no other but wretched impiety, not will we by the help of his Grace conform
unto it.

You who tell us these things are indifferent, are yet so far from answering
the Duty that Christ commands by the Apostle in these Chapters, i. e. to
receive us, not to judge us, not to offend us, that in opposition to the
command, you thrust us out of the Lords work; you shut us out from the
Sacraments; you excommunicate us, imprison us, and do what in you lie to
destroy us both soul and body.

As to what you say, p. 410. quoting Mr. Thorndike, with whom you agree, It is
not meant a bare displeasing of our Brother, but doing such actions which tend
to occasion some to fall from Christianity, disgust Christian Religion, for
which you quote the 15. v. Destroy not him, etc.

The first part in some sense I should yield; but for the latter part which
carries this sense, that the destruction in the 15. v. was by making them to
fall from Christianity, as if there were no other way to destroy them but that;
I conceive humbly that your self with Mr. Thorndike, are both mistaken.

For that weak Christian might be strongly convinced that Christian Religion
was true, though he could not as yet see the repealing of those Laws upon the
reasons I gave before; yet through the unkindness, pride, cruelty of the
stronger Christians who would judge, despise him, and not receive him unless he
would eat the forbidden meats, as they did; and through their example, whom he
saw to eat, he might be put upon a temptation to eat such meats too, not in
faith, but with a doubtful conscience, and so doing, he was condemned according
to the last verse. So their pride, unkindness, and example, did help to destroy
their brother as much as in them lay.

Hence in the first verse of the Chapter, the Apostle charges them not to
trouble such a one with doubtful disputations: (...), etc. Non cumeo disputis,
de usu libertatis quam nondum potest intelligere, quod plus anxietatis and
kaesitationis, rudibus animis parit, quam utilitatis. Vatabl.
In the last verse he ends with, He that doubts, (...), is damned; so that he
begins and ends with doubtfulness. Now had the weak Christian fallen off from
the Faith, the weak Christian would not have eaten such meats doubtfully, and
so bring himself under the danger of condemnation for so doing; for to be sure
he would eat none of those meats which made him fall off from Christianity,
because he saw Christians eat them, there was no danger of his damning for
eating with a doubting conscience; so that this implys, that he who eats with
doubting, did yet hold his Christianity.

Thus have some by reason of that unkindness and severity in imposing these
Laws upon us, been put upon Subscriptions with a doubtful Conscience in their
temptations, and afterward have met with that which has stung them. This is
the charity of your Church toward your brethren.

Nor does that you say, p. 435. help it, viz. That these different practices
had a peculiar respect to those times only, of the first dawning of
Christianity; for the Church afterward in their Canons condemned all those who
observed those Mosaical Laws.

For we are under the same condition with those Christians who dare not eat the
meat then, because they had been forbidden in the Law; so, nor dare we submit
to your Humane Inventions in the Worship of God, because they are forbidden in
the general Law, Thou shall not add, Deuteronomy. 12.32. They are not according to
Christ, Col. 2.8. Christ put no such things into the Apostles Commission to
Preach, Mat. 28. ult. So that with a doubtful conscience at least we must
practice them, and what is next, we know.

Nor does your obedience to authority help here, which so many are glad they
have that starting hole to run into, and your self so much urge. Had these
strong brethren in this, Romans 14. been Princes, or Archbishops, and they should
have commanded the weak brethren to have eat these meats, they had sinned in
their command; nor were they bound to obey them with a doubtful conscience; to
hazard amnation by obedience to superiors, is no good Divinity. Yet, Sir, we do
give obedience, and will preach up obedience to Princes, as much as any other,
only in the matters of God, he is the superior and supreamest, Nemini fit
injuria, cui praponitur Deus.

For your next Section, page 442. where you labor to defend your Ceremonies,
though they have been abused in a corrupt way of worship in Popery. As for this
Section Mr. Falkner might have spared it; for Humane Doctrinal Ceremonies to be
annexed to Gods own Institutions, we judge them sinful additions, intrenching
upon the Sovereignty, and flighting of the wisdom of Christ, though Rome had
never known them; as if the wise holy God could not have appointed more
Doctrinal Ceremonies, had he cared for them, as well as foolish sinful man; but
since then these were and are still in the Popish worship, and retained here
when England threw off the Papal yoke, I will consider what he has said, and
but touch it briefly.

1. Rome then, as now it stands, is that Whore described Apoc. 17.1. this I
doubt not; of this judgment were our English Bishops, the most learned of them;
the Professors of Divinity in both Universities, and generally of our pious and
learned men in this Nation, before our troubles began; and also of foreign
Divines. Was it ever known that a chaste Virgin, as the Church should be to
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. would dress up her self with the relics of a known
Whore? Come out of her my people, Apoc. 18.4. this is not obedience to that
call.

2ly. It seems very strange that when Gods own Institution came to be abused to
Idolatry, as the Brazen Serpent, 2 King. 18.4. that must now be broken in
pieces; and must a Humane Institution used in superstitious worship, in an
Idolatrous Church, be yet retained in a Reformed Church?

I shall not write out his Argument at length.

1st. In Regeneration the bodies and souls once abused to the service of the
Devil, Lust, Idols, may yet find acceptance with God, in serving of him.

Ans. A strange argument for a learned man! If so excellent a Creature as man,
made after the Image of God, under a necessity of obedience to his Creator,
being fallen from God, but by Gods rich mercy, the Obedience, Blood, and
Sacrifice of Immanuel, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, be accepted of God;
Then a paultry human Ceremony indifferent in its own nature, and no necessity
for the use, if abused in an Idolatrous Church, may yet be retained in a chaste
Church, and the use of it acceptable to God. This Logic I understand not:
Consequence denied. I could enlarge my answer, but will not.

2d. Arg. From single mersion, and threefold mersion in baptizm.

A. Was the water, so baptizing in water, a Human Ceremony and Invention, or
Christ's own Institution? For dipping in the water, or pouring of the water upon
the person, your Church allow both, because the word (...) signify both. If
any did dip thrice, denying the Trinity of persons to be of the same essence,
that was their Heresy: but if any did hold the Trinity of persons in the Unity
of the essence, and yet would dip thrice, though I do not much like it, yet I
should not condemn them of Heresy, the Text mentions nothing, whether once, or
thrice. But prove Baptizing in water to be man's invention.

3ly. The Christians lawfully used those fountains where the Gentiles drew
water for their Sacrifices, etc.

A. And why not? did the Heathen and Julian make those Fountains, or God make
them for the use of Man and Beast? shall therefore an Idolater deprive the
Christians of those which God made for the use and necessity of Man and Beast,
What is sold in the shambles? 1 Cor. 12.25. But this you are to prove, if you
will make an Argument of it, that when the Idolaters had taken water out of
those Fountains, carried it to their Idol Temples, made use of it in their Idol
worship, that then the Christians would take that water, and baptize believers
in it; though yet there is more to be said for them, than for your Ceremonies,
because to baptize in water, was Christ's Institution. For the fountains, Julian
might have Dedicated the Land thereabouts to Idols, and Devils, as well as the
Fountains, and so the Christians should be afraid to sow Corn to maintain Life.

4ly. We meet in their Churches or places they built, use their Bells, Tenths,
for maintenance of Ministers. Ergo.

A. 1. For places. 1st. Place has no moral signification, as your Ceremonies.
2. Place is necessary, so not your Ceremonies. 3. Those places were built for
the worship of the true God and Christ; though these blind Idolaters might also
intend some Saint: But if they had been built only for the worship of a Saint,
in imitation of the Heathens Demons, we would not meet in them, but done by
them as Constantine did by the Idols Temples, razed some to the ground, and
shut up others.

2. Bells. It seems you use them all the while you are reading Prayers, and
worshipping God in your Surplice, the Bells are Chiming: I thought the Bells
had done when worship began.

2. Something must be done to give notice to the people what time the worship
of God begins; so the Bell does this day; to morrow it calls the people to a
meeting about Town-affairs

3. Bells have no moral signification in them, as your Ceremonies.

4. I believe few Bells in England, but have been cast since the throwing off
Popery, to make them musical; and none use them for that end. No such musical
tunes did I observe in Spain, but a confused jangling in time of Thunder.

3. Tenths, Ministers maintenance, have no moral signification, nor annexed to
Divine Worship. The people tell you, Tenths are Levitical, not Popish. Though,
by their savor, twice we read of Tenths being paid to God before the Levitical
Law. But for maintenance, poor Nonconformists are not concerned in this
argument.

4 The Heathens lifted up their eyes when they worshipped their Idols, their
gods, Sun, Moon, etc.

A. 1. Did the Heathen call a Convention, and there decree, That when men did
worship God, they should lift up their eyes to heaven as your Convocation
appointed these? or did Natures light teach them this gesture?

2. Were the Heathens the first that in worshipping of Idols lifted up their
eyes to heaven? Did not Adam, Abel, and the Saints before the Flood; and Noah,
Sem, etc. after it, lift up their eyes in their worshipping of God? If the
Heathen will imitate the Church, must the Church lay by duty? because the
Heathen worship Devils, therefore we must not worship God?

5 I dolatrous sacrifices were practiced before the giving of the Law, yet God
continued and commanded saerifices after the Law.

A. Your Argument speaks thus much: If the Devil will be Gods Ape, and hateful
enemy, then God must have no worship; and every time the Devil imitates Gods
worship, God must change his worship, and appoint new means of worship.

I pray Sir, did the Devil, or God first appoint Sacrifices? why may I not
think the Devil understood something of the promised seed, and the meaning of
the Sacrifices; and in the following Ages, in hatred and revenge against God,
and hatred of souls, drew men to sacrifice to himself, not only beasts, but
men, as being the best of Creatures, and so most acceptable Sacrifice, in the
imitation of Isaac, that should have been sacrificed? and thus he got before
God.

Sir, I pray do this: show us where there were Ceremonies first invented by
Idolators, depending only on their wills (as yours do, and you tell us you may
change them when you please) these were used in idalatrous worship, and the
Church of God translated those Ceremonies (I do not mean individual) from the
idolatrous Temples into the worship of the holy and true God, and he approved
of them. This you must prove, or else you speak not home to our Case.

The last thing Mr. Falkner brings, is the Testimony of worthy men about
retaining some Ceremonies, etc. I only say, I honor the men; but I am of Mr.
Falkner's opinion, that the holy Scriptures are the only unerring Rule, and I
will willingly follow them; so men, where they follow Christ.

Several Distinctions about significant signs, Mr. Falkner makes; but I see not
how any of them reach the Question, no not so much as one.

1. Here are signs depending only on the Wills of Men.

2. These signs are Instituted to Instruct us in our Duty toward God.

3. These are said to be helps for our Edification.

4. These signs are appropriated and annexed to the Worship of God. While we
Administer his signs, we set up our signs.

5. He that uses not these signs, is turned out of the work of the Lord, and
shall not worship the Lord.

I desire Mr. Falk would either from express Scripture, or necessary
consequence from Scripture, or from the example of any holy and ordinary
persons in Scripture approved by God; I say, I desire from either of these he
would prove such signs in this manner Imposed. Did Moses ever dare to Institute
one Exciting (which is one Distinction) sign, and annex it to the worship of
God, more than he had in charge from God? yea and turn out those Priests that
would not use it?

It is said of your Ceremonies, they are not Dark and Dumb, but so set forth,
that every man may understand what they mean.

May every man understand, etc? truly I have known the Surplice above fifty
years, but never understood that the putting on a Surplice should properly
signify the Reverence we bear to God, and the high esteem of his ordinances,
till Mr. Falk. told me so, p. 391. nor I believe did few Priests so understand
it.

It seems then when you put off the Surplice, going into Pulpit, now you
declare a lower esteem of God and his Ordinances

Others tell us, it signifies Purity; others Decency; it seems you are not
agreed in the ends of your own inventions.

But for your exciting sign in the Cross; many thousands, if not millions of
Children in England have been baptized with this sign. I pray Name but One of
these that ever was Excited to fight under Christ's Banner, by this sign. Reason
is a word in which the Conforming party glory much; all Learning and Reason
they have engrossed. I pray, Sir, show us the Reason, how the moving of a
Priests finger over an Infants Forehead, in its Baptism, comes to have that
efficacy to excite that Infant to fight under Christ's Banner? How the
Christians of old used the real sign of the Cross, I know (I do not go about to
justify or condemn their practice) but this is another thing, or shadow of a
thing; no wonder though your own Mr. Carr calls your Ceremonies trifles, things
of which come no good. Surely, Sir, while you speak of the Reverence of God, we
should show more Reverence to that Majesty, in being content with his
Sovereignty and wisdom in his own Institutions, and not annex vain empty
trifles to them, and turn out those men who will not submit unto them.

CHAP. III.
THE next thing required of us, is our subjection to the Ecclesiastical
Government, consisting of six distinct Officers (or more) that exercise
Church Power; and holy Writ knows but one of them: In the Commonwealth none
dare pretend to Office but only such as the King and the Law authorize and
appoint; if there should be any other, their power and actions were null,
invalid, and they liable to punishment. But in the Church men can be more bold.
Here Dr. Stillingfleet's notion, if true, must help us, viz. That Christ has
appointed or determined no form of Government in the Church, but left it to the
chief Magistrates, or Church Governors to appoint the form, etc. the design of
his Irenicon.

In that Iearned Piece there are several things I must yield to, as, That the
power of Ordination is proper to the name (...), and not (...), p. 285. To
which let me add what Mr. Samuel Smith, a Minister dead above 20 years since,
told us, he with many others, being at one time Ordained by the Bishop of
Peterborough, the Bishop bad them all take notice, That he did not Ordain as
Bishop, but as Presbyter; this Mr. Smith would take his Oath to be true; yet
Bishop Gauden told me, The power of Ordination was solely in the Bishop, and
though Presbyters did impose hands with the Bishop, it was out of courtesy.
Thank you, Sir! I am not to meddle with this now. I presume he would defend
this as well as he did the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, in the several sheets
that passed betwixt us upon the question; but whence then comes Reordination to
the same office in the same Church? a thing unknown to Fathers, Councils,
Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, but only to this new Edition of Conformists.

2ly. I shall yield also to him in this, That it is not necessary there should
be so many particular Churches as particular Congregations. And this is a
question of great moment. Of this a word hereafter.

3ly. I agree also with him, That the power of Order and Jurisdiction is
committed by Christ ex aequo, to all Ministers of the Gospel actu primo, or
habitually, p. 197, 198, 275.

By this we may understand what he means by Church Governors in the Question.
To which I shall speak but briefly, though I had prepared a larger discourse
upon it. Three things then I would prove,

1. That Christ has appointed a Form of Government in his Church.

2ly. I will show what that form is, and this will prove the first.

3ly. That form is Jure Divino. Consequently if this Ecclesiastical Government
which we are required to subject to, be not according to that Form, then I hope
they will not blame us though we refuse to subject unto it, as we would refuse
subjection to one in the Commonwealth, who is not an Officer according to Law.

Professing withal for my self, and I dare say for all the Nonconformists in
England, that if it can be made good that Christ has appointed such a
Government in his Church, we will most willingly subject unto it, being glad we
are eased of such a burden. Pride shall never hinder us, though that be so much
charged upon us.

For the first, the Doctor meets with several arguments that some have produced
to prove there must be a Form appointed, and he answers them; but his answers
do not satisfy. I had prepared a reply to his answers, but lay it by.

To their Arguments I would add one or two more.

First, if Christ has determined no form of Government in his Church, then the
Form may be Monarchical; and Bellarmine's argument to prove it for the
prevention of Schism, will carry it; a simili, says he, etc. de Romans Pontif.
l. 1. c. 9. Dr. Stillingfleet might have spared the seventh Chapter of his
Rational Account, wherein he labors to disprove the Jesuit, arguing for the
Monarchical Form.

Kings are supreme in all cases Ecclesiastical, says the Church of England; the
supreme Magistrate may determine the Form, says Doctor Stillingfleet, then the
Ten Kings may give their power to the Beast without any error.

A Pastor and a Deacon may serve at first, while believers are few; but when
the Church is enlarged to a whole Nation, there must be another Form of
Government, says the Doctor, p. 180. Irenic. Go on, Sir; when the Church is
enlarged to many Nations, there may be another Form; and why not then
Monarchical? Christ having determined none, as the Doctor says.

Above one thousand Presbyters in a Diocese may devolve the exercise of that
power which Christ has committed to them actu primo to one person, according
to Dr. Stillingfleet; so may ten thousand as well, for ought I know, to one
Bishop, and he may exercise it by his Archdeacon, Chancellor, Commissaries, as
well as now.

2ly. If God determine a Form of Government in the Jewish Church, then Christ
in the Christian Church. Christ's Kingly-Government in the heart, is secret,
none can see that; his visible Government by which he is made known to the
world, is known by his Ordinances, Government of his House, (as our Courts at
Westminster, Sessions, and Assizes, show our Kings Government) with the
Profession of the Christian Faith, and conversation of Christians accordingly.
He is faithful in his house, Heb. 3.6. that House is his Church, which he
builds, not the Commonwealth; qua sic.

3ly. To determine a Form of Government, argues more Sovereignty, more
Perfection, more Wisdom in the supreme Governor, than to appoint only an
unformed Government; as it were a mere materiae prima.

If a Prince give a Charter to a Corporation, a Patent to a Colony, he appoints
the form of their Government. He that gives the form in other things, gives the
perfection of the thing. Christ's Form in the Church carries authority, and has
an awe upon the hearts of Believers; this notion brings Christ in his wisdom
and Sovereignty below an earthly Prince.

4ly. Dr. Stillingfleet has affirmed Christ has appointed a form of
Government in his Church; for whereas the Jesuit is pleading for the
Monarchical form of the Church Government, because wise men have thought that
to be best; the Doctor answers, What is this to the proving what Government
Christ has appointed in his Church? for that is the best Government of the
Church, not which Philosophers and Politicians have thought best, but which our
Savior has appointed in his word. Ration. Account, p. 464. then Christ has
appointed a form in his word, (and I hope that is Jure Divino) else the Jesuit
is not answered. We need no more proof.

2. For the second Quest. What then is that form? A. I shall lay several
Propositions, and clear them by Scripture.

First Prop. In all Churches in the New Testament, where we read of Elders, we
read of several Elders in one Church; we never read but of one Elder in a
Church, that I call to mind.

1. In the Church of Jerusalem; one Church, but diverse Elders, Act. 15.6, 23,
v. and 16. chapter 4.

2ly. In the Church of the Romans, one Church, but several Elders, as Romans
12.6, etc.

3ly. In the Church at Antioch, one Church, but more Elders, Act. 13.1.

4ly. In the Church of Corinth there were diverse Elders, witness the Schism.

5ly. In the Church of Ephesus, diverse Elders, Act. 20.17.

6ly. In the Church of Philippi were several Elders, Phil. 1.1. So Polycarpus's
Epistle to the Church declares.

7ly. In the Church of the Colossians, several Elders, Col. 1.7. and 4.17.
Epaphras, and Archippus, we are sure of; the Dutch say Onesimus also, from Chapter
4.9.

8ly. In the Church of the Thessalonians were several Elders, 1 These. 5.12. Let
any man that opposes me produce one Church where there was but one single
Pastor; though if it were so, it will not save us; for the Churches then had
the Apostles living among them, and could help that single Pastor, if the
Church were but new planted.

9ly. In Act 14.24. The Apostles ordained them Elders (not an Elder) in every
Church. Mr. Thorndike, one of your own, joining this Text with Tit. 1.5.
crosses Dr. Stillingfleet's gloss on the Text, i. e. says the Doctor, no
Church wanted an Elder, not that every Church had more Elders; but Mr.
Thorndike thus, not meaning one Elder in a place, but Presbyteries, College of
Presbyters, with common advice to order the Churches planted in those cities.
This agrees with the plain Gramar of the Text; 2. with eight examples I gave
before; 3ly. The Syriack is full for our sense.

The Doctor while he labors to darken this Text, forgets himself strangely;
for p. 239. He lays this for a foundation to clear the Apostolical practice
viz. that the Apostles in framing Churches did observe the customs of the
Jewish Synagogues. And p. 248. Having cleared that there was a peculiar form of
Government in the Synagogues, and that the Apostles copied out the Government
of the Christian Churches by them. Now p. 429. he tells us there were diverse
Rulers in a Synagogue, is evident from Act. 13.15. he supposes, Ten wise men
did jointly concur for ruling the affairs of the Synagogue. p. 250. so many
Elders to make a Bench. Strange the Doctor should forget his foundation!

For Act. 20.17. Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Hammond, with Irenaeus, darken that
Text. I might have shown how cross Dr. Hammond and Irenaeus are one to another.
Forsooth the Bishops of Asia (not only the Elders of Ephesus) were sent for
according to Hammond. Grotius is clear against Hammond, de Imper. p. 343, 393.

But I should answer thus:

1. Consider how many miles Philippi was distant from Jerusalem, the way Paul
sailed, etc. according to Bunting, who gives an account of all the miles from
Port to Port that Paul sailed, it was two thousand one hundred and fifty six
miles, if he mistake not.

2ly. Consider how many days between the Feast of Unleavened bread, and
Pentecost, for Paul to sail these miles.

3ly. What time Paul set sail from Philippi.

4ly. How many days he stayed in several places, all which I had cast up.

5ly. When he came at Miletum, thirty days at least were spent, he had but
twenty days; of these he stays eight days by the way; besides two days journey
going and coming between Miletum and Ephesus, as they reckon it; from Miletum
to Jerusalem 844 miles, according to Bunting; he stays at Philips house, Act.
21.8, 10. At Miletum, Act. 20.16. He hasted if possible, etc. yet now he sends
for the Bishops of Asia; this is the fancy of that learned man.

Besides if he can prove that (...) in the 17 verse. and (...), and (...), v.
28. be words of the Plural Number, then his great learning may persuade us to
something.

For his other notion on Phil. 1.1. the Jewish and Christian Bishop, Dr.
Stillingfleet has answered him. I add,

1. In matter of fact; one would think Chrysostom and Ambrose should know a
little better than Dr. Hammond of yesterday, and they could have given other
answers than they have done upon the Text.

2ly. When Paul, Phil. 4.15. says, O ye Philippians; he means the same persons
in Chapter 1.4. but if one in France should write to the French Church in London,
would they write, O ye Londoners, they are but strangers, as the Jews in
Philippi.

3. In the Church of Thessalonica there were Elders, 1 These. 5.12. but none
Jewish Christian Bishops, 1 These. 1.9. These turned from Idols, etc. not so the
Jews. So in Ephesus several Elders, but no Jewish distinct Elders, Ephesians. 2.11,
12. make that clear.

I could give more answers. --

Prop. 2. The Elders in the Gospel-churches had all of them Ministerial power
committed to them alike. I mean the ordinary teaching Elders. So Bishop Jewel,
If it be a heresy to say that by the Scriptures of God, a Bishop and Priest
are all one, then many of the Fathers (whom he mentions) yea Paul himself must
be a Heretic. Dr. Stillingfleet has yielded this, and we desire no more; the
truth is the same if he be changed; this question Learned Pens have discussed,
I let it alone.

Prop. 3. This equality of power which the Elders received from Christ did
continue all the time the Apostles lived.

This I think Dr. Stillingfleet yields, p. 275. the Epistle of Clemens to the
Corinthians after the Apostles time, and of Polycarpus to the Philippians,
declare the same.

The Teachers, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. did Ordain; so several of the ancient and
modern Divines, Lutherans and Calvinists, so understand it; there is a full
definition of Ordination. If this were Peter's, see where is that Bishop, had
there been an Apostle, he had been mentioned.

The Church of Corinth ought to have Excommunicated the Incestuous person,
though Paul had not sent to them, or here joined with them. Chrysostom on the
Text speaks fully to the point.

Prop. 4. The number of the Elders increasing in the Church by reason of the
increase of the Believers; One of these Elders, and most probably that Elder
which was first Ordained by the Apostles in the Church, had a Primacy, as to
order and honor, but not as to power and jurisdiction over his fellow Elders.

The Text commands it, 1 Cor. 14. ult. Order must be, and where there is a
Plurality, to avoid confusion there must be one.

If there be Twenty Justices of the Peace in a County, and the King add Ten
more, it does not alter the form of Government: At the Sessions one must be for
order sake the Judge of the Sessions, and the other Justices do not devolve the
exercise of their power upon him, nor has he more power than the rest, every
one exerts his own power: So in the Parliament, a Speaker must be, but no
superiority of power, nor devolving the exercise of the power of the other
Members upon him: so it is in the Church.

That Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Thomas Hooker, allows of an Episcopus
Humanus in the Consociation of Churches, to moderate the actions of the
Assembly, to propound things to be agitated, to gather voices, to pronounce the
Sentence which passed by common approbation. Reason and order says he, forces
such a kind of proceeding, Survey Chu. Disc. p. 1. Cap. 2. p. 22, 23. only the
constancy of it he denies from experience. There is the pinch.

Prop. 5. This Primacy (I humbly conceive) did continue in that Elder, during
his life, (unless for some default he were cast out by his fellow Elders) I
shall wrangle with none of my brethren, nor differ from them in affection about
it, but I shall ground my notion on the Angel of the Church, Apoc. 2. etc.

1st. The word does not connote any superiority of power over the rest, no more
than when the King wrote from Breda, or at any other time to the Speaker of the
House of Lords, or Commons, or to the Judge of the Sessions, did or do argue any
superiority of power, but only order; what Isidore says of the word Angelus,
Angelorum vox est nomen Officii, ne naturae, -- cum mittuntur vocantur Angeli.
So here, all Elders are sent, Romans 10.15. if sent, then they are Angels.
Superiority of power among the ordinary teaching Elders, was the first step
Antichrist took to get into his Chair.

2ly. The word is to be taken individually, not collectively. So famous
Reynolds against Heart, p. 314. So Beza, Piscator, Paraeus, and many others. The
instances our brethren give to prove collectively, some do not prove it;
others, as the Ram, the Goat in Daniel, the Antichristian Beast, etc. in the
Revel. I humbly conceive give away the Cause, (for there was ever one superior
in power), which I will not yield.

3ly. That this person was during life, etc. The Argument brought against it is
no Scripture, but humane Prudence from experience: so Mr. Hooker. To which I
say, keep out but superiority of power, and the danger is avoided: and no doubt
while the Churches kept that out, this form of government carried on things
very well. You cannot then charge me with being cross to Scripture in my
opinion.

2ly. Since you cannot prove me so, then I prove my sense from the practice of
the primitive Churches, of which we have the Histories, which to me is of great
force in proving the sense of a Text, that seems very fair, and have no other
Scripture to contradict that sense: how much the Histories of them speak of a
single person, who is ignorant? and that during life. Ambrose (or whoever it
was, as ancient as he) in his Comment on the 4 Ephesians. speaks home to the point,
see These. Salmar. p. 3. p. 299.

3ly. By the Seven Epistles to the Churches, I find him in his Primacy, do you
prove it was but for one or two Sessions, not during his life. Certainly that
Angel was well known in the Church to whom Christ wrote: in some Churches
commending him, in others discommending; though its true, the Epistles
concerned the whole Church.

4ly. This Angel is not the Moderator in a consociation of Churches, as
Reverend Mr. Hooker speaks of, whose constancy in the place may be bad, but the
Primate among the Elders of one particular Church: so that his fear does not
reach us.

Q. 3. For the Jus Divinum of this.

This form Dr. Stillingfleet cannot deny the Apostles did constitute in the
Churches; but it seems the Apostolical practice, though they were guided by the
Spirit of Christ, is not sufficient to make a Jus Divinum, a positive Law; for
it is demanded.

1st. There was no positive Law for the change of the seventh-day Sabbath; but
yet the Dr. tells us, the Apostolical practice is sufficient, for they were
guided by an Infallible Spirit, p. 12, 13. If so, in a matter of far greater
moment than in this, I hope, it is sufficient, the Dr. cannot deny it.

2ly. Dr. Stillingfleet denies the 18. Mat. 15, 16. proves Excommunication:
Then what positive Law has he for Excommunications, Deacons, Ordination of
Church Officers?

3ly. The Apostolical form did best conduce to the end of Government, which the
Dr. urges much against the Jesuit, Rat. Account, p. 462.

I pray compare that form then, and our form now; under which did, or do
ignorance and profaneness most abound?

4ly. If not so, then one great end of the Acts of the Apostles, which
Oecumenius calls the Evangelium Spiritus sancti) is lost.

A Lapide in his Preface to that Book speaks excellently.

5ly. I set up this Form; you demand my authority; I answer, It was the Form
they set up who were guided by an Infallible Spirit, and Christ owned the Form
in writing to it. You set up your Form different from it; I demand of you, show
me your authority, and see which is best.

6ly. If Apostolical practice be not sufficient, then you may to Rome for a
Form, for ought I know, I know no stop.

As to the Author of the Book Samaritanism, I am sure the Author was nothing
akin to the good Samaritan; for he shows himself a man of a vinegar-spirit,
his discourse as to Church Government, is built upon this foundation, That Form
of Government which appeared for hundreds of years, first, only, and was de
facto Instituted of God, that only has Divine right to warrant it, p. 10, 11.
In p. 37. I find this was Episcopacy, but this is very false; these three
terms, first, only, and hundreds of years, are not found in Episcopacy. The
first Governors had power over Bishops and Archbishops, if any such Creatures
were.

2ly. They were not the only Governors, for the Presbyters governed while the
Apostles lived.

3ly. The first Governors did not last hundreds of years.

4ly. The first Government was not confined to a narrow Diocese, as Episcopacy
was. In Augustine's time there were in one Province under Carthage of the
Catholics and Donatists above nine hundred Bishops, but their first Governors
had all Nations for their Diocese, and that made their Government Apostolical.
I am sure there is none such now.

Again, Presbyters were first before Bishops; witness your own Tribe, that tell
the world, Episcopacy was set up to prevent Schism among Presbyters after the
Schism in Corinth among the Presbyters.

According to this Author, there is no Government at all in the Church; for
these three Terms are found in no form of Government now; therefore I leave him.

As for his fine language wherewith he courts us, as Jack-straws, Fools,
Knaves, Peevish, etc. this Samaritans Oil and Wine, we bear it, the Disciple is
not above his Master.

There is another Question of very great consequence, but for these times not
so useful, therefore I will only state it, and give men's opinion about it, and
leave it, though I had prepared something to speak to it.

Q. Whether every particular Congregation consisting of one teaching Elder, and
a number of visible Christians, be a particular Church, according to the New
Testament? or may not, yea, ought not several particular Congregations unite,
to make up one particular Church?

By a Church I mean an Organical Church, invested with all the power and
exercise of the Keys within it self, both quo ad actum primum and secundum;
such were the eight Churches I mentioned before.

Learned and pious Ames, Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 39. tells us, That a Church in
the New Testament is a Parochial Church; such a company or congregation as
ordinarily meet in one place to worship God. (Sure I am that ordinarily there
is but one teaching-Elder in such a Church.) And this Church has as much power
as the National Church of the Jews met together. Compare his 16 and 18 Theses;
great use he makes of the words, (...), 1 Cor. 11.20. so does a reverend
Brother, who knew my opinion, quote it with a little warmth; but my good
Brother must prove there was but one Teaching-Elder in that Church, else his
argument will be guilty of Ignoratio Elenchi; five answers more I would have
given.

Mr. Tho. Hooker giving the true sense of Independency, says, it imports thus
much, Every particular congregation, rightly constituted, and completed, has
sufficiency in it self to exercise all the Ordinances of Christ. Surv. Chapter Dis.
part 2. page 80. But then it seems it must be completed; and to this
completing are required a Pastor, Teacher, Ruling-Elder, Deacon, one at least
of all these. So page 4. ib. and without these, though a particular
Congregation may be called a true Church, as a man that has but one eye, one
arm or leg, may be still defined Animal rationale, as having a reasonable soul;
yet he is but maimed, no entire man; such is that Church, page 2. Ibid. I pray
how many such Congregations have we?

The Synod held at Boston in New England, September. 10. 1679, the last year,
page 10, 11. calling for a full supply of Officers in the Churches, speak thus:
The defect of the Churches on this account is very lamentable, there being in
most of the Churches only one Teaching Officer, for the burden of the whole
Congregation to lie upon. The Lord Christ would not have instituted Pastors,
Teachers, Ruling Elders (nor the Apostles have ordained Elders in every Church,
Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5.) if he had not seen there was need of them for the good
of his people; and therefore for men to think they can do well enough without
them, is both to break the second Commandment, and to reflect upon the wisdom
of Christ, as if he did appoint unnecessary Officers in his Church. Thus the
Synod.

Half the question then is gained, the Independents yield it, men worthy to be
listened to, for they take up the word of God for their only Rule. I know there
is a great question about the Ruling Elder, but I am not to meddle with it now.

Our Brethren of the Presbyterian judgment, I suppose, yield the question, they
may and ought to unite, to make up one Governing Church; but I do not fully
understand their meaning. Suppose twenty Parishes and Congregations that meet
together to worship God, and twenty Ministers belonging to them, are these
twenty Parishes distinct Churches as to Word and Sacraments, so that he that is
Pastor in one Church, has nothing to do in another Parish, as to feeding them
with Word and Sacraments, but as to Government and Jurisdiction one Minister
with the rest of the Classis have power over them all? if this be the meaning,
I am not satisfied in it.

Dr. Stilling fleet has declared his judgment, they may unite. I wish he had
pleased to have opened his mind fully about it.

If he will yield but this, That constitution of a Church wherein a Pastor
cannot possibly feed with Word and Sacraments, watch over and govern his flock
according to Christ, be it Diocesan or Parochial, that constitution is not
according to Christ, and consequently unlawful, (as Scripture Light, and
nature's light will prove it) I should, it may be, come up to him, to perform
our duty by Substitutes; this may please them who make their own brains, not
Gods word, their rule, and such we little regard.

God has now brought me to old age in my Pilgrimage; diverse disputes about
Church-work and Government I have read; absurd, unscriptural practices in
Churches I have seen; woeful disorders and wretched effects I have heard and
known; great scandal, but so circumstanced, that a single Pastor could not
proceed by Mat. 18.15, etc. to remove it; I have met with one of the ablest
Divines in England, and exercised in Government, was of the same opinion with
me, all arising from this notion of a single Pastor with such a people making a
Church; and all which mischiefs might be avoided, if the uniting of several
particular Congregations into one particular Church were admitted, which
Scripture-examples, and Scripture-reasons will sufficiently justify.

CHAP. IV. Of SCHISM.
THere remains yet one thing to be spoken to, viz. the great crime of Schism,
with which we are charged by the Fr. Deb. in his first and second Book very
deeply; thus also Dr. Goodman, and this is the common language of them all,
both in Pulpit and Press.

To which I would take liberty to speak more largely: That Schism in the Church
is a great crime, is readily yielded by understanding men of all parties, and
no party will own it, though they be guilty enough of it.

At this day all but Conformists are Schismatics; but to the Prelatical party
this sin is a stranger; yea in the time of our troubles, when they were in
France, and refused Communion with the French Protestant Churches, yet a
Prelatical person was not then, nor can be guilty of Schism, but they were
Schismatics in France.

What is Schism? Dr. Goodman tells us, p. 112, 113. Schism is a voluntary
separation of ones self without cause given, from that Christian Church whereof
once he was a member.

He opens his Definition, p. 113, 114.

First, It is a separation, etc. i. e. When a man shall refuse to join in the
acts and exercises of Religion, used by such a society, and to submit to its
authority. So he that refuses Baptism, the Lord's Supper, or to submit to the
censures of the Church. Thus he. But what he means by non-submission to the
censures of the Church, I know not, for I know but few Nonconformists that are
under the Censures of their Church: nor how it will agree with his second:
which is,

2ly. It must be voluntary separation: So that Excommunicate persons are no
Schismatics.

3ly. It is separation from a particular Church.

4ly. Of which Church he was once a member, because Schism imports division,
making two of that which was but one before.

But according to this opening of his definition, I pray Sir, tell us how you
will prove us Schismatics?

For take up your third head.

1. I pray tell us what is that particular Church you mean, National, Diocesan,
Parochial?

As for the National, I know not how you understand a National Church; for as I
understand it, you cannot prove us Schismatics.

For the Diocesan, you cannot prove us Schismatics, unless the refusing to
submit to Prelatical Government be Schism. (For the Sacraments belong not to a
Diocesan Church qua sic.) I suppose Dr. Goodman's judgment to be the same with
the Doctor that kept the Act at the Commencement at Cambridg. I heard so much
of one question, that I labored much to get a view of it, but could not in our
parts. A Conformist told me it was to this purpose, Recessio a regimine
Episcopali, est mortale schisma; he told me, Damnabile schisma, as it was told
him.

I say only this to it: As God gives up some men to monstrous lusts in
practice, so he does others to as monstrous opinions in judgment in these days.
So that it must be meant the Parochial Church.

But, 2ly. I pray prove that we were members once of that particular Church you
mean. For the Diocesan, we deny any such Church (especially as your
constitution is) to be according to Christ's Institution; and therefore were
not, are not members of it.

For the Parochial Churches, I pray how are we members of them?

1. Not by our Baptism; if that were your meaning, I would soon give arguments
to confute it.

2. Not by my dwelling within such a Parish-bounds; though I am for the
Vicinity of Church Members, yet I was not so simple when I was in my Place, to
think that all the people that dwelt within the bounds of the Parish where I
was Minister, must own me for their Minister; as if a spot of ground measured
out by a Civil constitution, must make a man a member of a Church, which as
such is a spiritual and free society. I wish Dr. Goodman could convince all the
Papists that dwell within these Parishes, that therefore they are members of
the Church of England, or Schismatics.

3. I know nothing but consent that constitutes any man a member of a Church;
but that we never gave either to the Priests imposed upon us by a Patron, and a
Prelate; nor to the Parochial Church, as you take Parochial.

Wherefore upon Dr. Goodman's definition I argue, where there was no union,
there can be no Schism.

But between us and your Church there was no union: Ergo, no Schism; why then
does he charge us with it?

3ly. Suppose we were members, yet still you are to prove there was no cause
given for our separation; which though you attempt to do, yet Sir, you must
bring other manner of arguments than Rhetorical flourishes, and humane stories
to convince us.

But one thing more: Why does he tie up his definition to a particular Church?
I think a man may hold Communion with that particular Church of which he is a
member, and yet both he and that particular Church too, may be guilty of
Schism. So that his definition is too strait. I will give him more advantage,
and let him take it.

I shall then give a description of Schism, and open it. Then I will lay down
several Propositions tending to the clearing of the Question, who are the true
Schismatics.

Schism is a renting or dissolving that Union which Christ our Head requires
in his visible body.

To open it, I shall be short.

1st. That Christ has a Body Natural and Mystical, or a body in a mystery,
which is to him as his natural body, is known to all Christians, Ephesians 1.22.
speaking of Christ, He is the head over all to the Church, v. 23. which is his
body. This Head, and this Body, make up one Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12.12. so
is Christ.

2ly. This Body of Christ is but one; two Bodies joined to one Head, much more
thousands, were monstrous. All the believers in all the particular Churches of
the world make up but this one Body of Christ, (...), Ehes. 4 4. one body. So
Romans 12.4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12.12. so Revel. 19. and chapter 21. one Bride, one Wife.

3ly. This body has its bands or ligaments, whereby the body is tied to the
Head, and the members one to another. For those to the Head I omit; the other
concern me in this place, how the members are tied one to another. Now these
ligaments are first Internal; secondly, are External.

1. Internal: and they, 1. The blessed Spirit of Christ, Ephesians. 4.4. One body
and one spirit. so 1 Cor. 12.13. The second is love, Col. 3.14. Ephesians. 5.16.

2. The External bands are the Sacraments or Seals of the New Covenant; whether
Government be any thing, I shall touch afterward.

But for the Sacraments, they are the bands of this visible body; they belong
only to the members of this body; one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. belong only to that
one body, v. 4.

1 Cor. 11.17. We being many, are one bread, and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread.

Hence Excommunication, in which men are cut off the Body, and rendered,
durante hoc statu, as Heathens and Publicans, not visible members of Christ, is
by casting them out of Communion with their Body in these Ordinances. In these
Ordinances the visible members of the body declare that unity and internal band
of love one to another.

Panis igitur fractio est unitatis, and dilectionis symbolum. Virtute hujus
Sacramenti, con a lescimus, in unum corpus invicem and cum Christo. Par. in loc.
Paraeus in loc. who quotes Chrysostom, and the practice of the old Christian
Churches, how Christians in this Ordinance did manifest their unity and love.

A Christians love (I speak to the business in hand) is twofold.

1. There is a Christian love common to all.

2. There is a Christian Ecclesiastical love proper to some; as for Christian
love I am bound to manifest that to the bodies and souls of all, though
Heathens. I will pray with Heathens, (a silly thing to turn Excommunicated
persons from Prayer, which is Natural Worship) I will Preach to Heathens; I
will exhort, reprove, encourage Heathens privately; to comfort a Heathen as a
Christian, I cannot; else I call not to mind what effects of love I manifest to
a Christian, but I will to a Heathen.

But for Christian Ecclesiastical love, manifested by Communion in these
Symbols or signs, I will not manifest that to one Heathen, only to the members
of this visible body, being one with them.

As for Episcopal Government, which Dr. Goodman, and this late Commencer adds,

First, I would thank either of them if they would give us a stout piece
against Erastus and his followers.

2ly. If by Episcopal Government they mean such as now is among us, let them
first prove it is of Divine Institution, which all the Commencers in Cambridg
or Oxford shall never be able to do, so long as there is a Bible; and if they
cannot do that, then where is the schism? It Is rather our duty to separate from
what is not of Christ's planting in his house.

3ly. But let the Government be of Christ's Institution, yet wherein does that
Government show it self? among other things in letting in, or casting out of
this body? by admitting or casting out from these Ordinances of the Sacraments?
but that refusing, or separation from such Episcopal-Government, merely as
Episcopal, should be Mortale schisma, this is but the figment of the
delirant-brain of a Prelatical Zealot.

2ly. This Schism is in the visible body of Christ. I hear there are schisms
among you, 1 Cor. 11.8. the house of Cloe, 1 Cor. 1.11. saw them, who informed
Paul. Schism it seems comes under the senses, then it must be in the visible
body, when this body visibly met together.

By the visible body of Christ I understand all that make profession of their
Faith in the Lord Jesus, and the Doctrine of the Gospel soundly, and do in
their conversation visibly walk according to his Rules in his Gospel, so that
their conversation do not openly be^ly and deny their profession, Tit. 1.16.

That the one body of Christ mentioned 1 Cor. 12.12. in which there ought to be
no schism, v. 25. is meant the visible body of Christ, I think none will deny.
So Romans 12. and Ephesians. 4.

1. It is such a body in which the Lord had set Apostles, Evangelists, 1 Cor.
12.18. Ephesians. 4.11. such a body to which extraordinary gifts were given. But
these were Apostles; not to one particular Church, but the Catholic Church
visible.

2. One member is to suffer or rejoice with another, 1 Cor. 12.26. Ay, if it be
a member and real member of our particular Church of Corinth; but for other
Churches, and unless we are sure they are invisible members, let them go. Is
this the meaning?

3. Are we baptized into a particular, or the Catholic Church? 1 Cor. 12.13.
and Baptism belongs to the visible Church.

Other things I might mention, but I think it will not be denied.

3ly. When then that union our Lord and Head requires in this his visible body
is rent, dissolved; when Communion is denied among the members of it, contrary
to his appointment.

Now Schism appears, when the internal band, Love, is broken, there is
something of the nature, the root of the sin is in it, but that is hid. Men can
hypocritically and vilely meet together, and hold communion in that Ordinance
which holds forth unity and love, and have their hearts wretchedly divided one
from another, this may be hid, as I said.

But Schism properly so called, is when the external band is broken; when
communion in those symbols or signs, is denied on one side, or refused on the
other side, without warrant from Christ; so that the members do not meet and
hold their communion as they ought, but split into several pieces, opposite one
to another, as if they were not members of that one body. Now Schism is
apparent, Quia haec scissio maxim perficitur and apparet in debita communione
Ecclesiastica recusanda, id circo illa separatio, per appropriationem
singularem recto vocatur, Schisma. Ames Consc.

Having opened our description for finding out the true Schismatical Church or
Persons, let me give the Reader my mind under several Propositions.

First, I reassume that which I mentioned before, viz. the body of Christ is
but one; and that Schism is found in the visible body.

2ly. This body being but one, hence then, that this one body comes to be
divided into so many particular Churches, and meeting in so many particular
places to celebrate the Sacrament, and the other Institutions of Christ, it is
is but accidental, and not essential to this body, it being the consequent of
that vast number which makes up this one body.

3ly. Such yet ought to be the Conformity of all these particular Churches unto
the Gospel pattern, the Law and Rule of their Head, in their Faith and
Doctrine, in their Worship and Discipline, in their conversation and practice,
I may add, and constitutions, that wherever the members of this body come,
they may manifest their Unity, and Christian Ecclesiastical love to and with
those particular Churches, without any just scruple or doubt. It being not in
the power of any particular Church to vary in the least from that Rule and
Pattern their Lord and Head has given them; for in so doing they deny him to
be the Head, and make themselves the Head. The Head is to direct.

4ly. If any particular Church shall vary from that Pattern, and shall impose
upon the members of this body, conditions of communion which our Head has not
imposed, and such as from the light of Scripture we cannot but apprehend as
sinful, and yet will force them to subject to such conditions, or else no
communion; that imposing Church is the schimatical Church, and the guilt of
Schism lies at their door; Let this Imposition be in Faith, Worship,
Discipline, or Manners. Let the Church be Papal (if that be a Church),
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptistical, Lutheran, Calvinist, no
matter what, the Imposing party is the Schismatic. Why do you, how dare you if
you be members of that Head, impose that upon the members of his Body, which
himself has not? we will not, we must not admit any other wisdom or will in
things which concern him, but his own; if we may admit three things which vary
from his Rule, we may admit three hundred, and turn him out from being Head. A
great stir there is about the power of the Church in circumstances of worship:
If you mean inseparable circumstances, ordering them according to the general
Rule our Head has given, for the edification of the Church, I know no
Nonconformist such a block as to deny it; but that the things imposed upon us
as conditions of Communion in the Church of England (as you call it) are such,
the former discourse has sufficiently proved the contrary. Hence the
Churchmen of England are the Schismatics.

5ly. It is an irrational thing that the Imposers of Conditions in things
belonging to God, should be the sole Judges of the lawfulness of their
Impositions.

First, Because there is but one word or Rule given, to which the Imposers and
Imposed are strictly bound, and the Imposed may understand that Rule as well
and better than the Imposfers; else how the Protestant party will defend
themselves against Rome (the Imposer) I know not; they suppose they understood
it better than Rome, and so do you now think.

2ly. The Imposers have sin in them, and may sin; they are not Infallible;
therefore their Impositions must be judged by others.

3ly. If Imposers must be sole Judges, and we must obey because they impose,
then never must the people of God obey the call to come out of Babylon, Apoc.
18.4. for Imposing- Babylon being the sole Judge, will tell you, her Impositions
are all lawful, and therefore you must obey.

6ly. Christ our Head no where requires, but rather forbids our holding
Communion with that Church which Imposes such things as conditions of
Communion, which his members cannot subject to, but with a doubtful conscience,
Romans 14 23. (...). He that doubts is damned if he eat; but not, if because of
doubting he dare not eat.

That there are some such giddy Christians who will find such exceptions
against any Church that they cannot communicate with a clear conscience, though
there be no humane invention imposed, but only what Christ himself has
appointed, I do not deny; but then let the guilt of Schism lie at their door.
But as to your Humane Injunctions we cannot submit to them, but with a doubtful
conscience at least.

7ly. There is great difference between a Church in which there are some
corruptions, but no Imposition, and a Church where there is Imposition of
Humane Inventions, not agreeable to the Word; with the first we would not doubt
to communicate, but not with the second.

Hence for the examples brought against us out of the Scripture, where were
corrupt Churches, but no command for separation, as under the Old Testament.

It Is very true, how could they make a separation there from the Temple, and
the Levitical Priesthood, without going expressly against the Word? Might they
erect another Temple? Is there any such Temple under the Gospel?

For those in the New Testament:

1st. Their Churches were rightly constituted.

2ly. Their Pastors were rightly called.

3ly. Their Pastors sound in Doctrine; we do not read they were charged with
unsoundness.

4ly. For outward scandalous sins we read of none in their Pastors.

5ly. Their members for the major part sound; though some particular members
were unsound in Doctrine and conversation, yet they were but few.

6ly. They had Christ's Order and Discipline, as he appointed, to help
themselves against those unsound and corrupt members.

Hence what cause was here for separation? what understanding man would scruple
communion with these Churches, though there were some corruptions? Compare
yours and these. But,

1st. Where was this Imposition of Humane Inventions in the Worship of God?
unless some few Schismatics in the Church of Corinth, we do not find the
Churches charged with mixing any thing of theirs in the Worship of God.

2ly. Which of those Churches had sworn to the Great God to reform what was
amiss in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, and then return to their vomit
again?

8ly. Christ our Head may hold communion with his members living in corrupt
Imposing Churches, and yet others of his members that see and know these
corruptions, must not hold communion with them; still the Schism lies upon the
Imposer.

1st. Your Spiritual Courts having Excommunicated many gracious and
sincere-hearted Christians, for what cause we know; a sad thing that such a
solemn Ordinance should be so abused. But with these gracious Christians,
Christ holds communion we are sure; and will not your Church therefore hold
Communion with them?

2ly. Christ holds Communion with his people in Babylon, Apoc. 18.4. how were
they made, and kept his people else? must we therefore hold Communion with
Babylon?

3ly. Christ holds Communion with his people in the Lutheran Churches, I doubt
not; but if they impose upon you the Doctrine of the Ubiquity of Christ's Humane
Nature as a condition of Communion, will you hold Communion with them?

9ly. Persecution joined to Imposition upon the members of Christ's body, what
Christ never imposed, renders the sin of the Imposing-Church much greater; and
refusing Communion with such a Persecuting Imposing Church is no Schism. If
Christ does give us leave to flee from one Persecuting City to another, where
there is no Persecution, then if a City be a Persecuting City, by reason of a
Persecuting Church, surely he does not bind us to hold Communion with that
Persecuting Church.

10ly. Though one particular Church cannot communicate with another particular
Church, because of their corrupt Impositions, yet if that Church which cannot
communicate with the other, will admit of those members of that Church who walk
as become Christians in all other points, excepting those Imposed corruptions
which at present they cannot see, being blinded with those deluding notions of
indifferency and circumstances, that Church cannot be charged with Schism,
though they refuse communion with the Imposing Church; for we give communion to
their members, only exclude their imposed corruptions. I do not mean such
members as voluntarily took that solemn Oath, etc. of reforming those
corruptions, and now return to them again. I look on this as a greater sin; but
for others I know several of our Churches would give them communion, (I do not
say all will) but then how are we Schismatics?

11ly. Particular Churches may be so corrupt both in Doctrine, Worship, and
Conversation, that the sounder members not only may, but ought to separate from
them to save their own souls from infection, and this is not Schism but Duty.

12ly. The case of those who are actual members of those Churches where these
corruptions are, is different from those who are no members of such Churches;
they have something else to do before they may separate.

13ly. If it be our sin to communicate with such as we know to be notoriously
wicked, unless we follow the rule of Christ, Mat. 18.15, 16, etc. to seek the
removal of them, or do not our duty to reform the Pastor, Cure of
Church-Division, page 100.
or remove him, as Mr. Baxtar tells us; How we shall communicate without sin,
though we had nothing else to trouble us, I know not: that many such come to
the Sacraments, and who more boldly than they? we know; which way shall we
reform them? the Curate has no Juridical power. To the Spiritual Court must we
go? To the Diocesan must we go? we are like to mend it; carry Witnesses, how
many miles? when yet the power we cannot own to be of Christ. When all is done,
have a Writ upon our backs to bring us to the common Law, and what then?

Whence to conclude, they have dealt unworthily by us, who bring the old
Nonconformists against us, to condemn us, as if the state of this Church were
the same with the true Church of England.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFTER I had finished, I met with a Pamphlet, Entitled, The reason of
Episcopal Inspection asserted, in a Sermon at a Vesitation in Cambridg, by John
Templer, D. D.

The scope of the Sermon is to prove the Divine Right of Prelacy over Elders
and Congregations. And that the Author might show himself to be a true Son of
the Church, he has given sufficient proof in every particular. For the
Liturgy, that is so perfect, that he says, the most accuminated Intellect is
not able with justice to charge it with any error, p. 18. All then the old
Nonconformists, Parker, Ames, Bradshaw, Cartwright, Richardson, Didoclavius,
etc. together with the latter Nonconformists, who were appointed with others by
the Kings command, to review the Liturgy, and have given an account what things
in it were to be corrected; Calvin also, for saying he found in it some
Tolerabiles Ineptiae, are all by this accuminated Doctor, dubbed for so many
Dunces. They must be men of higher Acumens than these, that can find any just
cause against it; these have said nothing considerable. But whatever be the
opinion of this Author, yet Mr. Jeans, a man of an acute Intellect, one of
their own, and as great a Zealot once as he can be, confesses when he intended
to write in defense of the Discipline and Ceremonies, when he read these men's
Books, he found such arguments in them as were never answered, and thereupon
laid by his Pen, his judgment being quickly altered; but if you be a person of
a more accuminated Intellect, why did you not answer those dull fellows, and
therein do us a kindness, that we might have conformed as well as you?

He tells the Reader, p. 17. If this order (of Prelacy) had a period, the
Dissenters would never pitch upon any one way.

A. 1. The same says the old Gentleman at Rome; these Dissenting Protestants
cannot pitch upon one way. Hence no period must be put to the Papal Government

2ly. You were very cunning, Sir, to pitch upon the warm side of the hedge,
thereby to save your selves from persecution, and keep your fat Livings; then
cry up obedience to Governors; pity the Martyrs had no better Intellects to
have taken this course too, and so have saved their stakes!

3. If men would lay by their self-interests, we might sooner pitch upon one
way; but so long as he sits at Rome, and the Jews are uncalled, I look but for
little of this unity in the Gentile-Churches.

But to the main scope of his Sermon: Had it been to prove the Divine Right of
an Episcopus Praeses (or Primus Presbyter, as Ambrose calls a Bishop) with the
Presbytery or Ecclesiastical Senate, I should not have been his opposer; but it
is an Episcopus Princeps, and that not with, but over the Presbytery, superior
in power, which he contends for; how strongly proved, we shall see.

His Text was, Act. 15.36. Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go again, and visit
our Brethren, etc.

That the Doctor intended out of this Text to prove such a Visitation as was
then when he Preached, and so in England when Bishops visit, I presume; else he
deceived him to whom he dedicates it, and the four Doctors that Licensed it.
See how the Text will force it.

The Proposition or Antecedent is this: Paul and Barnabas, two Apostles, Act.
14.14. Persons of extraordinary mission, commission, and qualifications for the
office, having by their Preaching converted many people from Heathenism to the
Faith of Christ, gathered them into Churches, and set Elders over them. These
Elders and Churches being but all young Converts, and through the relicts of
corruption in them, and the malice of Satan and his Emissaries without them,
being in danger to miscarry in Doctrine or manners, these two Apostles go to
visit the Churches, which they had planted.

Therefore one Prelate but of ordinary mission, commission and qualification,
that never converted one Church, (may be not one person in truth), shall have
power over many Elders and Congregations where he never Preached; over so many,
that if he Preached every Lordsday, he could not preach once in a year to them;
yea so many, that if he Preached every day in the year, he could not preach
once in a year to them, (some Diocesses are so large.) This consequent from
such an Antecedent, my dull Intellect cannot reach I deny the Consequence.

What might be said, I foresee, and would have prevented it, but I am in a
Postscript, and so can only touch things as I pass.

Arguments he fetches from three Topics, to prove the superiority of one
single person over other Elders.

1. From Reason, p. 23. Though the Universal Church be built upon a Rock, yet
particular Churches are subject to Dilapidations, etc. Ergo.

A. In matters belonging to the House of God, I thought the will of him that
built the House, and is Lord over it, should first have been consulted: His
will has reason in it, we are sure; but for our reasons, they will put no end
to the debate, for one thinks his reason is as good as another, Quot capita,
tot sententiae It is Instituted worship we are upon, depending upon the
positive command of the Law giver. But however I deny your consequence: And
that,

1st. Mr. Baxter Church History, gives sufficient proof.
From the woeful experience the Church has found of your Repairers; these
having been as great causes of the Dilapidations, as any other. That Bishops
have been both great Schismatics and Heretics, Bellarmine will tell you. What
woeful work these have made in the Church of England in our time, we do still
remember; but I will spare names, let them alone in their graves. Musculus (not
an English Nonconformist) from the experience the Church had found of the
mischiefs it suffered by these Repairers, Musc. loc. Commun. p. 195.
sound out to prevent and heal Schism, as Hierom tells us, says, Had Hierom
lived to these days to see how this counsel of setting up the Bishop above the
Presbyter has profited the Church, he would have acknowledged it was not the
counsel of the Holy Ghost to take away Schism, as was pretended, but the
counsel of the Devil, etc. Thus he, with much more he adds.

2ly. There are other means to repair, without such Prelacy, as experience has
proved in several Churches, where Heresy and Schism have either been kept out,
or healed when crept in; Profaneness suppressed better than ever it was in
England by Prelacy.

3ly. That one Prelate is as subject to corruption in Doctrine, and
conversation, as other Ministers; and who shall repair him? the Presbyters
being inferior to him, they must not be so saucy; that kind of Creature whom
you call the Metropolitan, is as subject to corruption, as the other Prelate.

As to the proof you give, p. 26, 27. There is a greater probability of an
union of judgments, when all within a certain precinct lie under an obligation
to be determined by the reason of one, etc.

A. I thank you for this, says the now Pope Innocent; this helps to strengthen
my old worm-eaten Chair, weak in the joints, and ready to crack. Heresy and
Schism must be avoided in the Universal Church, as well as in the Church in
your Precinct; but if the Bishops in your several Precincts differ in their
Judgments about Heresy and Schism as they have done, and will do, now what
more probable way for union of Judgments, than to have them lie under an
obligation to be determined by the reason of one; and who should that one be,
but my self? this is but the same reason that Bellarmine has given for
Pontifex Maximus.

2ly. In one Diocese are some hundreds of Elders, all having the power of
Jurisdiction ex aquo from Christ, as the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet has proved;
but however, if this Doctor deny it, among these there may be many as godly
men, of as solid reason and judgment, as is this one Prelate, yea it may be
excel him in all, and in years his Elder too; yet all these must have their
reasons and judgments subject to the determination of the reason of that one
Prelate. I shall not applaud him for a man of an accuminated Intellect, that
shall assert such an irrational Proposition.

2. His second Topic is Gods Declaration for the perpetuity of Apostolical
Government, which was over other Elders and Congregations, p. 28. Yea, Sir,
this is of moment, if you can carry it.

First Text, Mat. 28.20. Teach, baptize, instruct all Nations to observe
whatsoever was commanded them I pray add this, And he commanded them to teach
That one Prelate, while the Church stands, should have superior power over
other Elders and Congregations, then you do something.

Because you mention commands for Government, name two or three Texts to stop
the mouths of these Erastians.

But to the Text. It is not for nothing that our Lord while he mention,
Teaching, Baptizing, and under this the Lords Supper; yet says nothing of
Government. Surely he had a reason for it.

2. I yield from the Apostles and other Elders, Government recorded in the
Scripture, that Government belongs to the Eldership (with the Erastians leave)
but from hence to infer that because the Apostles did exercise power over other
Elders, Ergo, now one Prelate over other Elders: I shall deny the Consequence.

For, 1. you tell us, p. 25. It Is true the Unction whereby they were qualified
for it, was not of the vulgar composition.

But say I, the Unction these Prelates have, is but of the vulgar composition.
Hence to argue from extraordinary to ordinary, is a kind of fallacy, a kin to
(...).

They that exercise Government over other Governors (as all Elders are) had
need be in Wisdom, Learning, Holiness, and fitness for Government, as Saul
among his brethren, higher by head and shoulders; so were the Apostles and
Evangelists above those Elders over whom they exercised Authority. We find no
such things amongst the men of the vulgar Unction.

2. Those Elders, as well as the people, were the Aposties Converts: these
being but newly brought home to the Faith, well may their Fathers have power
over them, and cause enough to visit them; the case is not so here.

3ly. When the Apostles come to deal with the ordinary Elders, there is no
intimation left of any such power of one Prelate over the rest. You tell us p.
45. that Timothy was Ordained Bishop of Ephesus about the 13th. year of
Claudius. I hope you will not force it from 1 Timothy 1.3. As I besought thee to
abide still at Ephesus. He must have an illuminated Intellect indeed, who can
force the ordination of a Bishop out of these words. Besides, certainly had he
been Bishop there, Paul need not have besought him to be resident there; but
however sure I am, he must be ordained before Paul's journey to Jerusalem Acts
20. for he tells Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.14. he hoped to come unto him shortly, but
Act. 20.25. when he sent for the Elders of Ephesus, he tells them they shall
see his face no more. If Timothy then were Bishop of Ephesus before this time,
then he was there now, and was now sent for, which I shall never believe, that
Paul would not mention him in particular, whose Name he uses to join with his
in several Epistles. But if Timothy did come with the other Elders, here is no
difference made of this Prelate from the other Elders, but 28. ver. he gives
the same alike to them all. Therefore I deny your Consequence. If Timothy were
Bishop of phesus, what need Paul tell him, in his second Epistle to him, Chap.
4.12. Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus? he might have spared that line, for
Timothy must needs know it, if he came to him there.

But you add, for a further Confirmation, p. 28. the words of Christ, Joh.
20.21. As my Father sent me, so I send you. But the Commission of Christ as an
Apostle, did undoubtedly extend to a superintendency over the Clergy, and the
particle (...) justify the same, as to the Apostles, etc.

A. Undoubtedly Christ's Commission did extend as you say, without limiting it
to any precincts, which you tell us several times the Apostles were, and
especially in p. 6. you would labor to prove it from 2 Cor. 10.16. [Though
that Text I conceive will not do it.] But if the particle (...) will force
their superintendency over the Clergy, it will as well force it, without
limitation to such precincts; for his Father did not so send him, and how their
Commission runs, we read. But I shall not give my thoughts about this now; you
tell us, page 34. that among the Bishops, Peter leads the Van in the Church of
Antioch. [Pope Innocent, this does not make for you: I pray tell us in your
next, in which Church did Paul lead the Van among the Bishops.] But if Peter
were Bishop at Antioch, indeed Paul went beyond his Precinct, when he dealt so
roundly with a Bishop in his own See, as he did with this Bishop of Antioch,
Gal. 2.11.14.

2ly. I conceive you stretch this Text beyond the intent of our Lord. For the
work which our Lord undertook, he had a Call from his Father, who sent him,
Heb. 5.4. Joh. 6.27. and 10.36. His Father had Authority to send him, and was
with him, Joh. 16.32. So he the Head and King of his Church, having all power
given to him in Heaven and in Earth, Math. 28.18. had Authority to send forth
his Apostles to their work; they might show their Commissions, or Credentials.
He promised also to be with them and their Successors to the end: and I think
all Gospel Ministers are their Successors: but that the Lord intended in these
words the settling of a Superiority of one person above his brethren in the
Ministry to the end of the world this is but Petitio pincipii, your gloss, and
I deny it, for the Reasons and Scriptures before mentioned.

3ly. Those Apostles had Superiority over Bishops, if there were such then, as
you say there were, yea, Archbishops; who is now over them?

His third Text is Ephesians 4.12, 13. Apostles were given and their Suffregans [as
you call them] Prophets and Evangelists, for the perfecting of the Saints,
hence page 30. you conclude, for the duration of Prophets and Evangelists to
this day.

Thus then we have to this day Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, in the
sense of this Text [unless he will abuse the Text:] a rare sight: I would go
many miles to see such persons; and to their Superiority willingly submit.

Calvin, Gerhard, Beza, Zanchi, the Leyden Professors, etc. tell us these were
Ministri extraordinarii and Temporarii; but they were men of no Acuminated
Intellects, their judgments signify little.

Well Sir, what Apostles were, you tell us not, neither need you, we know them
well: but where you can find such, I know not: but such you must find, if your
proof hold.

For the Prophets you tell us, they were such as had an excellent skill to
preach the Gospel out of the Books of the Old Testament, 1 Cor. 13.2.
Evangelical Doctrines locked up in the Figures of the Law, and Predictions of
the Prophets.

If this were all, we shall find many such Prophets amongst the Nonconformists.
But, Sir, you have spoken very short of the Prophets; Dr. Hammond, Zanchy, and
Gerhard, add two things more.

1. A foretelling things to come. 2ly. They spoke all from the Spirit, from a
Divine Afflatus. These three are somewhat like, I pray show us these Prophets
now.

The Evangelists you tell us, are such as had a profound insight into the
Gospel, as contained in the Writings of the New Testament: and could with
singular dexterity open and explain its true importance.

Such there are also amongst the Nonconformists.

But Sir, what if there were Evangelists, before there was any part of the
New Testament writtens how then does your description agree?

I question not, if the Ancients say true of the time when John wrote his
Gospel, but Timothy was an Evangelist long before: and in that Gospel are the
deep Mysteries contained, more than in the other three. If the first Epistle to
the Thessalonians, were the first Epistle that Paul wrote, as Divines generally
think, Timothy is joined with Paul in the 1. ver. so that very little was
written when he first was made an Evangelist; I see by some of your own, and
those Learned men, Philip was an Evangelist when he preached the Gospel at
Samaria, and wrought Miracles, Acts 8.5, 6, 7. but at that time no part of the
New Testament was written. For Matthew wrote first, and that was eight years
after the Ascension as our Divines for the generality of them agree.

But for the Evangelists, Eusebius, l. 3. Chap. 37. a fitter man to tell us
what an Evangelist was, than you, gives us another description, and that which
agrees with Philip in Acts 8.5, 6, 7. and other Scriptures; I shall note only
these.

1. That they watered the Churches, every where planted by the Apostles.

2. They preached Christ to them, which as yet heard not of the Doctrine of
Christ

3. Having planted the Faith in new and strange places, they ordained there
other Pastors, committing to them the Tillage of the new ground, pressing
themselves to other People and Countries.

4. By the power of the Holy Ghost they wrought miraculously.

Show us these Evangelists now.

His last Text is, 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep the Commandments until the appearing of
the Lord Jesus, etc.

A. 1. By the appearing of the Lord, etc. exitus vitae is meant, thinks Austin,
and some others. But if not, yet this appearing is an Argument used not only to
Timothy, but to all Christians, to look to their duty, Col. 3.4 Tit. 2.13. 1.
Pet. 17.

2. What Commandment this was, if we well observe the 11. and 13. ver. going
before, we may well guess

3. If you refer it to his Office as you do, and would thence infer the
perpetuity of his Office to the Worlds end: I deny that to be the meaning.

For, when the Apostle charges him, 2 Timothy 4.5. do the work of an Evangelist,
etc. there the word Evangelist is taken in the same sense with Ephesians. 4 11. not
only Calvin, and Gerhard, but Scultetus, though an Episcopal man, yields, and
it were absurd to think otherwise.

But that Timothy in the 1. Epistle Chap. 1.3. should be ordained a Bishop as
you say, and long after this charged to do the work of an Evangelist, they must
have dull Intellects indeed, that know nothing of an Evangelist, and a Bishop
who beelieve it: The Evangelist being one fixed to no place, and had the power
of Miracles, as Eusebius and the Scriptures testify.

This was a Commandment so incumbent upon Timothy, that his Salvation or
miscarrying was concerned in it, as he performed it, and so it is true of all
Ministers; but for an Evangelist, the French Church, the Low Countries,
Scotland, New England, [where Mr. Eliot has more right of Superiority over the
Churches of the Indians, than any Prelate in the World, yet would detest your
Doctrine] nor any Churches that I know of, own an Evangelist.

As yet then the proof fails. Thus we find in Clemens Epistle to the
Corinthians, a Metropolitan Church (forsooth) there is no mention made of any
such Prelate. But page 2.62, 69. and 73. especially, he mentions only Elders
without any distinction. A Bishop being but Primus Presbyter, Primi Presbyteri,
Episcopi, appellabantur, Ambros. in 4 Ephesians.
as Ambrose calls him, it may stand with Episcopus Praeses. Thus Polycarpus in
his Epistle to the Church in Philippi, another Metropolis, says Dr. Hammond;
there is no menion of any such Prelate, but page 18. he exhorts them to be
subject to the Elders and Deacons, answering to Paul, Phil. 1.1.

For Timothy's being twice ordained, and (...), mentioned 1 Timothy 4.14. which
you would have understood of Prophets, etc p. 45, 46.

What you aim at, in Timothy's twice Ordination, I know not; whether that we
may be twice ordained, though first by Presbyters: let it first be proved that
Timothy was twice ordained to the same Office.

Timothy first ordained by the Apostle himself, you say, 2 Timothy 1.6. I pray Sir
to what Office? say, and prove from Divine Writ.

If the second time ordained, not to an inferior Office I hope; the first
Ordination by an Apostle, the second to a higher Office by Inferior Officers.
I pray when was he ordained an Evangelist?

Nor does your notion of (...), take, to be meant of any other Prophets
different from Paul; for we know that Paul excelled in all gifts, 1 Cor. 14.18.
as of Tongues, so no question of Prophecy. Why therefore Paul might not be He
to whom the Spirit revealed this concerning Timothy; as yet so young, and so to
take him along for his Companion, give us a Reason, for it seems there was a
(...) given, 1 Timothy 4.14 (...) and in 2 Timothy 1.6 he bids him stir up the (...),
which was in him, (...). That the Apostles did convey gifts we know, by their
imposing of hands; though the Presbitery joined with the Apostle in his
Ordination; and so I know not above One Ordination that ever Timothy had, and
that to an Evangelist.

His third and last Topic to prove the Superiority of this Prelate is, the
practice of the universal Church, page 42. To which add his saying, page 53. As
for Prelacy; [the Essence whereof lies in a Superiority of an Ecclesiastical
person over Elders in a certain precinct]: it was ever owned by the Church as
agreeable to the Canon of Scripture.

Sir, did you deliver this in the Pulpit, for a Truth, where be sure no man
ought to speak any thing but Truth?

Have not you read Austins Epistle to Hierom, Epistle 18. in which Austin
writes thus to him, Quanquam enim secundum honorum Vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae
usus obtinuit Episcopatus Presbyterio major est, etc. Surely you have read
Hieroms Comment upon Tit. 1. Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine, quam
Dispositionis Dominicae veritate Presbyteris esse majores. To which A. B.
Anselm subscribes, in his Comment on the same Chapter. What Sir, is Ecclesiae
usus and Consuetudo, the same with Canon of Scripture?

Have not you read Estius, Sent. l. 4. d. 24. calling those Heretics that are
not of your Opinion, and undertaking to prove the jus Divinum of Prelacy as you
do? he says thus. Quod autem jure Divino sint Episcopi Presbyteris Superiores,
and si non ita clarum este sacris Scripturis, aliunde tamen satis efficaciter
probari potest. Have you not read what Medina says of the Fathers in this
point; and what our Bishop Jewel, naming the same Fathers that Medina did,
adds, Paul himself must be a Heretic if Bishop and Presbyter be not the same
according to the Scriptures. Much more I might add, that I wonder you could
write such a line.

And what Sir, will you exclude all those Churches from being parts of the
Catholic Church, that have not, nor do own your Prelacy? or what Church do you
mean, when you say the Church has owned?

That so many of the Church were of your Opinion, this with your Metropolitan
Archbishop brought that Whore in Apoc. 17. to her Chair, without which that
Prophecy had not been fulfilled to this day, so that though it is not true what
you say, yet if it had been true, it had not much prevailed with me: but God
has left Testimony against it, both in his Word, and in the Church.

As for your notion, p. 51. The reason why the Apostles wrote to the Churches
that were in the cities which were Metropoles, was to show that all the
Churches which were in that Province did depend upon that Metropolis
Government; and this Bishop was an Archbishop, p. 50.

I pray, Sir, which of the Apostles told you this was their reason? or where do
you find this written?

The Apostle mentions but but one, (...), 1 Pet. 5.4. This notion I see you are
so taken with, that p. 51. you tell us, this Hypothesis gives the most
intelligible account why all the Churches in Asia are reduced to Seven.

An Intelligible account then we have of that, which I had a desire to know;
but because the Lord had hidden it, it became not me to inquire after his
secrets; but now we have a reason why all the Churches in Asia are reduced to
Seven.

1. I pray, Sir, give us (since you are so acquainted with Christ's secrets) an
Intelligible account, why, since there were so many Churches in Europe, and
those Churches in the Metropoles, yet the Lord writes not to one of them in the
Apocalypse, only to Asia? Was not Rome a Metropoles, and there a Church?

2ly. Are you sure these were all Metropoles? It seems there is some question
about Philadelphia, and your solution does not satisfy. So for Thyatira, it
seems Pliny does not give it this honor, but Ptolomy does. So that we must
rest upon a Humane Faith, and prove which of these was the truest Writer.

3ly. But are you sure there were no more Churches in Asia than fell under the
seven Archbishops? Which of these was Archbishop to the Churches in Galatia?
that was a Province in Asia; but none of these Cities Metropolis there, for
Ancyra was. Antioch a Metropolis then under none of these, yet there a Church.
To which I pray did Colosse belong? Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithinia, were all
Provinces in Asia, and in these were Churches no doubt, for the Apostle writing
to the Believers in these Provinces, 1 Pet. 1.1. in the 5th Chap. v. 1, 2. He
charges the Elders to feed the flock. Yet none of the seven Churches were
Metropoles in any of these Provinces. I could instance in diverse more.

This I suppose the Doctor Preached to make amends for the fault he committed
in being ordained first by Presbyters; for now he talks of Archbishops in the
Apostles days; whereas Mr. Thorndike, page 45. Prim. Gov. and the old Episcopal
men tell us, Archbishops came in long after.

As for your discourse from p. 60. to the end, in which you tell your Reader
something concerning Rules about Order, Decency, Circumstantials in Religion.
Adiaphorus matters, etc. and what the Church may do to preserve it self against
opposers, that thereby p. 62. you might justify the punishment inflicted upon
us for our Nonconformity.

Sir, this is but the old Cheat to blind the people, as if we opposed Order,
Decency, and Circumstantials in Religion; and for the punishment inflicted,
will you justify it that Governors may for every error in things pertaining
to God, punish their people for not conforming to them, as we are punished? but
how much less then for nonconforming to Humane Inventions in the Worship of
God? which as yet all the Pulpits and Presses have not proved to be our error,
(I mean our non conformity to them) but our Duty.

And for that which p. 61. you would bring as a proof, viz. That the Churches
Determination upon some particu ars, in conformity to the general command, is
no addition to the Rule, etc.

It is very true, if there be a conformity to the general command; but if you
will undertake, (as here you implicitly assert) to prove that the Forms of
Prayer, Ceremonies, Prelacy, Reordination, Abjuration of the Covenant (all
which are imposed upon us) are all of them but particulars conformable to the
general command of God; Sir, let us but have the liberty of the Press, and you
shall soon find one that will answer you. I suppose there are but few pious
Conformists in England that will justify the casting of about two thousand
Ministers out of their work, because they could not submit to these Impositions
in the matters of God; had it been in things concerning the Commonwealth, that
had been another case, then let him blame us. Whence we are quite mistaken in
Dr. Templer.

A POSTSCRIPT to the Reverend Dr. STILLINGFLEET.
SIR,
THE former pages were printed off sooner than I was aware of; but give me
leave to add these lines to clear my self from that sin of Schism which which
you charge me among my Brethren, a little further; since I still continue the
same love and honorable respects to you.

Three cases there are you tell us, p. 213. in which the Sripture allows of
Separation, 1. Idolatrous worship. 2. False doctrine imposed. 3. Indifferent
things made necessary to salvation [of this latter one word by and by]. But
there are two others wherein Paul gives particular directions, but such as do
not amount to separation, viz. 1. Different opinions about meats and drinks,
observation of Jewish Holy Days. In these points he advises not to censure one
another, but notwithstanding this difference, join together as Christians in
the duties common to them all. Thus you.

A. Sir, This is very true: accordingly as I meet with Christians of different
apprehensions, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptists (some few of
which I have found, sober men, and sound in all points but that), let these men
be sound in the faith, and walk with a Gospelconversation, subjecting to Church
government, though in their different ways, I give the Lords Supper to them
all, refusing communion with none for these opinions.

2. But my good Brother, are you not beside the question? Did they in those
duties which were common to them all as Christians, impose such things as the
Lord never imposed, as terms of Communion? This is our case, both in Prayer,
Baptism, Lords Supper, Discipline, which are duties common to us all; in all
these you impose your own inventions, not our Lords injunctions; so did not
they.

And what if they would impose their Jewish Holydays (which yet were once Gods
own appointment) upon the Gentiles to observe them, who knew they were
abrogated? Sir, you impose Holydays of men's appointing upon us, which is far
worse; God's Authority is higher than yours.

2. The second thing you mention, is the corrupt lives of men in the Church,
etc. where you explain 1 Cor. 5.11. No, not to eat; but Sir, I prefer your
Hammond's explication, to which I refer the Reader; see his Pararaph and his
Notes.

As to that third ground which may warrant Separation, you say, viz. The
imposing of things indifferent as necessary to our salvation.

A. Sir, is our salvation all that we should regard? Is not the glory and
honor of God a thing to be attended? Is not this glory and honor of his, the
first thing to be intended in his Worship? Is it not his honor when his
Sovereignty and Wisdom alone commands in his Worship? In case he be deprived of
his Worship, is this honor to him? Sir, you make your Inventions, though in
themselves indifferent, yet being commanded by man's Authority, to alter in some
sort their natures (they are the words of your Canon upon the Cross) and so
necessary you make them, that without these God shall have no worship at all.
Witness Barthol mewday.

As to the Liturgy which you impose, you tell us, p. 332. you will say nothing,
Dr. Falkner having so well defended it.

A. I know it is imputed to our pride and conceitedness of our own gifts, that
we use it not. Sir, I do profess in words of sobriety, if you, or Dr. Falkner
can assure me infullibly, that I should be pleasing to God, and that I should
discharge my Office as I ought, only by reading Forms of Prayer, I will be as
ready to use nothing but Forms, as you are ready and resolute to impose them; I
would use also that Form of prayer before my Sermon, which your 55th Canon does
command to be used before Sermon; and so nothing but Forms, which is the sense
of your Church. I say, may I be but as pleasing to God. My reason is, I observe
it would very much please my corrupt, lazy, unbelieving heart. I should not
need then to beg of God the presence of his Spirit to help me as to the matter
of prayer; nor need I act my faith and dependence upon him as conscious of my
own insufficiency, 2 Cor. 3.5. for all my prayer is prepared to a syllable. I
should not then labor with my proud heart to submit quietly to Gods pleasure,
though he does substract, and not afford that presence sometimes, which he does
at other times. For here are the same words and syllables at all times, his
absence or presence has no room here. It may be the Friendly Debater that can
jeer, I see, at Christian experiences, will jeer at me too, because I give this
experience of my corrupt heart; but I care not.

As for Dr. Falkner, let but the Question be truly stated, and I do not find
one Scripture-argument he has brought that concludes the Question: for his own
humane reasons, I little regard them in divine Worship.

As for private Christians, I know your Clergy look on them as the Pharisees
did upon the vulgar, Joh. 7.49. but, Sir, I know more of them than you, or Dr.
Falkner; plain Mechanics have I known well Catechized, and humble Christians
excellent in practical piety, kept their station, did not aspire to be
Preachers, but for gifts of prayer, few Clergymen must come near them. I
profess I fall short of them. I have known some of them when they did keep
their Fasts (as they did often) they divided the work of Prayer; the first
began with Confession; the second went on with Petition for themselves; the
third Petition for Church and Kingdom, etc. the fourth. Thanksgiving, every one
kept to his own part, and did not meddle with another part. Such excellent
matter so compacted without Tautologies, each of them for a good time, about an
hour, if not more apiece, to the wondering of those who joined with them. Such
answers of prayer I have known to others, that they have praised God for
assurance that he had heard them before they rose off their knees, and at that
time it was done; a thing of very great consequence, but heard not of it till
two days after. Here was no reading of Liturgies; these were old Jacobs sons,
could wrestle and prevail with God; and yet must be punished if they came not
to Church, and set above an hour in the cold to hear a Minister read that which
their boys could do at home: and blessed be God that England in this dark day
has many thousands of such plain, but praying Christians, however despised and
punished.

As for that Question, Whether every particular Congregation makes a particular
Church? which you deny, and oppose the Dissenters, p. 234. etc. I pray, Sir,
why do you not answer Mr. Alsop's Text which he brings p. 45. from 1 Cor.
11.18. compared with 20. that Text deserves an answer; and till that be done,
they are not confuted; you have left out the strongest Argument.

Sir, you must state the Question a little closer, else you will not carry it.
I doubt not but there may be one particular Congregation which may be invested
with the power, and execute all the power of the keys, and I think that is a
Church. For instance, take your own Congregation, and a few more in London,
where four or five thousand meet to worship God, so large are your places, with
Galleries also. I would suppose in such a Congregation there would be required
four Teaching Elders, four Ruling Elders (Sir, I must own that Officer, though
I think there has been an error in assigning him that power which is not due
to him) and four Deacons. Let all these Officers ply their work as hard as they
will, I doubt not but they will find their hands full and hearts full too,
unless the Four thousand be the better Christians. But Sir, will you deny this
Congregation to be such a Church as we read of in the Gospel, complete as to
exercise of all the power of the keys? I am sure you will not.

As for your Reason for Episcopal Government [another ground of difference
between us] which you give us in your Preface, page 5. quoting Mr. Noyes of
New England in your Treatise, page 234. agreeing with you, viz. It is hard to
persuade considering men, that the Christian Church should degenerate so soon,
so unanimously, so universally, etc. -- Mr. Noyes -- Would not Elders, so many
knowing men, at least some of them have contended for Truth, wherein their own
Liberties were so much interessed? Aerius his opposing of Bishops so long after
their rise and standing, is inconsiderable, etc.

Sir, much here might be said, but I leave it to those, with whom you have to
deal; as for Mr. Noyes, I know him very well, and know what may cause him to
write for Episcopal Government. That (...) (bear with my words, for I am sure
it is contrary to Scripture and Reason) of the Congregational men, That the
Fraternity (or Plebs) is the first subject of the power of the keys, have made
such work in Congregational Churches to my knowledge, that their Elders have
felt the need of that principle, and made them to think again.

But good Brother, what Episcopacy is it you mean? if you mean only Episcopus
Praeses, I am of your opinion, it was the government in the Apostles time when
Elders in a particular Church were multiplied: And if we would but exercise
more meekness and patience one with another, Consult the Scriptures more
attentively, we shall find that the true Government and Constitution of the
Church takes in something of Episcopacy, something of Presbytery, something of
Independency.

But Sir, if you mean Episcopus Princeps, (which is our Case) one that has a
Superiority of power above Presbyters, with which these must not meddle, and
this Bishop such large Diocese as ours are, and this Bishop also the Sole
Pastor over the Diocese, as Bishop Morley checking Mr. Baxter, tells him, that
the Bishop of Worcester, and not Mr. Baxter, is Pastor of Kidderminster, as
well as of all other Parochial Churches in that Diocese, page 2. Sir, this
Episcopacy you and Mr. Noyes have to prove, that it was ever in the Apostles
time, or of Christ's Institution, for this we utterly deny.

The Presidential Episcopacy (as I may term it) lasted, as it is conceived by
Learned men, till the middle of the second Century, or toward the end of it:
your self does not deny it. Iren. page 275, 276.

But for this Princely Episcopacy, when that began to be set up, then began the
Degeneracy of the Apostolical Government.

Though Mr. Noyes makes little of Aerius, yet Medina tells the world that
Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodore,
Theophilacct, were all of Aerins his judgment: and you say Medinas judgment
will prove true, Iren. 276. So say Bishop Jewel and Learned Whitaker. Quam
Epiphanius frigidissimis rationibus refellit, says Whitaker, Tom. 1. page 149.

As for their Diocesses, beside what I have said before, you tell us they were
not very large, since all the Parishes could communicate on the same day with
what was sent from the Cathedral Church. Iren. page 370. Sure I am what you
plead for now, does not agree with the last Paragraph of your Irenicum, where
you were nearer the Truth.

How they should come to degenerate so soon, is easily understood if we believe
the 2 These. 2, 3, 4, and 7. ver. and the 17. Chap. of the Revelation. If posita
permissione infallibiliter sequitur quod permittitur, which I am sure is true;
then it is as true, if the Spirit foretells what shall come to pass, that must
come to pass. good Austni, good Cyprian, and other good Bishops, by their
Superiority of power and large Diocesses, did prepare the way for wicked
Boniface the third, and he made the Catholic Church his Diocese: it was
impossible for him else to come there, had the Churches kept to the Apostolical
Government.

That Counsel and prediction of God was secretly and severely brought about by
men. This was once your your Opinion, Ire. page 197 198.
Though the Elders had equal power from Christ, yet being it was to be
exercised but in a coordinate way with others, you tell us they might devolve
the exercise of their power to others, Iren. 276. and Dr. Templer tells us,
there is a greater probability of an Union of Judgment, when all within a
certain precinct lie under an obligation to be determined by the reason of One,
etc. when there is only matter of Right and Liberty, which require care, pains,
watch, but no profit or gain, come into the Purse (as here) we can easily, and
readily listen to Reason that may take us off from Duty, and part with that
Right which has no profit, but only pains annexed to it.

FINIS.

