A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF St. PATRICK'S DUBLIN, On the 5th
of November. 1690.

Before the Right Honorable the LORDS JUSTICES of IRELAND.

By JOHN FINGLAS Prebend of St. Audoens DUBLIN,

Published by their Lordships Special Command

Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray on Colledg-Green, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers in Dublin, 1690.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord SIDNEY Viscount SHEPPY, and THO. CONNINGSBY
Esquire Lords Justices of IRELAND.
May it please your Lordships,
YOur Commands first gave the ensuing Discourse Life, and now Publication; as
to the latter, there is so little of my own in it, that I can thereby design
not so much the publication of it, as of my obedience; But that there is so
little, may I hope be believed, was more out of choice then necessity; for tho
the notions of a Brain, rufsted and disordered by a violent and tedious
Distemper, might fall short of any reasonable performance; yet there is no
invention so weak or barren, but might upon such extraordinary occasion, abound
with more then ordinary productions. But indeed (considering our present
circumstances) I thought nothing more proper for that occasion, then to lay
open the Principle of that Church to which we are beholding for the designed
Treason of that Day.

And let their pretenses to Loyalty, be what they will, yet they must give me
leave to assert, that where the Popes Supremacy is maintained, there the King
looses always so much in a Subject, as his Holiness gains in him.

I am very far, from the least design of exasperating your Lordships against
any of that Profession now amongst us; Your prudent Conduct, (of which they
themselves are witnesses) may I hope prove a more successful instrument of
their Reformation, then Ruin and Power. Your Lordships Zeal for the Truth
(without making use of either) is already conspicuous enough, and will yet more
eminently appear, in Commanding these Sheets (that with so much plainness
assert it) to the Press.

Their dress I must submit to your Lordships favor, but their truth, to the
greatest severity; if in the former, I have been so unhappy as to have done
ill, yet (considering my present state) I have the happiness, that Charity may
construe I might have done better; Them together with my self, I lay at your
Lordships feet, and beg leave to subscribe my self,

My Lords Your Lordships most Faithful and Humble Servant. John Finglass.

A SERMON, Preached on the 5th of November. 1690.
Psalm. 21. latter part of the 11th. verse. They have imagined a mischievous
device which they are not able to perform.
IF we call to mind the Mercy of this Day, we may say of it as the four Lepers
surprised with joy at the sudden vanishing and disapearance of the Syrians
Army, This day is a day of good Tidings, and we should not do well to hold our
Peace. 2 King. 7. 9. Should we hold our Peace, the very Stones (as our Savior
told the Pharisees. troubled at the triumphing of the Disciples) would
Immediately cry out; for if ever any People, we, if we for any Deliverance, for
this; and if for this, on any day, much more on this day, may well say and sing
with the Psalmist, in the words of the Text, They have Imagined a mischievous
Device which they are not able to perform.

Before I come particularly to the Text, method requires, that I disingage it
from some connection: And that may be best done by casting a glance on the
foregoing Psalm; It is spent in Prayer for the King; was penned by David, and
by him committed to the praesect of his Music, as a sorm to solicit God with
in the troublesome times, and days of Danger.

And removing your eye from that Psalm to this, you will find this to stand as
a Talley to the former, containing a Form of Praise, in return of the Mercies
there prayed for; what the Church begged of God, in the foregoing, they bless
him for the receipt of in this psalm: They are none of those Orators whom
affliction only makes so, who never cry, but under the lash, nor list up their
hands to God but when he lays his hand upon them; such as the Prophet tells us
of, Ila. 26. 16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a
Prayer when thy chastening hand was upon them: But even now, when God has
remembered them they will not forget him; now they are past danger, they are not
past duty, now they are set out of hazard, they set their hearts, and tune
their spirits to thanksgiving. To beg of God when we are empty may speak Faith
in the Heart, but to bless him when we are full, is the breathing of an
excellent Spirit.

The Text then is a part of that (...), or Triumphant Song sung by the Jews in
acknowledgment of Gods goodness to David their King, and in him to the whole
Kingdom, Policy or Common Wealth of Israel; The sum or substance whereof I
shall deliver in these two Conclusions.

First, The Enemies of Gods Church and People are of a plotting, devising, and
mischievous spirit, and temper, They have imagined a mischievous thing.

Secondly, Let the wicked design what they will, or plot what they can, they
shall not be able to accomplish their desire or design, Which they are not able
to perform.

First the Enemies of Gods Church and People are of a Plotting, Designing,
Mischievous, spirit and temper.

The Mischievous thing here designed, was the overthrow of David and his
People, by the Forces of the Children of Ammon, with the Auxiliaries of Syria,
under the Command of their Capt. General Shobach, of which we read 2 Samuel: 10.
But David's Victory, that this and the foregoing Psalm. refer to, plainly
declare, tho they imagined a mischievous device, they were not able to perform:
It were easy to manifest this truth, either by Scripture, or the History of
the Primitive times; I could show you that Gods People were no sooner owned to
be so but they were soon oppressed; for how did Pharao (who prosessed that he
knew not the Lord, nor would hear his voice, nor let the People go) begin his
Reign, but by consulting how to keep Gods People under by heavy Burdens, and
hard Taskmasters: but when that succeeded not, the more they were vexed, the
more they increased; he adds to the former cruelty a Charge; that the Midwifes
should kill all the Males of the Hebrews in their birth; but neither did this
prodigious cruelty prove so successful as he desired; For the Text tells us,
that the Midwifes feared God, and did not as the King Commanded them; but
preserved alive the Men Children, Exodus: 1. 17. and therefore transported by
rage as one that had lost Humanity itself, he makes a more public and general
Law, charging all his People that every Man child that was born, they should
cast into the River, and Drown if, V. 22. With what sury and violence, after he
had made them weary of their lives by sundry oppressions, did he pursue them
into the very bottom of the Seas? thinking its like, that God had divided the
waters for no other end then for him to pitch his Field in, against his own
People: Its plain if God had not taken him off, he had never taken his rod off
the Israelits: If we should after him, look upon Manasses, that wretched
Idolater, who did evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abomination of the
Heathens, he built the high places which his good Father Hezekiah had
destroyed; he erected Altars for them, and that in the Courts of the Lord, all
which was attended with such Barbarous and Dispiteful wasting and oppressing of
the Church of God, that it is said in the 2 of Kings, 21. 16. that Manasses
shed Innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenisht Jerusalem from corner to
corner We might likewise reflect upon Haman that Idolatrous Tyrant; the Text
tells you Est. 3, 6. that being full of wrath against Mordecay for not bowing
unto him, he thought it to little to lay hands only on Mordecay, but thought to
destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole Kingdom of Ahasueras, and
for this purpose procured letters from the King, which he sent into all the
Provinces, to Root out, to Kill, and to Destroy all the Jews, both young and
old Children, and Women in one day. Est. 5. 15. I might further instance in
Antiochus Epiphanes, that Monster of men, for his horrible Idolatry, and savage
Cruelty against the Jews, called Epimanes, in both which he so raged, that
never was the like since there began to be a Nation till that time, as the
Prophet Daniel tells us in Chap. 12. 1. What shall I speak of the Tyrany and
Cruelty of those Heathen Roman Emperors, within the first 300 years after
Christ? by whom, not only the Apostles themselves suffered Death, but whosoever
made any profession of their Doctrine, were most ignominously tormented; no
respect had of Sex, or reverence of Age, so that the History of those times
seem to be writ in blood, of which those Monsters of nature in the shape of
men, made such effusion; that we read the dead bodies of Men, Women, and
Children, old and young together were cast out, and lay naked in the Streets,
like the pavement thereof; And indeed that enmity put by God himself between
the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman, seems to intimate as much,
which David sound in Psalm. 38. 19, 20. They that render me evil for good are
mine adversaries, because I follow the thing that God is; this spightful wrath
was kindled in them against him, because of his Religion and Piety, with which
their corruption could admit no accord; as Cain slew his brother because his
own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, so our Savior tells us in
John 7. 7. The world hates me because I testify of it, that the deeds thereof
are evil; and that his Disciples might not be surprised when they meet with the
like usage, he forwarns them in John 15. 19. If you were of the world the world
would love his own, but because ye are not of the world; but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you; and further tells them ye
shall be hated of all Nations for my name sake, and therefore informs them,
that he sent them forth as Sheep into the midst of the Wolves, which David long
before found true, and thereupon complains in Psalm. 57. 4. My soul is among
Lions, and I lie among them that are set on fire, even the Sons of men, whose
Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword. It were easy to
enlarge upon these and other heads; but upon such occasions as this which are
but annually observed amongst us, I have always thought it more proper to stick
close to the business of the day, then to expatiate by way of common place, or
otherwise upon any of the Truths proposed; and therefore in the next place
without any more ado, I shall endeavor to evidence that this Plotting,
Contriving, and Mischievous Spirit, is the very Spirit that rules and
influences Popery at this day; which Religion (if it deserves so good a name)
exceeds all other (the Turkish not excepted) in Barbarous Bloodshed and Cruelty.

Long it were to recite, and almost incredible to believe those Horrible
slaughters, which might be induced to prove this part, for there is neither
Writer that can be so diligent, nor Writing so exact, as to make a sufficient
Relation of the barbarous usages offered to the Saints by these Enemies of the
Truth, verifying that Prophecy, Rev. 17. 6. where it is affirmed, that that
Woman, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, was drunk
with the blood of the Saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. By
this Woman, the Jesuits themselves are forced to confess, is meant their Rome;
but old Rome (say they) such as it was under the Heathen Emperors; But let them
consider the other circumstances in the foregoing part of the Chap. and then
dec lare (if they can) how this can agree with old Rome, for where are those
arraid in Scarlet color, but in their new Rome: In whose forhead is the Name
MYSTERY written but in the present Romish Babylon: The Heathen Emperors
Proclaimed open War against Christianity, and carried not their enmity in
secret, and in a mystery they exercised their Cruelty to aper to mart, as we
say, wherein either warning to Prepare, or Entreaty, or Truce, or Flight, might
have satisfied or prevented the Enemy, and saved the lives of those that were
exposed; but these Romanists carry on their Plots and their Mischiefs with such
secrecy and such mystery, that it is almost as imposable to make any league
with them as it is with Hell it self: insomuch that (according to most Writers)
the Syrian Antiochus Epiphanes, was a lively Type of the Romish Antiochus, who
was to come after him, and is now in the world, and the Author of no less
misery to the Church then he was; for see how Daniel describes him, His power
shall be mighty, but not in his strength; he shall destroy wonderfully, and
shall prosper, and practice, and shall destroy the mighty and the Holy People
And by his Policy shall cause Craft to Prosper in his hand He shall magnify
himself in his heart; and by Peace shall destroy many. Dan: 8. 24, 25. A lively
description of the Romish Antiochus, of that Beast rising out of the Sea, of
which we Read, Rev: 13. 11. having as well the horns of the Lamb, as the speech
of the Dragon, that is prosessing the Meckness, and Inocency of Christ, but
exercising the Force and Power of the Dragon* intruding himself as the head and
husband of the Church, while he Robs and Spoils it; Possessing himself a
servant of servants while he sets himself above all Kings and Princes; as
Boniface the Eighth in the year 1300 before a great concourse, at one of their
Jubilies, showed himself one day in his Priestly Pontisicals with the Cross
carried before him; the next day in an Emperors Robes with a Sword carried
before him, and his Title proclaimed ego sum pentifex et imperator terrestre.
et Caeleste Imperium habeo, all this is mine and to whomsoever I will, I give
it. So Pope Adrian the 4th. caused the Emperor Fredrick, to hold his Stirup,
and quarreled with him, for taking the Left instead of the Right; but the next
Pope, Alexander the third, trod upon His neck, when he stooped to kiss his
Holinesses Foot, using those Words, in the 91. Psalm. Thou shall tread upon the
Lion and Adder, the Young Lion and Dragon, thou shall trample under foot; and
when the Emperor replied, Non tibi sed Petro, not to thee, but to Peter, do I
this Submission; the Pope treading on him again, said, et mihi and Petro, both
to Me and Peter. So Pope Celestine the third Crowned the Emperor Henry the 6th.
with his Foot, and after he had Crowned him, cast down the Crown to the ground,
thereby signifing that he had Power to cast Him down from the Empire (if he
deserved it) which Baronius highly commends: But his Successor Innocent the
3d exceeded him; For he Excommunicated John King of England, deposed Him,
Absolved his Subjects from their Allegiance to Him, and did cast an Interdict
upon the Kingdom, which lasted six years, giveing it to Philip of France? If he
could take it, which made his Subjects to despise Him, the Clergy to Revile
Him, the Barrons to rise in War against Him, and the French King, to fall upon
Him, and thereby reduced him to such extremity, that, (to purchase his Peace,)
He was glad to give the Kingdom to the Pope, and in the end a Monk Poisoned
Him. It were endless to recite their dealings this way, whereby it would appear
that a great part of their Religion is but a Mystery of Iniquity, a bundle of
Policy, which has brought, and held most Kingdoms and Countries in Europe
within the snare and Bondage of a silly Friar; and that by the pretended
Sanctity, lying Miracles, false Donations, forged Writings, and the like. What
Potentate could ever lay the Foundation of Obedience in Conscience? or could
overcome his Enemy without War by a Parchment Bull? or maintain himself and his
pomp, at all Men's costs and devotions? or conquer opposite Princes, by their
own Subjects? or stablish himself by Dispensing with unlawful Marriages, or
lawful Oaths, or maintain so many Intelligences by Consossions? or Pleasure all
Men in their humors, by Wealth, Poverty, Austerity, Volumptuousness? What a
notable Combination of mischievous devices is there in that Religion, where all
those things and many more, are most eminent and most usual? and that they are
all in this will easily appear if we consider either their Positions or
Disposions; their Principles, or Practices.

First their Principles; and herein, I shall be so just, as not to deliver one
syllable, but what I have from their own Authors; So that if any of them herd
me, I may (if possible) undeceave them; for I have Charity enough, to believe
many of them Pious, and Devout in their own way, and if they really understood
their own Doctrine as now refined by the Friery Wits of late Jesuits, and
Priests, they would soon renownce Communion with them.

1. Neighbors of Heriticks (meaning thereby Protestants) may lawfully be
spoiled of their goods, though indeed it were better (say they) to do it, by
the Authority of the Judge.

2, Men are not bound to restore what they have received, or to satisfy their
Creditors that are tainted with Heresy.

3. By the Heresy of the Parent, a Child is freed from his Obedience; and
Symancha gives us this instance, If a Priest returning into England finds his
Father to be a Protestant, he may deny him to be his Father: meaning (says he)
that he is not such a one as he ought to acknowledge for his Father.

4. Heriticks may not be termed, either Children, or Kindred, but according to
the old Law, thy hand must be upon them, to spill their Blood.

5. It is not Lawful for Christians to Tolerate an Heretical King: that is a
Protestant, they may Expel him, Depose him, yea Murder him; and this they say
is agreeable to the Apostolic Doctrine.

6. It is Lawful for Catholic Princes to make League with Protestants, only
for their own advantage; as for Example, to dispatch some business, which
hinders them from falling on Protestants with all their Forces.

By these and the like Positions which they maintain, we plainly see how they
disolve all Bands of humane Fellowship, and strangle the very Vitalls of all
Society; But amongst many, many more, there is one yet remaining, the most
pestilential of all, to wit, that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, and
that all Protestants are Heretics, being condemned by the Pope and Council of
Trent as such, and so are fallen from the Faith, and forfeit all privileges
where keeping of Faith with them, might stead them or oblige others. I confess
indeed I have seen a little Book written by one of them, who denies this,
assirming that Papists esteem themselves Obliged to keep Faith even with
Insidels; but this is an ordinary Stratagem of theirs, to profess to abhor
Jesuitical Tenets to lull us asleep, to get their Wickedness acted with less
Suspicion. Amongst many Instances that might be given, I shall give one in
Queen Elizabeth's time, so soon as the Pope perceived, that She intended in
earnest, to shake off the Romish Yoke, and that all his slattery, and smooth
dealing, could not reduce Her to his Obedience, (She refusing to permit his
Nuncio to enter Her Kingdom) he falls to his old courses, and in the Year.
1569: Pope Pius the 5th. Excomunicates Her, Absolving all her Subjects from
their Obedience; Cursing all that should any longer submit to Her, giving Her
Kingdom, to his Catholic Majesty, the King of Spain, and sends over his Bull
against into England, which some Seminary Priests there, admired, and Extolled,
and Blasphemously asserted, that it was Indicted by the Holy Ghost; yet
presently after they set out a Book on purpose, to lull the Queen and State
asleep and to admonish the Papists of England, not to practice any mischief
upon the Queen, because Catholics might use no other Arms but Prayers, Tears,
Watching, and Fastings against their Adversaries; And yet in the mean time,
these very Men, never rested Plotting one Treason after another; and Watson
with other Priests, who writ against this Book, were the desperate Propounders
and Ringleaders, of that Treason against King James and Prince Henry, at his
first coming into England, for which he with Clarke suffered the reward of
Traitors; So that they are not to be believed, for they will say any thing,
maintain any Assertion, that may tend to the advancement of their Cause.

But for your farther satisfaction to prove the truth of this, and show you
that their practice is suitable to this principle (let them asert what they
will) who knows not that John Hus and Jerome of Prague, upon the Emperors
promise, and Letters of safe Conduct appeared before the Council of Constance;
and yet notwithstanding, when they had them there, they Condemned them to the
fire, and accordingly burnt them, which the Emperor highly resenting, the
Council declared; He was not obliged to keep his promise to them: Because no
Faith is to be kept with Heretics. In Queen Maryes time in England, our own
Chronicles tells us, the Suffolk men did aid, assist, and advance Her to the
Crown; She swearing to them, that they should enjoy the Liberty of the
Protestant Religion. But this Principle, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics, made Her not only, to break Her promise, but also to Imprison some
of them for minding Her of it. How many fair promises did Katherine de Medicis
Queen of France, and her Son Charles the 9th make to the Protestants? and yet
this hellish Princiciple induced them, not only, to violate their promises, but
also, (under the greatest pretense of Friendship) to Massacre them all at Paris
Anno. 1572. Nor is this all; But let them swear never so solemnly, whether, for
performance of Fidellity to their Prince, or of keeping Covenant, or bargain
with their Neighbor, yet the Pope, (they hold) may disolve that Oath, and free
them from the obligation thereof; I shall give you but one instance to prove
this: After the He^^^sh Treason of this Day King James appointed that all
Papists should swear the Oath of Allegiance, but hear how the Paschenius in
answer to the Kings Monitory Epistle scoffed at it as Dr. Usher cites him, in
his Sermon before the House of Commons 1620, vide in tanta astutia quanta sit
simplicitas; see, says he, in so great craft, hew great simplicity does bewray
it self: When he had placed all his security in that Oath; he thought he had
found such a manner of Oath, knit with so many circumstances. that it could not
with safety of Conscience) by any means be disolved by any man: but he could
not see, that if the Pope disolve that Oath, all the tyings of it whither of
performing Fidelity to the King, or of admitting no dispensation, would be
disolved together, yea (says he) I will say another thing that is more
admirable. You know that an unjust Oath if it be evidently known, or openly
declared to be such, binds no man, but is void ipso facto; that the Kings
Oath is unjust, has been sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church
himself; ye see therefore that the obligation thereof is vanished in smoke, so
that the bond which was thought by so many wise men, to be of Iron, is become
less then of Straw: Hence we may see what Trust and Credit to give to their
pretenses to Loyalty, and their taking the Oath of Allegiance, for let them
pretend never so much moderation, yet they acknowledge the Pope as Supreme in
all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, and prosess obedience to him, before
all the world in things of that nature, and when occasion serves, he can
relieve them from all obligations of God, or Conscience, of Nature and Nations,
so that when he is pleased, to enjoin either Treason or Rebellion, a Papist
(being a Papist) must either cast off his Allegiance, or incur the Popes Curse,
and consequently (according to them) run on into certain Damnation.

And to make them the surer, the Jesuits are obliged to inculcate their
Principles of Treason, into their Profelites, and to stir them up, upon all
occasions, to act it: As will be evident to any, who will but read the Rules of
Ignatius Loyala the Father of the Jesuits; and how far do they extend their Vow
of biind Obedience? even to the killing of Kings, and raising of Treasons and
Rebellions, where ever they can have access? In order to which, their great
work is to corrupt the Judgments of their followers, and Instruments of
Assassination and Treason, with poisonous Positions, touching the nature of
such Arts; and bribe their Consciences, with strong baits of Reward and Glory,
proposed to all that will undertake such desperate Attempts, which is a strong
incentive to them; for Men that are either sensible of Religion, or desirous of
Glory, will easily be induced to any Attempts, which is pronounced, not only
Lawful, but Noble and Meritorious too, especially if it be for the advancment
of their Religion. And their Church-mens persuasions, are the more forcible, by
reason of the great Influence they have over Papists of both Sexes, and the
Power they exercise over their Consciences, and the esteem and honor they have
among them, which makes them more apt to drink down any poisonous Principle
that they insuse; and so under pretense of Religion, they at their pleasure,
involve them in desperate Treason; for whether will they not lead them? by
Advancing the Popes Authority over all, inordine ad Spiritualia? and by telling
them, that the Protestants, are a pack of Excommunicate and damnable Heretics,
which all Catholics are to look upon as such, and ought to prosecute them, as
the Pope shall Command, and Direct.

It would be too redious, to show, how often, and with what arguments they have
excited their Followers, to Treasons and Rebellion; for what Rewards have been
promised to Traitors, if they do the deed, and what Glory of Martyrdom they
purchase in Heaven, in case they miscarry, is better known, then I can declare,
I shall only mind you of that Renowned and never to be forgotten,
William-Prince of Orange, the Grandfather of Ours, (and the best of Kings) It
pleased God to make use of Him (as his Grandson amongst us) to deliver the
Netherlands from the Spanish Tyranny, and Popish Idolatry; For which the Popish
Faction bearing him an implacable hatred, they instigate and stir up, one
Joanvile to kill him, and for encouraging him in this develish attempt, a Friar
persuaded him, that he should go invisible, and to that purpose, gave him some
Characters in Paper, and little Frogs bones and other conjurations, wherewith
the desperate wretch being encouraged, he watched his opportunity, and shot the
Prince through the throat; but through Gods goodness, recovering of this wound,
they never rested till they persuaded one Gerard to make a second attempt upon
him, who shot him through the breast, so that he presently dyed.

But we need not rove abroad, for Foreign instances, nor for practices,
suitable to these Principles, need we go any farther, then the horrid
Matchless, and Bloody Design of this Day, such a Mischievous thing as the
present age may well admire, the future age will hardly belive, and no former
age can parallel a Treason and Cruelty so matchless, as no name can fit it; a
Plot so odious, a Tragedy so direful, a Wickedness so incomparable; nay such a
piece of Devilishness it self in the abstract; that the actors (if it had been
effected) would not have owned it, but as Nero, after he had set Rome on fire,
fathered it on the Christians, so had they prepared a Proclamation, to cast it
on the Puritans, under which title they would have revenged it, by the Massacre
of all the Protestants in the Land, within their reach.

I shall not long trouble you, with a particular Narrative of this dark
Conspiracy, nor say much to the obscure manner of its discovery, which
Bellarmin himself acknowledged not to have been without a Miracle; only those
of you, that are yet ignorant of this contrivance, may know;

That the Pope finding that the several Plots and Conspiracies, devised against
Queen Elizabeth, being to no purpose, a little before the end of Her Reign,
Pope Clement the Eighth issues two Bulls, one to the Catholic Nobility and
Gentry of England, the other to Father Garnet Provincial of the Jesuits there,
in which the Catholics in England. were commanded, that however the Right of
Succession, did entitle any man to the Crown, yet if he were not a Catholic,
that is a Papist, they should not own nor receive him, but with all their
power, hinder his coming in.

This Bull if not the Author, yet was the main encourager of Catesby, and more
then probably of the rest to engage in the Powder Plot, the Hellish Treason of
this Day, for he and others of them, having at first some scruples of the
lawfulness of it; consult Father Carnet, and others of their Ghostly Fathers,
who all pronounce it lawful, and full of merit, and encouraged them in it; and
for their further satisiaction, Garnet offers to send to Rome, to know the
Popes express pleasure in the business, but Catesby saved him the trouble, by
telling him he doubted not at all the Popes mind, but that he who commanded our
endeavors to hinder the Kings coming in, is willing enough we should throw him
out; and if he might then lawfully be kept out, he may now as lawfully be
thrust out: Pope Clement enjoined the former, therefore we may do the latter:
And thus armed with poisonous Divinity, he and his followers resolve most
desperately to go on in their wicked design, which (the better to effect) they
sow up their lips, swear silence, and back that oath with the Sacrament,
Catelines immanity and inhumanity now need be no wonder; he the better to
strengthen his Conspiracy, and carry on his design, made his Soldiers pledge
each other in a draught of man's blood, but these drink the blood of God, and
(as they conceive materially, that they may strengthen their hands in their
bloody design; Paul's Enemies vowed, neither to eat nor drink natural food, till
they had slain him, these eat and drink sacramental food, to speed the
slaughter of thousands, and among the rest, of him that was more then ten
thousands of us.

And in order to this, a considerable time before the sitting of the
Parliament, they hyr'd a Celler adjoining to the Parliament house, and breaking
through the wall of that, they dug a great Vault, and thereby undermined the
house; in that Vault were laid 36 Barrels of Gunpowder, upon the Gunpowder,
were laid great heaps of Billets, Fagots, huge Stones, Iron Crows, pickaxes,
great Hammer heads, enough to blow up or tear in pieces (by relation) the
strongest Fort in Christendom; and with these our adversaries, thought to have
blown up Englands strongest Fort of Religion and Justice, in the destruction of
the King, Queen, Prince, Arch Bishops, Bishops, Nobles, Judges, and Commons,
who were to have met (as on this Day) in the house of Parliament, and no sooner
come and gathered there, but should have been blown up with Gunpowder, all of
them to be as an Holocaust, a whole burnt offering unto the Moloch of Rome:
Creation never saw any thing like it! and indeed they mist not much of their
hopes; all things were in a readiness, the Match was lighted, and laid, and
there wanted nothing, but the solemn Convention of all the States the next day,
for them to give fire, and so destroy Head and Tail, Root and Branch, as the
Prophet speaks, which had the Prince of Darkness, and these Hellish miners been
able to have brought to pass the surviving persons thereabouts, had seen the
dreadful Image, of that last and Terrible day, when the Son of man shall come
in flaming fire to revenge on such wicked Conspirators, the contempt of his
Gosple. Then might they have heard louder Cries, Screeching, Howling, and
Lamentations; then were the mournings of Hadadrimon in the valley of Megidda;
Then likewise might they have heard (not Rachel mourning for her Children) but
all the Children of England mourning for their Fathers, or the Chiefs of their
Countries, by no means to be comforted, because they were not: Then should
Sovereign Majesty, Ecclesiastical and Civil Authority, public Justice, and all
the honor and Power of the Kingdom, been laid in the Dust, or Hovering in the
Air; Then should the Popes Bulls, have been fixed on the Gates, of our chiefest
Cities, to expose the Lives and Estates of all that had not the mark of the
Beast on their forehead, to Spoil, Rapine, and Destruction. Good God! what an
horrid and dismal time of Confusion had that been, when they, who alone could
have preserved Order in such a hurly burly, should have been all of a sudden,
swept away themselves.

But what was it, that could possibly have provoked them to such a devilish and
bloody attempt? was it any hard usage, offered by the King or State; were they
hurried to the fire, as in Queen Mary's days? or was there a new Inquisition,
erected after the manner of Spain, with Racks, and Tortures to rectify them?
no, so far from this, that they were tolerated to enjoy their Liberties and
Possessions, graced with Titles of Honor, living securely under the protection
of the Kings Laws, without any the least violence offered to any of them, and
yet all this, and more then this was too little to oblige them, when the good
of the Catholic Cause came in competition; strange! that any thing that is
called Religion, should be made a Cloak for such Bloody, Treacherous, and
Atheistical Practices; and yet says Faux, it was merely, and only for
Religion, and he was bound in Conscience to do it, because the King was an
Heretic; And so much for the first thing, they imagined a mischievous device.

The second follows, but they are not able to perform, which in other words we
have delivered thus.

Let the wicked Design what they will, and Plot what they can; yet they shall
not be able to accomplish their desire, or design; and to go no farther then
our selves; have not we ever since the Reformation found it so? have any of
their wicked Projects, or Plots, which since that time have been continually
forging, taken any expected success, have any of their Armados, or Powder
Plots, any of their Bulls, or Curses, any of their late and great endeavors
attained the end they sought after? if God, (as one observes) has always
defeated their malicious designs. and showed by his Judgments on the Actors how
much he detests such wicked practices, they might well gather, that their
courses are not warrantable, or as some of them in indignation have blundred
out, that the Judge of all the world is become a Lutheran.

If we are (as the same Author expostulates) such damnable Heretics as they
would make us, how comes it to pass that God so takes our part?

Is it possible that their Doctrine, that is so Catholic, or those Catholics
that are guided by an Infallible Head, should venture so far, and attain so
little, profess such Infallibility and be so often deceived; sure if they were
not given up to a spirit of delusion such palpable tokers of Gods Judgments
against their proceedings, and such manifestations of his Mercy toward us,
might breed at least a suspicion in them that something is a miss, and force
them to a serious Examination to know where the cause lies.

They call much for a Judge of Controversies between them and us, but why take
they not notice, how God has time after time, showed himself a Righteous Judge
pleading our cause, and preventing their Plots; but never more then in the
preservation of our Religion and our selves on this day, for never was
Wickedness nearer being acted, nor more strangely discovered, nor effectually
defeated, then this was, so that the Pit they have dug for others, they have
fallen into themselves.

How near this work of darkness was to have been brought to a fiery light,
judge you, it was not according to Jonas Prophecy, forty days, nor four days,
nor scarce so many hours one night betwixt; and but a part of that neither
er'e the Terrible blow had been given, and we destroyed; the hand of wickedness
was ready to have done the work before it was known to be lifted up; the snare
on our heels before it was discovered to be laid: we might well say had we
known it, there was but a step between death and us, all things were so ready,
and we so near being undone, that these wretched Conspirators applaud
themselves in their pregnant hopes and believe all their own: The Letter said,
God and man was agreed to punish the wickedness of the times, but stay man was
agreed, God was not, blessed be his Name, he was at, but not of their Council,
he who is a present refuge stepped in, trapping them in their own snare, and
discovered his Justice, in detecting their Malice; and indeed none but he
could do it, not man but the Devil devised it, not man, but God defeated it, so
that in this if in any thing the Lord was known as a just Judge Do but trace
the several steps of the discovery and you will plainly see it was not, it
could not be any other but God himself that snared them in their work; and so
brought it about by his wonderful providence, that he makes these very
Traitors to be the betrayers of themselves.

For the discovery was made but the night before, by the delivery of a monitory
Letter written in an obscure style, and given by a Lackey (crossing the street)
to the Lord Monteagle, son and Heir to the Lord Morley, wherein he is desired
to Retire into the Country, where he might expect the event with safety, for
tho there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say they shall receive a terrible
blow in this Parliament, and the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the
Letter; which Letter my Lord Salisbury (who first carried it to the King)
concluded to be an Idle Paper, designed only to amuse the Lord to whom it was
written, or to make him the subject of some mirth, if upon it he should absent
himself from the Parliament, the Principal words were, the danger is past as
soon as you have burnt the Letter; this might seem a slight danger indeed, and
not worth the warning, if it had not been merely to amuse one, but the King on
the contrary from this very sentence, devin'd the whole Truth of the matter,
interpreting it thus: That the danger or blow intended to the Parliament,
should be past as soon, or as quickly, and in as short a time as that Paper
should be blazing in the fire: So concluding it to be something of Powder, the
Rooms under the Parliament were searched, and the whole Villainy discovered and
prevented, and that by as signal a Providence as is to be found in the Records
of any Nation, and which is such a mark of the Divine favor to us, and to our
Church and Rellgion as can never be too much praised and admired by us, in our
Annual Thanksgivings.

Now I beseech you consider, what was it that extorted the means of revealing
this from his Pen, whose Tongue had sworn Concealments, that made him who was
Plotting the ruin of many, to consult for the preservation of one? not any
innate pity in the Traitor, but the overruling Sovereignty of God.

What was it that inclined the heart of that noble Lord, who affected their
Religion, to communicate the Letter (which detected the Treason) to the King?
not Popery, or carnal policy, but the all disposing Providence of God: What was
it that inspired (I can call it no less) the breast of that Royal King,
otherwise free from Jealousy, as a badge of Tyrany to suspect the danger, and
by a violent unnatural construction of a phrase to find out the violent
unnatural destruction that was hatching? not so much his own prudence (tho
otherwise great) but the wisdom of the Almighty; What was it that infatuated
the Traitors who while the Plot was but suspected, had oppertunity to escape
that they should try the utmost, and afterward sharpened the edg of all men's
spirits against them, to kill some and surprise the rest, even before a
Proclamation could overtake them, but that just severity of God: So that all
the attributes of God were concentred and met together in this days
deliverance, and therefore not unto us, not unto us O Lord, but to thy name, be
the glory of this and all our deliverances. for it is of the Lords Mercies that
we were not consumed: because his compassions faild not: Lam. 3. 22. For if the
Lord had not been in our side may we now well say, if the Lord had not been in
our side, when men rose up against us, the had blewn us up quick, when their
wrath and their match was kindled against us. Psalm. 124, 1, 2, 3,

O let the Lords Mercy, and their Cruelty never be forgotten.

The Israelites had their Pascha, and Purim Holydays, set apart for the
acknowledgment of their grand deliverance from Pharaoh, and Hamons Treason; so
let this days solemnity be continued with everlasting thankfulness, for the
miraculous discovery of the Powder Plot; let the People learn from our Pulpits,
and our Children understand in our streets, the barbarousness of this design,
the profession of the Actors, the danger that would have fallen on their
innocent heads, if the Lord in judgment to the contrivers, and in mercy to us,
had not prevented it, and ensnared the wicked in the work of their own hands;
and let us return all possible Praise and Thanksgiving, to him who on this day
mercifully declared himself both the Protector of Sion, and a Detector of her
Enemies. Who should we praise if not God? and for what, if not for this? I may
use St. Augustines words quisquis non videt caecus est, quisquis videt et non
gaudet ingratus est, whosoever beholds not both the mercy and severity of God
in this, is grossly blind; whosoever beholds and rejoices not is ingratefully
dumb.

O happy fifth of November! wherein our Sun had been turned into blood, wherein
our name had been changed into Ichabod, wherein had been set up again the
abomination of desolation, but God for his own name sake has turned it into a
glorious day, a Day of Joy and Gladness to all true hearted Protestants

Had this Monster which was come to the birth been brought forth, England's
Funeral had been with them a new Festival; how had this Fact been extolled at
Rome, and Registered in the Popes Calendar, as one of the most glorious exploits
that ever was attempted? How should we then instead of this pure worship, these
blessed opportunities we now enjoy, either have been plunged into gross
Superstition, as adoring Images, turning over Beads, mumbling to Saints,
wandering in Pilgrimages, or else have been dragged to the Rack or Stake, the
proper Engines of that Romish Cruelty.

But that God who still brings to light, the hidden things of darkness, and who
has from time to time delivered us from all the Malicious, Merciless, and
Restless attempts of our Adversaries, has likewise blasted this bloody design,
so, that though they imagined a mischievous device, yet they were not able to
perform.

To conclude all: Let us beware of that Church, whose Principles and Practices
are such as you have now heard, and from whose growing and cruel Usurpations,
we have been so lately and providentially delivered.

What shall we say, or what can we do to manifest our gratitude to him, who
next (under God) was the Author of our deliverance; who so generously exposed
himself to preserve us; and not only to him but to his Royal Consort, our
gracious Queen, to whom we are originally beholding for our miraculous escape
from an inundation of Slavery and Popery, but under the auspicious conduct of a
Sovereign truly meriting the Noble and Ancient Title, of King of men, and
Shepherd of the People, and the yet more dignified addition, of Defender of the
Faith, and (which is beyond that) amongst us the restorer of it too: For had it
not been for them, I verily believe that neither we, nor possibly this place,
especially in this decorum and luster, had been standing here this day.

That Syons stones had been pitied, and any have favored the dust thereof, so
that she did not sink into eternal, and irrecove rabble Ruins. Psalm: 102. 14.

That our Church is not sitting solitary like that Widow in the Lamentations,
bemoaning her miseries, and begging pity of Passengers. Is it nothing to you
all you that pass by? behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his anger. Lam: 1. 12.

That we have no leading into Captivity, no complaining in our Streets, but our
eyes see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken
down.

That the Designs, and Contrivances of unreasonable men are discovered; their
Purposes disappointed, and their Arm broken.

That our Necks are not under persecution, and we laboring without rest,
Servants ruling over us, while there is none to deliver us out of their hands.
Lam: Ch: 5. 5. 8.

In a word, that we are not incomparably wretched, as miserable as error and
wickedness, as malice, or a misguided Zeal can make us, is soelly and wholly
(next under God, by and from them: To whom likewise (next under him,) we owe not
only our Estates, our Quiet, our Plenty, our Liberty, but our very lives, I
could not forbear enlarging upon this? but that I must not anticipate the day
being the 16th of this month appointed, a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving for our
deliverance
which is at hand, and purposely designed for it: But while then, and always
let us admire them, as the generous Redeemers of the true Reformed Religion, as
the truly indulging Father and Mother of our Church and Country, and respect
them as the Israelites did David, the light of our Israel, and as they did
Josiah the breath of our Nostrils, the serious acknowledgment whereof, will not
suffer us to be wanting in all submissive obedience to them; whom God long
continue over us, and let all that love the Peace, and happiness of Church or
State say Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

