A DISCOURSE OF Christianity: Laying Open The Abuses thereof in the
ANTICHRISTIAN LIVES and WORSHIP of many of its Professors; Especially, the
ROMANISTS; AND Showing the WAY to a HOLY LIFE in the CHARACTER of a True
Christian.

Written Originally in French by the Famous Monsieur de Gombaud. And now done
into English by P. Lorrain.

LONDON, Printed for S. Lowndes, over against Exeter Exchange in the Strand,
1693.

IMPRIMATUR.

October 14. 1692. Ra. Barker R. in Christo Patri ac D. Dom. Johan. Arch. a
Sacris Dom.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of DEVONSHIRE, Baron Hardwick, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Derby and Nottingham, Lord Steward of HIS
MAJESTY's Household, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, and One of
THEIR MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please YOUR LORDSHIP,
HAving no other way publicly to express my grateful Sense of the deep
Obligations, laid by YOUR LORDSHIP upon my Family, and in particular upon my
self, I am prompted to do it by this Dedication. Wherein yet I dare not
undertake (as it is usual on such Occasions) to delineate YOUR LORDSHIP's High
Character, and (though perhaps I might do it without suspicion of Flattery)
fall upon the Encomium of Your Noble Virtues, and Eminent Actions; partly,
because they are so universally known already to the World, as not to need the
Pen of any Panegyrist, much less such an one as mine, who reckon my self
insufficient for so great a Task; And partly, because I believe YOUR LORDSHIP
would not like the Way that is so common and so much abused. Only I hope it may
not be thought below YOUR GRANDEUR to patronize this little Piece (at least for
the Subject, and the Author's sake) and to bear with what faults Your Judicious
Eye shall find in the Translator, who humbly begs Pardon for this presumption,
and accounts it a great Honor to be known and owned by YOUR LORDSHIP, as

MY LORD, YOUR LORDSHIP's Most Humbly Devoted and Most Obedient Servant, PAUL
LORRAIN.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THough it would be superfluous to offer any thing in Commendation of this
small TREATISE, to such as have read it in its Native Language, or been
acquainted with the Worth of its Author, Monsieur de GOMBAUD: Yet forasmuch as
there are but few among us, to whom either the Book, or Author is known, I
cannot but think it fit, that the rest should have some brief Account both of
the One and of the Other; which when I have given, may (I hope) be sufficient
to bespeak their attentive Perusal of it.

1. As to the BOOK; it treats of the most important and necessary (though
withal the most neglected) Subject of any other, viz, TRUE RELIGION. And here,
as on the one hand, you will find it represented to us in its Primitive Beauty,
and (if I may so say) Genuine Complexion, that must needs render it amiable to
sincere Souls, and inflame them with Devout Affections toward it: So on the
other hand, you will see delineated its State of Apostacsie, in the Depravation
of its Worship and Manners, wherewith it has been imbased, adulterated and
disguised, to that degree, that in many Places where it is prof^fs'd, there is
little else to be found remaining, besides the bare Name of it.

The sad Consideration whereof may well draw tears from the Eyes, and Sighs
from the Hearts of all good Christians, and make them take up the Lamentation
of the Holy Prophet; How is the Gold become dim! How is the most sine Gold
changed! and put them upon hastening out of BABYLON, which is become the
habitation of Devils, the hold of all foul Spirits, and the Cage of every
unclean Bird. Well may it stir them up to call mightily upon God, and give him
no rest, till he establish and make Jerusalem a Praise in the whole Earth; till
he build up again the Tabernacle of David that is fallen down, and bring forth
those Times of Refreshment, and of the Restitution of all things, which he has
spoken of by the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the World began.

Nor should such earnest Prayers be unaccompanied with as earnest Endeavors to
make way for that desirable Reformation in the Church and Renewed State of
Religion, by doing our best (every one in his respective Station and Calling)
for the Removal of those Corruptions that so notoriously obstruct it.

These appear to have been the main Ends of Monsieur de GOMBAUD's exposing here
the mischievous Abuses and Errors long since crept-in among CHRISTIANS, and now
so predominant (especially) in the CHUCH of ROME, whose False Worship and
Bloody Tenets, with the Pride and Covetousness, the Juggling and foul Practices
of their Clergy, his DISCOURSE seems to be chiefly levelled at.

2. As to the AUTHOR's Character and History, I shall only say in short, what
is necessary for the READER's Satisfaction, That he was a Person of great
Virtue and Learning, born and bred in the Roman Communion. But by Divine
Illumination, assisting his serious Study and impartial Examining of the Chief
Points controverted between us, his Eyes were opened to see the gross Errors of
that Church, which he thereupon quitted, and embraced the REFORMATION;
persevering therein constant to the end, notwithstanding the many Temptations
he met with to draw him back, for above half an Age together; during which time
he lived in the Court of France, under the Reigns of no less than three several
Kings, viz. Henry IV, Lewis XIII, and Lewis XIV; and was there (if not by all,
at least by the Judicious) highly respected and esteemed for his great Genius,
and other rare Endowments of his Mind: Of which he has in this Treatise (among
other his choice Works) given such an Instance, as bespeak him to be a very
extraordinary Person.

Now, since Originals (especially Excellent ones) are accounted generally to
lose somewhat of Spirit by Translations; I hope allowance may be granted to
this of mine, if it come not up to the Grace and Force of Monsieur de GOMBAUD's
Expression; who has a Style peculiar to himself, not easy for any to imitate.
But setting this aside, I may presume to say, I have rendered him faithfully;
so that, whoever shall take the pains to read this Translation, may enjoy the
whole Sense of the AUTHOR, though, perhaps, in a less taking and Ornamental
Dress. However, such as it is, I doubt not but the CHRISTIAN READER will meet
with THAT in it, will abundantly rccompence him for the time he shall spend in
the perusing of it; by filling his Heart with a lively Sense of the
transcendent Excellence of our Most HOLY RELIGION, which Monsieur de GOMBAUD
appears to have been so strongly affected and inflamed with, in the Writing of
this Discourse. But I stop here; as being unwilling to keep the READER any
longer from that Edifying Entertainment here prepared for him.

FAREWELL.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Christian Religion.
CHAP. I.
I. SINCE I have begun to make use of my Reason and Understanding, I have a
thousand times reflected upon the Beauty of this Universe, the Order of its
Parts, the mutual Services they lend one another, and the Eternal Laws they
observe. A thousand times, I say, have I considered all these Wonders, and the
custom of seeing them has not lessened my admiration of them. I have taken
notice that all this great World is nothing else but a Visible Word, that
proves a GOD so evidently, that in comparison of it all our Eloquence and
Rhetoric is dumb, or at best so obscure and inconsistent with it self, that
the more it endeavors on this account, the more it seems to hide what it would
demonstrate. I have seen that all things in Nature constantly perform their
respective Functions, and answer the end and perfection of their Creation, MAN
only excepted, who has from the beginning taken part with the Devils and
Enemies of GOD, by offending him with so much ingratitude, who had bestowed so
many Favors upon him, and made him such as it was possible for him to be,
without being God, but an Image of Him. As the first conception of his Mind was
a Fancy of Pride and Vainglory, so the first Production of his Body was a
Cain, a Murderer of his Brother, and all the Children he has brought into the
World have inherited his Rashness, and Rebellion; and consequently his
Condemnation and Punishment. I have considered Men in general, and perceived,
that some of them were of the Nature of Devils, others of Beasts, and many of
both together: that their hands were full of Blood, Extortions, Violence, and
Rapine; In short, that their whole Exercise was nothing else but a kind of
Monopoly and Robbery.

II. Then was I seized with a secret horror and grief, which like a shadow of
Death, brought a Cloud upon the fairest days of my Life. Nothing could comfort
me, neither the consideration that God had made me a Man, nor that I was one of
those that bear the Name of Christians, seeing they were at variance together,
and that Ignorance and Malice were as common amongst them, as with Barbarians
and Infidels. Nothing was more contrary to me, than those I thought like my
self, and I was reduced to this necessity, either to make my self odious to all
by an Everlasting Contradiction, or to follow their Examples; and thereby be in
some sort, an Accomplice with them in their deceit and unfaithfulness. In the
mean time I observe that the same accidents equally surpised both Old and
Young, and I could not persuade my self, that Rational Beings could feel any
true Content, in so great an Uncertainty of what must happen to them. My Reason
it self, and all the Reflections it enabled me to make, did but serve to
increase my sorrow, till I carefully and seriously considered the Divine
Oracles of the most ancient Writings, which assured me, that God had reserved
some to himself who bore a Mark in their Foreheads; which the Angels respect,
and whom the Destroyer does not approach in the Day of Vengeance; That this
World was nothing else but a Place of Trial to discern the Good from the Bad,
and a Way by which we are to pass through Darkness to Light, and from Misery to
Felicity: Words I should have heard with more fear than assurance, seeing there
were so few that could or would mind them; if they themselves had not taught
me, that Shepherds and Fishermen do much better understand them, than the
Disputers of this World, and Philosophers; and that for the true comprehending
of them, there is not so much need of Logic, as of Faith and Piety. That they
teach a Science that does not puff Men up, but makes them humble, and yet gives
the most Humble and Lowly courage enough to profess it openly before the
Proudest and Greatest Men in the World, and every day to venture their own
Lives in the attempt of saving of others from Death.

III. All these Divine Revelations, being accompanied with a Spirit of Comfort
have calmed my Soul, and I have found my self, as it were, renewed and
transformed on a sudden, in such a manner, that though my former grief has not
quite left me, at least its nature is changed, and has now no other cause but
my Sins and Infirmities. And if still I entertain any fears, they are such as
serve only to assure me the more, and make me press with greater eagerness
toward the Mark, which Hope and Faith have set before me. In this I rejoice,
not as for some transitory Oblectation, which nothing can satisfy, and which
at its full finds a want of many things; but as for an all-sufficient and
permanent Good, which increases by Communication, and which I may be very
liberal of without the least diminishing of it. This is that makes me now
freely offer what I have received, and to join my desires with those of such
Faithful Souls as Providence has sown and mixed with others, to the end that
the Voice of Truth may be heard every where, and leave them without out excuse,
who having heard shall not believe, or who being Traitors to themselves for
some Worldly Considerations shall fear to know it, lest thereby they should be
obliged to follow it. The Days are coming when those very Men will perhaps
accuse us for our not having said enough to them, and for our Cowardice in not
reproving of them, and will endeavor to charge their wilful Ignorance and
hardness of Heart upon our weakness or neglect. And yet, we no sooner open our
Mouths that way, but some say they pity us, or will laugh at and despise us,
and the most favorable usage we receive from them, is to be looked upon as
silly and extravagant Fellows. Others grow angry with us, and are ready to tear
us in pieces, revile us and take us for Heretics and Evildoers, though our
Crime be of such a nature as that we desire no better than to have our Judges
fully informed of it, and own it before all the World.

IV. But to whom shall we speak? Idolaters will never understand us. All the
Prophets have denounced a Curse against them, which takes away their
Understanding, and makes them like that they Worship. Neither will we be
understood by weak Minds, and destitute of Judgment; for such cannot apprehend
any thing, being more apt to be troubled, than instructed; and if they be
Wicked, they are offended to hear Words, that Condemn them. And these are by so
much the more dangerous, as they are more Witty and Learned; They do nothing
but use tricks, and wrest both Words and Sense. The clearest Propositions when
they please become dark and doubtful; they can prove and deny every thing
alike, and by a just Judgment for their not being willing to understand the
Truth they are grown such miserable wretches, as not to be able to understand
themselves; they are so given up to the study of things superfluous, that they
have lost the Care of those that are necessary; an Humane Science which they
have made the Judge of that which is Divine, has rendered them worse, than if
they were altogether ignorant. Besides, as Men will not be easily persuaded of
that which they don't like, so methinks I hear the Wise Men and Courtiers of
this Age cry, Pray tell us things pleasing to us, and be not wiser than the
Church. They will be no better than their Fathers, nor follow other Customs,
than those of their Town and Country; the Estates they there possess, or
rather, which possess them, not permitting them so much as to think of applying
themselves to a Profession, that might in the least be prejudicial to them; and
they will have God and Religion to buckle to their Interests, let it cost what
it will. How is it possible (say they) not to live after the way and mode of
the World, or to have different Opinions from theirs that are in possession of
Chairs and Pulpits, and of the Doctrine in vogue, to oppose the Belief of
People, Magistrates, and Princes, and to expose ones self to the Censure and
Contradiction of all? Thus to speak of Reformation, is to be a troublesome
Fellow, a Fanatic, and what not: Yea Licentiousness is grown to that degree,
that it cannot abide good and wholesome Remedies. Piety is almost wholly turned
to Superstition; and look which way you will, you will find that Corruption is so
great, that there is need not only of a Flood to wash the Earth, but of a
Universal Conflagration to consume it.

V. To what purpose then is so much talk? And what Illustration or new face
shall we give to so many old Instructions, which are always new, because always
necessary? If a Summary of some few Articles, a short Catechism, a Confession
of Faith should not be thought sufficient to make the best Christians in the
World, yet is there any thing of Man's Duty omitted in either Testament?
Nevertheless, since he that puts his Word into our Hearts, will have it also in
our Mouths, to the end, that being converted we may also labor for the
Conversion of our Brethren, let us not hold our peace when there is so great
need of our speaking, or at least, let us (if possible) write such things as
Men may not scorn to read. But take we great heed of imitating those Ambitious
Writers who seek for Reputation from the Number or Bulk of their Volumes,
wherewith they over-load Men's minds, not considering that this multiplicity of
Words intimates nothing more than the difficulty they have to apprehend
rightly, or incapacity to express fully what they would say. Let us speak
therefore in spite of all opposition and gainsaying, to try whether we can save
some by fear, plucking them, as it were, out of the Fire, Jude 23. and see
whether God will not open the heart of some Naaman among Men, 2 Kings, 5.15.
and of some Lydia among Women, Acts 16.14.

CHAP. II.
VI. I Have considered that those Holy Men, who were the first Penmen of Holy
Writ, and taught us the Laws of Living well, and the Way to Salvation, did not
trouble themselves to find out Arguments, or give any express Demonstration in
proof of a Deity; as not imagining we could be Rational Creatures, and doubt of
so evident a Truth. Indeed we must confess that every thing does in its own
Language so loudly proclaim the same, that this vast Universe seem to be
nothing else but a great Body, which God is pleased to make use of to render
himself visible, who of his own Nature is Invisible. Besides, the Natural
Notions we have of certain Principles that make us discern between Good and
Evil; the Terrors of Conscience, those Discourses of Reason, that carry us so
far above our own selves, that diligent search after a supreme Good, and the
desire of Perfection and Immortality, render him much more sensible to our
Mind, than he is to our Eyes. Therefore, whether we enter into our selves, or
look abroad, we meet with him every where, and the sense of him is so
Universal, that it must needs proceed from Nature, and they who have it not,
proclaim themselves Monsters and Unnatural. For a Man to deny a God and his
Providence (say the Wise and Judicious) is to be Deaf to his own Voice, and as
it were, a Stranger to himself.

VII. Nevertheless, some Men there are in the World who enjoy the sweetness of
Light and Life, and yet for all that do not acknowledge the Author of them, or
if they do so in appearance, it is only to avoid the Name of Atheists. Men that
accommodate themselves to all manner of Religions, because they have none, and
can either drop or caress them, according as they may be serviceable or
prejudicial to their Worldly Interests and Pleasures. They will allow no Laws
but what their Lusts prescribe, and the Justest always seem the most Cruel to
them; the Name of a Deity either offends them, or moves them not at all. They,
as far as in them lies, would destroy him, who gave them their Being, and sooth
themselves into an unbelief of That, which if they believed they would be
obliged both to reverence and fear. Their Libertine humor never gives leave to
inform themselves; and certainly they never read at all, or if they do, it is
without Meditation; and if they Meditate, being naturally Wicked, they turn
every thing to their own nature; and yet forsooth they must pass for Wits and
Men of Parts, and think themselves, Head and Shoulders, above others, when from
some infamous Sophister they have picked up two or three false Arguments for
their detestable Opinion, which they insolently extol before the Ignorant, or
in the Company of Profane Wretches like themselves. But these set aside, they
are fain to be silent; or if they speak, it is only to show themselves mere
Ignorants, in that they are always asking Questions without answering any. And
it grieves me to say, that many Princes and Great Men are so far from detesting
these Monsters, that they often find them better Company than other Men, and
admit them into their Familiarity and Confidence; not considering, that by this
means they become their Accomplices, and make themselves guilty of High Treason
against the Divine Majesty. Without these, forsooth, Conversations and
Entertainments are dull and insipid; Here it is they are highly countenanced
and respected; here they are pampered with Dainties; and where they are most
bound to be thankful, there it is they belch forth the blackest Blasphemies.
Their Sayings are received here with the greatest applause and appear so much
the more witty, by how much the more bold they are, and attack God himself? Men
truly the most ungrateful and the least reasonable of any other in the World,
who are ready to thank themselves for all the good things they receive, seeing
they acknowledge no other Cause thereof but their own Industry or good Fortune.
The very Sons of the Devil (whose Name imply's a Slanderer) that would fain
Signalize themselves by attempting the same thing with their Father, who did
ever make it his endeavor to oppose the Truth.

VIII. But since they will acknowledge no Wit paramount to their own; perhaps
it is by their Care and Power, that the Earth is counterpois'd by its own
Weight, and surrounded with so vast an Ocean without being drowned in it.
Belike, it is by their Industry and Providence, that so solid an Element is
pierced in so many places by such a vast number of Canals, springing with
Waters, that quench the thirst of all Living Creatures, and constitute Rivers
so abounding with Fish, so Fertile and Conducive to Commerce through the whole
World. It Is by their Order, no doubt, that the Sun rises at the set time to
enlighten them, when they are satisfied with Sleep; and that the Seasons return
to fill their Senses with all variety of Pleasures. Now, if in this they cannot
but own their Weakness, what folly is it in them not to grant that there are
Intellects more powerful and sublime than theirs, employed in these wonderful
Operations; and that we must at last come up to and stop, at some one that is
Superior to all others, which being finite have a Beginning, and consequently
depend upon That which has none, and is Infinite? For otherwise, proceeding
from the smallest to the greatest, Men would endlesly pass from one Cause to
another, and never find the First and Last, which alone deserves the Name of
DEITY. O shame of Men, that now adays we must be at the pains to prove a GOD!
What greater affront can be put upon our Kind than to show them that which is
continually present to all their Senses? Is not this to go about to teach the
Art of Seeing, to them whose Eyes are open, and that of Reason to such as
profess themselves to be Men? Or shall we need to add to these Considerations
their continual Repetitions, who have undertaken so high, but withal so
reasonable a Defense? Indeed, if God were not, how could the World exist? Or
must it be its own Workman and Workmanship, or have had a being before it was?
How could both these stand, and yet be but one and the same World? Or, if it
were Eternal, and Independent upon any Superior Cause, that admirable
Economy, which cannot proceed but from an infinite Intellect, and those
stupendous Virtues which it severally Communicates to all its Parts, would
insome sort, prove (what many have fancied) it to be a God. For what the least
appearance is there, that its Beauty, Order, and Duration should be the effect
of blind and heedless Chance, or that we owe to her Conduct, Prudence, and
Power, so steady and well regulated a Succession of Times and Motions, and that
such is her Wisdom and Might, as to make Causes so remote one from another, to
cooperate one and the self-same end? After all their pains, this would be
still a God, though under another Name, and these Monstrous Blasphemers would
still find in every place what their guilty Souls desire to meet no where. For,
what is Fortune or Chance? but an empty Name, a Vain Idol that subsists only in
our imagination, and to which we through Error attribute all Events, and the
Effects of all Causes unknown to us, to whom it appears greater or lesser
according as we have more or less knowledge; and if we could banish Ignorance
out of the World, Fortune would be fain to pack with her. This therefore is the
Deity of the Ignorant, to whom the Wise pay no Vows, nor make Offerings; and I
am astonished how they can think they have any reason, that speak for it, since
(according to their Scheme) they must believe that it is to Chance they owe
their Being, and consequently can neither move, act, nor speak, but by Chance.
Others there are who would seem to believe a God, but are so solicitous and
concerned for his repose, as to take from him the Care, if not of the whole
World, at least of all Sublunary Beings; fancying this would be too much
trouble for him, as if he stood in need of their Impious folly to ease him. Is
not this to deny him, whilst they pretend to acknowledge him, and rashly
confine the Actions of a Power that in its Nature is infinite? Is not this to
frame to ones self a God, that does not so much as perform the part of a Man,
and to attribute to him an Understanding deprived of Council, a Will without
Effect, and a Bounty without Communicativeness; and to say all in one Word, a
Being without being, and less than that of the Elements, which is next to
Nonentity.

IX. For, not to insist any more upon that Universal Relation, and
Concatenation of Causes and Actions, which plainly demonstrate that things
Superior stand in need of the help of those that are Inferior, and that it
necessarily depends upon the same Wisdom and Power both to make them and
preserve them; Let these Gigantick Wits stand forth and tell me, Who is it that
chastises Kings and People in his wrath, that removes Scepters from one Hand
into another, that changes, as it were in an instant, the Face of States and
Empires, and that (to show it is HE that does it) fails not of denouncing it a
long time before by the Mouth of his Messengers, Prophets and Ministers? Who
was it that did once punish the Sins of Men with so dreadful a Deluge owned by
all Nations; and by whose Advice was it that one single Family was then saved?
Who is it that promised the like Flood should never happen any more, and has so
well kept his Promise? What Intellect did foresee three or four thousand Years
before the Event, the Coming of the MESSIAH, of whom also Prophets did speak in
such a manner, as one would think they had no less seen him than the Apostles?
From whom but God himself, or some Angel sent by him, could proceed those
Predictions concerning the Posterity of Abraham, the Throne of David, and the
Lamp, that was to be preserved for him in his Family; the dispersed and
rejected Jews, and the Converted Nations? If they tell me there are
Mathematicians, Astrologers, and Magicians, that can predict future Events, I
will still ask them, what Hand did write them in Heaven in such fair Characters
as Men might read them? And who has put the signs of these things in the Stars,
or rather the Virtues and Causes which the same Men cannot comprehend? They
that are not touched with these Considerations must needs be strangely
possessed with a blind Passion that diverts their Reason to somewhat else, and
makes them pass from Custom to Hardness, and from Ignorance to Security. And
yet we see these Men very Wise and Prudent in Worldly Concerns; Their Ignorance
and Stupidity seem only to be about Divine Matters. And I am much mistaken if
most of them do not carry their Accusers and Judge in their own Bosom, who
sooner or later will force them to cry out, as well as many others, We have
wearied our selves in the ways of Iniquity, and are consumed in our own
Wickedness.

CHAP. III.
X. THus, all that we see, speaks to us of God, and convinces us of his
Existence. But what he is, no Objects nor any Discourse of ours can ever
represent. Yet what we know of him is sufficient to make us believe and adore
those his Perfections we know not. Whether therefore the Progress of Causes and
Effects be not infinite, and all things arrive or tend visibly to their End;
Whether from the Old Book, in comparison of which all others are New, we learn
the Origin of People and Nations; Whether the Virtues of Heaven grow weak, and
both the Age and Strength of Man decrease in comparison of what Sacred and
Profane Histories tell us was heretofore; it does evidently appear that God has
created the World, and for the Top-Stone of so many Masterpieces, he has made
Man after his own Image, that is to say, wholly conformable that is to say,
wholly conformable to his Will; not by a Conformity of Essence, but of
Imitation, and perfect with that degree of Perfection, which the most Noble
Creature was capable of, and sufficient for his Felicity. He held a most
Honorable Rank between Animals and Angels; He was, as it were, the Tie and
Band of the Universe, and the Center and End of all Created Beings, over which
he would have born an Eternal Sway and Command, had he but once obeyed his
Creator.

XI. But being not contented with the Favors and Munificence bestowed on him,
he rashly aspircs to a Dignity above the Supreme, and desirous to mount higher
than the very Top, and to seek (as it were) something beyond Existence he fell
down to the lowest Pit, and wanted but little of returning to that Nothing out
of which he was made. What a presumption and rashness for Man to strive to be
equal to God! What incredulity to accuse him of a Lie or of Envy! What
ingratitude and rebellion to substitute the Devil in his Place! What lack of
Charity, or what excess of Neglect toward his Children to sell them before
they were Born, and put them into Slavery before they knew what Liberty was! He
little imagined he should be thought the worst Father in the World, and that
the Curse he had drawn upon himself should reach from one end of the Earth to
the other, and from the Beginning to the determination of all Ages, and be the
most certain Inheritance he should leave to his Posterity. Neidid he foresee
that instead of that Correspondence or Society he had with the Angels, and his
Communion with God himself, his Unhappy Successors should only converse with
Devils, under whose Tyranny they would groan continually; and that to live
among Men would be to walk among Lions and Tigers, or among Vipers and Dragons:
Nor that instead of an Everlasting Spring, which he had begun to enjoy, and
might have transmitted to them, they should undergo the rigor of a hard
Winter, or be consumed by the Sunburning and Scorching heat of Summer; and that
instead of those fine Trees he beheld in the Earthly Paradise, and of the sweet
Flowers and Fruits he could gather there, they should frequently see nothing
else but Gallows and Racks, Graves and Dead-Men's Bones. He did not foresee
that besides the sweat of Labor, the misery of Want, the pain of Diseases, and
the terrors of Death, there would be Judgments that should overthrow Towns and
Cities, and lay waste whole Provinces; That sometimes Mortality would be so
great, and the Dead themselves so dreadful, that there should be none to be
found either to Mourn for, or Bury them; and that at other times Nature would
be so depraved, as that Men would devour one another, and Children being all
torn to bits and pieces should return into their own Mothers Wombs. In short,
he did not foresee, that most of his Progeny would be so abominably Wicked as
to persecute the most Innocent and Righteous of their Brethren rather than
imitate them; That they would not content themselves selves only to stone some,
and murder others; but would be so industrious as to find out Torments whereby
to oblige them to renounce the Truth, and worship Wood and Stone, or else
undergo all the Cruel and Barbarous Usage that the Malice of Hell can invent.
No, he did not foresee all this; and the Devil who made him believe he should
have his Eyes opened, aimed at nothing else than quite shutting of them, that
so he might precipitate him into an Abyss; whence it was not to be thought
there should ever be any Power of Man or Angel capable to retrieve him.

XII. How has this Fall disfigured him, and what proportion or resemblance is
there of what he now is to what he was before! He is ashamed of himself, and
has no sight but of his Nakedness, nor knowledge but of his Error. From the
Image of God which he was, he is transformed, as it were in an instant, into
that of the Devil; and there remains nothing in him of his pristine Innocence,
but the grief of having lost it. Who shall comfort him for this Loss, and what
can he expect from his Reason that only served to betray and undo him? How is
it possible that he who could not keep up while he stood, should get up again
when fallen? What can he hope for either from the Angels, or God himself;
having broken that Law whereby he was obliged to Obedience, or to Punishment?
Punishment that is of the same age with the Offense, troubles and afflicts him
already without inter mission, and he has no more Life left him, but to feel
the continual strokes and attacks of Death. And which is worse, still the
offense is heightened proportionably to the Dignity of the Person offended. So
that as he has sinned against him that is Infinite, so must he dye, or suffer
infinitely. O what confusion of thoughts! What remorse and what fears disturb
his Mind, especially considering that he had no less been informed of his Duty,
than threatened with his Disgrace; and the more to quicken in him the care of
his own Preservation, it seems the Sentence of Death should in some sort, as
one would think, have prevented his Crime? To what despair is he reduced, and
what can he think in this Miserable State? Save only this, that God never makes
a thing, which he afterward repents to have made; that he does not build up to
pull down, and that the Glory of such a Workman will not suffer his Work to
perish. That it was not likely that the most Excellent of all Creatures should
be appointed to Eternal Woes, and that being seduced, and the fault not wholly
his own, he should be obliged to make the same Satisfaction with the Devils,
which continues still, and shall never end.

XIII. Howbeit, he discovered no Expedient for his Deliverance, and could not
imagine there were any means capable of procuring him GOD's Mercy, without
doing Violence to his Justice. This is what neither he, nor we his Posterity,
could ever have conceived: And thereupon some lulled themselves asleep and
became Atheists; others framed Gods to themselves after their own way, and fell
to Idolatry. This unhappy Inclination (yet so natural and so strong that it is
grown almost to an universal Fury) did so pervert their Senses and
Understanding, that they would have the Objects of their Worships to be as
themselves, Corporeal and Visible, and not being able to imagine any thing
beyond themselves, they attributed Humane Passions to them, and appointed
Services for them, according to the Vanity of their own thoughts. They not only
degraded themselves beneath the nature of Man, when they paid Adoration to
their own kind, but made themselves less than Beasts, by Worshipping them all.
Nay, they adored the most Vile and Abject of all Creatures, that were so far
from having any Ray or Mark of the Divinity, that many times they were such as
had not so much as any sign of Life in them; Yea for fear lest any thing Horrid
and Execrable should be wanting in their Idolatry, they worshipped the very
Infernal Powers and Enemies of the Creator. Many judging well there must be a
better state for Man than that of this World, instead of enquiring whether
there was not some Divine Word that could inform them of their chief End and
supreme Good, consulted only ambiguous and Devilish Oracles. Instead of the
only and true Remedy that was able to cleanse them from all filthiness of Sin,
they sought for nothing but Crooked and By-ways; and therein wearied themselves
with Ceremonies, Abstinences, Purifications, Fasts, and Offerings; all which
had no other effect, than to add new afflictions to their Lives. For what
Sacrifices, what Beasts, what Hecatombs, could ever make atonement for the
Transgressions of one single Man? Or rather, what Man conceived as he is in
Sin, could ever satisfy, I don't say for others, but even for his own self?
And what else could he offer in offering up of himself, but Ingratitude, Envy,
Hatred, Malice, Thoughts of Vanity, and Words of Falsehood? Nay, what are his
very Virtues but disguised Vices? What is his Prudence but Deceit, his Valor
but Rashness, and his Wisdom but Hypocrisy? If he prays, he does it but
perfunctorily, and out of Custom; and if at any time he shows some Zeal, it is
not so much his Love to God that excites and inflames him, as his apprehension
of some Evil that he is threatened with, or the sense of that which presses him.
What can he do better than to make a continual Confession of his Sins, for
which, if he be judged according to his Demerits, he ought to expect nothing
else but the Sentence of Death and Eternal Damnation? Therefore if all Humane
Reason was never able to find out the means of Sanctifying so much as one
single Man; nor all Philosophy to make one Believer, or discover a Good not to
be snatched away by Death; What remains but that we should believe what the
best inspired Men could best tell us, viz. That we must have recourse to the
first Beginning; That the means was to be Universal, and that none but God
could reveal it?

CHAP. IV.
XIV. IT IS a thing most certain, That as Man was not made by Chance; so neither
was he created in vain; That his End can never be either to suffer Eternal
Torments, or to return to that Nothing out of which he was taken, and that the
same Power that gave him Being, must save him. Should not he, who by the single
Sparks of that Divine Image remaining in him, is able to measure the Heavens
without leaving the Earth, think we be Immortal? What would else become of so
many Revelations and Promises, or who is it that has taken so much care to
deceive us? What would Justice and Piety be more than vain empty. Names, to
cheat the World withal? And to what purpose so much Regard and Caution, if
after this Life there be nothing to be hoped for? No doubt, our Natural
Remisness and Sensuality would not be wanting in advising us to follow the
beaten Road, to enjoy the things Present, without troubling our head with the
Future, and to live like Beasts, since we must die like them? But away with all
these profane and rash Thoughts. The first Act of the Creator answers for all
the rest; and he that has made us of nothing, is as able to retrieve us from
Death. Should he be contented to suffer his own Image to be defaced and
defamed? Should the Devil be Conqueror in this Contest, and raise his Trophies
over the Works of the Almighty? No certainly; the first State of Innocence was
not the End of Man: How good soever he might be then, he was to be still
better, and his latter end more Blessed than his Beginning. But it was
requisite he should be exposed to his own desires, and left to the Counsel of
his own hand, as well for his Trial, as to the end he might know himself, that
this knowledge might be as a Step to him to raise him up to that of his
Creator. Perhaps he would have thought he was capable of maintaining himself
without the Help of any other Power; not reflecting that there is but one pure
Holy and true Being, on whom all others do depend, and without whom either we
must not be at all, or be Eternally Miserable.

XV. To the end therefore that all Men might know they are not to rely upon the
strength and virtue vouchsafed them, God has given them the means to try
themselves, and acknowledge that they are all of them equally fallen by the
fall of One; that they are naturally the Slaves of Sin, and consequently
Tributaries to Hell and Death. He gave them his Law, which how perfect soever
it be, yet brings nothing to its full Perfection; whose Justice serves only to
make them the more guilty, whose Instructions are but in order to confound
them, and which seems not to promise them good things, but to make them despair
of ever attaining them It is a Letter that kills, an intolerable Yoke, a
Ministry of Death, which is so far from justifying Men, that it ranks them all
under one and the same Condemnation. Or to speak more favorably of it; It is a
Glass wherein they may see what they were, what they are, and what they shall
be; It is a Flower, whose Fruit is the greatest Favor that can ever happen to
them; It is a Candle that lightens them during the Night, till the Sun rise
upon them.

XVI. Now, as the incomprehensible Unity, which comprehends all multiplicity,
is the supreme Perfection of God, so in like manner Union with God is the
supreme Perfection of Man. But we are not able to raise up our selves to him,
unless he first draws us, or rather vouchsafes to come down to us. This is the
Mystery of our Redemption, which even they themselves who had received the
Promises of it, confirmed by so many Signs and Miracles, did see so far off,
and through so many shadows and so much darkness, that they were better able to
believe and hope for it, than comprehend it. Seeing the vast distance there is
between Heaven and Earth, they could not think of any means to fill up their
great Abyss, and were not informed there were any Steps by which they might
ascend to Heaven, save only by Jacob's Ladder. Yet Reason does for all that
give its assent to things that happen beyond Reason it self; and helps us
apprehend that at last, which at first it could not so much as in the least
make us imagine. Since therefore it teaches us that a Mean ought equally to
partake of both Extremes, and does unite them, howsoever disagreeing they may
be; that a Mediator ought to be capable of the Sentiments and Affections of
both Parties he intends to reconcile, and set a just Estimate upon the Right or
Wrong of either of them: Who doubts but that he that for this end is sent to us
from Heaven is fully possessed of all the Qualities requisite for him as such;
that he partakes of the Humane and Divine Nature; in a Word, that he is Man and
God both together? Moreover, who doubts but that he is a Man conceived
otherwise than other Men, lest his Natural Corruption and Sin should make him
incapable of an intimate essential Union with the Divine Justice and Purity?
For if he were not Man, we could have no share in him, neither could his
satisfaction be imputed to us. If he were not God, he could not communicate his
Immortal Virtues, Glory and Felicity to us. If he were Man only, he could not
overcome Death, nor raise himself from the Grave, but sink under the Burden,
and be soon reduced to nothing: And if he were God only, he could not have
Died, nor received from himself that Payment to which we are bound by the Law.
Therefore he must suffer, and yet be altogether incapable of Dying; he must
die, and yet withal be Immortal too; He must descend into Hell, and come up
thence again; He must be above all the Infernal Powers, and show that to him
truly belong all the ways that lead to, as well as the Issues from, Death. He
that will deliver others from the Curse, must undergo and overcome it; and to
the end there might be some proportion between the Offense and the Punishment,
there must be a Person of an infinite Worth and Excellency, to make a temporal
and finite torment of infinite Merit. For certainly it is more with God that
his Son dies for the Sins of the World, then to see all Mankind perish
together. Now, though there be no Law that allows the Innocent to suffer for the
Guilty; neither is there any that forbids it, provided he offer himself
willingly, and be not absolutely destroyed by the Punishment, but have power as
to lay down his Life so to take it up again.

XVII. O the Wonders of the Eternal Power and Wisdom, who in the Beginning was
pleased to take out of Man a Woman that caused us all to Die, that afterward
out of the Woman he might take a Man that will make us all alive again! Thus
Humane, and Divine Nature in the fullness of time are by a stupendous Mystery
united together, and without any the least alteration in the properties of
either, the Son of God has joined himself in Unity of Person with the Son of
Man. I say the Son, and not the Father; for we cannot have him for an
Intercessor, who is to be interceded with. He that does send cannot be sent;
and because the Father does nothing by himself, but all things by his Son, it
is reasonable that he should exert the Second Creation, who was the Author of
the First. And who could speak better on our behalf, than he who is the Word it
self? Who could reprint the Divine Image better in us, than he that formed it
there at first, or entitle us better to the right of Children, than he that
possesses it in the highest degree? But it is not enough that he should make
satisfaction, and that this satisfaction should be imputed to us, but he must
also confer that Grace upon, and apply it to us; and this is the Office of the
Spirit, which equally proceeds from the Son and the Father. He it is that
enlightens and purifies us, that enables us to understand, love, and believe
these Mysteries, that impregnates us, as he did the Blessed Virgin, and makes
us conceive our Savior. He is that Band of Love which unites us to the
Divinity, that real Unction, wherewith we are all anointed, and thereby made
Kings, Prophets and Priests. In short, it is he that gives himself for a Pledge
and Security of the Promises of the Life to come, of the Resurrection, and
Glory.

XVIII. This great Mediator therefore is come, such as he was foretold, not
like some great Conqueror, a Cyrus or an Alexander; but in the form of a Man
full of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, like one Consecrated by suffering;
to be a Propitiatory Victim for Mankind, whose Merit is sufficient for all, but
appliable only to them that believe in him. He is come not to shed another's
Blood, but his own, and combat Rebellion with Obedience; Strength with
Weakness; Pride with Humility; This is that which makes him appear greater and
more Divine; This is that which overcomes and ravishes us into admiration, and
obliges us to fall down and worship him. This is the sole Object of Religion,
which is not only the Art of saving Man, but of making a God of him, without
any the least prejudice to the Divine Unity, or the Holy Trinity. For what name
can be given to the Son of Man, who makes but one and the same Person with the
Son of God? And of what Extract must we esteem them to be, whom he has
vouchsafed so far to honor, as to call them his Brethren? Now this RELIGION
has been established not by any Bribings, Companies, or Combinations; not by
the Favor of Princes, or the Votes of People; not by the Subtilty of
Philosophers, or the Persuasion of Orators; In a word, not by a Multitude of
Men, as the Mohammedan, nor a great Number of Gods, as the Pagan; but only by
the plain Proposal of a simple and naked Truth. Which Truth has,
notwithstanding all manner of Opposition and Gainsaying, made it self to be
heard throughout the World; and at its appearance has seen all Errors
confounded, all Sects dissipated and vanishing all False Oracles struck Dumb,
and all Idols and their Worshippers fall down before it.

CHAP. V.
XIX. AFter all that this RELIGION lays before us of the only Way for Man to be
saved, what can all the Religions in the World besides teach us? And what can
Mahomet pretend to persuade us, if the Name of a Christian be so odious to him,
and he so little agree with Christ, who does so perfectly agree with all the
Prophets? Is it not a wonderful thing, that so many Men should be inspired in
so different Places, and at so different times, to proclaim the Coming of a
Man, who was to be rejected of his own, and received of all the Nations of the
Earth? Certainly, after what the Scriptures tell us, and the Commands and
Counsels they give us, there is no more room left for Curiosity, but for
Submission and Obedience. Let those who make their own Gods appoint them what
Services they please: it must not be so with him, who is not made by our
Opinion, but we are all made by him: Whose Will cannot be manifested to us by
Imaginations or Conjectures, but only by his own Word. This is the Light he
has given us to be our Guide, and woe to them that call that Light Darkness. So
high and excellent is the knowledge it raises us to, that no man can ever be
supposed to have invented it: Besides it is so conformable to Reason, that it is
impossible to consider it, and not to approve it. In the first place it
discovers Man to himself, and makes him sensible of his own Weakness and
Misery; but immediately comforts him again; showing him his Distemper, only to
dispose him to be presented with a Remedy for it. It contains Revelations and
Predictions, which after so many Ages have been confirmed by the Events, and
tend to no other end but the Salvation of the Creature, and Glory of the
CREATOR. The Natural Simplicity and Plainness; the Scope, Style, Antiquity,
Energy, Duration, and so many other Signs that shine in it, are so clear an
Evidence of its being Divine, that it manifestly appears, that it is GOD himself
that speaks, and consequently it behooves Man to give attention and be siilent.
What History of the greatest and most flourishing Empires in the World, was
ever confirmed by their own Friends, as this is by its Foes? What other History
besides this, begins with the World, continues from Age to Age, speaks of
things to come, as if they were present, and ends with the World it self? This
is the Way to Salvation, the Gate of Heaven; and whoever enters in any other
way is a Thief and a Robber. This is the Model of Perfection, that shows us
what Good or what Evil we are capable of, and teaches us to examine, know, and
reform our selves. This is the true Paradise, wherein the Tree of Life is to be
found, the Leaves whereof are for the Healing of the Nations. In a Word, these
are the ALMIGHTY's Letters, which he writes as well to his Servants, as his
Friends, and are neither closed nor sealed up to any of them, whom he has
appointed Heirs of Eternal Salvation.

XX. Whosoever therefore does know, that there is a Holy Scripture for the
Instruction and Information of Man in the Service he ought to pay to his God,
and the Reward he may expect for it, and he is not careful to look into it,
whatever show of Religion such a one may make, he is a Liar, an Hypocrite, and
a Deceiver of his own self; seeing it is written for the Common People, as well
as for the Learned; for Women, as well as for Men; for Children, as well as for
Parents. And it is a bad sign for those, who have once read it, perhaps out of
Curiosity, not to be affected with the Love of it, and continually desire to
read it over and over again. Is this to deal honestly and faithfully; or
rather, is it not a siding with Satan, and being as it were at his Wages, and
taking his pay, to hinder the Salvation of Men, by forbidding the reading of it
to so many People of good will, who thirst after the WORD of ETERNAL LIFE? Let
Turks and Heretics hide their false Doctrines and Errors, as much as they
please, the GOSPEL of CHRIST, which is the TRUTH it self, must be Visible and
Communicable to all; it must shine as bright as the day, and this Spiritual
Light must be no more hid than the Corporeal. Perhaps some will say, We need
not so much Reading, nor so much Study; has not the Church prescribed
whatsoever is necessary for us, and are not we under the Conduct of Men that
cannot err? But to this I answer, that there can be no greater Error than that
which persuades us we cannot err; and that this is rashly to assume to our
selves a Divine Property incommunicable to any Man, besides Prophets and
Apostles; and that so far, as they are commissionated to be the Bearers of the
Word they have received, and the Preachers of what has really been revealed to
them. But perhaps, the WORD of GOD is not to be understood without the help of
Plato or Aristotle? But I answer, that the Wise of this World are so much the
farther from this Knowledge, because their Wisdom is Folly before GOD, and
prompts them to gainsay the Holy Spirit with Obstinacy and Violence, as two
Contraries are wont to do. Perhaps, it is but a part, or half of the Rule, and
therefore not sufficient perfectly to instruct us about our Salvation? But say
I, there is no Man so simple, nor so dull, but this will enable him to conceive
more good things than the most Holy can practice, and there is no Saint but
comes far short of the Perfection it proposes.

XXI. Methinks, I hear these wilfully ignorant Persons complain of the
Difficulty of a Science, about which they never made any more Enquiry, than if
the Knowledge of Salvation did not at all concern them; and through a
Religious, or rather, Superstitious Scruple profess that they are not worthy to
read it. It Is true, you are unworthy of the Favor that God is willing to show
you; but being he is pleased to do it, pray, who would you have to receive it
for you? You suspect him, and suppose his Word to be dangerous and dreadful,
and that it is spoken or inspired to no other end, but to lay Snares for Men's
minds, to deceive and undo them. You know (say you) your own Weakness and
Insufficiency; and that you would be apt to wrest or mistake the meaning of it.
Say rather, you know your own Malice and Wickedness, and that you would turn
that into rank Poison, which others do convert into Sweet Honey. You say that
Sacred WORD is dark and obscure, whose first Words made the Light, that
Spiritual Lamp, which was given us to this very end, that it might enlighten
us. You hear not that Word which the very Rocks have heard, and which does not
only raise the Dead, but calls those things that are not as if they were; which
Commands things out of Nothing, and the Command is obeyed. Confess therefore
that you are less sensible than Rocks, than the Dead, yea than Nothing it self.
This is the proper Effect, Counsel, and Instruction, of your Guides and
Masters, who at once made their own Precepts to be regarded, and the Scripture
despised; whose Purity cannot serve their Ambition, and who not daring to
accuse it of Lies, have given it the bad Name, that it is dark and obscure; and
not being able openly to gainsay it, have put their own Sense upon it. And
though it be full of strict Prohibitions of adding any thing to, or taking
ought from it, yet have they not contented themselves to lay heavy Burdens
upon Consciences, and load them with new Ceremonies and Ordinances, which make
the State of the Gospel more intolerable than that of the Law: But their
insolence and boldness has carried them to that excess, as to cut off some
Commandments from the Law it self; though one would think the Respect due to
the Hand of God that wrote it, should have exempted it from such a Sacrilege,
and rendered it for ever inviolable. These Men study Divinity only to oppose
and baffle the Scripture; and some of them have run over their Course of
Divinity and are admmitted Doctors, without ever having read it. Before they
read it, they learn the Sense of the School, and understand it not but by the
false Light of Prejudice. After all this, it is very hard for them to admit
another impression, than what they have received in their Youth; And then (O
Vanity, wherewith* the Devil deludes Men!) thus to understand it, is to be
thought Learned.

XXII. I Know there are Mysteries and Prophecies in it, which were not
understood even by those who delivered them, and that the Knowledge thereof was
reserved for them that should see their Events. Neither is there one Passage
threatening Men with Eternal Death, who cannot fully explain the Revelation. A
Man may work out his own Salvation with less Difficulty, than to understand
thoroughly all the Visions of Ezekiel and other Prophets. Nay, I say further,
that the Predictions, Threats, and Promises, the Evidence whereof necessarily
depends upon futurity, leave certain Impressions and Idea's on our Minds of
those horrible Torments prepared for the Wicked, and of that glorious Reward
and Happiness designed for the Righteous. The Things we understand assure us of
the Truth of those we understand not; and when those Places that are clear and
evident of themselves are not sufficient to render the other intelligible, the
Reader ought to humble himself, to confess his Ignorance Indocility, and Human
Presumption to stop here. But however, every one may here clearly see the
Commands he is to obey, the Belief he is to hold, the Pattern of the Prayers he
is to make, and Praises he is to return to GOD. And this indeed is all our
Preachers ought to teach us, without their needing to trouble and perplex our
Minds with Curious Questions, and lose both themselves and others in the Vanity
of their own thoughts. But don't we run the hazard of making our selves Liars,
if in the least we seem to assert this Word to be clear and plain, when the
Doctors of this Age declare the contrary, and the People believe them? Yes,
indeed it is Dark, our SAVIOR testifies it himself; but it is only so to the
Worldly Wise and Learned. He thanks his Father, that he has hid these things
from such, and revealed them to Babes. It is obscure to them that perish, and
whom the God of this World has blinded. So that we may confidently affirm that
it cannot be apprehended by an Understanding merely Human, and that it must be
a Divine Spirit that can conceive a Divine Word. They that have not this Spirit
can by no means comprehend it. None but the Children of God know the Voice of
their Father; None but Sheep that of the Shepherd. True it is, and I confess,
that its excessive Brightness makes it Dark to many that behold it, and that
Noble and true Born Eagles only can fix their Eyes upon this Sun, the Light
whereof never fails to strike Owls and Bats with Blindness.

CHAP. VI.
XXIII. IT is not to be doubted at all but that the Enemy of God, the Author of
the Universal Rebellion and Great Tyrant of the World will make himself to be
adored in his own Kingdom, and that consequently most Religions are Worldly and
Diabolical. It Is no matter to him by whom, or how they are instituted, whether
Ignorance, Opinion, Error, or Custom introduces them, provided they be equally
Superstitious and Profane, or whether those who at the first worshipped Bell or
Jupiter do afterward worship the Sun, the Moon and all the Host of Heaven, nay,
and that of Hell too. There is no Religion so extravagant or ridiculous, which
he does not favor; neither there is, any besides the True, that is displeasing
to him. He has first heaped Gods upon Gods, introduced their Idols even into
the Holy Place, and then found out a way to combat Scripture with Scripture,
and raised false Doctrines from false Interpretations. He has made use of the
Light, only to dazzle and blind People; and employed Truth, to cover and
disguise a Lie, the better to get off his own Impostures. He has his Doctors,
through whose Mouths he teaches and disputes continually. He has his Votaries,
by whom he exposes the Pattern of a good and devout Life: Nor does he want his
Priests, Prophets, Holy Men, or Martyrs. In the mean time, Men don't consider
what Spirit they are led by; And they are often hardened and delivered up to
Satan; yea in a manner possessed, or at lest blinded by him, who have quite
other thoughts of themselves. Besides they are of so presumptuous and profane a
Temper, and have so good an Opinion of their Natural Reason, that they would
fain reform his Works, who has formed both themselves and all things, and pass
their Judgment upon the Divine Word, with as much peremptoriness, as if it were
merely Human. They are not content with what Divinity teaches them, they must
(forsooth) call in Philosophy to their assistance, and so confound and corrupt
both the one and the other; without perceiving that by this means they leave
their Christian Vocation, and fall under the disadvantageous state of Heathens.
They spend their time in examining Curious and Subtle Questions, and laying
aside things that are clear, they make it their glory to raise Scruples and
foment Contradictions, to the diverting (by these affected Difficulties) both
themselves and others from the knowledge of Truth. Whenever it pleases them
they take Figurative Expressions in the Literal Sense, wrest those that are
dark or doubtful, and are very dexterous in putting upon equivocal terms, a
construction fit for their Turn. They dazzle one another's Eyes with specious
Arguments, and their weak Judgment suffers two Contradictories to appear
equally probable. Indeed one would think that their Learning serves only to
make them more Ignorant, and their Study to accomplish them in the Art of
doubting of every thing; thereby making Learning worse than Ignorance, they are
all Scepticks by Profession, and Christians only by Name.

XXIV. Indeed, if there were any certainty in Human Learning, they who presume
to be so accomplished in the Art of Reasoning should all agree. But if their
Opinions be so various and different, when yet there is but one TRUTH, what
does their Science amount to? Their Learning consists in a kind of Divinity,
that is merely artificial, intricate, thorny, and all full of Quiddities,
Instances, Relations and Formalities; which neither the Prophets, nor the
Apostles, ever thought necessary to Salvation, or rather were never acquainted
with them; and it were much better for us to be so too (after their Examples)
than to know them. They are learned in Human Inventions, Chimaera's, ridiculous
Fancies, and in every thing that is apt to advance Error, and confound Reason
by its own Subtilty. All Places swarm with vain Bablers, everlasting Disputers,
who employ their whole study in the art of gainsaying; that let a Man say what
he will, they may always be ready to contradict him, and are more alarmed with
a false Syllogism, than they are concerned for the Peace of the Church, or the
Happiness of Mankind. They never come to any Conferences with intent of
yielding any thing for the love of Truth, but only to try whether they can gain
their Adversaries by Persuasions and Promises, or supplant them by all manner
of Sophistry and cunning Devices. They dread nothing more than to grant one
Point, lest they should be obliged to grant them all; and if any one of them
should chance to yield never so small a matter, this would presently ruin his
Credit among those of his own Party, and the least act of sincerity would be
accounted a crime unpardonable. Wherefore they resort to those Meetings, well
provided with all manner of School-Stratagems, Arguments, and Instances,
grounded upon certain Axioms, or Maxims of their own, or others contrivance,
and constrain all to submit to them, as to Principles of Sovereign Truth, that
neither admit of doubts, nor need any evidencing, and on which depends the
infallible Consequence of what they themselves believe, or would fain persuade
others. Yea, though their Frauds be discovered, yet they have still some color
at hand to make them look plausible, and so by a pious Cheat keep the People in
their impious Devotions. They are dexterous at taking their advantage. They
have the Art of eluding the most formal Allegations: They Wiredraw the knot of
the matter, the state of the Question. They have their Sophistical
Distinctions, their set Glosses, their Sleights and Evasions at their Fingers
end; and in Disputes, as well as in Combats, their sole intent is to come off
Victors. Cursed Wretches! who prefer their own Honor and Interest to that of
Religion it self, and who being more solicitous about what they must object or
answer, than what they should believe, are very little concerned for their want
of Faith, provided they do not seem to want Reason. How can we expect, that
these Men should faithfully explain to us Things dark and abstruse, whose whole
business it is to darken those that are the most clear, and so much change the
Ordinances of God, that there needs no point of Wit to perceive it; Common
sense and Eyesight being sufficient to make one a competent judge of it? No
other fruits can be looked for either from their Animosity or Hard-heartedness,
which render them sociable only to such as are willing to be instructed in
their way, or abandon themselves to their Guidance. For as for themselves, they
are no more capable of learning any thing; because they presume they have
learned all; and so proposing to themselves nothing else but the teaching of
others, no wonder if they had rather pass for Masters of Error, than Disciples
of Truth.

XXV. But I hear them already demanding of me, Whether in a matter of this
importance, I may without too much presumption, pretend my Opinion or Judgment
to be infallible, or at least better informed, than that of the Doctors
themselves? To which I answer, That I will have no other, but that which the
most clear and intelligible Words of the Scripture do obviously afford to the
most simple among the People, and which God is pleased to reveal to the humble,
and hide from the proud. I will have no other, than that which teaches me, 1
Cor. 4.6. That none ought to presume to know beyond what is Written; That it is
absolutely forbidden either to add to, or take from it; and that they in vain
make profession of honoring God, who honor him only with the Doctrines of
Men, and make void his Law by their Tradition. I will have no other, than that
which commands me to avoid profane Questions, vain Disputations, and tedious
Contradictions of a Science, falsely so called, which one cannot follow, without
erring from the Faith, and abandoning one's self to Impiety. I further answer,
That such Questions ought not in justice to be asked of those who make use of
their Senses and Reason only to discern the Voice of their Lord and Father, to
receive his Commands and obey him, who do not rashly mix their own Fancies with
his Ordinances, and who do not explain the Scripture, but by it self. It Is from
the exorbitant Curiosity and sublime Visions of these enlightened, Angelical
and Seraphick Doctors, that so many extravagant Opinions arise, and not from
the innocent Reading of those poor and simple Creatures, that in the Word of
Eternal Life seek for nothing else, but a Light to guide them in the Way to
Conversion and Salvation. None ever were the Authors of Heresy, but such as
presume themselves able to defend it, and who with the same Spirit of Pride and
Rashness, wherewith they have started it, are resolved to maintain it. These
are Errors, which none but the Learned are capable of, and Follies that none
but Wise Men can commit. The vanity of knowing what others know not, of being
esteemed the Author of some Novelty, of giving a Name to a Sect, and being the
Ringleader of it; the Dread of Poverty, Thirst after Riches and Honors, the
Desire of pleasing Great Men, of deserving their Favors, flattering their
Passions, promoting their Interests, and thereby advancing their own: These are
the Secret Articles and chief Mysteries of their Faith. They are very willing
to quit the Pretensions of the Soul for the Ease of the Body. They are for a
Religion that may insure them a Fortune, and a Conscience that may yield to
Necessity. In the mean time, an Error is no sooner hatched, bur there are always
some ready to receive and embrace it; and that not out of any Devotion, but
from a design of forming a new Party, and raising Troubles and Divisions in a
peaceable State. Whole Europe is all bedappl'd with Sects, and as it were rent
to pieces by the Violence of so many Factions; at the sight whereof Atheists
increase, Mahometans are confirmed in their Error, Jews are scandalized, and
all equally hardened. There is no end of Questions; Sometimes about the Elect,
and at other times about the Reprobate. But who are those rash Persons, that
seek for a Reason, where so great an Apostle as St. Paul finds no other but the
good Will and Pleasure of God? For my part, I confess I cannot wonder enough at
them, who with so much ingratitude despise those things, which God has been
pleased to make known to us, that they may rashly dive into those, which for a
time he would have hid from us. Without too indiscreet a presumption, and a
Curiosity not only needless, but pernicious, I shall never disturb the public
Peace, nor raise new Doubts, either about the two Natures, the two Wills, or
Substance of JESUS CHRIST, and without a too great Love of my self, I shall
never pretend to be the COMFORTER with Montanus, nor the SAVIOR of Men, with
Menander. I will live as a Believer with Believers, and neither scandalize my
Brethren by any private Opinion, taken up of my own head, nor by a general
undervaluing of the Opinion of others.

XXVI. So long as the Weakness of Men shall introduce into the Church no other
Scruples, save about the difference of Meat, and have no other Ornaments but
Pictures, and not provoke God's Jealousy by Graven Images. So long as there
shall be only some superfluous Ceremonies, which in the Judgment of many will
pass sometimes for indifferent, and at other times be thought necessary; though
indeed an Error, that seems but small at first, is commonly a step to a
greater. So long as its Purity shall be, if not altogether such as it might be
wished, yet at least such as is tolerable; I will not depart from its
Communion. But I must and will withdraw from any Assembly, where I shall be
forced to conform with the outward actions of Superstition and Idolatry, and
pay a Religious Honor and Worship, not only to Saints and Angels, who are
Fellow Servants with us, but to Wood and Stone; where the Sacraments are not
entire, and where the Commandments of God are made void by the Precepts of Men.
Neither shall I think this is any Schism, where there is so just a reason of
Separating, and an impossibility of doing otherwise. For what else should be
the meaning or use of these Words, that command Believers to go without the
Camp, Heb. 13.13. and to come out of Babylon, Rev. 18.4. which going out is not
meant of the Spirit only, but of the Body too, seeing that both are equally to
be consecrated to the Glory of the Creator? And when we shall see the
abomination of Desolation set in the Holy Place, Dan. 9.27. must not we fly
into the Mountains, Mat. 24. Or if once Antichrist be seated in the Temple of
God, must he therefore be obeyed, and what he pleases to enjoin, be called,
the Commandments of the Church?

CHAP. VII.
XXVII. WHen therefore I saw the universal Division of so many Sects, which all
of them had their Doctors, and some of them their Prophets too, I thought, that
upon this account the necessity of Prayer was very urgent, that there was great
occasion for us to humble our selves, and consult, not the uncertain
Imaginations of Men, but those infallible Rules which God himself has laid
down. And this I desired with so much the more care to do, because the Word of
God tells us, that not only many Antichrists will arise in the Church, and one
above all the rest, but also that in the time of the Apostles themselves the
Mystery of Iniquity began already to put forward, and consequently must be by
this time grown to a great height, notwithstanding their blindness, who have no
minds to see it, and think they are safe enough whilst they can find some
pretense or other for their wilful Ignorance. I therefore suspected all
Religions, which are not purely Evangelical and Divine, which are mixed with
Human Inventions, meddle with Questions too high, and too difficult to be
resolved, and the Controversy whereof is too subtle, and fine-spun. I had also
an ill Opinion of those, that are brought in by the Sword and Tyranny, which
are so little assured of themselves, that they are afraid of a Communication
with others, and to that end keep their Followers in a Brutish Ignorance. In
like manner I mistrusted all those, that comport with the several interests of
the World, and put in for a share in its Government, whatever pompous Title of
the Church they may assume; because they overthrow the Order of CHRIST's own
Appointment, and rashly change that into a Time of Glory, which is appointed
for the Patience of the Saints.

XXVIII. Besides, if we will believe universal Experience; Every thing that is
under the Government of Men is like them, subject to Alteration, Mutability,
and Corruption, and soon or late follows the Way of their Inconstancy. Children
do not willingly continue in their Fathers, or at least Ancestors Belief; and
Faith is not hereditary, as the Title of a Family or an Estate is. For the most
part they have nothing left of it, but an outward Profession, to which they
being no otherwise engaged but by Birth or Custom, they easily abandon what
their depraved Nature neither incline them to know, or love; so that if they
have begun with good and sound Doctrine, a bad one is their Portion at last.
Thus we see that the purity of the Gospel, wheresoever it has been received,
has been seldom transmitted to the third Generation: and the Apostles were yet
alive, when in the very Churches they had planted, Error crept in insensibly
into the room of Truth. God threatened them already with the removal of their
Candlestick; giving them to understand, that Faith was no more the peculiar
Privilege of any one Place, Family, or People, and that the Church being
become Universal, could not be subjected to the Jurisdiction of one King only,
or the Administration of one single Priest. It Is in vain for Men to pretend to
lay the Foundation of a permanent State, or to find a Supreme Good here in this
Life; They are not able to bear Prosperity long, and the surest way to undo
them, is to grant them their desires. If our first Parents, though in the State
of Innocence, could not among the Flowers and Fruits of a most pleasant and
delightful Garden resist the suggestion of the Evil Spirit, who to tempt them,
took no other Form, than that of a Serpent, nor offered any thing but an Apple;
how is it possible for those who are Sinners by Nature to withstand him,
especially when he transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and offers them
all the advantages their Hearts can desire? It is indeed in a Paradise of
Pleasures, that the Devil, for the most part, tempts Men, to precipitate them
into Hell; and on the other hand, it is in a Hell of Sorrows and Afflictions,
that God trys them in order to raise them up to the Glory of Paradise. Riches
are so hurtful to those that possess them, that like a heavy Burden, they
hinder them from mounting up to Heaven. And so incompatible are they with the
Profession of the Gospel, that even he to whom they all belong, and who could
use them without the least abuse, did of his own accord become Poor, that he
might trace us the way of Eternal Salvation, and by his Poverty we might be
made Rich. Indeed, all good Men do acknowledge what is confirmed by Histories,
viz. That the Bountiful Donations of Emperors, and the free Gifts of Lords and
Ladies have proved the most dangerous Poison, that could ever have been handed
to the Church; That from that time Piety began to grow cold, and make room for
the Cares of this World, and that all Christian Virtues were soon choked by
great Plenty and Luxury. All those great Benefactors, who are so extremely
commended to us, plainly showed, that they were not thoroughly informed of the
Will of our SAVIOR, nor of the true Calling of his Ministers, when they thus
enriched them with Temporal Estates, and made of them so many Members and
Favorers of the Kingdom of this World. This great Wealth that flowed in upon
them, all on a Sudden, was but an ill omen to the Faithful, who easily judged
that for the future none but the Ambitious, Covetous, Wicked, and Profligate
could aspire to any Office in the Church, and that she was going to be reduced
to that extreme Misery, as not to be governed by any, but by her worst Enemies.

XXIX. From that time, the Corruption has (by a strange Permission of Heaven)
grown to this height, that the Clergy are grown worse than the Laity. They have
received from Men that Authority, which in their station they should receive
from none but God, and if they have taken any care about Spiritual Things, it
was not to serve, but to command, to advance themselves to the Highest
Dignities, and to be made Bishops over other Bishops. They have imitated him,
who despising a Common Joy with the other Angels, had the boldness to attempt
the raising himself to the highest Pitch of Singularity and Superiority, saying
in his Heart, I will set up my Throne above the Stars, and be like the Most
High. Instead of confining themselves to the Observation of that true Service,
which God had institued and prescribed himself, they have despised its
Simplicity, would not away with any Devotions, but such as were Pompous and
Dazzling, or if you will have it in their own Words, they have hallowed the
Ceremonies of Paganism, by admitting them into the Church. They could not
endure the Purity of the Gospel-Doctrine, without adulterating and disguising
it a thousand ways; and to that end, have chosen Doctors and Teachers after
their own fancies: They have started subtle Questions, which they that teach or
preach them, often understand no better, than their Auditors, however full of
sense they may appear, when uttered from an Eloquent Mouth, wherewith both the
one and the other seem equally satisfied. We have seen wretched Worms, that
were but a while since come out of the Dust, and ready to return to it again,
have the insolence to assume the Title of God, and dare to command Angels, as
their Ushers, and dispose of Heaven and Hell, as if they were their own Demain.
But indeed, what likelihood is there for them to be the infallible Trustees of
God's Will, and the just Umpires of the Faith of the World, who owe their
Promotion only to Bought Voices, Bribes, Corruptions, Promises, Threats,
Factious Combinations, Contracts, and Confederacies? What Patience would not be
tired, to see such, as are swayed by no other Spirit, than that of
self-interest, who make of the Church a House of Merchandise, and a Den of
Thieves, should yet be steeled to that excess of Impiety, as to render the Holy
Ghost not an Accomplice, but a Principal in their Crimes? Now if after all the
Credit they have in Heaven, they would show themselves a little less concerned
for their Earthly Pelf, perhaps one might doubt, whether their Authority did
not (as they pretend it does) run parallel with the Divine. But as they are
like Lions for cruelty and violence, so are they like Leeches for Covetousness;
and there is no end of their new Contrivances for the alluring of Men to make
vast Contributions to the insatiable Idol they Worship. For to pass by so many
Excommunications, Interdictions, Evocations, Appeals, Suits, and Exactions,
under the pretext of supporting a War against the Enemies of Christendom. There
is no end with their Reversions of Benefices, First Fruits, Bulls, Indulgences,
Canons, Cases of Conscience, Pardons, Remissions, both of Guilt and Punishment,
and Supererogatory Satisfactions. All which Inventions make not Sins Venial,
except it be by making them Venal; they expose Prayers, Sacraments, Heaven, and
God himself to sale, and prostitute them to the highest Bidder. Horrid
Inventions! that turn Simon Peter into a Simon Magus, and make, as far as in
them lies, a Tyrant of Christ, and Hirelings and Brokers of his Apostles! What
a goodly Divinity is this! That all, who have wherewith to pay, how heinons
soever their Sins be, may be in a moment, delivered from the pains of Hell, or
at least from those of Purgatory; which others must swelter through for some
thousands of Years, unless perhaps, Poverty, voluntary, or perforce; Fastings,
to that excess as to be their own Murderers; Nakedness, Hair-Cloth and
Scourges do retrieve them thence! But besides this Spiritual Merchandising and
Selling of every thing that is Sacred; by what Divine Inspiration are they
authorized to absolve Men from their Oaths of Allegiance, and discharge them of
their Obedience and Duty to their Lawful Kings and Princes, whom they rather
endeavor to terrify with their Thunderbolts, than to make them truly devout?
or can that horrid and abominable Inquisition, which makes them stop their Ears
to the just Remonstrances of those that long for a Reformation, be called an
Imitation of the Tenderness and Bowels of our SAVIOR, and not rather of the
Cruelty of Herod, who caused so many Innocent Babes to be be put to Death, for
fear only of missing Him who was Innocence it son.

XXX. O GOD! how long will thou bear with the Usurpation of the Children of
Pride, to whom Religion serves but for a Cloak and a Pretext, and who make use
of thy Name only to entice people to give more willingly? How long will thou
suffer that horrid Scandal, which on their account those Nations do receive,
with whom there still remains at least some Shadow of Respect for that Law thou
did pronounce thy self; and who seeing the Objects of thy Jealousy, those
Images set up in Churches, those Festivals appointed in honor of them, and
that Religious Service paid to them, fancy all this is done by the command of
thy CHRIST, and that Christians do indeed Worship as many Men and Women, as the
Heathens ever did Gods and Goddesses! How long will thou forbear destroying
with the Breath of thy Mouth, all those who with so much insolence and
hypocrisy thus impose upon the People by their juggling Delusions, which both
Jews and Atheists flock to see, that they may discover the cheat of them, and
be confirmed in their aversion to that Religion that endeavors to justify and
maintain it self by such lying Miracles! For redress of which abuses there is
no other way but to apply our selves to thy Supreme Power; for it is in vain
for us to think of working upon such as will not be cured of the good Opinion
they have taken up of themselves, who think they are so well endowed by Heaven,
that they excel all others in Common Sense, that they have no Conceptions but
what are the Dictates of Reason, nor no impressions but what they have received
from the Mouth of Truth. If the Pagans did so strongly oppose the Gospel, and
the Knowledge of the TRUE GOD, when preached to them, who had no other Gods but
such as Men had made, what resistance may not we expect from them who assume to
themselves GOD's own Authority, who think they are in possession of all Right
and Power both Divine and Humane, who imagine that from henceforth to the end
of the World, all Might is given them in Heaven and on Earth, and who under the
Name of the Church, make all manner of Errors to be applauded, and put off
their Cheats and Impostures without either fear or shame? Princes, who could at
first have prevented those Abuses, tolerated them, through what irreligious
Prudence I know not; whether it was that they wanted Light to discern them, or
that the Cares of the World, and of their Estates obliged them to dissemble
their knowledge, or whether they were in some sort forced to yield to the
Decree of Heaven, and could not but in vain oppose themselves against the
fulfilling of what the Prophets had foretold. Prophecies which having long
since represented things to us just as now we see them, render so many Doctors
inexcusable, who through fear or hope held their Peace, and with a faithless
and unaccountable Silence strengthened that which they might have weakened by a
just Contradiction and Opposition; Nay, they have been observed to be the most
industrious in the Defense of that Error, which they could once have buried
under an Eternal Condemnation.

CHAP. VIII.
XXXI. THere is no Tyrant that makes himself to be better obeyed than Custom,
especially in Religion: It is so much the more absolute, by how much the more
it influences and engages the Conscience, and out of fear of doing amiss,
obliges them to continue that homage they have begun to pay to it. Which
plainly shows that notwithstanding the presumption that attends Men, and the
good Opinion they have of their own Wit, they are for all that for the most
part so weak by Nature, that one would take their Soul not to be derived from
Heaven, but purely Animal, and to have no other Form, than that which
Instruction has given it. They are so much by ass'd by their Birth, Education,
and Company, that the first that possesses them carries them away, and does not
give them leave to believe any thing but what they have been once persuaded of.
Therefore I have, as much as in me lies, separated my self from my self, that
is to say, from those impressions I had received in my Youth; I have considered
them, as foreign and remote, that so, Truth might be the sole Object of my
Faith, and that Custom in me might exercise no Tyranny over my Reason. Besides
I always considered that none could say he really was a Man, who suffered
himself to be carried away with the Stream of the World, who was not in some
measure above the Councils that were given him, and had so little courage as
not to make use of his own Judgment, but yielded it a Slave to Common Errors.
Yet as most Men approve nothing but what they have been used to and judge of
every thing according as Custom has rendered it familiar to them; so whenever
they have contracted any ill habit, the Remedy is extremely difficult; because
the Faculties are seized, and it must be a powerful Endeavor that can deliver
them from it. They grow up and are formed with certain Impressions, which
become so con-natural to them, that they make up the chief part of their
Reason; They have been taught no other Science; they understand no other
Language, and unless they be born again, or have their Nature changed, they
cannot alter their Belief. They do not perceive that instead of standing up for
the Truth, they undertake the Defense of the first Opinion, they have received,
without examining whether it be as true as it is favorable, and whether it be
not grounded upon mere Prejudices, specious Pretenses, Likelihoods,
Conjectures, and Worldly Considerations. They don't observe that all Sects
pretend the same Advantages, that all Heresies have their Followers, who defend
them with a like Zeal, and have their Doctors, who think themselves no ways
inferior to others, whether in Point of Judgment or Learning. They do not
perceive that they are smoothly carried away by the stream of Self-Love, which
persuades them that they are very different from others of their kind; that
they can penetrate things better, and that they enjoy the Divine Light, whilst
others have scarcely that which is Humane. According to their saying, there is
nothing so true, nothing so easy to comprehend, as that which they believe;
the Proof of it is clear and evident, the Demonstration certain and infallible,
and he that does not understand it, can understand nothing at all: Reason is
always on their side, and Error and Obstinacy the portion of their Adversaries.
What Blind Fury, what Madness, what Presumption hinders them from perceiving
that those they are so much astonished at, look upon them with equal
astonishment; that they appear ridiculous to them they laugh at, and that they
for whom they make but a show of pity, are really and in good earnest moved
with pity toward them? Should not they, considering the uncertainty of things,
and the miserable condition of Man's Mind, have recourse to universal Maxims,
and stand firm to the Ordinances of the Supreme Lawgiver, who expressly ferbids
to depart therefrom, and turn either to the Right or to the Left?

XXXII. But so far are they prepossessed with what the World offers to them,
and the Cares of this Life have so blinded their Judgment, that they will not
enquire about any Principle, nor judge that neither Space of Time, nor
Privilege of Places, nor any manner of Considerations whatsoever can give any
prescription against Truth. Besides this, they are persuaded of their Parents
Faith; by Domestic Examples, by the Numbers, and by Antiquity it self; which
may be attributed to an Error that has insensibly crept-in, and by process of
time taken increase; and at length grown to such a height and power, that those
Enemies who have ventured to oppose it, have been bruised or crushed by it. It
is a hard thing, without doubt, for a Man to pronounce a Sentence of
Condemnation against his own Country and Prince; against his Ancestors,
Parents, and Friends, and against his own Teachers; But the case here is to rid
and undeceive ones self of the Errors of all Human Imaginations; to justify
the Truth against the false Testimonies of so many Enemies; to cure the
diseases of a Dying Life; to seek one Sovereign Good and Felicity, and to
assent to his Word, who says, That whosoever loves Father or Mother, or any
thing else more than him, is not worthy of him. But for all this they are
resolved to follow the Examples of so many Honest Men they allege; not
considering that the Turks can at least say as much; that the Pagans could say
yet more; and they had rather keep to those ill chosen Principles, than examine
the best Doctrine that can be proposed to them. Besides, they are, as it were,
listed and made Slaves, to live and dye under the Tyranny of certain Leaders,
who pretend they cannot err, and say, that they have the Spirit of God
assisting in their Consistories, and directing them in all their Decisions;
that they are the Commissioners of a Sovereign Court, and over and above this,
know how to reconcile Religion with the Advantages and Pleasures of this World.
This is a thing they easily suffer themselves to be persuaded of, as being more
agreeable to their humor, and subservient to their Designs. They gladly lend
an ear to Calumny; take delight to see them convinced of Error, who speak for
the Truth, which indeed they suspect, and dare not so much as cast an Eye
toward it, lest being taken with its transcendent* Beauty, they should be
obliged to follow it, and undergo some just severities and hardships, which
their wilful Humors could never yield to. They are willingly ignorant of those
Maxims, they have no mind to practice, as finding some kind of quiet in this
Ignorance; and are loath to receive a Law, how just soever it be, that may
force their Liberty. For, the truth is, that Afflictions make up a great part
of the Profession of the Gospel, is enough to deter Worldly Men from it. They
had rather yield to the swift Stream that carries them along, than to row
against it; They had rather be drousing in a sweet Sleep full of pleasant
Dreams, than hear their troublesome Voice, who awake them only to afflict them.
O brutish stupidity! O visible Obstinacy! What? must then Vices and Errors,
that are grown Public, lose their Name, and acquire that of Virtue and Wisdom?
and must Custom have so much Power over Men, as to hinder them from being
reasonable Creatures? But who doubts but that those who are by the Scripture
said to be Drunk, are so far deprived of their Senses and Judgment, as to take
Falsehood for Truth, and not to perceive what their Eyes see? Who doubts but
that they are like those People, who had so used themselves to Poison, that at
last it served them instead of Food?

XXXIII. In the mean time they have reduced all Religion to Human Traditions,
and Superstitions; Neither Reason nor Understanding are once called in to give
their Verdict in the case; and I do not know by what Error, or how it is come
to pass, that most Men, who are curious of all other Sciences, do not so much
as inquire into that which is the most necessary. They, with the Barbarians,
have no other Knowledge of GOD, but such as is obscure, idle, empty, fruitless,
and dead; and had they been born among the Turks, they would have been of the
same Belief with them, having nothing but an Acquired Faith, that depends only
upon Tradition, which never saved any Man. This Faith they have in common, both
with the Devils and wicked Men, who (as well as they) confess that God is
Almighty; that he has created the World and sent his Son, the whole Mystery of
whose Birth, Life, and Death they believe, and yet must not pretend to have any
share in his Kingdom and Glory. It is a thing that deserves both our Pity, and
our Horror, to see the indiscreet zeal of a People, who pray they know not
what; who feed themselves with Shows, and suffer themselves to be led away by
such Teachers as make them thirst more after their Neighbor's Blood, than his
Salvation. A People imposed upon, and deluded with vain Things, who fancy God
is better pleased in one Place than in another, and who go to seek among
Strangers what they might as well find in the midst of themselves. An ignorant
and unthinking People, that without considering what they do, under the Gospel
revive Judaism, in direct opposition to the Word, which says, That the hour is
come when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth.
What can Places or Pilgrimages conduce to this? Or all those Religious
Services, which are valued only for their Number, not for their Quality, and
the performance whereof is imposed neither out of Piety, nor Faith, but as
certain Tasks they put upon themselves, and certain Numbers which they
attribute some Virtue to, and do affect, much after the same manner as
Magicians do? Devotions full of Superstition, Scruples, and Jealousies, as of
Men that are afraid to know the Truth, and to whom the Light is hurtful, who
conceive nothing of the true Religion but what is told them by the very Enemies
of it, who can entertain nothing better for it than hatred and calumny; always
representing it in the most hideous shape they can imagine. Indeed, it is an
easy matter to persuade them any thing, who have already been persuaded to
that blind Obedience, to which they give their consent with as much Unmanliness
and Senselessness, as if they should say, I will be stupid, I will be sensible
of nothing. For if once they say they will follow the Church, they contradict
themselves, and own that they will follow what they know. Now how many things
must a Man know to be able to discern the false Church from the true? To what
purpose is Blind Obedience in them whom God has endu'd with Reason, and after
that given them his Ordinances with an express Command to Parents to teach
their Children the same, and to all, to search the Scriptures, which alone
plainly show the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven? But how should those instruct
others, who are so ill instructed themselves, who for a just Punishment for
worshipping things inanimate, are struck with such a prodigious hardness, that
to ask them for Advice or Answers, would be the same as to consult Marble.

XXXIV. Ye Blind, don't you perceive that you lose your Senses only by applying
your selves too much to things insensible? Don't you see that Reason it self
makes you inferior to the Object of your Adoration, and that your wicked
inclinations have made you less then the Work of your own hands? O ye Fools,
leave Puppets and Babies for Children; they are ridiculous for an Age that can
exert Reason. Ye are no less guilty than the Atheists; for with them you
annihilate the Deity, when you fix the form thereof to any Matter whatsoever,
and when you represent Him, who is a Spirit by a piece of Wood or Stone,
notwithstanding that he has said, with so much jealousy, To what will ye liken
me? Thus you rashly make him that has made you, and through an unaccountable
insolence and ingratitude, you seem to endeavor to render him ridiculous, by
giving him Eyes that cannot see, Ears that cannot hear, Hands that cannot
handle, and Feet that cannot walk. Perhaps you think your good Intention will
be an Excuse for your Ignorance; You go as you are led, and whatever you do,
you believe you do God Service, even when you afflict the Faithful, and put
them to Death. Ye Hypocrites, know that numerous Abuses are ready to crowd in
under the pretense of Good Intentions, which, if they be not grounded upon the
Word of God, are but so many Sins. Thus the Children of Israel justly
under-went the Punishment due to their Rashness, who whilst they were
worshipping the Golden Calf, thought they did celebrate a Solemn Feast to the
Lrod, Thus Nadab and Abihu stirred up God's Anger, and the Fire that consumed
them, though they had no other Intention but to offer up Perfumes and incense
to him. Thus Uzzah was immediately struck Dead for having stretched forth his
hand to the Ark, which seemed ready to fall; though he had no other design than
to keep it up. If good Intentions only are sufficient to justify Men, the
Jews, Enemies of CHRIST, were not guilty; St. Paul giving them this Testimony,
Romans 10.2. That they had the zeal of God. By this means, that is, upon the
account of Good Intentions, many unjust Sentences might be justified, many
Murders and Massacres ranked among Pious Works; all Religions might bring us
to Heaven, and almost all Men would be saved.

CHAP. IX.
XXXV. THerefore in an Exercise or Practice, wherein Men have received
sufficient Instructions and inviolable Orders, it is in vain for them to allege
or pretend Good Intentions, which can have no place but in Obedience. There is
no need of seeking for new Counsels or Advice in a matter in which there is
neither doubts nor danger, and wherein the ablest Professors and Masters have
no other Authority than to cause Men carefully to observe the Divine
Ordinances; And in this Sense it is, that the Church cannot err. So that they
who deceive both themselves and others with these vain Excuses, are as so many
Hypocrites that never did seriously set their Hearts upon Heavenly Things,
aiming at nothing else but to make an advantage of the Trade and Commerce of
the World. I have considered them under all their Circumstances; and whether it
be because the Scripture has foretold it, or Experience confirmed it, I find
that Great Men have seldom any sense of true Piety in them, that they suffer
themselves to be carried away more by Faction than by Reason, and like no
Counsels better than such as are favorable to their Worldly Ends. They make
use of Religion as a Cloak to their boundless Ambition, and many conspire
against their own Princes or the Government, and are hatching Hellish Designs
under the specious Pretense of propagating (forsooth) the Catholic Faith. From
their very infancy they have those that puff them up with Pride, and egg them
on to a false Generosity. They are rarely entertained with any discourse about
the Knowledge of God; unless it be at a Sermon, which they never frequent but
with reluctance and impatience; They look upon their Conversation as rude,
uncouth, and tedious, who speak to them of Religion and Salvation. They have no
Desire for that they know not; or if any one of them pretend to have some
glimpse of that knowledge, they are only Surmises and Probabilities, wherewith
they fill their heads, and persuade themselves that things are really so as
their Passion makes them to fancy. It were rashness to contradict them: for
being possessed of Fortune and Power, they think they cannot want Sense and
Reason; They join Authority to their Opinion, and pronounce Sentences from
which there is no Appeal. They can hardly abide any Company, but such as
indulge their Self-Love, nor any Discourses that do not flatter their humors
and idle imaginations. They are altogether vain in their Words and Thoughts;
they suffer themselves to be deluded only with outward Show and Appearances,
and to that Degree please themselves with looks and colors, that they would
reject the best things in the World, if they were conveyed to them by weak or
mean Instruments. They would never have received the Law from the Mouth of
Moses, because of his impediment in his Spheeh. Truth must be presented to them
in a fine Dress, and sumptuously adorned, that is with the artifice of Lies,
and unless a Man be Eloquent, and his discourse Florish'd, he must never think
to persuade them any thing, were it a Commission from God himself. Who if at
any time he thinks fit to send his Messengers to them, and they be taken from
the meanest of the People, from among Shepherds and Fishermen, they will pass
the same Judgment upon them, as the Pharisees did on the Apostles, whom they
looked upon as worse than abominable, and the very offscouring of Men, if they
do not proceed to stone and murder, or to imprison and banish them.

XXXVI. There is in the World a seeming Wisdom, which is nothing else but an
habit of making Faces, and a refined piece of Hypocrisy, by which Men deceive
one another, so that their whole Life is but a continual Masquerade or Comedy,
where every one personates another than himself, and affects nothing more than
to appear what he is not. This incurable Phrenzy, to which they give the Name
of Prudentials, does so much disturb their Understanding, and feed them with so
many fancies and Chimaera's, that it renders them incapable of apprehending any
Divine Truth. They only busy and concern themselves about things that are
perishable, not considering that they heap up Riches only for such as will one
day squander them away, and are covetous only to make Prodigals and Luxurious.
What Parents are these, who whether they indulge their Children at home, or
send them to a Monastry, seem equally to have resolved their Ruin, who for fear
of wanting wherewith to pamper the Vanity of those they keep with them, rob the
other of their lawful Inheritance, and before they know what Lust or Continence
is, under pretense of devoting them to God, inhumanely sacrifice them to their
ambitious Avarice! O Degenerate Prudence! which makes the Mind become a Slave
to the Body! Which makes Men only dexterous to shun their Sovereign Good! How
ingenious to destroy, and cunning to deceive themselves! It was this, made our
First Parents forfeit the Blessed State they enjoyed in Paradise, and which by
making Man fancy a thousand Ways of ordering his Life, has filled the World
with impious Superstitions, Idolatries, Sects, Heresies, and Religions. This is
it that has persecuted the Saints, crucified our SAVIOR, and used all its
endeavors for the Advancement and Defense of several Antichrists, whose
Kingdom was to be of this World. It is this Prudence, falsely so called, that
continually resists and contradicts the Holy Ghost, and is so daring as to
dispense contrary to the express Word of God, either by wresting the Meaning of
it, or leaving out some Expressions, where they cannot be so well altered and
disguised, as not to appear quite opposite to it. In short, it is this
Prudence, that has the Art of making every thing suit with its own interest,
which seeing the Divine Service performed in an unknown Tongue (whereby People
are kept in ignorance) Prayers diverted from the Creator to the Creature,
Images carried upon Men's Shoulders, and celebrated with Hymns, and many such
like or worse actions, would fain make them pass for slight inconveniences, or
things altogether indifferent.

XXXVII. Of all the Hypocrites in the World, they are the most dangerous, who
cover themselves with the Cloak of Religion, because none can with more ease
impose upon others than those that make profession of Holiness, and who have
the vogue of never deceiving any. Some of them appear of a sweet and mild
Temper, and others are as severe: but all of them equally endeavor to put a
gloss on their own Virtue. If their seeming Sweetness betrays us, their
Severity despises us, and the high esteem they have for themselves, makes them
have but a very mean one for their Neighbors. They have got the art of
appearing for a while what their Profession and Character oblige them to be.
But this forced Good Nature and affected Condescension lasts no longer than
their Interests and Opinions are not thwarted. For though they seem to be very
tame, yet they cannot play the Counterfeits long, for Nature damm'd up will at
last take its course with more violence; If you do provoke them never so
little, they will discover those Lions and Tigers they kept hidden under an
Human Figure; and, if you will believe them, their Anger is the pure effect of
Right Reason, and their Crimes are more just than the best Actions of other
Men. If Men think them to be Saints, they easily believe themselves such, and
lay claim to the Title as the true Reward of their false Devotion. Indeed this
Shadow of Piety, or rather, Flashing Zeal has often surpised me, till I
considered that all Nations have their Zealots, and that ours cannot equal the
Voluntary Austerity of the Cynicks, Pythagoreans, Hierophantes, or
Gymnosophists. And there is, besides, this difference between them, that those
miserable Heathens worshipped Demons, as they would be worshipped; but these
worship the True God, in a way directly opposite to his Commands. Moreover, who
knows upon what grounds Men resolve for Devotion; whether it be not from some
Natural Inclination, which they have in common with the Barbarians and
Infidels, or out of Pride and Ambition, as if the State and Public Affairs
stood in need of their Religion and Honesty? None of them will do a Virtuous
Action for Virtues sake; they have all By-ends, and those whom the fear of
Punishment cannot keep in their Duty, are restrained by the Hope of Riches and
Honors. Many of them have the patience to dissemble their Malice, till they
have compassed their Designs; but when they can mount no higher, and want
neither Votes nor Favor to give them a further Lift, they discover it. To
arrive to this pitch them employ all manner of artifice. They talk like Saints,
write good Books, and preach some Truths; and have often forced me to
expostulate, Who has put the Divine Word into the Mouths of these Men, and made
us also in our Days find Saul among the Prophets? I have with care and
attention heard their Sermons, which want neither Common Places, profound
Thoughts, nor Tragical Passions, more fit for the Stage than the Pulpit, nor
any of all the Colors that the Art of moving and pleasing can contribute to
them: But whatever good Lessons they may mix with them, they still keep firm to
their rotten Foundation; and forasmuch as they have no other aim but of
obtaining Benefices, trucking them for others, and heaping Dignities upon
Dignities, they preach Christ out of strife and emulation only, and bear
witness to him much like those evil Spirits, who confessed that he was the Son
of God, and were no sooner come out of one Body but presently begged leave to
go into others. And as if it were but a small thing for them to disguise
themselves to Men, even to the dissembling of their very dissimulation, they
make Profession of a manifest and public Hypocrisy toward God: For so I call
that outside and show-worship, that painted Devotion, by which People are
amazed with the eying of Gestures, hearing of Sounds, and pronouncing of Words,
they do not at all understand.

XXXVIII. Yet we see with what earnestness they bristle up for the Defense of
what they know not, and are willing to be still ignorant of. They are charmed
with a seeming Good; and true Religion appears to them but a poor cold thing,
in comparison of the more gay and pompous Mysteries of Superstition. Wretched
Superstition! which makes it self to be followed with Passion, or rather Fury,
by so many weak Minds and silly Women, that are called Devout, and are exactly
of the same Nature with those that could not be quiet till they had stirred up
a Sedition against those two Holy Apostles Paul and Barnabas. They frame to
themselves a very difficult God, whom nothing can satisfy, and with whom one
has never done: From whence arise their rash Vows, Pilgrimages, Prayers
delivered in Tale, and everlasting Repititions. They spend more time in the
Church, than in their Houses, whither they never return but to grieve and vex
their Families, and never show themselves merry amongst them, but when they
submit to their humors, and consent to their covetous Fasts. Under a show of
great Piety they make way for themselves into the Courts of Kings, and the
greatest and richest Houses, where some desire them, and others suffer them,
many are troubled with them, complain of them, defy them, and look upon them
as the worst of the World, and the best judgments commonly afford them the
worst testimony. They see well enough that they are ignorant, of little
judgment, and timorous, full of Jealousies, Doubts, and Scruples; that upon
very slight occasions they are sometimes ravished into admiration, and at other
times seized with horror: That they are easily provoked, the least thing
troubles and disquiets them, and are amazed at any Event above their capacity.
Every thing is to them a proof of what they have a mind to believe, and
Legerdemain, Juggling Tricks, Slights, and Delusions are by them looked upon as
true Miracles. You may persuade them what you will about things of remote
Countries, and make them esteem Trash for the greatest Rarities: They often
revere that upon the faith of an Impostor, which was gathered on their own
Mountains, or found on their Shores, as if it came from Mounr Libanon, from the
Banks of the River Jordan, or from the most Sacred Places of Palestina. Sure
Mount Calvary must be quite levelled by this time, or at least is nothing but
Earth and Dust; all the Stones even to the least Pebbles, having been picked up
long since for Holy Things and Relics, to adorn the Oratories of an infinite
Number of Virgins, who would think they gave but a very ill proof of their good
Education, if they did not show themselves more Superstitious than their
Mothers.

XXXIX. All these abuses are well enough known to many, who for all that cannot
hinder themselves either from condemning, or from following them; and whose
Works give their Words the Lie. For if any Weakness keep them back, and they
desire to be secret Disciples of JESUS CHRIST, why don't they contribute to the
relief of the poor Members of his Church? Or, if they cannot yet make any great
show of their zeal, why (at least) do they not take care that their Idolatry
may not appear at all? But press them a little upon this Point, and you will
make the Venom gush out. They presently fall into a passion, grow very angry,
and use the Authority they have of imposing Silence; and discover their
Hypocrisy. You are (say they) not above an hundred years standing; You are
Schismatics; Why did you leave the Church? But the Fops should add, You will
not worship that which is lifted up at the Altar, nor believe that a piece of
Bread is made your God. You will not prostrate your selves before the Likeness
of any thing that is in Heaven above, or on the Earth beneath; and you are
scandalized at the Submission of those People who run a whoring after Shrines
and Images with Himns of Devotion and Praise. You are so presumptuous, as that
you will needs receive the Sacrament whole, and in both kinds, according to
CHRIST's Institution, and are not contented with that share thereof which the
Church has thought sufficient for you. You will understand the Word which GOD
directs to you, the Prayers you put up, and the whole Service you are bound to
render to him. In a word, you will not submit your selves to the Authority of
the Learned, the Examples of Magistrates and Princes, and will allow nothing to
Tradition or Custom. Certainly these Men must believe that Religion consists in
the Succession of Persons, and not in the Doctrine of the Gospel. I can think
no other of them but that they do not know Truth, but by mere human reasoning,
and that they have no manner of Zeal either for this or that Party; but follow
that which they find the most convenient for them, and have never minded the
Word, which rejects the Lukewarm, and ranks the Fearful, the Murderers, and
Adulterers, under the same Condemnation. Here I am forced to confess my own
weakness in accusing theirs, and to own that sometimes I look upon them with
pity; at other times with anger; and then again with indifference. But I can
hardly see without horror, the Apostates from the Faith; the most wicked of all
Men, the very express Images of him that is the Head of all Apostasy. These are
they who betray their own Brethren, make a Trade of their Revolt, scandalize a
whole People, and think more of growing rich, than of saving their own Souls.
Do but give them the Bag, and they will side with you as Judas did, (who like
them) was not sensible that his Sale of his Master, was the purchase of his own
despair. As they never had a good will, so they neglected to inform themselves,
when they made an outward Profession of the True Religion; and they are no
sooner turned, but they immediately start up great Disputants, grow troublesome
with their Questions, and subtle in maintaining their Change. To which purpose
they make use of all the reasons in the World, though they know in their
Conscience they have no other for it but the weakness of their Judgment, the
perverseness of their Nature, and the difficulty of reconciling their Pride and
Avarice with the Reproach and Poverty of JESUS CHRIST: Besides, the Promises of
Great Persons, and their gracious looks carry, I do not know what Charms with
them, from which it is hard to defend ones self. On these occasions mean and
mercenary Minds surrender themselves, in a manner, without any resistance, and
their bastardly Spirits can hold out no longer, when courted by those who used
to command them; and when their Masters turn their Flatterers. In short, the
greatest part of Men seems to be born for Slavery; neither is there any so
hard, but they will yield to, nay, and prefer it too before the Liberty of
Christ, so their Chains be but of Gold. They are always ready to pay their
Adoration to them that make them rich, or confer Honors upon them; and with
the Heathen know no other Gods but their Benefactors.

CHAP. X.
XL. AMong so many bewitched or sick Minds; among so many wilful Blind and vile
Slaves of this World, I have been seeking for some, in whom I might discover
some Purity of Conscience, and some Testimony of their Election, and with whom
I might join my self in that Spiritual Communion and Bond of Perfection that
makes them to be inseparable from their Creator and Neighbors. For what
Comfort could I reap from those Favorers and Favorites of this World, in
whose Company a Man is obliged, by I don't know what preposterous Good Manners,
ever to hold his Tongue about Religion; and who either discourse not at all of
Divine Matters, or if they do, it is in a mere human way? What sweetness could
I reap from their Friendship whose heart was not united to mine in what should
be the chief end of our Hopes and Desires? I wished I could discern the
Children of Heaven, from the Children of the Earth; and the meeting with a
Believer was to me as if I had seen the face of an Angel. But amidst so many
Men I have often labored (but in vain) to find out one Man only, though I was
not so clear sighted as Elias, 1 Kings, 19.10, 14, 18. who did not see one
single person in all Israel, though indeed there were a great many. My lot is
fallen in an Age where Men are already degenerated from that former Simplicity
and new Reformation, and wherein those that bear the Name of Reformed, with
large steps pursue the same ways with those who have destroyed the most
flourishing Churches. I saw among them the same Licentiousness in Words and
Actions, the same superfluity in their Dress and Habits, and the same Luxury,
which heretofore scandalized Julian the Emperor, and confirmed him in his
Apostasy. Iniquity was so increased that the Charity of many waxed cold: Mat.
24.12. And by what appeared outwardly I could not see any difference between
the False Christians and those that were True.

XLI. These I could no where better look for, than in the most lawful
Assemblies; but I could not discern the Church in the Church it self. She does
not stand in need of those whose Devotion chiefly consists of Gestures and
Wry-faces, who never find a Sermon too long, nor a Communion too frequent, and
to whom Religion would seem too cold, if it had not something of the Zeal of
Superstition. She does but too much abound with such as serve only to make up a
Number, and seem to be engaged therein more by their Birth or Chance, than by
any desire or affection they have of improving themselves in the knowledge of
Truth. One would think they only come to see the World in a Place from whence
the World should in some sort, be banished, where they behave themselves with
so little respect, that it would be a great mistake to call them Hypocrites, in
whom not the least sign of Zeal or Devotion is to be observed. They aim at
nothing else but to make a show in the most conspicuous Places; whereas they
should return thanks to God that he allows them any in the Company of the
Saints; and it should suffice them (without pretending to any other advantage)
to have only so much room there as they need to put both knees to the ground.
Some make of the Day of Rest a day of trouble, and perform the most just Duty
in the World, as a toilfom and tedious Task. Others are so abominably wicked
and profligate, as to hear Sermons, with no other intent than to find fault
with them, and wrest the meaning, or make a mock of the Preacher. Many cannot
relish plain, pure, easy, and rational Exhortations; and no Truth can move
them, unless it be presented to them in a pleasing Elocution, a thundering
Voice, and eloquent Tongue; and unless it be adorned with all the Flowers of
Rhetoric. They slight those things that are plain and obvious, and think that
below them, which the common sort are able to apprehend. You cannot satisfy
them, unless you undertake some high Mystery, fathom the great Deeps, or
wiredraw some difficult Point or other, that only belongs to God to resolve,
and the knowledge whereof he has reserved to himself. They have forgotten, That
as he who has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the mighty, 1
Cor. 1.27. was humble, so he will have our Knowledge to be modest, and not
presumptuous; that he has put his Word into the Mouths of the simple, who yet
cannot express it so weakly, but that they that love it, will know how to
discern it from the flash and glittering outside of Lie. They have forgot that
he does not willingly employ the skill of so many Languages, but to harden
those, to whom he has so often offered his Grace, and they as often rejected
it, to maintain Error with an obstinacy, which they will have pass for
strength, and may be called the Constancy and Virtue of Reprobates. True
Believers, in order to their being persuaded, need not the Ministry of
Eloquence; which indeed is seldom introduced into the Church, but upon the
Decay of Faith; and when so much Art is used for moving Men, and stirring them
up to Piety, it is a visible mark of the hardness of their Hearts. Yet the
Preachers are obliged in compliance with the itching Ears and nice Palates of
their Hearers, to become nice and over-curions themselves, and leave the
Simplicity of the Apostles to betake themselves sometimes to the subtleties of
Philosophers, and at other times to to the lofty Terms of Orators. Censure is
no longer of use in these cases, no more than for the corrupt Manners of the
Great Men of the World; and many Evils have got such footing in most Churches
already, that very few can be found who have either courage or strength to
remove them. The Saints in our Days have much ado to resist the torrent of the
Age, and the Devil makes him self insensibly to be honored in the Persons of
the Mighty.

XLII. I Found therefore no Reformation but in the Doctrine, yet doubted not
but that there were Believers, where I saw the Word of Truth was preached. But
it was so much the more difficult for me to know them, because the Wicked have
all the Actions of the Good, and the Good all the Infirmities of the Wicked.
Very few are found who always take care that their Works should be so
conformable to the Precepts of the Gospel, as not to be sometimes diverted by
other Promises and to pursue other Hopes. Besides, God calls them in each Sex,
Age, and Profession; He invites them to him, that persecute him; and of his
greatest Foes (when he pleases) makes his most faithful Friends. Yea, and by a
Judgment, the causes whereof are unsearchable, he in an instant converts them
who lead an ill Life, and prefers them before those whose Manners seem to be
perfectly good and holy, and who do even boast that they have fulfilled the
Law. Certainly the most Righteous do but fall too often, either through an
extraordinary Fear, or a Surprise of Satan, or by a Trial from God himself, who
for a while abandons them to the weakne^s of their own Nature, that they may
not misdeem themselves, nor impute that to their own Virtue, which is the mere
Product of the Heavenly Grace in them. But with these the Gift of God is always
the strongest; so that notwithstanding the Sinful Pleasures whereby they are
over-taken, and the Errors that carry them away, it happens to them as to the
Prodigal Son; They must soon or late return to their Father. However it is not
by any composed or demure Looks, nor any peculiar Garb they are to be known:
They do not affect to appear otherwise than other Men, nor recommend themselves
by any extravagant or unusual Form: All their Actions have nothing common with
those of Hypocrites; Their Devotion serves not for a Cloak to their
Covetousness; nor their Humility for a Mask to their Ambition: They put on no
disguise; nor is there any alteration to be seen outwardly in their
Countenances, but such as really proceeds from an inward feeling, God affords
them of those supernatural things which Worldlings cannot be sensible of. When
once the Holy Ghost has touched them, there always remains in them a certain
Character and impression that makes them shine in the sight of the Almighty, as
the Stars in the Night, which yet have no other Light but what is communicated
to them from the Sun. He that made, and is the Searcher of all Hearts does both
know them, and make them known to whom he pleases. But many there are that seem
to be Believers, who are not so indeed, or at the best have but a temporal
Faith. Nevertheless, if we may be allowed to pass any Judgment upon it,
methinks Men's Conversation shows their Affections plain enough. And I am
confident that those who do love God with a true heart, are for the most part,
taken up with the Contemplation of his Works, and above all, with the
Meditation of his Sacred Word: in the reading of which they continually
exercise themselves, not out of mere curiosity, nor to find fault with it;
neither out of a vain desire of Learning, nor as Mercenaries, to teach it to
others, and make a Gain of it, but only to instruct themselves, seek for
Comfort, strengthen their Faith, and assure their Hopes. They have it always in
their Mouths, or in their Thoughts, and their greatest trouble is, that they
cannot impart it to those who mistrust it, and keep themselves as industriously
from it, as they would from a Snare, who fear it as much as the Singing of
Mermaids, and whose abominable Wickedness make them incompatible with its
Purity. A Spirit of discerning is a Gift, so few are blessed with, that none
but the true Elect know how or what to choose, none but they that are truly
Spiritual know how to try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. They are not disturbed that so many false Prophets, who rashly
assume the Name of God; boast themselves to be the Dispensers of his Word, make
it serve their wicked ends, and explain it as the Devil did, when he was so
daring as to tempt the Son of God himself, as he still does those who make it
their profession to follow him.

XLIII. In short, the Hurries and Intrigues of the World, are none of their
Concerns; they slight them, and for that reason, are slighted too; Nay, they
are not only vilified and contemned upon this account; but hated and
persecuted, as if their manner of Living, as well as their Belief, was a
Reproach to that of others. They do not willingly engage themselves in any
Party, unless the Service of God, or the Good of their own Country obliges them
thereto: And if they are called to any Office or Dignity, it is not in their
Nature to canvas, give bribes, or use any underhand-dealings to obtain Men's
Votes or Favors for it. Neither is it their Practice to increase their Wealth
to the prejudice of Faith and Charity. These Common Sayings, To get an Estate,
To make one's Fortune, To raise one's Family, are none of their usual Talk;
though indeed their Ambition may be said to be greater than that of others,
forasmuch as no Worldly Grandeur can set bounds to it. They are not ignorant
what the lawful use of Things is, nor what Advantages, Decency and Necessity
allow them who are possessed of Honors and great Places. But they do not
understand, for whom they labor, who never grow weary of heaping up Riches,
who raise such high structures, undertake so vast designs, that they can never
expect to live long enough to see the end of them. They think no Man can be
called Judicious or Rational, but he that seriously applys himself to the
knowledge of his Supreme Good; and they look with pity upon the miserable
Occupations of them that are as much tied to the Earth, as if they had no
Pretensions at all to Heaven. They behold with grief and horror the insolence
of those, who deny nothing to their Senses or Appeti^es, and make no other use
of their Riches and Power, than to commit all manner of crimes, and to tyranize
over their Neighbors with the more freedom and impunity. They withdraw
themselves, as far as they can, from the conversation of the Wicked, and as
they are no flatterers, so is their company less pleasing to others. They
cannot without great reluctance, be complaisant to such whose Manners are
displeasing to them, or to give their approbation to so many Errors and
Vanities. They cannot admire that which God condemns, nor afford a pleasant
look to those Objects that grieve their Hearts. But notwithstanding all the
constraint and unca^ness they suffer in this troublesome commerce, and the
great aversion they have for these things, yet is their severity always less
than their Charity, Under pretense of forsaking the World, they do not defraud
their lawful Heirs, neither do they strive to grow rich by the ruin of others;
they know they should be worse than Publicans, did they not take care of their
own Families, and that, according to the Divine Rule, They that will not work
must not feed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Upon which account, Working Days are no less
welcome, than the Days of Rest is Sacred to them. But they are so far from
minding nothing else but their Temporal Concerns, that they will ever and anon
cry out with their Master, Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God, Psalm.
40.9. And though they live, or rather languish in this World, as being out of
their own Element; though they are, as it were, alone in the midst of a
Multitude, and as Strangers to their Mothers Children; though their Purity and
Holiness be accounted Foolishness, and their Strength looked upon as Weakness
in them, yet that does not give them the least trouble; they are very little
concerned to see themselves Evil spoken of for well doing, 1 Pet. 3.17, and to
lose their Credit, provided they keep but their Consciences. They know very
well that if they would be Men-Pleasers, they could not be God's Servants; That
it is impossible to believe in him, and at the same time be so eager in the
pursuit of the glory of the World, which most infallibly becomes bitter to
them, to whom Christ begins to be Sweet. They are well aware, that this Life is
but a Passage, a Place of Trial, or rather a Field of Battle, where such as
will not fight ought to expect neither Honor nor Reward.

XLIV. Now, how to reconcile the Learning of so many Doctors, with their
obduration in this Case, I am quite at a loss: I cannot Imagine how they can
think of the Gospel, and never think of their own Conscience; I am astonished
that so much Light as they have, should not oblige them to know themselves, and
cry out, Certainly we are in Error; and our Profession is quite contrary to
that of Christ and his Apostles. It is Written, that all those who will live
godlily in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution; Where is the Persecution we
suffer? We are the Darlings and Favorites of the World; both Princes and
People are for us; We enjoy the pleasures of the Earth, and our lot falls
always in the best place. If this be not the Kingdom of this World, pray tell
me what is? Shall we cast into this account the Vows of Poverty, Fastings,
Austerities, and Mortifications of some of our own Party? But so far are they
from being blamed, hated, or persecuted therefore, that they are honored of
Men, and so receive their reward: And after all, these voluntary Afflictions
are of Human Invention, and of the Nature of those concerning which the
Scripture thus expostulates with Men, Who has required these things at your
hand? Isa. 1.12. Indeed I am astonished that the Pharisees of this Age do not
sometimes reflect upon these Matters, since Affliction is so certainly annexed
to the Profession of True Christianity, that I doubt whether they may be said
to have once began to be Christians, who were never persecuted. For if in some
Countries in the World, the Blessing of Heaven, which perhaps favors the zeal
of some Generation, suffers Religion to flourish, and (as the Scripture speaks)
possess the Gates of her Enemies, Genesis 22.17. and 24.60; presently Abuses and
Insolence, that are commonly the Attendants of Prosperity, the Practices of the
Devil and his Emissaries, are apt to alter and corrupt her, and inspire her
with an emulation of Worldly Religions, and a Contempt of her Primitive
Simplicity. Would we have the Servants greater than their Master, and partake
of his Consolation and Glory, and not of his Sufferings and Patience? No, no,
they must find Joy in the midst of Sorrows, and be as a Rose among thorns; And
the same must happen to them as befell Joseph, who was made greater by his
Exile, and whose Elevation was from a Dungeon; and as Job, whose Youth was
renewed through Affliction. They ought with St. Paul, to look upon it as a
singular favor, That unto them it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, Ph. 1.29. and still think
their sufferings are very small in comparison of what they hope for. Hope and
Charity are the inseparable Companions of Faith; all three together constitute
a Believer, and are the infallible Characters by which he is known. I don't
mean that Faith that is obscure, blind, weak and staggering, which depends upon
Birth, Opinion, Custom, and Tradition, which is always doubtful and apt to be
scandalized at every thing, which does not mortify the Affections, nor forsake
the World, is a stranger to Self-denial, and sinks under Persecutions. I do not
mean that Faith which does not follow Christ but for its own convenience, and
which, of all his Miracles, chiefly eyes that which multiply's the Loaves. But
I speak of a Faith that is clear, certain, and constant, which proceeds from
the Virtue of the Holy Spirit, from the Word of Eternal Life, from Prayer and
Humility; which is not acquired but revealed, and which does not enter the
hearts of those that have but a Human Faith. I speak of that Faith that rids us
of the Cares of transitory things, that ravishes us into an admiration of the
Divine Graces, that surpasses all human discourse and reasoning, and engages us
to glorify Him who gave it us, with groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26.

WHICH Precious Gift the FATHER of MERCIES vouchsafe to us all through JESUS
CHRIST Our Lord.

AMEN.

