THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE PROTESTANT RELIGION Asserted By REASON As well as
SCRIPTVRE.

Written in French by the Famous MONSIEUR de GOMBAVD, Made English by SIDNEY
LODGE.

To which is added, his Letters to MONSIEUR de MILITIERE, And other Personages
of the French-Court, upon the same Subject.

LONDON, Printed for W. C. M. G. and W. H. and sold by W. Davis in Amen-Corner.
MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable, BRIDGET COUNTESS OF PLYMOUTH.
Madam,
DEdications are usually made to Persons of your Ladiship's high Character, as
marks of Gratitude, or Respect due to 'em: This of mine is of that nature,
there being no one to whom I owe more Acknowledgments, or a greater Honor than
to your Ladyship. Romances and Plays are generally such Books, whose Fronts
are honored with Names of your Ladiship's Sex; but I have made choice of this
Serious and Weighty Subject, as believing it most suitable to your
Inclinations. The Matter of it is Grave and Solid, but withal Delightful, it
being writ in an Eloquent, and yet unaffected Style; I have endeavored to make
it not less so in our own Tongue. If your Honor finds any Satisfaction in the
reading of it, I shall believe the Pains I have taken in it sufficiently
requited; and nothing will more encourage me to Attempts of the like nature,
than your Ladiship's Approbation of this. Because such Applications as these,
if tedious, are presumptive, I Will only beg leave humbly to assure Your
Ladyship, that I am,

Madam, Your Honor's SIDNEY LODGE.

TO THE READER.
THE Preface translated out of French gives you a short account of the LIFE of
the celebrated Author: I intend by this only to let you know, that the ensuing
Discourse is so Rational Pithy, and full of Sense, that it will sufficiently
recommend it self, and withal, to beg you to read it with a due Attention and
Candor. For my own part, I dare confidently say, I have been very faithful to
the Original (having taken no more liberty than what a Translator may justly
claim) and yet I hope I may, without being thought Arrogant, affirm, that I
have given it so much the proper Idiom of the English, that you will find it
easy, smooth, and Natural, and as pleasing as it is useful; for such a Mixture
being most grateful, ought to be aimed at by those who write. The Follies, the
Superstition, the Idolatry, the Tyrannical Usurpation of the Church of Rome,
are here represented, in such lively, and yet deformed Colors, that no man who
pretends to be reasonable, but will endeavor to avoid 'em. Can any one imagine
himself safe under that Religion, where the Name of God is only made use of as
a Pretext, and instead of that Interest set up, and really worshipped. Religion
is both revealed and Natural, to instruct us fully: In the former, God has been
graciously pleased to give us his Word, but the Romanists have inhumanely
forbid the reading it: To attain to a perfect knowledge of the latter, he has
endu'd us with Reason, but that is enslaved by their positive Determinations:
nay, they rob us of our Senses too, by their established Principle of
Transubstantiation; so that indeed the Peoples Religion does wholly consist in
a blind obedience to a Pretended-Infallible-Priest. How happy then are we! who
are under a Government where the reading of the Scriptures, (the Rule of Faith)
is not only allowed, but commanded by the Church: A Church free from the
Extremities, on one hand, of Idolatry, and on the other, of Enthusiasm; so that
here we have the Opportunities of improving both our Religion and our Reason,
not being forbid the free Exercise of the one, or obliged to do violence to the
other; of being both good Christians and Philosophers, for the one may be
consistent with the other, which is clearly demonstrated by this short
Treatise, which I hope will meet with a kind Entertainment in the World.

THE PREFACE FROM THE FRENCH.
THOSE who are acquainted with Monsieur de Gombaud, know, that he set a greater
value on his Discourses concerning Religion, than on any of his other Works. He
was invited to write of that Subject, upon a pure charitable design of making
the Truth known to such who were yet under the darkness of Error, and to
confirm those in the true Faith, who were either born in, or had embraced it.
He frequently complained of two things, the one was, that those who writ
concerning Religion, were too Voluminous, urging Proof upon Proof, and
Authority upon Authority, without being careful to observe a due Order, and
clearness in their Discourses: The other was, that many persuaded themselves,
the true Doctrine was not consistent with an Elegant Style. To show how they
were deceived in this particular, he composed his Considerations on the
Christian Religion when he was yet young, and in the Vigor of his Age; and in
this has really demonstrated, that an Author may be both strong and
perspicuous, short and full, solid and elegant. Having communicated this Piece
to many of his Friends, and even to some of the Roman Communion; it was so well
esteemed by all of 'em, that he was encouraged after that to make a Treatise on
the Eucharist, and then another, which he presented to one of his Friends,
under the Name of Aristander. Most of his Letters were writ in a much fuller
Age. Throughout his Works, the strength and admirable ingenuity of his Mind,
his extraordinary faculty of thinking of, and expressing things, will be
discovered. I will say nothing of the Reasons that obliged him to keep these
excellent Writings private; I am sure he passionately desired to have published
'em, believing they would be of great use, and it may be there has not yet been
any Secular Man known in the World, who was more zealous for the Glory of God,
or had a greater, or a more sincere Love for his Neighbor than he had. But
when the heat and earnestness with which he writes, shall be observed, and
withal, it shall be considered that all he had to subsist on, did absolutely
depend on Court, it will not be thought strange that he did not make 'em
Public in his Lifetime. That the World might not be deprived of 'em after his
Death, which it might, if they had fallen into the hands of any who were not of
his Religion, he put 'em in his latter days into those of a good Friend, whose
Fidelity and Kindness he had experienced, whom he obliged to promise him to
keep 'em safe, till a convenient Opportunity offered it self to publish 'em.
This Friend always designed to perform these Desires, and his own Promise; but
besides the difficulty of Printing things of this Nature in the Kingdom, he met
with many other Impediments. At length, after diverse Attempts and Delays, he
resolved to make the dear Children of his Friend change their Climate, in hopes
that when they returned home, though in a strange Garb, they would be owned as
truly French. I leave the Reader to judge of their Merits, and of those of
their Father. His Works have long since made him so well known in France, and
in other Nations too, where they understood, and loved the Tongue, that 'twill
be needless to say any thing of 'em to those who have but seen his Eudymion,
his Letters in Prose, his Pastoral of Amarante, his Tragedy of the Danaides,
his Collection of Miscellaneous Poems, in which are his incomparable Sonnets,
especially those called the Christian, and his Epigrams, of which there are
Three Books. And this is to give notice to such who may not possibly have met
with 'em, that there are such Books, that they may have the opportunity of
having the same knowledge and opinion of 'em that others had.

Besides he left a Tragicomidy of Cydippe, and loose Papers enough to have made
a new Collection of Poems, especially Sonnets and Epigrams; but having fallen
into the hands of such who did not well understand those things, have not yet
seen the Light. I could very much enlarge my self upon what concerns the Person
and Life of this famous Man, but by both the one and the other he had procured
so large a Reputation in the World, that I should inform those who are living
of little of him, but for the sake of Posterity I will add -- That John-Oger de
Gombaud was a Gentleman of Xaintonge, and younger Brother by a fourth Marriage;
which he would frequently say in Raillery, as an excuse that he was not Rich.
He was tall, wellmade, of a good Mien, and looked like a Man of Quality. His
Piety was undissembled, his Honesty thoroughly experienced, his Manners grave,
and well-regulated. He had a Heart as Noble as his Aspect promised it, a Mind
upright, and naturally virtuous, of an exalted Spirit, less fertile than
judicious, of a violent hot Humor, presently provoked to Anger, and yet had a
serious and composed Look. After having finished all his Studies under the most
celebrated Masters of his time at Bourdeaux, he came to Paris, at the latter
end of the Reign of Henry the Great, where he suddenly made himself known, and
valued too.

This mighty Monarch being unhappily Assassmated, was bewailed by all the
French, as the Father of his Country; and the Poets did adorn his Tomb with
mournful Flowers they had gathered from Parnassus. Monsieur de Gombaud, though
young, was not the last, or least Considerable amongst 'em. In the Minority of
Louis the Just, and in the Regency of the Queen, Mary de Medias, his Mother, he
was one that was highly esteemed by this Great Princess, there being no one of
his Quality who had so free an access to her, or was received with greater
kindness. She being of a generous and free temper, and which she loved to show
to deserving Men, allowed considerable Pensions to several Persons of Learning
and Ingenuity: That of Monsieur de Gombaud was Twelve hundred Crowns; which
made him always appear in very good Equipage at Court, whether at Paris, or in
Progresses, which were in those times frequent. And being one who hated all
superfluous Expenses, though no one more gentile in making such which were
necessary, had raised a pretty good Stock from what he spared out of his large
Allowance, which was very serviceable to him when that came to be lessened;
when both Civil and Foreign Wars had almost dried up that Fountain from whence
he had had such Plenty.

He was at first reduced from Twelve hundred Crowns to Eight, and then from
Eight hundred to Four, which were continued to him to his Death; yet without
being paid, since the War of Paris, but from the friendship of some Great and
Generous Persons, by whom he had the honor to be known and favored, amongst
which the Duke and Duchess of Montausier were the principal. For some years
also he had a Pension under the Great Seal from Monsieur de Seguier, Chancellor
of France. He was always very healthful, to which his Frugality and Regular
manner of Life did much contribute. But walking one day in his Chamber, which
was usual with him, and his foot slipping, he fell down and hurt so very much
one of his Hips, that he was after this unhappy Accident, to the end of his
Life, almost always confined to his Bed. He lived even an whole Age, if the
time of his Birth, writ with his own Hand in one of his Books, were true, as he
had assured a Friend of his it was, who never spoke of it 'till after Monsieur
de Gombaud's Death. He had been honored with the Friendship of the most
considerable Persons of both Sexes of three Courts, which he had seen; viz.
That of Henry the Fourth, of Louis the Thirteenth, and Louis the Fourteenth.
And in the Regency of two great Queens, Mary de Medicis, and Anne of Austria,
no One was more constantly at Court, but especially in the time of the former.
But he did yet with greater diligence and pleasure frequent that infinitely
agreeable Company of Quality and Worth, who met at the House of Rambouillet,
which was a lesser Court made up of choice Persons, fewer in number, but, if I
durst say it, more refined than that of the Louvre, because not One was
admitted to approach this Temple of Honor, where Virtue was revered under the
Name of the Incomparable Artenice, who was not worthy of her Approbation and
Esteem.

To conclude, Monsieur de Gombaud was both loved and admired by all those, who,
as he, had offered Sacrifices to the Muses, and the Graces; and I doubt not but
succeeding Ages will be juster to him than that in which he lived; and that his
Excellent Works will procure him an Immortal Name, which is the Reward of all
Learned Men, when they can reach that height to which this Gentleman had
arrived.

The Principal Matters contained in this Treatise.
1. COnsiderations upon the Christian Religion. 2. A Treatise concerning the
Eucharist. 3. A Discourse, in which the Author gives his Reasons why he prefers
the Reformed Religion before the Roman Catholic. 4. A Letter to a Lord at
Court, who endeavored to persuade him to turn Catholic. 5. A Letter to an
Officer of the Crown, who often discoursed to him of Religion. 6. A Letter to
Monsieur de la Militiere, who desired his Opinion in writing, on the Books if
Controversy he had made. 7 A Letter to a Lady, who pressed him to go hear the
Sermons of some of the Famous Preachers of the Roman Church.
CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAP. I.
WHEN I first began to have the Use of my Senses and my Reason, I could not but
frequently meditate on the Beauty of this Great World, the admirable
Disposition of it is parts, those mutual Offices they each render to other, as
well as those just Laws by which they are eternally conserved. On these
extraordinary Effects, I often employed my Consideration; and yet the constant
Custom of doing so, did not at all lessen my Wonder of 'em: I could not then
but acknowledge, that the Universe was as a visible Word, that bespake, and
manifestly proved a God; and in comparison of which, our Eloquence was silent,
at least, so imperfect and contradictory to it self, that what it endeavored
to bring to Light, it made more obscure. I observed that every thing tended to
it is natural End, punctually did it is Duty, unless Man; for he, from the very
beginning, took part with the Devils themselves, the Enemies of God Almighty,
and thus ingratefully sinned against him from whom he had received such
infinite Favors, who had made him in as great Perfection as could be, though
not a God, yet after his own Image. But, as the first Product of his Mind was
Vanity and Pride, so that of his Body was Cain, the Murderer of his Brother:
and as all his Children inherit his Rebellion and Rashness, so consequently,
his Punishment and Condemnation. In the general Observation I have made of them,
I have found some of the Nature of Devils, others of Beasts, many of both
together, being guilty of Rapine and Extortion, their Hands stained with Blood;
and in a Word, the whole Course of their Lives passed either in private
Conspiracies, or open Rebellion and Thefts.

'Twas then a secret Horror seized me, and a Sadness, even as the Shadow of
Death, disturbed the serenest days of my Life. 'Twas little Satisfaction to me,
that God had made me Man, or that I was of the number of those who bore the
Name of Christians, since I saw what Disorders happened amongst 'em, and that
Malice and Ignorance were as predominant here, as with Barbarians and Infidels.
Nothing was so averse to me, as those whom I looked on as my Fellow Members;
and yet I found 'twas necessary, either to comply with 'em, and so make my self
an accomplice with 'em in their Exorbitances, or else, to render my self
perpetually detestable to 'em: yet, I considered, that like Accidents did
equally surprise both Old and Young, and I could not persuade my self, that any
reasonable Souls could find any real Satisfaction or Contentment under such
great Uncertainties that must needs follow.

My Reason it self, and all its thoughtful Results, did but yet serve to
torment me more, till I had carefully consulted the Divine Oracles, the best of
Books, and was assured by them, that God in his Providence did reserve and mark
out to himself some, for whom, even the Angels have respect; and who shall not
be destroyed in the day of Vengeance. That this World is but a place of trial
to distinguish the Good from the Bad, a way that leads from Darkness to Light,
from Misery to eternal Happiness. These words I had heard with more Fear and
Wavering than Assurance, (perceiving how very few either could or would
understand 'em) had I not from themselves learned, that even Shepherds and
Fishermen have more Knowledge in 'em than the greatest Casuits, or learned
Philosophers; and, that justly to comprehend their Meaning, we stand not in so
much need of Logic or Rhetoric, as true Faith and Piety. That they teach a
Knowledge, which puffs not up, but does humble and abase men; and yet not so
far, but (though mean and low in the World) have Courage enough to declare the
Truth before the proudest Tyrant, and daily to run the hazard of their Lives,
that by their Endeavors they may save others from Death.

These divine Revelations, attended with a Spirit of Comfort, calmed my
disturbed mind: I found my self so suddenly transformed from what I was, that
that Sadness which had possessed me, though not quite gone, yet had changed its
Nature; for, now 'twas occasioned only by my Sins and Infirmities. If I have
any remaining Fears, they do but strengthen me, and provoke me to strive with
more Violence and Ardency to attain that end which Hope and Faith propose.

I was filled with a just sense of Joy, arising, not from a transitory
unsatisfying Pleasure, but from a permanent satisfying Good; which, though
communicative, increases; and of which, though one may liberally dispose, will
not at all be diminished. It Is this which invites me to freely offer what I
have received; to join my Voice with those of the faithful, (whom God in his
Providence has mixed with others) that the Truth may be loudly declared, so
that those will be inexcusable who have heard it, and would not believe, or
those who betraying themselves to their private worldly Interest, feared to
listen to it, lest they should be obliged to follow it is Dictates.

The Time may come, when they will, perhaps, accuse us of having been too
remiss of not having sufficiently informed 'em, and then will they be ready to
impute their voluntary Ignorance and Obstinacy to our Neglect or Weakness. And
yet, when we endeavor to instruct 'em, some pity us, others laugh at, or
despise us; and indeed, the most favorable Opinion they can have of us, is,
that we are poor, simple, extravagant Creatures: Others are in Passion, and
angry with us, ready to tear us in pieces, affront and injure us, look on us as
Heretics and Criminals, though our Crime is of that Nature, that we desire
nothing more than to expose it even to the Censure of our very Judges.

But, to whom shall we discourse, we cannot be understood by Idolaters? The
Prophets have pronounced such a Curse against 'em, that makes 'em void of
Knowledge; makes 'em like even what they worship and adore. We cannot be
understood by men of weak, or no Judgments; they comprehend nothing, and do but
rather raise Doubts in themselves, than find Satisfaction. If they are of
wicked debauched Lives, they are disturbed to hear the Voice that condemns 'em.
But, they are the most dangerous who have the most Learning; these use Tricks
and Evasions, and wrest the clearest Sense and Words to their own meaning; the
easiest, and most natural Propositions, when they please, become difficult and
ambiguous; they equally prove, and deny every thing; and at length, as a just
Punishment upon 'em, they so far neglect the Knowledge of the Truth, as to be
unhappy enough not to know themselves; they have employed their Time and
Studies so much in superfluous things, that they have utterly lost all manner
of Care of such that are necessary; they have made their humane Learning so
much a Judge of the Divine, that it has rendered 'em infinitely worse than if
they had been altogether ignorant. Moreover, since it is hard to persuade any
one to what is disagreeable to him, I cannot but fancy I hear the Wise men of
the Age and our Courtiers, saying, Prithee talk to us of what is pleasing and
grateful to us, and don't you pretend to be wiser than the Church. They ought
not, they believe, be better than their Fathers were, or follow other Customs
than those of their own Country or Towns: The Estates they have will not allow
'em to make any Profession which may be in the least in jurious to 'em, and at
whatever Rate it is, God and Religion must suit with their Interest and
Convenience. How! to live contrary to the Opinion of the World, to have
different Sentiments from the great Doctors of the Chair, to go against the
belief of the People, the Magistrate and Prince; Is not this to expose one's
self to be thwarted by every one? To talk thus of Reformation, is to be looked
on as a Disturber of the Peace, or a Madman; and Liberty is grown to that pass,
that it is incurable. Religion is almost turned into Superstition; and on all
sides, the Corruption of the Age is so great, that there is not only need of a
Deluge to cleanse the Earth, but a Universal Fire to consume it.

To what end then is all this Discourse? What Light or new Invention shall we
add to those so many excellent ancient Lessons we have already received, which,
because always necessary, are always new? If we have not such Articles of
Faith, such Catechisms as are sufficient for our Instructions, to make us the
best Christians, yet there is nothing wanting in the Old and New Testament, to
inform us of our Duties. Nevertheless, since he who supplies us with
Understanding, and has planted his Word in our Hearts, would have us publish it
with our Mouths, that being converted, we may labor to convert our Brethren;
We ought not to be silent where there is so great a Necessity of speaking, of
writing at least, what the World may not be displeased to read.

But, let us take Care, that we do not imitate those ambitious Writers, who
only aim at procuring Glory, and Reputation by their voluminous Works, with
which they burden the Minds of men, not considering, that a Multitude of Words
does argue nothing more than their difficulty of Conception, or expressing
themselves.

Let us therefore by speaking, endeavor (notwithstanding all manner of
Opposition) to save some by Fear, pulling them out of the Fire, and try if it
will not please God to open the Heart, amongst Men, of a Naaman, and amongst
Women, of a Lydie.

CHAP. II.
IT IS observable, that the most celebrated Holy men, the first Writers of
Sacred History, who have instructed us in the Laws of living well, and taught
us the Methods of Salvation, have not given themselves the trouble to find out
Arguments to prove, or expressly to demonstrate the Being of a Deity, believing
that 'twas impossible for men to be reasonable, and doubt of so manifest a
Truth. We cannot but confess indeed, that every thing, in its proper Language,
does assert this so clearly, that the whole World seems to be but one large
Object, by which God is pleased to make himself seen, being in his Nature
Invisible. Besides those Principles which are naturally implanted in us,
whereby we discern betwixt Good and Evil; those Terrors of Conscience, those
Rational Discourses which exalt us even above our selves, that tendency to a
sovereign Good, the desire of Perfection and Immortality, do yet imprint a
fuller sense of him in our Minds, than we can have of him by our Eyes. If
therefore we argue from within our selves, or from without, we find him every
where, and this Notion is so universally received, that it can proceed from
nothing but Nature it self, so that those who disbelieve this, seem to have
divested themselves of it. To deny a God and his Providence, the Wise and
Judicious say, is to be deaf to ones own Voice, and a Stranger to ones self.

Yet there are those who enjoy the soft and pleasurable Benefits of Life, and
good Sense, and yet acknowledge not its Author, or at least, do but speciously
pretend it, that they may avoid the being thought Atheists: These men
accommodate themselves to all sorts of Religions, having none at all, or do
embrace or quit 'em, as they may be useful or disadvantageous to their
Pleasures and Interest. They will oblige themselves to no Laws, but such which
gratify 'em; the justest to them are the cruellest; and the very name of
Divinity does either offend 'em, or makes no impression at all on 'em. They
destroy, as much as it is possible, the Author of their Being, and please
themselves in disbelieving, what if they believed, they would be bound to
reverence and fear. Their licentious Humors give 'em not leave to inform
themselves of what they ought; and doubtless they either read not at all, or if
they do, don't meditate on it; but if they do, they are so naturally inciin'd
to Evil, that they turn all to an ill sense. However, these would be thought
the subtle, ingenious men of the Age, imagining they know much more than
others, having learned from some lewd cunning Fellow two or three false
Arguments to prove their horrid Opinions, which pass with such as themselves,
the Profane, or with the Ignorant; beyond these they proceed not, or if they
do, it is like unlearned men, still putting Questions, and never making Answer
to any. It Is with sorrow I speak it, that most Princes and Noblemen are so far
from ridding their Courts of these Monsters, that they are entertained as
better Company than others; received as particular Friends and Confidents; so
that thus insensibly they themselves become guilty with them of offending the
Divine Majesty. Without these, their Conversation at Table, and in Company,
will be thought dull and insipid. Here are they loaded with Honor, and filled
with the choicest Delicacies, and then, when they ought to make the highest
acknowledgments, they pronounce the greatest Blasphemies. What they say is
received with Applause, and the more are they valued, the more impudently they
attack God Almighty. Men, the most ungrateful, and least reasonable of all
sorts, making acknowledgments only to themselves, believing all they have to
proceed from their own Industry or good Fortune. True Children of the Devil,
who is the false Accuser, striving to signalize themselves by the same Methods
their Father does, by opposing, or openly fighting against the Truth.

Since these acknowledge no greater Wisdom than their own, they may believe
perhaps, it is by their Virtue, by their Care, the Earth is supported by its own
weight, that it is encompassed by the vast Waters of the Sea, without being
overflown; That by their Providence and Industry so many different Streams pass
through its Veins, some rising into Fountains, refreshing all sorts of
Creatures, and then making useful Rivers, filled with Fish, and serviceable to
entertain a Commerce between men; And doubtless, by their Order, the Sun rises
at an appointed time, to light them, when satisfied with sleep, and each Season
returns to gratify them with all manner of Delight. If they cannot in all these
but confess their insufficicy, why will they not also own that there are Powers
greater than theirs employed in these wonderful Services, and by degrees they will
find one Superior to others, which are finite, and to have a beginning, and
therefore necessarily depend on one that has none, which is infinite? Otherwise
we should pass from the less to the greater without end, from cause to cause,
without finding the first or last, which alone merits the name of Divinity. To
what are we come, that we must even now with Industry endeavor to prove the
Truth of the being of a God! Is not this indeed to affront men as reasonable as
our selves, to show 'em what each particular Sense does constantly prove to
'em? Is not this to teach those to see who have their Eyes open, and tell
others they have the use of Reason, who profess themselves men? Shall we add to
these Considerations, the frequently repealed Arguments of those who have
undertaken so high, but just and reasonable a Defense? In effect, if there was
no God, How could the World be? Could it be the Workmanship and the Workman of
it self? Could it be before it was? How can these agree, and yet but the same
World? If it be eternal, and is independent on any first Cause, that Order
which we observe, and must be an effect of admirable Wisdom, with all those
Powers which are differently communicated to each part, would, in a manner,
prove what some have fancied, That it is God himself.

For, it is not in the least probable, that it is Beauty, it is Order, and
Duration, can be the effects of blind and confused Chance; Can we imagine, that
from thence could proceed such long and regular Successions of Time and Motion?
Can we attribute to that, so much Care, and Wisdom, as to be able to make so
different Causes tend to the same Effect? This certainly, under another Name
would be God himself, and his Blasphemers would meet in every place, what their
guilty Souls are afraid of finding any where: otherwise, What is this Fortune,
but a vain and insignificant Title, an imaginary Idol, that exists but in our
Fancies, to which we erroniously attribute such Effects, of whose Causes we are
ignorant.

She appears to us less or greater, according to our Proportion of Knowledge;
and, if we could but free the World from Ignorance, the Notion of Fortune would
be laid aside. It Is then the Deity of the ignorant, which no wise man adores;
and I cannot but wonder, how those who plead for her can believe, themselves
reasonable, since, according to the Opinion they have of all things, they must
confess they were made by Chance, and consequently, that they move, act, and
speak so. There are amongst these, some who pretend to believe a God, but, at
the same time, make him careless and idle, slothful, and wholly unconcerned in
the Affairs of the Universe, at least, in all sublunary things, imagining
perhaps, says one, that this would be too great Trouble to him; As if their
Impieties could give him any Comfort or Satisfaction. Is not this to deny,
whilst they own him, and boldly to confine the Actions of an infinite Power? Is
not this to make to themselves a God, who cannot barely act as a Man, to allow
him Understanding without Counsel, a Will without Freedom, Goodness without
Communication; in a Word, a Being without a Being, and less than that of the
Elements, which comes nearest to no Being at all.

But, not to insist farther on the universal chain of Causes with their
Effects, which plainly demonstrate, that things of the sublimest nature, are
assisted by those of the lowest, and that these necessarily depend on the same
Wisdom and Power by which they are made and conserved. Who is he that in his
Anger chastises both Kings and People; that removes the Scepter from one, and
gives it to another; that overturns Empires, and in an instant, changes the
Face of Estates; and to show that this is done by his Power, has long since
foretold it by the Mouth of his Messengers and Prophets? Who was it that
punished the Sins of men by a miraculous Flood, acknowledged by all the World;
and by whose Advice was one only Family saved from it? Who was it that promised
such a Deluge should never return, and who has so faithfully kept his Promise?
What Spirit foresaw the coming of the Messiah three or four thousand years, of
whom the Prophets have so particularly spoke, as if they, as well as the
Apostles, had seen him: From whom, but God himself, or some Angel sent from
him, were those Predictions of the Posterity of Abraham, of the Throne of
David, and of that Lamp which should be kept in his Family, of the dispersing
and rejecting of the Jews, and the Conversion of the Gentiles? If it be told me
that there are Mathematicians, Astrologers, and Wise men, who foretell things
to come, I must ask by what hand they are writ in the Heavens, in such
Characters that men can read 'em, and who has placed the Signs in the Stars, or
rather, their Virtues and Causes, which the same men cannot comprehend? It must
needs be, that those who are not touched with these Considerations, are blinded
with Passion that prevents their Reason, who, from Custom become obstinate, and
from Ignorance, stupid. We find that there are many very wise, and knowing in
all worldly things; nay, are ignorant and insensible of nothing but Divine
ones: But, if I am not deceived; most bear in their Breast both their Accuser
and Judge, and will, earlier or later, be forced to say as others have done, We
are so weary of the ways of Iniquity, that we can endure 'em no longer.

CHAP. III.
THUS whatever presents it self to our sight does speak of a God, and prove
that he is; but what he is, neither all those Objects, nor all our Reason can
discover to us. Yet so much as we know of him, is sufficient to make us
believe, and worship what we don't perfectly know. Let it be then that the
continued course of Causes and Effects is not infinite, that all things either
reach or tend visibly to their End; that from the Ancientest of Books, in
respect of which all others are but new, and imperfect, we know the Origin and
Rise of all Nations; That the Powers of the Heavens are become weak, that the
Age and Strength of Men are impaired, in comparison of that account we receive
of 'em in Sacred and Profane History, it does evidently appear that God created
the World; and for an additional Perfection to his greatest Work, made Man
after his own Image, that is, wholly conformable to his Will, not in Essence
but Imitation, and as Perfect and as Happy as the Noblest Creature could be. He
was placed in an honorable Station, between Beasts and Angels, was the Bond of
the Universe, the End of all created things, over which he had eternally
commanded, had he been only but obedient to his Creator. But not content with
those abundant Favors he had received, rashly aspires to a degree above his
Sovereign, endeavors to rise higher than the Top it self, and aiming at
something in nothing, was near returning to that first Nothing from whence he
came. How strangely bold! What high Presumption is it to covet being equal with
God! What base Incredulity to accuse him of falsehood or Envy! What horrid
Ingratitude and Rebellion, to set the Devil in Gods place! How extremely
spiteful and uncharitable was he to his Children, to sell 'em before they were
born, and enslave 'em before they knew what Liberty was! He scarce imagined
that he should be believed the worst Father of the World, that the Curse he had
drawn on himself would extend it self from one end of the Earth to the other,
from the beginning to the end of all Ages, and would be the most certain
Inheritance he could leave to his Posterity. He foresaw not, that instead of
that commerce and fellowship he held with Angels, instead of that Access he had
to, and Communication with God himself, his unhappy Successors would converse
only with Devils, and must eternally submit to their Power and Tyranny; and
that to live amongst men, would be to herd with Lions, Tigers, Vipers, and
Dragons. He foresaw not, that instead of an Eternal Spring which he began to
enjoy, and might have preserved for 'em, they would suffer the Extremities of
cold Winter, or be stifled by the excessive Heats of Summer, that instead of
those fair delightful Trees he saw in the Terrestrial Paradise, and of that
delicious Fruit, and those curious Flowers he had the liberty to gather there,
they would seldom see but Racks and Gibbets, the devouring Grave, and dead men's
Bones. He foresaw not, that besides the Hardships and Swet of Labor, the
Terrors of fatal Necessity, sharp Pains, or languishing Diseases, and the
continual Horrors of approaching Death; there would be Judgments and Plagues
that would ruin whole Towns, and destroy Provinces, that there would be
sometimes so great a Mortality, and the dead so frightful, that there would be
scarce any left, either to lament or bury 'em; that Nature would become so
divested of her self, that Men would devour Men, and Children tore in Bits
would again return to their Mothers Bellies. He foresaw not that the greatest
part of his Posterity would become so odious to each other, that they would
please themselves with persecuting the justest and most innocent of their
Brethren, rather than imitate them; that they would not content themselves to
stone some, and massacre others, but would wittily invent some new Punishment,
by which they might force them to deny the Truth, to worship Wood or Stone, or
else to undergo the cruellest Torments the Furies of Hell it self could inspire
'em with. No, he foresaw not all these things; and the Devil, who flattered him
with Hopes that his Eyes should be more opened, endeavored to blind him more,
that he might throw him into a bottomless Abyss, from whence, 'twas not to be
imagined, that ever either any Humane, Angelick, or Divine Power, could justly
retrieve him.

How is he disguised by this Fall! what Proportion is there between what he is
and what he was! He is ashamed of himself, having only so much Sight left him
as to discover his Nakedness, and so much Knowledge as to perceive his Error.
From the Image of God, after which he was made, he is transformed in an Instant
into that of a Devil, and he has no more of the first Innocence remaining, than
the Trouble of having lost it. What comfort can he find after this Loss? He
cannot hope for any from his Reason, that having helped to destroy him. He who
could not preserve himself upright when standing, how, when fallen, shall he
recover himself? What can he promise himself, either from Angels or God
himself, since he has broken that Law by which he was obliged to Obedience or
Punishment? The Punishment which bears the same Date with Guilt, does, without
Intermission torment him, and has left him only so much Life as to make him
sensible of the Terrors of Death. But, what is yet worse, the Offense is
aggravated according to the Greatness of the offended Person; and as he has
sinned against an infinite Being, so he must dye, or suffer infinitely! What
Confusion of Thoughts, What Remorse, What Terrors torment his Mind! Since he
was not only told his Duty, but threatened with Disgrace if he did it not, and
to invite him to be the more careful, one would have believed the Decree of his
Death should have kept him from sinning. To what despair does he find himself
reduced, and what can he do or imagine in this sad miserable Condition! Unless
God has made what he cannot repent him of having made; and that he builds not
to pull down, and his Glory will not suffer his Workmanship to perish. That
it is not probable the most excellent of Creatures was destined to everlasting
Misery, that being seduced, and the Fault not altogether his own, he should be
obliged to make Satisfaction, as the Devils themselves, who are always doing
it, but never accomplish it.

Howsoever it is, he saw no Expedient for his Deliverance, and could not
imagine how he might find Mercy from God, without violating his Justice. 'Twas
this that neither he nor all his Posterity could conceive.

Some have been so amazed at it, that they have turned Atheists, others made to
themselves Gods after their own fashion, and became Idolaters. This unhappy
temper, but so natural and so strong, has even universally prevailed, and so
corrupted the very Sense and Understanding of Men, that they would have the
Objects of Adoration Corporal and visible, as themselves, not being able to
frame to themselves any thing higher, attributing to them humane Passions, and
appointed 'em Services according to their own vain Imaginations. They have not
only been less than men by worshipping them, but than Beasts themselves, having
worshipped those too. They adored the most abject and vilest Creatures, who
were so far from bearing any marks of Divinity, that they had not common signs
of Life; and, lest their Idolatry should not be sufficiently execrable, they
worshipped even the Infernal Powers, the greatest Enemies of the Creator. Many,
believing that there was a future, and better state of Life for Man than that
of this World, instead of searching the Divine Oracles, to instruct 'em in the
Attainment of their great End, have applied themselves to doubtful and
Diabolical ones. Instead of the only and true Remedy by which they might be
cleansed from all Sin and Corruption, they have taken indirect Measures, and
from hence wearied themselves with Ceremonies, Abstinencies, Purifications,
Fastings, Offerings, which have been only effectual to add fresh Troubles to
their Life. For what Sacrifices, what Beasts, what Hecatombs can expiate the
Crime only of one Man? Or rather, what Man is able, being conceived in Sin, to
make satisfaction, not for others; but for himself? And what Sacrifices can he
offer but Ingratitude, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Vain thoughts, and lying Words?
What is his Virtue but Vice palliated, his Prudence but Subtilty and Fraud, his
Valor but rashness, and his Wisdom but Hypocrisy? If he does pray, it is only
from Custom or for Fashion-sake, and if at sometimes he is more than ordinary
Zealous, it is not so much the love of God that excites him to it, as the fear
of Evil threatening him, or the sense of it, which is burdensome to him. What
therefore can he do better than daily to make Confession of his Sins? but from
thence he is to expect, if to be judged according to his Merits, only Death and
Damnation.

If then Man by all his Reason could never sanctify one Man only, if all the
Philosophy in the World could never make one Believer, or discover a Good which
Death cannot rob us of; what remains then but that we believe that, those who
have been inspired by God, have taught, is best; that we rely on the first and
surest Principles, that the Means are universal, which God only can reveal.

CHAP. IV.
AS it is an undoubted Truth, that Man was not made by Chance, so it is as
certain that he was not made in Vain; that he was not destined to everlasting
Torments, or to return to that Nothing from whence he came; and the same Power
that gave him his first Being, will give him a future Well-Being. Shall not He,
who by those Sparks of the Divine Image remaining in him, can measure the
Heavens standing upon the Earth, be immortal? What would signify else those
many Promises and Revelations? Who would have taken so much trouble to have
deceived us? What would Justice and Piety be accounted, but vain empty Names
with which the World is abused? and to what purpose all our Religion, if after
this Life there was nothing to be hoped for? It Is true that our degenerate and
sensual Inclinations persuade us to follow the common way; to enjoy the
Pleasures of the present time, without any concern for those of hereafter, to
live as Beasts, as if to dye as those: But let us lay aside all those profane
and inconsiderate Thoughts. The first Act of the Creator is a Proof of all the
rest; for He who made us out of nothing, can as well raise us from the dead.
Will he suffer such to escape unpunished who sully and deface his Holy Image?
Shall the Devil conquer in this Combat, or triumph over the Works of the
Almighty? No, the Happiness of man in his first State of Innocence, how great
soever, was not his ultimate End; nor was it so complete, but that he will be
yet infinitely more happy: but 'twas necessary to leave him to his own Will and
Counsels, as well to try him, as to oblige him to a Knowledge of himself, which
might serve as a step to raise him to that of his Creator: He would else,
perhaps, have believed he could have subsisted without the aid of any other
Power, and would not have duly considered, that there is but one only Being,
pure, holy, and true, on whom all others depend, and without whom, we must
either be not at all, or eternally miserable.

That men therefore may not too securely rest on the Remains of their own
Strength and Virtue, God has given 'em means to try themselves, and let 'em
know, that they all equally fell with the first man, are naturally Slaves to
Sin, and consequently, Tributaries to Hell and Death.

He has given 'em his Law, which, as perfect as it is, shows 'em but their
Imperfection. It Is being just, makes 'em the more criminal, it instructs but to
confound 'em; and seems so far from promising any good to 'em, that it takes
away all manner of Hopes: it is a killing Letter, an intolerable Yoke, an
Instrument of Death, so far from justifying, that it brings all under the same
Condemnation: Yet, to speak more favorably of it, it is a Looking-glass that
represents to 'em what they were, what they are, and what they must be; it is a
Flower, whose Fruit is the greatest Grace can happen to 'em; it is a Flambeau
that Lights 'em in the Night, till the rising of the Sun.

As the incomprehensible Unity which comprehends all things, is the sovereign
Perfection of God, so Union with God is the chief Perfection of Man; but we
cannot come to him, unless first he draws us, or rather, unless he is pleased
to come down to us. This is the great Mystery of our Redemption, which even
those who received the Promises of it confirmed by Numbers of Signs and
Miracles, saw at so great a distance, and through such shadows of Darkness,
that they could much better believe and hope for than comprehend it. Observing
the great distance between Heaven and Earth, they foresaw no way to fill up
this Abyss, nor could they imagine how they should ascend thus high, but by
Jacob's Ladder.

Yet Reason does often assent to things even beyond it self; and by this at
length we understand, what at first we could not possibly imagine. If then
Reason tells us, that a Medium is kept between two Extremes, and yet with this
Medium these Extremes equally agree, though never so distant; that it is
necessary that a Mediator be capable of the Sentiments and Affections of each
Party whom he reconciles; that he makes a just Estimate of Right and Wrong
between the one and the other; who can doubt but that he who is sent us from
Heaven, is endu'd with all Qualities necessary for him? that he partakes both
of the divine and humane Nature; in a word, that he is both God and Man; and
yet Man, conceived after another manner than others, lest his natural
Corruption and Sins make him incompatible with the Justice and Purity of God.
If he was not Man, we should have no part in him, nor could his Satisfaction be
imputed to us. If he was not God, he could not communicate to us his immortal
Virtues, his Glory and Happiness. If he was only Man, he could not conquer
Death, or have risen from the Grave, he would have sunk under the Pain, and
have been reduced to nothing. And if he was only God, he could not have dyed,
or received from himself the Satisfaction which the Law he made obliges us to.

He must then suffer, and yet be impassible; dye, and yet immortal; descend
into Hell and rise again: He must conquer the Infernal Powers, and let us see,
that in him truly are the Entries and Issues of Death. It is necessary, that he
who will deliver others from the Curse, does both suffer and overcome it; and
that there may be some Proportion between the Fault and the Punishment, it is
necessary that a Person of infinite Worth does render a temporal and finite
Suffering of infinite Value; for, doubtless, God rather chose that his Son
should dye for the Sins of the World, than the whole World should perish.
Though there be no Justice that allows, that one who is innocent suffer for the
guilty, yet none forbids it, on Condition, that he voluntarily offers himself,
and that he is not absolutely destroyed by the Punishment, but that it remains
in his Power to lay down and take up his Life again.

O wonderful Effects of Eternal Power and Wisdom, who from one Man, in the
beginning, made a Woman that caused us all to dye; and since has pleased, in
the Fullness of Time, of a Woman to make a Man that will us restore to Life
again! Thus is the Divine and Humane Nature mysteriously united, and without
the Properties either of the one or the other, being changed.

The Son of God is joined in Unity of Person with the Son of Man; I say, the
Son, and not the Father, because we cannot have for Intercessor that Person to
whom he must intercede. He who sends, cannot be sent; and then as the Father
does nothing of himself, but all things by the Son, it is reasonable, that the
second Creation should be made by the same as the first was. Who can more
effectually speak than He who is the Word it self? Who can better renew in us
the Divine Image, than He who first formed it? and who can better bestow on us
the right of Children, than the Possessour of it? But it is not enough that He
makes Satisfaction, or that that be imputed to us; but it is necessary that this
Grace be conferred upon us; that it be applied to us, which is the Office of
the Spirit that equally proceeds both from the Father and the Son: It Is He that
does both enlighten, and purify us, that makes us understand, love, and
believe these Mysteries; that makes us, as he did the Blessed Virgin, conceive
our Savior. He is the Bond of Love that unites us to Divinity; it is the true
anointing by which we are made Kings, Priests, and Prophets: To conclude, This
is He who gives himself as a Pledge, and assurance of the Promises of a future
Life, of the Resurrection, and of Glory.

This great Mediator is then come, and as he was foretold, not as a Conqueror,
as a Cyrus or Alexander, but a man of sorrows, consecrated, by his Afflictions,
the public Victim of Mankind, whose Merit is sufficient for all, but only
applicable to those who believe in him. He is come, not to shed the Blood of
others, but his own; to overcome Rebellion by Obedience, Force and Power by
Weakness, and Pride by Humility: and this makes him appear greater, and more
Divine, as well as us to admire and adore him. Behold the sole Object of
Religion, which is not only to save Man, but of him to make a God, without
prejudice to the Divine Unity, or Holy Trinity. For what name can we give the
Son of man, who makes one and the same Person with the Son of God? And of what
Race ought we to esteem those, whom he has vouchsafed to honor with the name
of Brethren? Now this Religion is established; not by Contention, or private
Conspiracy; not by the favor of Kings, or the suffrage of the People, not by
the cunning of Philosophers, or the Eloquence of Orators; not by a multitude of
men, as the Mohammedan, or by numbers of Gods, as the Pagan; but by the alone
publishing of the simple and naked Truth. Yet this Truth, notwithstanding all
manner of opposition, has flourished, and made it self known throughout the
World. It has so prevailed, that Errors of all sorts have been confounded, all
Sects dispersed and wasted, false Oracles, with Idols and their worshippers,
have fallen before it.

CHAP. V.
AFter that which we are taught concerning the only way of Man's Salvation,
What can we learn from all the Religions in the World? To what would Mahomet
persuade us, if the Name of Christian be so hateful to him, if he differs from
the Religion of Jesus Christ, to which, all the Prophets do so strongly adhere?
Is it not strange, that so many inspired men should be raised at different
Times, and at distant Places, to foretell the coming of one Man alone, who was
to be rejected by his own, and received by all the other Nations of the Earth?
Undoubtedly, after what we learn of him from the Scriptures, and those Commands
it lays upon us, as well as those Instructions we receive from 'em, we have no
need of being longer curious, but to submit and obey. Let those who make to
themselves Gods, appoint Services for 'em, it is otherwise with him, who is not
made by our Opinion, but is the Maker of us all. His Will cannot be discovered
by our Conceit or vain Imaginations, but by his Word alone; this he gives us as
a Light to guide us, and woe be to them who call this Light Darkness. The
Knowledge which it teaches us is so sublime and excellent, that Man could never
have found it out; and then so consonant to Reason, that it is impossible to
consider of it well, and not approve of it. It first represents Man to himself,
informing him of his Weakness and Misery, then comforts him; and no sooner
discovers his Disease to him, but offers him a Remedy against it. It contains
many Revelations and Predictions, confirmed, after a long Succession of Time,
by certain Events, whose end is the Salvation of the Creature, and the
glorifying of the Creator. The Naturalness, the End, the Style, the Antiquity,
the Strength, the Duration, and diverse other Marks, which eminently appear in
it, do so clearly prove it is Divinity, that it seems to be God himself who
speaks; Man therefore must attend and be silent. Has the Truth of any History
of the greatest and most flourishing Empires, been so much strengthened by its
Friends, as this has even by its Enemies? What other begins with the World,
continues from Age to Age, speaks of things to come, as if present, and ends
with the World it self? It Is the way of Salvation, the Gate of Heaven; and he
who endeavors to enter by any other, is a Thief. It Is the model of Perfection,
that shows us of what Good or of what Ill we are capable, and teaches us to
examine, to know, and reform our selves. It Is the true Paradise, where grows
the Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for the Health of the Gentiles.

To conclude, they are the Words of the Almighty, writ by him, and equally
dispensed to his Servants and Friends, being neither kept or hid from any one
of those who belong to his Election. Whoever then knows that there are Holy
Scriptures for to instruct men how they ought to serve God, and what Recompense
they may hope for, and does not carefully consult 'em, whatever Profession he
may make of Religion, is a Liar, a Hypocrite, and deceives himself; since they
are writ as well for the meaner sort as the greatest Doctor; for Women as Men;
and for Children as their Fathers. If there be any, who having once read 'em,
though out of Curiosity perhaps, and are not so taken with 'em as to read 'em
continually, it is a very ill Sign. Is it to deal fairly, or indeed, Is it not
to declare they receive the Devils Wages, and take his part to prevent the
Salvation of men when they forbid the reading of 'em to so many pious Souls who
thirst after the Word of Eternal Life? Let Heretics and Turks conceal the
Falseness of their Doctrines and Errors, but let the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
being Truth it self, be exposed and visible to all; let it shine as the Day,
that spiritual things may be as evident to our Understanding, as corporeal are.

But, perhaps 'twill be said, What need have we of so much Reading and Study,
since the Church does appoint what is necessary for us, and that such who
cannot err do guide us? But, I say, there can be no greater Error than to
persuade us that we cannot err; for this indeed, is boldly to attribute to our
selves, a divine Property, incommunicable to Men, unless to the Prophets and
Apostles; and they only by the Commission they had to declare the Word they
received, and publish what was truly revealed to 'em. Perhaps, the Word of God
is not to be understood without Plato and Aristotle: But I say, the Wise Men of
the World are so far from this Knowledge, as their Wisdom is folly before God,
which makes 'em as obstinately and with as much Violence resist the Motions of
the Holy Ghost, as one Contrary does the other. It may be urged again, that
it is but a fragment, a part, an imperfect Rule, insufficient to lead us to
Salvation. But I say, That there is no Man either so simple, or dull, who from
hence is not enabled to learn more than the best Saint can practice; for there
is no one so good, who comes not short of the Perfection that is here proposed.

Methinks I hear these wilfully ignorant men complaining of the difficulty of a
Knowledge they have never searched into; as if the knowing the ways of
Salvation did not belong to 'em.

They use to urge, out of a religious Scruple, they are not worthy to read it.
It Is true, you are not worthy of the Grace of God, but since he is pleased to
bestow it on you, who will you have to receive it for you? He is suspected by
you, his Word is dangerous, and to be feared; he has declared and inspired it
only to ensnare your Souls, to deceive and destroy 'em: You pretend you know
your Weakness, and you should wrest the sense of it; confess rather your own
Perverseness, and that you will turn that into Poison, which others, that you
know, do into Honey. You call that Word dark, the first of which, made Light;
that spiritual Lamp which was given us to no other end, but to enlighten us.
You understand not that Word which the very Rocks did, that Word which raised
not only the Dead to Life, but summoned them who were not, as if they were;
that Word which commanded Nothing to produce Something, and that Nothing
obeyed. Confess then, that you are less sensible than the Rocks, the Dead, or
Nothing it self. This is the Natural Effect of the Counsel, and those
Instructions you received from your Teachers, who, to make their own Precepts
the more esteemed, vilify the Scripture. Its Purity serves not their Ambition,
and not daring to accuse it of Falsehood, charge it with Obscurity; and because
they cannot positively contradict, they misinterpret it for their own Purposes:
and though it is full of Prohibitions, neither to add to, or substract any thing
from it, yet they are not content to lay heavy Impositions on the Consciences
of men, and load them with new Humane Ordinances, which make the State of the
Gospel more intolerable than that of the Law; but their Insolence and Boldness
are so exorbitant, as to retrench the Commandments of the Law, though the
Reverence due to God, who writ 'em with his own hand, ought to have secured 'em
from that Sacrilege, and have rendered 'em for ever inviolable. These men study
Divinity, only to quarrel the Scriptures, and pass for learned men in 'em,
without having read 'em; and before they have read 'em, being prepossessed with
the Sense of the Schools, they judge 'em with Prejudice: After which, it is very
hard to take any other Impression, than that which they received in their
Youth; and then, with what Folly does the Devil seduce the minds of men, that
they who proceed in such a Method, should be thought wise and knowing?

There are, it is true; mysterious Prophecies, that were not understood by those
who delivered 'em; the Knowledge of 'em was reserved for such that should see
their Accomplishment. There is no one Passage in Scripture that threatens
Eternal Damnation to those who don't clearly interpret the Revelations, and we
may attain to Salvation, without being fully acquainted with the meaning of the
Visions of Ezekiel, and the other Prophets. I will farther add, that the
Predictions, Threats, and Promises, the full discovery of which necessarily
depends on the future, do imprint certain Ideas upon us, of terrible pains
prepared for the Wicked, and of a glorious Reward and felicity for the Good.
Those things we understand, certify us of the truth of what we do not
understand; and when the Reader does meet with clear Texts, by which he cannot
explain others, he must humble himself, confess his Ignorance or Incapacity,
and so put a stop to his Presumption. However it is, there is no one but may
there discover such Commands as he ought to obey, the Belief he ought to hold,
a pattern of such Prayers and Thanksgivings which he ought to make to God
Almighty. And this indeed is all our Preachers have to direct us in, without
perplexing our Minds with nice and intricate Questions, or disturbing us and
themselves with their vain, impertinent Thoughts. But let us beware of belying
our selves, in saying this Word is clear and easy, because the Doctors of the
Age urge the contrary, and the People believe it. No, no, it is truly very
difficult and obscure; Jesus Christ himself does testify it, but especially to
the Learned. He gives thanks to his Father that he has hid these things from
'em, and revealed 'em to little Children. It Is obscure to such who are cast
away, and whose eyes the God of this World has shut. Let us boldly confess,
it is not to be understood barely by Humane Reason, We want the assistance of a
Divine Spirit, to make us have clear conceptions of so Divine a Word. Those who
have not this Spirit cannot certainly comprehend it: the Children of God only
know the Voice of their Father, and only those of the Flock know that of the
Shepherd. Let us acknowledge, that too great a luster does make it seem obscure
to a great part of those who look on it; only the generous and legitimate
Eagles can fixedly behold this Sun, but the Owls and Birds of Darkness become
blind by its light.

CHAP. VI.
IT IS not to be doubted, but that the chief Enemy of God, the first Author of
universal Rebellion, the great Tyrant of the World, does, by all Methods
imaginable, promote his own Worship, and then no wonder that the most part of
Religions are Worldly and Diabolical. He cares not how, or by whom they are
instituted, whether introduced by Ignorance, Opinion, Abuse, or Custom, so
they are but alike Profane and Superstitious; whether those who at first adored
Bell or Jupiter, do afterward worship the Sun, the Moon, the whole Host of
Heaven, or of Hell. There is no Religion so extravagant, which he does not
favor; nor is there any one displeasing to him, but the true. He has first
added Gods to Gods, carried their Idols to the Holy place, and then has found
out ways of opposing the Scripture by Scripture, and by untrue Interpretations
on it, created false Beliefs. He has served himself of the Light, only to
dazzle, and of Truth, to disguise falsehood, the better to put off his
Impostures. He has his Learned men to teach and dispute, his Professors of
Religion to give Examples of living well; his Priests, his Prophets, Martyrs
and Confessors. And yet men are not sensible by what Spirit they are led, so
obdurate are they, and given up to Satan; they are so fully possessed with, and
infatuated by him, that they scarce think that he is. They are so profane and
presumptuous, have so mighty an Opinion of their own Natural Reason, that they
pretend to reform the Works of their Maker, and to judge of the Word of God, as
if barely Humane; They content not themselves with what they learn from
Divinity, without the aid of Philosophy, and confound both the one and the
other; and thus, insensibly forsaking the Profession of Christians, become as
Heathens. They employ themselves in the search of nice and curious Questions,
and not regarding what is clear and evident, take a pride in raising Doubts and
Scruples; and in a collection of Contradictions, and affected Difficulties,
pervert themselves and others from the knowledge of the Truth. They take, when
they please, figurative Expressions literally; they make the worst
Interpretations on those things that are obscure and doubtful; and when they
meet with Words of a double Sense, they be sure take that which suits best with
their Interest and Designs. They puzzle each other with specious Reasons, and
their Judgment is so weak as to allow, that two Contradictories may be
maintained by equal Proofs. One would believe they learn, that they may be more
ignorant, and that they study to be Scepticks; and by these means, they make
Knowledge of less Value than Ignorance it self.

In Effect, if Humane Knowledge was grounded on any Certainty, those who
pretend so perfectly to understand the Art of reasoning well, would be all of
the same Belief: but if their Opinions are so very different, and divided, and
yet that there is but one Truth; in what can they be so understanding? in a
certain crabbed, knotty artificial Divinity only, full of Metaphysical Terms,
which neither the Prophets, or Apostles judged necessary to Salvation, or
rather, have not at all known; and of which, according to their Example, it is
much better to be ignorant than knowing.

In Humane Inventions, in Chimaera's and odd Pictures, and indeed, in all
things capable of producing Errors, and of destroying Reason by its own
subtilty, you meet with some who are always vainly prating, eternal Disputants,
that employ their whole study in contradicting others, and who are concerned
more for a false Syllogism, than for the Peace of the Church, or the Happiness
of the World. They never engage in any Conference, but with a resolution not to
yield in the least for the love of the Truth, but only to endeavor either to
seduce their Adversaries by all manner of persuasions and promises, or at
least, to supplant 'em by Artificial Stratagems. They fear nothing so much as
granting one Point, lest then they should be obliged to allow all. If any of
'em does in the least yield, he loses all his Credit with his Party; and if
sincere but in one act, 'twill be looked on by 'em as an unpardonable fault.
They are always armed with the fallacious Arguments of the Schools, and Proofs
grounded on certain Maxims which they lay down, and oblige them to maintain, as
Principles of unquestionable Truth, which must admit of no Doubt, or endure any
Examination; and on these depend the infallible consequence of what they
believe, or what they endeavor to persuade us to: For, though their Impostures
are apparent, yet they so disguise 'em as to make 'em plausible, that they may
keep the People, by their pious Cheats, in their impious Devotions.

They know how to take the advantage of the Enemy, they are well skilled in
shifting the most formal Assertions, they subtly refine the very substance of
the Matter, and the state of the Question; they have their Sophistical
Distinctions, their set Comments, their Evasions and Defeats; and thus every
one in their Disputes, as in War, aims only at Conquest. Execrable Souls! who
regard more the defense of their Honor and Interest, than their Religion it
self, and who look after what they are to object, or answer, rather than what
they ought to believe; who value not their want of Faith, provided they appear
not to be void of Reason. Why should we hope from these men for a candid and
faithful Interpretation of the most hidden things, who only endeavor to render
more obscure those which are clear and evident; and who so change the
Ordinances of God, that it is easy to discover it; for, with the assistance
even of common sense, our Eyes alone may be just Judges of it? But we are not
to expect other fruits from their Animosity or Obdurateness, who are only free
and sociable with those who suffer themselves to be instructed, or wholly
governed by 'em: For they are not capable of knowing more, having, as they
presume, learned all they can, and proposing to themselves only the teaching of
others, are pleased to be rather esteemed the Masters of Error, than the
Disciples of Truth.

But 'twill be asked me, if in a Consideration of so great weight as this, I
can pretend, without Presumption, that my Opinion herein is infallible, or at
least, more enlightened than that of the Learned themselves. I answer, that I
profess to embrace no other than what is established on the clear Evidence of
Scripture, intelligible by the meanest of men, and which it has pleased God to
reveal to the humble, and hide from the proud. No other than that by which I am
taught, that no one ought to presume beyond what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. That
it is absolutely forbid either to add, or take from it; that those who promote
God's Honor and Service, barely by humane Doctrines, do it in vain; and by
their Traditions, make the Law of no effect. No other than that which presses
me to avoid profane Questions, vain and impertinent Disputes, and unreasonable
Contradictions, of a Knowledge, falsely so called, which it is difficult to
pursue, without erring from the Faith, and becoming even impious. Besides, I
answer, that these Demands cannot be justly proposed to those who serve
themselves only of their Sense and Reason, to know the Voice of their Lord and
Father, to receive his Commands, and obey him; who presume not boldly to
intermine their own idle Conceits with his Ordinances, and who expound the
Scripture but by it self. It Is from the unbounded Curiosity, and sublime
Visions of these Angelical, Seraphick, enlightened Doctors, arise so many
extravagant Opinions; and not from the innocent reading of ordinary men, who in
the Words of eternal Life, seek after nothing but such Light as may direct 'em
in the ways of Repentance and Salvation. There are none esteemed the Authors of
Heresies, but those who presume they are able to defend 'em; who by the same
Spirit of Pride and Confidence they proposed 'em, maintain them. These are
Errors then, which the Learned can only pretend to, and Follies, which the Wise
can only commit; the Vanity of knowing what others know not, the Reputation of
having first discovered some new Invention, the giving a Name to some Sect, and
being it is Head; the Terrors of Poverty, a thirst after Honor and Riches; a
desire to please the Great men of the World, to merit their Favors, to flatter
their Passions, to carry on their Interest, for the Advancement of their own,
are those Considerations which contain the secret Articles, and chief Mysteries
of their Faith. They willingly abandon whatever concerns the Interest of their
Souls for the advantage of their Bodies; they desire that Religion should
submit to Fortune, and Conscience to Necessity. Error is no sooner broached,
than there are those found who receive, and promote it; not out of Devotion,
but from a Design of making some new Party in a Quiet Government, and thence to
create trouble and confusion. Europe is so divided into Sects, and torn in
pieces by the violence of so many Factions, that hereupon the Atheists
increase, the Mahometans are confirmed in their Errors, the Jews scandalized,
and all equally hardened. This does not happen from Questions sometimes
concerning the Elect, and at others of the Reprobate, but from the
inconsiderateness of those who enquire after Reasons thereof, when so great an
Apostle as St. Paul found none, but the good Will and Pleasure of God. I
confess, I cannot sufficiently wonder at those, who ingratefully slight those
things which God is pleased to make known to us, so rashly to search after
such, which, for some time, he thinks fit to hide from us; without being too
indiscreetly presumptuous, without not only an impertinent, but dangerous
Curiosity. I will not disturb the Public Quiet, by raising fresh Doubts
concerning the two Natures, the two Wills, or the Substance of Jesus Christ,
without too great a love of my self; I will not pretend to be the Comforter,
with Montanus, nor the Savior of Men, with Menander; I will live as a
Believer, with the Faithful; not scandalizing my Brethren, either by a too
particular Opinion of my own sufficiency, or by a contempt of that of others.

So long as the Weakness of Men shall introduce in the Church no other Scruples
but what are made concerning Meats, or such like; so long as no other Ornaments
are used but flat Pictures, that they provoke not the Jealousy of God by
embossed Images; so long as they use only some superfluous Ceremonies, which in
the judgment of many, are sometimes indifferent, and at others necessary,
although that Error which seems at first sight but small, is, for the most
part, a degree to a greater; so long as the state of the Church, though not so
pure as might be wished for, yet is at least tolerable, I will not forsake its
Communion; but I will withdraw my self from all those Assemblies where I shall
be forced to conform to the External Acts of Superstition or Idolatry, and to
yield a Religious Worship, not only to Saints, and to Angels, who are
fellow servants with us, but Wood and Stone; where the Sacraments are but
partially administered, and where the Commandments of God are destroyed by those
of men. And I shall not believe, that there can be any Schism, where there is
so just an occasion to separate; and indeed, where it is impossible to do
otherwise. For what Sense can those words bear, which oblige the Faithful to
forsake the Camp, Heb. 13. 13. or Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. and not only by their
Minds, but their Bodies too, since as well the one as the other are consecrated
to the Glory of their Creator? And when we see the Abomination of Desolation
set up in the Holy place, Dan. 9. 27. ought we not to fly to the Mountains,
Mat. 24. 15, 16. And if Antichrist be once placed in the Church of God, shall
we obey him, and call his Commands those of the Church? I will go out then from
this Confusion, and conform my self to the Order and Discipline of the true
Spouse of Jesus Christ, though in secret, in the midst of her Enemies, retired;
though I follow her to the Wilderness, and search her in the clefts of the Rocks
and Caverns; though she appears not glorious but by Persecution, and amidst her
sufferings, she shines with no Scarlet, but that of the Blood of Martyrs;
whether the Storm be over, or her Tears wiped off, that her Voice may be heard,
and her Face seen.

CHAP. VII.
OBserving the universal Division of so many Sects, each of which, had it is
Teacher and Head, and some their Prophets, I believed it highly necessary, to
make our Applications to God by Prayer, to humble our selves, and seriously
consult, not the uncertain Imaginations of men, but the infallible Rules which
God himself has taught us; I was the more sollicitous for the Performance of
these things, because God, by his Word, has forewarned us, that not only many
Antichrists shall arise in the Church, and some one above the rest, but also,
that from the time of the Apostles, the Mystery of Iniquity was set up, and was
consequently to be advanced, notwithstanding the Blindness of those who would
not see it, and who search for Pretenses for their voluntary Ignorance: I
looked therefore on those Religions as erroneous, which were not purely
Evangelical and Divine, which are mixed with the Inventions of men, and lay all
their stress on Questions too sublime, and not to be resolved; the Controversy
whereof is too nice and subtle. I had a very ill Opinion of those which are
introduced by Tyranny, or the Sword, which are so ill-grounded, that their
Professors dare not communicate 'em to others; and to that end, keep the People
under a sottish and brutal Ignorance. I had no kindness for those whose
Interest is secular, and whose Kingdom is of this World, whatever name of a
Church they may take to themselves, because they invert the Order of Jesus
Christ, and presumptuously transform that into a time of Glory which he has
ordained for the Patience of Saints.

Moreover, if we are to credit Universal Experience, whatever is subject to the
government of men does decay, and become as changeable and inconstant, earlier
or later, as they themselves. Children continue not willingly in the Belief of
their Fathers, at least, of their Grandfathers; Faith is not hereditary, as
the Title of an House or an Estate. They have only remaining for the most part
the external Profession, which, taking up either from their Birth or Custom,
they easily forsake what their perverse Humors forbid 'em to love, or know;
and if they have been initiated in good Principles, they end in bad ones. Thus
the Purity of the Gospel, in whatever Town or Province it has been received,
has scarce proceeded to the third Generation; and the Apostles themselves lived
only in those Churches they founded, Error insensibly creeping into the place
of Truth. God already threatened them to extinguish their-Light, or to transfer
it, letting 'em see that Faith was not a particular Privilege to one Place,
Family, or People, and that the Church being Catholic, could not be subjected
to the Power of one King, or the Government of one Priest. It is in vain Men
pretend to settle a durable State, or find a lasting Sovereign good in this
Life; they cannot long endure even Prosperity it self, and the alone way to
ruin 'em, is to grant 'em even their own Desires. If our first Parents, placed
in Innocence amidst the Fruit and Flowers of a delightful Garden, could not
withstand the Persuasions of the Evil Spirit, though he took on him only the
form of a Serpent, and offered 'em but an Apple to tempt 'em; how then shall
they who are Sinners by Nature, resist him when he appears as an Angel of
Light, and offers them all the Advantages they can possibly desire. It Is
certain, that the Devil for the most part does seduce men by a Paradise of
Pleasures, to cast 'em into the bottomless Abyss of Hell; and it is by a Hell of
Pains and Afflictions, that God does usually try men, to exalt 'em to the Glory
of Paradise. Riches are of so great Disadvantage to their Possessors, that they
keep 'em, as a weighty Burden, from ascending to Heaven. They are so
incoherent with the Profession of the Gospel, that he who had the Command of
all, and could have employed 'em without Abuse, voluntarily makes himself poor,
to procure us eternal Salvation, and to make us rich by his Poverty.

In effect, what History asserts is acknowledged by all good men, that the
great Presents of Emperors, and the vast Gifts of Lords and Ladies, have been
the most dangerous and fatal Poison that could have been spread in the Church:
for, from hence Piety began to grow cold, and to yield to the Business of the
Age; and all Christian Virtues were soon stifled by Luxury and Abundance. These
Benefactors who are so highly magnifyed, do sufficiently prove, that they were
unacquainted with the Will of Jesus Christ, and with the Calling of his
Ministers, since they bestow on 'em such mighty temporal Riches, as to make 'em
Sharers of the Kingdom of this World. Wealth on a sudden increasing so much,
made those who were true Believers plainly foresee, that none but the ambitious
and covetous; none but ill men would be advanced to Preferment in the Church,
and that it would be brought to the unhappy Extremity of being governed only by
it is Enemies.

Since then, I know not by what Permission of Heaven Corruption has been so
rife, that the Ecclesiastics are become worse than Seculars. They have
received their Authority from men, which they ought to have had alone from God,
in so religious a Profession; and if they have been concerned in spiritual
Affairs, it has been rather to command than serve; to raise themselves to great
Honors, and to make themselves Bishops over the rest of Bishops. They have
imitated him who not satisfied with the Joys of his Fellow-Angels, boldly
aspired to the utmost height of Pride, saying, in his Heart, I will raise my
Throne above the Stars, and shall be made like to the Almighty. Instead of a
due Observation of that Worship and Service God himself has appointed, they
have despised it is Simplicity, affecting Pomp and Bravery in their Devotions,
(and as they say themselves) sanctifying the Ceremonies of Paganism, by
introducing of 'em into the Church. Not being able to endure the Purity of
Doctrine, without altering and disguising of it into a thousand Shapes, they
have, to this purpose, made choice of Preachers after their own fashion, who
raising nice and scrupulous Questions, have understood 'em as little as their
Hearers: and whatever Color of Sense they may bear, being pronounced in
elegant and florid Words, they both seem equally satisfied. We have seen, that
poor Worms, just risen from the Dust, and ready to return thither again, have
insolently taken upon them the Title of Gods, and commanded the very Angels as
their Guards, and have disposed of Heaven and Hell at their Pleasure, as of
their Estates. But what likelihood is there, that those who are raised only by
Corruptions, by Bribery, by Threats, Promises, or private Bargains, should be
the infallible Dispensers of God's Will, and Judges of Men's Faith? What
Patience would not be tired to see those who are alone guided by the Spirit of
Interest, who make the Church an House of Trade and Den of Thieves, transported
to such heights of Impiety, as to make the Holy Ghost an Accomplice of all
their Crimes? Their Pretenses of having Power in Heaven makes 'em seem to
affect less the Good of the Earth, that we may believe, that the Divine
Authority and theirs are equal. But as they are Lions in Cruelty, so are they
Horseleeches for Covetousness, being always finding out new Methods of laying
numberless Impositions on the People. For, to pass by their several
Excommunications, Injunctions, transferring of Causes, and Exactions, under
pretense of War against the Enemies of Christianity, there is no end of their
first Fruits, Bulls, Indulgences, Canons, Cases of Conscience, Pardons for
Faults, and Penances, and superabundant Satisfactions. All these Inventions
make Sins venial so far as they are vendible; for they set to sale, their
Prayers, Sacrifices, and prostitute even Heaven and God himself; so that he
that offers most has the Bargain. Horrid Inventions, that transform Simon Peter
into Simon Magus! who make (as much as in their Power) Jesus Christ a Tyrant,
and his Apostles Mercenary Hucksters. What Divinity! That those who are but
able to pay for it, shall, in a Moment, be delivered from the Torments of Hell,
at least, from those of Purgatory, though the Sins they have committed are never
so enormous, whilst others remain there thousands of Years, unless perchance,
Poverty either voluntary or forced, or Fastings, even to the murdering of
themselves, or some other sort of Severities of Nakedness or whipping do redeem
'em! But besides this spiritual Merchandise, and exposing things sacred to
Sale, by what divine Inspiration do they absolve Subjects of their Oaths of
Fidelity, and dispense with their Allegiance to their lawful Princes, whom they
endeavor rather to terrify than reform; and that dreadful Inquisition which
renders 'em deaf to the just Remonstrances of those who breath after
Reformation only, is it an Imitation of the Meekness and Clemency of Jesus
Christ, or of the barbarous Cruelty of Herod, who put to Death so many
Innocents, lest he should miss of him who was Innocence it self?

O God! How long will thou suffer the Children of Pride to reign, who make
Religion but a Masque, and use thy Name only to render the People willingly
tributary? How long will thou endure that horrible Scandal these men give to
the Gentiles, who have yet some shadow of Respect for the Law thou thy self
have pronounced! and seeing the Objects of thy Jealousy, carved Images in the
Churches, and the Festivals with which they are honored, the religious Offices
paid to 'em, believe this is by the Command of thy Christ, and that Christians
do worship as many Men as the Heathens did Gods? When will thou by the Breath
of thy Mouth destroy those, who with as much. Insolence as Hypocrisy, abuse
the People by their Impostures, which even the Jews and Atheists discover, and
from thence believe Religion a Trick, since it is proved only by false and
counterfeit Miracles? Upon this account, we must have Recourse to thy Sovereign
Power; for, we endeavor but in vain to convince 'em, having so extraordinary
an Opinion of themselves, pretending to a Knowledge from Heaven it self, that
they believe their Sense is far beyond that of other men; that their Thoughts
are the immediate Dictates of Reason; and that whatever Impressions they
receive, is from the mouth of Truth it self. If the Heathens did with that
Violence resist the Gospel, and the Knowledge of the true God offered to 'em,
those who had no other Gods, but such as Men made; what Opposition is to be
expected from those who shroud themselves under the Authority of God himself?
who believe themselves possessed of all Right, both humane and divine; and that
to the end of the World, all Power is given 'em both in Heaven and Earth; and,
who under the empty Title of a Church, make their Errors seem fair and
plausible, and thus, too unpunished pass their Deceits upon the World; Princes,
who at first might have prevented these Abuses, have, by I don't know what
irreligious Prudence, suffered them; whether from want of a Knowledge of 'em,
or from some weighty Cares of State, found themselves obliged to dissemble that
Knowledge, or that they were constrained to yield to the Appointment of Heaven,
and could not, but in vain, oppose the fulfilling of the Prophecies:
Prophecies, which having long since represented to us things as we now see 'em,
leave in-excusable so many learned men whom Fear or Hope has made silent, and
who, by their unfaithful silence, have strengthened what by a just Contradiction
they might have rendered weak and invalid; or, who rather indeed have with too
great Ingenuity defended Error, which they ought to have buried under an
eternal Condemnation.

CHAP. VIII.
THERE is no greater Tyrant in the World, or that makes himself more obeyed,
than Custom, especially in Matters of Religion; and that which makes it the
more absolute, is, the Obligations it lays on men's Consciences, which for fear
of erring, are obliged to pursue those Rules it at first prescribed: This makes
it plain to us, that notwithstanding the vain presumption of men, and the good
Opinion they have of their own Parts, they are yet so naturally weak and
infirm, that it seems to us that their Soul came not from Heaven, but is purely
Sensual, and that all the Perfection which they have attained to, is only an
Effect of what they have learned. They lay so great stress upon their Birth,
Education, or Chance it self, that that which first takes with 'em, does so
strongly engage 'em, that they are made incapable of believing any thing, but
that of which they were first persuaded. Upon this account I have endeavored,
as much as possible, to dispossess my self of those impressions were made on me
in my Youth, to look on 'em as altogether foreign, that the Truth might be the
sole Object of my Faith, and that Custom might not tyrannically prevail over my
Reason. Then I have always thought, that he ought not to be truly valued as
Man, who was biased by the course of the World, who was not in some sort
infinitely above the Advice that is commonly given him; who was so weak and
mean-spirited, as to abandon his own Judgment, and suffer himself to be
enslaved by Popular Error. But men, approving for the most part, of such things
only to which they have been used; and judging according to their customary
Practice, have contracted so ill an habit, that to remedy it is extremely
difficult, the very faculties of the Mind being seized, which should be
employed to deliver 'em from it; they have certain Notions so deeply imprinted
on 'em, that they become natural; and pass for Reason it self: they know
nothing else, they understand no other Language, and without changing their
very Nature, they cannot alter their Belief.

They are not sensible, that instead of maintaining the Truth they defend only
the first Opinion they have received, without examining whether it be as true
as pleasing to 'em; whether grounded on Prejudice, on specious Pretenses,
probable Guesses, or wordly Considerations. They consider not, that all Sects
whatever, claim the same Advantage, that all Heresies have some who take their
part, and with equal Passion promote 'em; have their learned Patrons, who think
they ought not to yield the one to the other, either in Opinion or Knowledge.
They reflect not how strangely they are transported with a fond Love of
themselves, that persuades 'em they mightily differ from their own kind; that
they have a much better Conception of things than others; that they are
enlightened by some Divine Power, whilst others have scarce Humane
Understanding. Then they proceed, Nothing is so true, or to be so easily
comprehended, as what they believe. The proof of it is clear, and it is
Demonstration infallible; He that perceives not this, knows nothing Reason is
constantly on their side, but Error and Obstinacy on that of their Adversaries:
What unaccustomed madness and blind Rage, or what Pride keeps 'em from seeing,
that even those whom they wonder at, look on them with Amazement; and that they
are ridiculous to those they laugh at; and that they only seem to pity those,
who have a real pity and compassion on them? Ought they not, observing the
great Uncertainty of things, and the frailty of men's Parts, apply themselves to
universal Principles, and firmly adhere to the Commands of the sovereign
Lawgiver, who expressly forbids us to turn either to the right or to the left?

But they are so far prepossessed with what the World presents 'em; the
Concerns of this Life have so blinded their Judgment, that they take no Care to
inform themselves better, or do they consider, that neither Time, or Country,
or any thing whatever, can proscribe against the Truth; besides this, they are
captivated with the Belief of their Parents, their Examples at home, with the
multitude and Antiquity it self, which we cannot but attribute to Error, which
has so insensibly crept in amongst us, and has been advanced, from Time to
Time, to the height of Power, that it is Enemies, in opposing of it, have been
utterly foiled, or at least, very much baffled. It Is very difficult, without
doubt, to condemn our Country or our Prince; to speak against our Ancestors,
our nearest Friends or Relations; nay, even against those who have taught us:
but the Business is, we must strive to disingage our selves from the Falsehood
of men's vain Imaginations, to justify Truth against the Testimony of it is many
Enemies; to repair the Decays of an almost-spent Life; to seek after our chief
Good and Happiness; to give our Assents to the Words of him that says, Those
who love Father or Mother, or any thing else better than him, are not worthy of
him. But for all this, they persist in their Resolutions of following the
Example of those worthy men whose Authority they urge, not considering, that
even the Turks can at least say thus much for themselves, and the Heathens
more. But, they choose to stick to these false Principles, rather than to give
themselves the Pains of examining into the best Doctrine can be proposed to
'em. Then they are, as it were, listed and enslaved to live and dye, and submit
to the Tyrannical Power of certain Guides, who tell 'em they cannot err, that
the Spirit of God does necessarily assist in their Assemblies and
Determinations; that their Power is absolute; and besides all this, can
reconcile Religion with the Advantages of the World: Often thus they very easily
suffer themselves to be persuaded, it being most agreeable to their
Inclinations, and for the accomplishment of their Designs. They are pleased to
hear others slandered, and hug themselves to see those convicted of Error, who
talk to 'em of Truth: She is suspected by 'em, they dare scarce look on her,
lest being conquered by her Beauty, they find themselves obliged to court her,
or to suffer some just Displeasures on her Account, which they are unwilling to
submit to. The Truth of it is, they are wilfully ignorant of those Principles
they will not put in Practice, finding a certain Satisfaction and Quiet in
their Ignorance, that Law, though never so just, which restrains their Liberty,
is uneasy to 'em. It is enough, that Afflictions being a necessary part of the
Gospel Dispensation, to deter those of this World from it is Profession. They
rather yield to the violent Stream that hurries 'em on, than strive against it;
they had rather be lulled into a soft Sleep, attended by agreeable Dreams, than
hear the troublesome Voice of those who waken 'em only to disturb 'em. O
Brutish Stupidity! O Apparent Hardness! Must Vice and Error, because grown
common, loose their Name, and be called Virtue and Wisdom? Must Custom be so
prevalent, as to hinder men from being reasonable. But, it is not to be doubted,
but that those whom the Scripture styles Drunk, are so great Strangers to their
own Senses, so depraved in their Understandings, as to take that for true which
is false, and that they see not indeed what they see. And it is not to be
questioned, but that they resemble those who had so long used themselves to the
eating of Poison, that at length it was even Meat and Nourishment to 'em.

In the mean while, they have placed all sort of Religion in humane Traditions
and Superstition; they have not consulted either with Sense or Reason; and I
don't know from whence it is, that the greatest part of Men, the most
exquisitely curious in other things, make no Search at all after that which is
most necessary. Their Knowledge of God is, as that of the Barbarians, obscure,
barren and insignificant; and had they been born amongst the Turks, they would
have believed as they do, because they have but one Faith, called Acquired,
depending on Tradition, that never saved any one. This is that of the Wicked as
well as theirs; nay, that of the Devils themselves, who, as these, own a God,
and that he is Almighty, that he created the World, and sent his Son; who
believe the great Mystery of his Birth, of his Life, and of his Death, and who
yet must not pretend to have a share in his Kingdom or Glory. To observe the
inconsiderate Zeal of a People, who when they pray, are ignorant of what they
say, is a thing, claims both our Pity and Horror too; who satisfy themselves
with bare Shows, and are led away by such Preachers, who rather thirst after
the Blood of their Neighbors, than desire their Salvation. A People abused
with Vanities, imagining, God is better pleased in one place than another, and
who searches amongst Strangers for what he may find equally amongst his own. An
ignorant and unwise People, who see not, that under the Gospel they raise
(without thinking of it) Judaism again, against what is said in Scripture, That
the time is come, that those who will worship God truly, must do it in Spirit
and in Truth. And how do either Places or Pilgrimages serve in order to this?
How do those Acts of Devotions contribute to it, which are looked upon only
from their Quantity and not Quality, which are not recommended either from
their Faith or Piety, but by certain Tasks they impose on themselves, and by
some odd Numbers in which they believe great Virtue, and which they vainly
affect, as the Magicians did of old? Superstitious Devotions, full of dark and
scrupulous Doubts, as if they were afraid to know the Truth, and that the very
Light was offensive to 'em; who apprehend nothing of the True Religion, but
what is said of it by their Enemies, and therefore, hate and speak
reproachfully of it, and always represent it after the most dreadful manner
they can imagine. It cannot, certainly, be difficult to persuade those to what
we will, whom we have once brought under a blind Obedience; to which, they
yield with as much Ease and poorness of Spirit, as if they said, we will be
stupid, we will be senceless. For, if if they once say that they will follow the
Church, they contradict themselves, and confess they embrace what they know:
but, what more than an ordinary Knowledge is required to discern betwixt what
is true and what is false? But, why must they be blindly obedient, whom God has
endu'd with Reason, and given his Precepts to 'em with this express Command,
That Fathers instruct their Children in 'em, and that all search the
Scriptures, the alone means to direct us to the Kingdom of Heaven? But how can
they inform others, who are themselves so ignorant; who, as a just Punishment
on 'em, for adoring Images, are so besotted, as to ask their Advise and
Counsel; this is to consult even Stones and Marble.

Ye blind, perceive ye not, that ye become insensible, by paying a Veneration
to things that are so? Understand ye not, that even Reason tells you, that you
are beneath what you worship, and yet your depraved Inclinations have made you
less valuable than the works of your own hands? Be not thus childish, but leave
these Babies to Children; they are ridiculous, in a full grown and reasonable
Age. You are not less blameable than Atheists themselves, for you, as they,
render the Deity insignificant, and of no Use, making it material, and
representing him who is only Spirit, by a piece of Wood or Stone,
notwithstanding he has so often, in his Jealousy, said, To what will you
liken Me? You audaciously make him who made you, and most ingratefully
endeavor to ridicule him, by giving Eyes to him which see not, Ears that hear
not, Hands that work not, and Feet that are not able to walk. It Is possible you
may pretend, that your good Intentions are an excuse for your Ignorance; you
take such measures as are prescribed to you; and in whatever you do, you
believe you serve God, though you don't only persecute, but murder his Children.
Hypocrites, know that under the color of good Intentions, infinite Abuses
creep into the World, for unless they are grounded on holy Writ, they are
sinful. Thus the Children of Israel were punished for their want of
consideration, in worshipping the golden Calf, whilst they designed the
celebrating a Solemn Feast to the Eternal. Thus also Nadab and Abihu provoked
him to Anger, and kindled that Fire which consumed 'em, when they intended only
to offer him Perfumes. Thus Vzza was suddenly slain for having laid his hand on
the Ark, when falling, though he intended to have kept it up. If good Intentions
would serve, the Jews themselves, Enemies of Jesus Christ, were not guilty; for
St. Paul gives this testimony of 'em, that they had the Zeal of God; then also
would many wicked Sayings become justifiable; and the most barbarous Massacres
would be placed amongst good Works, all sorts of Religion would be safe, and
almost all men saved.

CHAP. IX.
IT IS to no purpose therefore to allege our good Intentions in the Exercise of
a Religion already furnished with sufficient Directions and infallible Rules,
as also restrained by an absolute Obedience to 'em. There is no need of other
Advice, or farther Instructions, where we are in no danger, and cannot act but
with certainty; where even our great Masters in the Profession are no farther
authorized than to see the Orders of the Church carefully observed; and thus
the Church cannot err. So that those who abuse themselves and others with these
trivial Excuses, are to be looked on as Hypocrites, who have never seriously
thought on those things that are Heavenly, but make it their business only to
procure the Advantages of this World. I have considered 'em under all sorts of
conditions, and whether it be, that the Scripture has foretold it, or that
Experience has proved it. I have observed, that even our great ones have seldom
any Tincture of true Piety, suffering themselves to be biased by Faction,
rather than Reason, taking no Measures, but what are serviceable to their
Interest. They make Religion only as a Cloak to their Ambitious Designs; and
many of 'em enter into Conspiracies, and lay dangerous Plots against their
lawful Sovereign, and the Gevernment, under Catholic Pretenses. They instill a
certain Courage and false Generosity, into 'em, even in their Infancy: They
rarely discourse to 'em of the Knowledge of God; and besides a Sermon
sometimes, which they hear with Impatience, they look upon their Conversation
who talk to 'em of Religion, or a future State, as uncourtly and troublesome.
They are not desirous to make any farther Search than their Knowledge already
reaches; or, if some of 'em pretend to more Light, they forge to themselves
some bare Probabilities, to persuade 'em, that things really are as their
Passions suggest 'em to 'em. To contradict 'em would be insolent; for, being in
Power, and possessed of Fortunes, they think they are of good Sense too; they
back their Opinions with Authority, and make indisputable Decrees. They cannot
bear with that Company which favors not that Love they have of themselves, or
that versation which does not flatter their Vanity, and is agreeable to their
Sense and Imaginations. They are altogether vain, both in their Discourse and
Thoughts; they suffer themselves to be abused with the outside and Appearance
of things, being so pleased with empty Shadows, that they will not approve of
those things that are most solid and substantial, if conveyed to 'em by weak
Instruments. They would never have received the Law from the mouth of Moses,
because of his Imperfection of Speech. Truth must be represented to them, with
Ornament and Splendour, that is, with the Artifices of Falsehood: and, without
the Gayety of Eloquence and Rhetoric, we cannot persuade 'em to any thing,
though sent by God himself. If he send his own Messengers, should he call 'em
out from the common people, being either Shepherds or Fishermen, they will
judge of 'em as the Pharisees did of the Apostles, whom they looked on, as
contemptible, sorry Wretches; 'twas well, if they neither stoned, massacred,
banished or imprisoned 'em.

There is a Wisdom in the World made up of Show, of Grimaces, a refined
Hypocrite, by which, men deceive themselves and others too; it is this makes
their Life but as a continual Mascarade or Comedy, in which, every one
represents another Person than his own, affecting nothing more than to appear
what really he is not. This incurable Madness, which goes under the Name of
humane Prudence, does so disorder their Understandings, and fills 'em with such
idle chimerical Notions, that it incapacitates 'em to comprehend any Divine
Truth. They employ themselves only in seeking after those things that are
perishing, not considering, that they heap up Goods for those that will
riotously waste 'em; and are covetous, only to the making others, either
luxurious or prodigal. What Fathers! who either that they are too indulgent to,
or that they utterly forsake their Children, seem equally to consult their
Ruin; who, whilst they are afraid of the Vanity of some, disinherit others of
their right of Succession; and, before they know what either Concupiscence or
Continency mean, under pretense of devoting 'em to God's Service, basely
sacrifice 'em to their own Covetousness. What Prudence! which makes the free
minds of Men Slaves to their Bodies; who are expert only in flying from their
chief Good, ingenious to their own Ruin, and subtle to deceive themselves!
'Twas this caused our first Parents to lose that happy State of Paradise; and
which, inviting men to fancy to themselves a thousand ways of living, has
filled the Earth with Superstitions, Idolatries, Sects, Heresies, and impious
Religions. By this, have the Saints been persecuted, our Savior crucified, it
having endeavored to promote and defend too many Antichrists, whose Reign must
be in this World. This it is also, that continually opposes the holy Spirit,
and with Insolence, dares dispense with his sacred Word, either by wresting the
Sense, or retrenching it is terms when it cannot so disguise 'em, as to make 'em
contradictory to it self. This is it which accommodates all to Interest, and
which their Service being in an untelligible Tongue, from whence the People are
kept in Ignorance, their Prayers directed to the Creature instead of the
Creator: Images bore on men's Shoulders, and solemnized by Songs, with more such
like Actions, or worse, pretends to make all these pass for slight
Inconveniences, or things indifferent.

Of all sorts of Hypocrites, those are the most dangerous, who make Piety their
Pretense; for, there are none who can so easily put tricks upon us, as such who
make profession of Religion; they having the Reputation of deceiving no one.
Some appear to us soft and mild, others severe and stately; and both ways they
alike endeavor to recommend their Virtues to us. If their appearing Sweetness
betrays us, their Haughtiness contemns us, and the great value they set on
themselves, suffers 'em to have very little for their Neighbors.

They have the art to appear for some time, what their Profess on or their
Habits oblige 'em to be. But, this forced Goodness this studied Compliance
remains no longer than till they are either thwarted in their Interest or
Opinions. They seem mild and gentle, but cannot long dissemble it; for, being
in the least provoked, they show themselves Lions and Tigers, which were hid
under a Humane Shape. Yet, their Anger, if we may believe 'em, is never raised
but by Reason, and their very Crimes are more justifiable, than the best
Actions of other men. If we look on 'em as Saints, they believe themselves so,
and lay claim to it, as a true Reward of their false Devotion. This shadow of
Holiness, or rather, this glittering Zeal, has so often amazed me, that I have
considered, that each Nation had it is devout religious Men, and that the
austere Life of ours, was not to be compared with that of the Cynick, the
Pythagoreans, the Hierophantes, or the Gymnosophists; and with this difference,
that those miserable Pagans worshipped the Devils, as they commanded 'em; but
these adore the true God after such a Manner as he would not be.

Besides, Whence is it Men embrace the Principles of Religion, unless, from a
natural Inclination, which is common to Barbarians and Infidels; or, from
Ambition, to let the World see, Government cannot be supported but by their
Justice and Probity? There are scarce any do good for the Love of it, each one
has his by End, and those who act not according to their Duty, for fear of
Punishment, are engaged to it by hopes of Honor or Riches. Many have Cunning
and Patience enough to conceal their bad Designs, till they have obtained their
desired Ends; but, having raised themselves to the highest Pitch they can, and
standing in need of no farther Assistance for their Advancement, discover 'em.
To this purpose, they use all Artifices imaginable; they speak the Language of
Saints, they write Books, they look grave and demure, they declare many Truths;
which frequently provokes me to say, Who is it that has put the Word of God in
the Mouths of these Men, and who makes us even now find Saul amongst the
Prophets? I have attentively heard their Sermons, which are furnished with
common Places, with deep and serious Meditations; but, they are so tragically
passionate, that they rather become the Theater than the Pulpit, and are filled
with all the rhetorical Flowers that Art can supply 'em with, either to move or
please. Whatever good Instructions may be interlarded in their Discourses, they
still closely adhere to their ill Principles; for, having no other aim, but the
gaining of some Preferment to exchange that, and so rise from Dignity to
Dignity, they preach Jesus Christ only with Emulation; they bear him witness,
but as those evil Spirits who confessed that he was the Son of God, and going
out of one Body, desired leave to enter into another. 'Twould be a matter of
little weight, if men disguised themselves only before men, even to the
dissembling of their Dissimulation, if they made not an apparent and public
Profession of their Hypocrisy before God himself. It Is this I call that
external, outside Worshlp, that painted Devotion by which they amuse the
People with fantastical Gestures, and confused Noises they understand not.

Yet, we see with what Heat and Eagerness they defend that which they know not,
and which they never will, being pleased with an airy Good, rather than with
the true substantial Religion; for, that seems but cold and insipid to 'em in
comparison of the palpable mysteries of Superstition. Wretched Superstition!
pursued with so much Passion, or rather Fury, by so many weak Men and Women,
called religious, who are like those who were never at Quiet till they had made
a disturbance between those two holy Apostles Paul and Barnabas They make to
themselves a God of very difficult Access, who is never to be satisfied, and
with whom they have never done; hence proceed all those rash Vows, their
Pilgrimages, their numbers of Prayers, and eternal Repetitions. They frequent
the Churches more than their Houses, where they go only to torment their
Families, which are never pleasing to 'em, unless, in Imitation of 'em they
comply with their avaritious Abstinencies. Under Pretense of an extraordinary
Piety, they introduce themselves into Courts, near some devout Persons, and
into the greatest and richest Families; where some caress 'em, others suffer
'em, but more are troubled with 'em, complain of 'em, rid themselves of 'em,
and think nothing so uneasy in the World; and those of the best Judgment,
ordinarily, give 'em the worst Character. They find they are ignorant, foolish,
timorous, distrustful, and full of idle Scruples, being, for little or no
Reason, sometimes transported with Admiration, and then seized with Horror,
they are provoked, tormented, amazed, only at something that happens beyond
their Capacity of understanding. Any thing proves what they have a mind to
believe; a few cunning Tricks, or a false Apparition, pass with them for
Miracles. They are persuaded to any thing that is unusual or strange.
Counterfeit Jewels are valued by 'em as great Rarities. They often, upon the
bare Credit of some Cheat, pay as great Respect to something that has been
brought from a neighboring Mountain or River, as if it had come from that of
Libanus, or those of Jordan, or the more celebrated Holy Places of Palestine. I
believe, by this time Mount Calvary is made plain, at least, is but common
Earth and Dust, all the Sand and pretty Stones being carried away, as holy
Relics, to adorn the little Chapels of numbers of devout Virgins, who would
believe, they should give but a bad Proof of their good Education, did they not
outdo their Mothers themselves in Superstition.

These Abuses are owned by many, which they forbear not to condemn, and yet
practices; so that their Actions belie their Words. For, if they are confined
by any Weakness or Infirmity, and would yet be accounted Sons of the Church;
Why don't they contribute to it is Necessities, to the Relief of the Poor, and
it is Pastors? Or, if their Zeal is not made remarkable, Why don't they, at
least, so act, that their Idolatry be not apparent? But, if you press this
Argument home upon 'em, you touch 'em to the Quick, you discover the Poison
within 'em, and so far provoke 'em, that they will not suffer you to say more;
and thus do they discover their Hypocrisy. It Is not, say they, a hundred
Years, since you were not at all; you are Schismatics; Why did you forsake the
Church? But, besotted as they are, they should add to this, You will not
worship what is elevated on the Altar, or believe, that God can be made of a
little Morsel of Bread: You will not prostrate your selves before the likeness
of any thing that is in Heaven or in Earth? and you are scandalized, that the
People pay such a submissive Respect to Images and Relics, with Songs of
Praise and Devotion. You presume so far, as fully to receive the Sacrament in
both kinds, as Jesus Christ has instituted; and will not be contented with that
part only the Church allows you: You will understand the Scriptures, the
Prayers you make to God, and all the religious Service you are obliged to
render to him. In a word, you will not submit to the Authority of the Learned,
after the Example of Princes and Governors, or be enslaved either by Tradition
or Custom. Certainly, they believe Religion does principally consist in the
Succession of Persons, and not in the Doctrine of the Gospel. I can only say of
'em, that they own the Truth but by bare Humane Reason, that they are zealous
neither for one Party or other, but close with that which is most to their
Advantage, not considering, that the Scripture does condemn the Lukewarm, as
well as Murderers and Adulterers. I am obliged here, to confess my own Weakness
in accusing theirs, and to acknowledge, that I sometimes look on 'em with Pity,
at others, with Anger, and then with Indifference; but, I cannot think on such
who have forsaken the Faith, without Horror, as being the worst of men, the
lively Images of the first and chief Apostate. These men betray their very
Brethren, sell their Religion, are a Scandal to the whole World, making it more
their Business to enrich than to save themselves.

Give 'em the Purse, and they will continue with you, as Judas, who foresaw not,
as these, that in selling his Master he bought his own Despair. Having never
had any real Inclinations to the gain of Knowledge, they have always neglected
the procuring it, whilst they have made an outward Profession of the true
Religion; but having altered their Belief, they become mighty Disputants, and
cunning in the Defense of their Change. To this purpose, they serve themselves
of all the Reasons that can be thought of, though in their Consciences they
know they have none, but the weakness of their Judgment, the natural Depravity
of their Minds, or the difficulty they have to reconcile their Ambition and
Covetousness with the Disgrace and Poverty of Jesus Christ. Then, the Promises
and Favors of great men, have irresistible Charms, with which, these men of
mercenary Tempers, easily comply; whilst those who used to command, now court
'em, their very Masters caress and flatter 'em. In a word, the greatest part of
Mankind seem born to Slavery; to which, though never so full of Hardship, if
bound to it by golden Chains, they submit, nay, prefer it before the Christian
Liberty. They are ready even to adore those by whom they enrich themselves, or
where they meet with Honor and Respect; and, as the Heathens, own no other
Gods but their Benefactors.

CHAP. X.
AMongst so many bewitched or crazed Persons, the wilfully blind, and Slaves of
the World, I have sought for some, in whom I might confess to have found such a
Purity of Mind, and such marks of their Election, that I might have joined with
'em in the Communion of the Spirit, and by that Bond of Perfection, which makes
'em inseparable from their Creator, and their Neighbor. For, what Satisfaction
or Comfort could I find with the men of the Age, before whom we must never, it
being indecent (from whence I know not) to discourse of Religion; they either
talk not at all of Divine things, or if they do, it is after a Humane way? What
Pleasure could I have in their Friendship, who heartily differed from me in
that which ought to be the chief end of all our Desires and our Hopes? I
endeavored to know the Children of Heaven from those of the Earth; and the
meeting one of the Faithful would have been as an Angel to me. But, amongst
such Numbers of men, I could not meet with one, though I earnestly labored
after it, being without doubt, less discerning than Elijah, who saw not one in
all Israel, where yet there were many.

I happened in an Age, in which, the men of it did even already degenerate from
the first Simplicity and late Reformation; in which, those who styled
themselves of the Reformed Religion, followed their very steps who have
destroyed the most flourishing Churches. For, they used the same liberty in
their Words and Actions, the same superfluous Vanity in their Clothes, the same
luxurious way of living, which scandalized the Emperor Julian, and confirmed
him in his Apostasy. Matthew. 24. 12. Iniquity did so abound, that the love of
many waxed cold. And to judge of 'em by their outward Behavior, those who were
false Christians, could not be distinguished from the true.

I thought no where so proper to find those I sought for, as in the most lawful
Assemblies; but I could not discover the Church, even in the Church, that being
frequented by certain Persons, whose highest Devotion consists in their Looks;
who never think the Sermon too long, or their Meetings too often; who would
look upon Religion as too cold, did it not in some Acts imitate even
Superstition. It is indeed too much filled with those who come only for
Company; it is their Education or Chance, that draws 'em thither, rather than
any hearty desire of improving themselves in the knowledge of the Truth. Hither
they come, only to see the World, from whence, the World, in some sort, ought
to be banished; where they behave themselves with so little Respect, that
'twould be Injustice to call 'em Hypocrites, since there is no manner of
Appearance either of their Zeal or Devotion.

Their only Aim is to be seen in the most known and public Places, instead of
giving God Thanks that he is pleased to permit 'em to be in the Company of
Saints; amongst whom, it ought to be of sufficient Satisfaction to 'em, without
pretending to other Advantages, that they have room enough only to kneel. There
are some, who make the day of rest a day of Labor, and perform the most
necessary and just Duties, as burthensom and uneasy Tasks. There are others so
depraved, that they hear Sermons, only to find fault with 'em, to wrest their
Sense, or scoffingly, to repeat 'em to the Enemies of the Reformation. Many
have lost the very Sense of such Exhortations that are plain, pure, easy, and
full of Reason; Truth does not at all affect 'em, unless agreeably pronounced
by a loud and eloquent Tongue, unless beautified with all the Gayety and
Flowers of Rhetoric. They despise what is intelligible and clear, and judge
that unworthy of 'em which the common People are able to understand. They are
not to be satisfied, unless we undertake to criticize on some profound
mysterious Point, subtly to treat of some intricate Difficulty, the resolving
of which belongs to God alone, having reserved the Knowledge of it to himself.
They have forgot, that he who has chosen the weak things of this World to
confound the things that are mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 27. As he was meek and humble,
so will he that our Knowledge be not immoderate or presumptuous; that he has
put his Word in the Mouths of such weak ones who cannot yet declare it so
imperfectly, but that those who have a Love for it, must own it, and
distinguish it from the dazzling appearance of Falsehood. They have forgot that
the subtilty of Language, and cunning Arts of Speech, are used only to harden
those to whom he has so frequently offered his Grace, which they have
rejected, to maintain Error with Obstinacy, which passes with them for strength
of Argument, and which indeed may be called the Constancy and Virtue of the
Reprobate. The truly Faithful need no Eloquence to persuade 'em, that is
introduced into the Church when Faith decays; and whenever Art is used to move
the People, it is an apparent Argument of their obdurate Tempers. Yet, our
Preachers find themselves obliged, that they may please their curious Hearers,
to become more refined and lofty, to quit the Simplicity of the Apostles,
sometimes for the subtilty of Philosophers, or at others, for the sublime Style
of Orators. These things are now no more censured than the manners of the
Princes of the People; and many ill Customs are so far established in several
Churches, that there are very few who either have the Courage, or Strength to
remove 'em. The holy men of this Age have trouble enough to strive against the
Age it self, and the Devil, in the Person of the Great and Powerful, does
insensibly procure a Respect to himself.

I have met with a Reformation only in Doctrine; and I have not doubted, but
that there were some Believers where the Word of Truth was preached: but, 'twas
as hard for me to discover 'em, as it is for the Wicked to discern the Actions
of the Just, or for the Good, the Infirmities of the Wicked. There are found
but few, who are always careful to render their Works so consonant to the
Precepts of the Gospel, as not sometimes to be drawn off by Promises and Hopes
of another kind. Besides, God calls some of every Sex, of each Age, and of all
Professions; even those who persecute him, are sometimes called; and, when he
pleases, his greatest Enemies are made his faithfullest Friends. Nay, by I know
not what sort of Decree, whose Causes are incomprehensible, he, in an Instant,
changes those whose Lives are debauched and vicious, and prefers 'em even
before such, whose Manners seem to have been perfectly regular, and who boast,
that they have fulfilled the Law. It Is certain, that the most virtuous fall too
often, whether it be from some extraordinary Terror, or some sudden Assault of
Satan, or from a Trial by God himself, who does sometimes expose 'em to their
own Weakness, that they may not forget themselves, and that they impute not to
their own Virtue, what is really an Effect of Divine Grace. The Gift of God has
always the strongest Influence upon 'em; for, notwithstanding those
Extravagancies they sometimes allow themselves in, or those Errors that prevail
upon 'em, it fares with 'em as with the prodigal Son, for sooner or later, they
necessarily return to their Father. However it is with 'em, they make not
themselves known by any affected Looks, or peculiar Fashion in their Clothes;
they desire to appear as other men, not particularizing themselves by any odd
fantastical Gestures; their Actions are not at all hypocritical, their Devotion
serves not as a Snare for their Covetousness, or their Humility as a Mask to
their Ambition. It Is by spiritual Signs they are made remarkable; if the Body
does partake of these, they are Secrets in Physiognomy, the knowledge of which,
is reserved to the Author of Nature alone. When the Holy Spirit has once made
an Impression on 'em, there remain certain Marks upon 'em, which make 'em shine
in the Eyes of the Almighty, as the Stars of the Night, which yet have no Light
but what the Sun lends 'em. He alone, who has made the Hearts of men, and can
change 'em, does know 'em, and make 'em known to whom he pleases; but, there
are many appear Believers to us, who are not so, being capable only of a
temporary Faith. Nevertheless, if we may pass our Judgments on Men, I believe
that their Conversation does sufficiently discover their Affections: I believe
also, that those who truly love God, do infinitely rejoice in the Contemplation
of his Works, but more especially, in the Meditation of his Word. They
constantly read it, not out of bare Curiosity, or to find Fault with it, not
from a vain desire after Knowledge, or mercenarily to instruct others in it,
but to inform themselves of the Truth, to seek after Comfort, to strengthen
their Faith, and to confirm their Hopes. They have it always, either in their
Mouths or Thoughts; and the greatest Trouble they have, is, that they cannot
effectually communicate it to those who despise it, who look on it as a Snare
to entrap 'em; who fear it as the singing of Sirens; for, their profligate
Tempers render 'em incompatible with it is Purity. The Spirit of Discretion is
an advantage so rarely met with, that only the true Elect know how to choose,
and the truly spiritual how to try all things, and keep to that which is good.
1 Thessal. 5. 21. They are not concerned to see so many false Prophets
insolently take upon 'em the Name of God, and vainly boast to be the Dispensers
of his Word, which they use only to their own base Ends, and which they
expound, as the Devil did, when he presumed to tempt the Son of God himself,
and, as he daily does, those who follow him.

Moreover, they intermeddle not in the Business or Intrigues of this World, but
their contempt of 'em makes themselves despisable; upon this account, they
appear mean and despicable, they are hated, persecuted, as if their manner of
Living, as well as their Belief, did accuse that of others. They don't
willingly side with any Party, unless the Service of God, or the Good of their
Country engages 'em to it. And if they aim at any public Employment; they will
not underhand make their Interest for it; much less, raise their Estates to
the Prejudice of the Faith or Charity. The common Talk amongst men of getting
Riches, of making their Fortunes, of building fine Houses, is not their
ordinary Conversation: we may with Reason say, their Ambition is much higher
than that of others, since no worldly Greatness can confine it. They know very
well the right Use of things, what Advantages men possessed of Honors and
great Offices, may with Decency, and necessarily claim; but those are ignorant
for whom they take pains, who are always heaping up Riches, projecting mighty
Designs, and erecting such vast, prodigious Buildings, that their whole Life is
not long enough to finish 'em. They believe no one ought to be called either
Judicious or Reasonable, but he who in earnest labors after the attainment of
his sovereign Good and Happiness; and it is with pity they look on those who
busy themselves so perpetually about the things of the Earth, as if they
pretended not in the least to any part in Heaven. It Is with trembling and
sorrow they observe the confidence of those who stick at nothing whereby they
may gratify their Appetite and Senses; to whom the steps of Goodness seem but
as Degrees to Evil; and who become Great and Powerful, but that they may commit
all sorts of Crimes unpunished, and tyrannize over their Fellow Creatures. They
absent themselves, as much as possible, from the Conversation of bad men; and
because they are less given to Flattery, they are looked on as less agreeable.
It Is painful to them to be complaisant to those that are displeasing to them,
nor can they approve of Error and Vanity; they cannot admire what God condemns,
or show any Signs of Joy in their Faces, for that which their Hearts are sad.

Whatever Trouble or Dissatisfaction they may meet with in this uneasy
Conversation, whatever Hatred, or Aversion they have for all these things,
their Severity is yet less than their Charity. They don't, under color of
renouncing the World, spend all they have, nor do they advance their own
Fortunes by the Ruin of any one. They know they should be worse than Infidels,
did they not take Care of their Families, and that it is God's Command, That
those who work not, ought not to eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. Therefore, as the day of
Rest is kept Holy by 'em, so those of working are employed in honest Labor.
But they are so far from believing that they have no other end in this World,
but the doing their own Business in it, that they frequently cry out with their
Master, Here I am, O God, to do thy Will. And, though they live, or rather
languish, (as out of their Element) being alone amidst the Multitude, and
Strangers even amongst their Brethren; although their Integrity and purity of
Life, is looked on as Folly, and their Strength as Weakness, yet they are not
concerned, that they suffer for doing well, and value not their Reputation, if
they can but preserve their Conscience. They know very well, that if they
pleased Men, they should not be true Servants of God; that it is impossible to
believe in him, and yet passionately to pursue the Glory of this World, which
certainly becomes bitter to 'em, when they begin to have a just Sense of the
Sweetness of Jesus Christ. They are satisfied that this Life is but a Passage,
a place of Trial, or rather, a Field of Combat, where those that fight not,
must not expect either Honor or Reward.

It Is extremely difficult, on this occasion, to reconcile the Knowledge of so
many great Doctors, with their Obdurateness; I cannot imagine how they can
think of the Gospel, and yet reflect not on their own Consciences. I am amazed,
that such Manifestations as they have, don't oblige 'em to own, and to say, We
are out of the way certainly, and the Profession we make is absolutely contrary
to that of Jesus Christ and his Disciples. It Is said, That such who will live
righteously shall suffer Persecution; How then do we suffer? The Princes and
People are of our side, we enjoy the Pleasures and Delights of the Earth, our
Lot is always on a fair Ground. And if this makes not the Kingdom of this
World, what is it that can do it? Shall we reckon the Vows of Poverty, the
Fastings and the Rigors some of our Party suffer? But, they are so far from
being blamed, hated, or persecuted for these things, that they are rather
honored and receive Rewards for 'em. Besides, these voluntary Afflictions are
of Humane Invention, and of the nature of those, concerning which, the
Scripture says, Who has required this at your Hands? I wonder, that the
Pharisees of the Age have no Consideration of these things; since Sufferings
are so nearly linked to the Profession of Christianity, that I know not whether
we can say, that those who have not been under some Persecution have yet
commenced Christians. For, if in any Province or Country, the Blessing of
Heaven, which perchance, favorably countenances the pious Zeal of some one
Age, suffers Religion to flourish, and possess the Gate of it is Enemies, Genesis
chap. 22. verse. 17. and chap. 24. verse. 60. in a little time, Error and
Insolence, the common Attendants of Prosperity, the Practices of Satan and his
Emissaries, change and corrupt it, make it emulate the Religions of the World,
and despise it is own original Simplicity. Shall the Servants be greater than
their Master, shall they have the benefit of the Joys he has procured for 'em,
and partake of his Glory, without bearing a part in his Torments and Patience?
No, No, it is necessary that they find their Pleasures amidst Grief and Sorrows,
as the Rose amongst the Thorns; and that it fares with them as with Joseph, who
became greater by his Banishment; and as with Job, who grew young by his
Calamities. They ought to esteem it a singular Favor, as St. Paul did, that is
given them not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for his sake. Philip.
chap. 1. verse. 29. and to think that they suffer very little, in comparison of
that Reward they hope for. Hope and Charity are the inseparable Companions of
Faith, all three together made a true Believer, and these three are infallible
Marks of one. I don't mean that Faith which is obscure, blind, weak, and
wavering; that is an effect of Birth, Opinion, Custom, and Tradition, that is
always doubting, and is easily scandalized, that does not mortify the
Affections, that makes us not forsake the World, or our Selves, and which
faints under Persecutions. I don't mean that Faith which follows Jesus Christ
for Interest and only Advantage, and of all his Miracles, considers that
chiefly which multiplied the Bread. But, I speak of that which is manifest,
certain, and constant, that proceeds from the Power of the Holy Ghost, from the
Words of Eternal Life, from Prayer and Humility, which is not acquired but
revealed, that enters not into the Heart of those who believe after a humane
way. I speak of that Faith which removes from us the Cares of this Life; that
ravishes us with the Admiration of Divine Graces; that infinitely surpasses the
Discourse of Men; that obliges us to glorify him who has bestowed it on us,
with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered.

A TREATISE Concerning the EVCHARIST.
IF Religion was only grounded upon the Opinion of men; if they might serve God
according to their own Imaginations, and not his Commands; every Religion would
be a good one, and our Intentions alone would be sufficient to recommend each
different Invention to us. The World, which for the most part is affected with
things present, would be pleased with such variety of Worship; one part of it
would not be accused of Heresy, or any other looked on as guilty of
Superstition. But it is not enough to own a God, or pay any sort of Homage to
him, the great business of Religion is, to save men from that Eternal Death
which they have merited; but their Minds are so clouded with darkness, and so
involved in Sin, that they cannot find either a Remedy against it, or the way
to Salvation, or the Paths that lead to Supreme Happiness. What likelihood is
there, that the Children of Rebellion, who are under the Curse and Anger of
God, should have yet strength enough to recover their Fall, or sufficient Light
to direct 'em out of that profound and dark Abyss into which they cast
themselves. If they cannot comprehend Divine Truth, and that this Faith must be
derived from some other Spirit than their own, why should they pretend to the
making of Laws, and so absolutely to determine of Universal Religion. They
ought to receive Instructions from an Understanding much more perfect than
their own; for indeed they are so incapable to prescribe or command on this
occasion, that they are utterly disabled even to obey. I cannot imagine how men
can be so presumptuous, and yet so weak and impotent. They are sure become
insensible of their Infirmities, they are ignorant of their want of Knowledge,
and flatter themselves that their Light is so very clear, that their Blindness
cannot be discovered. The same Insolence that at first destroyed 'em, does
continue to do so even to the end; they have violated the most holy things,
and, if we may so say, have laid their hands on the Ark, against the strictest
Prohibitions. Is there any thing more Sacred in Religion, than the Sacrament of
the Eucharist? And ought not that to be for ever preserved inviolable, since
instituted by him who was Wisdom it self? Yet what part of it is not altered,
corrupted, or brought to nothing at all by the Roman Church? What remains then,
in the celebration of what is now called the Mass, of that which was heretofore
called the Supper of the Lord? It Is a memorial our Savior was pleased to leave
of himself, to excite men, not only by Words, but by visible Signs, to a
remembrance of that which they never ought to forget. What Signs were so
eligible? To what Elements could he have better compared himself, than to those
which are most necessary to the preservation of our Lives? He who is that Bread
which came from Heaven, for our Spiritual food, and that we might eternally
live with him? What was more proper for him to do, than to take Bread, break
it, and give it us, since his Body was to be broke for our Sins, and He to be
delivered up to Death, that he might procure Life for us? What could He more
significantly say, than Take and Eat, since we cannot live unless joined with
him, as the Substance of the Bread which we eat every day is incorporated with
our bodies, so that it becomes the same with us, and of two Substances but one.
The same considerations that invite us to Eat, will to Drink also, unless one
could do the Office of the other, as it is done in the Church of Rome. But the
Cup, being a sign of the separation of the Blood from the Body, is inseparable
from the Sacrament, even because the Blood was separated from the Body; for, in
the double Action, the breaking of the Body, and the effusion of the Blood,
ought to be equally represented. It is not enough then at this Feast to eat, we
must drink also, as it is customary at all others in the World; for he who
invites us to it, does command us to do so, being pleased to suit himself to
our Methods of living, and who would have us bear a part in his Sorrows, only
that we may partake of his Joys; He being the Beginning and the End of all
things, the true Source of those living Waters, whose Streams so refresh the
Trees of Paradise, that by those they grow, flourish, and become eternally
fruitful. I have not here undertaken to examine each particular part of the
Mass, or to compare it with this first Institution, or to search after any
conformity to it, where in truth there is none: The Institutions of men are
here so intermixed with those of God, or indeed, have rather so quite altered
'em, that we can discover nothing but the pomp and stateliness of the mystery
of Iniquity: I will venture only to urge some things on the very words of our
Savior, which are the innocent Original of those Controversies, Seditions,
Massacres, and Differences that happen amongst Christians, and which make the
reason of our Communion become that of our Dissension. It Is extremely difficult
to add any thing to the thoughts of so many admirable Persons, who have said
all that can be on this Subject, and who seem to have forgot nothing but
Brevity; but I, having no other End, than the endeavoring to make my self
understood by the stupid and wilfully deaf, 'twould be to no purpose to serve
my self of others Reasons, if so be I can make my own persuasive.

It Is a manner of speaking usual amongst all Nations, the style of all
Languages, to give to a thousand things the name of what they only put us in
mind of, and to which they bear some resemblance: This also extends even to
Persons: as we say, This is the King, when there is only his Seal or Picture;
and, not absurdly, we often name God, when there is only his shadow, or Image.
This is a Figure so very common, that it is frequently made use of, even by
those that understand not one Figure in Rhetoric. This manner of Speech seems
to be particularly made use of in Sacraments, not only as a great Propriety,
but that it is inevitably necessary. Yet the Superstitious, or rather those
whose Interest it is, have made it their business to take it literally; and
it is insufferable to hear 'em impertinently repeating, He has said it, He has
said it. It Is true, that He has said, This is my Body; but the Apostle adds to
it, which is broken for you; and shows the necessary relation between the
breaking of the one and the other: For, he took Bread, not to eat it himself
alone, but to give it those who were with him; He gave it not as a Sign of his
Glorious Body, but as that of his Body which was to be broken for us. From
hence it is apparent, that the Breaking and the Communion are so firmly joined
to this Action, that without them it is not indeed a Sacrament. Let those, who
so frequently urge, that He has said it, teach us, after what manner He gave
his Body to his Disciples, during his Weakness, before his Resurrection and
Glory; as also before his Passion and Death. Is it not in breaking Bread for
'em himself (who was in some sort broken before he suffered) and that by his
own hands, and not by those of his Enemies, since the Sacrament preceded the
Sacrifice? Is it not according to the custom of all Sacraments, that he spoke
of it, in giving it a Name expressive of the Effect, and in saying, that it is
not only what he represents, but that which he offers to those who desire to
receive it? Who perceives not, that our Corporal eating does assist at the same
time, and is a means to excite our ^ouls to a ^piritual one, which is
absolutely dependent on Faith? It Is certain, that many have been afraid, after
the Blessing, to give the Bread the name of Bread, lest it should be taken for
ordinary Bread. But, St. Paul calls it Bread four times at least, for fear,
that as by the Capernaites, or Romans, it should be taken for Flesh: he said
also, the Cup is the Communion of the Blood of Christ, for fear it should be
believed the Blood it self. We cannot, doubtless, approach these Sacred Signs
with too great Reverence, since by their means, the things they signify are
conveyed to us, or at least, so offered, that it is but desiring 'em, and we may
receive 'em. Faith serves as a Mouth to us, and our Souls, in some sort, eat
and drink the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, as our Bodies eat and drink the
Bread and Wine which represent 'em. Thus the Fathers, to stir up a Peoples
Devotion, and engage 'em to the profound Respect of Holy Things, used certain
ways of speaking, which were not to have been believed, had they not been
figurative. Their mighty Zeal, which persuaded 'em they could never say too
much, left 'em no room to imagine that their Metaphors, Metonymies and
Hyperboles, would one day pass for Articles of Faith. They could never have
thought, that from the Flowers of their Rhetoric, would have grown such a
monstrous Doctrine, or, that from the Weakness or Malice of men their serious
and devout Meditations would have been turned into Chimerical Notions.

But, having endeavored to improve each others Expressions, they have
unhappily contributed, without thinking of it, to a Mystery they as yet knew
not, and have by their Arguments, helped to strengthen it is Abuse. Their
Evidence is every day cited to this purpose, the Transports of their Thoughts,
and their extraordinary heights of Speech, are urged as undoubted Testimonies
of the simple Truth. Though the same Writings of these Fathers are so
expounded, that we may say of them as of the Holy Scriptures, That those things
which are clear and manifest remove the Scruples raised by such which are
difficult and obscure; yet the great Doctors of the Age, whatever Reasons have
been shown 'em to the contrary, forbear not to impose on the Credulity of the
People; who, as the highest Piece of Devotion, daily worship a bit of Bread,
and in this are so far prevailed with by Custom, that they are even ready to
massacre those who will not believe it. Add to the Errors of Speech, the long
Conversation the Primitive Christians held with the Heathens, of whom they have
not only borrowed Temples, Altars, and Images, but also, Habits, Gestures,
Numbers and Mysteries; you will find, that after their Example, they have omitted
nothing that may render their Religion pompous, and suitable to the Grandeur of
the World, that they could not stoop to the simplicity of the Gospel,
preferring rather the Appearance of things, than the real Truth.

Those who have read but a very little, must confess, that they scarce see any
thing in their Churches, which they have not borrowed from the superstitious
Gentiles: And, not to speak of any thing but what relates to our Subject of
Discourse, they worshipped no Images but what must be consecrated; being
persuaded, the Deities they represented were fixed to 'em, by the power of
their magical Operations. Those Christians who have not been satisfied with the
Terms of Blessing, and giving of Thanks, have been so pleased with that of
Consecration, that in time they believed a Virtue and Efficacy in it? hence
proceeded the Observation of many mysterious Ceremonies, an Affectation of
certain Words often repeated, besides a Presumption of adding others to those
of Jesus Christ's, that they might not be wanting either in their Numbers or
Virtue. Hence arose the Name of Transubstantiation, so ill understood, and so
ill made use of, that without the Explication they give of it, 'twould not be,
in the least, significative of what they design it. This is a Doctrine, which
as much as it is possible, destroys the Humanity of Jesus Christ, and which
frames to it self a God in which, no reasonable Creature can believe. This is
the Source from whence flow such Streams of Contradictions, and unallowable
Consequences, that they both scandalize and discourage the greatest part of
Men, they obstruct the Conversion of the Infidel, and confirm the Atheist in
his Unbelief. It Is indeed a horrible Abuse of those Sacramental Words, This is
my Body, to place a Power in 'em, in these lattertimes, of changing the Bread
of the Eucharist into the incorruptible Body of Jesus Christ, to be received in
by our corruptible ones, without any Need, or our finding any extraordinary
Effect or Advantage by it. The Text is much more express, that says, The Word
was made Flesh; yet no one believes, that by Transubstantiation, the Divine
Nature was changed into the Humane: So from the Sacramental way of speaking,
that says, This is my Body, no one ought to infer, that the Substance of the
Bread is converted into the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ. What Virtue,
what efficacious Use has not been allowed to Baptism, both by the Scripture and
the Fathers? By it, we put on Jesus Christ, and partake not only of his Death
and Burial, but his Resurrection also. By it, we are in an Instant made new
Creatures; we pass from Sin to Justification, and ascend from Earth to Heaven.
However Holy and Celestial the Eucharist is, what more abundant Graces can it
bestow on us, than the Confirmation of these same Privileges, the Operations
of the same Spirit, the first Fruits of the same Transfiguration and Glory?
Yet, for this only, the Learned of the Times have sought out many Inventions
that exceed the Capacity of Men, and subvert all Orders, and the very
Principles of the True Doctrine. From their hollow brain is produced an idle
vain thing, that is void of all Substance, a real Apparition, which presents it
self only to the Eyes, but deceives all the other Senses, that offers Violence
to our Minds, and imposes on our Understanding and. Reason. A Body that has
neither Extent or Quantity; an indivisible Point that comprehends the whole;
Blood that contains the Body in which it is contained; at the same time solid,
and yet to be drank. What is really Corporeal, they annihilate, and make a Body
of that which is truly spiritual. They utterly spoil the Sacrament by taking
the Substance from it; they destroy the Body of Jesus Christ, by robbing him of
all the Proprieties of a Body, only attributing to him those of a Spirit. It Is
not then to receive the Sacrament, unless we have what it exhibits, viz. A
substantial Sign: To be denied, that is, to be deprived of what is signified;
since in this Sacramental Communion, the one goes not without the other. But,
either let 'em tell us what is it is Substance, what it is Elements, what it is
Figure, what it is Relation, or let 'em confess that it is not necessary to
represent him in Figure, who is present in Person, or corporally to receive in
the Host, the Sign and the thing signified together. In effect, it is incoherent
to be sacramentally present, and yet really so: The Sign is not what it
signifies, or the Picture what it represents; the Union of these things is made
by Relation, not Substance.

The matter in Question is concerning a Spiritual Nourishment, represented to
us by a Corporeal one, without which, the other cannot be: For, what Relation
is there between a Sacrament made up of Accidents, an appearance only of Bread,
and the real Body of Jesus Christ, broken, by which, we are nourished to Life
eternal? What subsists not, cannot be the Representation of a Substance; and to
represent a Body by what has no Body, is to represent a Being by no Being,
Every thing by Nothing, and if I may so say, the Truth by Falsehood. Hereupon,
they make Expositions so very obscure, and Distinctions so intricate and
confused, that they cannot possibly make others understand that of which they
themselves are ignorant; and you cannot disturb 'em more, than to put 'em on
making plain even their own Explications. It has always been believed, That the
Mind did better apprehend things, than they could be expressed by any Words:
but these men imagine they express what our Thoughts cannot conceive: And when
they have said all they can, they have Recourse to the Omnipotence of God,
without taking the least notice of his Will. If we are to believe 'em in this,
God is not Omnipotent, unless he can destroy those very Laws which he made to
be eternally inviolable; unless he can contradict himself, and belie the Truth.
He is not omnipotent, unless he can make a Humane Body to take up no place at
all; or at least, that the Whole be comprehended under a Point or Atome. He is
not Omnipotent, unless he can make the Color and Taste of Bread to subsist
without the Bread it self; that is to say, That Accidents are not Accidents,
which, they pretend, is every day done by him, in favor of these Gentlemen, by
a Miracle, which no one can evidence, having never perceived any thing of it;
or rather, by a Mystery that surpasses all sorts of Miracles, kept hid and
undiscovered only to be a Refuge for Presumption and Ignorance. Who can
patiently hear these Doctors, and not slight 'em? It is not enough that God is
incomprehensible, they do all they can to make him disbelieved. They shelter
themselves under a Divinity, falsely so called, that consists in critical
Questions and difficult Answers, made insignificant by their own Subtlety, that
affect the Ears with Sound and Noise, but not at all the Understanding. They
own a Sacrament, which they emphatically pronounce; and which, to speak
properly, signifies nothing, unless taken in the sense of the Reformed
Churches, who believe, that our Communion cannot be but Spiritual so long as it
is Sacramental. By such like extravagant and vain Expressions, they take off
all the Difficulties can be urged to 'em, and entertain their Hearers with airy
and idle Imaginations, by which, they take Pleasure to deceive themselves. They
say, there must be a Sacrifice in the Church, against that place of Scripture,
There is no more Offering for Sin, after that which has been once made for all.
Heb. 10. v. 10. 18. They will have their pretended propitiatory Sacrifice, and
that of the Cross, to be but the same thing. Besides, they will have the Bread
of the Eucharist changed into the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ; and I know not
how they allow to the same Subject, Passion and Glory: we must receive him
whole, in remembrance that he was broke; and living in Memory of his Death; and
though at their desire, he comes every day to 'em, both in his Humane and Divine
Nature, yet we must not forbear doing these things till he come. This is called
Consecration, that is, taking away the Substance of the Bread, and only
reserving it is Accidents, therewith to cover the Body of Jesus Christ. This is
called sacrificing him, in Remembrance of himself, for the Redemption of the
Living and the Dead. This is called eating him corporeally, although the Flesh
profits not at all. And although all these things are confuted by contradicting
themselves, yet that never to be dried source of Miracles, Transubstantiation,
reconciles 'em all, in defense of a Temporal right that usurps the Name of
Spiritual. However it is, the Sacrament cannot be referred but to the time of
the Sacrifice; and it is not to celebrate the memory of that, by supposing any
other Body than that which was broken. It Is not that Blood which remained in
the Veins of the Body we are to drink, but that which was shed, which, though
worthy of having been received in the Vessels of Election, yet fell on the
Earth, and consequently, cannot be drank, but spiritually. The Sign cannot
contain more than the thing it signifies; and we take it really, though after the
manner that the Spirit and Faith make things real. If it be true, that the
Bread contains the Body whole and entire, what does the Wine add to it? What
signifies the Superfluity of two Signs? 'Twas in vain the Lord commanded they
should be taken separately, if one contains the other by a necessary
consequence of this Transubstantiation. 'Twou'd be no great matter if it only
produced superfluous things, if it did not such monstrously strange ones, that
we dare scarce mention 'em, being so very offensive to those who maintain 'em,
that they have not the Courage to hear 'em. To what end had the Son of God,
supping with his Apostles, eat his own Flesh and drank his own Blood? Was his
Body glorious before glorified, or else, Had he two Bodies at the same time,
the one passible, and the other impassible? What necessity in these latter
days, more than in former, obliged him to exhibit himself as Corporeal Food, to
be exposed, as we may urge to these Doctors, to be eaten by the most abject
Creatures of the Earth? But, let us pass by in silence these many
Inconveniences which they themselves infer from this so ill-grounded Doctrine;
and to palliate 'em are obliged to have Recourse to Rules, and Canons, which
were they not Superstitious, we would call Ridiculous. Let us only add, that if
the Body of Jesus Christ be enclosed in the Sacrament, we may eat it without
believing in him: Thus Infidels obtain more than they require.

They eat of Celestial Food they have not asked for; nay, their very Contempt
of it does not hinder 'em from it, since they cannot receive the Sacrament
without eating it: but they are so far from eating it, that Believers
themselves do it not as it is understood by the Church of Rome. They receive not
with the Sacrament, the Divine Essence, but the Virtue and Essicacy of the
Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ: and, since the Wicked cannot partake of his
Graces, it follows, that those Graces are not joined to it by Consecration.
It Is not the Words pronounced, but believed, that make Jesus Christ
communicated in the Sacrament. 'Twould be strange, if he must be unworthily
eaten by his very Enemies, and that he who is Holiness it self should every day
enter into their defiled bodies, only to render 'em more guilty, and that he
might have more Reason to condemn and punish 'em. On the contrary, it is the
Devil that would enter into 'em, as he did Judas, when our Lord gave him the
Sop. How is it possible, these two Guests so irreconcilable, can agree
together? It is not credible, that being filled with the most sovereign Good,
we should only have a sense of Evil from it; we receive our Savior, that we
may be saved, the Wicked take only the consecrated Signs; and because such,
they commit Sacrilege, and render themselves guilty of Treason against the
Divine Majesty, because they have no regard to the Institution of Our Lord,
contemn his Offers in it, and deny it is Virtue.

They publicly take his Enemies part, they again spit in his Face, they crown
him with Thorns, they strike and crucify him: It Is thus they eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup unworthily; it is thus they eat their own
Condemnation, not discerning the Body of Jesus Christ. For, the Symboles,
Seals, and Pledges of his Love, are accounted himself, by those who believe in
him, it being Faith alone, which makes the Signs inseparable from the thing
signified. It Is heavenly Food, given to no one for his Condemnation, but only
for his Justification; for Life, and not for Death; not being under the
Accidents of Bread, or in the Bread it self, but in the Heart of those who
receive it. Thus the Bread ceases not to be Bread, but to be common Bread; it
loses not it is Substance, but acquires Sanctification, which changes not it is
Nature, but adds Grace to Nature, for the sake of those that believe. The
Mystery of the Incarnation unites us to the Body of our Savior; Faith, with
which he inspires us by his Word, unites us to his Spirit, which double Union
is confirmed to us by the Communion of Sacraments. But, as our Union with Jesus
Christ, cannot be perfect in this World, by reason of our Sins, and Death,
which is a Consequence of 'em; so, though we take the Symboles he gives us
corporally, yet it is neither possible, or necessary for us to take what they
signify, but spiritually: For, if we take his Body, as the Church of Rome
imagines it does, our Infirmities could not bear his Glory, the stronger would
overcome the weaker, we should doubtless perish, or his Virtue would even then
blot out all our sins, we should in an instant be transformed, and become
incorruptible and glorious, we should be assured never to see Death. But we
partake not of one of all these but by the comfort the Spirit gives us, but by
Faith, by which we rely on his Promises, and but by that Hope we have of a Life
to come. Thus to eat the Body of Jesus Christ is to hear his Word, is to
believe in him; to behold him on the Cross, loaded with our Sins; to be truly
sensible of his Wounds and Sorrows, and to confess, that by the Satisfaction of
the Son, whose Merit is infinite, we satisfy the Father whom we have
infinitely offended. It Is to be inflamed with the love of him who has so very
much loved us; and to assure him, (as we do all those we love) that he is
always in our Thoughts, that he fully possesses our Hearts; that he is the
Soul of our Souls; and, to use his own terms, that He dwells in us, and we in
him. In fine, To eat the Body of Jesus Christ, is to have a fresh and lively
sense of those Favors he has bestowed on us, and to think that we are not only
his Servants and Friends, but his Brethren, his own blood, bone of his bones,
flesh of his flesh, and that we are part of that Church whom he has honored so
far as to make his Eternal Spouse.

Behold what is the Meat, and the Drink which are not given to all sorts of
Persons, which satisfy, and quench the Thirst of those only, who hunger and
thirst after Righteousness. But the Men of this World have not truly relished
the Simplicity of this Institution; they would heighten the Luster of this
double Sacrament, and do all things according to the Example, or rather, in
Emulation of the Superstitions of the World. The Name of Religion, of a Church,
and even of God himself, who served 'em but as a pretense to make themselves
more honorable, to procure with more Ease, earthly Advantages and Preferments.
Besides this, I have often thought what lawful and necessary use they could
make of this Transubstantiation; it is what they themselves could scarce tell,
if so be they would consider the common cause of Salvation, as well that of the
Jews as of the Gentiles. These prodigious Errors are the true Causes of all
that Mischief which happens in the World; and Mankind will be so long infested
with Judgments, as Superstition continues to corrupt Religion. But the Divine
Oracles give us Reason to hope, that the days of Sorrow will be shortened, and
that God will confound the Wicked by the Breath of his Mouth. The Time will
come, that Children shall abhor, and detest the Belief of their Fathers, and
will say, Is it possible that our Predecessors have been so silly and stupid,
or so extremely hardened by Custom, or so very careless in search of the Truth,
to have believed things altogether incredible! What Spirit of Pride, what high
Presumption, has possessed these Councils, who have imagined, they could
appoint better Orders for Divine Service, than the Providence of God himself
had done, by the Mouth of his own Son? I will then conclude with the Wise Man,
or at least, with his Translator, who makes him speak after this manner;
Ecclesiastes chap. 3. verse. 18. I said in my Heart, concerning the Estate of
the Sons of Men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see, that
they themselves are Beasts.

A DISCOURSE In which the Author gives his Reasons why he Prefers the Reformed
Religion before the Roman.
YOU have been so kind, Generous Aristander, not only to suffer, but command me
to give you a short Account of the Reasons that invite me to separate from the
Church of Rome, to close with that of the Reformed. It Is with all my heart I
desire to obey you, yet not without an Apprehension that my Obedience may not
suit with that Respect I owe you. I fear my Belief may in some sort appear
injurious to yours, and that when I confess, with the greatest sincerity
imaginable, my nearest Thoughts to you, they may be so displeasing, as not to
be suffered by you. You shall have no reason to accuse me of wresting the Sense
of the Scripture, or interpreting it according to my own Fancy; for I will not
quote many Passages out of it. You shall have no reason to mistrust my
Arguments, as being nice or subtle, not designing to meddle with any
Controversy, for I Will leave that to the Schools and Books, believing nothing
can be said more concerning it. I will serve my self of no Rhetorical Colors
or Artificial Eloquence, intending to make my Discourse as plain and ingenious
as my Thoughts are; I will entertain you only with those things your Eyes see,
and your Ears hear every day, but Custom hinders you from having a due
consideration of 'em.

First, I must needs say, that nothing is so amazing to me, as to observe the
Name of God every day in the mouths of those who know him not, nor indeed will
they at all make it their business to do it. They discourse of him according to
their own Imaginations, and invest him with Qualities barely Humane, and so
become guilty of the same fault with Pagans and Idolaters, who made to
themselves Gods according to the vain Suggestions of their own Thoughts. Some
take their Religion by chance, and stand up in defense only of what was first
imprinted on 'em: Others, susceptible of all sorts of Opinions, follow that
only which is the most convenient for 'em. Whosoever, to this purpose, will act
only as his Natural Reason dictates to him, or believe but what Men like
himself persuade him to, will be capable of pursuing all Religions, one after
the other, and by consequence will really have none at all. If men were to
receive no instructions but only from Men, they would find it extremely
difficult to make a true choice of what might yield solid Quiet, and Ease to
their Minds. Each Sect has its Doctors and Logicians, who all believe their own
reasonings grounded on Reason it self. They neither want Natural or Artificial
Logic, which they pervert, and so raise from it numbers of odd Chimaera's,
called by them un-erring, invincible Arguments, which swell 'em with Pride and
Vanity, and make 'em love rather to appear reasonable, than really to be so.

Truth, in their mouths, seems to put on all manner of shapes, or to speak more
properly, Bare Probability passes with them for Truth; and in this multitude of
Opinions, he who does not closely adhere to some Principles, knows not which to
embrace. Every one is not able to discern false Teachers by their Doctrine. For
it being now both subtle and obscure too, we may call it a Learned Ignorance,
that raises more Difficulties than it can resolve, and does rather multiply
Doubts than clear 'em. But however, since the great Point in Question is the
Service of God, to live well, and to attain to Salvation; it is necessary that
those who furnish us with Precepts, give us Examples too. It Is necessary that
such who are our Guides, lead the way. It Is thus they may procure the name of
true Pastors; and it is the most certain means, by which we are taught by Jesus
Christ himself to distinguish and know 'em. It Is true, that if Men were to be
judged only by their Works, there would be found but very few who were not
extremely guilty. But without doubt Religion is much corrupted, since those of
the Church are become worse than Laymen, since their vicious and debauched
lives render 'em intolerable to honest men, make 'em abused by their own
People, and deserve to be hated by all the World.

I have not much wondered at the different Opinions of Pagans, and their
Philosophy; but I must confess, the Division amongst Jews, Christians, and
Turks,, has seemed very strange to me, who ought all to be united, who had
nothing more to wish for, when once they had learned there was a Divine Word.
Above all, I could not observe, without horror and pity, so many different
Parties amongst Christians themselves; and amongst those, I am obliged to say,
I found that the Worst, which would peremptorily force us to believe, is the
Best. It Is that Party which seems to have made a collection of all the Errors
in the World, and from hence only has merited the name of Universal. It Is that
which is rich only by borrowing, not being able to bear with the pure
simplicity, not to say the Poverty of the Gospel. It Is that which has not been
contented to have the name of a Church common to others, but would, for it self
alone, set up a Title of Sovereignty, pretending no Spiritual things can be
disposed of but by its Order; and thus by a Presumption as ridiculous as
insolent, calls it self the Absolute Judge of the whole World. But it is that
also which is easily known, however we observe it, either by its Leaders or
Followers, its Stateliness or Poverty. We need no great Learning or Subtilty on
this Account, so many Controversies are useless, since it sufficiently makes it
self apparent; it at first sight shows it self to any one who will take the
least notice of it, its Works do plainly enough manifest its Doctrine. But if
we will yet make a farther discovery of it, we need but read the Scriptures,
and compare the matter of 'em with the Practices of this Spiritual Head and its
Party. It may be you will ask me, what I find so strange in it? I answer, that I
meet with what does really astonish me, and what in my Opinion, should others
too, as well as my self. I observe in it, I know not what, that does both
grieve and fright me, that fills me with compassion, and strikes a terror upon
me, which I ordinarily express by Sighs and Groans. I observe I know not what
Political Order, that subsists by Traffic, and the Sale of Spiritual things,
that uses the Name of God, to make the Laws of Men more regarded, and to oblige
the People willingly to pay such Impositions as are laid on 'em. Doubtless,
there is no Monarch has fairer Pretenses to make himself obeyed, and his
Monarchy Universal. But this Scarlet, this Purple, these Crowns, do rather
belong to Emperors, and Terrestrial Princes, than to the Ministers of Jesus
Christ, who has assured us, that his Kingdom is not of this World, John 18. 36.
Which is a certain Argument, that under the name of Spiritual, this Temporal
Power is but a Tyrannical Usurpation, much more grounded on the Predictions of
the Revelations, than the Precepts of the Gospel. It Is an Empire, whose Princes
are as so many Slaves to Ambition and Covetousness, whose Votes are to be
bought, and who, in the Election of a Head, that has no Power but what he
attributes to himself, do bear a part even with Kings; who are scared without
reason by his imaginary Thunder. What likelihood is there that the Truth of
God, or rather God himself, can be found amongst so much corruption and
Bribery, which fills the Conclave? That Holiness cannot be fixed in its Throne
but by the mercenary suffrages of these Men; That St. Peter cannot preserve his
Chair safe, but by secret and unjust Contrivances? What likelihood that men led
by Interest, which doubtless is the greatest God they own, and men whose
manners are so impure and depraved, can any long time agree with the purity of
the Gospel? And by what Vices could they more justly fall into a Reprobate
sense? It Is really a very strange thing to me, that the Doctors of the Roman
Church imagine themselves, upon an ill-grounded Presumption, to be the most
reasonable of all men; and perceive not that they may err as well as those who
cried out, The Temple, the Temple, Jer. 7. 4. as they do now the Church, the
Church. If it be so that it cannot err, why could not St. Peter, from whom it
receives this great Privilege, bestow it on that of Antioch? What could his
Death contribute more to it than his Life? What signify Places which have not
had any particular Promises, or Seats which are not more ancient than others?
In what have the Errors of Asia outdone those of Europe? What Holy Oracles
have ever foretold that Rome should be the Jerusalem of the Universe? What an
unhappiness has it been to other Churches, that they have not been able to
continue even one Age without their Impurities, when the Church of Rome alone
has been for fifteen free from Error? If she must persevere in the Faith, even
to the end, what did St. Paul think when he placed her amongst the wild
Branches grafted on the Olive tree, and consequently more liable to be cut off
than its own natural ones; and why would he pronounce a threatening upon her,
which was never likely to come to pass? Those certainly who have designed to
build her up, have ruined her, and those who have enriched, have destroyed her.
It Is extremely hard to make a just agreement between the love of the things of
the Earth, and those of Heaven? Or can Faith, Piety, or Virtue, subsist long
amidst Luxury and Abundance? Corruption generally begins with our Manners,
which, when once so perverted as to arrive to their height, they have no manner
of Respect for those things that are Sacred; nothing then so Holy or Religious,
which they turn not into Profaneness. It Is then men cannot away with the pure
Doctrine; it is then they make Doctors after their own fashion; that those are
invested with Authority who least deserve it, and who insolently violate the
Divine Commands. It Is then their Preachers become fearful and cowardly, holding
many things as indifferent, which are indeed very pernicious; and thus at
length they allow, what at first 'twas uneasy to 'em even to connive at.

The Romish Religion has been too long consistent with the Power of the World;
the Princes and Nobility, the Magistrates and People side with it, and have,
for many Ages supported its Authority. This is a sign of its not being the true
Church, since that frequently needs Trials of Affliction, and whose greatest
Enemy is the World it self. I must confess, that sometimes the Preaching of the
Gospel does convert whole Towns and Provinces, nay, even Kingdoms; but they
continue not long without disturbance; the Jealousy of their Neighbors, the
Treachery of their own People and Servants, set on foot by the Church of Rome,
and, what is worst of all, their abuse of Gods blessings, and their prosperous
Condition, which is generally attended by a corruption of Manners, do in a
little time create to 'em Crosses and Disquiets. Their Tranquillity and Peace
would be extraordinary and wonderful, if it lasted one Age; but this
Terrestrial resting place is not appointed for their Happiness. How long has
the Reign of Jesus Christ been that of this World? how long have the Nobles,
the Learned, and the People, submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Church? How
long has it been that true Christians have not been persecuted? How long since
Servants are become greater than their Masters? And by what new Gospel have
they made even Caesar's, and the Princes of the Earth Tributary? No, no, there
is no Society of men (let 'em be what they will) can have the name of a Church
by any Temporal Estate, but by the alone Profession of Embracing and of
teaching the incorrupted Doctrine and the Truth. Thus the Doctors of the Age,
with an insufferable Confidence, brag that they have not in the least altered,
either the Commandments of the Law, or the Articles of Faith, but that they
have closely adhered to the very foundation of 'em. But is it not to break the
Law which God pronounced with his own Mouth, and writ with his own Hand,
sometimes to accuse it, of being insufficient, and then of superfluity, and to
retrench such words from it, as they like not, when they deliver it to the
people? Is it not to violate the Faith, to apply themselves to any other
Mediators than Jesus Christ, and to subvert that Order he has appointed both
for a Form of Prayers, and that of Sacraments? Those who have but an
indifferent knowledge of the Pagan Religion, must own that three parts of what
they see practiced in the Celebration of the Mass; as to their Habits, their
Gestures or Ceremonies; were the invention of, and established by Numa
Pompilius, King of the Romans. Yet no one has so much as thought of making him
pass for a Prophet, or a Messenger sent by God seven hundred years before the
coming of Jesus Christ, to declare what sort of Worship and Religion that of
the Christians should be. But hereupon to satisfy you, they give you fine
words, telling you, that these Ceremonies of the Heathens by introducing of 'em
into the Church are sanctified. By the same reason those things that were
borrowed by the Jews of Idolatrous Nations, and which they brought into the
Temple, should have been sanctified even by the Temple. But neither Priests, or
Prophets ever imagined they could appease the jealousy and anger of the
Eternal, by a specious excuse so well devised. It Is unseasonable to use the
flowers of Rhetoric, and to entertain those with glittering colors, and
appearances who only search after, and stand in need of the Truth. It Is in vain
to endeavor to please the eyes of those whose Hearts are grieved for their
sins, who tremble at the voice of the Lawgiver, and who believe the Divine
Institutions so very Sacred, that those are looked on by 'em as guilty of
Sacrilege, who dare be so bold as to intermix Humane Inventions with 'em. I
own that I cannot go into their Churches with a satisfied Conscience, without a
great disquiet to my mind. For I see nothing on every side but the Pomp of
Paganism shining forth, but such things as are displeasing to the Eternal, and
which provoke his Jealousy. I only see Altars and Chapels, each of which has
its Patron, and are admirably beautified, in emulation one of the other, by the
presents of Ladies, and superstitious Trophies. How! you will say, is not Jesus
Christ Preached here? Yes doubtless, his name must be made use of to gain a
Reputation to what is said, and fairly to put off the rest of their Inventions.
But consider a little, and you will find that Leaven mixed with it, of which we
ought to beware; that dreadful poison, and that Character of Paganism. You Will
perceive a Style that has little of that of the Scripture in it, but very much
of the Schools and profane Authors, and their chief Divinity generally set out
with Allegories, and some Meditations of the Fathers. You Will meet with a certain
Miscellany of Commonplaces, some ingenious pieces of Wit that please the Ears,
and whose end for the most is not so much for the Preaching of the Gospel, and
edifying of the People, but for the praise of the Preacher. It is palpable,
that the Spirit of God does not inspire 'em with these things, however good
they may be in appearance, since they seem to be said or done only to procure
applause to the Ingenuity of men. I know there are some amongst 'em who desire
to be accounted more sincere than the rest, by publicly professing that they
only Preach Jesus Christ Crucified: But presently they belie themselves, and
give demonstrations of their being not less Superstitious than those they
teach, by committing with 'em open Acts of Idolatry. I could never like these
Famous Preachers or Writers, who sometimes find fault with the Jesuits, and
then with those of other Orders, who seem to endeavor to make a Reformation in
some Points of Doctrine. These are those refined Hypocrites, who strike at some
head of this Hydra, but never go to the Belly. If there were no Cardinals Caps,
or rich Bishoprics to be hoped for, they would not much care to be, or indeed
seem better than others. For after all this do they not pray to Saints? Don't
they observe their Feasts? don't they fall down before Images? don't they go
every day to Mass? This is the fullness and complication of all errors, the
source of all evil. This is that wonderful Sacrament, which since its first
institution has extremely changed its nature, and which was not ordained to be
exposed as a sight only. This is that invisible Miracle, that incredible sign,
without Elements, in which there is nothing that can be broken, nothing that
can nourish, nor any thing which has the least conformity with, or relation to
the things it signifies. This is, if we will believe those of the Church of Rome,
that true Supper, at which Christ made a propitiatory Sacrifice before he was
Sacrificed; at which his Body became Spiritual before he was glorified. What
aerie fancy! what strange Doctrine, that would persuade us that the Body of
Jesus Christ, which, except sin, is altogether like ours, is whole on the
Table, and whole under the accidents of the smallest piece of bread that can be
imagined; that it is covered under a Point or Atome? Is not this to belie, and
utterly destroy the Humanity of the Son of God? Is not this to place Death in
the room of Life, and to make our Adoration of no effect at all, instead of
bringing us to a serious Contemplation of the Being of Beings, and of him who
is really Man, as he is truly God.

This imaginary Transubstantiation is so full of Contradictions, that it
renders the Learned more ridiculous than the most ignorant of men. It has
Consequencies not to be pronounced without Horror, and which those who defend,
cannot hear of, without Transports of Fury. What wilful Ignorance, what blind
Passion, what Curse, what Obstinacy, does hinder the Exercise of their Minds?
Open your Eyes ye stupid ones, use that Understanding which is left you, and
consider that the same Communion, and the same Faith serves the Jews and the
Gentiles; and that whatever Privilege one has had above the other, they are
chiefly distinguished by Time: The one believed in him who was to come, and the
other, in him who was come: The former had no need of Transubstantiation, and
the latter judge it not necessary. The Priests, who are believed to make every
day this miraculous Change, and by that, receive within 'em the Holy of Holies,
should be extraordinary sanctified Men; and yet their Lives are so corrupt and
vicious, that their Names, for a long Time, are become infamous even to a
Proverb. I could never approve of their Masses, their Mattins, their Vespers,
or indeed, of their Prayers, which are made in a Tongue the People understand
not; a true Sign of their Slavery, and the Roman Tyranny.

I liked not those Traditions which are loaded with so much Heathenish
Superstition, that Purgatory, those pretended Satisfactions, their Singing,
their Feasts, their Fraternities, their Processions or Pilgrimages, their
presuming on their good Works and Merits. After their manner of proving these
things by the Scripture, there is nothing in the World but may be proved by it
also. They forcibly deduce 'em from some Passages, in which, neither the
Prophets or Apostles would have been under figurative or obscure Expressions,
had they been necessary to the Christian Worship. They have boldly set up
Saints in the place of Gods, and their Canonizations of Men instead of that of
God's, without considering it is Consequence. In the mean while, the World
groans under Multitudes of different Orders, which they every day institute,
sometimes under one Name, and sometimes another. They care not though they
ruin Houses, and whole Families, if they can but advance their own Interest,
and leave enough to establish themselves under Retreats of Idleness. Children,
by their Persuasion, disobey even their Fathers, and under Color of devoting
themselves to God, and to frequent Prayer, they give themselves up to the
imaginary Devotion of certain hollow Brains, and to the unprofitable Actions of
a vain and ridiculous Obedience. And it is certainly apparent, that the more
these things increase, the more does the Anger and Judgments of Heaven afflict
the Earth. I cannot imagine, how the Austerity of some, agrees with the
Licentiousness of others; for, it is often observed in the World, that there are
several bear the Name of Monks, who are far from being such. They cunningly
wheedle themselves into Houses where they can get any Advantage, and holding
the Women captive, enslave the Men by their Means. Some are professed Litigious
men, and yield not in this to their very Abbots; others are sollicitous, and
make whom they please to gain or loose the Cause.

Besides, I could never endure those Pagan Imitations, their Shaved Heads,
which look as if bald. They seemed to me, to have taken something away from the
Shape and Beauty of Men, which God had given 'em; they were so far, in my
Opinion, from bearing the Character of Holiness, that nothing looked more
deformed and ugly. I have always been rather displeased with, and indeed
detested, than admired their Hoods, their Cowls, their nasty Habits, and naked
Feet. God having created Man after his own Image, endued him with the most
perfect form of all Creatures; yet they have made it more frightful than that
of the most monstrous or wildest Beasts.

Since Jesus Christ is come, Figures and Signs are needless, unless such which
he has appointed. It Is not bare Feet, or bald Heads, but Mouths to publish the
Gospel, that we want. I abhorred likewise to see several go about cheating the
World, pretending to be possessed by some Spirit that taught 'em to show
cunning Tricks, as not long since, those of Loadun and Louvriers, of which
People have been undeceived, I would say to their Shame, if they had not wholly
lost it.

I have not easily given Credit to their Miracles, whose Doctrine I could not
believe. It Is the last Refuge Satan has, when he has lost his Cause, to
endeavor to dazzle us with false Lights, and fright us with Apparitions. The
Adventures of Kings, Princes, and People, are represented by our Comediens; but
the Religious, pretending to be possessed, play the part of Devils, and act the
Comedies of Hell. I have thought, that if their Doctors are extravagantly
learned the People are brutishly ignorant; and that it pleases God, that his
Children should be moderately wise, that is, supplied with such a Wisdom that
suits not only with the Capacity of Philosophers, but with that of Shepherds
and Fishermen; not such who are really Brutes and Sots, who knew no farther
than the Animal Life, who take Pains only to eat and drink, and so dye as they
have lived.

I have observed that those devout Souls which are so mightily esteemed, are
zealous without Knowledge, superstitiously Religious, have not a true filial,
but servile Fear of God, which instead of easing, does without Intermission
torment 'em; and at length, having made both Body and Mind uneasy, does
equally destroy 'em. They pray much less to the Creator than to the Creatures;
they contemplate Jesus Christ, the Virgin, and Saints in pieces of Wood and
Stone, which are so far from being like 'em, that they do 'em great Wrong; and
whatever they may tell us, when they prostrate themselves before Images, since
the Body cannot at all act without the Motion of the Soul; their Minds, without
doubt, are fixed upon 'em, as well as their Eyes. It Is true, many of 'em are
taught to say, that they do not adore in 'em what we apparently see 'em do:
They distinguish Adoration, and please themselves to give different Names to
things which they alike practice. They are become so subtle, that they belie
not only our Senses and Reason, but their own too, being almost persuaded, that
they do not that which is done by 'em even with so much Heat and Fervency, and
in the sight of the whole World. The People who understand not these
Sophistical Distinctions, do prostitute and allow themselves in the commission
of Pure Idolatry: There are some pleased to keep 'em in this Error, no one
takes the least Pains to undeceive 'em.

In fine, I have found that the greatest part of 'em rely on their Birth; the
first Instructions they have received, from some particular City or Place, on
Custom or Interest. That they satisfy themselves with the outside of things,
with Colors, Sounds, and other Vanities, which make 'em contemn the Simplicity
of the Gospel; for, Men not being able naturally to comprehend what is of the
Spirit of God, will embrace no Religion, unless pompous, or will admit of the
Government of Jesus Christ, if not Temporal. Nothing engages them to Reverence
and Devotion, but what makes a glorious Show. Nothing prevails with them so
much as Music, Painting, Images, Gold, Azure, Purple, Scarlet, and external
Ornaments. In these, the Ladies every day employ themselves; and not being able
longer to charm the men of the World, by necessity become religious. Their
great Care is to beautify Churches and Altars, and richly to adorn the very
Marbles; whilst the Poor are naked, and groan under their Miseries, not having
wherewithal to defend 'em from the extreme Rigor of the Seasons. Shall I
venture to say, that I observe nothing in the Church of Rome, that bears the
least mark of true Christianity; no, not their very Funerals, which should at
least terminate all their Vanities? The Rich then, if we may believe them, may
purchase their very Salvation; but the Poor, even after their Death, beg for
the Payment of their Burial.

'Twas now but necessary that God should raise a sort of men to reform those
who were arrived to the highest pitch of wickedness, or that to this purpose he
should send even Angels themselves. Yet they have blasted their Reputations,
they have rendered their very names odious, whose design was only to keep 'em
from the Pit of Perdition, and direct 'em in the ways of Salvation, who of
their own heads have made no Inventions, who have aimed at no Benefice or
Interest, but that of Reformation, and the Service of God. These are the
Messengers whose Missions needs no new Miracles, for they Preach no new
Doctrine. They adhere to Principles, to Universals, to the foundations of the
Truth, which grows not old, or decays, and yet is valued for its Antiquity.
Their Sermons are such, that there is no one who is reasonable, but must own
their coherence with the Scriptures, which they persuade their People to read
with care and diligence, saying, Observe, if we deceive you, trust not to us,
or believe not our Doctrine, if you find it not confirmed to you by that of the
Prophets and Apostles. Whilst those on the contrary, of the Roman persuasion,
cry, after the manner of the Heathens, from hence, from hence, ye profane, and
do always rather terrify than afford comfort, their profession being in every
thing dark, and mysterious, nay, it sets it self out with the name of Mystery.
But I cannot imagine that Religion a bad one, which deals with us with that
frankness, which takes off the Veil of Superstition, which disperses the
darkness of Ignorance, and gives fuch light, understanding and consolation to
its Professors, as that of the Reformed does. Yet these are the unpardonable
crimes that excite the calumny of so many enemies, who are both their
Accusers, and Judges, unjust and inconsiderate Judges, who continually
pronounce against 'em this short sentence, inspired into 'em by truly infernal
Furies; you are damned, you are damned. Inhumane and Diabolical saying! which
against the Prohibition of our Savior himself, rashly judges another
Servants; and those who are not under their jurisdiction. These are the
strongest arguments, the softest remonstrances, and the most charitable words
they put into the mouths of their people, who bark and rail at their Brethren,
instead of gently discovering their Error to 'em, or hearing their
Justification. How great is the injustice of Men! And how do most of 'em
deserve that Condemnation they pronounce against their Neighbors. Such as
these upbraid me with my Religion, who are unacquainted with their own, and
know nothing of mine but from its Enemies. They condemn me upon the bare report
of my Adversaries; without hearing either my Advocate or my self. But pray tell
me, Gentlemen and Ladies, who are they for whom you have so great an Aversion?
to whom do you talk with that Sharpness and Anger? Are they not those who
ground all their Religion on the Holy Scripture, who read, meditate on, love,
and admire it, who learn it by heart, and who are so far from accusing it of
insufficiency, that in that alone they find the Words of Eternal Life,
sufficient for their perfect Instruction and Comfort? Are they not those whose
Charity recalls you to that first Estate in which you were? When no Images were
yet set up in your Churches, when you owned no other Purgatory than the Blood
of Jesus Christ, when going to Mass, or taking the Cup from the People, was not
so much as talked of, but meeting together for the breaking of Bread, which was
not elevated to make it adored? They certainly have not the Spirit of God, who
hate such as love his Word, and only covet to impart to you that Light, and
those Joys they receive from it.

It must be acknowledged, these are strange Heretics, and are mightily in the
wrong, to stick to Principles, not to presume beyond what is written, 1 Cor. 4.
6. and not to turn to the right hand, or to the left, Josh. 23. 6. They are to
blame, not to consent to the adding of other Commands to the Law, or other
Articles to the Faith which is prescribed 'em. In a word, they do very ill,
that they mix not profane things with Holy. Indeed, I consent with all my Soul
to their Profession; let what name they please be given 'em, I had much rather
be one of those Heretics, than one of the Catholics of the Age. For, in
effect, who are they whose Doctrine we ought so very much fear? Is it that of
Kings and Princes, who are chiefly entrusted with the care of Secular things?
Is it that of Magistrates, who decide Differences between men? Is it that of
the People, who are employed in Mechanical Arts, or in Trading? Nothing less:
It Is that of the Great Doctors of the Church, and whose Leaven ought to be
suspected by us, as that of the Pharisees. They are those who do what they
please, by the Privilege and Authority of that Character they bear; who, under
the name of Doctors, or Fathers, preach Error effectually, and who, the more
they are filled with Frenzy and Enthusiasm, the more would they persuade us
they are inlighten'd. They are those who have such an extraordinary Opinion of
their own Strength, that they brag that they are not only able to fulfill, but
to surpass the Law. And though that obliges us to love God with all our Hearts,
and our Neighbors as our selves, it is not sufficient to bear testimony of
their Faith, or to magnify their Works. To this must be added Councils which
it comprehends not, and which transport men beyond that perfect Love which it
obliges us to. Several Traditions must be observed, which, though instituted by
Pagans and Infidels, are become Sacred, since admitted into the Church, and
called Apostolical. To conclude, Many amongst 'em do so abound in doing Good
Works, that they have some to spare to impart to those who do none at all; and
in order too to their obtaining Eternal Life.

It is not to be wondered at, that the Evil Spirit has prevailed on men to
forbid the reading of the Holy Scripture; for it is impossible that those
impressions it makes on pious minds, which are seriously industrious in the
search of Salvation, can consist with the Doctrine and Religion of the Times.
It has often recovered me from a Lethargy, into which I was insensibly plunged
by the Errors of the World. By it I have learned to know both my Beginning and
my End. It has infused into me both a Love and Fear of my Creator: it has made
me fear his Judgments, adore his Goodness, and lay claim to his Mercy. It has
caused me to observe such various, and so many proofs of his Providence, that I
had no room left to doubt of it. I never read it, but I became bettered by it,
yet not with that Perseverance as I could have wished. Therefore I thought
'twas necessary for me to begin it often, and never to leave it off. I met with
so many Truths in it, from one end to the other, that I have not followed their
Example who only seek after Contradictions in it, who will not distinguish
Times, or consider the different respects why things have been said. It is not
dangerous to such, who have good desires, it ought not to be mistrusted by 'em;
it does inlighten 'em, instruct 'em, and shows 'em the way that leads to
Eternal Life. It is impossible that He who suspends his Judgment, who is not
swayed by Passion, Custom, or Prejudice, who is only governed by Reason, and
seeks after the Truth, should not find it by this way; and thus to search after
it, comes from the Spirit of God. What shall I say more? He must not expect to
be saved, who does not love this Word above all things; and who does not
evidence the love he has for it, by frequent reading of it. For many will say
with their Mouths, they love that which indeed they do not. They in vain
pretend to excuse themselves, upon the Credit of their Teachers, in saying,
that it is not intelligible by all, that every one expounds it to his own
Advantage. If they are to be believed, God spoke to his Children only to
deceive 'em, and not to be understood by 'em. Thus there is no way left either
to read or know any thing. Every passage has its different Sense, whereupon we
must refer our selves to our Masters. Even those which seem most Evident, are
most obscure, and oftentimes signify the contrary of what they seem to
signify. As for Example; when it is said, Thou shall not make to thy self any
likeness, Exodus 20. verse. 4. this signifies, we must fill our Churches with
Images: when it is said, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
Neighbor, Exodus 24. 16. by this is meant, those are to be called Heretics,
who embrace no other Religion but what is prescribed by the Word of God. Then
when it is said, speaking of the Communion, As often as you shall eat of this
Bread. 1 Cor. 11. 26. The Sense of this is, That you shall eat no Bread. And
when it is said, Tarry one for another. 1 Cor. 11. 33. The meaning of this is,
That Masses shall be said without Communicants. And thus of the rest. They
render the Scripture intricate and difficult only, that they may be consulted
as Oracles, and their Authority absolutely depended on.

If Philosophy was so necessary for men to discharge their Duty to God, the
mean and ordinary people of the World could never know any thing of it, against
that place of Scripture, which says, That he has hid these things from the
Wise and Prudent, and has revealed 'em unto Babes. Matthew. 11. 25. It is not to
be hoped, that a well established Couference, can either clear or dissipate
this Darkness; since most men design only the maintaining the first Opinion
they have received, or setting a Value and Reputation on their Profession.
Disputes indeed are dangerous, for those who manage 'em ordinarily grow
passionate and sharp, or ambitious of Conquest; at least, of not being
overcome. I have never observed those of the Church of Rome to deal with
Sincerity; their Religion has so little of Religion in it, that it scarce ever
suffers 'em to act in any thing, without consulting their Humane Interest, or
without having studied all manner of Tricks and Cunning: As the Children of
this World are in their Generation wiser than the Children of light. Luke 16.
8. They are assured of the Victory before the Combat. They are certain they
shall be countenan'd by those who preside, and be applauded by the Voice of the
Multitude. They are assured of him on whose Account the Dispute is made, and to
have the better by any way whatever, unless that of Reason.

Otherwise, they amuse the Standers by, and lose the time in repeating long
Quotations, and will always speak thrice as much at least, as their
Adversaries. They will not dispute with equal Strength or Arms; they will be
both Party and Judges, and pretending a Sovereign Jurisdiction over all things
that belong to Religion; will not be determined but by themselves; they will
admit of no Advice, or allow any Councils but what are made up of men all
obliged to the same Interest. They will resolve nothing but after their own
Way, their own Policy, their own Customs, or Prejudices, which confirm their
Errors, instead of removing of 'em. But, if they were well assured that Truth
was of their side, it being certainly the strongest, though the least known; yet
ought they to be so charitable to us, as to say, Assemble the learned of
your Men together, and we, on our parts, will do the same; We'll receive your
Reasons in Writing, signed with your hands, and we'll return you ours, with the
same Freedom. But these Hypocrites, these self-interessed Men, of seared
Consciences, will not run the Risque of ruining, at once, both their Religion
and their Fortunes. It Is not their design to draw men to their Party by the
Power of Truth; they know no way to do it, but by Corruption, by Liberty, and
fair Promises. They make it their business to find out, amongst those of the
Reformed Religion, and especially the Pastors, a Judas, who may be prevailed on
to sell himself, to betray their Master and Brethren. But, to what purpose
these Persuasions, or these Compulsions? To what end, this Dispute, or rather,
this insufferable Wrangling? Is it not only to prove to us, that those who
prostrate themselves before Images are not Idolaters? Is it not to persuade us
to go every day before the Altar, to observe the going forward and backward,
the Gestures, the mysterious Ornaments of a Priest that turns his Back upon us,
and to oblige the People to say Amen, to several repeated Words and murmuring
Noise of a Tongue, which for the most part, they understand not. It Is for this
they make so much Disorder in the World; it is for this they promise, they
threaten, and persecute the Saints even to overcome 'em, as far as it is
possible for 'em, and make the very Stars fall from Heaven. It Is this which
does afflict us, and this which does often amaze us. It Is this would make us
sink under our Fear and Sorrows: but on this account, the Holy Trinity comes to
our Assistance, the Holy Ghost does comfort, and withal assure us, That the Son
shall not lose one of those whom the Father has given him. Joh. 17. 12. and 18.
9. Moreover, Providence and Truth, are so gloriously triumphant over their
Enemies, that they find themselves caught in those Snares they laid for others.

Whoever shall attentively read the Books of Controversy, so refined as they
are at this Time, will perceive, that those of the Reformed Religion do
apparently surpass all others; and that there are only such who are
contentious, stupid, or hardened, and given up even to a reprobate Sense, that
receive not from 'em as full Satisfaction as Reason it self can offer.

To conclude, Aristander, I am forced to tell you, that I find not so much as
one remaining Spark of the pure Gospel, any shadow of true Christianity, in all
this Roman Hierarchy. It Is a Body laboring under an irrecoverable Leprosy; an
Hydropick Body, puffed up with it is ill Humors. It Is sick of a Lethargy that
sleeps the Sleep of Death, from which, no Voice is strong or loud enough to
awaken it. On the contrary, I am fully satisfied with the Profession of the
Reformed Churches, which instruct me in the Divine Commands, without any
Mixture of Humane Inventions. I find there preached, the pure and plain Truth
of a Jesus Christ crucified; 1 Cor. 2. 2. who brings healing under his Wings,
Mal. 4. 2. who makes the Deaf to hear, and the Blind to see; and in a Word,
even the Dead to rise again, Matt. 11. 5. to enjoy the for-ever-blessed Life of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who lives and reigns eternally.

Amen.
A LETTER to a Lord at Court, who would have persuaded him to turn Catholic.
MY LORD,
SInce the Care you are pleased to have of me in all my Concerns, extends it
self even to the Salvation of my Soul, I humbly beg your Lordships leave to
give you my Opinion on this Subject; and 'twould be an extreme Pleasure to me,
was it not contrary to yours. It Is not without Astonishment that I have
observed in the World so many different Religions, which are all maintained by
their Patrons, with an equal Positiveness, one believing he has as much Reason
on his side as the other. But 'twas yet greater Amazement to me, to see that
God does so manifestly make himself known to men that will not listen to him,
and who are so obdurate, not to meditate either on what they hear or read, and
perceive not what they even see. I can hardly look on those without Contempt,
or Indignation, who have no Religion but from their Education, or Chance, on
whom Custom is abundantly more prevalent than Reason it self. They lazily
adhere to what they first meet with, and, betraying themselves, dread nothing
more than to know the Truth, for fear of being obliged to embrace it. I
believed then, my Lord, that to preserve our selves from these Errors, 'twas
highly necessary to have recourse to Principles; and therefore I diligently
searched the Scriptures, which are said, and with reason, to be Divinely
inspired, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and in which are found the Words of Eternal life, John
6. 68. From hence I first learned, that God would be acknowledged the sole
Author, as well as the only Object of Religion; and that he is so jealous of
his Commandments, that whoever presumes to add to, or retrench from 'em, is
guilty of Sacrilege. These Holy Oracles, by so many evident Proofs, confirm the
Faith of the Gospel, and the Truth of Christianity, that it is impossible for
any one, unless stupid, or hardened in Wickedness, to doubt of 'em. The best
things that have been said by Philosophers are here urged, with more Power and
Efficacy; There is nothing wanting in 'em, either for regulating our Manners,
or the Worship of God, or the Comfort of our Souls. But in these we find not
any of those new words, which 'twas necessary to invent to express their new
Doctrines. These acquaint us with what is sufficient to know of our Sovereign
Good, and what they declare not, was not necessary to be said. We must not
imagine that they are to be interpreted as we please. They are sufficiently
explained by themselves, to be understood by those who sincerely desire it, and
perfectly to inform 'em of what true Christians ought not to be ignorant of. If
the Mysteries in 'em are obscure, the Precepts are clear, but neither the
Darkness of the one, or the Clearness of the other, allow men to contribute any
thing to 'em, but their Obedience. I read 'em then, My Lord, not out of bare
Curiosity, with design to contradict 'em, or that I may be looked on as more
learned by it; but that I may enjoy the Comforts of this present Life, and
acquaint my self with those of a future. I dispute not of Grace, but earnestly
ask it. I dive not into the Secret of Predestination, but I look after, and
endeavor all possible ways to find my self concerned in it. I don't believe
that God is obliged to give me an Account of what he is pleased to do from his
Justice or his Mercy. All these nice Questions belong to the Great Doctors of
the Age, who allow themselves this Privilege; who so much abound in their own
Sense, and who are so full of Pride and Presumption, that they will not humble
themselves even at the Voice of the Almighty; to which, would they yield that
respect and Submission as they ought, was of it self alone, sufficient to
reconcile all the Differences of the World.

The Impressions which the Word of God makes on those who read it with Care and
Attention, do enlighten 'em to distinguish between the true Religion and the
false, and to reject all those Traditions which are not coherent with its
Doctrine, or confirmed by its Authority. Who doubts but that the Primitive
Christians, the more calmly to introduce themselves in the World, have been
forced to allow of many things, which have been made use of as degrees to
Superstition, and which at length have been established as inviolable Laws? Men
have been always vain in their imaginations; have sought out many inventions,
Eccl. 7. 29. and I know not by what Science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
have framed to themselves some fantastic Chimera's and Notions, which they
have placed in the room of Truth. They cannot relish the wholesome Doctrine,
they desire something to please the eye, they entertain themselves with
colors, and sounds, or with some mysterious Appearances, the subject of their
Admiration and Amazement. The plainness of the Gospel suits well with their
temper; they are so far from following the steps of our Savior, to go forth
from the Camp bearing his Reproach, Heb. 13. 13. that they will admit of no
Religion, but what is glorious and splendid, and consequently of none but what
^s conformable to the Kingdom of this World. They have their Religious men, and
what is worse, Women too, who look askew on those that believe not as they do,
and who on the credit of some Impostor, or on the testimony of one Party alone,
condemn the other to forfeit all his Happiness. They often put me in mind of
those honorable Women who did so persecute those two Apostles, St. Paul and
St. Barnabas, and were never at ease till they had forced 'em out of Antioch.
Observe then, How not only vain and useless Devotion is, but pernicious too,
when it is not inspired by the Spirit of Discretion, or the Knowledge of the
Truth. Many of 'em impose on themselves Laws which God never instituted, and
are as those concerning which it is said, Who has required this at your hands?
Isa. 1. 12. From hence have the People been corrupted, become Superstitious,
and from Superstition proceeded to Idolatry. It Is from hence so many Judgments
remain yet amongst us, from hence is God's Anger kindled against men; from
hence are they provoked one against another; and to complete their misery, it is
from hence they rather harden their hearts than strive to reform 'em.

For my part, my Lord, I join with those who constantly adhere to the
Scriptures* who turn not from 'em either to the right hand, or to the left, who
exhort us to the reading of 'em, and who desire their Sermons may be tried by
this Touchstone. When we see 'em deal thus fairly, I cannot doubt but that
their Calling is lawful, and that they make a part of the Universal Church. But
I beware, as much as it is possible for me, of the Leaven of the Pharisees of
the Age, who would have the Ordinances of men be equal to those of Divine
Institution, whose Religion is but a Pretense to make 'em the more easily
procure what their Ambition or Avarice prompt 'em to. I confess I cannot but
wonder that they reflect not on those words of Jesus Christ; But in vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9.
and that they believe not that many, even when they design to Honor, displease
him. Who are these men? Not Kings, Nobles, or Magistrates, that are entrusted
with the management of Temporal things; it must be those then who are charged
with the government of Spiritual ones, who abusing the credulity of the People,
and the name of God himself, make themselves obeyed even as God. I am amazed
that what he says in another place so expressly against the Wise and Learned men
of the World, does not terrify 'em, and oblige 'em to quit their own Doctrine.
But they think so arrogantly of themselves, that they look on those with pity,
not to say rage, who dare contradict 'em, or in the least doubt of their
Infallibility. Yet, as a just punishment on 'em, they are so blinded, as to be
ignorant of, and suffer others to be so too, what it has pleased God to reveal
unto Babes, Matthew. 11. 25. to the confounding of the greatest part of the
Mighty, of the Noble, and the Learned themselves, 1 Cor. 1. 26. All sorts of
Reason teaches us, that he spoke only to be understood, that he caused his Word
to be written that it might be read, and hid it not but from those who are
lost. If he condemns a wilful and brutish Ignorance, he disapproves of a
haughty and vain Knowledge, the Spring from whence arise so many Disputes,
which do infinitely more hurt than good, and which maintain not so much the
Truth, as the first received Opinion. He believes, He follows Christ who
persecutes him; He believes himself of the number of the Faithful, whose whole
Faith consists but in an indiscreet Zeal, in the strength of Error, and in
being positive and obdurate. The men of the Age acquaint not themselves with
this Truth, or if they do, it is from those of their own party, who confirm 'em
in their belief, and neither the one or the other allow of any Religion which
agrees not with their Conveniences. If any of 'em have a sense of their
Disease, it is agreeable to 'em, they take such pleasure in it, that they will not
endeavor after any cure. But to conclude all, I will maintain, that men have
no surer sign of their Election, than their love of the Word of God; and that
those shall not be saved who have not loved it more than Honor, Riches, and
the most amiable things in the World.

A LETTER to an Officer of the Crown that often discoursed to him of Religion.
MY LORD,
WHEN Your Lordship does me the Honor to discourse to me of Religion, my
Respect will not give me leave to answer you, but only to listen to you: yet,
if I am longer silent, I fear you may judge me insensible of what I have the
most lively Sense. It Is this makes me take the Confidence of entertaining Your
Lordship with a few Lines concerning my Belief, and not without wonder, that
others are not of the same Opinion with me. As soon as my Sense and Reason
began to be serviceable to me, I with great Care and Diligence searched the
Holy Scriptures; and I have no other Religion but what I learned from thence. I
never believed that some dark and abstruse Passages were contrary to others
that were clear and evident; and I have found most of 'em sufficiently plain,
fully to inform me of what I ought to believe. I never thought that God would
speak to his Children only to deceive 'em, or not to be understood by 'em.
Those who have good Inclinations, never read the Scriptures but they profit by
'em. If those whom Curiosity (it may be) has invited once to read 'em, don't
continually persevere in doing so, it is a shrewd Sign, they have had no
Operation on 'em. It Is not the meek or humble, the plain men of the World, or
even the ignorant, that promote Heresies; those who do this, and then maintain
'em, must be both malicious and learned too. 'Twas no disheartening to me to
see the true Professors of the Gospel bear a certain Character that made the
World despise 'em, and they the World. They are dejected, as if out of their
Element, and did but out of Complaisance participate of others Joys. Above all,
in the Exercise of their Religion, they abhor all manner of Superstition, and
believe that it is an Abuse and a high Crime, to mix the Inventions of men with
the Ordinances of God. If our good Intentions were capable of making our Vows
and Offerings equally acceptable, all Religions would be good ones: But, the
Jealousy of the Eternal, Exodus 20. 5. will not suffer us to profane holy
Things, or sanctify profane ones; or, to speak yet more fully, to consecrate
Sacriledges. Let the most rational men read and read again the Scriptures, and
let 'em frame a Religion according to the Rules they prescribe, without
presuming beyond what is written, 1 Cor. 4 6. and I am confident, they cannot
make any other than that which I profess, and, by the Grace of God, will do the
same all my Life.

A LETTER to Monsieur de la Militiere, who begged his Opinion in Writing, upon
the Books of Controversy he had made.
SIR,
I Don't pretend to answer in one Letter, so many Books which your Revolt has
occasioned you to write in Opposition to that Religion you have forsaken, and
in the Defense of that you have closed with. I must only say, I could never,
with all the Sense and Reason Heaven has been pleased to bestow on me,
reconcile what I see in the Church of Rome, to what I read in the Holy
Scriptures. I have ever consulted both Parties, I have read the Writings both
of the one and the other, that I might the better know 'em by their Words and
their Actions. But, I find that your Doctors serve themselves of too much Art
and Cunning, to be believed; their Divinity is so refined, that they undo
themselves by their own Subtilty. They mix with it I know not what Leaven, of
which our Savior bids us beware, and which indeed has not the taste of true
Bread, or the heavenly Manna. Those of the Reformed Religion, on the contrary,
act with greater Sincerity, adhere to the Rule of the Scriptures, which do more
enlighten our Understandings, and give greater Tranquillity to our Minds.

Let who please imagine he has clearer Illuminations than I have, such as I
have, I find in their Doctrine as full Satisfaction as a reasonable Soul can
wish for in the Search of the Truth. Why then all this Controversy? If we have
never so little Knowledge of the Will of God, or how jealous he is of his
Commandments, we cannot see the Church of Rome without condemning it. We are
extremely in the Wrong, to call those Christians, who have no sign of true
Christianity, who speak not in the style of Jesus Christ or the Gospel, to whom
the Words of Eternal Life are strange and uncouth. If we mistake any one Word
in their Hearing, it is enough to make us pronounced Heretics; they look a skew
on us, and it is very likely, we shall pass for Strangers even in our own
Country. Instead of this, they discourse only of the Prayer Book of our Lady,
and the Office of the Blessed Virgin, of their praying by Beads, of their
devoting themselves to St. Francis, or St. Roch; and those defective
Instructions show that those who instruct them thus must needs be very bad
Masters. What, Sir, would you have me go, and whither would you have me go? Can
I look on those People without Pity, who know not what they say when they
either pray or sing? But, above all, Can I see so many poor miserable Women,
who have never done, and who believe God is only pleased with Numbers and
Repetitions? Can I, without Horror, take Notice of their Beads and Altars,
dedicated to any other than the Holy of Holies, where the Creature is placed in
the Room of the Creator? Can I see on the high Altar that which is called the
Blessed Sacrament, an ineffectual Object, an insignificant Sign, Bread which is
neither broke, given, or received by any one; that represents neither the
breaking of the Body, or the shedding of the Blood of Jesus Christ, and which
is nothing less than the Sacrament? Would you have me go every day to observe
sacrificing Priests that cannot tell you themselves what they sacrifice, and of
the Supper of the Lord, make a Show only? Sometimes, they speak with a loud
Voice, and yet not to be understood; and sometimes so foftly, and pronounce
such Mysterious and Sacred Words, that it is not permitted to those who are by,
though never so devout, to hear what is said, lest they profane it. They turn to
the right hand and to the left, in Imitation of what the Heathens called
Vertigines, and from whence, they expect to procure some efficacious and
admirable Virtue. This is the highest pitch of Superstition; They elevate what
they hold in their hands, to make it adored; to which, they attribute the Names
of God, of the Host, of the Body of our Lord, and of the Sacrament; and all
these, if we may believe them, are consistent together, without any
Contradiction. Sure these Men must be of a very easy Belief, to imagine, that
that which they make with their own hands, and which they consecrate, should be
made the God who made them* Then not considering that the Supper ought to be a
common Meal, and therefore must have Company at it, or without having
Consideration of that Passage, which says, Stay one for another, the Priest,
for the most part, eats alone, and sometimes, gives it only to some particular
Person; which, from Abuse and Custom, they forbear not to call the Communion.
What is yet worse, the taking away of the Cup; which cannot, upon any Account,
more at one time than another, be justified, and that evident Reason of it is
Concomitancy, tacitly accuse our Savior of not having well thought what he
did, do correct, or rather violate his Ordinance, and so add Sacrilege to
Blasphemy. Moreover, those who have but an ordinary Tincture of Humane
Learning, very well know from what Invention, from what Source have flowed
their Holy Waters, some fixed, others running, or carried about. Their
Ensigns, their lighted Tapers at Noonday, their Images of Saints, I had
almost said Gods. To conclude, all their Feasts, their Processions, their shorn
crowned Heads, their pontifical Ornaments, their pompous Ceremonies, that make
the Cross of Jesus Christ of no effect, do sufficiently of themselves prove,
that they preserve nothing of the Plainness or Simplicity of the Gospel. The
principal Heads of the Church of Rome (in this truly Universal) have been
afraid to omit any one single Act of the Religions of this World, as if God
needed to borrow even from his Enemies, new Inventions, or other Methods to
procure greater Honor to himself. Thus Paganism is not quite abolished, and we
may say, that there are yet such Remains of Superstition and Idolatry, that the
Heathens even now do triumph, in some Measure, over the Christians. Here we
find nothing pure or complete, nothing that bears any Marks of the first
Institution, every thing is changed and corrupted; and, to use their own terms,
there seems to have been in all things, a universal Transubstantiation. But,
what would become of the Mystery of Iniquity, that was set on Work from the
time of St. Paul. 2 Thess^. 7. and by what would Believers know it, if it had
not the Marks of Infidels? All these Alterations have come to pass for the
Promotion of that Kingdom, or rather that King, who advances himself above all
others, and who only use the Name of God to authorize his own Laws against
those of God himself.

It Is with the Head of this Church as with the Church he governs; it is but
warily observing him, and we may be undeceived. He is elected only by political
Intrigues and Briberies, and his Government is but a Trade; for, under it Sins
are taxed, and Pardons to be sold. He sets himself up as the absolute Judge of
Divine, as well as Humane things, of the Living as the Dead, and disposes even
as he pleases, of our very Souls, sending some to Hell, and others to Paradise*
He bestows on some Ecclesiastics in great Employments, Titles of Vanity and
Pride, and canonizes only such who defend his Tyranny and Usurpation. What a
Successor is this of St. Peter? How does he imitate Jesus Christ? What a Vicar
is he, to subvert all the Orders of his Lord, and who turns his Poverty, his
Humility, and Sufferings, into Riches, Pomp; and Pleasures? Yet, he has the
Multitude on his side, the Arm of Flesh; and for a Time, he is even empowered
to contend against the Saints and overcome 'em. These are Ills scarce to be
remedied, because esteemed Virtues, and in which, many find all the
Conveniences imaginable. With these, are Hypocrites, the Ambitious and
Covetous, pleased, and all such who are biased by Interest. These are
agreeable to the timorous, the weak, the brutish, the stupid, and to all those
who are hardened by Custom. The Antiquity of these Errors is sufficient to make
'em valued as Sacred Laws, in the Opinion of the Vulgar. Even many of the
Fathers, by suiting themselves too much to the present time, and not
foreseeing what might come to pass, have confirmed 'em by conniving at 'em. To
cite their Testimony on this Account, is not to defend our own Cause, but
accuse theirs, it is to have Recourse to Authority for want of Reason. They
themselves ow^ that they are not infallible, and in this matter, that their
best Thoughts are very imperfect, if not altogether consonant to the Scripture.
The Doctrine of the true Church is purely Canonical and Divine, and not to be
authorized by that which is not so. These famous Preachers, which you desire so
much I should hear, are Accessories to all these Abuses, and deal very
unfairly, unless they undeceive the People. There is no Religion but may be
eloquently discours^; nay, there are those which preach up Mo^y admirably well,
but we may say of Eloquence, as of Beauty, that it is a gift of Heaven, bestowed
as well on the Wicked as the Good. The Business of the greatest part of 'em is
indeed to set forth themselves, and to procure some spiritual Preferments which
now exceed the Secular. Is it to preach Jesus Christ, to conceal the ^ost
important and chief part of his Commands? They freely enlarge themselves in
discoursing on the Precepts of the Second Table, but fear nothing more than
saying the least that can be on the First, which does alone sanctify all our
Devotion, and without which, it is impossible to please God. Instead of
exhorting their Hearers to read the Scriptures, they do all that lies in their
Power to make 'em mistrusted, sometimes accusing 'em of being imperfect, and at
others, of Obscurity. As if God, the sole Author of Religion, had commanded us
to do our Duties but by halfs, and had spoke to us that he might not be
understood. Sure, Sir, those who talk at this Rate, do but deride their
Hearers, and have not a mind to be believed. For my part, I am so much
persuaded, that what is evident and clear in the Word of God, is sufficient
fully to inform me in the Methods of Salvation, that I boldly declare, if I
cannot attain it by these, I will not endeavor after it. In a few Words, I
adhere with all my Heart to the Creed, I am obedient, as far as it is possible
for me, to the Ten Commandments, I pray as our Savior himself has taught me,
and receive the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper after that manner
which he himself has instituted 'em. This being the Summary, not only of the
Law but of Faith also, a Collection of the very Life of the Scriptures, to be
of this Belief, and to assemble our selves with those who make the same
Profession, is indeed to be in the Church.

A LETTER to a Lady who endeavored to prevail on him to go hear some of the
Famous Preachers of the Roman Church.
YOU have often pressed me, Stephanie, to go hear the most excellent, at least
such who are most esteemed amongst your Preachers: And you now oblige me to
tell you what I wish I could pass by in silence. But your absolute commands are
laid on me to give you my judgment of 'em, and I shall then have done it, when
I have assured you only that I find in 'em what has been foretold of 'em, That
their Discourses would be florid and sublime; That they would publish great and
wonderful Things. But I foresaw that this would not satisfy you, and that it
was necessary for me to deliver my Opinion yet more fully, although absolutely
contrary to yours. I must freely confess to you, that I never go into your
Churches without doing violence to my self, or indeed being out of my Element:
For, since I cannot join with 'em in their Religious Exercises, I cannot be
there without giving or receiving some sort of Scandal. First, I consider the
Place, and the Persons, and the sight of each of 'em is equally offensive to
me. I observe those who sing, or who pray, to have little or no Understanding,
and whose Stupidity is a just Punishment on 'em for their blind Obedience to
the Commandments of men, and for that religious Veneration they pay to Images,
which are exalted where God alone ought to be worshipped. It Is not at all
pleasing to me to see the Preacher in his Surplice or Rocket, whiter than Snow,
bordered with a rich Lace, starched, stiffen'd, and so set out, that he has
much ado to go from one side of the Pulpit to the other. These things, without
doubt, preach already to those who will understand. They have all their meaning
and Signification. The very Habit of the Bishop, is a complication of
Mysteries, and is not one of the shortest Lectures of the Schools. It Is, it may
be, the better to represent the Disgrace and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, and to
show, that the Servant is not greater than the Master. When I observe any of
'em thus splendidly attired, I say to my self, Nothing will come from him but
what is like him; and I expect such, and not fewer Flowers than the Poets have
bestowed on their fabulous Aurora. It Is true, some of 'em do not thus
externally adorn themselves, as not suiting with their courser Russets, or
their Vows of Poverty, which will not allow 'em to wear such gay things,
however Sacred they may be. Yet, this Vow seldom reaches beyond the Garb, and
the Language of Capuchins and Recolets, is not less Rhetorical than that of
Bishops and Abbots. However, they all begin after the same manner, by making a
Sign of a Cross, of Humane and Superstitious Invention, which they
presumptuously apply to the three Persons of the Godhead; by which, as I
believe, they pretend to draw a Blessing on themselves and their Preaching. By
a like Abuse, they name their Text in Latin, the Repetition of which, many of
'em affect in the several parts of their Sermons. And I cannot imagine, why
they set a greater Value on the Ancient Language of Popes, than on that of
Jesus Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, in which, things were at first writ or
declared. This is but a false Luster, by which they make their Discourses more
florid, since they are presently forced to pronounce it in a known Tongue, and
to explain it. It Is but a strange Noise with which they would surprise the
People, and make that pass for some great Mystery, which is indeed but a
ridiculous Superfluity. Then do they begin with a Preface, not less artificial,
mysterious, or allegorial than the rest, as a Pattern of what follows, which
they be sure fail not to consecrate with an Ave-Maria. Here I find my self
extremely disturbed; I who believe all Religious Worship ought to be terminated
in the alone Persons of the Trinity, and that that Honor which is due to them,
ought not to be given to any one besides. If the Blessed Virgin does take
notice of 'em, and hear what they say, it is not to be questioned, but that she
is highly offended at 'em, and that the greatest kindness they can receive from
Her is this, that she says, after the Example of her Son, Pardon them, O Lord,
they know not what they do, Luke 23. v. 34. and that it is answered. These are
the wilfully ignorant; who ought to know it, and who deserve to be thus
hardened, since they are more careful in the observation of Traditions, than
the Scriptures. As to the Preaching in general, both of the one and the other,
though the Matter and Form of it may differ, yet they all agree in their first
ill Principle, and set it out with the Name of a Church, which is so very
convenient for 'em, that they can by no means quit it. Doubt not, Stephanie,
but that I have with attention heard these famous Preachers, who are followed
by so many, who are admired by the Nobility, and approved of by the Learned
themselves. I have indeed found that they had knowledge and eloquence, and many
other natural Gifts which indifferently happen to the Bad men of the World, as
well as the Good. Nay, I have observed in the Faces of some the marks of
Holiness, whose Discourse was ready to have deceived me, and possessed me with
a good Opinion of their Belief, if, either a little before, or presently after,
I had not discovered their being, as it were, poisoned with unhappy Traditions,
that did not at all savor of the Purity of the Gospel. These Wise men have put
me often in mind of those Fools, who after having for some time discoursed very
seriously, could not forbear returning to their first Folly. Here is I know not
what mixture of good and bad things, I know not what Mysteries, of which they
have some sort of Conception, but cannot express. Here are discovered those
Tares the Devil sowed in the Church, that Leaven of the Pharisees, the poison
of Humane Inventions, which make us now say, what the Sons of the Prophets did
in the time of Elisha, There is Death in the Pot, 2 Kings 4. v. 40. They all
equally betray God's Cause, their designs being only to preach up themselves;
and proceeding from a wilful Blindness, to the efficacy of Error, at length
come to believe what they endeavor to make others do. They pretend truly to
preach Jesus Christ crucified, that it may be said they preach him, that his
Name may be made use of to their praise, and set a greater Reputation on their
Sermons. But they plainly demonstrate they do not absolutely believe in Him,
since after this they fail not to preach up a St. Fraencis, a St. Dominic, to
whom they attribute as much Power, and as many Miracles, as to Jesus Christ
himself. The highest Points of their Divinity are grounded more on Aristotle
than St. Paul, and these mighty Defenders of the Christian Faith have no
greater Masters than Pagans and Infidels: They make by their Discourses the
Simplicity of the Gospel pompous, and disguise all Plainness and Sincerity, so
that when I have well observed em, they always appeared to me such as Hucksters
and Mountebanks, which corrupt the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. But if this
Comparison seems too injurious to 'em, and that you desire one more favorable
and lofty; I must tell you that I place 'em amongst Angels, but those who bear
the name of Wormwood, who make the Waters bitter, and destroy a great part of
the World, I place 'em amongst those who are permitted to do Miracles, to shake
the Powers of Heaven, to make the Stars fall from it, to tempt, to seduce, to
perplex, as much as it is possible for 'em, the very Elect. We have had so many
warnings of these things, as if they came to pass only to make good the
Scripture that has foretold 'em. This is the true Lamp that directs us in the
Discovery of Satan's Character, amidst so much Brightness they borrow to dazzle
us. If we do hear any thing that is pure and holy from 'em, their false
applying of it, and those subalternate ends they serve by it, does presently
make their Design plain; all their seeming Reality does not prevent our easy
perception of the Mystery of Iniquity. I don't mean those whom you your self
approve not of, whose Words and Actions are so light and extravagant, that
their Business seems to be rather the entertaining of their Hearers with some
pleasant, diverting Discourse, than the correcting, or instructing of 'em; who
rather act the part of Comedians, than seriously do that of Preachers. I don't
mean such who spend their time in Conversation with the Ladies, who run from
House to House so much the more eagerly, since what they are commanded by God,
to be Husbands of one Wise is looked on as a Crime by 'em, and therefore the
more strictly forbid by men. There are none set their Affections more on
Secular things than these Churchmen, nor any those of this World more than
they who pretend to abandon it.

I know very well, that Bishops are advised to be free and familiar with those
they have the Care of; this heretofore signified, that they should entertain
'em kindly, visit 'em upon Occasion, exhort and comfort 'em. But, now the
meaning of it is, That they must play with some, hunt with others, treat
splendidly, and keep a Noble Table. In these things, the Revenue of so many
rich Bishoprics is employed, and seem to be bestowed on many of 'em, that they
may the better be enabled to live at Court, whilst their Flocks know no one so
little as their Pastor. Must that which is the Art of all Arts, the Cure of
Souls, the Administration of holy Things, be now the Profession of the
Ambitious, the Prodigal, the Covetous, and such who addict themselves to
Pleasures. What Edification can we expect from such who aim at nothing but
their own Advantage, and preach only, that by that they may rise to these high
Preferments they so earnestly covet. The passionate Desire by which you so
frequently urge me to hear these men, puts me in mind of that great Zeal the
Wives of Solomon had for their false Gods, and who were never quiet till they
had prevailed on him to consent to their Idolatry. You would have me submit my
Judgment to that of such numbers of honest men, who both approve of, and follow
'em; not considering, that the true Ministers of the Gospel meet not with so
much favor from the Princes of the People, or the Multitude. No, no, their
sincere and plain Profession allows 'em not to procure so much the Approbation
of the World; they stick firmly to the true Rule; they expound the Scriptures
by themselves; they intrude not on things they have not seen; and, as the
Prophets and Apostles, deliver not what they have not received. You here see,
Stephanie, what a too fond Opinion of your own Belief, a no less violent than
superstitious Piety, common to the devout Zealous Women of the Times, have
provoked you to make me say. It Is too short an Answer, in Comparison of what I
could have returned, and it may be longer than what you desired to have had;
But, if you cannot consent to my Opinion, be so kind at least, to approve of my
Obedience, who assure you that I am

FINIS.

