MEDITATIONS UPON Mr Baxter's Review of His Treatise of the Duty of HEAVENLY
MEDITATION. IN Answer to the Exceptions of GILES FIRMIN, Against some things in
that Treatise concerning MEDITATION.

PUBLISHED ^^r the satisfaction of many sincere Christians, troubled at their
inability to perform that Duty as the said Author (and some others with him)
have described it and charged it.

By GILES FIRMIN.

Printed in the Year 1672.

Meditations upon the Christian Duty of Meditation.
THat Gospel-Conversion, and Gospel-Co^versation are not things so easy as
carnal-gospellers take them to be, the daily experience of sincere converts, do
sufficiently testify. To make these more easy than God has made them, is
very dange^es, and of destructive consequence to the souls of men. To make ^^m
more difficult than God has made them, is to lay a block in the ^ay of the
unconverted, and very injurious to the really converted. So ^^ce it is, what
Calvin says in another case. Valde periculosum est auctio^laqueos induere
conscientiis, quam quibus Verb^ Dei stringantur.

Whither some holy men, whose names are very precious in the ^^rch of Christ,
have not exceeded in the latter, I did in my Treatise the Real-Christian, with
honorable respects to their names, soberly ^^sider, and I thought I might do
it without any offense. For shall we ^^r serious Christians, that were in
earnest for Heaven, and proving of ^^mselves, very sadly concluding against
their regeneration, because ^^y have not experienced such works, as such holy
men have Preached (...) Printed must be in true converts; and others crying
out, if this be (...) Duty that God requires, which such an eminent man, with
earnest^^ of spirit calls for, then we must never come in Heaven, and shall
(...) not have the liberty, with the men of Berea to examine these things the
Scriptures, whether they agree with them or no?

Object. It may be you will say, you should have concealed their names.

Ans. This is the Objection of those who never ^ound that trouble (...) these
points, which others have done: and possibly because they ^^ot read the books
with that application to their own hearts, which ^^y ought to do. Let such hold
their peace. For others who have ^^d the trouble, they will say, if I had left
out their Names, I had left (...) the strongest argument. For they being men as
of eminent parts and (...), so of very high esteem with Christians. It was
their Names that (...) Authority to their Doctrines, and caused that trouble to
diverse se^es Christians. For my part, had I met with such things in the works
some other men, I could as easily have passed them over, as I do that ^perate
[I know not what else to call it] Divinity, which I meet with ^ame young men's
books, put forth in the heat of their affections: but these being men so
eminent, and all of them [except holy Mr. Perkins, dead before my time] known
unto me, the high esteem I beat unto their names, made me to consider my self,
and see whether in those particulars, they spoke as God spoke; for if so; not
only my self, but the greatest number of those who go for sound Christians [a
hundred for one] must all begin again.

Besides I could not well tell how to referr my Reader to the Pages of a book,
or give him my reply to a Letter written to me as an answer to what I had
objected against such a point in the book, without the nameing of the Authors,
But were all men's names treated with that honor I have done theirs, I think
there would be no complaint.

Obj. Why did you not write while they were living.

Answ. 1. While they lived, I was but a novice in the study of Divinity as a
Minister. 2. I did write to Mr. Shephard, and give you an account of it. 3. I
found after their death, more experience of the trouble those points had
caused. 4. I know they have successors, able to answer, if Christ and his
Apostles did so Preach.

Toward the close of my book, I touched upon Meditation, which I saw by a
person of eminent abilities, was driven to such a height, made so difficult,
and yet charged with such vehemence, that many setious Christians, being not
able to come near it, were rather scared and discouraged, then drawn unto their
Duty. The question therefore I discussed was this.

Qu. Whether every day, as duly as we Pray; so we must set a part one hour, or
half an hour for the duty of Meditation: and more especially in meditating of
the joys of Heaven: and making it for that time our whole work, and intermix
other matters with it no more, then we would do with Prayer?

Who was the Author, I mentioned not so much as one Letter of his name, but
only that a Learned and Reverend Author had delivered it. Mr. Baxter takes
himself to be that Learned and Reverend Author meant, and vindicates himself,
his Book, I saw not till August 1671. I drew up my reply to it, so soon as I
saw it, but was not determin^d to publish it till now: which I am the more
enduced to, from the consideration of the great complaints I have heard
Christians make against themselves about this duty of Meditation, especially
upon their hearing of some men's Sermons, and reading some books upon it. If God
requires that Duty of us, said some, as Mr. Baxter does, we must not go to
Heaven. Another Reverend Divine I see requiring at least half an hour, for
young beginners, and one hour for others: another giving twenty heads in the
explication of the Duty, being requesite to the right performance of the Duty,
I presume these heads will require meditation also, and thus we shall make the
Duty difficulty indeed, at last. I very much honor the gifts and graces of
these worthy men. But when I considered the Chri^^unt who complain they cannot
come up to these men, I observed they were warm in their work [not the lazy
sort of Professors] of good un^erstanding in the things of God: serious
attenders upon all the Ordi^ances of God, in public, private, and kept their
communion with God insecret Prayer, and Reading. Savoury and Spititual in their
conversati^^ beautified their Profession: walked humbly and beleivingly with
God, yea very submissively, under afflicting Providence; very busy about
cleating out their state, etc. I thought with my self, can all these things be
done without Meditation? I know they cannot be, what then is the matter of
their trouble? They cannot fix their thoughts, especially for an hour, or half
hour, upon one spiritual object, without other thoughts intermixing, which is
the meditation these worthy men call for.

The question then is not, whither Meditation be a Christian Duty, I said
enough for that in my Treatise, and only add. I will as soon believe a man can
be a true Chriflian without meditation, as without Prayer. But the question is
of meditation, as it is stated in the question; whether that be the duty which
God commands his people? That Mr. Bax. has charged it as the Duty, and that of
persons of the meanest capacity, Page Edition 4th.
2^1. where he sums up all his large discourse about meditation, is very
plain. I shall come to it presently.

It is very true, when I read with what earnestness you press the Duty, [your
own words, p. 146. Edit. 4th.] I called for the Scripture, to p^ove the Duty
[as you had described it and pressed it] to be the command of God. You had
charged the Conscience of your Reader with it, p. 251. I hope you will not bind
the Conscience but by Scripture. This is that ^^fect Law 19. Psalm. 7. This is,
Able to make the man of God perfect. 2. Tim. 3.16.17. If I charge Duty toward
God upon a Christian, I will not go first to my Reason to prove it: but if the
Scriptures will not surnish me sufficiently, and make me perfect, for my proof,
the Duty being either expressly mentioned in the true Sense I hope sir, Veroniu^
with his verbotim and I am agreed, you might have spared your Author I read him
long since.
of the Scripture, or deduced by necessary and infallible conscequence I hope
sir, Veroniu^ with his verbotim and I am agreed, you might have spared your
Author I read him long since.
from-Scripture, I will cease charging such a Duty upon Christians. If the
Scripture speak it, I am ^^e there is Reason but my Reason will not always
prove Scripture-rea (...), I observe what you say p. 12. of the Light of
Nature, the Law of Nature. But Sir, neither your Reasons nor my Reasons will
prove a Duty as the Law of Nature will do. Men differ much in their Reasons.
Quot Capita, etc

To take a clearer view of your Book, I will draw it into this method, I will
consider 1. The Subject of meditation. 2. The Object of meditation. 3. The Time
of meditation. 4. Intermixed thoughts in meditation. 5. Methodical-meditation.


These are the things I find in your book, about which our apprehensions differ
something, but I hope in the conclusion will agree.

As for that accurate method in the Lords Prayer, unto which method we are so
bound, that if we observe it not, we sin, p. 9.29. I understand it not,
therefore I admire it, and can say nothing to it, but I dare say there will be
a sin brought to light, which the world never heard of before.

First then for the Subject, the Persons who are bound to meditate. I read, p.
8. you charge me with Unrighteous dealing, that I had carried it, as if you had
made that manner [of meditation stated in the Question] to be all men's, or most
men's Duty. And below in the same page thus You see I make it not so much as a
Duty to any that have not Ability and convenience. That, p. 4.5.6. you had said
this will not prove every man's Duty, Servants, Poor, the children of poor and
carnal Parents are exempted.

Hold a little I pray Sir, what do you mean by Ability? for I find none
exempted, but melancholy persons, and some weak headed women, p. 28. I suppose
you exempt these upon that score: but I am confident we shall find thousands of
sincere Christians besides such, that are unable to hold their thoughts fixed
to one Heavenly object, for one hour, or half hour, without other thoughts
intermixed, as you have charged them.

^.What is the reason Sir, that in this Treatise against me, you have put in
Ability seven times, and not once, in your large discourse about it, that I can
find, pardon me if it be, it slips my eye. I looked for it narrowly where you
sum up all, and there you take notice of Convenience, for the poor man, and
servant, but not of Ability. Had you there mentioned it once, and given a fair
interpretation of it, I question whether you had ever read a line of mine about
it.

But do you indeed not make it the Duty of most men, nor of any that have not
Ability, etc? then why does my good Brother charge me with so horrible a crime
in the next page 9. I like not the reducing the Rule, to our impotent sinful
natures, nor to our crooked Lives. Truly Sir, no more do I, for it is a great
sin. But,

1. If this be not a Duty to most men, not to any unable, etc, as you say, [and
it is the case of thousands of sincere Christians Unable to come ^^p to your
Rate, that I plead] then there is no Rule to such, if there be a ^^le to such,
then I am sure it is their Duty. How then do I reduce Gods Rule to our sinful
Natures, when there is no Rule at all?

2. If Gods Rule does impose the duty as you do, why then did you (...) direct
me to that Rule, when I called for Scripture, to prove the-Du^^ as you imposed
it to be Gods Command: but instead of Scripture, you ^re me your reason. Before
I would have charged my Brother with such (...) sin, I think I were bound, both
as Minister and Christian, to have gi^^n him clear Scripture proof for the
point I had asserted, which he ^^estioned for want of Scripture proof, and
which he called for, but this you are far from. True Sir, you do bring one
Scripture to prove what (...) never in the question: and another to prove
something in the que^ion; how aptly, I will examine both in their place: But
still the main ^^ess or pinch of the question is left destitute of Scripture;
yet thus you are charged me.

To say you brought it as an Argument against me, yea Sir, if you did (...)
leave out the Principal ve^^, or rather, the main propositions unpro^^d, viz.
That your Rule is Gods Rule, till you have proved this, I pray (...) your
Argument into a Syllogism, and see how finely it will run.

And now Sir, for my unrighteous dealing, as to the Subject.

First, I pray how do you agree with your self? for p. 145. The Subject of
meditation.
you press not Reader, to the practice of this Duty thus. Else thou do
frustrate ^^chief design, and make me lose the chief of my labor, be who
will (...) Reader, this is your Argument, but in vain it seems to most men. p.
(...), you tell us, The want of this Duty, is the cause why men digest not,
also profit not by Sermont. For want of meditation I think so too, and ^^refore
exempt none, p. 251. you say, you bring it down to the meanest ^^q^ity, and
charge even such at the end of the Paragraph, If thou will ^^^actise it, do not
read it; I read no exemption of such in the Para^^^h. Then you set down the
Duty. The sum is this. As thou make ^^science of praying daily, so do thou
of acting of thy graces in meditation, (...) more especially in meditating of
the joys of Heaven. To this end set a ^et one hour or half an hour every day,
etc. intermix other matters no more (...) it, then you would do in Prayer. p.
153. in that you charge your Rea^^, as he makes conscience of Prayer daily, so
etc. here you put as much ^^ty upon it, as upon Prayer, and bind the conscience
to it; but I will ^ay that Prayer is not a Duty for all persons, be they poor,
servants, (...), melancholy persons, or unable, all having the use of Reason
are ^^^^d to it, but if your Reasons will serve to salve them from the Duty
(...) Meditation, they will as well from Prayer.

2. Let us consult Holy writ, which must determine you and me. The grand Text
for meditation is 1 Psalm. 2. in other Scriptures we find David putting this
Rule into practice, now this Text exempts not servants, or poor, or, most men,
but that person that will be blessed, be what he will, here is his Duty, he
must meditate in the Law of God day and night. I know no Text that warrants me
to teach such distinctions of meditation, whereof one is not the Duty of All
men or most men Another is the Duty of All men. Therefore I stated the question
according to the Scripture.

3. Though Rich men and Masters, having more time and liberty may be more
frequent in Religious duties, yet it is not the having the most time and
liberty, which will make a man Able to meditate, and to continue in the Duty:
but Ability is All in this point, and that depends.

1. I may say something upon the constitution of the body, some being of a more
volatile, some of a more fixed constitution.

2. Upon the strength of the invention being able to expatiate upon a subject,
which though but a common gift, yet is very essential to the length of
meditation which the question speaks of.

3. Upon the degree of grace infused, the more the will and affections are
sanctified, the work is the easier.

4. Upon the degree of the gracious and assisting presence of the Spirit, of
God: who being the first cause in Nature and Grace acts both the common gift of
the Invention, and the special gift of grace influencing the soul most
graciously in what degree he pleases.

Hence, a poor man ^ay be m^^^ more able to meditate then a Rich man, a Servant
more able then his Master (...) ^y women more able then many men, because the
invention the g^^ the assistance of Gods spirit, may be much more in the Poor
Servants, Women, then in the rich, master, or men. So the exemption you have
made in the Subject is groundless, for as for convenience, you tell the poor
man, and the servant, they may do it when they are about their labors, p. 252.

2. The Object of our Meditation
For the Object of meditation. It is the whole word of God. So says the Text,
1 Psalm. 2, In his Law he meditates.

There is not one particular Object which the Scripture has bound us up unto,
that upon this you must meditate every day. The varieties of Providence,
temptations, the state, condition and frame of the Soul, with several things,
make differences here, why then should we stint Christians to one object every
day; I take notice of your words p. 31: What ever else I think of, of Christ,
of Scripture, of Promises, of Threatenings, of Sin, of Grace, etc. If I leave
out Heaven and make it not the chief part of my meditation, I leave out the
sense and life of all. Thus from your example and experience, you prove that
Heavens joys and rest, must be ^e Object of our Meditation every day, and is
this sufficient I pray, to charge a Duty upon Christians in that manner you
have done?

Believe it Sir, we that are of the low form in the School, can find ^^ch
things in our Meditations upon our dear Christ, the Promises, the Scriptures,
and Grace, that could we but experience them in our hearts, ^^ would not fear
but we should find Joy upon earth abundantly, a be^^ing of Heaven, though we
do not meditate upon the joys and rest a ^^ming: and I must profess to you
again, unless I can in some good ^easure experience them, the thoughts of Rest
a coming, afford little joy ^^me.

There may be much heavenly-mindedness, though the Soul does not ^^ally
meditate upon the Joys and Rest that shall be in Heaven every ^^.

The chief and main thing an unconverted person should meditate upon is, his
sinful and miserable state he is in, out of Christ. Yet I deny not, (...) the
Joys and Rest in Heaven are an object, for the unconverted and (...) the
converted, though not assured of their conversion, to meditate ^o, so that you
might have spared your Arguments, p. 25.26.27. I ^^w not who oppose you, the
great difference you mention is none at (...).

Yet this I say again, Christians that are pressed with the sense of guilt,
(...) the continual assaults of impetuous and strong corruptions, cannot (...)
redemption applied, cannot experience the Gospel, and Christ in (...) execution
of all his offices though they seek and wait for help: These ^rislians will
have little pleasure to think of Rest and Joys in Heaven, (...) will more
increase their sorrows, for want of a title apprehended. (...) that has
nothing but an hereafter [which rather terrifies to think of] (...) satisfy
his hungry will at present, will be as well pleased as a man who ^^ngry indeed,
and you give him nothing at present to satisfy, but leave ^^ this to meditate
upon, he shall have a rich feast three Months ^^e, but till then he must fast.

Though a person be not able to fix his thoughts half a quarter of an (...)
upon one spiritual object, but his mind is moving up and down from (...)
spiritual object to another, but yet out of every object or flower he ^^ers
honey and carries it to his spiritual hive, this person does answer (...)
command as truly, as he that can keep them fixed an hour, for he still
^^ditating in the law, 1 Psalm. 2. by what Rule Ministersty up Christi^^, but to
one only object at a time in the performance of the Duty of ^^tation, I know
not.

3. Thirdly, The time of Meditation.
For the Time of meditation, your Rule says, an hour, or half an hour, and
here lay the main stress of the Question.

Sir, I have nothing to say against two three, six hours, if God has given to
others such large inventions, strength of grace, and assistance of his spirit:
but I hope it is no part of my sinful nature, to which I reduce Gods Rule, that
I have not such a large invention as Mr. Baxter has, which I must have before
I or any other can perform the Duty according to your Rule.

This is it I mislike, that where as the wisdom of God has determined no
time, we cannot rest in his wisdom, but must determine the duty to an hour, or
half hour, as you and another worthy Divines have done after you, p. 5. I see
you have quoted 1 Psalm. 2. and 119. Psalm. 97. for meditation. But Sir, those
Texts do as strongly prove that meditation must be All the day, as they prove
meditation to be a Duty, and from those Texts I will as well prove that
Meditation must be twelve hours, as you can prove it must be one hour, and add
but this also which you have charged that there be no intermixing of any other
thoughts, then we have a hard Duty indeed. But I know David did govern his
Kingdom, and his Army, and had many other thoughts, about other Objects then
spiritual. So that we must have an interpretation given of the Texts, and such
a one as I am sure must not determine hours, or half hours, or quarters. But
page 16, 17. you give me a Syllogism to prove your determination, and tell me
you will not give me a Text for the Conclusion.

Sir Syllogysms are not all on your side. But for your Syllogysme what does it
prove more then I had said before? that a Christian endeavor should be, to get
his affections wound up to a suitableness to the object he is meditating upon,
that so the end may be attained, this you acknowledge, p. 22. I had said, and
must I determine one hour or half hour for this? it may be it may cost two
hours, a man may have such woeful struggling with his corrupt heart that he
cannot get up, it may be another time a quarter, half a quarter may do, I
determine no time, my reason is, and therein I shall answer the flout you have
given me, p. 22. [I know not how to interpret it else] how happy a heart have
you that will so easily be got up, etc. O Sir, how corrupt a heart I have I
feel, but though I have not your parts, nor grace, yet I have so much
acquaintance with the ways of God, that I know the Spirit of God may and does
sometimes, give in that to a soul, in a quarter or half quarter of an hour, or
less, which may cost him several hours another time, and many Prayers, but
cannot reach it, and do you think there are none of the people of God will join
with me, in wh^^ I say?

I observe you, p. 18. while you prove the defining of the time not to ^e
presumptuous (as you term it (you put this question to me, Suppose I say (...)
the master of a family, you that have Ability, may do well yea it is your ^^y
often times [once a day, etc.] to set some time a part to speak methodi^dly to
your family: would you call for a Text to prove this duty? I will give Deuteronomy.
6.7.8. and Deuteronomy. 11. etc.

To which I answer, I observe two words in your Argument, which doubt will
prove you guilty of Sophistry. 1. Here Ability is expressed (...) required,
which was not in the Question: and of this before 2. Your ^^gument says, some
time, but the question says an hour or half hour, the (...) is determined to
one of these, but does he that says, some time, ^etermine or define any part
of time? what follows this is you know, I ^^e it not. Hold to the Question
Sir. I observe p. 23. you argue a^^^^st me from a like absurdity in a Learned
Physician, that said: What (...) all this ado in Preaching, when all is
dispatched in three words, think (...) and speak well, and do well.

But Sir, you must go on, and make your Argument full to answer ^^e, viz. that
as he said, so he did speak well, he did think well, and did well, (...) your
Argument is lame, for you confess I had said the end and effect ^ Meditation
must be attained. Page 22. If he did as he said, where was (...) absurdity? so
where is mine? Sir here is more Sophistry in your argu^^^.

1. Question you put to me p. 22. If a Christians affections be brought (...) a
suitableness to the object, and so the essence of the Duty is attained, (...)
do you regard nothing in duty but the essence? nothing at all the integri^^
degree? etc. I answer.

For integrity, where the end and effect are attained, there are all the ^^ses:
then the integrity of the duty cannot be denied: unless you will ^^end about
the Logical notion of integrum, as being Argumentum ^^m a primo, and Symbolum
effecti, as the members are Symbola cau^^, which signify nothing in this point.

1. For the Degree, the goodness of a duty does not consist so much ^^e length
of time that a person takes up in the performance of it, then ^^m that prays
three hours and preach four hours dully, be esteem^^ (...) the excellent
Preacher.

2. Why did you not put two hours or four, when you charged the (...) upon
your Reader? for this would be a higher degree then one (...), if degree was
the thing you aimed at?

3. But good Sir, let sincere Christians have first such inventions as you
(...), [which must be if the length make the degree] let them have the ^^^e
strength of grace, and assistance of the spirit. Let not him that has five
Talents and can improve them, make his improvement a Rule for him that has but
one Talent or two Talents, when these are faithful in improving two or but one.
Because they are unable to hold long, therefore they endeavor to be frequent,
and often in it, (as I said, and shall have occasion to mind you of these words
presently.)

4. If one meditate two hours, but he comes not up to the end of meditation
which he ought, another meditates one quarter of an hour, and attains the end
which is best?

I find p. 14. you make an argument against me from what I had said my self,
viz. that if a man can thus meditate ten hours, he is the happier man and had
cause to bless God. Therefore say you, it is some meant Duty.

I answer. Had you charged none with the Duty, but those who were Able to do
it, as you described it, you had said something now, and its possible I had
said nothing at all, but your discourse ran generally to your Reader, though of
the meanest capacity, and your exceptions I have before considred.

2. I shall yet deny your Consequence A man prays this day two hours,
therefore, it is his duty to pray once every day two hours, nay if it were to
charge it once a week to be his duty, having Ability and Convenience, Preach
it, or Print it who will, not I, lest when I be called to prove it, I should
say to him, I shall give no Text but a Syllogism.

3. It will not follow to be his Duty, every day thus to meditate, because that
this day he could hold out one hour in meditation, it was from the assistance
of the good spirit, that helped his invention, and acted his grace. That good
spirit is a free agent, will not give forth his assistance the next day, may be
not next week or month, in that degree which he did this day. My duty is to
pray for his assistance, but his Assistance is none of my duty. But it was that
Assistance which made the duty this day thus to be performed, and that which
makes Christians in their Duties, at one time differ so much from themselves
another time: not like themselves: I appeal to Christians whether I write false
Divinity in their experiences, we in the low form, Sir, are fain to own that
good spirit, else we find untoward work.

I find page 12. and 17. You insist much upon an Argument from Preaching one
hour [that's the Question] to Meditation one hour, and least I should deny the
consequence, saying, That Preaching is ^^e of Divine Institution then
Meditation, you say you deny it, no magis ^^minus here, etc.

I. Answer, first, I ever thought that Preaching by Office, [and I now no
Preaching properly so called, but is so] was a part of Institu^ed Worship, but
that Meditation is a part of Instituted worship, I never and any Divine that
would say it. I cannot understand that Medi^a^ion is Worship properly, when I
examine my self I m ust do it by Me^ation, But is God the immediate Object of
that Act, as I think he is ^ Worship.

2. What Sir, must we Preach as frequently as we must Medi^e? and must we
Preach day and night, and all the day, as we must ^editate?

3. Because when I Preach to a multitude, some, Atheists, Erro^s, Heretics,
others very ignorant and weak, doubtful, dead in (...), etc. Therefore I must
labor to Illighten, Convince, Confute, ^orm, and diverse things must sall in,
that I may come to the end ^^my work [if it be possible] and this will cost so
convenient time ^ not to dunt my Auditory, must I needs run over these Topics,
^^en I am in Meditation with my self? possibly when I hear a man ^^each, I
understand the point, the reasons etc. as well as himself: my (...) possibly so
convinced of the goodness of the thing, that it says, I ^^d in no need of your
Reasons to convince me, or motives to draw ^^ to consent; I consent already:
give me the thing says my will, and ^^ it not be the same at home in my
Meditation? and yet must I ^^ds require of men as much time at home in
Meditation as a Minister (...) his Preaching?

Text of Scripture you tell me you will not, [because you cannot] ^en me but
your Reasons, and what I pray are those Reasons you have ^en me as strong and
clear for one hour or half, every day in meditati^, etc. as the Law of nature
you tell me of? Let the Learned Reader ^^ge.

To conclude this Head you tell me: By all this I conjecture, that you ^^l be a
gentle censurer of Ministers that Preach short and seldom: and ^^rents that
are short and seldom in instructing their family, etc. p. 24. ^^before this p.
17. thus, If short and seldom Preaching to others be all (...) is any
Preachers duty, murmr not that you are silenced, but write to ^^isters to
spare the Bishops the labor and odium and to silence themselves, (...) their
long ^nnecessary Sermons.

I pray, Brother, what do you mean by this? I shall return no answer but let
the Reader judge of it, only as there is another charge of something like sin,
let me clear my self if I can.

Sir, had you but so much charity to have suspended your Conjecturalcensure,
till you had enquired any way, of the Parish or corner where I Preached,
whither in my practice [which is the best proof of a man's opinion] I was such a
seldom and short Preacher, I doubt not but you would have met with a loud
confutation.

2. I pray whence do you draw this conjecture? I hope from those words but five
or six lines below the words which you have transcribed in the same Paragraph.
I had been speaking of Meditation when it had attained its end, and if the end
be attained, then my words are these, If this Meditation for the time be not a
quarter of an hour, or half quarter, but often in a day [as those who are
plagued with their hearts, are put upon these meditations frequently] will not
this Meditation answer the Scripture meditation, etc.

I pray Mr. Baxter, are often frequent and seldom, Synonoma's? did not I
expressly use the words, and yet will you conclude me to be a gentle censurer [a
little softer word for a Favourer] of seldom Preaching? Sir, I leave it with
your own conscience.

For length or shortness of Preaching instruction of Families, and Prayer, etc.
they ought so to be performed, as become the Majesty of God, and may most
conduce to their end. Ordered with such prudence, that the affections of
people, servants, children, be not made dull, and discour^ged from attending
upon ordinances, through tedious and imprudent prolixity: Let the Appetite and
affections be kept up. This I am sure agrees with Scripture, 5 Eccles. 2. in
the first place, then with Reason solid and sound. This has been approved and
practiced, by holy and judicious men, I could name some of our own Divines, and
among foreign Divines there wants not proof. The Churches of Bohemia, if
credence may be given to the History of them [and why it should not I know not]
had so much Gospel-simplicity amongst their members as is not to be found, but
in few Churches. In those Churches the longest Sermon on the Sabbath, was not
above one hour, with the Ordinance of singing joined to it. It was a Law among
them, that long Sermons should be avoided, lest people should loath their
spiritual food. So Comenius tells us, Hoc potius legis instar est, ut concionum
prolixitas vitetur ad evita^^ dum in auditoribus fastidium in other exercises,
but half an hour at a time.

The Author of the book, Entitled, Sacrilegious desertion, of the holy
^^nistry rebuked [it may be Mr. Baxter knows the Authors name] page ^^. Exhorts
the Non-Conformists in some Parishes to Preach but once a ^y, telling them,
people cannot hear and digest three Sermons in a day ^^; and in the end of that
Paragraph, tells them, it is Preaching well, (...) more affects people, then
Preaching Long and Often. I am of the ^^ne opinion with this worthy Autho^, and
wish that as Satan sometimes (...) play his game, while he puts on some
Christians [especially young ^^ginners] to be often at Prayer, thereby to tire
them out; so that (...) do not play his game in that so often Preaching, in the
great City, ^^d other places, many Hearers at last proving no other then
Glutted ^^malists: But shall I say of this Author, what a frien^ is he to
Seldom ^^d Short Preaching? that speaks against Long and Often Preaching?

I come to the fourth head. 4th. Head Intermixing.
The intermixing other matters in the time ^^formance of the Duty, no more then
in Prayer, of this you tell me page (...) you often mention it.

I pray Sir, how often is once? excepting in the question where I must ^^t it,
because you had so charged it, p. 153. but else I find not that I ^^k of it
above once, and there with just complaint against my self for ^^ ficklenefs,
inconstancy, of my quicksi^ver thoughts; but I oppose (...) not that I see,
only in the end of my Paragraph, I spoke doubtfully, ^ther if they did crowd
in, they were as sinful, as in Prayer, you ha^^g charged your Reader as much
against them in Meditation, as in Pray^^. I annexed my Reason, because, Prayer
was such Divine worship that ^deal therein immediately with God: but in
meditationwe do not ^l always immediately with God. I may have many thoughts
of ^^, when yet I cannot be said to worship God in those thoughts, they (...)
immediately terminate in my self, to help me on in my christian ^^se and
warfare. Now to my reason you give me no answer at all. I ^^w no serious
Christian, that would carelessly, willingly, admit other ^^ghts to hinder the
end he aims at in Meditation. But whether the (...) you bring do prove
thoughts crouding in, to be as sinful as in Pray^^^ for this was the question]
I will consider. Your Text is Eccles. 9.10. ^^soever thy hand finds to do,
etc. The sense of the Text must first be ^^ed into. Now,

1. Here I find Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Pemble, and Innius as I understand (...) by
his Notes on the 7. v. (with him) take this verse with some ver^^eceding, to be
the language of the Epicure, Mr. Cartw. in his Ana^^ seems to carry it
smoothly, these are men of no small note, and if (...) then it is nothing to
the purpose.

2. Quicquid aliquis valet, in sua habere maus aut manu invenire dicitur.
Lorinus in Text.
Though they be not the Epicures words, yet the Phrase, whatsoever thy hand
finds needs explication, for the hand to find a thing, is for a man to have a
thing in his power, his hand can grasp it he is able to do it, it is in his
hand, hence the vulgar render it, quodcunque facere potest manus tua, and
though the Syriak word signifies invenit, as well as potuit, yet the
Translator, render it by potuit. Hence the Calde apply it to giving of Alms:
because a Rich man's hand has wherewithal, he has the power, add the will.
Thus if we compare Texts [the best way of interpretation] 25. Levit. 26.28. in
both the verses the word Able as we translate, the Hebrew words are the same in
this Text. His hand has found, etc. or, His hand has not found sufficiency,
that makes him able, thus again. Judge 9.33. latter end. Do as thy Hand shall
find, the same words, but now are spiritual things, the things of eternal
concernment, within our grasp? have our hands found them? etc. When I was in
the Ministry, I had a desire to have handled the Text, in reference to
spiritual things, but upon serious weighing the Text, I laid by my thoughts: to
have very good things spoken from a Text, and the Text not the true mother of
the children, I did not like it.

3. But make the most you can, it will amount to seriousness and diligence in
Meditation, but it will not prove that by thoughts creeping in are as sinful as
in Prayer: and that is the question.

Now I come to the last, your Methodical Meditation, a new notion that I never
met with before, and no part of the question.

That there must be a serious pondring of things in the understanding, before
we can apply them to our hearts, so as to have our hearts wrought up to a
suitableness with the objects we meditate upon, is very true: and if this were
all you meant by Methodical meditation, it would be yielded the act is not
Rational without it. But I see you have other notions, as your argument from
Preaching declares, p. 12. where you tell me, Meditation is a preaching to our
selves, and therefore look what order is in preaching, the same may be in
Meditation; and here you run through all the parts of a Sermon, and for this
Duty you give me a Text to prove it, 1 Cor. 14. ult, Let all things be done in
order, p. 11th.

Sir, I think that is orderly Meditation, and tending to edification, which I
have mentioned, and I know no other order. Here I perceive you put in Ability
again. But why I pray do you bring a Text to prove a Duty, and tell us what is
orderly Preaching, and then when you apply it to Meditation say that order may
be in Meditation, which is a preaching to our selves? I doubt it must be, if
the Text will prove what you bring it for, and there be no orderly preaching
but what you have set down. Do Texts which command duty, prove only May bee's?
but to the Text, which is but the general conclusion of the 11.12. and 14.
Chapters, le^lled against the undecency and disorder among the Corinthians, of
which (...) read in those Chapters. And this is a standing Rule for all
Churches, (...) all Church-Acts, in all Ages, that Order be observed. In our
interpreing of Scriptures, the scope, the circumstances, and series of the
Text, that went before and what follows, must be the guide for interpreta^^.
Hilari says true, Intelligentia dictorum, ex causis sumenda est di^^is, this
is very clear to any man that reads the Chapters, but Medi^^, was not in the
least the subject of the Apostles discourse before, (...) Church Affairs.

2. This Order was such as might be seen, [as was their disorder, in (...) 11.
and 14 Chap.] or come under the cognizance of others who be^ed them. Had Paul
been present bodily in the Church of the Colossians (...) might have seen the
order. 2 Col. 5. Beholding your order. True, Paul ^ he was with them in spirit
beholding their Order, etc. how he could ^old their carriage in the exercise of
Church Discipline [so I perceive ^^derstand this order] 1080, miles with his
eyes, Rome being so far ^^ant, as some say, I know not; but had he been present
as Epaphras ^^, and from whom as some think he had his relation] he could have
(...) it is Epaphras did. I can see Order in an Army in the field, (...) (...)
are vocabulum est, and denotat cohortem militum instructam, and ordine (...)
lobatam. But can Paul or any man behold the immanent acts of (...) soul [as
Meditation is] in another person? then he could not see ^^, or disorder there.

3. This Text admits of no such limitations as Ability and opportunity. ^so,
the sense must run thus, Let all things be done in order, if you have A(...)
and opportunity. So that if this Text have any respect to Meditation, ^^ds all,
without limitations; will this salve the disorder in Churches, (...) of
Ability? are not Churches bound to order unless they have Abi^^ but you bind
none by the Text, but those that have it.

As for the blame you seem to lay upon me, p. 15. that I had not read (...) her
writings, in which you had added limitations, etc. Sir, I read a ^^mat had four
times passed the Press, and you might have corrected (...) you saw cause, but I
see you have not in the 9th. Edition by what you ^^cribe; and what you tell me
out of your other books do as little (...) it. To read all your books, would
cost me more money, then I can (...) spare to buy them, but much less should I
find time to read them. ^^ell the world, that I am but a gentle censurer of
soldome and short Preaching etc. [how truly let the Reader judge] but had you
added short writings, I assure you, I would not have censured you at all, but
rather thanked you for them. You tell me p. 16. I should understand your
writings before I oppose them, which it seems I did not, because I suppose that
which you wrote of the Common necessity of the meditation of Heaven, to be
written also, to prove or urge the same necessity of the length or method.

Truly Sir, I am not so simple but I understand what an hour or half hour is,
which in the brief sum of all your discourse, you charge your Reader with. I
think you intend as you write.

2. If length be nothing, why am I judged a gentle censurer, of short Preaching
by you, and repeat shortness so often?

3. Why do your Syllogism endeavor to prove, the hour or half hour, [or
quarter, which now you put in]? this is all I meddle with, but what the Length
or Method is of your discourse, I did not so much as think of it, not had the
least respect to it, therefore I doubt you are mistaken much in this.

No duty that God requires but the performance of it has a tendency to our
salvation. So has this of Meditation: and if God requires the performance of
it, in that manner you have charged, and that as we make conscience of Prayer
daily, then we must endeavor to perform it in every particular, as you have
described it: else our hopes of Salvation will be shaken.

But how did I invite you to a Review, as your Title speaks, when I never
mentioned one letter of your Name, and another has required as you, an hour or
half hour, and that Heaven may well be an Object none deny; this made all that
I meet with, wonder to see my name put in your Title page.

And now Reverend Sir, [whose graces and gifts I do highly honour] I have given
you as clearly as I can, an account of those heads, in which our apprehensions
seemed to differ; but if that be All which you desire as to this Meditation,
viz. to understand and practice these two Texts Mat. 6.21. Phillip. 3.20. As
you tell me, p. 30. I assure you I am fully agreed with you: and never shall
there be one line more written by me in opposition to you. I am sure we are All
bound to have our conversation in Heaven, where our treasure is there will our
hearts be, without any limitations to Ability and opportunity, the Duty bind
All.

Let me but have a few words to the serious, and sincere Christians, who are
much troubled about this Duty, and I have done; what is the reason of your
trouble, and discouragement from this Duty more then any other, is it because
you cannot Meditate? are you not mistaken? Do you not in this Duty, as you do
about Prayer, when you hear ano^^er pray one hour or two together, fluent in
expression, various in mat^^, warm in affections, you cannot pray, no not you,
when your Prayers may be as acceptable to God as his, though you cannot pray
half ^^hour, is it not the same in Meditation? I grant Meditation is not a rock
for Hypocrites, no more then secret Prayer. I speak of Prayer, indeed: such as
call upon God in truth. 145. Psalm. 18. Such secret ^^yer will either beat the
man's Lust out, or his Lust will beat (...) secret Prayer. So it will be with
Meditation, if a man meditates indeed.

But do you not Meditate? as I said in the beginning, I know some of you, very
diligent in reading the Holy Scriptures, so as the word of Christ dwells richly
in you, Coll. 3.16. I know you to be those who are ^^ch in heart-searching,
very fearful of Hypocrisy. I know you to be ^^y serious in attending upon all
the Ordinances of God, desiring and laboring to improve them to your spiritual
growth; I know you to be my savoury, you relish the things of Heaven; I know
you to be very ^^der of offending God, I know you to be in a great measure
crucified to the world. I know you humble, and low before God, submissive under
his afflicting hand, or very much chiding your own hearts if they ^^er to
grumble, and earnestly begging for the sanctified fruit of your ^ctions; ask I
pray those worthy and holy men, whose Sermons and ^^ks about meditation have so
troubled you, whether, these can be with^^^ Heditation? with honor to those
worthy Divines, I should exa^^ that Sermon, or book very well, what that
Doctrine is, that cause noble, and sad the hearts of such as these, and make
sure it has a Divine ^^p upon it, else I should be blame worthy.

Obj. But I cannot fix my thoughts one hour, or half hour, no not a ^^ter.

Answ. What then? which Command of God do you break? has (...) set down hours,
or half hours? Let us hear the Text. But though you (...) fix so long, yet,

1. Have you not the savor of the thing upon your spirit which you (...)
meditating upon, is there not some suitableness left between your ^^ection and
the Object, for the time, though you are but short?

2. Are not your thoughts often in a day upon one or other spiritual Obje^t?
what though you cannot stay long upon one, but going off to another, like the
Be, but still gathring Honey, what then, what will this ^gne, want of Grace,
obedience to a command? let them name it, that affirm it, it seems you are
meditating in the law.

3. If there arises a suspicion of Hypocrisy, if some vile corruption be
stirring, if fear be up, or love enlarged from apprehensions of Gods love, then
you can fix for longer time, though I will not say with no other thoughts
intermixed.

4. Prayer is an easier Ordinance then fixing the thoughts in meditation to one
object: but what if you cannot pray one hour or half an hour at a time every
day, what then? you do pray and that seriously; let them who will blame you for
not praying so long every day, at one time, prove where God has bound his
people to such length of time every day in Prayer, if not in Prayer why in
meditation. Look to thy self, that thou be serious in all, labor to attain
the end of duties.

5. I observe that your conversations are day and night in some measure
becoming your profession [I know you have your infirmities] then certainly you
do meditate day and night in the Law of God, else I know not how you come to
have your conversations so ordered, whether you meditate by half quarters, or
quarters, or half hours, or two hours, I know not, nor do I regard as to any
command that binds you to this or that set time or place.

Why then Christian art thou troubled more about this Ordinance then other
Ordinances. I know we have cause to be troubled, that in every ordinance we
come not up to that holiness the ordinance require, and there I join with you.

How persons that are uniform in their conversations, who except against no
command or duty, but have respect to all the Commandments, 119. Psalm. 6. are
serious in all other Ordinances, and there not so much blamed, come to be so
tardy, and so much blamed in this of meditation, I could not well tell:
supposed that work of grace in their hearts, and that good spirit dwelling in
them, would carry them on in the practice of this Duty, as well as the other,
unless it were that worthy men did strain this Duty in some circumstances
beyond what the word of God has done. Is there nothing that enables one man to
be longer in a Duty, but merely Grace in the heart of one man more then
another; in which though God will show his good pleasure in giving to one a
larger measure then another; yet as for Grace, you will say, that is alike
required of all, and our fault it is if we fall short.

But is there nothing else I say but Grace? Is there not something that is not
properly Grace, but of a more common nature, a common gift, strength and
largeness of invention, fixedness of constitution, besides the presence of that
good spirit, who commonly does give out his assistance ^^^^rding to his former
gifts to the creature, whether those gifts be Com^^^ or Special, I leave this
to the piously learned to judge, there was (...) blame I hope imputed to him
that had but two Talents, and in^^^^^ them but to four, not ten, 25. Matthew.
22.23. had he that had but (...), been diligent, and increased but one, I doubt
not of acceptance.

Besides consider we the several conditions most Christians are under, which
are no small hindrances, some burdned with cares not easy to cast ^^f, the
husbandman when he carried on that which mend his ground, ^^wed, Sowed, etc. he
is assured he has performed his part right as to ^^e use of fit means to his
end. But the Physician that has life in hand, (...) not so sure that he has
hit the cause of a Disease, and used the fittest means for his end. So the
cares which others may lie under, variety of occasions, and businesses, not
pulled upon themselves neither by their covetousness, others their Callings
cast them into all sorts of companies, others great charge of children, low,
and forced to hard labor to maintain them; others woefully, unequally yoaked,
and children it may ^^e ^s perverse; others in debt not able to pay; it peirced
my heart, when I had been Preaching of Faith, one of my Auditors [who went for
a Professor] going from Church, being pressed with the temptation, burst (...),
Faith will pay no debts, said he, I deny not but he was to blame, for ^aith
has paid debts. No man can tell what the conditions and temptations of others
are, but those who have been under the same conditions (...) temptations every
way circumstantiated. For Gods Rules they must (...) pressed, let men's
conditions or temptations be what they will, but for (...) Rules which I
perceive some of our late Reverend Divines, [whose ^^^ce I highly honour] have
pressed upon Christians very high for their ^^yly practice, which if I were
asked how I proved this were God's ^^mand, that all these Rules, (...) pressed,
should be daily practi^^^, I could not tell; for these Rules I have thought
with my self, I ^^^^d never press them or Print them my self, unless I had
passed under these conditions and temptations, and experienced, how under these
^ditions and temptations I could practice these Rules my self, yet God ^^y give
that in to one under such a condition and temptation, which (...) denies to
another who is truly Gracious.

To conclude. As for the greatest part of sincere Christians, this is all (...)
to say, while we have bodies that call for Food, Raiment and ^ealth: while we
have our Callings to be employed in, and it is a mercy (...) have them, being
not able always to be feeding upon spiritual Ob^^^^^, while here we live among
present sensible things, that our nature (...) but desire, while we walk among
temptations every where, while we live by Faith on this side Vision, and while
we have a body of death yet remaining in us: can they but look to their
foundation that it be laid upon the Rock, to their hearts, that they be sound
in Gods Statutes. Can they by Meditation, and all other Ordinances of Christ,
the good spirit blessing all unto them, keep up grace in the prevalency: Can
they get and maintain the upper hand of flesh, World and self. Can they walk in
the fear of the Lord, dread sin, and grow in the love of Christ; for my part
(...) all not press them with a multitude of Rules, which I know they cannot
practice, nor shall I tell them how long they must be in Duties, but that they
be serious, and labor to attain the end of all in Duties, for others to whom
God has given larger abilities and grace, they have the more cause to bless
the Lord, but let them not measure all by themselves.

FINIS.

