A few Lines in True Love TO THE Inhabitants of England, Especially this Great
CITY of LONDON, who are called CHRISTIANS.
DEar People, many are so called, that have not yet considered the end of
Christ in his coming, who came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance; therefore to you that are in that State, his Call is yet extended,
that you may now consider while you have time, lest any or many of you should
prove of that number that hates to be Reformed, but will still persist to go on
in Pride and Wickedness to Destruction, provoking the Righteous God to Anger,
who is angry with the Wicked every day; then consider how many Days, Months,
and Years, some of this Generation has been kindling the Anger of the Lord,
which in his hot Displeasure (if it should break forth) will be terrible to the
Workers of Iniquity: Therefore, let such Repent, and seek the Lord while he is
to be found in Mercy, or otherwise he may be seen in Judgment; and therefore
all prepare and seek the Lord, Oh Inhabitants of England; Professor and
Profane, for you the Lord has often visited, with the Tenders of his Love, by
and through his Son Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all Mankind,
that he might Redeem them out of that State in which the Lord was displeased
with them: Therefore, consider all you who bear the Name of Christians; but too
many are still found out of that pure peaceable Spirit of Truth and
Righteousness, that Christ Jesus left an Ensample of, but many have been, and
still are Resisting his Spiritual Appearance, which is the way that God has
appointed for Man's Salvation and Restoration out of that Fallen State of
Deprivation, in which he is Separated from the Glory of his Power, and the
Belief of the Benefit they may receive thereby; through which we see by woeful
Experience, That the Spirit of Antichrist has prevailed over Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues and People; but the Lord has looked and beheld their
Babel-Buildings, although their Tops have seemed to reach to Heaven; he will
confound the wise Builders, and bring to naught the Understandings of the
Prudent Professors of his Worthy Name, who will not bow to the Yoke and Cross
of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, by which they may come to live that
Righteous Life which does bespeak his Glory and his Fame: Therefore, Dear
People, all consider while there is a day of Mercy yet extended, and remember
what Severity has been shown to other Nations and Places* and forget not how
the Lord does yet spare you, and lengthen out the day of your Visitation, to
see, if by any means, that may work a Reformation from those Evil Corruptions
that do abound in the Nation; and O how ready People are to forget both Mercies
and Judgments which the Lord has often mixed in, and to the City of London;
therefore it is high time now to consider and Remember to be Wise, and depart
from Iniquity, which is of many kinds; and forsake all those crying sins that
do abound, for the Call of the Lord is come out of Babylon, partake not of her
Sins, lest you should partake of her Plagues* and also remember his Gracious
Call has been extended many ways: How gently did the Lord lately shake the
Earth, as many know, that People might hear and fear before him, the Great
Almighty Powerful God, who will not only shake the Earth, but the Heavens also;
For he will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain: Therefore, Dear
People, once more hear and fear, and prepare to meet the Lord; that if happily
you may obtain farther Mercy from the Gracious long-Suffering God, who can
afford us Peace and Plenty, if People will love him and forsake Iniquity, which
is of absolute necessity for all that desire Englands Prosperity, and the good
of their own Souls.

A. F.

And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man,

Genesis 6.3. Tribulation and Anguish shall be upon the Soul of every Man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile,

Romans 2.9.
London, Printed and sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street, 1696.


