Augustissimi CAROLI Secundi Dei Gratia ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE
REX Bona agere and mala pati Regium est Page.1.



THE Freeholders GRAND INQUEST, Touching Our Sovereign Lord the KING And His
PARLIAMENT, To which are added OBSERVATIONS UPON FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.

Together with Directions for Obedience to Governors in Dangerous and Doubtful
Times.

By the Learned Sir ROBERT FILMER, Knight.

Claudian* de laudibus Stiliconis. Fallitur egregio quisquis sub Principe
credit Servitium: Nunquam Libertas gratior extat Quam sub Rege pio. -- LONDON,
Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

The Author's PREFACE.
THere is a general Belief, that the Parliament of England was at first an
Imitation of the Assembly of the Three Estates in France: therefore in order to
prepare the Understanding in the Recerche we have in hand, it is proper to give
a brief Account of the mode of France in those Assemblies: Scotland and Ireland
being also under the Dominion of the King of England; a touch of the manner of
their Parliaments shall be by way of Preface.

1. In France, the Kings Writ goes to the Bailiffs, Seneschals, or Stewards of
Liberties, who issue out Warrants to all such as have Fees and Lands within
their Liberties, and to all Towns, requiring all such as have any Complaints,
to meet in the Principal City, there to choose two or three Delegates, in the
name of that Province, to be present at the General Assembly.

At the day appointed, they meet at the Principal City of the Bailiwick. The
King's Writ is read, and every man called by name, and sworn to choose honest
men, for the Good of the King and Commonwealth, to be present at the General
Assembly as Delegates, faithfully to deliver their Grievances, and Demands of
the Province. Then they choose their Delegates, and swear them. Next, they
consult what is necessary to be complained of, or what is to be desired of the
King: and of these things they make a Catalogue or Index. And because every man
should freely propound his Complaint or Demands, there is a Chest placed in the
Town Hall, into which every man may cast his Writing. After the Catalogue is
made and Signed, it is delivered to the Delegates to carry to the General
Assembly.

All the Bailiwicks are divided into twelve Classes. To avoid confusion, and to
the end there may not be too great Delay in the Assembly, by the Gathering of
all the Votes, every Classis compiles a Catalogue or Book of the Grievances and
Demands of all the Bailiwicks within that Classis, then these Classes at the
Aslembly compose one Book of the Grievances and Demands of the whole Kingdom.
This being the order of the Proceedings of the third Estate; the like order is
observed by the Clergy and Nobility. When the three Books for the three Estates
are perfected, then they present them to the King by their Presidents. First,
the President for the Clergy begins his Oration on his knees, and the King
commanding, he stands up bare-headed, and proceeds. And so the next President
for the Nobility does the like. But the President for the Commons begins and
ends his Oration on his knees. Whilst the President for the Clergy speaks, the
rest of that Order rise up, and stand bare, till they are bid by the King to
sit down, and be covered, and so the like for the Nobility. But whilst the
President of the Commons speaks, the rest are neither bidden to sit, or be
covered. Thus the Grievances and Demands being delivered, and left to the King
and His Counsel, the General Assembly of the three Estates ends, Atque ita
totus actus concluditur.

Thus it appears, the General Assembly was but an orderly way of presenting the
Public Grievances and Demands of the whole Kingdom, to the consideration of
the King: Not much unlike the ancient Usage of this Kingdom for a long time,
when all Laws were nothing else but the King's Answers to the Petitions
presented to Him in Parliament, as is apparent by very many Statutes,
Parliament-Rolls, and the Confession of Sir Edw. Coke.

2. In Scotland, about twenty days before the Parliament begins, Proclamation
is made throughout the Kingdom, to deliver in to the King's Clerk or Master of
the Rolls, all Bills to be exhibited that Sessions, before a certain day: then
are they brought to the King, and perused by Him: and only such as he allows
are put into the Chancellour's hand, to be propounded in Parliament, and none
others: And if any man in Parliament speak of another matter, than is allowed
by the King, the Chancellor tells him, there is no such Bill allowed by the
King. When they have passed them for Laws, they are presented to the King, who,
with his Scepter put into His hand by the Chancellor, ratifies them, and if
there be any thing the King dislikes, they raze it out before.

3. In Ireland, the Parliament, as appears by a Statute made in the Tenth year
of Hen. 7. c. 4. is to be after this manner: No Parliament is to be holden but
at such Season as the King's Lieutenant and Council there, do first certify
the King, under the Great Seal of that Land, the Causes and Considerations, and
all such Acts as they think fit should pass in the said Parliament. And such
Causes and Considerations, and Acts affirmed by the King and his Council to be
good and expedient for that Land: And His License thereupon as well in
affirmation of the said Causes and Acts, as to summon the Parliament under His
Great Seal of England had and obtained. That done, a Parliament to be had and
holden after the Form and Effect before rehearsed, and if any Parliament be
holden in that Land contrary to the Form and Provision aforesaid, it is deemed
void, and of none Effect in Law. It is provided, that all such Bills as shall
be offered to the Parliament there; shall first be transmitted hither under the
Great Seal of that Kingdom, and having received Allowane and Approbation here,
shall be put under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, and so returned thither to
be preferred to the Parliament. By a Statute of 3 and 4 of Philip and Mary, for
the expounding of Poynings Act, it is ordered, for the King's Passing of the
said Acts in such Form and Tenor as they should be sent into England, or else
for the Change of them, or any part of them.

After this shorter Narrative of the Usage of Parliaments in our Neighbor and
Fellow Kingdoms, it is time the inquisitio magna of our own be offered to the
Verdict or Judgment of a moderate and intelligent Reader.

REFLECTIONS Concerning the ORIGINAL OF GOVERNMENT,

Upon

I. Aristotle's Politiques. II. Mr. Hobs's Leviathan. III. Mr. Milton against
Salmasius. IV. H. Grotius De Iure Belli. V. Mr. Hunton's Treatise of Monarchy.
VI. Another Treatise of Monarchy, by a nameless Author.
Arist. Pol. Lib. 4. (...).

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

THE ANARCHY OF A LIMITED OR MIXED Monarchy.

OR, A Succinct Examination of the Fundamentals of Monarchy, both in this and
other Kingdoms, as well about the Right of Power in Kings, as of the Original
or Natural Liberty of the People.

A Question never yet Disputed, though most necessary in these Times.

Lucan. Lib. 3. LIBERTAS ( -- Populi quem Regna coercent Liberate Perit: --
Neque enim Libertas gratior ulla est Quam Domino servire bono -- Claudian.
LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE Jurymen OF ENGLAND, TOUCHING WITCHES.

Together with a Difference between An ENGLISH AND HEBREW Witch.



LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

The Argument.
A Presentment of diverse Statutes, Records, and other Precedents, explaining
the Writs of Summons to Parliament: showing,

I. That the Commons by their Writ are only to Perform and Consent to the
Ordinances of Parliament. II. That the Lords or Common Council by their Writ
are only to Treat, and give Counsel in Parliament. III. That the King Himself
only Ordains and makes Laws, and is Supreme Judge in Parliament.
With the Suffrages of
Hen. de Bracton. Jo. Britton. Tho. Egerton. Edw. Coke. Walter Raleigh Rob.
Cotton. Hen. Spelman. Jo. Glanvil. Will. Lambard. Rich. Crompton Will. Cambden,
and Jo. Seldom.
THE Freeholders GRAND-INQUEST Touching Our Sovereign Lord the King, and His
Parliament.
EVery Freeholder that has a Voice in the Election of Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses for the Parliament, ought to know with what Power he trusts those
whom the chooses, because such Trust is the Foundation of the Power of the
House of Commons.

A Writ from the King to the Sheriff of the County, is that which gives
Authority and Commission for the Freeholders to make their Election at the
next County-Court-day after the Receipt of the Writ; and in the Writ there is
also expressed the Duty and Power of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses that
are there elected.

The means to know what Trust, or Authority the Country or Freeholders confer,
or bestow by their Election, is in this, as in other like Cases, to have an eye
to the words of the Commission, o^ Writ it self: thereby it may be seen whether
that which the House of Commons does act be within the Limit of their
Commission: greater or other Trust than is comprised in the Body of the Writ,
the Freeholders do not, or cannot give if they obey the Writ: the Writ being
Latin, and not extant in English, few Freeholders understand it, and fewer
observe it; I have rendered it in Latin and English.

Rex Vicecomiti salut'. etc.
QUia de Advisamento and Assensu Concilii nostri pr^ quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus Negotiis, Nos, statum, and defensionem regni nostri Angliae, and
Eccles^ Anglicanae concernen', quoddam Parliamentum nostru^ apud Civitatem
nostram West. duodecimo die Novembr^ prox. futur' teneri ordinavimus, and ibid.
cum Praelat^ Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquiu^ habere and
tract: Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungent^ quod facta proclam. in prox.
comitat' tuo post receptione^ hujus brevis nostri tenend' die and loco
praedict. duos mili^ gladiis cinct' magis idoneos and discretos comit'
praedict^ and de qualib. civitate com' illius duos Cives, and de qu^libet Burgo
duos Burgenses de discretior' and magis suffcientibus libere and indifferenter
per illos qui proclam' h^jusmodi interfuerint juxta formam statutorum inde ed^
and provis' eligi, and nomina eorundum milit', civium ^ Burgensium, sic
electorum in quibusdam indentur' int^te and illos qui hujusmodi election'
interfuerint, inde confidend' sive hujusmodi electi praesentes fuerint vel
absentes, inseri: eosque ad dict' diem and locum venire fac'. Ita quod iidem
milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate comit'
praedicti, ac dict' Cives and Burgenses pro se and communitat' Civitatum and
Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum
his quae tunc ibid' de communi Consilio dicti reg. nostri (favente Deo)
contigerint ordinari super negotiis ante dictis: Ita quod pro defectu
potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam electionem milit' civium aut
Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia infecta non remaneant quovismodo.
Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius vic' dicti reg. nostri aliqualiter sit
electus. Et electionem illam in pleno comitatu factam, distinct and aperte sub
sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerint, nobis in
cancellar' nostram ad dict' diem and locum certifices indilate, remittens nobis
alteram partem indenturarum praedictarum praesentibus consut' una cum hoc
breve. Test meipso apud Westmon.

The King to the Sheriff of Greeting.
WHereas by the Advice and Consent of our Council, for certain difficult and
urgent Businesses concerning Us, the State and Defense of our Kingdom of
England, and the English Church: We have ordained a certain Parliament of ours,
to be held at Our City of the day of next ensuing, and there to have
Conference, and to treat with the Prelates, Great men and Peers of our said
Kingdom. We command and straightly enjoin you, that making Proclamation at the
next County Court after the Receipt of this our Writ, to be holden the day, and
place aforesaid: You cause two Knights, girt with Swords, the most fit, and
discreet of the County aforesaid: and of every City of that County two
Citizens; of every Borough, two Burgesses of the discreeter and most
sufficient; to be freely, and indifferently chosen by them who shall be present
at such Proclamation, according to the Tenor of the Statutes in that case made
and provided: and the Names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so
chosen, to be inserted in certain Indentures to be then made between you, and
those that shall be present at such Election, whether the Parties so elected be
present, or absent: and shall make them to come at the said day, and Place: so
that the said Knights for themselves, and for the County aforesaid, and the
said Citizens, and Burgesses for themselves, and the Commonalty of the
aforesaid Cities, and Boroughs, may have severally from them, full and
sufficient Power to Perform, and to Consent to those things which then by the
Favor of God shall there happen to be ordained by the CommonCouncel of our
said Kingdom, concerning the Businesses aforesaid: So that the Business may not
by any means remain undone for want of such Power, or by reason of the
improvident Election of the aforesaid Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses. But We
will not in any case you or any other Sheriff of Our said Kingdom shall be
elected; And at the Day and Place aforesaid, the said Election made in the full
County Court, you shall certify without Delay to Us in our Chancery under your
Seal, and the Seals of them which shall be present at that Election, sending
back unto Us the other part of the Indenture aforesaid affiled to these
Presents, together with this Writ. Witness Our Self at Westminster.

By this Writ we do not find that the Commons are called to be any part of the
Common Council of the Kingdom, or of the Supreme Court of Judicature, or to
have any part of the Legislative Power, or to Consult de arduis regni negotiis,
of the difficult Businesses of the Kingdom. The Writ only says, the King would
have Conference, and Treat with the Prelates, Great men, and Peers: but not a
word of Treating or Conference with the Commons; The House of Commons which
does not minister an Oath, nor fine, nor imprison any, but their own Members
(and that but of late in some Cases) cannot properly be said to be a Court at
all; much less to be a part of the Supreme Court, or highest Judicature of the
Kingdom: The constant Custom, even to this day, for the Members of the House of
Commons to stand bare, with their Hats in their Hands in the Presence of the
Lords, while the Lords sit covered at all Conferences, is a visible argument,
that the Lords and Commons are not fellow Commissioners, or fellow Counselors
of the Kingdom.

The Duty of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, mentioned in the Writ, is only
ad Faciendum, and Consentiendum, to Perform and to Consent to such things as
should be ordained by the Common Council of the Kingdom; there is not so much
mentioned in the Writ as a Power in the Commons to dissent. When a man is bound
to appear in a Court of Justice, the words are, ad Faciendum and recipiendum
quod ei per curiam injungetur: which shows, that this word Faciendum is used as
a Term in Law to signify to give Obedience: For this, we meet with a Precedent
even as ancient as the Parliament-Writ it self, and it is concerning
Proceedings in Parliament. 33. Ed. 1. Dominus Rex mandavit vicecom' quod etc.
summon' Nicolaum de Segrave, and ex part Domini regis firmiter ei injungeret,
quod esset coram Domino Rege in proximo Parl. etc. ad audiendum voluntatem
ipsius Domini Regis etc. Et ad Faciendum and recipiendum ulterius quod curia
Domini Regis consideraret in Praemissis: Our Lord the King commands the Sheriff
to summon Nicholas Segrave to appear before the Lord our King in the next
Parliament to hear the Will of the Lord our King himself, and to Perform and
receive what the Kings Court shall further consider of the Premises.

Sir Ed. Coke to prove the Clergy has no Voice in Parliament; says, that by
the Words of their Writ their Consent was only to such things as were ordained
by the Common Council of the Realm. If this argument of his be good, it will
deny also Voices to the Commons in Parliament, for in their Writ are the
self-same words, viz. to consent to such things as were ordained by the Common
Council of the Kingdom. Sir Edw. Coke concludes, that the Procuratores Cleri,
have many times appeared in Parliament, as Spiritual Assistants, to Consider,
Consult, and to Consent; but never had voice there; how they could consult, and
Consent without Voices he does not show: Though the Clergy (as he says) often
appeared in Parliament, yet was it only ad consentiendum, as I take it, and not
ad faciendum, for the Word Faciendum is omitted in their Writ; the cause, as I
conceive is, the Clergy, though they were to assent, yet by reason of Clerical
Exemptions, they were not required to Perform all the Ordinances or Acts of
Parliament.

But some may think, though the Writ does not express a Calling of the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses to be part of the Common Council of the Kingdom; yet it
supposes it a thing granted, and not to be questioned, but that they are a
part of the Common Council.

Indeed if their Writ had not mentioned the Calling of Prelates, Great men, and
Peers to Council, there might have been a little better color for such a
Supposition: but the Truth is, such a Supposition does make the Writ it self
vain and idle; for it is a senseless thing to bid men assent to that which they
have already ordained: since ordaining is an Assenting; and more than an
Assenting.

For clearing the meaning and sense of the Writ, and Satisfaction of such as
think it impossible but that the Commons of England have always been a part of
the Common Council of the Kingdom, I shall insist upon these Points. 1. That
anciently the Barons of England were the Common Council of the Kingdom. 2. That
until the time of Hen. 1. the Commons were not called to Parliament. 3. Though
the Commons were called by Hen. 1. yet they were not constantly called, nor yet
regularly elected by Writ until Hen. 3. time.

For the first point M. Cambden in his Britania, does teach us, that in the
time of the English Saxons, and in the ensuing Age, a Parliament was called,
Commun^ concilium, which was (says he) Praesentia Regis, Praelatorum,
Procerumque collectorum, the Presence of the King, Prelates and Peers
assembled; No mention of the Commons: the Prelates and Peers were all Barons.

The Author of the Chronicle of the Apud Seldom.
Church of Lichfield, cited by M. Seldom, says, Postquam Rex Edvardus, etc.
Concilio Baronum Angliae, etc. After King Edward was King; by the Council of
the Barons of England he revived a Law which had layen asleep threescore and
seven years: and this Law was called the Law of St. Edward the King.

In the same Chronicle it is said, that Will. the Conqueror anno regni sui
quarto apud Londin', ha^ Concilium Baronum Suorum, a Council of his Barons And
of this Parliament it is, that his Son Hen. 1. speaks saying, I restore you the
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, with those amendments wherewith my Father
amended them by the Council of his Barons.

In the fifth year, as M. Seldom thinks, of the Conqueror, was a Parliament or
Principum conventus, a^ Assembly of Earls and Barons at Pinenden Heath i^ Kent,
in the Cause between Lanfranke the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Odo Earl of
Kent. The King gave Commission to Godfrid, then Bishop of Constan^ in Normandy,
to represent His own Person for Hearing the Controversy (as says M. Lambard;)
and caused Egelrick the Bishop of Chichester (an aged man, singularly commended
for Skill in the Laws and Customs of the Realm) to be brought thither in a
Wagon for his Assistance in Council: Commanded Haymo the Sheriff of Kent to
summon the whole County to give in Evidence: three whole days spent in Debate:
in the End Lanfranke and the Bishop of Rochester were restored to the
Possession o^ Detling and other Lands which Odo has withholden*

21. Ed. 3. fol. 60. There is mention of a Parliament held under the same King
William Apud Seldom.
the Conqueror, wherein all the Bishops of the Land, Earls and Barons, made an
Ordinance touching the Exemption of the Abbey of Bury from the Bishops of
Norwich.

In the tenth year of the Conqueror: Episcopi, Comites, and Barons regni
regia potestate ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis and tractandis
convocati, says the Book of Westminster.

In the 2 year of William 2. there was a Parliament de cunctis regni
Principibus; another which had Seldom.
quosque regni proceres: All the Peers of the Kingdom.

In the seventh year was a Parliament at Rockingham-Castle in
Northamptonshire. Episcopis, Abbatibus cunctique regni Principibus una
coeuntibus.

A year or two after, the same King, de statu regni acturus, etc. called
thither, by the Command Seldom.
of his Writ, the Bishops, Abbots, and all the Peers of the Kingdom.

At the Coronation of Hen. 1. All the People of the Kingdom of England were
called, and Seldom.
Laws were then made; but it was Per Commune Concilium Baronum meorum, by the
Common Council of my Barons.

In his third year, the Peers of the Kingdom were called without any mention of
the Commons: Seldom.
and another a while after, consensu Comitum and Baronum, by the consent of
Earls and Barons.

Florentius Wigoriensis says, these are Statutes which Anselme and all the
other Bishops in the Presence* of King Henry, by the assent of his Barons
ordained: and in his tenth year, of Earls and Peers; and in his 23. of Earls
and Barons. In the year following the same King held a Parliament, or great
Council with His Barons Spiritual and Temporal.

King Hen. 2. in his tenth year had a great Council or Parliament at Clarendon,
which was an Assembly of Prelates and Peers.

22. Hen. 2. says Hovenden, was a great Council at Nottingham, and by the
Common Council of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons, the Kingdom was
divided into six parts. And again, Hovende^ says, that the same King at
Windsor (apud Wind^ shores) Communi Concilio of Bishops, Earls, and Barons,
divided England into four Parts. And in hi^ 21 year a Parliament at Windsor of
Bishops, Earl^ and Barons. And another of like Persons at Northampton.

King Richard 1. had a Parliament at Nottingham in his fifth year, of Bishops,
Earls, and Barons: Thi^ Parliament lasted but four days, yet much was done in
it: the first day the King disseiseth Gerard de Canvil of the Sherifwick of
Lincoln, and Hugh Bardol^ of the Castle and Sherifwick of York. The second day
he required judgment against his Brother John who was afterward King; and Hugh
de Nova^ Bishop of Coventry. The third day was granted to the King of every
Plow-land in England 2 s. He required also the third part of the Service of
every Knights F^ for his Attendance into Normandy, and all the Woo^ that year
of the Monks Cisteaux, which, for that (...) was grievous, and unsupportable,
they fine for Mo^ny. The last day was for Hearing of Grievances^ and so the
Parliament brake up; And the same yea^ held another at Northampton of the
Nobles of the Realm.

King John, in his fifth year, He and his Great m^met, Rex and Magnates
convenerunt: and the Seldom.
Roll of that year has Commune Concilium B^ronum Meorum, the Common Council of
my Baron^ at Winchester.

In the sixth year of King Henry 3. the Noble^ granted to the King, of every
Knights Fee, two Mark^ in Silver.

In the seventh year he had a Parliament at London, an Assembly of Barons. In
his thirteenth year an Assembly of the Lords at Westminster. In his fifteenth
year of Nobles both Spiritual and Temporal.

M. Par. says that 20. H. 3. Congregati sunt Magnates ad colloquium de
negotiis regni tractaturi, the Great men were called to confer and treat of the
Business of the Kingdom. And at Merton, Our Lord the King granted by the
Consent of his Great men, That hereafter Usury should not run against a Ward
from the Death of his Ancestor.

21. Hen. 3. The King sent his Royal Writs, commanding all belonging to His
Kingdom, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Priors installed,
Earls and Barons, that they should all meet at London, to treat of the Kings
Business touching the whole Kingdom: and at the day prefixed, the whole
multitude of the Nobles of the Kingdom met at London, says Mat. Westminster.

In his 21 year, At the Request, and by the Council of the Lords, the Charters
were confirmed.

22. Hen. 3. At Winchester the King sent his Royal Writs to Archbishops,
Bishops, Priors, Earls and Barons, to treat of Business concerning the whole
Kingdom.

32. Hen. 3. The King commanded all the Nobility of the whole Kingdom to be
called to treat of the State of His Kingdom. Mat. Westm'.

49. Hen. 3. The King had a Treaty at Oxford with the Peers of the Kingdom. M.
Westminster.

At a Parliament at Marlborow 55. Hen. 3. Statutes were made by the Assent of
Earls and Barons.

Here the Place of Bracton, Chief Justice in thi^ Kings time, is worth the
observing; and the rathe^ for that it is much insisted on of late, to make for
Parliaments being above the King. The words i^ Bracton are, The King has a
Superior, God; also the Law by which he is made King; also his Court, viz the
Earls and Barons. The Court that was said i^ those days to be above the King
was a Court of Earls and Barons, not a Word of the Commons, or the
representative Body of the Kingdom being any pa^ of the Superior Court. Now
for the true Sen^ of Bractons words, how the Law, and the Court (...) Earls and
Barons, are the Kings Superiors; the^ must of Necessity be understood to be
Superiors, (...) far only as to advise, and direct the King out of hi^ own
Grace and Good Will only: which appea^ plainly by the Words of Bracton himself,
where speaking of the King, he resolves thus, Nec potest (...) necessitatem
aliquis imponere quod injuriam suam corrig^ and emendat, cum superiorem non
habeat nisi Deum; (...) satis ei erit ad poenam, quod Dominum expectat ultore^
Nor can any man put a necessity upon Him to corre^ and amend his Injury unless
he will himself, sin^ he has no Superior but God; it will be sufficie^
Punishment for him, to expect the Lord an avenge^ Here the same man, who
speaking according to som^mens Opinion says, the Law and Court of Earls a^
Barons are superior to the King; in this place tel^ us himself, the King has
no Superior but God: the Difference is easily reconciled; according to the
D^stinction of the Schoolmen the King is free from t^ Coactive Power of Laws
or Counselors: but may be su^ject to their Directive Power, according to his
ow^ Will: that is God can only compel, but the Law and his Courts may advise
Him.

Rot. Parliament. 1 Hen. 4. nu. 79. the Commons expressly affirm, Judgment in
Parliament belongs to the King and Lords.

These Precedents show, that from the Conquest until a great part of Henry the
Third's Reign (in whose days it is thought the Writ for Election of Knights
was framed) which is about two hundred years, and above a third part of the
time since the Conquest to our days, the Barons made the Parliament or Common
Council of the Kingdom: under the name of Barons; not only the Earls, but the
Bishops also were Comprehended, for the Conqueror made the Bishops Barons.
Therefore it is no such great Wonder, that in the Writ, we find the Lords only
to be the Counselors, and the Commons Called only to perform and consent to
the Ordinances.

Those there be who seem to believe that under the word Barons, anciently the
Lords of Court-Ba^ons were Comprehended, and that they were Called to
Parliament as Barons; But if this could be proved to have been at any time
true, yet those Lords of Court-Barons were not the representative Body of the
Commons of England, except it can be also proved that the Commons, or
Freeholders of the Kingdom chose such Lords of Court-Barons to ^e present in
Parliament. The Lords of Manors ^ame not at first by Election of the People, as
Sir Edw. Coke, treating of the institution of Court-Ba^ons, resolves us in
these words: By the Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings, and especially of
King Al^red, it appears, that the first Kings of this Realm ^ad all the Lands
of England in Demean; and les grand Manors and Royalties they reserved to
themselves, and of the remnant they, for the Defense of the Real^ enfeoffed the
Barons of the Realm with such Jurisdiction as the Court Baron now has. Coke's
Institute^ First part, Fol. 58.

Here, by the way, I cannot but note that if the first Kings had all the Lands
of England in Demean, (...) Sir Edward Coke says they had; And if the fir^
Kings were chosen by the People, (as many thin^ they were) then surely our
Forefathers were a ver^ bountiful (if not a prodigal) People, to give all the
Lands of the whole Kingdom to their Kings, wit^ Liberty for them to keep what
they pleased, and t^ give the Remainder to their Subjects, clogged an^ cumbred
with a Condition to defend the Realm^ This is but an ill sign of a limited
Monarchy by original Constitution or Contract. But to conclude the former
Point, Sir Edward Coke's Opinion is, the in the ancient Laws, under the name of
Barons were comprised all the Nobility.

This Doctrine of the Barons being the Comm^ Council, does displease many, and
is denied, a^tending to the Disparagement of the Commons, an^ to the Discredit,
and Confutation of their Opinion who teach, that the Commons are assigned
Councello^ to the King by the People, therefore I will call in M^ Pryn to help
us with his Testimony: He in his Boo^ of Treachery and Disloyalty etc. proves
that before the Conquest, by the Laws of Edward the Confesso^ cap. 17. The King
by his Oaths was to do Justice (...) the Council of the Nobles of his Realm. He
also resolves, that the Earls and Barons in Parliament a^ above the King, and
ought to bridle him, when he exor^tates from the Laws. He further tells us, the
Peers an^ Prelates have often translated the Crown from the right He^

1. Electing and Crowning Edward, who was illegitimate; and putting by
Ethelred, the right Heir after Edgars decease. 2. Electing and Crowning
Canutus, a mere Foreigner, in opposition to Edmund the right Heir to King
Ethelred. 3. Harold and Hardiknute, both elected Kings successively without
title; Edmund and Alfred the right Heirs being dispossessed. 4. The English
Nobility, upon the Death of Harold, enacted that none of the Danish blood
should any more reign over them. 5. Edgar Etheling, who had best Title, was
rejected; and Harold elected and crowned King. 6. In the second and third year
of Edw. 2. the Peers and Nobles of the Land, seeing themselves contemned,
entreated the King to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom by the Council of his
Barons. He gave his Assent, and swear to ratify what the Nobles ordained; and
one of their Articles was, that he would thenceforward order all the Affairs of
the Kingdom by the Council of his Clergy and Lords. 7. William Rufus, finding
the greatest part of the Nobles against him, swear to Lanfranke that if they
would choose him for King, he would abrogate their overhard Laws. 8. The
Beginning, says Mr. Pryn, of the Charter of Hen. 1. is observable; Henry by
the Grace of God of England, etc. Know ye, That by the Mercy of God and Common
Council of the Barons of the Kingdom, I am Crowned King. 9. Maud the Empress,
the right Heir, was put by the Crown by the Prelates and Barons, and Stephen,
Earl of Mortain, who had no good Title, assembling the Bishops and Peers,
promising the amendment of the Law^ according to all their Pleasures and
Liking, was by the all proclaimed King. 10. Lewis of France Crowned King by the
Barons in stead of King John.
All these Testimonies from Mr. Pryn may satisfy, that anciently the Barons
were the Common Council* or Parliament of England. And if Mr. Pryn could have
found so much Antiquity, and Proof for the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
being of the Common Council: I make no doubt but we should have heard from him
in Capital Characters: but alas he meets not with so much as these Names in
those elder Ages. He dares not say the Barons were assigned by the People,
Counselors to the King; for he tells us, every Baron in Parliament does
represent hi^ own Person, and speaks in behalf of himself alone* but in the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are represented the Commons of the whole
Realm: therefore every one of the Commons has a greater voice in Parliament
than the greatest Earl in England. Nevertheless Maste^ Pryn will be very well
content if we will admi^ and swallow these Parliaments of Barons for the
representative Body of the Kingdom; and to that Purpose he cites them, or to no
Purpose at all. But to prove the Treachery and Disloyalty of Popish
Parliaments, Prelates, and Peers, to their Kings: which i^ the main Point, that
Master Pryn by the Title of hi^ Book is to make good, and to prove.

As to the second Point; which is, That until the time of Hen. 1. the Commons
were not called to Parliament: besides, the general Silence of Antiquity which
never makes mention of the Commons Coming to Parliament until that time; our
Histories say, before his time only certain of the Nobility were called to
Consultation about the most important affairs* of the State: He caused the
Commons also to be assembled by Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of their own
Appointment: much to the same Purpose writes Sir Walter Raleigh, saying, it is
held that the Kings of England had no formal Parliaments till about the 18th
year of King Hen. 1. For in his Third year, for the Marriage of his Daughter,
the King raised a Tax upon* every Hide of Land, by the Advice of His Privy
Council alone. And the Subjects (says he) soon after this Parliament was
established, began to stand upon Terms with their King, and drew from him by
strong hand, and their Swords, their Great Charter; it was after ^he
establishment of the Parliament, by color of it, that ^hey had so great
Daring. If any desire to know the ^ause why Hen. 1. called the People to
Parliament, ^t was upon no very good Occasion, if we believe Sir Walter
Raleigh; The Grand Charter (says he) was not originally granted Regally and
freely; for King Hen. 1. did but usurp the Kingdom, and therefore the ^etter to
assure himself against Robert his elder Brother, ^e flattered the People with
those Charters: yea, King John that confirmed them, had the like Respect: for
Arthur D^ Britain was the undoubted Heir of the Crown, upon whom John usurped:
so these Charters had their original from Kings, de facto, but not de jure: and
then afterward his Conclusion is, that the Great Charter had* ^rst an obscure
Birth by Usurpation, and was fostered, and ^ewed to the World by Rebellion: in
brief, the King cal^ed the People to Parliament, and granted them Magna Charta;
that they might confirm to him the Crown.

The third Point consists of two parts; First, that ^he Commons were not called
unto Parliament until Hen. 3. days, this appears by diverse of the Prec^dents
formerly cited, to prove that the Barons we^ the Common Council. For though
Hen. 1. called a^ the People of the Land to His Coronation, and again in the
15. or 18. year of his Reign; yet always h^ did not so; neither many of those
Kings that di^ succeed him, as appears before.

Secondly, for calling the Commons by Writ, find it acknowledged in a Book,
entitled, The Privilege and Practice of Parliaments, in these words; l^
ancient times after the King had summoned His Parliament, innumerable
multitudes of People did man their Access thereunto, pretending that Privilege
^ Right to belong to them. But King Hen. 3. havi^ Experience of the Mischief,
and inconveniences by occasion of such popular Confusion, did take order that
no^ might come to His Parliament but those who were spec^ally summoned. To this
purpose it is observed b^ Master Seldom, that the first Writs we find
accompani^ with other Circumstances of a Summons to Parliamen^ as well for the
Commons as Lords, is in the 49 ^ Hen. 3. In the like manner Master Cambden
speaking of the Dignity of Barons has these Words King Hen. 3. out of a great
Multitude which w^ seditious and turbulent, called the very best by Writ ^
Summons to Parliament; for he, after many Troubles a^ Vexations between the
King himself, and Simon ^ Monefort, with other Barons; and after appeased:
d^decree and ordain, That all those Earls and Barons unto whom the King himself
vouchsafed to direct H^ Writs of Summons should come to his Parliament, an^ no
others: but that which he began a little before h^ Death, Edward 1. and his
Successors constantly o^served and continued. The said prudent King Edwar^
summoned always those of ancient Families, that were most wise, to His
Parliament; and omitted their Sons after their Death, if they were not
answerable to their Parents in Understanding. Also Master Cambden Cambden.
in another place says, that in the time of Edw. 1. select men for Wisdom and
Worth among the Gentry were called to Parliament, and their Posterity omitted
if they were defective therein.

As the power of sending Writs of Summons for Elections, was first exercised by
Hen. 3. so succeeding Kings did regulate the Elections upon such Writs, as does
appear by several Statutes, which all speak in the Name and Power of the Kings
themselves; for such was the Language of our Forefathers.

In 5 Ric. 2. c. 4. these be the words, The King Wills and Commands all
Persons which shall have Summons to come to Parliament; and every Person that
does absent himself (except he may reasonably and honestly excuse him to Our
Lord the King) shall be amerced, and otherwise punished.

7 Hen. 4. c. 15. Our Lord the King, at the grievous complaint of his Commons,
of the undue Election of the Knights of Counties, sometimes made of affection
of Sheriffs, and otherwise against the Form of the Writs, to the great slander
of the Counties, etc. Our Lord the King, willing therein to provide Remedy, by
the Assent of the Lords and Commons, Has Ordained, That Election shall be made
in the full County Court, and that all that be there present, as well Suitors
as others, shall proceed to the Election freely, notwithstanding any Request,
or Command to the contrary*

11 Hen. 4. c. 1. Our Lord the King Ordained, that a Sheriff that makes an
undue Return, etc. shall incur the Penalty of 100 l. to be paid to Our Lord the
King.

1 H. 5. c. 1. Our Lord the King, by the Advice and Assent of the Lords, and
the special Instance and Request of the Commons, Ordained, that the Knights of
the Shire be not chosen, unless they be resiant within the Shire the day of the
date of the Writ: and that Citizens and Burgesses be resiant, dwelling, and
free in the the same Cities and Buroughs, and no others, in any wise.

6 Hen. 6. c. 4. Our Lord the King, willing to provide remedy for Knights
chosen for Parliament, and Sheriffs, Has Ordained, that they shall have their
Answer, and traverse to Inquest of Office found against them.

8 Hen. 6. c. 7. Whereas Elections of Knights have been made by great
Outrages, and excessive number of People, of which most part was of People of
no value, whereof every of them pretend a Voice equivalent to Worthy Knights,
and Esquires; whereby Man-slaughters, Riots, and Divisions among Gentlemen
shall likely be* Our Lord the King has Ordained, That Knights of Shires be
chosen by People dwelling in the Counties, every of them having Lands or
Tenements to the value of 2 l. the year at the least, and that he that shall be
chosen, shall be dwelling and resiant within the Counties.

10. H. 6. Our Lord the King ordained, that Knight^ be chosen by People
dwelling, and having 2 l. by the year within the same County.

11 H. 6. c. 11. The King, willing to provide for the Ease of them that come to
the Parliaments and Councels of the King by his Commandment, has ordained that
if any Assault or Fray be made on them that com^ to Parliament, or other
Council of the King; the Part* which made any such Affray or Assault, shall pay
doubl^ Damages, and make Fine and Ransom at the Kings Will

23. H. 6. c. 15. The King considering the Statutes of 1 H. 5. c. 1. and 8.
Hen. 6. c. 7. and the Defaults of Sheriffs in returning Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, ordained;

1. That the said Statutes should be duly kept. 2. That the Sheriffs shall
deliver Precepts to Majors, and Bailiffs to choose Citizens and Burgesses. 3.
The Penalty of 100 l. for a Sheriff making an untrue Return concerning the
election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses. 4. The Penalty of 40 l, for Majors
or Bailiffs, making untrue Returns. 5. Due Election of Knights must be in the
full County Court, between the Hours of Eight and Eleven before noon. 6. The
Party must begin his Suit within 3 Months after the Parliament began. 7.
Knights of the Shire shall be notable Knights of the County, or such notable
Esquires, or Gentlemen born of the said Counties as shall be able to be
Knights, and no man to be such Knight which stands in the Degree of a Yeoman,
and under.
The last thing I observe in the Writ for Election of Members for Parliament,
is, That by the express words of the Writ, Citizens and Burgesses for the
Parliament were eligible at the County Court as well as Knights of the Shire;
and that not only Freeholders, but all others, whosoever were present at the
County Court, had Voices in such Elections: see the Stat. 7. Hen. 4. cap. 15.

I have the longer insisted on the Examination of the Writ, being the Power,
and Actions of the House of Commons are principally justified by the Trust
which the Freeholders commit unto them by virtue of this Writ.

I would not be understood to determine what Power the House of Commons does,
or may exercise if the King please: I confine my self only to the Power in the
Writ. I am not ignorant that King Hen. 7. in the Cause of the Duke of Britain,
and King James in the Business of the Palatinate asked the Council of the House
of Commons; and not only the House of Commons, but every Subject in particular
by Duty and Allegiance, is bound to giv^ his best Advice to his Sovereign, when
he is though^ worthy to have his Council asked.

13. Edw. 3. nu. 10. All the Merchants of England were summoned by Writ to
appear at Westminster in proper Person, to confer upon great business
concerning the Kings Honor, the Salvation of the Real^ and of themselves.

In Passages of public Council it is observable (says Sir Rob. Cotton) that
in ancient times the Kings Cotto^
of England did entertain the Commons with weighty Causes, thereby to apt and
bind them to a readiness of Charge; and the Commons to shun Expense ha^ warily
avoided to give Advice.

13. Edw. 3. The Lords and Commons were called to consult how the domestic
Quiet may be preserved, the Marches of Scotland defended, and the Sea secured
from Enemies. The Peers and Commons having apart consulted, the Commons desired
Not to be charged to Council of things of which they had no Cognizance; de
queux ils n' ont pas de Cognizance.

21. Edw. 3. Justice Thorp declaring to the Pee^ and Commons that the French
War began by their Advice: the Truce after by their Assent accepted and now
ended: the Kings Pleasure was to have their Counsel in the Prosecution: the
Commons, being commanded to assemble themselves, and when they were agreed, to
give notice to the King, and the Lords of the Council; after four days
Consultation, Humbly desire of the King that he would be advised therein by the
Lords and others of more Experience than themselves in such Affairs.

6. Ric. 2. The Parliament was called to consult whether the King should go in
Person to rescue Gaunt, or send an Army. The Commons, after two days Debate,
crave a Conference with the Lords, and Sir Thomas Puckering (their Speaker)
protests, that Councels for War did aptly belong to the King and His Lords; yet
since the Commons were commanded to give their Advice, they humbly wished a
Voyage by the King.

7. Ric. 2. At the second Session, the Commons are willed to Advise upon View
of Articles of Peace with the French; whether War or such Amity should be
accepted; they modestly excuse themselves, as too weak to Counsel in so weighty
Causes. But charged again, as they did tender their Honor and the Right of the
King; they make their Answer, giving their Opinions, rather for Peace, than War.

For fuller Manifestation of what has been said touching the Calling,
Election, and Power of the Commons in Parliament, it is behooful to observe
some Points delivered by Sir Edw. Coke in his Treatise of the Jurisdiction of
Parliaments; where,

First, he fairly begins, and lays his Foundation, that the High Court of
Parliament consists of the Kings Majesty sitting there, and of the three
Estates;

1. The Lords Spiritual. 2. The Lords Temporal. 3. And the Commons.
Hence it is to be gathered, that truly and properly it cannot be called the
High Court of Parliament, but whilst the King is sitting there in Person: so
that the Question now a days, whether the Parliament be above the King, is
either false or idle: false, if you exclude, and idle if you include the King's
Person in the word Parliament: The case truly put, and as it is meant, is,
whether the three Estates (o^ which is all one, the Lords and Commons)
assembled in Parliament be above the King: and not whether the King with the
three Estates be above the King: It appears also that they are much mistaken,
who reckon the King one of the three Estates as Mr. Pryn, page 20. and many
others do; for the three Estates make the Body, and the King is Caput*
Principium, and finis Parliamentor, as confesses Sir Edw. Coke.

Secondly, Sir Edw. Coke delivers, That certain it is, both Houses at first
sat together, and that it appears in Edward the Third's time, the Lords and
Commons sat^ together, and the Commons had no continual Speaker. If he mean,
the Lords and Commons did sit, and Vote together in one Body; few there be that
will believe it, because the Commons never were wont to lose, or forego any of
their Liberties, or Privileges; and for them to stand now with their Hats in
their hands (which is no Magistratical Posture) there, where they were wont to
sit and Vote, is an alteration not imaginable to be endured by the Commons. It
may be, in former times, when the Commons had no constant Speaker, they were
often, and perhaps for the most part, in the same Chamber, and in the presence of
the Lords, to hear the Debates and Consulations of the Great Council, but not
to sit, and Vote with them: for when the Commons were to Advise among
themselves, the Chapter House of the Abbey of Westminster was oft-times their
place to meet in, before they had a settled House, and their meetings not being
very frequent, may be the reason, I conceive, why the name of the House of
Commons is not of such great Antiquity, or taken notice of; but the House of
Lords was only called the Parliament House: and the Treatise called, Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, speaks of the Parliament as but of one House only. The
House, where now the Commons sit in Westminster, is but of late Use, or
Institution: for in Edward the Sixth's days Stow.
it was a Chapel of the College of Saint Stephen, and had a Dean, Secular
Canons and Chorists, who were the Kings Quire at his Palace at Westminster, and
at the dissolution were translated to the Kings Chapel at White Hall.

Also I read, that Westminster Hall being out of Repair, Ric. 2. caused a large
House to be builded betwixt the Clock-tower, and the Gate of the great old Hall
in the midst of the Palace Court: the House was long and large, made of Timber,
covered with Tiles, open on both sides, that all might see and hear what was
both said and done: four thousand Archers of Cheshire, which were the Kings own
Guard, attended on that House, and had bouche a Court, and 6 d. by the day.

Thirdly, he says, The Commons are to choose their Speaker, but seeing after
their Choice the King may refuse him, the Use is (as in the conge d'eslire of a
Bishop) that the King does name a Discreet, Learned man whom the Commons Elect:
when the Commons have chosen, the King may allow of his Excuse, and Disallow
him, as Sir John Popham was, (says his Margin.)

Fourthly, he informs us, That the first day of the Parliament four Justices
assistants, and two Civilian^ (Masters of the Chancery) are appointed Receivers
(...) Petitions, which are to be delivered within six days following: and six
of the Nobility, and two Bishops, calling to them the Kings Learned Council,
when nee^ should be, to be Tryers of the said Petitions, whether the^ were
reasonable, good, and necessary to be offered and propounded to the Lords. He
does not say, that any (...) the Commons were either Receivers, or Tryers (...)
Petitions: nor that the Petitions were to be propounded to Them, but to the
Lords.

Fifthly, he teaches us, that a Knight, Citizen, (...) Burgess, cannot make a
Proxy, because he is Electe^ and Trusted by multitudes of People: here a
Question may be, whether a Committee, if it be Trusted to (...) any thing, be
not a Proxy? since he says, the Hi^ Power of Parliament to be committed to a
few, is hold^ to be against the Dignity of Parliaments; and that (...) such
Commission ought to be granted.

Sixthly, he says, The King cannot take notice of (...) thing said, or done in
the House of Commons, but by (...) Report of the House. Surely, if the Commons
sa^ with the Lords, and the King were present, (...) might take notice of what
was done in His Presence. And I read in Vowel, that the old Usage w^ that all
the Degrees of Parliament sat together, (...) every man that had there to
speak, did it openly, bef^ the King and his whole Parliament.

In the 35 Eliz. there was a Report, that the Commons were against the
Subsidies, which was to^ the Queen: whereupon, Sir Henry Knivet said, it should
be a thing answerable at the Bar for any man to report any thing of Speeches,
or Matters done in the House. Sir John Wolley liked the Motion of Secrecy;
except only the Queen, from whom, he said, there is no reason to keep any
thing: And Sir Robert Cecil did allow, that the Council of the House should be
secretly kept, and nothing reported in malam partem. But if the meaning be,
that they might not report any thing done here to the Queen, he was altogether
against it.

Seventhly, he voucheth an Enditement or Information in the Kings Bench against
39 of the Commons, for departing without License from Parliament, contrary to
the Kings Inhibition: whereof six submitted to their Fines, and Edmund Ployden
pleaded, he remained continually from the beginning to the end of the
Parliament: Note, he did not plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court of Kings
Bench, but pleaded his constant Attendance in Parliament, which was an
Acknowledgment, and submitting to the Jurisdiction of that Court: and had been
an unpardonable betraying of the Privileges of Parliament by so learned a
Lawyer, if his Case ought only to be tried in Parliament.

Eighthly, he resolves, that the House of Lords in their House have Power of
Judicature, and the Commons in their House: and both Houses together. He brings
Records to prove the Power of Judicature of both Houses together, but not of
either of them by it self. He cites the 33 Edw. 1. for the Judicature of both
Houses together: where Nicholas de Segrave was adjudged per Praelatos, Comites,
and Barons, and alios de Concilio, by the Prelates, Earls and Barons, and
others of the Council. Here is no mention of the Judgment of the Commons.
Others of the Council, may mean, the Kings Privy Council, (...) his Council
Learned in the Laws, which are called by their Writs to give Counsel; but so
are not the Commons. The Judgment it self says, Nichol^ de Segrave confessed
his fault in Parliament, and submitted himself to the Kings Will: thereupo^ the
King, willing to have the Advice of the Earl^ Barons, Great men, and others of
his Council, enjoined them by the Homage, Fealty, and Alleg^ance which they
owed, that they should faithful counsel Him what Punishment should be
inflicte^ for such a Fact: who all, advising diligently, sa^ That such a Fact
deserves loss of Life and Member^ Thus the Lords (we see) did but Advise the
Kin^ what Judgment to give against him that deserte^ the Kings Camp to fight a
Duel in France.

Ninthly, he says, Of later times, see diverse not ab^ Judgments at the
Prosecution of the Commons by t^ Lords: where the Commons were Prosecutors,
the^ were no Judges, but (as he terms them) gener^ Inquisitors, or the Grand
Inquest of the Kingdom. The Judgments he cites are but in King James his daye^
and no elder.

Tenthly, also he tells us, of the Judicature in t^ House of Commons alone; his
most ancient preceden^ is but in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, of one Tho. Lon^ who
gave the Mayor of Westbury 10 l. to be elect^ Burgess.

Eleventhly, he has a Section, entitled, The House of Commons (to many
Purposes) a distinct Court: an^ says, Nota, the House of Commons to many
Purposes, (...) distinct Court: of those many Purposes he tells but one that
is, it uses to adjourn it self. Commissioners tha^ be but to examine Witnesses,
may Adjourn themselves, yet are no Court.

Twelfthly, he handles the Privileges of Parliament, where the great Wonder is,
that this great Master of ^he Law, who has been often a Parliament Man, could
^ind no other, nor more Privileges of Parliament ^ut one, and that is, freedom
from Arrests: which, he ^aith, holds, unless in three cases, Treason, Felony,
and ^he Peace. And for this freedom from Arrests, he cites Ancient Precedents
for all those in the House of Lords, but he brings not one Precedent at all for
the Commons Freedom from Arrests.

It is behooful for a Freeholder to consider what Power is in the House of
Peers; for although the Freeholder have no Voice in the Election of the Lords,
yet if the Power of that House extend to make Ordinances that bind the
Freeholders, it is necessary for him to enquire what and whence that Power is,
and how far it reaches: The chief Writ of ^ummons to the Peers was in these
words,

CAROLUS Dei Gratia, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo patri G. eadem gratia
Archiepiscopo Cantuarien^i, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, salutem.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro qui^usdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, Nos and statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae, and
ecclesiae Anglica^ae concernentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud W. etc.
teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum, and cum ^aeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus dicti regni nostri Angliae colloquium habere, and tractatum:
Vobis ^n fide, and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo
mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotioru^ arduitate, and periculis
imminentibus, cessante quacunqu^ excusatione dictis die and loco personaliter
intersitis, Nobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Procerib^
praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque concilium impensuri,
and hoc sicut Nos and Honorem nostr^ac salvationem regni praedicti, ac
ecclesiae sanctae, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus
omittati^ Praemonentes Decanum and capitulum ecclesiae vestrae Ca^tuariensis,
ac Archidiacanos, totumque Clerum vestrae Di^cesis, quod idem Decanus and
Archidiaconi in propriis pe^sonis suis, ac dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque
Cler^ per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam and sufficientem po^ statem ab
ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes, praedictis die ^ loco personaliter
intersint, ad consentiendum hiis quae tu^ibidem de Commune Concilio ipsius
Regni Nostri, divine favente Clementia, contigerint ordinari. Test Meipso ap^
West. etc.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, etc. To the mo^ Reverend Father in Christ W. by
the sam^ Grace Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all
England, Health. Whereas by the Advice and Assent of our Council, for certain
difficult and urgent Businesses concerning Us, the Stat^ and Defense of Our
Kingdom of England, and (...) the English Church: We have Ordained a certa^
Parliament of Ours to be holden at W. etc. a^ there to have Conference, and to
treat with you the Prelates, Great men, and Peers of Our said Kingdom We
straightly Charge and Command, by the Fai^ and Love by which you are bound to Us,
that considering the Difficulties of the Businesses aforesai^ and the imminent
Dangers, and setting aside all Excuse you be personally present at the Day and
Place aforesaid, to treat and give your Counsel concerning the said Businesses:
And this, as you love Us and Our Honor, and the Safeguard of the foresaid
Kingdom and Church, and the Expedition of the said Businesses, you must no way
omit. Forewarning the Dean and Chapter of your Church of Canterbury, and the
Archdeacons, and all the Clergy of your Diocese, that the same Dean, and the
Archdeacon in their proper Persons, and the said Chapter by one, and the said
Clergy by two fit Proctors, having full and sufficient Power from them the
Chapter and Clergy, be personally present at the foresaid Day and Place, to
Consent to those things, which then and there shall happen by the favor of
God, to be Ordained by the Common Council of our Kingdom. Witness Our Self ^t
Westminster.

The same Form of Writ mutatis mutandis, concluding with, you must no way omit.
Witness, etc. ^s to the Temporal Barons: But whereas the Spiritu^l Barons are
required by the Faith and Love; the Temporal are required by their Allegiance
or Homage.

The Difference between the two Writs is, that the Lords are to Treat and to
Give Counsel; the Commons ^re to Perform and Consent to what is ordained.

By this Writ the Lords have a deliberative or a ^onsultive Power to Treat, and
give Counsel in difficult Businesses: and so likewise have the Judges, Barons
^f the Exchequer, the Kings Council, and the Ma^ters of the Chancery, by their
Writs. But over and ^esides this Power, the Lords do exercise a decisive or
Judicial Power, which is not mentioned or found in their Writ.

For the better Understanding of these two different Powers, we must carefully
note the distinction between a Judge and a Counselor in a Monarchy: the
ordinary Duty, or Office of a Judge is to give Judgment, and to command in the
Place of the King; but the ordinary Duty of a Counselor is to advise the King
what he himself shall do, or cause to be done: The Judge represents the Kings
Person in his absence, the Counselor in the Kings Presence gives his Advice:
Judges by their Commission o^ Institution are limited their Charge and Power,
and in such things they may judge, and cause their Judgments to be put in
Execution: But Counselors have no Power to command their Consultations to b^
executed, for that were to take away the Sovereignty from their Prince, who by
his Wisdom is to weigh^ the Advice of his Council, and at liberty to resolv^
according to the Judgment of the wiser part of hi^ Council, and not always of
the greater: In a word* regularly a Counselor has no Power but in the Kings
Presence, and a Judge no Power but out o^ his Presence; These two Powers, thus
distinguished* have yet such Correspondency, and there is so nee^ Affinity
between the Acts of judging, and counselling; that although the ordinary Power
of the Judg^ is to give Judgment: yet by their Oath they ar^ bound in Causes
extraordinary, when the King pleases to call them, to be his Counselors; and
o^ the other side, although the proper work of a Counselor be only to make
Report of his Advice to his Sovereign, yet many times for the Ease only, and by
the Permission of the King, Counselors are allowed to judge, and command in
Points wherein ordinarily they know the mind of the Prince; and what they do is
the act of the Royal Power it self: for the Council is always presupposed to be
united to the Person of the King, and therefore the Decrees of the Council are
styled, By the King in his Privy Council.

To apply this Distinction to the House of Peers: we find originally they are
called as Counselors to the King, and so have only a deliberative Power
specified in their Writ, and therefore the Lords do only then properly perform
the Duty for which they are called, when they are in the Kings Presence, that
He may have Conference and treat with them: the very Words of the Writ are,
nobiscum ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis super dictis
negotiis tractaturi vestrumque concilium impensuri, with Us and with the
Prelates, Great men and Peers to treat and give your council: the word Nobiscum
implies plainly the Kings Presence. It is a thing in reason most absurd, to
make the King assent to the Judgments in Parliament, and allow Him no part ^n
the Consultation; this were to make the King ^ Subject. Council loses the name
of Council, and becomes a Command if it put a Necessity upon the King to follow
it: such Imperious Councels, make those that are but Counselors ^n name to be
Kings in Fact: and Kings themselves to be but Subjects. We read in Sir Ro^ert
Cotton, that toward the end of the Saxons, and ^he first times of the Norman
Kings, Parliaments stood (...) Custom-grace fixed to Easter, Whitsontide, and
Christmas; and that at the Kings Court, or Palace, Parliaments sat in the
Presence, or Privy Chamber from whence he infers, an Improbability to believe
the King excluded His own Presence; and unmannerly f^ Guests to bar Him their
Company who gave them the^ Entertainment. And although now adays the
Parliament sit not in the Court where the Kings houshol^ remains, yet still
even to this day, to show that Parliaments are the Kings Guests, the Lord
Steward o^ the Kings Household keeps a standing Table to entertain the Peers
during the sitting of Parliament; and he alone, or some from, or under him, as
the Treasurer, or Comptroller of the Kings Household taken the Oaths of the
Members of the House of Common the first day of the Parliament.

Sir Richard S^roop Steward of the Household Seld^
of our Sovereign Lord the King, by the Commandment of the Lords sitting in
full Parliament i^ the Great Chamber, put I. Lord Gomeniz and William Weston to
answer severally to Accusations brough^ against them.

The Necessity of the King's Presence in Parliamen^ appears by the Desire of
Parliaments themselves i^former times; and the Practice of it Sir Robert Cotto^
proves by several Precedents: whence he conclude^ that in the Consultations of
State, and Decisions of private Plaints, it is clear from all times, the King
w^ not only present to advise, but to determine also. Whenever the King is
present, all Power of judging which is derived from His, cease: The Votes of
the Lords may serve for matter of Advice, the fina^ Judgment is only the Kings.
Indeed, of late years* Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, by reason of their Sex,
being not so fit for public Assemblies, have brought it out of Use, by which
means it is com^ to pass, that many things which were in former times acted by
Kings themselves, have of late been left to the Judgment of the Peers; who, in
Quality of Judges extraordinary, are permitted for the Ease of the King, and in
His absence, to determine such matters as are properly brought before the King
Himself sitting in Person, attended with His great Council of Prelates and
Peers. And the Ordinances that are made there, receive their Establishment
either from the Kings Presence in Parliament, where his Chair of State is
constantly placed; or at least from the Confirmation of Him, who in all Courts,
and in all Causes is Supreme Judge. All Judgment is by, or under Him; it
cannot be without, much less against his Approbation. The King only and none
but He, if He were able, should judge all Causes; says Bracton, that ancient
Chief Justice in Hen. 3. time.

An ancient Precedent I meet with cited by Master Seldom, of a judicial
Proceeding in a Criminal Cause of the Barons before the Conquest, wherein I
observe the Kings Will was, that the Lords should be Judges, ^n the Cause
wherein Himself was a Party; and He ^atified their Proceeding: The case was
thus, Earl Godwin having had a Trial before the Lords under King Hardicanute,
touching the Death of Alfred (Son to King Ethelbert, and Brother to him who was
afterward Edward the Confessor) had fled out of England; and upon his Return,
with Hope of Edward the Confessor's Favor, he solicited the Lords ^o intercede
for him with the King; who (consulting together) brought Godwin with them
before the King to obtain his Grace and Favor: But the King* ^resently, as
soon as he beheld him, said, Thou Traitor Godwin, I do appeal thee of the Death
of my Brother Alfred, whom thou have most traitorously slain; Then Godwin
excusing it, answered, My Lord the King, may it please your Grace, I neither
betrayed nor killed your Brother, whereof I put my self upon the Judgment of
your Court: Then the King said, You noble Lords, Earls, and Barons of the Land,
who are my Liege men now gathered here together, and have heard My Appeal, and
Godwins Answer, I Will that in this Appeal between Us, ye decree right
Judgment, and do true Justice. The Earls and Barons treating of this among
themselves, were of differing Judgments; some said that Godwin was never bound
to the King either by Homage, Service, or Fealty, and therefore could not be
his Traitor, and that he had not slain Alfred with his own hands: others said,
that neither Earl nor Baron, nor any other Subject of the King could wage his
War by Law against the King in his Appeal; but most wholly put himself into the
Kings Mercy, and offer competent Amends. Then Leofric Consul of Chester, a good
man before God and the World, said, Earl Godwin next to the King, is a man of
the best Parentage of all England, and he cannot deny but that by his Counsel
Alfred the Kings Brother was slain, therefore for my part I consider, that He
and his Son, and all we twelve Earls who are his Friends and Kinsmen, do go
humbly before the King, laden with so much Gold and Silver as each of us can
carry in our Arms, offering him That for his Offense, and humbly praying for
Pardon; And he will pardon the Earl, and taking his Homage and Fealty, will
restore him all his Lands. All they in this form lading themselves with
Treasure, and coming to the King, did show the Manner and Order of their
Consideration, to which, The King not willing to contradict, did ratify all
that they had judged.

23 Hen. 2. In Lent there was an Assembly of all the Spiritual and Temporal
Barons at Westminster, Seldom.
for the determination of that great Contention between Alfonso King of
Castile, and Sancho King of Navarre, touching diverse Castles, and Territories
in Spain, which was by compromise submitted to the Judgment of the King of
England. And the King, consulting with his Bishops, Earls, and Barons,
determined it (as he says) Himself in the first Person, in the Exemplification
of the Judgment.

2 Of King John also, that great Controversy touching the Barony that William
of Moubray claimed against William of Stutvil, which had depended from the time
of King Hen. 2. was ended by the Council of the Kingdom, and Will of the King:
Concilio regni, and voluntate Regis.

The Lords in Parliament adjudge William de Weston to Death for surrendering
Barwick Castle, but for Seldom.
that Our Lord the King was not informed of the manner of the Judgment, the
Constable of the Tower, Allen Buxall, was commanded safely to keep the said
William until he has other Commandment from our Lord the King. 4 Ric. 2.

Also the Lords adjudged John Lord of Gomentz for surrendering the Towns, and
Castles of Ardee: Seldom.
and for that he was a Gentleman, and Bannaret, and had served the late King,
he should be beheaded, and for that our Lord the King was not informed of the
manner of the Judgment, the Execution thereof shall be respited until our Lord
the King shall be informed. It is commanded to the Constable of the Tower,
safely to keep the said John, until he has other commandment from our Lord
the King.

In the case of Hen. Spencer Bishop of Norwich, 7 Ric. 2. who was accused for
complying with the French, and other Failings; the Bishop complained, what was
done against him, did not pass by the Assent and Knowledge of the Peers;
whereupon it was said in Parliament, that The cognizance and Punishment of his
Offense did, of common Right, and ancient Custom of the Realm of England,
solely and wholly belong to Our Lord the King, and no other: Le cognizance and
punissement de commune droit and auntienne custom de Royalme de Engleterre,
seul and per tout apperteine au Roy nostre Seignieur, and a null autre.

In the case of the Lord de la Ware, the Judgment of the Lords was, that he
should have place next after the Lord Willoughby of Erisbe, by consent of all,
except the Lord Windsor: and the Lord Keeper was required to acquaint Her
Majesty with the Determination of the Peers, and to know her Pleasure
concerning the same.

The Inference from these Precedents, is, that the Decisive or Judicial Power
exercised in the Chamber of Peers, is merely derivative, and subservient to the
Supreme Power, which resides in the King, and is grounded solely upon his grace
and favor: for howsoever the House of Commons do allege their Power to be
founded on the Principles of Nature, in that they are the Representative Body
of the Kingdom (as they say) and so being the whole, may take care, and have
power by Nature to preserve themselves: yet the House of Peers do not, nor
cannot make any such the least Pretense, since there is no reason in Nature,
why amongst a company of men who are all equal, some few should be picked out
to be exalted above their Fellows, and have power to Govern those who by Nature
are their companions. The difference between a Peer and a Commoner, is not by
Nature, but by the grace of the Prince: who creates Honors, and makes those
Honors to be hereditary (whereas he might have given them for life only, or
during pleasure, or good behavior) and also annexeth to those Honors the
Power of having Votes in Parliament, as hereditary Counselors, furnished with
ampler Privileges than the Commons: All these Graces conferred upon the Peers,
are so far from being derived from the Law of Nature, that they are
contradictory and destructive of that natural equality and freedom of mankind,
which many conceive to be the foundation of the Privileges and Liberties of the
House of Commons: there is so strong an opposition between the liberties of
Grace and Nature, that it had never been possible for the two Houses of
Parliament to have stood together without mortal Enmity, and eternal jarring,
had they been raised upon such opposite foundations: But the truth is, the
Liberties and Privileges of both Houses have but one, and the self same
foundation, which is nothing else but the mere and sole Grace of Kings.

Thus much may serve to show the Nature and Original of the deliberative and
decisive Power of the Peers of the Kingdom.

The matter about which the deliberative power is conversant, is generally the
Consulting and Advising upon any urgent Business which concerns the King, or
Defense of the Kingdom: and more especially sometimes in preparing new Laws;
and this Power is grounded upon the Writ.

The decisive Power is exercised in giving Judgment in some difficult Cases;
but for this Power of the Peers, I find no Warrant in their Writ.

Whereas the Parliament is styled the Supreme Court it must be understood
properly of the King sitting in the House of Peers in Person; and but
improperly of the Lords without him: Every Supreme Court must have the Supreme
Power, and the Supreme Power is always Arbitrary; for that is Arbitrary which
has no Superior on Earth to control^ it. The last Appeal in all Government,
must still b^ to an Arbitrary Power, or else Appeals will b^ in Infinitum,
never at an end. The Legislative Power is an Arbitrary Power, for they are
termini convertibiles.

The main Question in these our days is, Where this Power Legislative remains?
or is placed; upon conference of the Writs of Summons for both Houses, with the
Bodies and Titles of our Ancient Acts of Parliament, we shall find the Power of
making Laws rests solely in the King. Some affirm, that a part of the
Legislative Power is in either of the Houses; but besides invincible reason
from the Nature of Monarchy it self, which must have the Supreme Power Alone;
the constant Ancient Declaration of this Kingdom is against it. For howsoever
of later years in the Titles and Bodies of our Acts of Parliament it be not so
particularly expressed who is the Author and Maker of our Laws, yet in almost
all our elder Statutes it is precisely expressed, that they are made by the
King Himself: The general words used of later times, that Laws are made by
Authority of Parliament, are particularly explained in former Statutes, to
mean, That the King Ordains, the Lords Advise, the Commons Consent, as by
comparing the Writs with the Statutes that expound the Writs, will evidently
appear.

Magna Charta begins thus, Henry by the grace of God, Know ye, that WE of Our
Mere and Free Will have given these Liberties.

In the self-same style runs Charta de Foresta, and tells us the Author of it.

The Statute de Scaccario 41 H. 3. begins in these words, The King Commands,
that all Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and other Officers, etc. And concerning the
Justices of Chester, the King Wills etc. and again, He Commands the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer upon their Allegiance.

The Stat. of Marlborough, 52 Hen. 3. goes thus: The King has Made these
Acts, Ordinances, and Statutes, which He Wills to be Observed of all his
Subjects, high and low.

3 Edw. 1. The Title of this Statute is, These are the ACTS of King EDWARD; and
after it follows, The KING has Ordained these ACTS; and in the first Chapter,
The King Forbids and Commands, That none do hurt, damage, or grievance ^o
any Religious Man, or Person of the Church: and in the thirteenth Chapter, The
King prohibiteth that none do Ravish or take away by force, any Maid within age.

6 Edw. 1. It is said, Our Sovereign Lord the King has established these Acts,
commanding they be ^bserved within this Realm: and in the fourteenth Chap. the
words are, The King of his special Grace grants, that the Citizens of London
shall recover in an Assise, Damage with the Land.

The Stat. of West. 2. says, Our Lord the King has ordained, that the Will of
the Giver be observed and in the 3. Chap. Our Lord the King has ordained, that
a woman after the Death of her Husband shall recover by a Writ of Entry.

The Stat. of Quo Warranto says, Our Lord the King at His Parliament, of his
special Grace, and for Affection which he bears to his Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, and others, has granted, that they that have Liberties by Prescription
shall enjoy them.

In the Stat. de finibus Levatis, the Kings Words are, We intending to provide
Remedy in our Parliament have ordained, etc.

28. Edw. 1. c. 5. The King Wills, that the Chancellor, and the Justices of the
Bench shall follow Him* so that he may have at all times some near unto him
tha^ be learned in the Laws: and in Chap. 24. the words are, Our Lord the King,
after full Conference and Debate had with his Earls, Barons, Nobles, and other
Great men, by their whole Consent, has ordained etc.

The Stat. de Tallagio (if any such Statute there be) speaks in the Kings
Person, No Officer of Ours* No Tallage shall be taken by Us; We Will and Grant.

1. Edw. 2. begins thus, Our Lord the King Wills and Commands.

The Stat. of 9. the same King, says, Our Lord the King, by the Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, and other great States, has Ordained.

10. Edw. 2. It is provided by our Lord the King and his Justices.

The Stat. of Carlisle says, We have sent our Command in writing firmly to be
observed.

1. Edw. 3. begins thus, King Edw. 3. at his Parliament at the request of the
Commonalty by their Petition before him, and his Council in Parliament, has
granted, etc. and in the 5th Chap. The King wills, that no man be charged to
arm himself otherwise than he was wont.

5. Edw. 3. Our Lord the King, at the Request of his People, has established
these things, which He Wills to be kept.

9. Of the same King there is this Title, Our Lord the King by the Assent etc.
and by the Advice of his Council being there, has ordained, etc.

In his 10 year, it is said, Because Our Lord King Edw. 3. has received by the
Complaint of the Prelates, Earls, Barons; also at the showing of the Knights of
the Shires, and his Commons by their Petition put in his Parliament, etc. Has
ordained, by the Assent etc. at the Request of the said Knights and Commons,
etc.

The same year in another Parliament you may find, these be the Articles
accorded by Our Lord the King, with the Assent, etc. at the Request of the
Knights of the Shires, and the Commons by their Petition ^ut in the said
Parliament.

In the year-Book 22 Edw. 3. 3. pl. 25. It is said, The King makes the Laws by
the Assent of the Peers and Commons; and not the Peers and Commons.

The Stat. of 1. Ric. 2. has this Beginning, Rich^d the 2. by the Assent of
the Prelates, Dukes, Earls and Barons, and at the Instance and special Request
of ^ Commons, Ordained.

There being a Statute made 5 Ric. 2. c. 5. against Lollards, in the next year
the Commons Petition Him, Supplient les Commons que come un estatute fuit fait,
etc. The Commons beseech, that whereas a Statute was made in the last
Parliament, etc. which was never Assented to, nor Granted by the Commons, but
that which was done therein was done without their Assent. In this Petition the
Commons acknowledge it a Statute, and so call it, though they assented not to
it.

17 Ric. 2. nu. 44. The Commons desire, some pursuing to make a Law which they
conceive hurtful to the Commonwealth; That His Majesty will not pass it.

As for the Parliaments in Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Edw. 4. and Ric. 3. Reigns,
the most of them do agree in this one Title, Our Lord the King by the Advice
and Assent of His Lords, and at the special Instance and Request of the
Commons, Has ordained. The Precedents in this Point are so numerous that it
were endless to cite them.

The Statutes in Hen. 7. days do for the most part agree, both in the Titles
and Bodies of the Acts* in these words: Our Lord the King by the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons i^ Parliament assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, has ordained.

Unto this Kings time we find the Commons very often petitioning, but not
petitioned unto. The first Petition made to the Commons that I meet with among
the Statutes, is but in the middle of this King Hen 7. Reign, which was so well
approved, that the Petition it self is turned into ^ Statute: It begins thus,
To the Right Worshipfu^ Commons in this present Parliament assembled Shows to
your discreet Wisdoms, the Wardens of the Fellowship of the Craft of Upholsters
within London, etc. This Petition, though it be directed to the Commons in the
Title; yet the Prayer of the Petition is turned to the King, and not to the
Commons; for it concludes, therefore it may please the Kings Highness by the
Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and his Commons in Parliament, etc.

Next for the Statutes of Hen. 8. they do most part agree, both in their
Titles, and the Bodies of the Acts, with those of his Father King Hen. 7.

Lastly, In the Statutes of Edw. 6. Qu. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and of
our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, there is no Mention made in their
Titles of any Assent of Lords and Commons, or of any Ordaining by the King, but
only in general terms it is said, Acts made in Parliament: or thus, At the
Parliament were Enacted: yet in the Bodies of many of these Acts of these last
Princes, there is sometimes Mention made of Consent of Lords and Commons, in
these or the like words: It is Enacted by the King, with the Assent of the
Lords and Commons; Except only in the Statutes of our Lord King Charles,
wherein there is no Mention, that I can find, of any Consent of the Lords and
Commons; or Ordaining by the King: But the words are, Be it Enacted by
Authority of Parliament: or else, Be it Enacted by the King, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons; as if they were all Fellow-Commissioners.

Thus it appears, that even till the time of K. Ed. 6. who lived but in our
Fathers days, it was punctually expressed in every King's Laws, that the
Statutes and Ordinances were made by the King. And withal we may see by what
degrees the Styles, and Titles o^ Acts of Parliament have been varied, and to
whose Disadvantage. The higher we look, the more absolute we find the Power of
Kings in Ordainin^ Laws: nor do we meet with at first so much as the Assent or
Advice of the Lords mentioned. Nay, (...) we cast our eye upon many Statutes of
those that b^ of most Antiquity, they will appear as if they we^ no Laws at
all; but as if they had been made only to teach us, that the Punishments of
many Offenc^ were left to the mere pleasure of Kings. The punitive part of the
Law, which gives all the Vigo^ and Binding Power to the Law, we find committed
by the Statutes to the Kings mere Will and Pleasure, as if there were no Law at
all. I will offer a few Precedents to the Point.

3 Edw. 1. c. 9. says, That Sheriffs, Coroners, a^ Bailiffs, for concealing of
Felonies, shall make grievo^ Fines at the Kings pleasure.

Chap. 13. Ordains, That such as be found culpabl^ of Ravishing of Women, shall
Fine at the Kings pleasure.

Chap. 15. says, The penalty for detaining a Priso^er that is mainpernable, is
a Fine at the Kings pleasure, or a grievous Amercement to the King; and, he the
shall take Reward for deliverance of such, shall be at the Great Mercy of the
King.

Chap. 20. Offenders in Parks or Ponds shall man Fines at the Kings pleasure.

Chap. 25. Committers of Champerty, and Extortioners, are to be punished at the
Kings pleasure.

Chap. 31. Purveyors, not paying for what they tak^ shall be Grievously
punished at the Kings pleasure.

Chap. 32. The King shall punish Grievously the Sheriff, and him that does
maintain Quarrels.

Chap. 37. The King shall grant Attaint in Plea of Land where it shall seem to
him necessary.

7 Edw. 1. says, Whereas of late, before certain Persons deputed to Treat upon
Debates between Us and certain Great Men, it was accorded, that in our next
Parliament provision shall be made by Us, and the common Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all Parliaments for ever, every man shall
come without Force and Armor. And now in our next Parliament the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and Commonalty have said, That to US it belongs, through Our
Royal Signory, straightly to defend Force of Armor at all times, when it shall
please Us, and to punish them which shall do otherwise, and hereunto they are
bound to Aid Us their Sovereign Lord at all Seasons when Need shall be.

13 Edw. 1. Takers away of Nuns from Religious Houses, Fined at the Kings Will.

If by the Default of the Lord that will not avoid the Dike, Underwoods, and
Bushes in Highways, murder be done, the Lord shall make Fine at the Kings
pleasure.

28 Edw. 1. If a Goldsmiths be attainted for not Assaying, Touching, and
Working Vessels of Gold, he shall be punished by Ransom at the Kings pleasure.

2 Hen. 4. The Commons desire they may have Answer of their Petitions before
the gift of any Subsidy; to which the King answers, He would conferr with the
Lords, and do what should be best according to their Ad^ice; and the last day
of Parliament He gave this An^er, That that manner of Doing had not been Seen,
nor used in no time of his Progenitors or Predecessors, that they should have
any Answer of then Petitions, or knowledge of it before they have showed, and
finished all their other Business of Parliament, be it of any Grant, Business,
or otherwise, and therefore the King would not in any ways change the Good
Customs and Usages Made and Used of Ancient Times.

5 Hen. 4. c. 6. Whereas one Savage did Beat and maime one Richard Chedder
Esquire, Menial Servan^ to Tho. Brook, Knight of the Shire for Somersetshire,
the Statute says, Savage shall make Fine and Ransom at the Kings Pleasure.

8 Hen. 4. It is said, POTESTAS PRINCIPIS NON EST INCLUSA LEGIBUS, the Power of
the Prince is not included in the Laws.

13 Hen. 4. nu. 20. we read of a Restitution i^ Blood, and Lands of William
Lasenby, by the King, by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual, and Commons;
omitting the Lords Temporal.

2 Hen. 5. in a Law made, there is a Clause, That it is the Kings Regalty to
grant or deny such of their Petitions as pleases Himself.

6 Hen. 6. c. 6. An Ordinance was made for to endure As long as it shall please
the King.

11 Hen. 7. c. 1. has this Law, The King o^ Sovereign Lord, calling to His
remembrance the duty of Allegiance of His Subjects of this His Realm, and that
by reason of the same they are bound to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord
for the time being in His Wars, for the Defense of Him, and the Land, against
every Rebellion, Power, and Might reared against Him, and with Him to enter and
abide in Service in Battle, if Case so require; and that for the same Service,
what fortune ever fall by chance in the same Battle, against the Mind and Will
of the Prince (as in this Land some time past has been seen) that it is not
reasonable, but against all Laws, Reason, and good Conscience, that the said
Subjects, going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars, attending upon Him in His
Person, or being in other places, by his Commandment within the Land, or
without; any thing should lose or forfeit, for doing their true Duty and
Service of Allegiance; Be it therefore Enacted, That no Person that shall
attend upon the King, and do Him true Service, shall be attainted therefore of
Treason, or any other Offense by Act of Parliament, or otherwise.

Also the 18 Chap. of the same Year says, Where every Subject by the Duty of
his Allegiance is bounden to Serve and Assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord at
all Seasons when need shall require, and bound to give attendance upon his
Royal Person, to defend the same when He shall fortune to go in Person in War
for Defense of the Realm, or against His Rebels and Enemies, for the Subduing
and Repressing of them, and their malicious purpose.

Christopher Wray, Sergeant at Law, chosen Speaker, 13 Eliz. in his Speech to
Her Majesty, said, that for the orderly Government of the Commonwealth, three
things were necessary:

1. Religion. 2. Authority. 3. Law.
By the first, we are taught not only our Duty to God, but to obey the Queen,
and that not only in Temporals, but in Spirituals, in which Her Power is
absolute.

Mr. Grivel in the 35 Eliz. said in Parliament, He ^ished not the making of
many Laws; since the more we make, the less Liberty we have our selves; Her
Majesty not being bound by them.

For further proof that the Legislative Power is proper to the King, we may
take notice, that in ancient time, as Sir Edw. Coke says, All Acts of
Parliament were in form of Petitions: if the Petitions were from the Commons,
and the Answer of them the King's, it is easy thereby to judge who made the
Act of Parliament: Also Sir Io. Glanvil affirms, that in former times the
course of Petitioning the King was this, The Lords and Speaker, either by Words
or Writing, preferred their Petition to the King; this then was called the Bill
of the Commons, which being received by the King, part He received, part He put
out, and part he ratified; for as it came from Him, it was drawn into a Law.

Also it appears, that Provisions, Ordinances, and Proclamations, made
heretofore out of Parliament, have been always acknowledged for Laws and
Statutes: We have amongst the printed Statutes, Chanc.
one called the Statute of Ireland, dated Egerton.
at Westminster, 9 Feb. 14 Hen. 3. which is nothing but a Letter of the King to
Gerard Son of Maurice Justicer of Ireland.

The Explanations of the Statute of Gloucester made by the King and His
Justices only, were received always for Statutes, and are still printed with
them.

Also the Statute made for the correction of the twelfth Chapter of the Statute
of Gloucester, was Signed under the Great Seal, and sent to the Justices of the
Bench after the manner of a Writ Patent, with a certain Writ closed, dated by
the Kings hand at Westminster, 2 Maii 9 Edw. 1. requiring that they should do
and execute all and every thing contained in it, though the same do not accord
with the Stat. of Gloucester in all things.

The Provisions of Merton made by the King at an Assembly of Prelates, and the
greater part of the Earls and Barons, for the Coronation of the King, and his
Queen Elinor, are in the form of a Proclamation, and begin Provisum est in
Curia domini Regis apud Merton.

19 Hen. 3. a Provision was made, de assisa praesentationis, which was
continued and allowed for a Law until the Stat. of West. 2. which provides the
contrary in express words.

In the old Statutes it is hard to distinguish what Laws were made by Kings in
Parliament, and what out of Parliament: when Kings called Peers only to
Parliament, and of those how many, or whom they pleased, (as it appears
anciently they did) it was no easy matter to put a difference between a
Councel-Table, and a Parliament: or between a Proclamation and a Statute: Yet
it is most evident, that in old times there was a distinction between the Kings
special or Privy Council, and His Common Council of the Kingdom: and His
special Council did sit with the Peers in Parliament, and were of great and
extraordinary Authority there.

In the Stat. of Westminster. 1. it is said, These are the Acts of K. Edw. 1. made at
His first Parliament by His Council, and by the Assent of Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm.

The Stat. of Acton Burnell has these words, The King for Himself, and by His
Council, has Ordained and Established.

In articulis super Chartas, when the Great Charter was confirmed at the
Request of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, are found these two provisions:

1. Nevertheless the King and his Council do not intend by reason of this
Statute to diminish the Kings Right. 2. Notwithstanding all these things
beforementioned, or any part of them, both the King and his Council, and all
they that were present, Will and intend, that the Right and Prerogative of His
Crown shall be saved to Him in all things.
The Stat. of Escheators has this Title, At the Parliament of our Sovereign
Lord the King, By His Council it was agreed, and also by the King himself
commanded.

1 Edw. 3. where Magna Charta was confirmed, this Preamble is found, At the
request of the Commonalty, by their Petition made before the King and His
Council in Parliament, by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, etc.

The Statute made at York 9 Edw. 3. goes thus: Whereas the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses desired Our Sovereign Lord the King in His Parliament by their
Petition, etc. Our Sovereign Lord the King, desiring the profit of His People,
By the Assent of His Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of His Realm,
and by the Advice of His Council being there, Has Ordained.

25. Edw. 3. In the Statute of Purveyors, where the King, at the request of the
Lords and Commons, made a Declaration what Offenses should be adjudged Treason:
It is there further said, if per-case any man ride Armed with Men of Arms
against any other to slay him, or rob him, It is not the Mind of the King, or
of His Council: that in such cases it shall be adjudged Treason. By this
Statute it appears, that even in the case of Treason, which is the Kings own
Cause, as, whereas a man does compass, or imagine the Death of Our Lord the
King, or a man do wage War against Our Lord the King in His Realm, or be
adherent to the Kings Enemies in his Realm, giving to them Aid or Comfort in
the Realm, or elsewhere* in all these cases it is the Kings Declaration only
that makes it to be Treason: and though it be said, that Difficult points of
Treason shall be brought and showed to the King, and His Parliament, yet it is
said, it is the mind of the King and his Council, that determines what shall be
adjudged Treason, and what Felony, or Trespass.

27 Edw. 3. the Commons presenting a Petition to the King which the Kings
Council did mislike, were content thereupon to amend and explain their
Petition: the Petition has these words, To their most redoubted Sovereign Lord
the King, Praying, Your said Commons, that whereas they have prayed him to be
discharged of all manner of Articles of the Air etc. which Petition seems to
his Council to be prejudicial unto him, and in Disinherison of his Crown if it
were so generally granted. His said Commons not willing nor desiring to demand
things of Him, or of his Crown perpetually, as of Escheats, etc. But of
Trespasses, Misprisions, Negligences, Ignorances, etc.

And as in Parliaments the Kings Council were of Supereminent Power, so out of
Parliament Kings made great Use of them.

King Edw. 1. finding that Bogo de Clare was discharged of an Accusation
brought against him in Parliament, commanded him nevertheless to appear before
him and his Council, ad faciendum and recipiendum quod per Regem and ejus
Concilium fuerit faciendum, and so proceeded to the Examination of the whole
Cause, 8 Edw. 1.

Edw. 3. In the Star Chamber (which was the ancient Councel-table at
Westminster) upon the complaint of Eliz. Audley, commanded James Audley to
appear before Him and His Council; and determined a Controversy between them,
touching Land contained in her Jointure, Rot. claus. de An. 41 Edw. 3.

Hen. 5. In a Suit before Him and His Council, For the Titles of the Manors of
Serre and St. Lawrence in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, took order for the
Sequestring the Profits till the Right were tried.

Hen. 6. commanded the Justices of the Bench to stay the Arraignment of one
Verney in London, till they had other Commandment from Him and His Council, 34
Hen. 6. rot. 37. in Banco.

Edw. 4. and his Council in the Star Chamber heard the Cause of the Master and
poor Brethren of Saint Leonard's in York, complaining that Sir Hugh Hastings,
and others, withdrew from them a great part of their Living, which consisted
chiefly upon the having of a Thrave of Corn of every Plow-land within the
Counties of York, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Lancashire, Rot. pat. de an. 8.
Edw. 4. part. 3. memb. 14.

Hen. 7. and his Council in the Star Chamber, decreed, that Margery and
Florence Becket should sue no further in their cause against Alice Radley
Widow, for Lands in Wolwich and Plumsted in Kent, for as much as the matter had
been heard first before the Council of Edw. 4. after that before the President
of the Requests of that King Hen. 7. and then lastly before the Council of the
said King, 1 Hen. 7.

In the time of Hen. 3. an Order or Provision was made by the Kings Council,
and it was pleaded at the Common Law in Bar to a Writ of Dower; the Plaintifs
Attorney could not deny it, and thereupon the Judgment was, ideo sine die. It
seems in those days an Order of the Kings Council, was either parcel of the
Common Law, or above it.

Also we may find, the Judges have had Regard, that before they would resolve
or give Judgment in new Cases, they consulted with the Kings Privy Council.

In the case of Adam Brabson who was assaulted by R. W. in the Presence of the
Justices of Assise at Westminster, the Judges would have the Advice of the
Kings Council: for in a like Case, because R. C. did strike a Juror at
Westminster which passed against one of his Friends, It was adjudged by all the
Council that his right hand should be cut off, and his Lands and Goods
forfeited to the King.

Green and Thorp were sent by the Judges to the Kings Council, to demand of
them whether by the Stat. of 14 Edw. 3. 16. a word may be amended in a Writ,
and it was answered that a word may be well amended, although the Stat. speaks
but of a Letter or Syllable.

In the Case of Sir Thomas Ogthred, who brought a Formedon against a poor man
and his Wife; they came and yielded to the Demandant, which seemed suspicious
to the Court; whereupon Judgment was staid, and Thorp said that in the like
case of Giles Blacket it was spoken of in Parliament, and we were commanded
that when any like should come we should not go to Judgment without good
Advice; therefore the Judges Conclusion was, Sues an counseil and comment ils
voilent que nous devomus fair, nous volums fair, and autrement nient en oest
case; sue to the Council, and as they will have us to do, we will do; and
otherwise not in this Case, 39 Edw. 3.

Thus we see the Judges themselves were guided by the Kings Council, and yet
the Opinions of Judges have guided the Lords in Parliament in Point of Law.

All the Judges of the Realm, Barons of Exchequer, of the Quoif; the Kings
learned Council, and the Civilians, Masters of Chancery, are called Temporal
Assistants by Sir Edw. Coke, and though he deny them Voices in Parliament, yet
lie confesses, that by their Writ they have Power both to treat, and to give
Council. I cannot find that the Lords have any other Power by their Writ: the
Words of the Lords Writ are, That you be present with Us the Prelates, Great
men, and Peers, to treat and give your Counsel: The words of the Judges Writ
are, that you be present with Us, and others of the Counsel (and sometimes with
Us only) to treat and give your Counsel.

The Judges usually joined in Committees with the Lords in all Parliaments,
even in Queen Eliz. Reign, until her 39th Year; and then upon the 7th of
November, the Judges were appointed to attend the Lords. And whereas the Judges
have Liberty in the upper House it self, upon Leave given them by the L.
Keeper, to cover themselves, now at Committees they sit always uncovered.

The Power of Judges in Parliament is best understood, if we consider how the
judicial Power of Peers has been exercised in matter of Judicature: we may
find it has been the Practice, that though the Lords in the Kings Absence give
Judgment in Point of Law, yet they are to be directed and regulated by the
Kings Judges, who are best able to give Direction in the difficult Points of
the Law; which ordinarily are unknown to the Lords. And therefore, if any
Error be committed in the Kings Bench, which is the highest ordinary Court of
Common Law in the Kingdom, that Error must be redressed in Parliament. And the
Manner is, says the Lord Chancellor Egerton, If a Writ of Error be sued in
Parl. upon a Judgment given by the Judges in the Kings Bench, the Lords of the
higher House alone, (without the Commons) are to examine the Errors. The Lords
are to proceed according to the Law, and for their Judgments therein they are
to be informed by the Advice and Council of the Judges, who are to inform them
what the Law is, and to direct them in their Judgment; for the Lords are not to
follow their own Discretion or Opinion otherwise.

28 Hen. 6. the Commons made Suit that W. de la Pool D. of Suffolk, should be
committed to Prison for many Treasons, and other Crimes; the Lords of the
higher House were doubtful what Answer to give; the Opinion of the Judges was
demanded, their Opinion was, that he ought not to be committed, for that the
Commons did not charge him with any particular Offense, but with general
Reports and Slanders: this Opinion was allowed.

31. Hen. 6. A Parliament being prorogued, in the Vacation the Speaker of the
House of Commons was condemned in a thousand Pounds Damages in an Action of
Trespass, and committed to Prison in Execution for the same: when the
Parliament was re-assembled, the Commons made suit to the King, and Lords, to
have their Speaker delivered. The Lords demanded the Opinion of the Judges
whether he might be delivered out of Prison by Privilege of Parliament; upon
the Judges Answer it was concluded, that the Speaker should remain i^ Prison
according to the Law, notwithstanding the Privilege of Parliament, and that he
was Speaker; which Resolution was declared to the Commons by Moy^ the Kings
Sergeant at Law, and the Commons were commanded in the Kings name by the Bishop
(...) Lincoln (in the absence of the Archbishop of Canterbury, then
Chancellor) to choose another Speaker.

7 Hen. 8. A Question was moved in Parliament, Whether Spiritual Persons might
be convented before Temporal Judges for criminal Causes? there Sir John Fineux
and the other Judges delivered their Opinion, that they might and ought to be;
and their Opinion allowed and maintained by the King and Lords, and Dr.
Standish who before had holden the same Opinion, w^ delivered from the Bishops.

I find it affirmed, that in Causes which receive Determination in the House of
Lords, the King has (...) Vote at all, no more than in other Courts of
ministerial Jurisdiction. True it is, the King has no Vote at all if we
understand by Vote, a Voice among others: for he has no partners with Him in
giving Judgment. But if by no Vote is meant he has no Power to judge; we
dispoil him of his Sovereignty: It is the chief Mark of Supremacy to judge in
the highest Causes, and last Appeals. This the Children of Israel full well
understood, when they petitioned for a King to judge them; if the dernier reso^
be to the Lords alone, then they have the Supremacy. But as Moses by choosing
Elders to judge in small Causes, did not thereby lose his Authority to be Judge
himself when he pleased, even in the smallest matters; much less in the
greatest, which he reserved to himself: so Kings by delegating others to judge
under them, do not thereby denude themselves of a Power to judge when they
think good.

There is a Distinction of these times, that Kings themselves may not judge,
but they may see and look to the Judges, that they give Judgment according to
Law, and for this Purpose only (as some say) Kings may sometimes sit in the
Courts of Justice. But it is not possible for Kings to see the Laws executed,
except there be a Power in Kings both to judge when the Laws are duly
executed, and when not; as also to compel the Judges if they do not their
Duty. Without such Power a King sitting in Courts is but a Mockery, and a Scorn
to the Judges. And if this Power be allowed to Kings, then their Judgments are
supreme in all Courts. And indeed our Common Law to this Purpose does presume
that the King has al^ Laws within the Cabinet of His Breast, in Scrinio
pectoris, says Crompton's Jurisdiction. 108.

When several of our Statutes leave many things to the Pleasure of the King,
for us to interpret all those Statutes of the Will and Pleasure of the Kings
Justices only, is to give an absolute Arbitrary Power to the Justices in those
Cases wherein we deny it to the King.

The Statute of 5 Hen. 4. c. 2. makes a Difference between the King, and the
Kings Justices, in these words, Diverse notorious Felons be indicted of diverse
Felonies, Murders, Rapes: and as well before the Kings Justices, as before the
King himself, arreigned of the same Felonies.

I read, that in An. 1256. Hen. 3. sat in the E^chequer, and there set down
Order for the Appearance Sheriffs, and bringing in their Accounts; there w^
five Marks set on every Sheriffs Head for a Fine, because they had not
distrained every Person that mig^ dispend fifteen pounds Lands by the Year, to
receive t^ Order of Knighthood, according as the same Sherif^ were commanded.

In Michaelmas Term, 1462. Edw. 4. sat the days together in open Court in the
Kings Bench.

For this Point there needs no further Proofs, because Mr. Pryn does confess,
that Kings themselv^ have sat in Person in the Kings Bench, and other Cou^ and
there given Judgment, p. 32. Treachery and D^loyalty, etc.

Notwithstanding all that has been said for t^ Legislative and Judicial Power
of Kings, Mr. Pry^ is so far from yielding the King a Power to man Laws, that
he will not grant the King a power to hinder a Law from being made; that is,
(...) allows Him not a Negative Voice in most case which is due to every other,
even to the Mea^est Member of the House of Commons in his Judgment.

To prove the King has not a Negative Voice, (...) main, and in truth, his
only Argument insisted o^ is a Coronation Oath, which is said anciently so^ of
our Kings of England have taken, wherein the grant to defend and protect the
just Laws and Custom^ which the Vulgar has, or shall choose: Iustas Leg^ and
Consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit: Hence M^ Pryn concludes, that the King
cannot deny any Ia^ which the Lords and Commons shall make cho^ of; for so he
will have vulgus to signify.

Though neither our King, nor many of His Predecessors ever took this Oath, nor
were bound to ^ake it, for ought appears; yet we may admit that our King has
taken it; and answer, we may be confident, that neither the Bishops, nor Privy
Council, nor Parliament, nor any other whosoever they were that framed, or
penned this Oath, ever intended in this word Vulgus the Commons in Parliament,
much less the Lords: they would never so much disparage the Members of
Parliament, as to disgrace them with a Title both base and false: it had been
enough, if not too much, to have called them Populus, the People; but Vulgus,
the Vulgar, the rude Multitude (which has the Epithet of Ignobile Vulgus) is a
word as dishonorable to the Composers of the Oath to give, or for the King to
use, as for the Members of the Parliament to receive; it being most false: for
the Peers cannot be Vulgus, because they are the prime Persons of the Kingdom:
next, the Knights of the Shires are, or ought to be notable Knights, or notable
Esquires, or Gentlemen, born in the Counties, as shall be able to be Knights:
then the Citizens and Burgesses are to be most sufficient, none of these can be
Vulgus: even those Freeholders that choose Knights, are the best and ablest men
of their Counties; there being for every Freeholder, above ten of the Common
People to be found to be termed the Vulgar: Therefore it rests that vulgus must
signify the vulgar or common People, and not the Lords and Commons.

But now the Doubt will be, what the Common People, or vulgus, out of
Parliament, have to do to choose Laws? The Answer is easy and ready; there
goes before quas vulgus, the Antecede^ Consuetudines, that is, the Customs
which the Vulghath, or shall choose. Do but observe the Nature (...) Custom, and
it is the Vulgus or Common People only who choose Customs: Common Usage time out
(...) mind creates a Custom, and the commoner (...) Usage is, the stronger and
the better is the Custom no where can so common an Usage be found, (...) among
the Vulgar, who are still the far great^ part of every Multitude: if a Custom
be common through the whole Kingdom, it is all one with the Common Law in
England, which is said to be Common Custom. Thus in plain Terms to protect the
Customs which the Vulgar choose, is to swear to protect the Common Laws of
England.

But grant that Vulgus in the Oath, signifies Lord and Commons, and that
Consuetudines does not signify Customs, but Statutes, (as Mr. Pryn for a
desperate Shift affirms,) and let elegerit be the Future or Preterperfect
Tense, even which Mr. Pryn please yet it cannot exclude the Kings negative
Voice; for as Consuetudines goes before quas vulgus, so does justas stand
before leges and consuetudines: so that not all Laws, but only all just Laws
are meant. If the sole Choice of the Lords and Commons, did oblige the King to
protect their Choice, without Power of Denial, what Need, or why is the Word
justas put in, to raise a Scruple that some Laws may be unjust? Mr. Pryn will
not say that a Decree of a General Council, or of a Pope is infallible, nor (^
think) a Bill of the Lords and Commons is infallible just, and impossible to
err; if he do, Sir Edward Coke will tell him that Parliaments have been
utterly deceived, and that in eases of greatest Moment, even i^ case of High
Treason: and he calls the Statute of 11 Hen. 7. an unjust and strange Act. But
it may be Mr. Pryn will confess that Laws chosen by the Lords and Commons may
be unjust, so that the Lords and Commons themselves may be the Judges of what
is just, or unjust. But where a King by Oath binds his Conscience to protect
just Laws, it concerns him to be satisfied in his own Conscience, that they be
just, and not by an implicit Faith, or blind Obedience: no man can be so
proper a Judge of the Justness of Laws, as he whose Soul must lie at the Stake
for the Defense and Safeguard of them.

Besides, in this very Oath the King does swear, to do equal and right Justice
and Discretion, in Mercy and Truth in all His Judgments: facies fieri in
omnibus judiciis tuis aequam and rectam justitiam and discretionem in
Misericordia and Veritate: if we allow the King Discretion and Mercy in his
Judgments, of Necessity he must judge of the Justness of the Laws.

Again, the clause of the Oath, quas vulgus elegerit, does not mention the
assenting unto, or granting any new Laws, but of holding, protecting, and
strengthening with all his Might, the just Laws that were already in Being:
there were no need of Might or Strength, if assenting to new Laws were there
meant.

Some may wonder, why there should be such Laboring to deny the King a
negative Voice, since a negative Voice is in it self so poor a thing; that if a
man had all the Negative Voices in the Kingdom, ^t would not make him a King;
nor give him Power to make one Law: a negative Voice is but a ^ivative Power,
that is, no Power at all to do or act any thing; but a Power only to hinder the
Power of another. Negatives are of such a malignant or destructive Nature, that
if they have nothing else to destroy, they will, when they meet, destroy one
another, which is the reason why two Negatives make an Affirmative, by
destroying the Negation which did hinder the Affirmation: A King with a
Negative Voice only, is but like a Syllogism of pure negative Propositions,
which can conclude nothing* It must be an Affirmative Voice that makes both a
King, and a Law, and without it there can be no imaginable Government.

The reason is plain why the Kings negative Voice is so eagerly opposed: for
though it give the King no Power to do any thing; yet it gives him a Power to
hinder others: though it cannot make Him a King, yet it can help him to keep
others from being Kings.

For Conclusion of this Discourse of the negative Voice of the King, I shall
oppose the Judgment of a Chief Justice of England, to the Opinion of him that
calls himself an utter Barister of Lincolns Inn, and let others judge who is
the better Lawyer of the two: the words are Bracton's, but concern Mr. Pryn to
lay them to heart; Concerning the Charters and Deeds of Kings, the Justices nor
private men neither ought, nor can dispute; nor yet if there rise a Doubt in
the Kings Charter, can they interpret it; and in doubtful and obscure Points,
or if a word contain two Senses, the Interpretation, and Will of Our Lord the
King is to be expected, seeing it is his part to interpret; who makes the
Charter: full well Mr. Pryn knows, that when Bracton writ, the Laws that were
then made, and strived for, were called the Kings Charters, as Magna Charta,
Charta de Foresta, and others: so that in Bracton's Judgment the King has not
only a Negative Voice to hinder, but an Affirmative, to make a Law, which is a
great deal more than Master Pryn will allow him.

Not only the Lawmakers, but also the sole Judge of the People is the King, in
the Judgment of Bracton; these are his words: Rex and non alius debet judicare,
si solus ad id sufficere possit, the King and no other ought to judge, if He
alone were able. Much like the words of Bracton, speaks Briton, where, after
that he had showed that the King is the Viceroy of God, and that He has
distributed his Charge into sundry portions, because He alone is not sufficient
to hear all Complaints of His People, then he adds these words, in the Person
of the King: Nous volons que nostre jurisdiction soit sur touts Jurisdictions,
etc. We Will that Our Jurisdiction be above all the Jurisdictions of Our Realm,
so as in all manner of Felonies, Trespasses, Contracts, and in all other
actions Personal or Real We have Power to yield, or cause to be yielded, such
Judgments as do appertain without other Process, wheresoever we know the right
Truth as Judges.

Neither was this to be taken, says Mr. Lambard, to be meant of the Kings
Bench, where there is only an imaginary presence of His Person, but it must
necessarily be understood of a Jurisdiction remaining and left in the King's
Royal Body and Breast, distinct from that of His Bench, and other ordinary
Courts; because he does immediately after, severally set forth by themselves,
as well the authority of the Kings Bench, as of the other Courts.

And that this was no new-made Law, Mr. Lam^d puts us in mind of a Saxon Law of
King Edgars. Nemo in lite Regem appellato, etc. Let no man i^ Suit appeal unto
the King, unless he cannot get Right a^ home, but if that Right be too Heavy
for him, then l^ him go to the King to have it eased. By which i^ may evidently
appear, that even so many years ag^ there might be Appellation made to the
Kings Persae whenever the Cause should enforce it.

The very like Law in Effect is to be seen in the Laws of Canutus the Dane,
sometimes King of the Realm, out of which Law Master Lambard gathe^ that the
King Himself had a High Court of Iustia wherein it seems He sat in Person,
for the words b^ Let him not seek to the King, and the same Court ^ the King
did judge not only according to mee^ Right and Law, but also after Equity and
goo^ Conscience.

For the Close, I shall end with the Suffrage ^ our late Antiquary Sir Henry
Spelman, in his Glossary, he says, Omnis Regni Iustitia solius Regis est, etc.
All Justice of the Kingdom is only the King's, and H^ alone, if He were able,
should Administer it; but the being impossible, He is forced to delegate it to
Ministers whom he bounds by the limits of the Laws; the positive Laws are only
about Generals; in particular Cases, they are sometimes too strict, sometimes
too remis^ and so, often Wrong instead of Right will be done, if w^ stand to
strict Law: also Causes hard and difficult d^ly arise, which are comprehended
in no Law Books, ^ those there is a necessity of running back to the King, t^
Fountain of Justice, and the Vicegerent of God himself who in the Commonwealth
of the Jews took such Cause to His own cognizance, and left to Kings not only
the Example of such Jurisdiction, but the Prerogative also.

Of Privilege of Parliament.
WHat need all this ado, will some say, to sift out what is comprised in the
Writ for the Election of the Commons to Parliament, since it is certain, though
the Writ does not, yet Privilege of Parliament gives sufficient Power for all
Proceedings of the Two Houses? It is answered, that what slight Esteem soever
be made of the Writ, yet in all other cases the Original Writ is the Foundation
of the whole business, or action: and to vary in Substance from the Writ, makes
a nullity in the Cause, and the Proceedings thereupon: and where a Commissioner
exercises more Power than is warranted by his Commission, every such Act is
void, and in many Cases punishable: yet we will lay aside the Writ, and apply
our selves to consider the Nature of Privilege of Parliament. The Task is the
more difficult, for that we are not told what the number of Privileges are, or
which they be; some do think that as there be dormant Articles of Faith in the
Roman Church, which are not yet declared; so there be likewise Privileges
dormant in the House of Commons, not yet revealed, we must therefore be content
in a generality to discourse of the Quality or Condition of Privilege of
Parliament, and to confine our selves to these three points:

1. That Privilege of Parliament gives no power; but only helps to the
execution of the Power given by the Writ. 2. That the Freeholders by their
Elections give no Privilege. 3. That Privilege of Parliament is the Gift of the
King.
First, The End or Scope of Privilege of Parliament is not to give any Power to
do any public Act, not warranted by the Writ: but they are intended as Helps
only to enable to the Performance of the Duty enjoined, and so are subservient
to the Power comprised in the Writ: For Instance, the grand Privilege of
Freedom from Arrests does not give any Power at all to the House of Commons to
do any act; but by taking away from the Freeholders and other Subjects the
Power of Arrests, the Commons are the better enabled to attend the Service to
which they are called by the King.

In many other Cases the Servants, o^ Ministers of the King are privileged, and
protected much in the same Nature. The Servants in household to the King may not
be arrested without special License: Also the Officers of the Kings Courts of
Justice, have a Privilege not to be sued in any other Court but where they
serve and attend; and to this Purpose they are allowed a Writ of Privilege.
Likewise all such as serve the King in his Wars, or are employed on foreign
Affairs for him, are protected from Actions and Suits. Nay the Kings Protection
descends to the privileging even of Laundresses, Nurses, and Midwives, if they
attend upon the Camp, as Sir Edw. Coke says, quia Lotrix, seu Nutrix, seu
obstetrix. Besides the King protects his Debtors from Arrests of the Subject
till his own Debts be paid.

These sorts of Protections are Privileges the Common Law takes notice of, and
allows: and has several Distinctions of them; and some are Protections, quia
profecturus, and others are, quia moraturus: some are with a Clause of volumus
for stay of Suits: others with a Clause of Nolumus for the safety of men's
Persons, Servants, and Goods: and the Kings Writs do vary herein according to
the Nature of the Business.

But none of these Privileges or Protections do give any Power; they are not
positive, but privative: they take away and deprive the Subject of the Power,
or Liberty to arrest, or sue, in some cases only: no Protection or Privilege
does defend in point of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace: Privileges are
directly contrary to the Law, for otherwise they should not be Privileges, and
they are to be interpreted in the strictest manner, as being odious and
contrary to Law: we see the Use of Privileges; they do but serve as a
Dispensation against Law, intended originally, and principally for the
expediting of the Kings Business; though secondarily, and by accident there do
sometimes redound a Benefit by them to the Parties themselves that are
protected. Strictly, and properly every Privilege must be against a public or
common Law, for there is no Use or Need of a private Law to protect, where
there is no public Law to the contrary: Favors and Graces which are only
besides, and not against the Law, do not properly go under the name of
Privileges, though common Use do not distinguish them: I know no other
Privilege that can be truly so called, and to belong to the House of Commons,
which is so vast and great, as this Privilege of their Persons, Servants, and
Goods: this being indeed against the Common Law, and does concern the whole
Kingdom to take notice of it, if they must be bound by it.

Touching this grand Privilege of Freedom from Arrests, I read that in the 33
Hen. 8. the Commons did not proceed to the Punishment of Offenders for the
breach of it, until the Lords referred the Punishment thereof to the Lower
House. The Case is thus reported, George Ferrers Gentleman, Servant to the
King, and Burgess for Plymouth, going to the Parliament House was arrested in
London, by Process out of the Kings Bench for Debt, wherein he had before been
condemned as Surety for one Welden at the Suit of one White: which Arrest
signified to Sir Thomas Moyl Speaker, and to the rest; the Sergeant (called
SaintIohns) was sent to the Counter in Breadstreet to demand Ferrers: The
Officer of the Counter refused to deliver him, and gave the Sergeant such ill
Language that they fall to an Affray: the Sheriff coming, takes the Officers
part, the Sergeant returned without the Prisoner: This being related to the
Speaker and Burgesses, they would sit no more without their Burgess; and
rising, repaired to the Upper House, where the Case was declared by the Speaker
before Sir Thomas Audley Chancellor, and the Lords and Judges there assembled,
who judging the Contempt to be very great, referred the Punishment thereof to
the House of Commons it self.

This Privilege of Freedom from Arrest^ is the only Privilege which Sir Edward
Coke finds to belong to the House of Commons; he cannot, or at least he does
not, so much as name any other in his Section of the Privileges of Parliament:
neither does he bring so much as one Precedent for the Proof of this one
Privilege for the House of Commons; which may cause a Doubt that this sole
Privilege is not so clear as many do imagine. For in a Parliament in the 27
Eliz. Richard Coke, a Member, being served with a Subpoena of Chancery, the
Lord Chancellor thought the House had no such Privilege for Subpoena's as they
pretended; neither would he allow of any Precedents of the House committed unto
them, formerly used in that Behalf, unless the House of Commons could also
prove the same to have been likewise thereupon allowed, and ratified also by
Precedents in the Court of Chancery.

In the 39 of Eliz. Sir Edw. Hobby, and Mr. Brograve, Attorney of the Duchy,
were sent by the House to the Lord Keeper, in the name of the whole House, to
require his Lordship to revoke two Writs of Subpoena's, which were served upon
M. Th. Knevit, a Member of the House, since the Beginning of Parliament. The
Lord Keeper demanded of them, whether they were appointed by any advised
Consideration of the House, to deliver this Message unto him with the word
Required, in such manner as they had done, or no: they answered his Lordship,
yea: his Lordship then said, as he thought reverently and honorably of the
House, and of their Liberties, and Privileges of the same, so to revoke the
said Subpoena's in that sort, was to restrain Her Majesty in Her greatest
Power, which is, Justice in the Place wherein he serves under Her, and
therefore he concluded, as they had required him to revoke his Writ, so he did
require to deliberate.

Upon the 22 of February, being Wednesday, 18 Eliz. Report was made by Mr.
Attorney of the Duchy, upon the Committee, for the delivering of one Mr.
Hall's man; that the Committee found no Precedent for setting at large by the
Mace any Person in Arrest but only by Writ, and that by diverse Precedents of
Records perused by the said Committee, it appears that every Knight, Citizen
or Burgess which does require Privilege, has used in that case to take a
Corporal Oath before the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, that the party for
whom such Writ is prayed, Came up with him, and was his Servant at the time of
the Arrest made. Thereupon M. Hall was moved by the House to repair to the Lord
Keeper, and make Oath, and then take a Warrant for a Writ of Privilege for his
Servant.

It is accounted by some to be a Privilege of Parliament to have power to
Examine Misdemeanors of Courts of Justice, and Officers of State: yet there is
not the meanest Subjest but has liberty, upon just cause, to question the
misdemeanour of any Court or Officer, if he suffer by them; there is no Law
against him for so doing; so that this cannot properly be called a Privilege,
because it is not against any public Law: It has been esteemed a great Favor
of Princes to permit such Examinations: For, when the Lords were displeased
with the Greatness of Pierce Gaveston, it is said, that in the next Parliament,
the whole Assembly obtain of the King to draw Articles of their Grievances,
which they did. Two of which Articles were, First, that all Strangers should be
banished the Court and Kingdom: o^ which Gaveston was one. Secondly, that the
business of the State should be treated of by the Council of the Clergy and
Nobles.

In the Reign of King Henry the sixth, one Mortimer, an Instrument of the Duke
of York, by promising the Kentish men a Reformation, and freedom from
Taxations, wrought with the people, that they drew to a Head, and made this
Mortimer (otherwise Jack Cade) their Leader: who styled himself Captain
Mend-all: He presents to the Parliament the Complaints of the Commons, and he
petitions that the Duke of York and some other Lords might be received by the
King into favor, by the undue Practices of Suffolk and his Accomplices,
commanded from his Presence; and that all their Opposites might be banished the
Court, and put from their Offices, and that there might be a general amotion of
corrupt Officers: These Petitions are sent from the Lower House to the Upper,
and from thence committed to the Lords of the Kings Privy Council, who, having
examined the particulars, explode them as frivolous, and the Authors of them to
be presumptuous Rebels.

Concerning Liberty, or freedom of Speech, I find, that at a Parliament at
Black Friars in the 14 of Henry the Eighth, Sir Tho. More being chosen Speaker
of the House of Commons: He first disabled himself, and then petitioned the
King, that if in Communication and Reasoning, any man in the Commons House
should speak more largely than of duty they ought to do, that all such Offenses
should be pardoned, and to be entered of Record; which was granted. It is
observable in this Petition, that liberty or freedom of Speech is not a power
for men to speak what they will, or please, in Parliament; but a Privilege not
to be punished, but pardoned for the offense of speaking more largely than in
duty ought to be; which in an equitable construction must be understood of
rash, unadvised, ignorant, or negligent Escapes, and Slips in Speech: and not
for wilful, malicious Offenses in that kind; And then the Pardon of the King
was desired to be upon Record, that it might be pleaded in Bar to all Actions.
And it seems that Ric. Strood and his Accomplices, were not thought
sufficiently protected for their free Speech in Parliament, unless their Pardon
were confirmed by the King in Parliament, for there is a printed Statute to
that purpose in H. 8ths time.

Touching the freedom of Speech, the Commons were warned in Q. Eliz. days not
to meddle with the Queens Person, the State, or Church Government. In her time
the Discipline of the Church was so strict, that the Litany was read every
morning in the House of Commons, during the Parliament, and when the Commons
first ordered to have a Fast in the Temple upon a Sunday, the Queen hindered it.

21 Ian. Saturday, 23 Eliz. the Case is thus reported: Mr. Paul Wentworth
moves for a Public set Fast, and for a Preaching every morning at 7 of the
clock, before the House sat: the House was divided about the Fast, 115 were
for it, and an 100 against it; it was ordered, that as many of the House as
conveniently could, should on Sunday fortnight after, Assemble, and meet
together in the Temple-Church, there to hear Preaching, and to join together in
Prayer, with Humiliation and Fasting, for the Assistance of God's Spirit in all
their Consultations, during this Parliament, and for the Preservation of the
Queens Majesty and Her Realms: And the Preachers to be appointed by the Privy
Council that were of the House, that they may be Discreet, not meddling with
Innovation or Unquietness. This Order was followed by a Message from Her
Majesty to the House, declared by Mr. Vice-chamberlain, that Her Highness had a
great Admiration of the rashness of this House, in committing such an apparent
Contempt of her express Command, as to put in execution such an Innovation,
without Her privity, or pleasure first known. Thereupon Mr. Vice-chamberlain
moved the House to make humble submission to Her Majesty, acknowledging the
said Offense, and Contempt, craving a Remission of the same, with a full
purpose to forbear the Committing of the like hereafter: and by the Consent of
the whole House, Mr. Vice-chamberlain carried their Submission to her Majesty.

35 Eliz. Mr. Peter Wentworth, and Sir Henry Bromley, delivered a Petition to
the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the upper House to be Suppliants with
them of the lower House, unto her Majesty for entailing the Succession of the
Crown. Whereof a Bill was ready drawn by them. Her Majesty was highly
displeased herewith, as contrary to her former strait Command, and charged the
Council to call the Parties before them: Sir Thomas Henage sent for them, and
after Speech with them, commanded them to forbear the Parliament, and not to go
out of their several Lodgings; after, they were called before the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Henage; Mr. Wentworth was
committed by them to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromley, with Mr. Richard Stevens, to
whom Sir Henry Bromley had imparted the Matter, were sent to the Fleet, as also
Mr. Welsh the other Knight for Worcestershire.

In the same Parliament Mr. Morris, Attorney of the Court of Wards, moved
against the hard Courses of the Bishops, Ordinaries, and other Ecclesiastical
Judges in their Courts, used toward sundry Learned, and godly Ministers and
Preachers; and spoke against Subscription, and Oaths; and offered a Bill to be
read against Imprisonment for refusal of Oaths: Mr. Dalton opposed the Reading
of it, as a thing expressly against Her Majesty's Command, to meddle in: Doctor
Lewin showed, that Subscription was used even at Geneva: At two of the clock
the same day, the Speaker, Mr. Coke, (afterward Sir Edward Coke) was sent for
to the Court, where the Queen Her self gave him in Command a Message to the
House: She told him, It being wholly in Her Power to Call, to Determine, to
Assent, or Dissent to any thing done in Parliament: that the Calling of This
was only, that the Majesty of God might be more religiously observed, by
compelling, by some sharp Laws, such as neglect that Service: and that the
Safety of Her Majesty's Person, and the Realm might be provided for: It was not
meant they should meddle with matters of State, or Causes Ecclesiastical, (for
so Her Majesty termed them) she wondered that any could be of so high
Commandment, to attempt (they were Her own words) a thing so expressly contrary
to that which She had commanded: wherefore with this She was highly offended:
And because the words spoken by my Lord Keeper, are not now perhaps well
remembered, or some b^ now here that were not then present. Her Majesty's
present Charge and express Command is, that no Bill touching the said matter of
State or Reformation in Causes Ecclesiastical, be exhibited, and upon my
Allegiance (says Mr. Coke) I am charged, if any such Bill be exhibited; not to
read it. I have been credibly informed, that the Queen sent a Messenger, or
Sergeant at Arms, into the House of Commons, and took out Mr. Morris, and
committed him to prison: within few days after, I find Mr. Wroth moved in the
House, that they might be humble Suitors to Her Majesty, that She would be
pleased to set at liberty those Members of the House that were restrained. To
this it was answered by the Privy Counselors, that Her Majesty had committed
them for Causes best known to Her self, and to press Her Highness with this
Suit, would but hinder them whose Good is sought: that the House must not call
the Queen to account for what she does of Her Royal Authority: that the Causes
for which they are restrained may be High and Dangerous: that Her Majesty
likes no such Questions; neither does it become the House to searc^ into such
matters.

In the 39 Eliz. The Commons were tol^ their Privilege was Yea, and No: and
tha^ Her Majesty's Pleasure was, that if the Speaker perceived any idle heads
which would not stick to hazard their own Estates; which will meddle with
reforming the Church, and transforming the Commonweal, and do exhibit Bills to
that purpose; the Speaker should not receive them till they were viewed and
considered by those, whom it is fitter should consider of such things, and can
better judge of them: and at the end of this Parliament, the Queen refused to
pass 48 Bills which had passed both Houses.

In the 28 of Eliz. the Queen said, She was sorry the Commons meddled with
choosing and returning Knights of the Shire for Norfolk, a thing impertinent for
the House to deal withal, and only belonging to the Office and Charge of the
Lord Chancellor, from whom the Writs issue, and are returned.

4 Hen. 4. The 10 of October, the Chancellor before the King declared, the
Commons had sent to the King, praying him that they might have Advice, and
Communication with certain Lords about Matters of Business in Parliament, for
the common good of the Realm: which Prayer Our Lord the King graciously
granted, making Protestation, he would not do it of Duty, nor of Custom, but of
his special Grace at this time: and therefore Our Lord the King ^harged the
Clark of the Parliament, that this Protestation should be entered on Record upon
the Parliament-Roll: which the King made known to them by the Lord Say, and his
Secretary; how that neither of Due nor of Custom, our Lord the King ought to
grant any Lords to enter into Communication with them of Matters touching the
Parliament, but by his special Grace at this time he has granted their Request
in this Particular: upon which matter, the said Steward and Secretary made
Report to the King in Parliament; that the said Commons knew well that they
could not have any such Lords to commune with them, of any Business of
Parliament, without special Grace and Command of the King Himself.

It has heretofore been a question, whether it be not an Infringing, and
Prejudice to the Liberties and Privileges of the House of Commons, for them to
join in Conference with the Lords in Cases of Benevolence, or Contribution,
without a Bill.

In the 35 Eliz. on Tuesday the first of March, Mr. Egerton, Attorney general,
and Doct. Carey came with a Message from the Lords; their Lordships desired to
put the House in Remembrance of the Speech delivered by the Lord Keeper, the
first day for Consultation and Provision of Treasure, to be had aginst the
great and imminent Dangers of the Realm; thereupon their Lordships did look to
have something from the Houses, touching those Causes before this time (and yet
the Parliament had sat but three days, for it began Feb. 26.) and therefore
their Lordships had hitherto omitted to do any thing therein themselves. And
thereupon their Lordships desired, that according to former laudable Usages
between both Houses in such like Cases, a Committee of Commons may have
Conference with a Committee of Lords, touching Provision of Treasure against
the great Dangers of the Realm, which was presently resolved by the whole
House, and they signified to their Lordships the willing, and ready Assent of
the whole House. At the Meeting, the Lords negatively affirm, not to assent to
less than three Subsidies, and do insist for a second Conference. M. Francis
Bacon yielded to the Subsidy, but opposed the joining with the Lords, as
contrary to the Privileges of the House of Commons; thereupon the House
resolved to have no Conference with the Lords, but to give their Lordships most
humble and dutiful Thanks with all Reverence for their favorable and courteous
Offer of Conference, and to signify that the Commons cannot in those Cases of
Benevolence, or Contribution join in conference with their Lordships, without
prejudice to the Liberties and Privileges of the House: and to request their
Lordships to hold the Members of this House excused in their not-assenting to
their Lordships said Motion for Conference, for that so to have Assented
without a Bill, had been contrary to the Liberties and Privileges of this
House* and also contrary to the former Precedents of the same House in like
cases had. This Answer delivered to the Lords by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, their Lordships said, they well hoped to have had a Conference
according to their former Request, and desired to see those Precedents by which
the Commons seem to refuse the said Conference. But in conclusion it was agreed
unto, upon the Motion of Sir Walter Raleigh, who moved, that without naming a
Subsidy, it might be propounded in general words, to have a Conference touching
the Dangers of the Realm, and the necessary Supply of Treasure to be provided
speedily for the same, according to the Proportion of the Necessity.

In the 43 Eliz. Sergeant Heal said in Parliament, he marvail'd the House stood
either a^ the granting of a Subsidy or time of Payment, when all we have is her
Majesty's, and She may lawful* at her Pleasure take it from us; and that she
had ^ much right to all our Lands and Goods, as to an^ Revenue of the Crown;
and he said he could pro^ it by Precedents in the time of H. 3. K. John and K.
Stephen. The ground upon which this Sergeant at Law went, may be thought the
same Sir Edw. Coke delivers in his Institutes, where he says, the first Kings
of this Realm had all the Lands of England in Demesne, and the great Manors and
Royalists they reserved to themselves, and of the remnant for the defense of
the Kingdom enfeoffed the Barons: from whence it appears, that no man holds any
Lands but under a condition to defend the Realm; and upon the selfsame Ground
also the Kings Prerogative is raised, as being a Pre-eminence, in cases of
Necessity, above, and before the Law of Property, or Inheritance. Certain it
is, before the Commons were ever chosen to come to Parliament, Taxes or
Subsidies were raised and paid without their gift. The great and long continued
Subsidy of Dane-gelt was without any Gift of the Commons, or of any Parliament
at all, that can be proved. In the 8 H. 3. a Subsidy of 2 Marks in Silver upon
every Knights fee was granted to the King by the Nobles, without any Commons.
At the passing of a Bill of Subsidies the words of the King are, the King
thanks his loyal Subjects, accepts their good Will, and also will have ^so: le
Roy remercie ses loyaux Subjects, accept leur ^enevolence, and ausi ainsi le
veult: which last words of ainsi le veult, the King wills it to be so, ^re the
only words that makes the Acts of Sub^idy a Law to bind every man to the
Pay^ent of it.

In the 39 Eliz. The Commons, by their Speaker, complaining of Monopolies, the
Queen spoke in private to the L. Keeper, who then made answer touching
Monopolies, that Her Majesty hoped her dutiful and loving Subjects would not
take away Her Prerogative, which is the chiefest Flower in her Garland, and the
principal and head Pearl in Her Crown and Diadem, but that they will rather
leave that to Her Disposition.

The second Point is, that the Freeholders, or Counties do not, nor cannot
give Privilege to the Commons in Parliament. They that are under the Law cannot
protect against it, they have no such Privilege themselves as to be free from
Arrests, and Actions: for if they had, then it had been no Privilege, but it
would be the Common Law: And what they have not, they cannot give; Nemo dat
quod non habet, neither do the Freeholders pretend to give any such Privilege,
either at their Election, or by any subsequent Act; there is no mention of any
such thing in the return of the Writ; nor in the Indentures between the
Sheriff, and the Freeholders.

The third Point remains, That Privilege of Parliament is granted by the King.
It is a known Rule, that which gives the Form gives the Consequences of the
Form; the King by his Writ gives the very Essence, and Form to the Parliament:
therefore Privileges which are but Consequences of the Form, must necessarily
flow from Kings.

All other Privileges and Protections are the Acts of the King; and by the
Kings Writ. Sir Edw. Coke says, that the Protection of men's Persons, Servants,
and Goods, is done by a Writ of Grace from the King. At the presentment of the
Speaker of the House of Commons to the King upon the first day of Parliament,
The Speaker in the Name and Behoof of the Commons, humbly craveth that his
Majesty would be graciously pleased to grant them their accustomed Liberties
and Privileges; which Petition of theirs, is a fair Recognition of the
Primitive Grace and Favor of Kings in bestowing of Privilege, and it is a
shrewd Argument against any other Title: For our Ancestors were not so
ceremonious nor so full of Complement as to beg that by Grace, which they might
claim by Right. And the Renewing of this Petition every Parliament argues the
Grant to be but temporary, during only the present Parliament; and that they
have been accustomed, when they have been accustomably sued, or petitioned for.
I will close this Point with the Judgment of King James, who in his Declaration
touching his Proceedings in Parliament 1621. resolves, that most Privileges of
Parliament grew from Precedents which rather show a Toleration than an
Inheritance; therefore he could not allow of the Style, calling i^ their
ancient and undoubted Right and Inheritance, but could rather have wished that
they had said, their Privileges were derived from the Grace and Permission of
his Ancestors and Him: and thereupon he concludes, He cannot with Patience
endure his Subjects to use su^ Antimonarchicall words concerning their
Liberties, except they had subjoyned, that they were granted unto them by the
Grace and Favour^ of his Predecessors: yet he promises to be careful of
whatsoever Privileges they enjoy by long Custom and uncontrolled and lawful
Precedents.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Aristotle's Politiques, TOUCHING Forms of Government.

Together with DIRECTIONS FOR Obedience to Governors in Dangerous and Doubtful
Times.

THE PREFACE.
IN every Alteration of Government there is something new, which none can
either Divine, or Judge of, till time has tried it: we read of many several
ways of Government; but they have all, or most of them, been of particular
Cities, with none, or very small Territories at first belonging to them. At
this present the Government of the Low Countries, and of Swisserland, are not
appropriated either of them to any one City, for they are compounded of several
petty Principalities, which have special and different Laws and Privileges each
of them; insomuch that the United Provinces, and united Cantons are but
Confederacies and Leaguers, and not two entire Commonweals; Associates only
for mutual Defense. Nay, the Cantons of Swisserland are not only several
Republics, but reputed to have different Forms of Commonweals; some being said
to be Aristocratically governed, and others Democratically* as the
Mountaineers: and some of the Cantons are Papists, and some Protestants, and
some mixed of both: we do not find that any large or great Dominion or Kingdom
united in one Government, and under the same Laws, was ever reduced at once to
any kind of Popular Government, and not confined to the subjection of one City:
This being a thing not yet done, requires the abler men to settle such a
Peaceable Government as is to be desired: there being no Precedent in the case;
all that can be done in it, is, at first to enquire into such other
Governments, as have been existent in the World. As a Preface to such an
Enquiry, the Sacred Scripture (if it be but for the Antiquity of it) would be
consulted; and then Aristotle, the grand Master of Politiques; and after him
the Greek and Latin Historians that lived in Popular times, would be diligently
examined. To excite others of greater Abilities to an exacter Disquisition, I
presume to offer a Taste of some Doctrines of Aristotle, which are ushered in
with a briefer Touch of the Holy Scriptures.

It is not probable, that any sure direction of the beginning of Government,
can be found either in Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Polybius, or in any other of
the Heathen Authors, who were ignorant of the manner of the Creation of the
World: we must not neglect the Scriptures, and search in Philosophers for the
grounds of Dominion and Property, which are the main Principles of Government
and Justice. The first Government in the World was Monarchical, in the Father
of all Flesh. Adam being commanded to multiply, and People the Earth, and to
subdue it, and having Dominion given him over all Creatures, was thereby the
Monarch of the whole World; none of his Posterity had any Right to possess any
thing, but by his Grant or Permission, or by Succession from him: the Earth
(says the Psalmist) has he given to the Children of men: which shows, the
Title comes from Fatherhood. There never was any such thing as an Independent
Multitude, who at first had a natural Right to a Community: this is but a
Fiction, or Fancy of too many in these days, who please themselves in running
after the Opinions of Philosophers and Poets, to find out such an Original of
Government, as might promise them some title to Liberty, to the great Scandal
of Christianity, and bringing in of Atheism, since a natural freedom of mankind
cannot be supposed without the denial of the Creation of Adam. And yet this
conceit of Original Freedom is the only Ground upon which not only the Heathen
Philosophers, but also the Authors of the Principles of the Civil Law; and
Grotius, Seldom, Hobs, Ash^am, and others raise, and build their Doctrines of
Government, and of the sever^ sorts or kinds, as they call them, of
Commonwealths.

Adam was the Father, King, and Lord over his Family: a Son, a Subject, and a
Servant or a Slave, were one and the same thing at first; the Father had power
to dispose, ^ sell his Children or Servants, whence we find, that at the first
reckoning up of Goods i^ Scripture, the Manservant, and the Maidservant are
numbered among the Possessions and Substance of the Owner, as other Goods wor^*
As for the names of Subject, Slave, and Tyrant, they are not found in
Scripture, but what we now call a Subject or a Slave, is then named no other
than a Servant: I cannot learn that either the Hebrew, Greek or Latin have any
proper and Original Word for a Tyrant or a Slave, it seems these are names of
later invention, and taken up in disgrace of Monarchical Government.

I cannot find any one place, or Text in the Bible, where any Power or
Commission is given to a People either to govern themselves, o^ to choose
themselves Governors, or to alter the manner of Government at their pleasure*
the Power of Government is settled and fixed by the Commandment of Honor thy
Father; if there were a higher Power than the Fatherly, then this Commandment
could not stand, and be observed: Whereas we read in Scripture, of some Actions
of the People in setting up of Kings, further than to a naked Declaration by a
part of the People of their Obedience, such Actions could not amount, since we
find no Commission they have, to bestow any Right; a true representation of the
People to be made, is as impossible, as for the whole People to Govern; the
names of an Aristocracy, a Democracy, a Commonweal, a State, or any other of
like signification, are not to be met either in the Law or Gospel.

That there is a ground in Nature for Monarchy, Aristotle himself affirms,
saying, the first Kings were Fathers of Families; as for any ground of any
other Form of Government, there has been none yet alleged, but a supposed
natural Freedom of Mankind; the Proof whereof I find none do undertake, but
only beg it to be granted: We find the Government of Gods own People varied
under the several Titles of Patriarchs* Captains, Judges, and Kings; but in all
these the Supreme Power rested still in one Person only: We no where find any
Supreme Power given to the People, or to a Multitude in Scripture, or ever
exercised by them. The People were never the Lords ^nointed, nor called Gods,
nor Crowned, nor ^d the Title of Nursing-Fathers, Genesis 35. 11. The Supreme
Power being an indivisible Beam of Majesty, cannot be divided among, or settled
upon a Multitude. God would have it fixed in one Person, not sometimes in one
part of the People, and sometimes in another; and sometimes, and that for the
most part, no where as when the Assembly is dissolved, it must rest in the Air,
or in the walls of the Chamber when they were Assembled.

If there were any thing like a Popular Government among Gods People, it was
about the time of the Judges, when there was no King in Israel; for they had
then some small Show of Government, such as it was, but it was so poor and
beggarly, that the Scripture brands it with this note, that every man did what
was right in his own eyes, because there was no King in Israel; it is not said,
because there was no Government, but because there was no King* it seems no
Government, but the Government of a King, in the judgment of the Scriptures
could restrain men from doing what they listed* where every man does what he
pleases, it may be truly said, there is no Government; for the end of
Government is, that every man should not do what he pleased, or be his own
Judge in his own case; for the Scripture to say the^ was no King, is to say
there was no Form o^ Government in Israel.

And what the Old Testament teaches us, we have confirmed in the New: If Saint
Paul had only said* Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, and said
no more: then men might have disputed, whether Saint Paul, by higher Powers,
had not meant as well other Governors as Kings; or other Forms of Government,
as Monarchy; but the good luck is, Saint Paul has been his own Interpreter or
Comment: for, after the general Doctrine of Obedience to be given by all men to
the higher Powers, he proceeds next to charge it home, and lay it to the
Conscience under pain of Damnation, and applies it to each particular man's
Conscience; saying, Will thou not be afraid of the Power? which Power he
expounds in the singular number, restraining it to one Person, saying, He is
the Minister of God to thee; it is not, They are the Ministers to thee; and
then again, He bears not the Sword in vain; and then a third time in the same
verse, lest thou should forget it, he says, for He is the Minister of God,
a Revenger to Wrath etc. upon thee: if Saint Paul had said, They are the
Ministers of God, or They bear not the Sword in vain, it might be doubted,
whether [they] were meant of Kings only, or of other Governors also; but this
Scruple is taken away by the Apostle himself. And as St. Paul has expounded
what he means by Higher Powers, so St. Peter also does the like: for the
self-same Word that St. Paul uses for Higher, in Saint Peter is translated
Supreme; so that though in our English Bibles the words differ, yet in the
Original they are both the same; so that St. Paul might have been Englished,
Let every Soul be subject to the Supreme Power; or St. Peter might have been
translated, whether to the King as to the higher; yet there is this difference,
that whereas St. Paul uses the word in the Plural number, St. Peter has it in
the Singular, and with application to the King.

It will be said, Though St. Peter make the King Supreme, yet he tells us the
King is a humane Ordinance, or a Creature of the People's. But it is answered,
Kings may be called an humane Ordinance, for being made of one of the People,
and not by the People; and so are humane in Regard of their material Cause, not
of their efficient. If St. Peter had meant that Kings had been made by the
People, he must also have meant that Governors had been made by the People,
for he calls the Governors as well an Ordinance of Man, as the King; for his
woods are, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme or whether it be to Governors: but Saint
Peter shows, that Governors are not made by the People; for he says, they
that are sent by Him (not by them) for the punishment of Evil doers: so that
the Governors are sent by the King, and not by the People: some would have
sent by him, to be sent by God; but the Relative must be referred to the next
Antecedent, which is the King, and not God. Besides, if Governors be sent by
God, and Kings by the People, then Governors would be Supreme, which is
contrary to Saint Peter's Doctrine; and it will follow, that the People have
not the power of choosing Representers to Govern, if Governors must be sent of
God.

The safest sense of Saint Peter's words is, Submit your selves to all Humane
Laws, whether made by the King, or by his Subordinate Governors. So the King
may be called a Humane Ordinance, as being all one with a Speaking Law: the
word in the Original is, Be subject to every humane Creation; it is more proper
to call a Law made by a King a creation of an Ordinance, than the Peoples
choosing or declaring of a King, a Creation of him.

But take the words in what sense soever you will, it is most evident, that
Saint Peter in this place, takes no notice of any Government or Governors, but
of a King, and Governors sent by him, but not by the People. And ^t is to be
noted, That St. Peter and St. Paul, ^he two chief of the Apostles, wrote their
Epistles at such a time, when the name of a Popular Government, or of the
People of Rome was at least so much in Show and in Name, that many do believe,
That notwithstanding the Emperors by strong hand usurped a Military Power; yet
the Government was for a long time in most things then in the Senate and People
of Rome; but for all this, neither of the two Apostles take any notice of any
such Popular Government; No, nor our Savior himself, who divides all between
God and Caesar, and allows nothing that we can find for the People.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Aristotle's Politiques, TOUCHING Forms of Government*
WHAT cannot be found in Scripture, many do look for in Aristotle; for if there
be any other Form of Government besides Monarchy, he is the man best able ^o
tell what it is, and to let us know by what name ^o call it, since the Greek
Tongue is most happy in ^ompounding Names, most significant to express the
nature of most things: The usual terms in this Age of Aristocraty and Democraty
are taken up from him ^o express Forms of Government most different from
Monarchy: We must therefore make inquiry into Aristotle touching these two
Terms.

True it is, Aristotle seems to make three sorts of Government, which he
di^inguisheth by (...). l. 3. c. 7. (...). etc.
the Sove^ignty of one man, or of a ^w, or of many, for the ^ommon Good. These
(he says) are rig^ or perfect Governments, (...) those that are for the priva^
Good of one, or of a few, (...) of a Multitude, are Transgressions. The
Government of a Monarchy for the Common Good, he calls a Kingdom. The
Government of a few more than one, an Aristocratie; either bee^ the best men
govern, or because it is for the best of (...) governed: when a Multitude
governs for the com^ Good, it is called by the common name of all Governments,
a POLITY. It is possible that one (...) few may excel in Virtue, but it is
difficult for many excel in all Virtue, except in Warlike Affairs, for (...)
is natural in a Multitude; therefore, in this sort of Government their
principal Use is to war one for another and to possess the Arms or Ammunition.
The Transg^sions of Government before spoken of, are these: ^ranny is the
Transgression of the Kingdom; and D^mocratie is the Transgression of the
Polity. For Ty^ is a Monarchy for the Benefit of the Monarch, the Olig^chy,
for the Profit of the Rich; the Democratie for the ^nefit of the Poor. None of
these are for the Com^ Good.

Here Aristotle, if he had stood to his own Prin^ples, should have said an
Oligarchy should be for (...) Benefit of a few, and those the best; and not for
the (...) of the rich: and a Democratie for the Benefit of (...) and not of the
Poor only; for so the Opposition ^eth; but then Aristotle saw his Democratie
wou^ prove to be no Transgression, but a perfect Polity, (...) his Oligarchy
would not be for the Benefit of a few, and those the best men; for they cannot
be the best men, that seek only their private Profit. In this Chapter, the
mind of Aristotle about the several kinds of Government, is clearliest
delivered, as being the foundation of all his Books of Politiques, it is the
more necessary to make a curious Observation of these his Doctrines. In the
first place, he acknowledges the Government of one man, or of a Monarchy, and
that is a perfect Form of Government.

Concerning Monarchy, Aristotle teaches us the beginning of it; for, says he,
the (...). l. 1. c. 2. (...).
first Society made of many Houses is a Colony, which seems most naturally to
be a Colony of Families, or Foster-bretheren of Children and Childrens
children. And therefore at the beginning Cities were, and now Nations, under
the Government of Kings; the Eldest in every house is King; and so for Kindred
sake it is in Colonies.

Thus he deduced the Original of Government from the Power of the Fatherhood,
not from the Election of the People. This it seems he learnt of his Master
Plato, who in his third Book of Laws affirms, that the true and first Reason of
Authority is, that the Father and Mother, and simply those that beget and
engender, do command and rule over all their Children. Aristotle also tells us
from Homer, (...).
that every man gives Laws to his Wife and Children.

In the fourth Book of his Politiques, cap. 2. he gives to Monarchy the Title
of the (...).
first and divinest sort of Government, defining Tyranny to be a Transgression
from the first, and divinest.

Again, Aristotle in the eighth Book of his Ethics, in the 12 Chapter, says,
That of (...).
the right Kinds of Government, a Monarchy was the best, and a popular Estate
the worst.

Lastly, in the third Book of his Politiques, and the sixteenth Chapter
concerning Monarchy, he says, that (...).
A perfect Kingdom is that wherein the King rules all things according to his
own Will; for he that is called a King according to the Law makes no kind of
Government.

Secondly, he says there is a Government of a few men, but does not tell us
how many those few men may, or must be; only he says they must be more than
one man, but how many, that he leaves uncertain.

This perfect Government of a few, any man would think Aristotle should have
called an Oligarchy, for that this word properly signifies so much; but in
stead of the Government of a few, Aristotle gives it a quite other name, and
terms it an Aristocraty, which signifies the Power of the best; the reason why
it is called an Aristocraty, says Aristotle, is for that there the best men
govern, or (because that is not always true) for that it is for the best of the
governed; by this latter reason any Government, and most especially a Monarchy,
may be called an Aristocraty, because the End of Monarchy is for the best of
the governed, as well as the End of an Aristocraty; so that of these two
Reasons for calling the Government of a few an Aristocratie, the first is
seldom true; and the latter is never sufficient to frame a distinction. This
Aristotle himself confesses in his next Chapter, saying (...), etc. lib. 3. c.
8.
that the Causes aforesaid do not make a Difference, and that it is Poverty and
Riches, and not Few, and Many, that makes the Difference between an Oligarchy,
and Democraty; there must be an Oligarchy where rich men rule, whether they be
few or many: and wheresoever the Poor have the Sovereignty, there must be a
Democraty.

Now if Aristotle will allow Riches and Poverty to make a Difference between an
Oligarchy and a Democrat^: these two must likewise make the Difference between
an Aristocraty and a Polity: for the only Difference Aristotle makes between
them is, in their Ends, and not in their Matter; for the same few men may make
an Aristocraty, if their End be the Common Good; and they may be an Oligarchy,
if they aim only at their private Benefit.

Thus is Aristotle distracted and perplexed how to distinguish his
Aristocratie, whether by the smallness of their Number, or by the Greatness of
their Estates. Nay if we look into Aristotle's Rhetoriques, Lib. 1. c. 8.
we shall find a new Conceit, not only about Aristocratie, but also about the
sorts of Government: for whereas he has taught us in his Politiques, that there
be three sorts of right or perfect Government, and as many sorts of wrong,
which he calls Transgressions or Corruptions, he comes in his Rhetoriques, and
teaches us that there be four sorts of Government.

1 (...).
A Democratie, when Magistracies are distributed by Lots. 2. In an Oligarchy by
their Wealth. 3. In an Aristocratie by their Instructions in the Law. It is
necessary for these to appear the best from whence they have their name. 4.
(...).
A Monarchy according to the name, wherein one i^ Lord over all.
Here we see Aristocratie is not distinguished by smallness of Number, nor by
Riches, but by Skill in the Laws; for he says those that are instructed in the
Laws govern in an Aristocratie: (...). a Point (...) dreamt of in his
Politiques; by which it seems Aristotle himself did not know well what he would
ha^ to be an Aristocratie. And as he cannot teach us truly what an Aristocratie
is, so he is to seek to tells us where any Aristocratie ever was; even himself
seems to doubt, whether there be any such Form of Government, where he says in
his third Book of Politiques, cap. 5.

(...).
It is impossible for any Mechanical man to be a Citizen in an Aristocratie, if
there be any such Government as they call Aristocratical.

His [ if] makes him seem to doubt of it; yet I find him affirm that the
Commonwealth of Carthage was Aristocratical; he does not say it was an
Aristocratie, for he confesses it had many of the Transgressions which other
Commonwealths had, and did incline either to a Democratie or an Oligarchy.
(...). L. 2. c. 11.
The Government of Carthage did transgress from an Aristocratie to an Oligarchy.

And he concludes, that if by Misfortune there should happen any Discord among
the Carthaginians themselves, there would be no Medicine by Law found out to
give it Rest; wherein methinks Aristotle was a kind of Prophet, for the
Discords between the Citizens of Carthage, were the main Cause that Hannibal
lost not only Italy, but Carthage it self.

By these few Collections we may find how uncertain Aristotle is in determining
what an Aristocratie is, or where or when any such Government was; it may
justly be doubted whether there ever was, or can be any such Government.

Let us pass from his Aristocraty, to his third sort of perfect or right
Government; for which he finds no particular Name, but only the common Name of
all Government, Politia: It seems the Greeks were wonderfully to seek, that
they of all men should not be able to compound a name for such a perfect Form
of Government; unless we should believe that they esteemed this kind of
Commonwealth so superlatively excellent, as to be called, (...), the Government
of all Governments, or Polity of Polities.

But howsoever Aristotle in his Books of Politiques vouchsafe us not a Name,
yet in his Books of Ethiques he affirms it may very properly be called (...).
L. 8. c. 12.
a timocratical Government, where Magistrates are chosen by their Wealth: But
why Aristotle should give it such a Name I can find no Reason; for a Polity by
his Doctrine is the Government of many, or of a Multitude, and the Multitude he
will have to be the poorer sort, insomuch that except they be poor, he will not
allow it to be the Government of a Multitude, though they be never so many; for
he makes Poverty the truest Note of a popular Estate; and as if to be Poor and
to be Free were all one, he makes Liberty likewise to be a Mark of a popular
Estate; for in his 4th Book, and 4th Chapter, he resolves, That (...).
a popular State is where free men govern, and an Oligarchy where rich men
rule; as if rich men could not be free men: Now how Magistrates should be
chosen for their Wealth, (...), among all poor men is to me a Riddle.

Here I cannot but wonder why all our modern Politicians, who pretend
themselves Aristotelians, should forsake their great Master, and account a
Democraty a right or perfect Form of Government, when Aristotle brands it for a
Transgression, or a depraved, or corrupted manner of Government. They had done
better to have followed Aristotle, who (though other Grecians could not, yet
he) could find out the name of a Timocraty for a right popular Government: But,
it may be, our Politicians forbear to use the word Timocraty, because he
affords an ill Character of it, saying, That of all the right Kinds of
Government a Monarchy was the best, and a Timocraty the worst; (...). Yet
afterward Aristotle in the same Chapter makes amends for it, in saying, a
Democraty is the least vicious, because it does but a little Transgress from a
Timocraty.

But not to insist longer on the name of this nameless Form of Government, let
Inquiry be made into the thing it self, that we may know what Aristotle says
is the Government of many, or of a Multitude, for the Common Good.

This Many, or Multitude is not the whole People, nor the major part of the
People, or any chosen by the People to be their Representors. No, Aristotle
never says, or means any such thing; for he tells us (...). L. 31. 5.
the best City does not make any Artificer, or Handicraftsman a Citizen.

And if these be excluded out of the Number of Citizens, there will be but a
few left in every City to make his Timocratical Government, since Artificers or
Mercenary men make far the greatest part of a City; or to say (...). L. 3. c. 7.
a City is a Community of free men, and yet to exclude the greatest part of the
Inhabitants from being Citizens, is but a Mockery of Freedom; for any man would
think that a City being a Society of men assembled to the End to live well,
that such men without whom a City cannot subsist, and who perform necessary
Works, and minister to all in Public, should not be barred from being
Citizens, yet says Aristotle, (...). L. 3. c. 5.
all those are not to be deemed Citizens without whom a City cannot subsist,
except they abstain from necessary Works; for he resolves it (...).
impossible for him to exercise the Work of Virtue, that uses a mechanical or
mercenary Trade.

And he makes it one of his Conclusions, That (...). L. 3. c. 4.
in ancient times among some men, no public Workman did partake of the
Government, until the worst of Democraties were brought in.

Again Aristotle will have his best popular Government consist of Free men, and
accounts the poorer sort of People to be free men; how then will he exclude
poor Artificers, who work for the Public, from participating of the Government?

Further it is observable in Aristotle, That, quite contrary to the
Signification of the Greek names, the Government of a Multitude may be termed
an Oligarchy if they be rich, and the Rule of a few a Democratie if they be
poor and free.

After much Incertainty of the Nature of this Politic Government, which wants
a name; Aristotle at last resolves that this general Commonweal or Politia is
compounded of a Democratie and Oligarchy; for, (...). L. 4. c. 8.
to speak plainly, a Polity is a Mixture of a Democratie and an Oligarchy.

That is, one perfect Form is made of two imperfect ones; this is rather a
confounding than compounding of Government, to patch it up of two corrupt ones,
by appointing an Oligarchical Penalty for the rich Magistrates that are chosen
by Election, and a Democratical Fee for the poor Magistrates that are chosen by
Lot.

Lastly it is to be noted, That Aristotle does not offer to name any one City
or Commonweal in the World, where ever there was any such Government as he
calls a Polity: for him to reckon it for a perfect Form of Government, and of
such Excellency as to carry the Name from all other, and yet never to have been
extant in the World, may seem a Wonder; and a man may be excused for doubting,
or for denying any such Form to be possible in Nature, if it cannot be made
manifest what it is, nor when, nor where it ever was.

In Conclusion, since Aristotle reckons but three kinds of perfect Government,
which are, First, a Monarchy of one; Secondly, an Aristocraty of a few;
Thirdly, a Polity of a Multitude; and if these two latter cannot be made good
by him: there will remain but one right Form of Government only, which is
Monarchy: And it seems to me, that Aristotle in (...) manner does confess as
much, where he informs us (...). L. 4. c. 13.
the the first Commonweal amo^ the Grecians, after Kingdom* was made of those
that wages War: meaning that the Grecians, when they left to be governed by
Kings, fell to be governed by an Army: the^ Monarchy was changed into a
Stratocraty, and not into an Aristocraty or Democraty: for if Unity in
Government, which is only found in Monarchy, be once broken, there is no Stay
or Bound, until it come to a constant standing Army; for the People or
Multitude, as Aristotle teaches us, can excel in no Ver^ but Military, and
that That is natural to them, and therefore in a popular Estate* (...). L. 3.
c. 7.
The Sovereign Power is i^ the Sword, and those that a^ possessed of the Arms.
So that any Nation or Kingdom that is not charged with the keeping of a King,
must perpetually be at the Charge of paying and keeping of an Army.

These brief Observations upon Aristotle's perfect Forms of Government, may
direct what to judge of those corrupted or imperfect Forms which he mentions;
for rectum est index sui and obloqui, and he reckons them to be all one in
Matter and Form, and to differ only in their End: the end of the Perfect Forms
being for the Good of the Governed; and of the Imperfect, for the benefit only
of the Governors. Now since Aristotle could not tell how to define or describe
his Right or Perfect Forms of Government, it cannot be expected he can satisfy
us concerning those he calls Imperfect: yet he labors and bestirrs himself
mainly in the business, though to little purpose; for howsoever the Title of
his Book be (...), of Politiques, and that he mentions (...) for a special Form
of Government, which has the common name of a Policy: yet when he comes to
dispute in particular of Government, he argues only about Democracies and
Oligarchies, and therein he is copious, because only those which he calls
corrupt Forms of Governments were common in Greece in his days. As for an
Aristocracy, or a Policy which he mentions, they are only Speculative Notions,
or Airy Names, invented to delude the World, and to persuade the People, that
under those quaint Terms, there might be found some subtle Government, which
might at least equal, if not excel Monarchy: And the Inventers of those fine
Names were all but Rebels to Monarchy, by Aristotle's confession, where he
says, the first Commonweals of Greece after Kings were left, were made of
those that waged War. l. 4. c. 13.

As Aristotle is irresolute to determine what are ^uly Perfect Aristocracies
and Policies, so he is to seek in describing his imperfect Forms of Government,
as well Oligarchies as Democracies, and therefore he is driven to invent
several forts of them, and to confound himself with Subdivisions: we will
allege some of his words. The cause why there be many kinds of Commonweals is,
for that there are many parts of every City. Sometimes all these parts are in a
Commonweal, sometimes more of them, sometimes fewer: whence it is manifest,
that there are many Commonweals differing from each other in kind* because the
parts of them differ after the same manner. For a Commonweal is the Order of
Magistrates distributed, either according to the Power of them that an^
partakers of it, or according to some other common equality belonging to Poor
and Rich, or some other thing common to both. It is therefore necessary, that
then be so many Commonweals as there are Orders, according to the excellencies
and differences of Parts. But it seems principally there are but two chief
kinds of Commonweals; the Democracy and the Oligarchy* for they make the
Aristocracy a branch of Oligarchy, as if it were a kind of Oligarchy; and that
other which is properly a Policy, to be a branch of Democracy. So they are wont
to esteem of Commonweales, but it is both truer and better; that there being
two right Forms, or one, that all the other be transgressions. Here we find
Aristotle of several minds, sometimes he is for many Commonweales, sometimes
for two, or sometimes for one. As for his many Commonweals, if he allow them
according to the several parts of a City, he may as well make three thousand
kinds of Commonweals, as three: if two Artificers and three Soldiers should
govern, that should be one kind of Commonweal: if four Husbandmen, and five
Merchants, that would be a second sort; or six Tailors, and ten Carpenters, a
third sort, or a dozen Saylors, and a dozen Porters, a fourth; and so in
infinitum, for Aristotle is not resolved how many parts to make of a City, or
how many Combinations of those Parts; and therefore in his Reckoning of them,
he differs from himself, sometimes makes more, sometimes fewer Parts: and often
concluding at the end of his Account with et caetera's: and confessing that one
and the same man may act several Parts; as he that is a Soldier, may be a a
Husbandman and an Artificer: and in his fourth Book and fourth Chapter, he
seems to reckon up eight parts of a City, but in the Tale of them, he misses or
forgets the sixth. 1. He names the Plowman. 2. The Artificer. 3. The Tradesman,
or Merchant. 4. The mercenary Hireling. 5. The Soldier, (here Aristotle falls
foul upon Plato, for making but four parts of a City. 1. The Weaver. 2. The
Plowman. 3. The Tailor. 4. the Carpenter. Afterward, as if these were not
sufficient, he adds the Smith, and the Freeder of necessary Cattle, the
Merchant, and the ingrosser or Retayler) whilst Aristotle was busy in this
Reprehension of Plato, he forgets himself, and skips over his sixth part of a
City, and names the 7. rich men, 8. the Magistrates. In the same Chapter, he
offers at another Division of the Parts of a City or Commonweal, first dividing
it into a Populacy, and Nobility. The People he divides first into Husbandmen.
2. Into Artificers. 3. Into Merchants, or those that use Buying or Selling. 4.
Into those that frequent the Seas, of whom some follow the War, others seek for
Gain, some are Carriers or Transporters, others Fishermen. 5. Handicraftsmen
that possess so little goods, that they cannot be idle. 6. Those that are not
free on both sides, and any other such like Multitude of People. The kinds of
Noblemen are distinguished by Riches, by Lineage, by Virtue, by Learning, and
other such like things.

That there may be more Parts of a Commonweal than are here numbered, Aristotle
confesses or supposes; and of a Multitude of Parts, and of a Multitude of
Mixtures of such Parts may be made (...) World of Forms of Oligarchies and
Democraties.

This Confusion of the Parts and Kinds of Commonweals drove Aristotle rather to
rest upon the Division of Rich and Poor, for the main parts of (...)
Commonweal, than any other. The distinction of a Few and of a Multitude, or the
whole People* might seem more proper to distinguish between an Oligarchy and a
Democraty; but the Truth is, Aristotle looking upon the Cities of Greece, and
finding that in every of them, even in Athens it self, there were many of the
People that were not allowed to be Citizens, and to participate in the
Government, and that many times He was a Citizen in one sort of Government, who
was not a Citizen in another, and that Citizens differed according to every
Commonweal; he considered that if he should place (...) Right in the whole
People, either to govern, or to choose their Form of Government, or the Parties
that should govern: he should hereby condemn the Government of all the Cities
in Greece, and especially of Aristocraty, which, as he says, allows (...)
Artificer to be a Citizen; and besides, he should thereby confute a main
Principle of his own Politiques, which is, that some men are born slaves by
Nature* which quite contradicts the Position, that all me^ are born equal and
free; and therefore Aristotle thought it fitter to allow all imaginable Forms
of Government, that so he might not disparage any one City, than to propound
such a Form as might condemn and destroy all the rest.

Though Aristotle allow so many several Forms of corrupted Governments; yet he
insists upon no one Form of all those that he can define or describe, in such
sort, that he is able to say that any one City in all Greece was governed just
according to such a Form; his diligence is only to make as many Forms as the
giddy or inconstant Humor of a City could happen upon; he freely gives the
People Liberty to invent as many Kinds of Government as they please, provided
he may have Liberty to find Fault with every one of them; it proved an easier
Work for him to find Fault with every Form, then to tell how to amend any one
of them; he found so many Imperfections in all sorts of Commonweals, that he
could not hold from reproving them before ever he tells us what a Commonweal
is, or how many sorts there are; and to this Purpose he spends his whole second
Book in setting out, and correcting the chief Commonweals of Greece, and among
others the Lacedemonian, the Cretan, and Carthaginian Commonweals; which three
he esteems to be much alike, and better than any other, yet he spares not to
lay open their Imperfections, and does the like to the Athenian; wherein he
breaks the Rule of Method, by delivering the Faults of Commonweals, before he
teach us what a Commonweal is; for in his first Book, he speaks only of the
Parts of which a City, or a Commonweal is made, but tells ^s not what a City or
Commonweal is, until he ^ome to his third Book, and there in handling the
sorts of Government, he observes no Method at all but in a disorderly way,
flies backward and forward from one sort to another: and howsoever there may be
observed in him many Rules of Policy touching Government in general, yet
without Doubt where he comes to discourse of particular Forms, he is full of
Contradiction, or Confusion, or both: it is true he is brief and difficult, the
best Right a man ca^ do him, is to confess he understands him not; ye^ a
diligent Reader may readily discern so many Irregularities and Breaches in
Aristotle's Books of Politiques, as tend to such Distraction or Confusion, the
none of our new Politicians can make Advantage of his Principles, for the
Confirmation of an original Power by Nature in the People, which is the only
Theme now in Fashion: For Aristotle's Discourse is of such Commonweals as were
founded by particular Persons, as the Chaleedonian by Phaleas, the Milesian by
Hippodamas, the Lacedemonian by Lyeu^gus, the Cretan by Minos, the Athenian by
Solon, and the like: But the natural Right of the People to found, or elect
their Kind of Government is not once disputed by him: It seems the underived
Majesty of the People, was such a metaphysical piece o^ Speculation as our
grand Philosopher was not acquainted with; he speaks very contemptuously (...)
the Multitude in several Places, he affirms that the People are base or wicked
Judges in their own Cases (...). and Lib. 3. c. 9.
that many of them differ nothing from beast (...); and again (...) Lib. 3. c.
11.
says, The Common People or Freemen (...) such as are neither Rich, nor in
Reputation for Virtue and it is not safe to commit to them great Government^
for, by reason of their Injustice and Unskilfulness, they would do much
Injustice, and commit many Errors; and it is pleasanter to the multitude to
live Disorderly, than Soberly, (...) Lib. 6. c. 4.
(...). If Aristotle had believed a Public Interest to have been in the
People, to the enabling them to be their own carvers in point of Government, he
would never have entangled himself with such intricate and ambiguous Forms of
Commonweals, as himself cannot tell how to explain, nor any of his Commentators
how to understand, or make Use of.

This one Benefit I have found by Reading Aristotle, that his Books of
Politiques serve for an admirable Commentary upon that Text of Scripture, which
says, In those days there was no King in Israel; every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. For he grants a liberty in every City, for any man, or
multitude of men, either by Cunning, or Force, to set up what Government they
please; and he will allow some name or other of a Commonweal, which in effect
is to allow every man to do what he lists, if he be able; hence it is, that by
the confession of Aristotle, the first Commonweals in Greece, after Kings were
given over, were made of those that waged War; those several kinds of
Commonweals, were all summed up into the government of an Army; for ( a) it is,
says (...). L. 7. c. 9.
Aristotle, in their power, who manage Arms to continue, or not continue the
Form of Government, whereby the Estate is governed, which is nothing else but a
Stratocratie, or Military Government. We cannot much blame Aristotle for the
Incertainty, and Contrariety in him about the sorts of Government, if we
consider him as a Heathen; for it is not possible for the Wit of man to search
out the first Grounds or Principles of Government, (which necessarily depend
upon the original of Property) except he know that at the Creation one man
alone was made, to whom the Dominion of all things was given, and from whom all
men derive their Title. This Point can be learnt only from the Scriptures: as
for the imaginary Contract of People, it is a Fancy not improbable only, but
impossible, except a multitude of men at first had sprung out, Lib. 2. c. 8.
and were engendered of the Earth, which Aristotle knows not whether he may
believe, or no: If Justice (which is to give every man his Due) be the End of
Government, there must necessarily be a Rule to know how any man at first came
to have a Right to any thing to have it truly called his. This is a Point
Aristotle disputes not; nor so much as ever dreamt of an original Contract
among People: he looked no farther in every City, than to a Scambling among the
Citizens, whereby every one snatched what he could get: so that a violent
Possession was the first, and best Title that he knew.

The main Distinction of Aristotle touching perfect or Right Forms of
Government from those that are imperfect or corrupt, consists solely in this
Point, that where the Profit of the governed is respected, there is a right
Government, but where the Profit of the Governors is regarded, there is a
Corruption or Transgression of Government. By this it is supposed by Aristotle,
that there may be a Government only for the Benefit of the Governors; this
Supposition to be false, may be proved from Aristotle himself; I will instance
about the Point of Tyranny.

Tyranny, says Aristotle, L. 3. c. 7.
is a despotical or masterly Monarchy; now he confesses, that L. 4. c. 10.
in truth the masterly Government is profitable both to the Servant by Nature,
and the Master by Nature, and he yields a solid reason for it, saying, L. 3. c.
6.
It is not possible, if the Servant be destroyed, that the Mastership can be
saved; whence it may be inferred, That if the Masterly Government of Tyrants
cannot be safe without the Preservation of them whom they govern, it will
follow that a Tyrant cannot govern for his own Profit only: and thus his main
Definition of Tyranny fails, as being grounded upon an impossible Supposition
by his own Confession. No Example can be showed of any such Government that
ever was in the World, as Aristotle describes a Tyranny to be; for under the
worst of Kings, though many particular men have unjustly suffered, yet the
Multitude, or the People in general have found Benefit and Profit by the
Government.

It being apparent that the different kinds of Government in Aristotle, arise
only from the difference of the number of Governors, whether one, a few, or
many: there may be as many several Forms of Governments as there be several
Numbers, which are infinite; so that not only the several Parts of a City or
Commonweal, but also the several Numbers of such Parts may cause multiplicity
of Forms of Government by Aristotle's Principles.

It is further observable in Assemblies, that it is not the whole Assembly, but
the major part only of the Assembly that has the Government; for that which
pleases the most, is always ratified, says Aristotle, lib. 4. c. 4. by this
means one and the same Assembly may make, at one Sitting, several Forms of
Commonweals, for in several Debates and Votes the same number of men, or all
the self-same men do not ordinarily agree in their Votes; and the least
Disagreement, either in the Persons of the men, or in their number, alters the
Form of Government. Thus in a Commonweal, one part of the Public Affairs shall
be ordered by one Form of Government, and another part by another Form, and a
third part by a third Form, and so in infinitum. How can that have the
Denomination of a Form of Government, which lasts but for a moment only, about
one fraction of Business? for in the very instant, as it were in the Twinkling
of an eye, while their Vote lasts, the Government must begin and end.

To be governed, is nothing else but to be obedient and subject to the Will or
Command of another; it is the Will in a man that governs; ordinarily men's Wills
are divided according to their several Ends or Interests; which most times are
different, and many times contrary the one to the other, and in such cases
where the Wills of the major part of the Assembly do unite and agree in one
Will, there is a Monarchy of many Wills in one, though it be called an
Aristocracy or Democracy, in regard of the several Persons; it is not the many
Bodies, but the one Will or Soul of the Multitude that governs. (...).
Where one is set up out of many, the People becomes a Monarch, because many
are Lords, not separately, but altogether as one; therefore such a People as if
it were a Monarch, seeks to bear Rule alone L. 4. c. 4.

It is a false and improper Speech to say that a whole Multitude, Senate,
Council, or any Multitude whatsoever does govern where the major part only
rules; because many of the Multitude that are so assembled, are so far from
having any part in the Government, that they themselves are governed against
and contrary to their Wills; there being in all Government various and
different Debates and Consultations, it comes to pass oft-times, that the major
part in every Assembly, differs according to the several Humors or Fancies of
men; those who agree in one Mind, in one Point, are of different Opinions in
another; every Change of Business, or new Matter begets a new major part, and
is a Change both of the Government and Governors; the Difference in the
Number, or in the Qualities of the Persons that govern, is the only thing that
causes different Governments, according to Aristotle, who divides his Kinds of
Government to the Number of one, a few, or many. As amongst the Romans their
Tribunitial Laws had several Titles, according to the Names of those Tribunes
of the People, that preferred and made them. So in other Governments, the Body
of their Acts and Ordinances, is composed of a Multitude of momentary Monarchs,
who by the Strength and Power of their Parties or Factions are still under a
kind of a civil War, fighting and scratching for the legislative miscellany, or
medly of several Governments. If we consider each Government according to the
nobler Part of which it is composed, it is nothing else but a Monarchy of
Monothelites, or of many men of one Will, most commonly in one Point only: but
if we regard only the baser part, or Bodies of such Persons as govern, there is
an interrupted Succession of a Multitude of short-lived Governments, with as
many Intervalls of Anarchy; so that no man can say at any time, that he is
under any Form of Government; for in a shorter time than the word can be
spoken, every Government is begun and ended. Furthermore in all Assemblies, of
what Quality soever they be, whether Aristocratical or Democratical, as they
call them, they all agree in this one Point, to give that honorable Regard to
Monarchy, that they do interpret the major, or prevailing part in every
Assembly to be but as one man, and so do feign to themselves a kind of Monarchy.

Though there be neither Precept nor Practice in Scripture, nor yet any Reason
alleged by Aristotle for any Form of Government, but only Monarchy; yet it is
said that it is evident to common Sense, that of old time Rome, and in this
present Age Venice, and the Low Countries, enjoy a Form of Government different
from Monarchy: Hereunto it may be answered, That a People may live together in
Society, and help one another; and yet not be under any Form of Government; as
we see Herds of Cattle do, and yet we may not say they live under Government.
For Government is not a Society only to live, but to live well and virtuously.
This is acknowledged by Aristotle, who teaches that (...).
the End of a City, is to live blessedly and honestly. Political Communities
are ordained for honest Actions, but not for living together only.

Now there be two things principally required to a blessed and honest life:
Religion toward God, and Peace toward men: that is, a quiet and peaceable
Life in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Here then will be the Question,
Whether Godliness and Peace can be found under any Government but Monarchy, or
whether Rome, Venice, or the Low Countries did enjoy these under any popular
Government. In these two Points, let us first briefly examine the Roman
Government, which is thought to have been the most glorious.

For Religion, we find presently after the Building of the City by Romulus, the
next King, Numa, most devoutly established a Religion, and began his Kingdom
with the Service of the Gods; he forbad the Romans to make any Images of God,
which Law lasted and was observed 170 Years, there being in all that time no
Image or Picture of God, in any Temple or Chapel of Rome; also he erected the
Pontifical College, and was himself the first Bishop or Pontifex; These
Bishops were to render no Account either to the Senate or Commonalty. They
determined all Questions concerning Religion, as well between Priests as
between private men: They punished inferior Priests, if they either added or
detracted from the established Rites, or Ceremonies, or brought in any new
thing into Religion. The chief Bishop, Pontif^ Maximus, taught every man how to
honor and serve the Gods. This Care had Monarchy of Religion.

But after the Expulsion of Kings, we do not find during the Power of the
People, any one Law made for the Benefit or Exercise of Religion: there be two
Tribunitian Laws concerning Religion, but they are merely for the Benefit of
the Power of the People, and not of Religion. L. Papirius, a Tribune, made a
Law called Lex Papiria, that it should not be lawful for any to consecrate
either Houses, Grounds, Altars, or any other things without the Determinatin of
the People. Domitius Aenobarbus another Tribune enacted a Law called Domitia
Lex, that the Pontifical College should not, as they were wont, admit whom
they would into the Order of Priesthood, but it should be in the Power of the
People; and because it was contrary to their Religion, that Church-Dignities
should be bestowed by the common People; hence for very Shame he ordained, that
the lesser part of the People, namely seventeen Tribes should elect whom they
thought fit, and afterward the Party elected should have his Confirmation or
admission from the College: thus by a Committee of seven Tribes taken out of
thirty five, the ancient Form of Religion was altered and reduced to the Power
of the lesser part of the People. This was the great Care of the People to
bring Ordination and Consecration to the Laity.

The Religion in Venice, and the Low Countries is sufficiently known, much need
not be said of them: they admirably agree under a seeming contrariety; it is
commonly said, that one of them has all Religions, and the other no Religion;
the Atheist of Venice may shake hands with the Sectary of Amsterdam. This is
the Liberty that a popular estate can brag of, every man may be of any
Religion, or no Religion, if he please; their main Devotion is exercised only
in opposing and suppressing Monarchy. They both agree to exclude the Clergy
from meddling in Government, whereas in all Monarchies both before the Law of
Moses, and under it, and ever since: all Barbarians, Graecians, Romans,
Infidels, Turks, and Indians, have with one Consent given such Respect and
Reverence to their Priests, as to trust them with their Laws; and in this our
Nation, the first Priests we read of before Christianity, were the Druides, who
as Caesar says, decided and determined Controversies, in Murder, in Case of
Inheritance, of Bounds of Lands, as they in their Discretion judged meet; they
grant Rewards and Punishments. It is a Wonder to see what high Respect even the
great Turk gives to his Mufti, or chief Bishop, so necessary is Religion to
strengthen and direct Laws.

To consider of the Point of Peace, It is well known, that no People ever
enjoyed it without Monarchy. Aristotle says, the Lacedaemonians preserved
themselves by Warring; and after they had gotten to themselves the Empire, then
were they presently undone, for that they could not live at Rest, nor do any
better Exercise, than the Exercise of War, l. 2. c. 7. After Rome had expelled
Kings, it was in perpetual War, till the time of the Emperors: once only was
the Temple of Ianus shut, after the end of the first Punique War, but not so
long as for one year, but for some Months. It is true, as Orosius says, that
for almost 700 years, that is, from Tullus Hostilius (...) Augustus Caesar,
only for one Summer, the Bowels (...) Rome did not sweat Blood. On the Behalf
of the Romans it may be said, that though the Bowels of Rome did always sweat
Blood, yet they did obtain most glorious Victories abroad. But it may be truly
answered, if all the Roman Conquests had no other Foundation but Injustice;
this alone soils all the Glory of her warlike Actions. The most glorious War
that ever Rome had, was with Carthag^; the Beginning of which War, Sir Walter
Raleig^ proves to have been most unjustly undertaken by the Romans, in
confederating with the Mamertines, and Aiding of Rebels, under the Title of
protecting their Confederates; whereas Kings many times may have just Cause of
War, for recovering and preserving their Rights to such Dominions as fall to
them by Inheritance or Marriage; a Popular Estate, that can neither marry, nor
be Heir to another, can have no such Title to a War in a Foreign Kingdom; and
to speak the Truth, if it be rightly considered, the whole time of the
Popularity of Rome, the Romans were no other than the only prosperous and
glorious Thieves, and Robbers of the World.

If we look more narrowly into the Roman Government, it will appear, that in
that very Age, wherein Rome was most victorious, and seemed to be most popular,
she owed most of her Glory to an apparent kind of Monarchy. For it was the
Kingh^ Power of the Consuls, who (as Livy says) had the same Royal
Jurisdiction, or absolute Power that the Kings had, not any whit diminished or
abated, and held all the same Regal Ensigns of supreme Dignity, which helped
Rome to all her Conquests: whiles the Tribunes of the People were struggling at
home with the Senate about Election of Magistrates, enacting of Laws, and
calling to Account, or such other popular Affairs, the Kingly Consuls gained
all the Victories abroad: Thus Rome at one and the same time was broken and
distracted into two Shows of Government; the Popular, which served only to
raise Seditions and Discords within the Walls, whilst the Regal achieved the
Conquests of Foreign Nations and Kingdoms. Rome was so sensible of the Benefit
and Necessity of Monarchy, that in her most desperate Condition and Danger,
when all other Hopes failed her, she had still Resort to the Creation of a
Dictator, who for the time was an absolute King; and from whom no Appeal to the
People was granted, which is the royallest Evidence for Monarchy in the World;
for they who were drawn to swear, they would suffer no King of Rome, found no
Security but in Perjury, and breaking their Oath by admitting the Kingly Power
in spite of their Teeth, under a new name of a Dictator or Consul: a just
Reward for their wanton expelling their King for no other Crime they could
pretend but Pride, which is most tolerable in a King of all men: and yet we
find no particular Point of Pride charged upon him, but that he enjoined the
Romans to labor in cleansing, and casting of Ditches, and paving their Sinks:
an Act both for the Benefit and Ornament of the City, and therefore commendable
in the King: But the Citizens of Rome, who had been Conquerours of all Nations
round about them, could not endure of Warriers to become Quarriers, and
Day-labourers. Whereas it is said, that Tarquin was expelled for the Rape
committed by his Son on Lucrece; it is unjust to condemn the Father for the
Crime of his Son; it had been fit to have petitioned the Father for the
Punishment of the Offender: The Fact of young Tarquin cannot be excused, yet
without wrong to the Reputation of so chaste a Lady as Lucrece is reputed to
be, it may be said, she had a greater Desire to be thought chaste, than to be
chaste; she might have died untouched, and unspotted in her Body, if she had
not been afraid to be slandered for Inchastity; both Dionysius Halicarnasseus,
and Livie, who both are her Friends, so tell the Tale of her, as if she had
chosen rather to be a Whore, than to be thought a Whore. To say Truth, we find
no other Cause of the Expulsion of Tarquin, than the Wantonness, and
Licentiousness of the People of Rome.

This is further to be considered in the Roman Government, that all the time
between their Kings, and their Emperors, there lasted a continued strife,
between the Nobility and Commons, wherein by Degrees the Commons prevailed at
last, so to weaken the Authority of the Consuls and Senate, that even the last
sparks of Monarchy were in a manner extinguished, and then instantly began the
Civil War, which lasted till the Regal Power was quickly brought home, and
settled in Monarchy. So long as the Power of the Senate stood good for the
Election of Consuls, the Regal Power was preserved in them, for the Senate had
their first Institution from Monarchy: It is worth the noting, that in all
those places that have seemed to be most popular, that weak Degree of
Government, that has been exercised among them, has been founded upon, and
been beholden unto Monarchical Principles, both for the Power of assembling,
and manner of consulting: for the entire and gross Body of any People, is such
an unweildy and diffused thing as is not capable of uniting, or congregating,
or deliberating in an entire Lump, but in broken Parts, which at first were
regulated by Monarchy.

Furthermore it is observable, that Rome in her chief Popularity, was often
beholden for her Preservation to the Monarchical Power of the Father over the
Children: by means of this Fatherly Power, says Bodin, the Romans flourished
in all Honor and Virtue, and oftentimes was their Commonweal thereby delivered
from most imminent Destruction, when the Fathers drew out of the Consistory,
their Sons being Tribunes publishing Laws tending to Sedition. Amongst others
Cassius threw his Son headlong out of the Consistory, publishing the Law
Agraria (for the Division of Lands) in the Behoof of the People, and after by
his own private Judgment put him to Death, the Magistrates, Sergeants, and
People standing thereat astonished, and not daring to withstand his Fatherly
Authority, although they would with all their Power have had that Law for
Division of Lands; which is sufficient Proof, this Power of the Father not only
to have been sacred and inviolable, but also to have been lawful for him,
either by Right or Wrong to dispose of the Life and Death of his Children, even
contrary to the Will of the Magistrates and People.

It is generally believed that the Government of Rome, after the Expulsion of
Kings, was popular; Bodin endeavors to prove it, but I am not satisfied with
his Arguments, and though it will be thought a Paradox, yet I must maintain, it
was never truly popular.

First it is difficult to agree, what a popular Government is, Aristotle says
it is where Many or a Multitude do rule; he does not say where the People, or
the major part of the People, or the Representors of the People govern.

Bodin affirms if all the People be interessed in the Government, it is a
Popular Estate, Lib. 2. c. 1. but after in the same Chapter he resolves, that
it is a Popular Estate, when all the People, or the greater part thereof has
the Sovereignty, and he puts the Case that if there be threescore thousand
Citizens, and forty thousand of them have the Sovereignty, and twenty thousand
be excluded, it shall be called a popular Estate: But I must tell him, though
fifty nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety nine of them govern, yet it is no
popular Estate, for if but one man be excluded, the same reason that excludes
that one man, may exclude many hundreds, and many thousands, yea, and the major
part it self; if it be admitted, that the People are or ever were free by
Nature, and not to be governed, but by their own Consent, it is most unjust to
exclude any one man from his Right in Government; and to suppose the People so
unnatural, as at the first to have all consented to give away their Right to a
major part, (as if they had Liberty given them only to give away, and not to
use it themselves) is not only improbable, but impossible; for the whole
People is a thing so uncertain and changeable, that it alters every moment, so
that it is necessary to ask of every Infant so soon as it is born its Consent
to Government, if you will ever have the Consent of the whole People.

Moreover, if the Arbitrary Trial by a Jury of twelve men, be a thing of that
admirable Perfection and Justice as is commonly believed, wherein the Negative
Voice of every single Person is preserved, so that the dissent of any of the
twelve frustrates the whole Judgment: How much more ought the natural freedom
of each man be preserved, by allowing him his Negative Voice, which is but a
continuing him in that estate, wherein, it is confessed, Nature at first placed
him; Justice requires that no one Law should bind all, except all consent to
it, there is nothing more violent and contrary to Nature, than to allow a major
part, or any other greater part less than the whole to bind all the People.

The next difficulty to discovering what a Popular Estate is, is to find out
where the Supreme Power in the Roman Government rested; it is Bodin's opinion,
that in the Roman state the Government was in the Magistrates, the Authority
and Counsel in the Senate, but the Sovereign Power and Majesty in the People.
Lib. 2. c. 1. So in his first Book his Doctrine is, that the ancient Romans
said, Imperium in Magistratibus, Authoritatem in Senatu, Potestatem in plebe,
Majestatem in Populi jure esse dicebant. These four words Command, Authority,
Power, and Majesty signify ordinarily, one and the same thing, to wit, the
Sovereignty, or supreme Power, I cannot find that Bodin knows how to
distinguish them; for they were not distinct Faculties placed in several
Subjects, but one and the same thing diversely qualified, for Imperium,
Authoritas, Potestas, and Majestas were all originally in the Consuls; although
for the greater show the Consuls would have the Opinion, and Consent of the
Senate who were never called together, nor had their Advice asked, but when and
in what Points only it pleased the Consuls to propound: so that properly
Senatus consultum was only a Decree of the Consuls, with the Advice of the
Senators: And so likewise the Consuls, when they had a mind to have the
Countenance of an ampler Council, they assembled the Centuries, who were
reckoned as the whole People, and were never to be assembled, but when the
Consuls thought fit to propound some Business of great weight unto them; so
that jussus populi, the Command of the People which Bodin so much magnifies,
was properly jussus Consulum, the Command of the Consuls, by the Advice or
Consent of the Assembly of the Centuries, who were a Body composed of the
Senators, and the rest of the Patritians, Knights, and Gentlemen, or whole
Nobility together with the Commons: for the same men who had Voices in Senate,
had also their Votes allowed in the Assembly of the Centuries* according to
their several Capacities.

It may further appear, that the Roman Government was never truly popular, for
that in her greatest Show of Popularity, there were to be found above ten
Servants for every Citizen or Freeman, and of those Servants, not one of them
was allowed any Place, or Voice in Government: If it be said that the Roman
Servants were Slaves taken in War, and therefore not fit to be Freemen; to this
it may be answered, that if the Opinion of our modern Politicians be good,
which holds that all men are born Free by Nature, or if but the Opinion of
Aristotle be found, who says that by Nature some men are Servants, and some
are Masters, then it may be unnatural, or unjust to make all Prisoners in War
Servants or (as they are now called) Slaves, a Term not used in the Popular
Governments, either of Rome or Greece; for in both Languages, the usual word
that does answer to our late Term of Slave, is but Servus in Latin, and (...)
in Greek. Besides, if the Wars of the Romans, by which they gained so many
Servants were unjust, as I take all offensive War to be without a special
Commission from God, and as I believe all the Roman Wars were, that were made
for the Enlargement of their Empire, then we may conclude, that the Romans were
the notablest Plagiaries, or Men-stealers in the World.

But to allow the lesser part of the People of Rome, who called themselves
Citizens, to have had a just Right to exclude all Servants from being a part of
the people of Rome, let us enquire whether the major part of those, whom they
allowed to be Citizens, had the Government of Rome; whereby we may discover
easily how notoriously the poorer and greater part of the Citizens were guld of
their Share in Government; There were two famous manners of their assembling
the People of Rome: the first was by Classes, as they called them, which were
divided into Centuries; the second was by Tribes, or Wards; the former of these
was a Ranking of the People, according to their Abilities or Wealth; the latter
according to the Place or Ward, wherein every Citizen dwelt: In the Assemblies
of neither of these, had the major part of the People the Power of Government,
as may thus be made appear.

First, for the Assembly of the Centuries, there were six Degrees or Classes of
men according to their Wealth; the first Classis was of the richest men in
Rome, none whereof were under 200 l. in Value: The Valuation of the second
Classis was not under fourscore Pounds; and so the 3. the 4. and the fifth
Classis were each a Degree one under another. The sixth Classis contained the
poorer sort, and all the Rabble. These six Classes were subdivided into
Hundreds, or Centuries.

CENTURIES. The first Classis had 98 The 2. had 22 The 3. Classis had. 20 The
4. had 22 The 5. Classis had 30 The 6. Classis had 1 193

The Classes, and Centuries being thus ordered when the Assembly came to give
their Votes they did not give their Voices by the Poll, which is the true
popular way: but each Century Voted by it self, each Century having one Voice,
the major part of the Centuries carried the Business: Now there being fourscore
and eighteen Centuries in the first Classis, in which all the Patricians,
Senators, Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Rome, were enrolled, being more
in Number, and above half the Centuries, must needs have the Government, if
they agreed all together in their Votes, because they Voted first, for when 97
Centuries had agreed in their Votes, the other Centuries of the inferior
Classis, were never called to Vote; thus the Nobles, and richer men who were
but few in Comparison of the Common People did bear the chief Sway, because all
the poorer sort, or proletarian Rabble, were clapped into the sixth Classis,
which in reckoning were allowed but the single Voice of one Century, which
never came to Voting: whereas in Number they did far exceed all the five other
Classes or Centuries, and if they had been allowed the Liberty of other
Citizens, they might have been justly numbered for a thousand Centuries, or
Voices in the Assembly; This Device of packing so many thousands into one
Century, did exclude far the greatest part of the People from having a part in
the Government.

Next, for the Assembly of the People of Rome by Tribes, it must be considered,
that the Tribes did not give their Voices by the Poll altogether, which is the
true way of popular Voting, but each Tribe or Ward did Vote by it self, and the
Votes of the major part (not of the People but) of the Tribes did sway the
Government, the Tribes being unequal, as all Divisions by Wards usually are,
because the Number of the People of one Tribe, is not just the same with the
Number of the People of each other Tribe; whence it followed, that the major
Number of the Tribes might possibly be the minor Number of the People, which is
a destroying of the Power of the major Part of the People.

Add hereunto, that the Nobility of Rome were excluded from being present at
the Assembly of the Tribes; and so the most considerable part of the People was
wanting, therefore it could not be the Voices of the major part of the People,
where a great part of the People were allowed no Voices at all, for it must be
the major part of the whole, and not of a Part of the People, that must
denominate a popular Government.

Moreover it must be noted, that the Assembly of the Tribes was not originally
the Power of the People of Rome, for it was almost 40 years after the Rejection
of Kings before an Assembly of Tribes were thought on, or spoken of; for it was
the Assembly of the People by Centuries, that agreed to the Expulsion of Kings,
and creating of Consuls in their Room, also the Famous Laws of the twelve
Tables were ratified by the Assembly of the Centuries. This Assembly by
Centuries, as it was more Ancient, than that by Tribes; so it was more truly
popular, because all the Nobility, as well as the Commons, had Voices in it:
The Assembly by Tribes, was pretended at first, only to elect Tribunes of the
People, and other inferior Magistrates, to determine of lesser Crimes that
were not Capital, but only finable; and to decree that Peace should be made;
but they did not meddle with denouncing War to be made, for that high Point did
belong only to the Assembly of the Centuries; and so also did the judging of
Treason, and other Capital Crimes. The Difference between the Assembly of the
Tribes, and of the Centuries, is very material; for though it be commonly
thought, that either of these two Assemblies were esteemed to be the People,
yet in Reality it was not so, for the Assembly of the Centuries only could be
said to be the People, because all the Nobility were included in it as well as
the Commons, whereas they were excluded out of the Assembly of the Tribes; and
yet in Effect, the Assembly of the Centuries was but as the Assembly of the
Lords, or Nobles only, because the lesser, and richer part of the People had
the Sovereignty, as the Assembly of the Tribes was, but the Commons only.

In maintenance of the popular Government of Rome, Bodin objects, that there
could be no regal Power in the two Consuls, who could neither make Law, nor
Peace, nor War. The Answer is, though there were two Consuls, yet but one of
them had the Regality; for they governed by Turns, one Consul one Month, and
the other Consul another Month; or the first one day, and the second another
day. That the Consuls could make no Laws is false, it is plain by Livy, that
they had the Power to make Laws, or War, and did execute that Power, though
they were often hindered by the Tribunes of the People; not for that the Power
of making Laws or War, was ever taken away from the Consuls, or communicated to
the Tribunes, but only the Exercise of the Consular Power was suspended by a
seeming humble way of intercession of the Tribunes; The Consuls by their first
Institution had a lawful Right to do those things, which yet they would not do
by reason of the shortness of their Reigns, but chose rather to countenance
their actions with the title of a Decree of the Senate (who were their private
Council) yea, and sometimes with the Decree of the Assembly of the Centuries
(who were their Public Counsel) for both the Assembling of the Senate, and of
the Centuries, was at the Pleasure of the Consuls, and nothing was to be
propounded in either of them, but at the Will of the Consuls: which argues a
Sovereignty in them over the Senate and Centuries; the Senate of Rome was like
the House of Lords, the Assembly of the Tribes resembled the House of Commons,
but the Assembling of the Centuries, was a Body composed of Lords and Commons
united to Vote together.

The Tribunes of the People bore all the Sway among the Tribes, they called
them together when they pleased, without any Order, whereas the Centuries were
never Assembled without Ceremony, and Religious observation of the Birds by the
Augurs, and by the Approbation of the Senate, and therefore were said to be
auspicata, and ex authoritate Patrum.

These things considered, it appears, that the Assembly of the Centuries was
the only legitimate, and great Meeting of the People of Rome: as for any
Assembling, or Electing of any Trustees, or Representors of the People of Rome,
in nature of the modern Parliaments, it was not in Use, or ever known in Rome.

Above two hundred and twenty years after the expulsion of Kings, a sullen
humor took the Commons of Rome, that they would needs depart the City to
Ianiculum, on the other side of Tybur, they would not be brought back into the
City, until a Law was made, That a Plebiscitum, or a Decree of the Commons
might be observed for a Law; this Law was made by the Dictator Hortensius, to
quiet the Sedition, by giving a part of the Legislative Power to the Commons,
in such inferior matters only, as by Toleration and Usurpation had been
practiced by the Commons. I find not that they desired an Enlargement of the
Points which were the Object of their Power, but of the Persons, or Nobility
that should be subject to their Decrees: the great Power of making War, of
creating the greater Magistrates, of judging in Capital Crimes, remained in the
Consuls, with the Senate, and Assembly of the Centuries.

For further manifestation of the broken and distracted Government of Rome, it
is fit to consider the original Power of the Consuls, and of the Tribunes of
the Commons, who are ordinarily called the Tribunes of the People.

First, it is undeniable, that upon the expulsion of Kings, Kingly power was
not taken away, but only made Annual and changeable between two Consuls; who in
their Turns, and by course had the Sovereignty, and all Regal power; this
appears plainly in Livy, who tells us, that Valerius Publicola being Consul, he
himself alone ordained a Law, and then assembled a general Session.

Turemillus Arsa inveighed and complained against the Consul's Government, as
being so absolute, and in Name only less odious than that of Kings, but in Fact
more cruel; for instead of one Lord the City had received twain, having
Authority beyond all Measure, unlimited and infinite. Sextius and Licinus
complain, that there would never be any indifferent Course, so long as the
Nobles kept the Sovereign Place of Command, and the Sword to strike, whiles the
poor Commons have only the Buckler; their Conclusion was, that it remains, that
the Commons bear the Office of Consuls too, for that were a Fortress of their
Liberty, from that day forward, shall the Commons be Partakers of those things*
wherein the Nobles now surpass them, namely Sovereign Rule and Authority.

The Law of the twelve Tables affirms, Regio imperio duo sunto, iique Consules
appellantor. Let two have regal Power, and let them be called Consuls: also the
Judgment of Livy is, that the Sovereign Power was translated from Consuls to
Decemvirs, as before from Kings to Consuls. These are proofs sufficient to show
the Royal Power of the Consuls.

About sixteen years after the first Creation of Consuls, the Commons finding
themselves much run into Debt, by wasting their Estates in following the Wars;
and so becoming, as they thought, oppressed by Usury, and cast into Prison by
the Judgment, and Sentence of the Consuls, they grievously complained of Usury,
and of the Power of the Consuls, and by Sedition prevailed, and obtained Leave
to choose among themselves Magistrates called Tribunes of the People, who by
their Intercession might preserve the Commons from being oppressed and
suffering Wrong from the Consuls: and it was further agreed, that the Persons
of those Tribunes should be sacred, and not to be touched by any. By means of
this Immunity of the Bodies of the Tribunes from all Arrests or other Violence,
they grew in time by Degrees to such Boldness, that by stopping the legal
Proceedings of the Consuls (when they pleased to intercede) they raised such an
Anarchy often times in Government, that they themselves might act, and take upon
them, what Power soever they pleased (though it belonged not to them.) This
Gallantry of the Tribunes was the Cause, that the Commons of Rome, who were
diligent Pretenders to Liberty, and the great Masters of this part of
Politiques, were thought the only famous Preservers, and Keepers of the Liberty
of Rome. And to do them right, it must be confessed, they were the only men
that truly understood the Rights of a Negative Voice; if we will allow every
man to be naturally free till they give their Consent to be bound, we must
allow every particular Person a Negative Voice; so that when as all have equal
Power, and are as it were fellow-Magistrates or Officers, each man may impeach,
or stop his Fellow-Officers in their Proceedings, this is grounded upon the
general Reason of all them, which have any thing in Common, where he which
forbids, or denies, has most Right; because his Condition in that Case is
better than his which commands, or moves to proceed; for every Law or
Command, is in it self an Innovation, and a Diminution of some part of popular
Liberty; for it is no Law except it restrain Liberty; he that by his negative
Voice does forbid or hinder the Proceeding of a new Law, does but preserve
himself in that Condition of Liberty, wherein Nature has placed him, and
whereof he is in present Possession; the Condition of him thus in Possession
being the better, the stronger is his Prohibition, any single man has a juster
Title to his Negative Voice, than any Multitude can have to their Affirmative;
to say the People are free, and not to be governed, but by their own Consent,
and yet to allow a major part to rule the whole, is a plain Contradiction, or a
destruction of natural Freedom. This the Commons of Rome rightly understood,
and therefore the transcendent Power of the Negative Voice of any one Tribune,
being able of it self to stay all the Proceedings, not of the Consuls and
Senate only, and other Magistrates, but also of the rest of his
fellow-Tribunes, made them seem the powerfullest men in all Rome; and yet in
Truth they had no Power or Jurisdiction at all, nor were they any Magistrates,
nor could they lawfully call any man before them, for they were not appointed
for Administration of Justice, but only to oppose the Violence, and Abuse of
Magistrates, by interceeding for such as appealed, being unjustly oppressed;
for which Purpose at first they sat only without the Door of the Senate, and
were not permitted to come within the Doors: this Negative Power of theirs was
of Force only to hinder, but not to help the Proceedings in Courts of Justice;
to govern, and not to govern the People. And though they had no Power to make
Laws, yet they took upon them to propound Laws and flattered and humoured the
Commons by the Agrarian and Frumentarian Laws, by the first they divided the
Common fields, and conquered Lands among* the Common People; and by the latter,
they afforded them Corn at a cheaper or lower price: by these means these
Demagogues or Tribunes of the Commons led the Vulgar by the Noses, to allow
whatsoever Usurpations they pleased to make in Government.

The Royal Power of the Consuls was never taken away from them by any Law that
I hear of, but continued in them all the time of their pretended popular
Government, to the very last, though repined at, and opposed in some
particulars by the Commons.

The No-Power, or Negative Power of the Tribunes, did not long give content to
the Commons, and therefore they desired, that one of the Consuls might be
chosen out of the Commonalty: the eager propounding of this point for the
Commons, and the diligent opposing of it by the Nobility or Senate, argues how
much both parties regarded the Sovereign power of a Consul; the Dispute lasted
fourscore years within two: the Tribunes pressing it upon all advantages of
opportunity, never gave over till they carried it by strong hand, or
stubbornness, hindering all Elections of the Curule, or greater Magistrates, for
five years together, whereby the Nobles were forced to yield the Commons a
Consul's place, or else an Anarchy was ready to destroy them all; and yet the
Nobility had for a good while allowed the Commons Military Tribunes with
Consular Power, which, in effect or substance, was all one with having one of
the Consuls a Commoner, so that it was the bare Name of a Consul which the
Commons so long strived for with the Nobility: In this contentionsome Years
Consuls were chosen, some years Military Tribunes in such Confusion, that the
Roman Historians cannot agree among themselves, what Consuls to assign, or name
for each Year, although they have Capitoline Tables, Sicilian and Greek
Registers, and Kalenders, Fragments of Capitoline Marbles, linen Books or
Records to help them: a good while the Commons were content with the Liberty of
having one of the Consuls a Commoner; but about fourscore years after they
enjoyed this Privilege, a Desire took them to have it enacted, that a Decree of
the Commons called a plebiscitum might be observed for a Law, Hortensius the
Dictator yielded to enact it, thereby to bring back the Seditious Commons, who
departed to Ianiculum on the other side of Tybur, because they were deeply
engaged in Debt in regard of long Seditions and Dissensions. The eleventh Book
of Livy, where this Sedition is set down, is lost; we have only a touch of it
it in Florus his Epitome, and St. Augustine mentions the Plundring of many
Houses by the Commons at their departing: this Sedition was above 220 years
after the Expulsion of Kings* in all which time, the People of Rome got the
Spoil of almost all Italy, and the wealth of very many rich Cities: and yet the
Commons were in so great Penury, and over whelmed with Debts that they fell to
plunder the rich Houses of the Citizens, which sounds not much for the Honor
of a popular Government. This communicating of a legislative Power to the
Commons, touching Power of enfranchising Allies, Judgments Penal, and Fines,
and those Ordinances that concerned the Good of the Commons called Plebiscita,
was a dividing of the Supreme Power, and the giving a Share of it to others, as
well as to the Consuls, and was in effect to destroy the legislative Power, for
to have two Supremes is to have none, because the one may destroy the other,
and is quite contrary to the indivisible nature of Sovereignty. The Truth is,
the Consuls, having but annual Sovereignty, were glad for their own Safety, and
Ease in Matters of great Importance, and Weight, to call together sometimes the
Senate, who were their ordinary Council, and many times the Centuries of the
People, who were their Council extraordinary, that by their Advice they might
countenance* and strengthen such Actions as were full of Danger and Envy: and
thus the Consuls by weakening their original Power brought the Government to
Confusion, civil Dissension, and utter Ruin: so dangerous a thing it is to
show Favor to Common People, who interpret all Graces and Favors for their
Rights, and just Liberties: the Consuls following the Advice of the Senate or
People, did not take away their Right of Governing no more than Kings lose
their Supremacy by taking Advice in Parliaments.

Not only the Consuls, but also the Pretors and Censors (two great Offices,
ordained only for the ease of the Consuls, from whom an Appeal lay to the
Consuls) did in many things exercise an arbitrary or legislative Power in the
Absence of the Consuls, they had no Laws to limit them: for many Years after
the Creation of Consuls, ten men were sent into Greece to choose Laws; and
after the 12 Tables were confirmed, whatsoever the Pretors, who were but the
Consuls Substitutes, did command, was called jus honorarium; and they were wont
at the Entrance into their Office to collect, and hang up for public View, a
Form of Administration of Justice which they would observe, and though the
edictum Praetoris, expired with the Preto^ Office; yet it was called Edictum
perpetuum.

What Peace the Low Countries have found since their Revolt is visible; it is
near about an hundred Years since they set up for themselves, of all which time
only twelve years they had a Truce with the Spaniard, yet in the next year,
after the Truce was agreed upon, the War of Iuliers brake forth, which engaged
both Parties; so that upon the matter, they have lived in a continued War, for
almost 100 Years: had it not been for the Aid of their Neighbors, they had
been long ago swallowed up, when they were glad humbly to offer their new
hatched Commonweal, and themselves Vassals to the Queen of England, after that
the French King Hen. 3. had refused to accept them as his Subjects; That little
Truce they had, was almost as costly as a War; they being forced to keep about
thirty thousand Soldiers continually in Garrison. Two things they say they
first fought about, Religion and Taxes; and they have prevailed it seems in
both, for they have gotten all the Religions in Christendom, and pay the
greatest Taxes in the World; they pay Tribute half in half for Food, and most
necessary things, paying as much for Tribute as the price of the thing sold;
Excise is paid by all Retailers of Wine, and other Commodities; for each Tun of
Beer six Shillings, for each Cow for the Pail two Stivers every week: for Oxen,
Horses, Sheep, and other beasts sold in the Market the twelfth part at least,
be they never so often sold by the year to and fro, the new Master still pays as
much: they pay five Stivers for every Bushel of their own Wheat, which they use
to grind in public Mills: These are the Fruits of the Low Country War.

It will be said that Venice is a Commonwealth that enjoys Peace. She indeed of
all other States has enjoyed of late the greatest Peace; but she owes it not
to her kind of Government, but to the natural Situation of the City, having
such a Banck in the Sea of near threescore Miles, and such Marshes toward the
Land, as make her unapproachable by Land, or Sea; to these she is indebted for
her Peace at home, and what Peace she has abroad she buys at a dear Rate; and
yet her Peace is little better than a continued War; The City always is in such
perpetual Fears, that many besieged Cities are in more Security; a Senator or
Gentleman dares not converse with any Stranger in Venice, shuns Acquaintance,
or dares not own it: they are no better than Banditos to all humane Society.
Nay, no People in the World live in such Jealousy one of another; hence are
their intricate Solemnities, or rather Lotteries in Election of their
Magistrates, which in any other Place, would be ridiculous and useless. The
Senators or Gentlemen are not only jealous of the Common People, whom they keep
disarmed, but of one another; they dare not trust any of their own Citizens to
be a Leader of their Army, but are forced to hire, and entertain Foreign
Princes for their Generals, excepting their Citizens from their Wars, and
hiring others in their Places; it cannot be said, that People live in Peace
which are in such miserable Fears continually.

The Venetians at first were subject to the Rom^ Emperor; and for fear of the
Invasion of the Hunnes forsook Padua, and other places in Italy, and retired
with all their Substance to those Island^ where now Venice stands: I do not
read they had any Leave to desert the defense of their Prince and Country,
where they had got their Wealth, much less to set up a Government of their own;
it was no better than a Rebellion, or Revolting from the Roman Empire. At first
they lived under a kind of Oligarchy; for several Islands had each a Tribune,
who all met, and governed in common: but the dangerous Seditions of their
Tribunes, put a necessity upon them to choose a Duke for Life, who, for many
hundreds of years, had an Absolute Power; under whose Government Venice
flourished most, and got great Victories, and rich Possessions. But by
insensible degrees, the Great Council of the Gentlemen have for many years been
lessening the Power of their Dukes, and have at last quite taken it away. It is
a strange Error for any man to believe, that the Government of Venice has
been always the same that it is now: he that reads but the History of Venice,
may find for a long time a Sovereign Power in their Dukes: and that for these
last two hundred years, since the diminishing of that Power, there has been no
great Victories and Conquests obtained by that Estate.

That which exceeds admiration is, that Contare^ has the confidence to affirm
the present Government of Venice to be a mixed Form of Monarchy, Democratie,
and Aristocratie: For, whereas he makes the Duke to have the Person and Show of
a King; he after confesses, that the Duke can do nothing at all alone, and
being joined with other Magistrates, he has no more Authority than any of
them: also the power of the Magistrates is so small, that no one of them, how
great soever he be, can determine of any thing of moment, without the allowance
of the Council. So that this Duke is but a man dressed up in Purple, a King
only in Pomp and Ornament, in Power but a Senator, within the City a Captive,
without a Traitor, if he go without Leave. As little reason is there to think a
Popular Estate is to be found in the great Council of Venice, or S. P. Q. U.
for it does not consist of the fortieth part of the People, but only of those
they call Patritians or Gentlemen; for the Commons, neither by themselves, nor
by any chosen by them for their Representors, are admitted to be any part of
the Great Council: and if the Gentlemen of Venice have any Right to keep the
Government in their own hands, and to exclude the Commons, they never had it
given them by the People, but at first were beholding to Monarchy for their
Nobility. This may further be noted, that though Venice of late enjoyed Peace
abroad, yet it had been with that Charge, either for Fortification and Defense,
or in Bribery so excessive, whereby of late upon any terms they purchased their
Peace, that it is said their Taxes are such, that Christians generally live
better under the Turk, than under the Venetians, for there is not a grain of
Corn, a spoonful of Wine, Salt, Eggs, Birds, Beasts, Fowl, or Fish sold, that
pays not a certain Custom: upon occasions the Laborers and Crafts-men pay a
Rate by the Poll monthly, they receive incredible Gains by Usury of the Jews*
for in every City they keep open Shops of Interest' taking pawns after fifteen
in the hundred, and if at the years end it be not redeemed, it is forfeited, or
at the least, sold at great loss. The Revenues which the very Courtizans pay
for Toleration, maintains no less than a dozen of Galleys.

By what has been said, it may be judged how unagreeable the popular
Government of Rome heretofore, and of Venice, and the United Provinces at
present, are, either for Religion or Peace (which two are principal ingredients
of Government) and so consequently not fit to be reckoned for Forms, since
whatsoever is either good or tolerable in either of their Governments, is
borrowed or patched up of a broken, and distracted Monarchy. Lastly, though
Venice and the Low Countries are the only remarkable places in this age that
reject Monarchy; yet neither of them pretend their Government to be founded
upon any original Right of the People, or have the Common people any power
amongst them, or any chosen by them. Never was any popular Estate in the World
famous for keeping themselves in peace; all their glory has been for
Quarrelling and Fighting.

Those that are willing to be persuaded, that the power of Government is
originally in the People, finding how impossible it is for any people to
exercise such power, do surmise, that though the people cannot govern, yet they
may choose Representors or Trustees, that may manage this power for the People,
and such Representors must be surmised to be the People. And since such
Representors cannot truly be chosen by the People, they are fain to divide the
People into several parts, as of Provinces, Cities, and Burrough-Towns, and to
allow to every one of those parts to choose one Representor or more of their
own: and such Representors, though not any of them be chosen by the whole, or
major part of the People, yet still must be surmised to be the People; nay,
though not one of them be chosen either by the People, or the major part of the
People of any Province, City, or Borough, for which they serve, but only a
smaller part, still it must be said to be the People. Now when such
Representors of the People do Assemble or meet, it is never seen that all of
them can at one time meet together; and so there never appears a true, or full
Representation of the whole People of the Nation, the Representors of one part
or other being absent, but still they must be imagined to be the People. And
when such imperfect Assemblies be met, though not half be present, they
proceed: and though their number be never so small, yet it is so big, that in
the debate of any Business of moment, they know not how to handle it, without
referring it to a fewer number than themselves, though themselves are not so
many as they should be. Thus those that are chosen to represent the People, are
necessitated to choose others, to represent the Representors themselves; a
Trustee of the North does delegate his power to a Trustee of the South; and one
of the East may substitute one of the West for his Proxy: hereby it comes to
pass, that Public Debates which are imagined to be referred to a general
Assembly of a Kingdom, are contracted into a particular or private Assembly,
than which nothing can be more destructive, or contrary to the nature of
Public Assemblies. Each company of such Trustees has a Prolocutor, or
Speaker; who, by the help of three or four of his fellows that are most active,
may easily comply in gratifying one the other, so that each of them in their
turns may sway the Trustees, whilst one man, for himself or his friend, may
rule in one Business, and another man for himself or his friend prevail in
another cause, till such a number of Trustees be reduced to so many petty
Monarchs as there be men of it. So in all Popularities, where a General
Council, or great Assembly of the People meet, they find it impossible to
dispatch any great Action, either with Expedition or Secrecy, if a public free
Debate be admitted; and therefore are constrained to Epitomize, and
sub-epitomise themselves so long, till at last they crumble away into the
Atoms of Monarchy, which is the next degree to Anarchy; for Anarchy is nothing
else but a broken Monarchy, where every man is his own Monarch, or Governor.

Whereas the Power of the People in choosing both their Government and
Governors, is of late highly magnified, as if they were able to choose the
best and excellentest men for that purpose. We shall find it true what
Aristotle has affirmed, that to choose well is the office of him that has
Knowledge; none can choose a Geometrician but ^ that has skill in Geometry, l.
3. c. 11. for, says he, All men esteem not Excellency to be one and the same,
l. 3. c. 17.

A great deal of talk there is in the World of the Freedom and Liberty that
they say is to be found in Popular Commonweals; it is worth the enquiry how
far, and in what sense this Speech of Liberty is true. True Liberty is for
every man to do what he list, or to live as he please, and not to be tied to
any Laws. But such Liberty is not to be found in any Commonweal; for there are
more Laws in Popular Estates than any where else; and so consequently less
Liberty: and Government many say was invented to take away Liberty, and not to
give it to every man; such Liberty cannot be; if it should, there would be no
Government at all: therefore Aristotle, l. 6. cap. 4. It is profitable not to
be lawful to do every thing that we will, for power to do what one will, cannot
restrain that Evil that is in every man; so that true Liberty cannot, nor
should not be in any Estate. But the only Liberty that the talkers of Liberty
can mean, is a Liberty for some men to Rule and to be Ruled, for so Aristotle
expounds it; one while to Govern, another while to be Governed; to be a King in
the forenoon, and a Subject in the afternoon; this is the only Liberty that a
Popular Estate can brag of, that where a Monarchy has but one King, their
Government has the liberty to have many Kings by turns. If the Common People
look for any other Liberty, either of their Persons or their Purses, they are
pitifully deceived, for a perpetual Army and Taxes are the principal materials
of all Popular Regiments: never yet any stood without them, and very seldom
continued with them; many popular Estates have started up, but few have lasted;
It is no hard matter for any kind of Government to last one, or two, or three
days, l. 6. c. 5. For all such as out of hope of Liberty, attempt to erect new
Forms of Government, he gives this prudent Lesson. We must look well into the
continuance of Time, and remembrance of many Years, wherein the means tending
to establish Community had not lain hid, if they had been good and useful; for
almost all things have been found out, albeit some have not been received, and
other some have been rejected, after men have had experience of them; l. 2. c.
5.

It is believed by many, that at the very first Assembling of the People, it
was unanimously agreed in the first place, that the Consent of the major part
should bind the whole; and that though this first Agreement cannot possibly be
proved, either how, or by whom it should be made; yet it must necessarily be
believed or supposed, because otherwise there could be no lawful Government at
all. That there could be no lawful Government, except a general Consent of the
whole People be first surmised, is no sound proposition; yet true it is, that
there could be no popular Government without it. But if there were at first a
Government without being beholden to the People for their Consent, as all men
confess there was, I find no reason but that there may be so still, without
asking Leave of the Multitude.

If it be true, that men are by nature freeborn, and not to be governed
without their own Consents, and that Self-preservation is to be regarded in the
first place, it is not lawful for any Government but Self-government to be in
the World, it were sin in the People to Desire, or attempt to Consent to any
other Government: if the Fathers will promise for themselves to be Slaves, yet
for their Children they cannot, who have always the same Right to set
themselves at Liberty, which their Fathers had to Enslave themselves.

To pretend that a major part, or the silent Consent of any part, may be
interpreted to bind the whole People, is both unreasonable and unnatural; it is
against all Reason for men to bind others, where it is against Nature for men
to bind themselves. Men that boast so much of natural Feeedom, are not willing
to consider how contradictory and destructive the Power of a major part is to
the natural Liberty of the whole People; the two grand Favorites of the
Subjects, Liberty and Property (for which most men pretend to strive) are as
contrary as Fire to Water, and cannot stand together. Though by humane Laws in
Voluntary Actions, a major part may be tolerated to bind the whole Multitude,
yet in Necessary Actions, such as those of Nature are, it cannot be so.
Besides, if it were possible for a whole People to choose their Representors,
then either every, each one of those Representors ought to be particularly
chosen by the whole People, and not one Representor by one part, and another
Representor by another part of the People, or else it is necessary, that
continually the entire Number of the Representors be present, because otherwise
the whole People is never represented.

Again, it is impossible for the People, though they might and would choose a
Government, or Governors, ever to be able to do it: for the People, to speak
truly and properly, is a thing or Body in continual Alteration and Change, it
never continues one Minute the same, being composed of a Multitude of Parts,
whereof diverse continually decay and perish, and others renew and succeed in
their places; they which are the People this Minute, are not the People the
next Minute. If it be answered, that it is impossible to stand so strictly, as
to have the Consent of the whole People; and therefore that which cannot be,
must be supposed to be the Act of the whole People: This is a strange Answer,
first to affirm a Necessity of having the Peoples Consent, than to confess an
Impossibility of having it. If but once that Liberty, which is esteemed so
sacred, be broken, or taken away but from one of the meanest or basest of all
the People; a wide Gap is thereby opened for any Multitude whatsoever, that is
able to call themselves, or whomsoever they please, the People.

Howsoever men are naturally willing to be persuaded, that all Sovereignty
flows from the Consent of the People, and that without it no true Title can be
made to any Supremacy; and that it is so current an Axiom of late, that it
will certainly pass without Contradiction as a late Exercitator tells us: yet
there are many and great Difficulties in the Point never yet determined, not so
much as disputed, all which the Exercitator waves and declines, professing he
will not insist upon the Distinctions, touching the manner of the Peoples
passing their Consent, nor determine which of them is sufficient, and which not
to make the Right or Title; whether it must be Antecedent to Possession, or may
be consequent: Express, or Tacit: Collective, or Representative: Absolute, or
conditionated: Free, or Enforced: Revocable, or Irrevocable. All these are
material Doubts concerning the Peoples Title, and though the Exercitator will
not himself determine what Consent is sufficient, and what not, to make a Right
or Title, yet he might have been so courteous, as to have directed us, to whom
we might go for Resolution in these Cases. But the Truth is, that amongst all
them that plead the Necessity of the Consent of the People, not one of them
has ever touched upon these so necessary Doctrines; it is a Task it seems too
difficult, otherwise surely it would not have been neglected, considering how
necessary it is to resolve the Conscience, touching the manner of the Peoples
passing their Consent; and what is sufficient, and what not, to make, or derive
a Right, or Title from the People.

No Multitude or great Assembly of any Nation, though they be all of them never
so good and virtuous, can possibly govern; this may be evidently discovered by
considering the Actions of great and numerous Assemblies, how they are
necessitated to relinquish that supreme Power, which they think they exercise,
and to delegate it to a few. There are two Parts of the Supreme Power, the
legislative, and the Executive, neither of these can a great Assembly truly
act. If a new Law be to be made it may in the General receive the Proposal of
it from one or more of the General Assembly, but the forming, penning, or
framing it into a Law is committed to a few, because a great number of persons
cannot without tedious, and dilatory Debates, examine the Benefits and
Mischiefs of a Law. Thus in the very first Beginning the Intention of a general
Assembly is frustrated; then after a Law is penned or framed, when it comes to
be questioned, whether it shall pass or nay; though it be Voted in a full
Assembly, yet by the Rules of the Assembly, they are all so tied up, and barred
from a free and full Debate; that when any man has given the Reasons of his
Opinion; if those Reasons be argued against, he is not permitted to reply in
Justification or Explanation of them, but when he has once spoken, he must be
heard no more* which is a main Denial of that Freedom of Debate, for which the
great Assembly is alleged to be ordained in the high Point of Legislative
Power.

The same may be said, touching the executive Power; if a cause be brought
before a great Assembly, the first thing done, is to referr, or commit it to
some few of the Assembly, who are trusted with the examining the Proofs, and
Witnesses, and to make Report to the general Assembly; who upon the Report
proceed to give their Judgments without any public hearing, or interrogating
the Witnesses, upon whose Testimonies diligently examined every man that will
pass a conscientious judgment is to rely. Thus the legislative and executive
Power are never truly practiced in a great Assembly; the true Reason whereof
is, if Freedom be given to Debate, never any thing could be agreed upon without
endless Disputes; mere Necessity compels to refer main Transactions of Business
to particular Congregations and Committees.

Those Governments that seem to be popular a^ kinds of petty Monarchies, which
may thus appear: Government is a Relation between the Governors, and the
governed, the one cannot be without the other, mutuo se ponunt and auferunt;
where a Command or Law proceeds from a major part, there those individual
Persons that concurred in the Vote, are the Governors, because the Law is only
their Will in particular: the Power of a major Part being a contingent, or
casual thing, expires in the very Act it self of voting, which Power of a major
part is grounded upon a Supposition, that they are the stronger part; when the
Vote is past, these Voters, which are the major part, return again, and are
incorporated into the whole Assembly, and are buried as it were in that Lump,
and no otherwise considered; the Act or Law ordained by such a Vote, loses the
Makers of it, before it comes to be obeyed; for when it comes to be put in
Execution, it becomes the Will of those who enjoin it, and force Obedience to
it, not by Virtue of any Power derived from the Makers of the Law. No man can
say, that during the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, that King Henry the
8th. or Edward the sixth did govern, although that many of the Laws that were
made in those two former Princes times, were observed, and executed under her
Government; but those Laws, though made by her Predecessors, yet became the
Laws of her present Government; who willed and commanded the Execution of them,
and had the same Power to correct, interpret, or mitigate them, which the first
makers of them had; every Law must always have some present known Person in
Being, whose Will it must be to make it a Law for the Present; this cannot be
said of the major part of any Assembly, because that major part instantly
cease, as soon as ever it has voted: an infallible Argument whereof is this,
that the same major part after the Vote given; has no Power to correct, alter,
or mitigate it, or to Cause it to be put in Execution; so that he that shall
act, or cause that Law to be executed, makes himself the Commander, or willer
of it, which was originally the Will of others: It is said by Mr. Hobs in his
Leviathan page 141. nothing is Law, where the Legislator cannot be known; for
there must be manifest Signs, that it proceeds from the Will of the
Sovereign; there is requisite, not only a Declaration of the Law, but also
sufficient Signs of the Author and the Authority.

That Senate or great Council, wherein it is conceived the supreme, or
legislative Power does rest, consists of those Persons who are actually
Subjects at the very same time, wherein they exercise their legislative Power,
and at the same Instant may be guilty of breaking one Law, whilst they are
making another Law; for it is not the whole and entire Will of every particular
Person in the Assembly, but that part only of his Will, which accidentally
falls out to concur with the Will of the greater part: So that the Sharers of
the legislative Power have each of them, perhaps not a hundredth part of the
legislative Power (which in it self is indivisible) and that not in Act, but in
Possibility, only in one particular Point for that Moment, whilst they give
their Vote. To close this Point which may seem strange and new to some, I will
produce the Judgment of Bodin, in his sixth Book of a Commonweal, and the
fourth Chapter; his words are, The chief Point of a Commonweal, which is the
Right of Sovereignty, cannot be, nor insist, to speak properly, but in
Monarchy; for none can be Sovereign in a Commonweal, but one alone; if they be
two or three or more, no one is Sovereign, for that no one of them can give or
take a Law from his Companion: and although we imagine a Body of many Lords, or
of a whole People to hold the Sovereignty, yet has it no true Ground nor
Support, if there be not a Head with absolute Power to unite them together,
which a simple Magistrate without Sovereign Authority cannot do. And if it
chance that the Lords, or Tribes of the People be divided (as it often falls
out) then must they fall to Arms one against another: and although the greatest
part be of one Opinion, yet may it so happen, as the lesser part, having many
Legions, and making a Head, may oppose it self against the greater Number, and
get the Victory. We see the Difficulties which are, and always have been in
popular Estates, whereas they hold contrary Parts and for diverse Magistrates,
some demand Peace, others War; some will have this Law, others that; some will
have one Commander, others another; some will treat a League with the King of
France, others with the King of Spain, corrupted or drawn, some one Way, some
another, making open War, as has been seen in our Age amongst the Grisons etc.

Upon these Texts of Aristotle forecited, and from the Mutability of the Roman
Popularity, which Aristotle lived not to see, I leave the Learned to consider,
whether it be not probable that these, or the like Parodoxes may be inferred to
be the plain Mind of Aristotle, viz. 1. That there is no Form of Government,
but Monarchy only, 2, That there is no Monarchy, but Paternal. 3. That there is
no Paternal Monarchy, but Absolute, or Arbitrary. 4. That there is no such
thing as an Aristocratie or Democratie. 5. That there is no such Form of
Government as a Tyranny. 6. That the People are not born Free by Nature.

DIRECTIONS FOR Obedience to Government IN Dangerous or Doubtful Times.
ALL those who so eagerly strive for an original Power to be in the People, do
with one Consent acknowledge, that originally the Supreme Power was in the
Fatherhood; and that the first Kings were Fathers of Families: This is not only
evident, and affirmed by Aristotle; but yielded unto by Grotius, Mr. Seldom,
Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Ascam; and all others of that Party, not one excepted, that I
know of.

Now for those that confess an original Subjection in Children, to be governed
by their Parents, to dream of an original Freedom in Mankind, is to contradict
themselves; and to make Subjects to be Free, and Kings to be Limited; to
imagine such Pactions and Contracts between Kings and People, as cannot be
proved ever to have been made, or can ever be described or fancied, how it is
possible for such Contracts ever to have been, is a boldness to be wondered at.

Mr. Seldom confesses, that Adam, by donation from God, was made the general
Lord of all things, not without such a private Dominion to himself, as (without
his Grant) did exclude his Children. And by Donation, or Assignation, or some
kind of Concession (before he was dead, or left any Heir to succeed him) his
Children had their distinct Territories, by Right of Private Dominion. Abel had
his Flocks, and Pastures for them: Cain had his Fields for Corn, and the Land
of Nod, where he built himself a City.

It is confessed, that in the Infancy of the World, the Paternal Government was
Monarchical; but when the World was replenished with multitude of people, then
the Paternal Government ceased, and was lost; and an Elective kind of
Government by the People, was brought into the World. To this it may be
answered, That the paternal Power cannot be lost; it may either be transferred
or usurped; but never lost, or cease. God, who is the giver of Power, may
transferr it from the Father to some other; he gave to Saul a Fatherly power
over his Father Kish. God also has given to the Father a Right or Liberty to
alien his Power over his Children, to any other; whence we find the Sale and
gift of Children, to have been much in Use in the beginning of the World, when
men had their Servants for a possession and an Inheritance as well as other
Goods: whereupon we find the power of Castrating, and making Eunuchs much in
Use in old times. As the power of the Father may be lawfully transferred or
aliened, so it may be unjustly usurped: And in Usurpation, the Title of an
Usurper is before, and better than the Title of any other than of him that had
a former Right: for he has a possession by the permissive Will of God, which
permission, how long it may endure, no man ordinarily knows. Every man is to
preserve his own Life for the Service of God, and of his King or Father, and is
so far to obey an Usurper, as may tend not only to the preservation of his King
and Father, but sometimes even to the preservation of the Usurper himself, when
probably he may thereby be reserved to the Correction, or Mercy of his true
Superior; though by Humane Laws, a long Prescription may take away Right, yet
Divine Right never dies, nor can be lost, or taken away.

Every man that is born, is so far from being Freeborn, that by his very Birth
he becomes a Subject to him that begets him: under which Subjection he is
always to live, unless by immediate Appointment from God, or by the Grant or
Death of his Father, he become possessed of that power to which he was subject.

The Right of Fatherly Government was ordained by God, for the preservation of
Mankind; if it be usurped, the Usurper may be so far obeyed, as may tend to the
preservation of the Subjects, who may thereby be enabled to perform their Duty
to their true and right Sovereign, when time shall serve: in such Cases to obey
an Usurper, is properly to obey the first and right Governor, who must be
presumed to desire the Safety of his Subjects: the Command of an Usurper is not
to be obeyed in any thing tending to the destruction of the Person of the
Governor, whose Being in the first place is to be looked after*

It has been said, that there have been so many Usurpations by Conquest in all
Kingdoms, that all Kings are Usurpers, or the Heirs or Successors of Usurpers;
and therefore any Usurper, if he can but get the possession of a Kingdom, has
as good a Title as any other.

Answer. The first Usurper has the best Title, being, as was said, in
possession by the Permission of God; and where an Usurper has continued so
long, that the knowledge of the right Heir be lost by all the Subjects, in such
a case an Usurper in possession is to be taken and reputed by such Subjects for
the true Heir, and is to be obeyed by them as their Father. As no man has an
infallible Certitude, but only a moral Knowledge, which is no other than a
probable persuasion grounded upon a peaceable possession, which is a warrant
for subjection to Parents and Governors; for we may not say, because Children
have no infallible, or necessary certainty who are their true Parents, that
therefore they need not obey, because they are uncertain: it is sufficient, and
as much as Humane Nature is capable of, for Children to rely upon a credible
persuasion; for otherwise the Commandment of Honor thy Father, would be a
vain Commandment, and not possible to be observed.

By Humane positive Laws, a Possession time out of mind takes away, or bars a
former Right, to avoid a general Mischief, of bringing all Right into a
disputation not decideable by proof, and consequently to the overthrow of all
Civil Government, in Grants, Gifts, and Contracts, between man and man: But in
Grants and Gifts that have their original from God or Nature, as the Power of
the Father has, no Inferior power of man can limit, nor make any Law of
Prescription against them: upon this ground is built that common Maxim, that
Nullum tempus occurrit regi, No time bars a King.

All Power on Earth is either derived or usurped from the Fatherly power, there
being no other original to be found of any Power whatsoever; for if there
should be granted two sorts of power without any subordination of one to the
other, they would be in perpetual strife which should be Supreme, for two
Supremes cannot agree; if the Fatherly power be supreme, then the power of the
People must be subordinate, and depend on it; if the power of the People be
supreme, then the Fatherly power must submit to it, and cannot be exercised
without the License of the People, which must quite destroy the frame and
course of Nature. Even the Power which God himself exercises over Mankind is
by Right of Fatherhood; he is both the King and Father of us all; as God has
exalted the Dignity of Earthly Kings, by communicating to them his own Title,
by saying they are gods; so on the other side, he has been pleased as it were
to humble himself, by assuming the Title of a King, to express his Power, and
not the Title of any popular Government; we find it is a punishment to have no
King, Hosea, chapter 3. 4. and promised, as a Blessing to Abraham, Genesis 17. 6. that
Kings shall come out of thee.

Every man has a part or share in the preservation of Mankind in general, he
that usurps the Power of a Superior, thereby puts upon himself a Necessity of
acting the Duty of a Superior in the Preservation of them over whom he has
usurped, unless he will aggravate one heinous Crime, by committing another more
horrid; he that takes upon him the Power of a superior sins sufficiently, and
to the Purpose: but he that proceeds to destroy both his Superior, and those
under the Superiors Protection, goes a Strain higher, by adding Murder to
Robbery; if Government be hindered, mankind perishes, an Usurper by hindering
the Government of another, brings a Necessity upon himself to govern, his Duty
before Usurpation was only to be ministerial, or instrumental in the
preservation of others by his Obedience; but when he denies his own, and
hinders the Obedience of others, he does not only not help, but is the Cause of
the Distraction in hindering his Superior to perform his Duty, he makes the
Duty his own: if a Superior cannot protect, it is his part to desire to be
able to do it, which he cannot do in the Future if in the present they be
destroyed for want of Government: therefore it is to be presumed, that the
Superior desires the preservation of them that should be subject to him; and
so likewise it may be presumed, that an Usurper in general does the Will of his
Superior, by preserving the People by Government, and it is not improper to
say, that in obeying an Usurper, we may obey primarily the true Superior, so
long as our Obedience aims at the preservation of those in Subjection, and not
at the Destruction of the true Governor. Not only the Usurper, but those also
over whom Power is usurped, may join in the preservation of themselves, yea,
and in the preservation sometimes of the Usurper himself.

Thus there may be a conditional Duty, or Right in an Usurper to govern; that
is to say, supposing him to be so wicked as to usurp, and not willing to
surrender or forego his Usurpation, he is then bound to protect by Government,
or else he increases, and multiplyeth his Sin.

Though an Usurper can never gain a Right from the true Superior, yet from
those that are Subjects he may; for if they know no other that has a better
Title than the Usurper, then as to them the Usurper in Possession has a true
Right.

Such a qualified Right is found at first in all Usurpers, as is in Theives who
have stolen Goods, and during the time they are possessed of them, have a Title
in Law against all others but the true Owners, and such Usurpers to diverse
Intents and Purposes may be obeyed.

Neither is he only an Usurper who obtains the Government, but all they are
Partakers in the Usurpation, who have either failed to give Assistance to their
lawful Sovereign, or have given Aid either by their Persons, Estates or
Counsels for the Destroying of that Governor, under whose Protection they have
been born and preserved; for although it should be granted, that Protection and
Subjection are reciprocal, so that where the first fails, the latter cease;
yet it must be remembered; that where a man has been born under the Protection
of a long and peaceable Government, he owes an Assistance for the preservation
of that Government that has protected him, and is the Author of his own
Disobedience.

It is said by some, that an usurped Power may be obeyed in things that are
lawful: but it may not be obeyed not only in lawful things, but also in things
indifferent: Obedience in things indifferent, is necessary; not indifferent.
For in things necessarily good God is immediately obeyed, Superiors only by
Consequence: If men command things evil, Obedience is due only by tolerating
what they inflict: not by performing what they require: in the first they
declare what God commands to be done, in the latter what to be suffered, so it
remains, that things indifferent only are the proper Object of humane Laws.
Actions are to be considered simply and alone, and so are good as being Motions
depending on the first Mover; or jointly with Circumstances: And that in a
double Manner. 1. In Regard of the Ability or Possibility whilst they may be
done. 2. In the Act when they be performed: Before they be done they be
indifferent, but once breaking out into Act, they become distinctly Good or
Evil according to the Circumstances which determine the same. Now an Action
commanded, is supposed as not yet done (whereupon the Hebrews call the
Imperative Mood the first Future) and so remains many times indifferent.

Some may be of Opinion, that if Obedience may be given to an Usurper in things
indifferent, as well as to a lawful Power; that then there is as much Obedience
due to an usurped Power, as to a lawful. But it is a Mistake; for though it be
granted that in things indifferent, an Usurper may be obeyed, as well as a
lawful Governor; yet herein lies a main Difference, that some things are
indifferent for a lawful Superior, which are not indifferent, but unlawful to
an Usurper to enjoin. Usurpation is the resisting, and taking away the Power
from him, who has such a former Right to govern the Usurper, as cannot
lawfully be taken away: so that it cannot be just for an Usurper, to take
Advantage of his own unlawful Act, or create himself a Title by continuation of
his own Injustice, which aggravates, and never extenuates his Crime: and if it
never can be an Act indifferent for the Usurper himself to disobey his Lawful
Sovereign, much less can it be indifferent for him to command another to do
that to which he has no Right himself. It is only then a matter indifferent
for an Usurper to command, when the Actions enjoined are such; as the lawful
Superior is commanded by the Law of God, to provide for the benefit of his
Subjects, by the same, or other like Restriction of such indifferent things;
and it is to be presumed, if he had not been hindered, would have commanded the
same, or the like Laws.

OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Original of Government,

Upon

Mr. HOBS his Leviathan. Mr. MILTON against Salmasius. H. GROTIUS De Iure
Belli. Mr. HUNTON'S Treatise of Monarchy.
Arist. Pol. Lib. 4. (...). THE PREFACE.
WITH no small Content I read Mr. Hobs's Book De Cive, and his Leviathan, about
the Rights of Sovereignty, which no man, that I know, has so amply and
judiciously handled: I consent with him about the Rights of exercising
Government, but I cannot agree to his means of acquiring it. It may seem
strange I should praise his Building, and yet mislike his Foundation; but so it
is, his Jus Naturae, and his Regnum Institutivum, will not down with me: they
appear full of Contradiction and Impossibilities; a few short Notes about them,
I here offer, wishing he would consider, whether his Building would not stand
firmer upon the Principles of Regnum Patrimoniale (as he calls it) both
according to Scripture and Reason. Since he confesses, the Father, being
before the institution of a Commonwealth, was Originally an Absolute Sovereign,
with power of Life and Death, and that a great Family, as to the Rights of
Sovereignty, is a little Monarchy. If, according to the order of Nature, he had
handled Paternal Government before that by Institution, there would have been
little liberty left in the Subjects of the Family to consent to Institution of
Government.

In his pleading the Cause of the People, he arms them with a very large
Commission of Array; which is, a Right in Nature for every Man, to war against
every Man when he please: and also a Right for all the People to govern. This
latter Point, although he affirm in Words, yet by Consequence he denies, as to
me it seems.

He says, a Representative may be of All, or but of a Part of the People. If
it be of All, he terms it a Democratie, which is the Government of the People.
But how can such a Commonwealth be generated? for if every man Covenant with
every man, who shall be left to be the Representative? if All must be
Representatives, who will remain to Covenant? for ^e that is Sovereign makes no
Covenant by his Doctrine. It is not All that will come together, that makes the
Democratie, but All that have power by Covenant; thus his Democratie by
Institution fails.

The same may be said of a Democratie by acquisition; for if all be
Conquerours, who shall Covenant for Life and Liberty? and if all be not
Conquerours, how can it be a Democratie by Conquest?

A Paternal Democratie I am confident he will not affirm; so that in conclusion
the poor People are deprived of their Government, if there can be no
Democratie, by his Principles.

Next, If a Representative Aristocratical of a Part of the People be free from
Covenanting, then that whole Assembly (call it what you will) though it be
never so great, is in the state of Nature, and every one of that Assembly has
a Right not only to kill any of the Subjects that they meet with in the
streets, but also they all have a natural Right to cut one another throats,
even while they sit together in Council, by his Principles. In this miserable
condition of War is his Representative Aristocratical by Institution.

A Commonwealth by Conquest, he teaches, is then acquired, when the
Vanquished, to avoid present Death, Covenanteth, that so long as his Life, and
the liberty of his Body is allowed him, the Victor shall have the Use of it at
his pleasure. Here I would know how the Liberty of the Vanquished can be
allowed, if the Victor have the Use of it at pleasure, or how it is possible
for the Victor to perform his Covenant, except he could always stand by every
particular man to protect his Life and Liberty?

In his Review and Conclusion he resolves, that an ordinary Subject has
liberty to submit, when the means of his Life is within the Guards and Garrisons
of the Enemy. It seems hereby that the Rights of Sovereignty by Institution may
be forfeited, for the Subject cannot be at liberty to submit to a Conqueror,
except his former Subjection be forfeited for want of Protection.

If his Conqueror be in the state of nature when he conquers, he has a Right
without any Covenant made with the conquered: If Conquest be defined to be the
acquiring of Right of Sovereignty by Victory, why is it said, the Right is
acquired in the Peoples Submission, by which they contract with the Victor,
promising Obedience for Life and Liberty? has not every one in the state of
Nature a Right to Sovereignty before Conquest, which only puts him in
possession of his Right?

If his Conqueror be not in the state of Nature, but a Subject by Covenant,
how can he get a Right of Sovereignty by Conquest, when neither he himself has
Right to Conquer, nor Subjects a liberty to Submit? since a former Contract
lawfully made, cannot lawfully be broken by them.

I wish the Title of the Book had not been of a Commonwealth, but of a Weal
Public, or Commonweal, which is the true word, Carefully observed by our
Translator of Bodin de Republica into English: Many ignorant men are ap^ by the
Name of Commonwealth to understand a Popular Government, wherein Wealth and all
things shall be Common, tending to the Levelling Community in the state of pure
Nature.

OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. HOBS's LEVIATHAN: OR, HIS ARTIFICIAL MAN A Commonwealth.
I.
IF God created only Adam, and of a Piece of him made the Woman; and if by
Generation from them two, as parts of them, all Mankind be propagated: If also
God gave to Adam not only the Dominion over the Woman and the Children that
should issue from them, but also over the whole Earth to subdue it, and over
all the Creatures on it, so that as long as Adam lived no man could claim or
enjoy any thing but by Donation, Assignation, or Permission from him; I wonder
how the Right of Nature can be imagined by Mr. Hobs, which he says page 64.
is, a Liberty for each man to use his own Power as he will himself for
Preservation of his own Life; a Condition of War of every one against every
one, a Right of every man to every thing, even to one another Body, especially
since himself affirms, page 178. that originally the Father of every man was
also his Sovereign Lord, with Power over him of Life and Death.

II
Mr. Hobs confesses and believes it was never generally so, that there was
such a jus naturae; and if not generally, then not at all, for one exception
bars all if he mark it well; whereas he imagines such a Right of Nature may be
now* practiced in America, he confesses a Government there of Families, which
Government how small or brutish soever (as he calls it) is sufficient to
destroy his jus natural.

III.
I cannot understand how this Right of Nature can be conceived without
imagining a Company of men at the very first to have been all Created together
without any Dependency one of another, or as Mushroms (fungorum more) they all
on a sudden were sprung out of the Earth without any Obligation one to another,
as Mr. Hobs's words are in his Book De Cive, cap. 8. sect. 3. the Scripture
teaches us otherwise, that all men came by Succession, and Generation from one
man: we must not deny the Truth of the History of the Creation.

IV.
It is not to be thought that God would create man in a Condition worse than
any Beasts, as if he made men to no other End by Nature but to destroy one
another; a Right for the Father to destroy or eat his Children, and for
Children to do the like by their Parents, is worse than Canibals. De Cive, cap.
1. sect. 10.
This horrid Condition of pure Nature when Mr. Hobs was charged with, his
Refuge was to answer, that no Son can be understood to be in this state of pure
Nature: which is all one with denying his own Principle, for if men be not
freeborn, it is not possible for him to assign and prove any other time for
them to claim a Right of Nature to Liberty, if not at their Birth.

V.
But if it be allowed (which is yet most false) that a Company of men were at
first without a common Power to keep them in Awe; I do not see why such a
Condition must be called a State of War of all men against all men: indeed if
such a Multitude of men should be created as the Earth could not well nourish,
there might be Cause for men to destroy one another rather than perish for want
of Food; but God was no such Niggard in the Creation, and there being Plenty of
Sustenance and Room for all men, there is no Cause or Use of War till men be
hindered in the Preservation of Life, so that there is no absolute Necessity of
War in the State of pure Nature, it is the Right of Nature for every man to
live in Peace, that so he may tend the Preservation of his life, which whilst
he is in actual War he cannot do. War of it self as it is War preserves no man's
Life, it only helps us to preserve and obtain the Means to live: if every man
tend the Right of preserving Life, which may be done in Peace, there is no
Cause of War.

VI.
But admit the State of Nature were the State of War; let us see what Help Mr.
Hobs has for it, It is a Principle of his, that the Law of Nature is a Rule
found out by Reason, (I do think it is given by God) page 64. forbidding a man
to do that which is destructive to his Life, and to omit that by which he
thinks it may be best preserved: If the Right of Nature be a Liberty for a man
to do any thing he thinks fit to preserve his Life, then in the first Place
Nature must teach him that Life is to be preserved, and so consequently forbids
to do that which may destroy or take away the means of life, or to omit that by
which it may be preserved: and thus the Right of Nature and the Law of Nature
will be all one: for I think Mr. Hobs will not say the Right of Nature is a
Liberty for man to destroy his own Life. The Law of Nature might better have
been said to consist in a Command to preserve or not to omit the Means of
preserving Life, than in a Prohibition to destroy, or to omit it.

VII.
Another Principle I meet with, page 65. If other men will not lay down their
Right as well as he, then there is no Reason for any to divest himself of his:
Hence it follows, that if all the men in the World do not agree, no
Commonwealth can be established; it is a thing impossible for all the men in
the World, every man with every man, to Covenant to lay down their Right. Nay
it is not possible to be done in the smallest Kingdom, though all men should
spend their whole Lives in nothing else but in running up and down to Covenant.

VIII.
Right may be laid aside but not transferred, for page 65. he that renounceth or
passes away his Right, gives not to any other man a Right which he had not
before, and reserves a Right in himself against all those with whom he does not
Covenant.

IX.
Page 87. The only way to erect a Common Power or a Commonwealth; is for men to
confer all their Power and Strength upon one man, or one Assembly of men, that
may reduce all their Wills by Plurality of Voices to one Will; which is to
appoint one man or an Assembly of men to bear their Person, to submit their
Wills to his Will: this is a real Unity of them all in one Person, made by
Covenant of every man with every man, as if every man should say to every man,
I authorize, and give up my Right of Governing my self to this man, or this
Assembly of men, on this Condition, that thou give up thy Right to him, and
authorize all his Actions. This done, the Multitude so united in one Person, is
called a Commonwealth.

To authorize and give up his Right of Governing himself, to confer all his
Power and Strength, and to submit his Will to another, is to lay down his Right
of resisting: for if Right of Nature be a Liberty to use Power for Preservation
of Life, laying down of that Power must be a Relinquishing of Power to preserve
or defend Life, otherwise a man relinquisheth nothing.

To reduce all the Wills of an Assembly by Plurality of Voices to one Will, is
not a proper Speech, for it is not a Plurality but a Totality of Voices which
makes an Assembly be of one Will, otherwise it is but the one Will of a major
part of the Assembly, the Negative Voice of any one hinders the Being of the
one Will of the Assembly, there is nothing more destructive to the true Nature
of a lawful Assembly, than to allow a major part to prevail when the whole only
has Right. For a man to give up his Right to one that never Covenants to
protect, is a great Folly, since it is neither in Consideration of some Right
reciprocally transferred to himself, nor can he hope for any other Good, by
standing out of the way, that the other may enjoy his own original Right
without hinderance from him by reason of so much Diminution of Impediments.
page 66.

X.
The Liberty, says Mr. Hobs, whereof there is so frequent and honorable
Mention in the Histories and Philosophy of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and
in the Writings and Discourse of those that from them have received all their
Learning in the Politiques, is not the Liberty of particular men, but the
Liberty of the Commonwealth. Whether a Commonwealth be Monarchical or Popular,
the Freedom is still the same. Here I find Mr. Hobs is much mistaken: for the
Liberty of the Athenians and Romans was a Liberty only to be found in popular
Estates, and not in Monarchies. This is clear by Aristotle, who calls a City a
Community of Freemen, meaning every particular Citizen to be free. Not that
every particular man had a Liberty to resist his Governor, or do what he list,
but a Liberty only for particular men, to Govern and to be governed by Turns,
(...) and (...) are Aristotle's words: this was a Liberty not to be found in
hereditary Monarchies: so Tacitus mentioning the several Governments of Rome,
joins the Consulship and Liberty to be brought in by Brutus, because by the
annual Election of Consuls, particular Citizens came in their Course to govern
and to be governed. This may be confirmed by the Complaint of our Author, which
follows: It is an easy thing for men to be deceived by the specious name of
Liberty: and for want of Judgment to distinguish, mistake that for their
private Inheritance or Birthright which is the Right of the Public only: And
when the same Error is confirmed by the Authority of men in Reputation for
their Writings on this Subject, it is no wonder if it produce Sedition and
Change of Government. In the Western parts of the World, we are made to receive
our Opinions concerning the Institution and Right of Commonwealths from
Aristotle and Cicero, and other men, Greeks and Romans, that living under
popular Estates, derived those Rights not from the Principles of Nature, but
transcribed them into their Books ^ut of the Practice of their own
Commonwealths, which were Popular. And because the Athenians were taught (to
keep them from Desire of changing their Government) that they were Freemen,
and all that lived under Monarchy, Slaves: therefore Aristotle puts it down in
his Politiques. In Democracy Liberty is to be supposed, for it is commonly held
that no man is free in any other Government. So Cicero and other Writers
grounded their civil Doctrine on the Opinions of the Romans, who were taught to
hate Monarchy, at first, by them that having deposed their Sovereign, shared
amongst them the Sovereignty of Rome. And by reading of these Greek and Latin
Authors, men from their Childhood have gotten a Habit (under a false show of
Liberty,) of favoring Tumults, and of licentious controuling the Actions of
their Sovereigns.

XI.
Page 102. Dominion paternal not attained by Generation, but by Contract, which
is the Child's Consent, either express, or by other sufficient Arguments
declared. How a Child can express Consent, or by other sufficient Arguments
declare it before it comes to the Age of Discretion I understand not, yet all
men grant it is due before Consent can be given; and I take it Mr. Hobs is of
the same Mind, page 249. where he teaches, that Abraham's Children were bound
to obey what Abraham should declare to them for Gods Law: which they could not
be but in Virtue of the Obedience they owed to their Parents; they owed, not
they covenanted to give. Also where he says page 121. the Father and Master
being before the Institution of Commonweals absolute Sovereigns in their own
Families, how can it be said that either Children or Servants were in the State
of jus naturae till the Institutions of Commonweals? It is said by Mr. Hobs, in
his Book De Cive, cap. 9. Section 7. the Mother originally has the Government
of her Children, and from her the Father derives his Right, because she brings
forth and first nourishes them. But we know that God at the Creation gave the
Sovereignty to the man over the Woman, as being the nobler and principal Agent
in Generation. As to the Objection, that it is not known who is the Father to
the Son, but by the discovery of the Mother, and that he is his Son whom the
Mother will, and therefore he is the Mother's: The answer is, that it is not at
the Will of the Mother to make whom she will the Father, for if the Mother be
not in possession of a Husband, the Child is not reckoned to have any Father at
all; but if she be in the possession of a man, the Child, notwithstanding
whatsoever the Woman discovers to the contrary, is still reputed to be his in
whose possession she is. No Child naturally and infallibly knows who are his
true Parents, yet he must obey those that in common reputation are so,
otherwise the Commandment of Honor thy Father and thy Mother were in vain,
and no Child bound to the obedience of it.

XII.
If the Government of one man, and the Government 94.
of two men, make two several kinds of Government, why may not the Government
of of two, and the Government of three do the like, and make a third? and so
every differing Number a differing kind of Commonwealth. If an Assembly of all
(as Mr. Hobs says) that will come together be a Democratie, and an Assembly of
a part only an Aristocratie, then if all that will come together be but a part
only, a Democratie and Aristocratie are all one; and why must an Assembly of
part be called an Aristocratie, and not a Merocratie?

It seems Mr* Hobs is of the mind that there is 87.
but one kind of Government, and that is Monarchy; for he defines a
Commonwealth to be one Person, and an Assembly of men, or real Unity of them
all in one and the same Person, the multitude so united he calls a
Commonwealth: This his Moulding of a Multitude into one Person, is the
generation of his great Leviathan, the King of the Children of Pride, page 167.
Thus he concludes the Person of a Commonwealth to be a Monarch.

XIII.
I cannot but wonder Master Hobs should say, Page 112. the Consent of a Subject
to Sovereign Power is contained in these words, I Authorize, and do take upon
me all his Actions, in which there is no restriction at all of his own former
natural Liberty. Surely here Master Hobs forgot himself; for before he makes
the Resignation to go in these words also, I give up my Right of governing my
self to this man: This is a restriction certainly of his own former natural
Liberty, when he gives it away: and if a man allow his Sovereign to kill him,
which Mr. Hobs seems to confess, how can he reserve a Right to defend himself?
And if a man have a Power and Right to kill himself, he does not Authorize and
give up his Right to his Sovereign, if he do not obey him when he commands him
to kill himself.

XIV.
Mr. Hobs says, page 112. No man is bound by the words themselves of his
Submission to kill himself, (...) any other man: and consequently that the
Obligation a man may sometimes have upon* the Command of the Sovereign to
execute any dangerous or dishonorable Office, depends not on the words of
our Submission, but on the Intention, which is to be understood by the End
thereof. When therefore our refusal to Obey frustrates the End for which the
Sovereignty was Ordained, then there is no liberty to refuse: otherwise there
is. If no man be bound by the words of his Subjection to kill any other man,
then a Sovereign may be denied the benefit of War, and be rendered unable to
defend his People, and so the End of Government frustrated. If the Obligation
upon the Commands of a Sovereign to execute a dangerous or dishonorable
Office, depends not on the words of our Submission, but on the Intention,
which is to be understood by the End thereof; No man, by Mr. Hobs's Rules, is
bound but by the words of his Submission; the Intention of the Command binds
not, if the words do not: If the Intention should bind, it is necessary the
Sovereign must discover it, and the People must dispute and judge it; which how
well it may consist with the Rights of Sovereignty, Master* Hobs may consider:
Whereas Master Hobs says, the Intention is to be understood by the End; I take
it he means the End by Effect, for the End and the Intention are one and the
same thing; and if he mean the Effect, the Obedience must go before, and not
depend on the understanding of the Effect, which can never be, if the Obedience
do not precede it: In fine, he resolves, refusal to obey may depend upon the
judging of what frustrates the End of Sovereignty, and what not, of which he
cannot mean any other Judge but the People.

XV.
Mr. Hobs puts a case by way of Question. A great many men together have
already resisted the Sovereign Power unjustly, or committed some Capital Crime,
for which every one of them expects death: whether have they not the liberty
then to join together, and assist and defend one another? Certainly they have;
for they but defend their Lives, which the Guilty man may as well do as the
Innocent: There was indeed Injustice in the first breach of their Duty, their
bearing of Arms subsequent to it, though it be to maintain what they have done,
is no new unjust Act; and if it be only to defend their Persons, it is not
Unjust at all. The only reason here alleged for the Bearing of Arms, is this;
That there is no new unjust Act: as if the beginning only of a Rebellion were
an unjust Act, and the continuance of it none at all. No better Answer can be
given to this case, than what the Author himself has delivered in the
beginning of the same Paragraph, in these words; To resist the Sword of the
Commonwealth in defense of another man, Guilty or Innocent, no man has
liberty: because such Liberty takes away from the Sovereign the Means of
protecting us, and is therefore destructive of the very Essence of Government.
Thus he first answers the question, and then afterward makes it, and gives it
a contrary Answer: other Passages I meet with to the like purpose. He says,
Page 66. A man cannot lay down the Right of Resisting them that Assault him by
Force to take away his Life: The same may be said of Wounds, Chains, and
Imprisonment. Page 69. A Covenant to defend my self from Force by Force, is
void. Page 68. Right of Defending Life and Means of living, can never be
abandoned.

These last Doctrines are destructive to all Government whatsoever, and even to
the Leviathan it self: hereby any Rogue or Villain may murder his Sovereign, if
the Sovereign but offer by force to whip or lay him in the Stocks, since
Whipping may be said to be wounding, and Putting in the Stocks an Imprisonment:
so likewise every man's Goods being a Means of Living, if a man cannot abandon
them, no Contract among men, be it never so just, can be observed: thus we are
at least in as miserable condition of War, as Mr. Hobs at first by Nature found
us.

XVI.
The Kingdom of God signifies, (says Master Hobs, page 216.) a Kingdom
constituted by the Votes of the People of Israel in a peculiar manner, wherein
they choose God for their King, by Covenant made with him, upon God's promising
them Canaan. If we look upon Master Hob's Text for this, it will be found that
the People did not Constitute by Votes, and choose God for their King; But by
the Appointment first of God himself, the Covenant was to be a God to them:
they did not contract with God, that if he would give them Canaan, they would
be his Subjects, and he should be their King; It was not in their power to
choose whether God should be their God, yea, or nay: for it is confessed, He
reigned naturally over all by his Might. If God Reigned naturally, he had a
Kingdom, and Sovereign Power over his Subjects, not acquired by their own
Consent. This Kingdom, said to be constituted by the Votes of the People of
Israel, is but the Vote of Abraham only; his single Voice carried it; he was
the Representative of the People. For at this Vote, it is confessed, that the
Name of King is not given to God, nor of Kingdom to Abraham; yet the thing, if
we will believe Master Hobs, is all one. If a Contract be the mutual
transferring of Right, I would know what Right a People can have to transferr
to God by Contract. Had the People of Israel at Mount Sinai a Right not to obey
God's Voice? If they had not such a Right, what had they to transferr?

The Covenant mentioned at Mount Sinai was but a Conditional Contract, and God
but a Conditional King; and though the People promised to obey Gods word, yet
it was more than they were able to perform, for they often disobeyed Gods
Voice, which being a breach of the Condition, the Covenant was void, and God
not their King by Contract.

It is complained by God, They have rejected me that I should reign over them:
but it is not said, according to their Contract; for I do not find that the
Desiring of a King was a breach of their Contract of Covenant, or disobedience
to the Voice of God: there is no such Law extant.

The People did not totally reject the Lord, but in part only, out of
timorousness, when they saw Nahash King of the Children of Ammon come against
them; they distrusted that God would not suddenly provide for their
Deliverance, as if they had had always a King in readiness to go up presently
to fight for them: This Despair in them who had found so many miraculous
deliverances under Gods Government, was that which offended the Lord so highly:
they did not desire an Alteration of Government, and to cast off Gods Laws, but
hoped for a certainer and speedier deliverance from danger in time of War. They
did not petition that they might choose their King themselves, that had been a
greater sin; and yet if they had, it had not been a total rejection of Gods
Reigning over them, as long as they desired not to depart from the Worship of
God their King, and from the Obedience of his Laws. I see not that the Kingdom
of God was cast off by the Election of Saul, since Saul was chosen by God
himself, and governed according to Gods Laws. The Government from Abraham to
Saul is no where called the Kingdom of God, nor is it said, that the Kingdom of
God was cast off at the Election of Saul.

Mr. Hobs allows, that Moses alone had, next under God, the Sovereignty over
the Israelites, p. 252. but he does not allow it to Joshua, but will have it
descend to Eleazar the High Priest, Aaron's son. His Proof is, God expressly
says concerning Joshua, He shall stand before Eleazar, who shall ask Counsel
for him before the Lord, (after the judgment of Urim, is omitted by Mr. Hobs)
at his word they shall go out, etc. therefore the Supreme Power of making Peace
and War was in the Priest. Answ. The Work of the High Priest was only
Ministerial, not Magisterial; he had no power to Command in War, or to Judge in
Peace; only when the Sovereign or Governor did go up to War, he enquired of
the Lord by the Ministry of the High Priest, and, as the Hebrews say, the
Enquirer with a soft voice, as one that prays for himself, asked: and
forthwith the Holy Ghost came upon the Priest, and he beheld the Breast Plate,
and saw therein by the Vision of Prophecy, Go up, or go not up, in the letters
that showed forth themselves upon the Breast Plate before his face: then the
Priest answered him, Go up, or Go not up. If this Answer gave the Priest
Sovereignty, then neither King Saul nor King David had the Sovereignty, who
both asked Counsel of the Lord by the Priest.

OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. Milton Against SALMASIUS.
I.
AMong the many Printed Books, and several Discourses touching the Right of
Kings, and the Liberty of the People, I cannot find that as yet the first and
chief Point is agreed upon, or indeed so much as once disputed. The word King
and the word People are familiar, one would think every simple man could tell
what they signified; but upon Examination it will be found, that the learned
cannot agree of their Meaning.

Ask Salmasius what a King is, and he will teach us, that a King is he who has
the Supreme Power of the Kingdom, and is accountable to none but God, and may
do what he please, and is free from the Laws. This Definition I. M. abominates
as being the Definion of a Tyrant: And I should be of his Mind, if he would
have vouchsafed us a better, or any other Definition at all, that would tell us
how any King can have a Supreme Power, without being freed from humane Laws: To
find fault with it, without producing any other, is to leave us in the Dark:
but though Mr. Milton brings us neither Definition nor Description of a King,
yet we may pick out of several Passages of him, something like a Definition, if
we lay them together. He teaches us that Power was therefore given to a King
by the People, that he might see by the Authority to him committed, that
nothing be done against Law: and that he keeps our Laws, and not impose upon us
his own: Therefore there is no Regal Power but in the Courts of the Kingdom,
and by them, page 155.

And again he affirms, the King cannot Imprison, Fine or punish any man,
except he be first cited into some Court; where not the King, but the usual
Judges give Sentence, page 168. and before we are told, not the King, but the
Authority of Parliament does set up and take away all Courts, page 167.

Lo here the Description of a King, He is one to whom the People give Power, to
see that nothing be done against Law: and yet he says there is no Regal Power
but in the Courts of Justice and by them, where not the King, but the usual
Judges give Sentence. This Description not only strips the King of all Power
whatsoever, but puts him in a Condition below the meanest of his Subjects.

Thus much may show, that all men are not agreed what a King is. Next, what the
word People means is not agreed upon: ask Aristotle what the People is, and he
will not allow any Power to be in any but in free Citizens. If we demand, who
be free Citizens? That he cannot resolve us; for he confesses that he that is
a free Citizen in one City, is not so in another City. And he is of Opinion
that no Artificer should be a free Citizen, or have Voice in a well ordered
Commonwealth; he accounts a Democratie (which word signifies the Government of
the People) to be a corrupted sort of Government; he thinks many men by Nature
born to be Servants, and not fit to govern as any part of the People. Thus does
Aristotle curtal the People, and cannot give us any certain Rule to know who be
the People: Come to our Modern Politicians, and ask them who the People is,
though they talk big of the People, yet they take up, and are content with a
few Representors (as they call them) of the whole People; a Point Aristotle was
to seek in, neither are these Representors stood upon to be the whole People,
but the major part of these Representors must be reckoned for the whole People;
nay I. M. will not allow the major part of the Representors to be the People,
but the sounder and better part only of them; and in right down terms he tells
us page 126. to determine who is a Tyrant, he leaves to Magistrates, at least
to the uprighter sort of them and of the People, page 7. though in number less
by many, to judge as they find cause. If the sounder, the better, and the
uprighter Part have the Power of the People, how shall we know, or who shall
judge who they be?

II.
One Text is urged by Mr. Milton, for the Peoples Power: Deuteronomy. 17. 14. When
thou art come into the Land which thy Lord thy God gives thee, and shall say,
I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations about me. It is said, by the
Tenure of Kings these words confirm us that the Right of Choosing, yea of
Changing their own Government, is by the Grant of God himself in the People:
But can the foretelling or forewarning of the Israelites of a wanton and wicked
Desire of theirs, which God himself condemned, be made an Argument that God
gave or granted them a Right to do such a wicked thing? or can the Narration
and reproving of a Future Fact, be a Donation and approving of a present Right,
or the Permission of a Sin be made a Commission for the doing of it? The Author
of his Book against Salmasius, falls so far from making God the Donor or
Grantor, that he cites him only for a Witness, Test ipso Deo penes populos
arbitrium semper fuisse, vel ea, quae placer^t forma reipub. utendi, vel hanc
in aliam mutandi; de Hebraeis hoc diserte dicit Deus: de reliquis non abnuit.

That here in this Text God himself being Witness, there was always a Power in
the People, either to use what Form of Government they pleased, or of changing
it into another: God says this expressly of the Hebrews, and denies it not of
others. Can any man find that God in this Text expressly says, that there was
always a Right in the People to use what Form of Government they please? The
Text not warranting this Right of the People, the Foundation of the Defense of
the People is quite taken away; there being no other Grant or proof of it
pretended.

2. Where it is said, that the Israelites desired a King, though then under
another Form of Government; in the next line but one it is confessed, they had
a King at the time when they desired a King, which was God himself, and his
Viceroy Samuel; and so says God, They have not rejected thee; but they have
rejected me, that I should not reign over them; yet in the next Verse God
says, As they have forsaken me, so do they also unto thee. Here is no Show of
any other Form of Government but Monarchy: God by the Mediation of Samuel
reigned, who made his Sons Judges over Israel; when one man constitutes Judges,
we may call him a King; or if the Having of Judges do alter the Government,
then the Government of every Kingdom is altered from Monarchy, where Judges are
appointed by Kings: it is now reckoned one of the Duties of Kings to judge by
their Judges only.

Where it is said, He shall not multiply to himself Horses, nor Wives, nor
Riches, that he might understand that he had no Power over others, who could
Decree nothing of himself, extra Legem; if it had said, contra legem Dei, it
had been true, but if it meant extra legem humanam, it is false.

4. If there had been any Right given to the People, it seems it was to the
Elders only; for it is said, it was the Elders of Israel gathered together,
petitioned for a King; it is not said, it was all the People, nor that the
People did choose the Elders, who were the Fathers and Heads of Families,
authorized by the Judges.

5. Where it is said, I will set a King over me like as all the Nations about
me. To set a King, is, not to choose a King, but by some solemn public Act of
Coronation, or otherwise to acknowledge their Allegiance to the King chosen; It
is said, thou shall set him King whom the Lord thy God shall choose. The Elders
did not desire to choose a King like other Nations, but they say, now make us a
King to judge us like all the Nations.

III.
As for David's Covenant with the Elders when he was anointed, it was not to
observe any Laws or Conditions made by the People, for ought appears; but to
keep Gods Laws and serve him, and to seek the Good of the People, as they were
to protect him.

6. The Reubenites and Gadites promise their Obedience, not according to their
Laws or Conditions agreed upon, but in these words All that thou cammandest us
we will do, and whithersoever thou sendst us we will go; as we harkened to
Moses in all things, so will we harken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with
thee as he was with Moses. Where is there any Condition of any humane Law
expressed? Though the rebellious Tribes offered Conditions to Rehoboam; where
can we find, that for like Conditions not performed, all Israel deposed Samuel?
I wonder Mr. Milton should say this, when within a few Lines after he
professes, that Samuel had governed them uprightly.

IV.
Ius Regni is much stumbled at, and the Definition of a King which says His
Power is supreme in the Kingdom, and he is accountable to none but to God, and
that he may do what he please, and is not bound by Laws: it is said if this
Definition be good, no man is or ever was, who may be said to be a Tyrant; p.
14. for when he has violated all divine and humane Laws, nevertheless he is a
King, and guiltless jure Regio, To this may be answered, That the Definition
confesses he is accountable to God, and therefore not guiltless if he violate
Divine Laws: Humane Laws must not be shuffled in with Divine, they are not of
the same Authority: if humane Laws bind a King, it is impossible for him to
have Supreme Power amongst men. If any man can find us out such a kind of
Government, wherein the supreme Power can be, without being freed from humane
Laws, they should first teach us that; but if all sorts of popular Government
that can be invented, cannot be one Minute, without an Arbitrary Power, freed
from all humane Laws: what reason can be given why a Royal Government should
not have the like Freedom? if it be Tyranny for one man to govern arbitrarily,
why should it not be far greater Tyranny for a multitude of men to govern
without being accountable or bound by Laws? It would be further enquired how it
is possible for any Government at all to be in the World without an arbitrary
Power; it is not Power except it be arbitary: a legislative Power cannot be
without being absolved from humane Laws, it cannot be showed how a King can
have any Power at all but an arbitrary Power. We are taught, that Power was
therefore given to a King by the People, that he might see by the Authority to
him committed, that nothing be done against Law; and that he keep our Laws, and
not impose upon us his own: therefore there is no Royal Power, but in the
Courts of the Kingdom, and by them, page 155. And again it is said, the King
cannot Imprison, Fine or Punish any man except he be first cited into some
Court, where not the King but the usual Judges give Sentence, page 168. and
before, we are told, not the King, but the Authority of Parliament does set up
and take away all Courts, page 167.

Lo here we have Mr. Milton's perfect Definition of a King: He is one to whom
the People gave Power to see that nothing be done against Law, and that he keep
our Laws, and not impose his own. Whereas all other men have the Faculty of
Seeing by Nature, the King only has it by the Gift of the People, other Power
he has none; he may see the Judges keep the Laws if they will; he cannot
compel them, for he may not Imprison, Fine, nor punish any man; the Courts of
Justice may, and they are set up and put down by the Parliament: yet in this
very Definition of a King, we may spy an arbitrary Power in the King; for he
may wink if he will: and no other Power does this Description of a King give,
but only a Power to see: whereas it is said Aristotle does mention an absolute
Kingdom, for no other Cause, but to show how absurd, unjust and most tyrannical
it is. There is no such thing said by Aristotle, but the contrary, where he
says, that (...) King according to Law makes no sort of Government* and after
he had reckoned up five sorts of Kings, he concludes, that there were in a
manner but two sorts, the Lacedemonian King, and the Absolute King; whereof the
first was but as General in an Army, and therefore no King at all, and then
fixes and rests upon the Absolute King, who rules according to his own Will.

V.
If it be demanded what is meant by the word People? 1. Sometimes it is Populus
universus, and then every Child must have his Consent asked* which is
impossible. 2. Sometimes it is pars major, and sometimes it is pars potior and
sanior; How the major part, where all are alike free, can bind the minor part,
is not yet proved.

But it seems the major part will not carry it, nor be allowed, except they be
the better part, and the sounder part. We are told the sounder part implored
the help of the Army, when it saw it self and the Commonwealth betrayed; and
that the Soldiers judged better than the Great Council, and by Arms saved the
Commonwealth, which the Great Council had almost damned by their Votes, p. 7.

Here we see what the People is; to wit, the sounder part; of which the Army is
the judge: thus, upon the matter, the Soldiers are the People: which being so,
we may discern where the Liberty of the People lies, which we are taught to
consist all for the most part in the power of the Peoples Choosing what Form of
Government they please page 61. A miserable Liberty, which is only to choose
to whom we will give our Liberty, which we may not keep. See more concerning
the People, in a Book entitled The Anarchy, p. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

VI.
We are taught, that a Father and a King are things most diverse. The Father
begets us, but not the King; but we create the King: Nature gives a Father to
the People, the People give themselves a King: If the Father kill his Son he
loses his life, why should not the King also? p. 34.

Ans. Father and King are not so diverse; it is confessed, that at first they
were all one, for there is confessed Paternum imperium and haereditarium, p.
141. and this Fatherly Empire, as it was of it self hereditary, so it was
alienable by Patent, and seizable by an Usurper, as other goods are: and thus
every King that now is, has a Paternal Empire, either by Inheritance, or by
Translation, or Usurpation; so a Father and a King may be all one.

A Father may dye for the Murder of his Son, where there is a Superior Father
to them both, or the Right of such a Supreme Father; but where there are only
Father and Sons, no Sons can question the Father for the death of their
Brother: the reason why a King cannot be punished, is not because he is
excepted from Punishment, or does not deserve it, but because there is no
Superior to judge him, but God only, to whom he is reserved.

VII.
It is said thus, He that takes away from the People the power of Choosing for
themselves what Form of Government they please, he does take away that wherein
all Civil Liberty almost consists, p. 65. If almost all Liberty be in Choosing
of the Kind of Government, the People have but a poor Bargain of it, who cannot
exercise their Liberty, but in Chopping and Changing their Government, and have
liberty only to give away their Liberty, than which there is no greater
mischief, as being the cause of endless Sedition.

VIII.
If there be any Statute in our Law, by which thou can find that Tyrannical
Power is given to a King, that Statute being contrary to Gods Will, to Nature
and Reason, understand that by that general and primary Law of ours, that
Statute is to be repealed, and not of force with us, p. 153. Here, if any man
may be judge, what Law is contrary to Gods Will, or to Nature, or to Reason, it
will soon bring in Confusion: Most men that offend, if they be to be punished
or fined, will think that Statute that gives all Fines and Forfeitures to a
King, to be a Tyrannical Law; thus most Statutes would be judged void, and all
our Forefathers taken for Fools or Madmen, to make all our Laws to give all
Penalties to the King.

IX.
The sin of the Children of Israel did lie, not in Desiring a King, but in
desiring such a King like as the Nations round about had; they distrusted God
Almighty, that governed them by the Monarchical Power of Samuel, in the time of
oppression, when God provided a Judge for them; but they desired a perpetual
and hereditary King, that they might never want: in Desiring a King they could
not sin, for it was but Desiring what they enjoyed by Gods special Providence.

X.
Men are persuaded, that in Making of a Covenant, something is to be performed
on both parts by mutual Stipulation; which is not always true: for we find God
made a Covenant with Noah and his Seed, with all the Fowl and the Cattle, not
to destroy the Earth any more by a flood. This Covenant was to be kept on Gods
part, neither Noah, nor the Fowl, nor the Cattle were to perform any thing by
this Covenant. On the other side, Genesis 17. 9, 10. God covenants with Abraham,
saying, Thou shall keep my Covenant, -- every male child among you shall be
circumcised. Here it is called Gods Covenant, though it be to be performed
only by Abraham; so a Covenant may be called the Kings Covenant, because it is
made to him, and yet to be performed only by the People. So also, 2 Kin. 11.
17. Iehoiada made a Covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the People,
that they should be the Lords People. Between the King also and the People,
which might well be, that the People should be the Kings Servants: and not for
the King's covenanting to keep any Humane Laws, for it is not likely the King
should either Covenant, or take any Oath to the People when he was but seven
years of age, and that never any King of Israel took a Coronation Oath that can
be showed: when Iehoiada showed the King to the Rulers in the House of the
Lord, he took an Oath of the People: he did not Article with them, but says
the next Verse, Commanded them to keep a Watch of the Kings House, and that
they should compass the King around about, every man with his weapon in his
hand; and he that comes within the Ranges, let him be slain.

XI.
To the Text, Where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say unto
him, What do thou? J. M. gives this Answer: It is apparent enough, that the
Preacher in this place gives Precepts to every private man, not to the great
Sanhedrin, nor to the Senate -- shall not the Nobles, shall not all the other
Magistrates, shall not the whole People dare to mutter, so often as the King
pleases to dote? We must here note, that the great Council, and all other
Magistrates or Nobles, or the whole People, compared to the King, are all but
private men, if they derive their Power from him: they are Magistrates under
him, and out of his Presence, for when he is in place, they are but so many
private men. I. M. asks, Who swears to a King, unless the King on the other
side be sworn to keep Gods Laws, and the Laws of the Country? We find that the
Rulers of Israel took an Oath at the Coronation of Iehoash: but we find no Oath
taken by that King, no not so much as to Gods Laws, much less to the Laws of
the Country.

XII.
A Tyrant is he, who regarding neither Law nor the Common Good, reigns only
for himself and his Faction; p. 19. In his Defense he expresses himself thus,
He is a Tyrant who looks after only his own, and not his Peoples profit, Eth.
l. 10. p. 189.

1. If it be Tyranny not to regard the Law, then all Courts of Equity, and
Pardons for any Offenses must be taken away: there are far more Suits for
relief against the Laws, than there be for the observation of the Laws: there
can be no such Tyranny in the World as the Law, if there were no Equity to
abate the rigor of it. Summum Ius is Summa Injuria; if the Penalties and
Forfeitures of all Laws should still be exacted by all Kings, it would be
found, that the greatest Tyranny would be, for a King to govern according to
Law; the Fines, Penalties, and Forfeitures of all Laws are due to the Supreme
Power only, and were they duly paid, they would far exceed the Taxes in all
places. It is the chief happiness of a Kingdom, and their chief Liberty, not to
be governed by the Laws Only.

2. Not to regard the Common Good, but to reign only for himself, is the
supposition of an impossibility in the judgment of Aristotle, who teaches us,
that the despotical Power cannot be preserved, except the Servant, or he in
subjection, be also preserved. The truth of this strongly proves, That it is in
Nature impossible to have a Form of Government that can be for the destruction
of a People, as Tyranny is supposed; if we will allow People to be governed, we
must grant, they must in the first place be preserved, or else they cannot be
governed.

Kings have been, and may be vicious men, and the Government of one, not so
good as the Government of another; yet it does not follow, that the Form of
Government is, or can be in its own nature ill, because the Governor is so: it
is Anarchy, or want of Government, that can totally destroy a Nation. We cannot
find any such Government as Tyranny mentioned or named in Scripture, or any
word in the Hebrew Tongue to express it. After such time as the Cities of
Greece practiced to shake off Monarchy, then, and not till then, (which was
after Homer's time) the name of Tyrant was taken up for a word of Disgrace, for
such men as by craft or Force wrested the Power of a City from a Multitude to
one man only; and not for the exercising, but for the ill-obtaining of the
Government: but now every man that is but thought to govern ill, or to be an
ill man, is presently termed a Tyrant, and so judged by his Subjects. Few
remember the Prohibition, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
curse the Ruler of thy People: and fewer understand the reason of it. Though we
may not one judge another, yet we may speak evil or revile one another, in that
which has been lawfully judged, and upon a Trial wherein they have been heard
and condemned: this is not to judge, but only to relate the judgment of the
Ruler. To speak evil, or to revile a Supreme Judge, cannot be without judging
him who has no Superior on Earth to judge him, and in that regard must
always be presumed innocent, though never so ill, if he cannot lawfully be
heard.

I. M. That will have it Tyranny in a King not to regard the Laws, does himself
give as little Regard to them as any man; where he reckons, that Contesting for
Privileges, Customs, Forms, and that old entanglement of Iniquity, their
gibrish Laws, are the Badges of ancient Slavery. Tenure, page 3. a Disputing
Presidents, Forms and Circumstances, page 5.

I. M. is also of opinion, That, If at any time our Forefathers, out of
baseness, have lost any thing of their Right, that ought not hurt us; they
might if they would promise Slavery for themselves, for us certainly they could
not, who have always the same Right to free our selves, that they had to give
themselves to any man in Slavery. This Doctrine well practiced, lays all open
to constant Anarchy.

Lastly, If any desire to know what the Liberty of the People is, which I. M.
pleads for, he resolves us, saying, That he that takes away from the People the
Right of Choosing what Form of Government they please, takes away truly that in
which all Liberty does almost consist. It is well said by I. M. that all
Liberty does almost consist in Choosing their Form of Government, for there is
another liberty exercised by the People, which he mentions not, which is the
liberty of the Peoples Choosing their Religion; every man may be of any
Religion, or of no Religion; Greece and Rome have been as famous for
Polytheisme, or multitudes of gods, as of Governors; and imagining
Aristocratie and Democratie in Heaven, as on Earth.

OBSERVATIONS UPON H. Grotius DE IURE BELLI, and PACIS.
IN most Questions of Weight and Difficulty concerning the Right of War, or
Peace, or Supreme Power, Grotius has Recourse to the Law of Nature or of
Nations, or to the Primitive Will of those men who first joined in Society. It
is necessary therefore a little to lay open the Variety or Contrariety in the
Civil and Canon Law, and in Grotius himself, about the Law of Nature and
Nations, not with a Purpose to raise any Contention about Words or Phrases, but
with a Desire to reconcile or expound the Sense of different Terms.

Civilians, Canonists, Politicians and Divines, are not a little perplexed in
distinguishing between the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations; about Ius
Naturae, and Ius Gentium, there is much Dispute by such as handle the Original
of Government, and of Property and Community.

The Civil Law in one Text allows a threefold Division of Law, into Ius
Naturae, Ius Gentium, and Ius Civil. But in another Text of the same Law, we
find only a twofold Division, into Ius Civil, and Ius Gentium. This latter
Division the Law takes from Gaius, the former from Ulpian, who will have Ius
Natural to be that which Nature has taught all Creatures, quod Natura omnia
animalia Docuit, but for this he is confuted by Grotius, Salmasius, and others,
who restrain the Law of Nature only to men using Reason; which makes it all one
with the Law of Nations; to which the Canon Law consents, and says, That Ius
Natural est commune omnium nationum: That which Natural Reason appoints all
men to use, is the Law of Nations, says Theophilus in the Text of the Civil
Law: and in the second Book of the Instit. cap. 1. Ius Naturae is confounded
with Ius Gentium.

As the Civilians sometimes confound and sometimes separate the Law of Nature
and the Law of Nations, so other-whiles they make them also contrary one to the
other. By the Law of Nature all men are born free; Iure naturali omnes liberi
nascuntur. But Servitude is by the Law of Nations: Iure Gentium Servitus
invasit, says Ulpian.

And the Civil Law not only makes the Law of Nature and of Nations contrary,
but also will have the Law of Nations contrary to it self. War, says the Law,
was brought in by the Law of Nations. Ex jure gentium introducta bella, and yet
the Law of Nations says, Since Nature has made us all of one Kindred, it
follows it is not lawful for one man to lie in Wait for another. Cum inter nos
cognitionem quandam natura constituit, consequens est hominem homini insidiari
nefas esse, says Florentinus.

Again* the Civil Law teaches, that from the Law of Nature proceeds the
Conjunction of man and women, the Procreation and Education of Children. But as
for Religion to God, and Obedience to Parents it makes it to be by the Law of
Nations.

To touch now the Canon Law, we may find in one place that men are governed
either by the Law of Nature, or by Customs. Homines reguntur Naturali jure, aut
moribus. The Law of Nations they call a Divine Law, the Customs a humane Law;
Leges aut divinae sunt aut humanae; divinae natura, humanae moribus constant.
But in the next place the Canon Law makes Ius to be either Natural, aut
Civil, aut Gentium. Though this Division agree in Terms with that of Ulpian in
the Civil Law, yet in the Explication of the Terms there is Diversity; for what
one Law makes to belong to the Law of Nature, the other refers to the Law of
Nations, as may easily appear to him that will take the Pains to compare the
Civil and Canon Law in these Points.

A principal Ground of these Diversities and Contrarieties of Divisions, was an
Error which the Heathens taught, that all things at first were common, and that
all men were equal. This Mistake was not so heinous in those Ethnic Authors of
the Civil Laws, who wanting the Guide of the History of Moses, were fain to
follow Poets and Fables for their Leaders. But for Christians, who have read
the Scriptures, to dream either of a Community of all things, or an Equality of
all Persons, is a Fault scarce pardonable.

To salve these apparent Contrarieties of Community and Property; or Equality
and Subjection: the Law of Ius Gentium was first invented; when that could not
satisfy, to mend the matter, this Ius Gentium, was divided into a Natural Law
of Nations, and an Humane Law of Nations; and the Law of Nature into a Primary
and a Secondary Law of Nature; Distinctions which make a great sound, but
edify not at all if they come under Examination.

If there has been a time when all things were common, and all men equal, and
that it be otherwise now; we must needs conclude that the Law by which all
things were common, and men equal, was contrary to the Law by which now things
are proper, and men subject.

If we will allow Adam to have been Lord of the World and of his Children,
there will need no such Distinctions of the Law of Nature and of Nations: For
the Truth will be, that whatsoever the Heathens comprehended under these two
Laws, is comprised in the Moral Law.

That the Law of Nature is one and the same with the Moral, may appear by a
Definition given by Grotius. The Law of Nature (says he) is the Dictate of
Reason, showing that in every Action by the agreeing or disagreeing of it with
natural Reason, there is a moral Honesty or Dishonesty, and consequently that
such an Action is commanded or forbidden by God the Author of Nature. I cannot
tell how Grotius would otherwise have defined the Moral Law. And the Canon Law
grants as much; teaching that the Law of Nature is contained in the Law and the
Gospel: Whatsoever ye will that men do, etc. Mat. 7.

The Term of Ius Naturae is not originally to be found in Scripture, for though
T. Aquinas takes upon him to prove out of the 2. to the Romans, that there is a
Ius Naturae, yet St. Paul does not use those express Terms; his words are, The
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law are a Law unto themselves: He does not say, Nature is
a Law unto them, but they are a Law unto themselves. As for that which they
call the Law of Nations, it is not a Law distinct, much less opposite to the
Law of Nature, but it is a small Branch or Parcel of that great Law; for it is
nothing but the Law of Nature, or the moral Law between Nations. The same
Commandment that forbids one Private man to rob another, or one Corporation to
hurt another Corporation, obliges also one King not to rob another King, and
one Commonwealth not to spoil another: the same Law that enjoins Charity to all
men, even to Enemies, binds Princes and States to show Charity to one another,
as well as private Persons.

And as the Common, or Civil Laws of each Kingdom which are made against
Treason, Theft, Murder, Adultery, or the like, are all and every one of them
grounded upon some particular Commandment of the moral Law; so all the Laws of
Nations must be subordinate and reducible to the moral Law.

The Law of Nature, or the moral Law is like the main Ocean, which though it be
one entire Body, yet several Parts of it have distinct Names, according to the
diversity of the Coasts on which they border. So it comes to pass that the Law
of Nations which is but a part of the Law of Nature, may be sub-divided almost
in infinitum, according to the Variety of the Persons, or Matters about which
it is conversant.

The Law of Nature or the divine Law is general, and does only comprehend some
Principles of Morality notoriously known of themselves, or at the most is
extended to those things which by necessary and evident Inference are
consequent to those Principles. Besides these, many other things are necessary
to the well-governing of a Commonwealth: and therefore it was necessary that by
Humane Reason something more in particular should be determined concerning
those things which could not be defined by Natural Reason alone; hence it is
that Humane Laws be necessary, as Comments upon the Text of the Moral Law: and
of this Judgment is Aquinas, who teaches, that necessitas legis humanae manat
ex eo, quod Lex naturalis, vel Divina, generalis est, and solum complectitur
quaedam principia morum per se nota, and ad summum extenditur ad ea quae
necessaria and evidenti elatione ex illis principiis consequuntur: praeter illa
vero multa alia sunt necessaria in republica ad ejus rectam Gubernationem: and
ideo necessarium fuit ut per humanam rationem aliqua magis in particulari
determinarentur circa ea quae per solam rationem naturalem definiri non
possunt. Ludo. Molin de Just. Thus much may suffice to show the Distractions in
and between the Civil and Common Laws about the Law of Nature and Nations. In
the next place we are to consider how Grotius distinguishes these Laws.

To maintain the Community of things to be Natural, Grotius has framed new
Divisions of the law of Nature. First, in his Preface to his Books De Iure
Belli and Pacis, he produces a Definition of the Law of Nature, in such
doubtful, obscure and reserved Terms, as if he were diffident of his
Undertaking: Next in his first Book and first Chapter he gives us another
Distribution, which differs from his Doctrine in his Preface.

In his Preface his Principle is, that the Appetite of Society, that is to say,
of Community, is an Action proper to man. Here he presently corrects himself
with an Exception, that some other Creatures are found to desire Society; and
withal he answers the Objections thus, that this Desire of Society in brute
Beasts, comes from some external Principle. What he means by Principium
intelligens extrinsecum, I understand not, nor does he explain, nor is it
material, nor is the Argument he uses to any purpose; for, admitting all he
says to be true, yet his Principle fails; for the Question is not, from what
Principle this Desire of Society proceeds in Beasts, but whether there be such
a Desire or no. Besides, here he takes the Appetite of Society and Community to
be all one, whereas many live in Society, which live not in Community.

Next he teaches, that the keeping of Society (custodia Societatis) which in a
rude manner (says he) we have now expressed, is the fountain of that Law which
is properly so called. I conceive by the Law properly so called, he intends the
Law of Nature, though he express not so much: And to this appetite of Sociable
Community he refers Alieni Abstinentia; but herein it may be he forgets
himself, for where there is Community there is neither meum nor tuum, nor yet
alienum; and if there be no alienum, there can be no alieni abstinentia. To the
same purpose he says, that by the Law of Nature men must stand to bargains,
Iuris naturae sit stare pactis. But if all things were common by Nature, how
could there be any bargain?

Again, Grotius tells us, that from this signification of the Law there has
flowed another larger, which consists (says he) in Discerning what delights us
or hurts us, and in judging how things should be wisely distributed to each
one. This latter he calls the looser Law of Nature; the former, Ius Sociale,
the Law of Nature, strictly, or properly taken. And these two Laws of Nature
should have place (says he) though men should deny there were ^ God. But to
them that believe there is a God, there i^ another Original of Law, beside the
Natural, coming from the free Will of God, to the which our own Understanding
tells us we must be subject.

Thus have I gathered the Substance of what is most material concerning the Law
of Nature, in his Preface.

If we turn to the Book it self, we have a division of the Law into

Ius
Natural. Voluntarium. Divinum. Humanum. Civil. Latius patens, Seu jus
Gentium. Arctius Patens, Seu Paternum, Seu Herile.


In the Definition of Ius Natural he omits those Subtilties of Ius Naturae
proprie dictum, and quod laxius ita dicitur, which we find in his Preface, and
gives such a plain Definition, as may fitly agree to the Moral Law. By this it
seems the Law of Nature and the Moral Law are one and the same.

Whereas he affirms, that the Actions about which the Law of Nature is
conversant, are lawful or unlawful of themselves, and therefore are necessarily
commanded or forbidden by God: by which mark this Law of Nature does not only
differ from Humane Law, but from the Divine voluntary Law, which does not
command or forbid those things, which of themselves, and by their own nature
are lawful or unlawful, but makes them unlawful by forbidding them, and due by
commanding them. In this he seems to make the Law of Nature to differ from Gods
Voluntary Law; whereas, in God, Necessary and Voluntary are all one. Salmasius
de Usuris, in the twentieth Chapter, condemns this opinion of Grotius; though
he name him not, yet he means him, if I mistake not.

In the next place, I observe his saying, that some things are by the Law of
Nature, not proprie, but reductive; and that the Law of Nature deals not only
with those things which are beside the Will of Man, but also with many things
which follow the act of Man's Will: so Dominion, such as is now in Use, man's
Will brought in: but now that it is brought in, it is against the Law of
Nature, to take that from thee against thy Will, which is in thy Dominion.

Yet for all this Grotius maintains that the Law of Nature is so immutable,
that it cannot be changed by God himself. He means to make it good with a
Distinction, Some things (says he) are by the Law of Nature, but not simply,
but according to the certain State of things; so the common use of things was
natural as long as Dominion was not brought in; and Right for every man to take
his own by Force, before Laws were made. Here if Grotius would have spoken
plain, in stead of but not simply, but according to the certain State of
Things, he would have said, but not immutably, but for a certain Time. And then
this Distinction would have run thus; Some things are by the Law of Nature, but
not immutably, but for a certain time. This must needs be the naked Sense of
his Distinction, as appears by his Explication in the Words following, where he
says, that the Common Use of Things was natural so long as dominion was not
brought in: Dominion he says was brought in by the will of man, whom by this
Doctrine Grotius makes to be able to change that Law which God himself cannot
change, as he says. He gives a double ability to man; first, to make that no
Law of Nature, which God made to be the Law of Nature: And next, to make that a
Law of Nature which God made not; for now that Dominion is brought in, he
maintains, it is against the Law of Nature to take that which is in another
man's dominion.

Besides, I find no Coherence in these words, By the Law of Nature it was right
for every ^an to take his own by force, before Laws made, since by the Law of
Nature no man had any thing of his own; and until Laws were made, there was no
Propriety, according to his Doctrine.

Ius Humanum voluntarium latius patens, he makes to be the Law of Nations,
which (says ^e) by the Will of All, or Many Nations, has received a power to
bind, he adds, of Many, because there is, as he grants, scarce any Law to be
found common to all Nations, besides the Law of Nature; which also is wont to
be called the Law of Nations, being common to all Nations. Nay, as he
confesses often, that is the Law in one part of the World, which in another
part of the World is not the Law of Nations.

By these Sentences, it seems Grotius can scarce tell what to make to be the
Law of Nations, or where to find it.

Whereas he makes the Law of Nations to have a binding Power from the Will of
men, it must be remembered, that it is not sufficient for men to have a Will to
bind, but it is necessary also to have a Power to bind: Though several Nations
have one and the same Law.

For instance, Let it be granted that Theft is punished by Death in many
Countries, yet this does not make it to be a Law of Nations, because each
Nation has it but as a Natural, or Civil Law of their own Country; and though
it have a binding Power from the Will of many Nations, yet because each Nation
has but a Will and Power to bind themselves, and may without prejudice
consent, or, consulting of any Neighbour-Nation, Alter this Law, if they find
Cause, it cannot properly be called the Law of Nations. That which is the
foundation of the Law of Nations, is, to have it concern such things as belong
to the mutual Society of Lib. 4. c. 8.
Nations among themselves, as Grotius confesses; and not of such things as
have no further relation than to the particular Benefit of each Kingdom: For,
as private men must neglect their own Profit for the Good of their Country; so
particular Nations must sometimes remit part of their Benefit, for the Good of
many Nations.

True it is, that in particular Kingdoms and Commonwealths there be Civil and
National Laws, and also Customs that obtain the Force of Laws: But yet such
Laws are ordained by some supreme Power, and the Customs are examined judged
and allowed by the same supreme Power. Where there is no Supreme Power that
extends over all or many Nations but only God himself, there can be no Laws
made to bind Nations, but such as are made by God himself: we cannot find that
God made any Laws to bind Nations, but only the Moral Law; as for the Judicial
Law, though it were ordained by God, yet it was not the Law of Nations, but of
one Nation only, and fitted to that Commonwealth.

If any think that the Customs wherein many Nations do consent, may be called
the Law of Nations, as well as the Customs of any one Nation may be esteemed
for national Laws: They are to consider that it is not the being of a Custom
that makes it lawful, for then all Customs, even evil Customs, would be lawful;
but it is the Approbation of the supreme Power that gives a Legality to the
Custom: where there is no Supreme Power over many Nations, their Customs cannot
be made legal.

The Doctrine of Grotius is, that God immediately after the Creation did bestow
upon Mankind in general a Right over things of inferior Nature -- From whence
it came to pass, that presently every man might snatch what he would for his
own Use, and spend what he could, and such an Universal Right was then in stead
of Property; for what every one so snatched, another could not take from him
but by Injury.

How repugnant this Assertion of Grotius is to the Truth of Holy Scripture, Mr.
Seldom Lib. 1. c. 4.
teaches us in his Mare Clausum, saying, that Adam by Donation from God, Genesis
1. 28. was made the general Lord of all things, not without such a private
Dominion to himself, as (without his Grant) did exclude his Children: and by
Donation and Assignation, or some kind of Cession (before he was dead, or left
any Heir to succeed him) his Children had their distinct Territories by Right
of private Dominion: Abel had his Flocks, and Pastures for them; Cain had his
Fields for Corn, and the Land of Nod where he built himself a City*

This Determination of Mr. Selden's being consonant to the History of the
Bible, and to natural Reason, does contradict the Doctrine of Grotius: I cannot
conceive why Mr. Seldom should afterward affirm, that neither the Law of
Nature, nor the Divine Law, do cammand or forbid either Communion of all things
or private Dominion, but permits both.

As for the general Community between Noah and his Sons, which Mr. Seldom will
have to be granted to them, Genesis 9. 2. the Text does not warrant it; for
although the Sons are there mentioned with Noah in the Blessing, yet it may
best be understood with a Subordination or a Benediction in Succession, the
Blessing might truly be fulfilled, if the Sons either under, or after their
Father enjoyed a Private Dominion: it is not probable that the private Dominion
which God gave to Adam, and by his Donation, Assignation or Cession to his
Children was abrogated, and a Community of all things instituted between Noah
and his Sons, at the time of the Flood: Noah was left the sole heir of the
World, why should it be thought that God would dis-inherit him of his
Birthright, and make him of all the men in the World, the only Tenant in
Common with his Children? If the Blessing given to Adam, Genesis 1. 28. be
compared to that given to Noah and his Sons, Genesis 9. 2. there will be found a
considerable Difference between those two Texts: In the Benediction of Adam, we
find expressed a subduing of the Earth, and a Dominion over the Creatures,
neither of which are expressed in the Blessing of Noah nor the Earth there once
named, it is only said, The Fear of you shall be upon the Creatures, and into
your hands are they delivered; then immediately it follows, Every moving thing
shall be meat for you, as the green Herb: The first Blessing gave Adam Dominion
over the Earth and all Creatures, the latter allows Noah Liberty to use the
living Creatures for Food: here is no Alteration or diminishing of his Title to
a Propriety of all things but an Enlargement only of his Commons.

But, whether, with Grotius, Community came in at the Creation, or, with Mr.
Seldom, at the Flood, they both agree it did not long continue; Sed very non
est simile hujusmodi communionem diu obtinuisse, is the confession of Mr.
Seldom. It seems strange that Grotius should maintain, that Community of all
things should be by the Law of Nature, of which God is the Author; and yet such
Community should not be able to continue: Does it not derogate from the
Providence of God Almighty, to ordain a Community which could not continue? or
does it make the Act of our Forefathers, in Abrogating the natural Law of
Community, by introducing that of Propriety, to be a Sin of a high presumption?

The prime Duties of the Second Table are conversant about the Right of
Propriety: but if Propriety be brought in by a Humane Law (as Grotius teaches)
then the Moral Law depends upon the Will of man. There could be no Law against
Adultery or Theft, if Women and all things were common.

Mr. Seldom says, that the Law of Nature, or of God, nec vetuit, nec jubebat,
sed permisit utrumque, tam nempe rerum communionem quam privatum Dominium. And
yet for Propriety (which he terms primaeva rerum Dominia) he teaches, that
Adam received it from God, a Numine acceperat: And for Community, he says, We
meet with evident footsteps of the Community of things in that donation of God,
by which Noah and his three Sons are made Domini pro indiviso rerum omnium.
Thus he makes the private Dominion of Adam, as well as the common Dominion of
Noah and his Sons, to be both by the Will of God. Nor does he show how Noah, or
his Sons, or their Posterity, had any Authority to alter the Law of Community
which was given them by God.

In distributing Territories (Mr. Seldom says) the Consent, as it were, of
Mankind (passing their promise, which should also bind their Posterity) did
intervene, so that men departed from their common Right of Communion of those
things which were so distributed to particular Lords or Masters. This
Distribution by Consent of Mankind, we must take upon Credit; for there is not
the least proof offered for it out of Antiquity.

How the Consent of Mankind could bind Posterity when all things were common,
is a Point not so evident: where Children take nothing by Gift or by Descent
from their Parents, but have an equal and common Interest with them, there is
no reason in such cases, that the Acts of the Fathers should bind the Sons.

I find no Cause why Mr. Seldom should call Community a pristine Right; since
he makes it but to begin in Noah, and to end in Noah's Children, or
Grandchildren at the most; for he confesses the Earth, a Noachidis seculis
aliquot post diluvium esse divisam.

That ancient Tradition, which by Mr. Seldens acknowledgment has obtained
Reputation every where, seems most reasonable, in that it tells us, that Noah
himself, as Lord of all, was Author of the distribution of the World, and of
private Dominion, and that by the appointment of an Oracle from God, he did
confirm this Distribution by his last Will and Testament, which at his Death he
left in the hands of his eldest Son Sem, and also warned all his Sons, that
none of them should invade any of their Brothers Dominions, or injure one
another, because from thence Discord and Civil War would necessarily follow.

Many conclusions in Grotius his Book de Iure Belli and Pacis, are built upon
the foundation of these two Principles.

1. The first is, That Communis rerum usus naturalis fuit. 2. The second is,
that Dominium quale nune in usu est, voluntas humana introduxit.
Upon these two Propositions of natural Community and voluntary Propriety,
depend diverse Dangerous and Seditious conclusions, which are dispersed in
several places. In the fourth Chapter of the first Book, the Title of which
Chapter is, Of the War of Subjects against Superiors; Grotius handles the
Question, Whether the Law of not resisting Superiors, do bind us in most
grievous and most certain danger? And his Determination is, that this Law of
not resisting Superiors, seems to depend upon the Will of those men who at
first joined themselves in a Civil Society, from whom the Right of Government
does come to them that govern; if those had been at first asked, if their Will
were to impose this burden upon all, that they should choose rather to dye,
than in any case by Arms to repel the force of Superiors; I know not whether
they would answer, that it was their Will, unless perhaps with this addition,
if Resistance cannot be made but with the great disturbance of the
Commonwealth, and destruction of many Innocents. Here we have his Resolution,
that in great and certain danger, men may resist their Governors, if it may be
without disturbance of the Commonwealth: if you would know who should be Judge
of the greatness and certainty of the Danger, or how we may know it, Grotius
has not one word of it, so that for ought appears to the contrary, his Mind
may be that every private man may be Judge of the Danger, for other Judge he
appoints none; it had been a foul Fault in so desperate a Piece of Service, as
the resisting of Superiors, to have concealed the lawful Means, by which we may
judge of the Greatness or Certainty of public Danger, before we lift up our
hands against Authority, considering how prone most of us are, to censure and
mistake those things for great and certain Dangers, which in Truth many Times
are no dangers at all, or at the most but very small ones; and so flatter our
selves, that by resisting our Superiors we may do our Country laudible
Service, without Disturbance of the Commonwealth, since the Effects of Sedition
cannot be certainly judged of but by the Events only.

Grotius proceeds to answer an Objection against this Doctrine of resisting
Superiors. If (says he) any man shall say that this rigid Doctrine of dying*
rather then resisting any Injuries of Superiors, is no humane, but a divine
Law: It is to be noted, that men at first, not by any Precept of God, but of
their own Accord, led by Experience of the Infirmities of separated Families
against Violence, did meet together in Civil Society, from whence Civil Power
took beginning, which therefore St. Peter calls an humane Ordinance, although
elsewhere it be called a divine Ordinance, because God approves the wholesome
Institutions of men; God in Approving a humane Law is to be thought to approve
it as humane, and in a humane Manner.

And again in another place he goes further, and teaches us, that if the
Question happen to be concerning the Primitive Will of the People, it will not
be amiss for the People that now are, and which are accounted the same with
them that were long ago, to express their Meaning, in this matter, which is to
be followed, unless it cetainly appear, that the People long ago willed
otherwise. lib. 2. c. 2.

For fuller Explication of his Judgment about resisting Superiors, he
concludes thus: The greater the thing is which is to be preserved, the greater
is the Equity which reaches forth an Exception against the words of the Law:
yet I dare not (says Grotius) without Difference condemn either simple men or
a lesser part of the People, who in the last Refuge of Necessity, do so use
this Equity, as that in the mean time, they do not forsake the Respect of the
common Good.

Another Doctrine of Grotius is, that the Empire which is exercised by Kings,
does not cease to be the Empire of the People; that Kings who in a lawful Order
succeed those who were elected, have the supreme Power by an usufructuary Right
only, and no Propriety.

Furthermore he teaches, that the People may choose what Form of Government
they please, and their Will is the Rule of Right. Populus eligere potest qualem
vult gubernationis formam, neque ex praestantia formae, sed ex voluntate jus
metiendum est. lib. 1. c. 3.

Also, that the People choosing a King may reserve some Acts to themselves, and
may bestow others upon the King, with full Authority, if either an express
Partition be appointed, or if the People being yet free do command their future
King, by way of a standing Command, or if any thing be added by which it may be
understood, that the King may be compelled or else punished.

In these Passages of Grotius which I have cited, we find evidently these
Doctrines.

1. That Civil Power depends on the Will of the People. 2. That private men or
petty Multitudes may take up Arms against their Princes. 3. That the lawfullest
Kings have no Propriety in their Kingdoms, but an usufructuary Right only: as
if the People were the Lords, and Kings but their Tenants. 4. That the Law of
Not resisting Superiors, is a humane Law, depending on the Will of the People
at first. 5. That the Will of the first People, if it be not known, may be
expounded by the People that now are.
No Doubt but Grotius foresaw what Uses the People might make of these
Doctrines, by concluding, if the chief Power be in the People, that then it is
lawful for them to compel and punish Kings as often as they misuse their Power:
Therefore he tells us, he rejects the Opinion of them, who every where and
without Exception will have the chief Power to be so the Peoples, that it is
lawful for them to compel and punish Kings as often as they misuse their Power;
and this Opinion he confesses if it be altogether received, has been and may
be the Cause of many Evils. This cautelous Rejection qualified with these Terms
of every where without Exception, and altogether, makes but a mixed Negation,
partly negative, and partly affirmative (which our Lawyers call a negative
Repugnant) which brings forth this modal Proposition, that in some Places with
Exception, and in some sort the People may compel and punish their Kings.

But let us see how Grotius does refute the general Opinion, that People may
correct Kings. He frames his Argument in these words, It is lawful for every
man to yield himself to be a private Servant to whom he please. What should
hinder, but that also it may be lawful for a free People so to yield themselves
to one or more, that the Right of governing them be fully set over without
retaining any part of the Right? and you must not say, That this may not be
presumed, for we do not now seek, what in a doubtful case may be presumed, but
what by Right may be done. Thus far is the Argument, in which the most that is
proved (if we gratify him, and yield his whole Argument for good) is this,
that the People may grant away their Power without retaining any part. But what
is this to what the People have done? for though the People may give away their
Power without Reservation of any part to themselves; yet if they have not so
done, but have reserved a part, Grotius must confess, that the People may
compel and punish their Kings if they transgress: so that by his Favor, the
Point will be, not what by Right may be done, but what in this doubtful case
has been done, since by his own Rule it is the Will and Meaning of the first
People that joined in Society, that must regulate the Power of their
Successors.

But on Grotius side it may be urged, that in all Presumption the People have
given away their whole Power to Kings, unless they can prove they have reserved
a part; for if they will have any Benefit of a Reservation or Exception, it
lies on their part to prove their Exception, and not on the Kings Part who are
in Possession.

This Answer, though in it self it be most just and good; yet of all men
Grotius may not use it. For he saves the People the Labor of proving the
primitive Reservation of their Forefathers, by making the People that now are
competent Expositors of the meaning of those first Ancestors, who may justly be
presumed, not to have been either so improvident for themselves, or so
negligent of all their Posterity, when by the Law of Nature they were free and
had all things common, at an Instant with any Condition or Limitation to give
away that Liberty and Right of Community, and to make themselves and their
Children eternally subject to the Will of such Governors as might misuse them
without Control.

On the behalf of the People, it may be further answered to Grotius, that
although our Ancestors had made an absolute Grant of their Liberty, without any
Condition expressed, yet it must be necessarily employed, that it was upon
condition to be well-governed, and that the Nonperformance of that employed
Condition, makes the Grant void; Or, if we will not allow an implicit
Condition, then it may be said, that the Grant in it self was a void Grant, for
being unreasonable, and a violation of the Law of Nature, without any valuable
Consideration. What sound Reply Grotius can return to such Answers, I cannot
conceive, if he keep himself to his first Principle of natural Community. As
Grotius's Argument against the People is not sound, so his Answer to the
Argument that is made for the People, is not satisfactory. It is objected, that
he that ordains* is above him that is ordained. Grotius answers, Verum duntaxat
est in ea constitutione cujus effectus perpetuo pendet a voluntate
constituentis, non etiam in ea quae ab initio est voluntatis, postea vero
effectum habet necessitatis, quomodo mulier virum sibi constituit, cui parere
semper habet necesse. The Reply may be, that by Grotius's former Doctrine the
very Effect of the Constitution of Kings by the People, depends perpetually
upon the Will of them that Constitute, and upon no other Necessity: he will not
say, that it is by any necessity of the Law of Nature, or by any positive Law
of God* he teaches, that non Dei praecepto, sed sponte, men entered into Civil
Society, that it is an Humane Ordinance, that God does only approve it ut
humanum, and humano modo. He tells us further, that Populus potest eligere
qualem vult gubernationis for^am, and ex voluntate jus metiendum est; that the
People may give the King as little Power as they will, and for as little time
as they please, that they ^ay make temporary Kings, as Dictators and
Protectors: jus quovis tempore revocabile, id est precarium; as the Vandals in
Africa, and the Goths in Spain, would depose their Kings as often as they
displeased them, horum enim actus irriti possunt reddi ab his ^i potestatem
revocabiliter dederunt, ac proinde non idem est effectus nec jus idem. Here he
does teach in plain words, the Effect does depend upon the Will of the People.
By this we may judge how improperly he uses the instance of a Woman, that
appoints her self a Husband, whom she must always necessarily obey, since the
necessity of the continuance of the Wives obedience depends upon the Law of
God, which has made the Bond of Matrimony indissolvable. Grotius will not say
the like for the continuance of the Subjects obedience to the Prince, neither
will he say that Women may choose Husbands, as he tells us the People may
choose Kings, by giving their Husbands as little Power, and for as little a
Time as they please.

Next, it is objected, that Tutors who are set over Pupils may be removed, if
they abuse their Power. Grotius answers, In tutore hoc procedit qui superiorem
habet, at in imperiis quia progressus non datur in infinitum omnino in aliqua
persona aut coetu consistendum est: We must stay in some one Person, or in a
Multitude, whose faults (because they have no superior Judge above them) God
has witnessed that he will have a particular care of, either to revenge them,
if he judge it needful, or to tolerate them, either for Punishment, or Trial of
the People. It is true, in Kingdoms we cannot proceed in infinitum, yet we
may, and must go to the highest, which by Grotius his Rule is the People,
because they first made Kings, so that there is no need to stay in aliqua
persona, but in coetu, in the People, so that by his Doctrine Kings may be
punished by the People, but the faults of the People must be left to the
Judgment of God.

I have briefly presented here the desperate Inconveniences which attend upon
the Doctrine of the natural freedom and community of all things; these and many
more Absurdities are easily removed, if on the contrary we maintain the natural
and private Dominion of Adam, to be the fountain of all Government and
Propriety: And if we mark it well, we shall find that Grotius does in part
grant as much; The ground why those that now live do obey their Governors, is
the Will of their Forefathers, who at the first ordained Princes, and, in
obedience to that Will, the Children continue in subjection; this is according
to the mind of Grotius: so that the Question is not Whether Kings have a
fatherly Power over their Subjects, but how Kings came first by it. Grotius
will have it, that our Forefathers being all free, made an Assignment of their
Power to Kings; the other opinion denies any such general freedom of our
Forefathers, but derives the Power of Kings from the Original Dominion of Adam.

This natural Dominion of Adam may be proved out of Grotius himself, who
teaches, that gene^ione jus acquiritur Parentibus in Liberos, and that ^urally
no other can be found, but the Parents to whom the Government should belong,
and the Right of Ruling and Compelling them does belong to Parents. And in
another place he has these words, speaking of the first Commandment, Parentum
nomine, ^i naturales sunt Magistratus, etiam alios Rectores (...) est
intelligi, quorum authoritas Societatem huma^m, continet: and if Parents be
natural Magistrates, Children must needs be born natural Subjects.

But although Grotius acknowledge* Parents to ^e natural Magistrates, yet he
will have it, that Children, when they come to full age, and are ^parated from
their Parents, are free from natural Subjection. For this he offers proof out
of Ari^le, and out of Scripture. First, for Aristotle; we ^ust note, he does
not teach, that every separation of Children of full age, is an Obtaining of
liberty, ^s if that men when they come to years, might vo^ntarily separate
themselves, and cast off their ^atural Obedience; but Aristotle speaks only of
passive Separation; for he does not say that Children are subject to Parents
until they do sepa^te, but he says, until they be separated, (...), in ^he
Verb of the Passive Voice. That is, until by ^aw they be separated: for the Law
(which (...) nothing else but the Will of him that has the Power of the
Supreme Father) does in many cases, for the public Benefit of Society, free
Children from subjection to the Subordinate Parent, so that the natural
Subjection by such Emancipation of Children, is not extinguished, but only
assumed and regulated by the Parent paramount.

Secondly, Grotius cites Numb. 30. to prove that the Power of the Fathers over
the Sons and Daughters, to dissolve their Vows, was not perpetual, bu^ during
the time only whilst the Children were part o^ the Fathers Family. But if we
turn to the Chapter, we may find that Grotius either deceives himself, or us;
for there is not one word in that Chapter concerning the Vows of Sons, but of
Daughters only, being in their Father's Family; and the Being of the Daughter
in the Father's House, means only the Daughter's being a Virgin, and no^
married, which may be gathered by the Argumen^ of the whole Chapter, which
takes particular order for the Vows of Women of all Estates. First for
Virgins, in the third verse. Secondly, for Wives in general, in the sixth
verse. Thirdly, for Widows, and Women divorced, in the nint^ verse. There is no
Law for Virgins out of the^ Father's houses; we may not think they would have
been omitted, if they had been free from their Fathers; we find no freedom in
the Te^ for Women, till after Marriage: And if they we^ married, though they
were in their Father's ho^ses, yet the Fathers had no power of their Vow^ but
their Husbands.

If, by the Law of Nature, departure from t^ Fathers house had emancipated
Children, w^ does the Civil Law, contrary to the Law of Nature, give Power and
Remedy to Fathers for to recover by Action of Law their Children that de^rt, or
are taken away from them without their Consent? Without the Consent of Parents
the Civil Law allows no emancipation.

Concerning Subjection of Children to Parents, Grotius distinguishes three
several times.

The first is the time of Imperfect Judgment. The second is the time of Perfect
Judgment: but whilst the Son remains part of the Father's Fa^ily. The third is,
the time after he has departed out of his Father's Family.
In the first time he says, All the actions of Children are under the dominion
of the Parents.

During the second time, when they are of the ^ge of mature Judgment, they are
under their Father's Command in those actions only, which are of moment for
their Parents Family. In other actions the Children have a Power or moral
Faculty of doing, but they are bound in those also to study always to please
their Parents. But since this Duty is not by ^orce of any moral Faculty, as
those former are, but ^ely of Piety, Observance, and Duty of repaying Thanks;
it does not make any thing void which is done against it, as neither a gift of
any thing is void, being made by any Owner whatsoever, against the ^ules of
Parsimony.

In both these times, the Right of Ruling and Compelling is (as Grotius
acknowledges) comprehended so far forth as Children are to be compelled to
their Duty, or amended; although the Power of a Parent does so follow the
person of a Father, that it cannot be pulled away, and transferred upon
another, yet the Father may naturally pawn, or also sell his Son, if there be
need.

In the third time he says, the Son is in all things Free, and of his own
Authority: always that Du^ remaining of Piety and Observance, the cause of
which is perpetual. In this triple distinction, though Grotius allow Children
in some cases during the second, and in all cases during the third time to be
free, and of their own Power, by a moral Faculty: yet, in that he confesses,
in all cases Children are bound to study always to please their Parents out of
Piety and Duty, the cause of which, as he says, is perpetual: I cannot
conceive, how in any case Children can naturally have any Power or moral
Faculty of doing what they please without their Parents leave, since they are
always bound to study to please their Parents. And though by the Laws of some
Nations, Children, when they attain to years of Discretion, have Power and
Liberty in many actions; yet this Liberty is granted them by Positive and
Humane Laws only, which are made by the Supreme Fatherly Power of Princes, who
Regulate, Limit, or Assume the Authority of inferior Fathers, for the public
Benefit of the Commonwealth: so that naturally the Power of Parents over their
Children never cease by any Separation; but only by the Permission of the
transcendent Fatherly power of the Supreme Prince, Children may be dispensed
with, or privileged in some cases, from obedience to subordinate Parents*

Touching the Point of dissolving the Vows of Children, Grotius in his last
Edition of his Book has corrected his first: for in the first he teaches,
that the Power of the Father was greater over the Daughter dwelling with him,
than over the Son; for her Vow he might make void, but not his: But instead of
these words, in his last Edition, he says, that the Power over the Son or
Daughter to dissolve Vows, was not perpetual, but did endure as long as the
Children were a part of their Fathers Family. About the meaning of the Text out
of which he draws this Conclusion, I have already spoken.

Three ways Grotius propounds, whereby Supreme Power may be had.

First, By full Right of Propriety. Secondly, By an Usufructuary Right.
Thirdly, By a Temporary Right.
The Roman Dictators, says he, had Supreme Power by a Temporary Right; as well
those Kings who are first Elected, as those that in a lawful Right succeed to
Kings elected, have Supreme Power by an usufructuary Right: some Kings that
have got Supreme Power by a just War, or into whose Power some People, for
avoiding a greater Evil, have so yielded themselves, as that they have excepted
nothing, have a full Right of Propriety.

Thus we find but two means acknowledged by Grotius, whereby a King may obtain
a full Right of Propriety in a Kingdom: That is, either by a just War, or by
Donation of the People.

How a War can be just without a precedent Title in the Conqueror, Grotius
does not show; and if the Title only make the War just, then no other Right
can be obtained by War, than what the Title brings; for a just War does only
put the Conqueror in possession of his old Right, but not create a New. The
like which Grotius says of Succession, may be said of War. Succession (says
he) is no Title of a Kingdom, which gives a Form to the Kingdom, but a
Continuation of the Old; for the Right which began by the Election of the
Family, is continued by Succession* wherefore, so much as the first Election
gave, so much the Succession brings. So to a Conqueror that has a Title, War
does not give, but put him in possession of a Right: and except the Conqueror
had a full Right of Propriety at first, his Conquest cannot give it him: for if
originally he and his Ancestors had but an usufructuary Right, and were outed
of the possession of the Kingdom by an Usurper: here, though the Re-conquest be
a most just War, yet shall not the Conqueror in this case gain any full Right
of Propriety, but must be remitted to his usufructuary Right only: for what
Justice can it be, that the Injustice of a third Person, an Usurper, should
prejudice the People, to the devesting of them of that Right of Propriety,
which was reserved in their first Donation to their Elected King, to whom they
gave but an usufructuary Right, as Grotius conceives? Wherefore it seems
impossible, that there can be a just War, whereby a full Right of Propriety may
be gained, according to Grotius's Principles. For if a King come in by
Conquest, he must either conquer them that have a Governor, or those People
that have none: if they have no Governor, then they are a free People, and so
the War will be unjust to conquer those that are Free, especially if the
Freedom of the People be by the primary Law of Nature, as Grotius teaches: But
if the People conquered have a Governor, that Governor has either a Title or
not; If he have a Title, it is an unjust War that takes the Kingdom from him:
If he have no Title, but only the Possession of a Kingdom, yet it is unjust for
any other man, that wants a Title also, to conquer him that is but in
possession; for it is a just Rule, that where the Cases are alike, he that is
in Possession is in the better condition; In pari causa possidentis melior
conditio. Lib. 2. c. 23. And this by the Law of Nature, even in the judgment of
Grotius. But if it be admitted, that he that attempts to conquer have a Title,
and he that is in possession has none: here the Conquest is but in nature of a
possessory Action, to put the Conqueror in possession of a primer Right, and
not to raise a new Title; for War begins where the Law fails: Ubi Iudicia
deficiunt incipit Bellum. Lib. 2. c. 1. And thus, upon the matter, I cannot
find in Grotius's Book de Iure Belli, how that any Case can be put wherein by a
just War a man may become a King, pleno Jure Proprietatis.

All Government and Supreme Power is founded upon public Subjection, which is
thus defined by Grotius. Publica Subjectio est, qua se Populus homini alicui,
aut pluribus hominibus, aut etiam populo alteri in ditionem dat. Lib. 2. c. 5.
If Subjection be the Gift of the People, how can Supreme Power, pleno Iure, in
full Right, be got by a just War?

As to the other means whereby Kings may get Supreme Power in full Right of
Propriety, Grotius will have it to be, when some People, for avoiding a greater
Evil, do so yield themselves into another Power, as that they do except
nothing. It would be considered how, without War, any People can be brought
into such danger of Life, as that because they can find no other ways to
defend themselves, or because they are so pressed with Poverty, as they cannot
otherwise have means to sustain themselves, they are forced to renounce all
Right of Governing themselves, and deliver it to a King.

But if such a Case cannot happen, but by a War only, which reduces a People
to such terms of Extremity, as compells them to an absolute Abrenuntiation of
all Sovereignty: then War, which causes that necessity, is the prime means of
extorting such Sovereignty, and not the free Gift of the People, who cannot
otherwise choose but give away that Power which they cannot keep.

Thus, upon the Reckoning, the two ways propounded by Grotius, are but one way;
and that one way, in conclusion, is no way whereby Supreme Power may be had in
full Right of Propriety. His two ways are, a Just War, or a Donation of the
People; a just War cannot be without a Title, no Title without the Donation of
the People, no Donation without such a Necessity as nothing can bring upon the
Donors but a War. So that howsoever Grotius in words acknowledges that Kings
may have a full Right of Propriety, yet by consequence he denies it, by such
circular Suppositions, as by coincidence destroy each other, and in effect he
leaves all People a Right to plead in Bar against the Right of Propriety of any
Prince, either per minas, or per dures.

Many times, says Grotius, it happens, that War is grounded upon Expletive
Justice, Iustitiam Expletricem, which is, when a man cannot obtain what he
ought, he takes that which is as much in value, which in moral Estimation is
the same. For in War, when the same Province cannot be recovered, to the which
a man has a Title, he recovers another of the like value. This recovery cannot
give a full right of Propriety: because the Justice of such a War reaches no
farther than to a compensation for a former Right to another thing, and
therefore can give no new Right.

I am bound to take notice of a Case put by Grotius, amongst those Causes which
he thinks should move the People to renounce all their Right of Governing, and
give it to another. It may also happen (says he) that a Father of a Family
possessing large Territories, will not receive any man to dwell within his Land
upon any other condition. And in another place, he says, that all Kings are
not made by the People, which may be sufficiently understood by the Examples of
a Father of a Family receiving Strangers under the Law of Obedience. In both
these Passages we have a close and curt acknowledgment, that a Father of a
Family may be an absolute King over Strangers, without Choice of the People;
now I would know whether such Fathers of Families have not the same absolute
Power over their own Children, without the Peoples Choice, which he allows them
over Strangers: if they have, I cannot but call them Absolute proprietary
Kings, though Grotius be not willing to give them that Title in plain terms:
for indeed to allow such Kings, were to condemn his own Principle, that
Dominion came in by the Will of the People; and so consequently to overthrow
his Usufructuary Kings, of whom I am next to speak.

Grotius says, that the Law of Obeying, or Resisting Princes, depends upon the
Will of them who first met in Civil Society, from whom Power does flow to
Kings: And, that men of their own accord came together into Civil Society, from
whence springs Civil Power, and the People may choose what Form of Government
they please. Upon these Suppositions, he concludes, that Kings, elected by the
People, have but an Usufructuary Right, that is, a Right to take the Profit or
Fruit of the Kingdom, but not a Right of Propriety or Power to alienate it. But
why does he call it an Usufructuary Right? It seems to me a term too mean or
base to express the Right of any King, and is derogatory to the Dignity of
Supreme Majesty. The word Usufructuary is used by the Lawyers, to signify him
that has the Use, Profit or Fruit of some Corporal thing, that may be used
without the Property; for of fungible things (res fungibiles, the Civilians
call them) that are spent or consumed in the Use, as Corn, Wine, Oil, Money,
there cannot be an Usufructuary Right.

It is to make a Kingdom all one with a Farm, as if it had no other Use but to
be let out to him that can make most of it: whereas, in truth, it is the Part
and Duty of a King to govern, and he has a Right so to do, and to that End
Supreme Power is given unto him; the taking of the Profit, or making Use of the
Patrimony of the Crown, is but as a means only to enable him to perform that
great work of Government.

Besides, Grotius will not only have an elected King, but also his lawful
Successors, to have but an Usufructuary Right, so that though a King has a
Crown to him and to his Heirs, yet he will allow him no Propriety, because he
has no Power to alienate it; for he supposes the primary Will of the People
to have been to bestow Supreme Power to go in Succession, and not to be
alienable; but for this he has no better proof than a naked presumption: In
Regnis quae Populi voluntate delata sunt concedo non esse praesumendum eam
fuisse Populi voluntatem, ut alienatio Imperii sui Regi permitteretur.

But though he will not allow Kings a Right of Propriety in their Kingdoms, yet
a Right of Propriety there must be in some body, and in whom but in the People?
for he says, the Empire which is exercised by Kings, does not cease to be the
Empire of the People. His meaning is, the Use is the King's, but the Property
is the Peoples.

But if the Power to alienate the Kingdom be in him that has the Property,
this may prove a comfortable Doctrine to the People: but yet to allow a Right
of Succession in Kings, and still to reserve a Right of Property in the People,
may make some contradiction: for the Succession must either hinder the Right of
Alienation which is in the People, or the Alienation must destroy that Right of
Succession, which, by Grotius's confession, may attend upon elected Kings.

Though Grotius confess, that Supreme Power be Unum quiddam, and in it self
indivisible, yet he says, Sometimes it may be divided either by parts
potential, or subjunctive. I take his meaning to be, that the Government or the
Governed may be divided: an Example he gives of the Roman Empire, which was
divided, into the East and West: but whereas he says, fieri potest, etc. It
may be, the People choosing a King, may reserve some Actions to themselves, and
in others they may give full power to the King: The Example he brings out of
Plato of the Heraclides does not prove it, and it is to dream of such a Form of
Government as never yet had name, nor was ever found in any settled Kingdom,
nor cannot possibly be without strange Confusion.

If it were a thing so voluntary, and at the pleasure of men, when they were
free, to put themselves under Subjection, why may they not as voluntarily leave
Subjection when they please, and be free again? If they had a liberty to change
their Natural Freedom, into a voluntary Subjection, there is stronger reason
that they may change their voluntary Subjection into natural Freedom, since it
is as lawful for men to alter their Wills as their Judgments.

Certainly, it was a rare felicity, that all the men in the World at one
instant of time should agree together in one mind, to change the Natural
Community of all things into Private Dominion: for without such an unanimous
Consent, it was not possible for Community to be altered: for, if but one man
in the World had dissented, the Alteration had been unjust, because that Man by
the Law of Nature had a Right to the common Use of all things in the World; so
that to have given a Propriety of any one thing to any other, had been to have
robbed him of his Right to the common Use of all things. And of this Judgment
the Jesuit Lud. Molina seems to be, in his Book De Iustitia, where he says, Si
aliquis de cohabit antibus, etc. If one of the Neighbors will not give his
Consent to it, the Commonwealth should have no Authority over him, because then
every other man has no Right or Authority over him, and therefore can they not
give Authority to the Commonwealth over him.

If our first Parents, or some other of our Forefathers did voluntarily bring
in Propriety of Goods, and Subjection to Governors, and it were in their power
either to bring them in or not, or having brought them in, to alter their
minds, and restore them to their first condition of Community and Liberty; what
reason can there be alleged that men that now live should not have the same
power? So that if any one man in the World, be he never so mean or base, will
but alter his Will, and say, he will resume his Natural Right to Community, and
be restored unto his Natural Liberty, and consequently take what he please, and
do what he list; who can say that such a man does more than by Right he may?
And then it will be lawful for every man, when he please, to dissolve all
Government, and Destroy all Property.

Whereas Grotius says, That by the Law of Nature all things were at first
Common; and yet teaches, that after Propriety was brought in, it was against
the Law of Nature to use Community; He does thereby not only make the Law of
Nature changeable, which he says God cannot do, but he also makes the Law of
Nature contrary to it self.

THE ANARCHY OF A Limited or Mixed MONARCHY.

THE PREFACE.
WE do but flatter our selves, if we hope ever to be governed without an
Arbitrary Power. No: we mistake, the Question is not, Whether there shall be an
Arbitrary Power; but the only point is, Who shall have that Arbitrary Power,
whether one man or many? There never was, nor ever can be any People governed
without a Power of making Laws, and every Power of making Laws must be
Arbitrary: For to make a Law according to Law, is Contradictio in adjecto. It
is generally confessed, that in a Democracy the Supreme or Arbitrary Power of
making Laws is in a multitude; and so in an Aristocracy the like Legislative or
Arbitrary Power is in a few, or in the Nobility. And therefore by a necessary
Consequence, in a Monarchy the same Legislative Power must be in one; according
to the Rule of Aristotle, who says, Government is in One, or in a Few, or in
Many.

This ancient Doctrine of Government, in these latter days has been strangely
refined by the Romanists, and wonderfully improved since the Reformation,
especially in point of Monarchy, by an Opinion, That the People have Originally
a Power to create several sorts of Monarchy, to limit and compound them with
other Forms of Government, at their pleasure.

As for this natural Power of the People, they find neither Scripture, Reason,
or Practice to justify it: For though several Kingdoms have several and
distinct Laws one from another; yet that does not make several sorts of
Monarchy: Nor does the difference of obtaining the Supreme Power, whether by
Conquest, Election, Succession, or by any other way, make different sorts of
Government. It is the difference only of the Authors of the Laws, and not of
the Laws themselves, that alters the Form of Government; that is, whether one
man, or more than one, make the Laws.

Since the growth of this new Doctrine, Of the Limitation and Mixture of
Monarchy, it is most apparent, that Monarchy has been crucified (as it were)
between two Thieves, the Pope and the People; for what Principles the Papists
make use of for the Power of the Pope above Kings, the very same, by blotting
out the word Pope, and putting in the word People, the Plebists take up to use
against their Sovereigns.

If we would truly know what Popery is, we shall find by the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm, that the main, and indeed the only Point of Popery, is
the alienating and withdrawing of Subjects from their Obedience to their
Prince, to raise Sedition and Rebellion: If Popery and Popularity agree in this
Point, the Kings of Christendom, that have shaken off the Power of the Pope,
have made no great bargain of it, if in place of one Lord abroad, they get many
Lords at home within their own Kingdoms.

I cannot but reverence that Form of Government which was allowed and made use
of for God's own People, and for all other Nations. It were Impiety, to think
that God, who was careful to appoint Judicial Laws for his chosen People, would
not furnish them with the best Form of Government: or to imagine that the Rules
given in diverse places in the Gospel, by our blessed Savior and his Apostles,
for Obedience to Kings, should now, like Almanacks out of date, be of no use to
us; because it is pretended, We have a Form of Government now, not once thought
of in those days. It is a shame and scandal for us Christians, to seek the
Original of Government from the Inventions or Fictions of Poets, Orators,
Philosophers, and Heathen Historians, who all lived thousands of Years after
the Creation, and were (in a manner) ignorant of it: and to neglect the
Scriptures, which have with more Authority most particularly given us the true
Grounds and Principles of Government.

These Considerations caused me to scruple this Modern piece of Politics,
touching Limited and Mixed Monarchy: and finding no other that presented us
with the nature and means of Limitation and Mixture, but an Anonymus Author; I
have drawn a few brief Observations upon the most considerable part of his
Treatise, in which I desire to receive satisfaction from the Author himself,
if it may be, according to his promise in his Preface; or if not from him, from
any other for him.

THE ANARCHY. Of a Limited or Mixed MONARCHY.
THere is scarce the meanest man of the multitude, but can now in these days
tell us that the Government of the Kingdom of England is a LIMITED and MIXED
Monarchy: And it is no marvail, since all the disputes and arguments of these
distracted times both from the Pulpit and the Press to tend and end in this
Conclusion.

The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy has copiously handled the nature and
manner of Limited and Mixed Monarchy, and is the first and only man (that I
know) has undertaken the task of describing it; others only mention it, as
taking it for granted.

Doctor Fern gives the Author of this Treatise of Monarchy this testimony,
that the Mixture of Government is more accurately delivered P. 3.
and urged by this Treatise than by the Author of the Fuller Answer. And in
another place Doctor Fern says, he allows his distinction of Monarchy into
Limited and Mixed. P. 13.


I have with some diligence looked over this Treatise* but cannot approve of
these distinctions which he propounds; I submit the reasons of my dislike to
others judgments. I am somewhat confident that his doctrine of Limited and
Mixed Monarchy is an opinion but of yesterday, and of no antiquity, a mere
innovation in policy, not so old as New England, though calculated properly for
that Meridian. For in his first part of the Treatise which concerns Monarchy in
General, there is not one proof, text, or example in Scripture that he has
produced to justify his conceit of Limited and Mixed Monarchy. Neither does he
afford us so much as one passage or reason out of Aristotle, whose books of
Politics, and whose natural reasons are of greatest authority and credit with
all rational men, next to the sacred Scripture: Nay, I hope I may affirm, and
be able to prove, that Arist. does confute both limited and mixed Monarchy,
howsoever Doctor Fern think these new opinions to be raised upon P. 6.
Arist. principles. As for other Politicians or Historians, either divine or
humane, ancient or modern, our Author brings not one to confirm his opinions;
nor does he, nor can he show that ever any Nation or people were governed by a
limited or mixed Monarchy.

Machivel is the first in Christendom that I can find that writ of a Mixed
Government, but not one syllable of a Mixed Monarchy: he, in his discourses or
disputations upon the Decades of Livy, falls so enamored with the Roman
Commonwealth, that he thought he could never sufficiently grace that popular
government, unless he said, there was something of Monarchy in it: yet he was
never so impudent as to say, it was a mixed Monarchy. And what Machivel has
said for Rome, the like has Contarene for Venice. But Bodin has laid open
the errors of both these, as also of Polybius, and some few others that held
the like opinions. As for the Kingome of England, if it have found out a form
of Government (as the Treatise lays it down) of such perfection as never any
people could; It is both a glory to the Nation, and also to this Author, who
has first deciphered it.

I now make my approach to the Book it self: The title is, A Treatise of
Monarchy. The first part of it is, of Monarchy in General: Where first, I
charge the Author, that he has not given us any definition or description of
Monarchy in General: for by the rules of method he should have first defined,
and then divided: for if there be several sorts of Monarchy, then in something
they must agree, which makes them to be Monarchies; and in something they must
disagree and differ, which makes them to be several sorts of Monarchies. In the
first place he should have showed us in what they all agreed, which must have
been a definition of Monarchy in General, which is the foundation of the
Treatise; and except that be agreed upon, we shall argue upon we know not what.
I press not this main omission of our Author out of any humor of wrangling,
but because I am confident that had he pitched upon any definition of Monarchy
in General, his own definition would have confuted his whole Treatise: Besides,
I find him pleased to give us a handsome definition of Absolute Monarchy, from
whence I may infer, that he knew no other definition that would have fitted all
his other sorts of Monarchy; it concerned him to have produced it, lest it
might be thought there could be no Monarchy but Absolute.

What our Author has omitted, I shall attempt to supply, and leave to the
scanning. And it shall be a real as well as nominal definition of Monarchy. A
Monarchy is the Government of one alone. For the better credit of this
definition, though it be able to maintain it self, yet I shall deduce it from
the principles of our Author of the Treatise of Monarchy.

We all know that this word Monarch is compounded of two Greek words, (...) and
(...) is imperare, to govern and rule; (...) signifies one alone. The
understanding of these two words may be picked out of our Author. First, for
Government he teaches us, it is Potestatis exercitium, P. 1.
the exercise of a moral power; next he grants us, that every Monarch (even his
limited Monarch) must have the Supreme power of the State in him, so that his
power must no way be limited P. 12.
by any power above his; for then he were not a Monarch, but a subordinate
Magistrate. Here we have a fair confession of a supreme unlimited power in his
limited Monarch: if you will know what he means by these words supreme power,
turn to his 26 page, there you will find, Supreme power is either Legislative,
or Gubernative, and that the Legislative power is the chief of the two; he
makes both supreme, and yet one chief: the like distinction he has before,
where he says, The power of Magistracy, in respect of its degrees, is P. 5.
Nomothetical or Architectonical; and Gubernative or Executive: by these words
of Legislative, Nomothetical, and Architectonical power, in plain English, he
understands a power of making Laws; and by Gubernative and Executive, a power
of putting those Laws in execution, by judging and punishing offenders.

The result we have from hence is, that by the Authors acknowledgment, every
Monarch must have the supreme power, and that supreme power is, a power to make
laws: and howsoever the Author makes the Gubernative and Executive power a part
of the supreme power; yet he confesses the Legislative to be chief, or the
highest degree of power, for he does acknowledge degrees of supreme power; nay,
he afterward teaches us, that the Legislative power is the height of power,
to P. 40.
which the other parts are subsequent and subservient: if Gubernative be
subservient to Legislative, how can Gubernative power be supreme?

Now let us examime the Authors Limited Monarch by these his own rules; he
tells us, that in a moderated, limited, stinted, conditionate, P. 12.
legal or allayed Monarchy, (for all these terms he has for it) the supreme
power must be restrained by some Law according to which this power was given,
and by direction of which this power must act; when in a line before he said,
that the Monarchs power must not be limited by any power above his: yet here he
will have his supreme power restrained; not limited, and yet restrained: is not
a restraint, a limitation? and if restrained, how is it supreme? and if
restrained by some Law, is not the power of that Law, and of them that made
that Law, above his supreme power? and if by the direction of such Law only he
must govern, where is the Legislative power, which is the chief of supreme
power? When the Law must rule and govern the Monarch, and not the Monarch the
Law, he has at the most but a Gubernative or Executive power: If his authority
transcends P. 14.
its bounds, if it command beyond the law, and the Subject is not bound legally
to subjection in such cases, and if the utmost extent of the law of the land be
the measure of the Limited Monarchs power, and Subjects duty, where shall we
find P. 16.
the supreme power, that Culmen or apex potestatis, that prime (...), which our
Author says, must be in every Monarch: The word (...), which signifies
principality and power, does also signify principium, beginning; which does
teach us, that by the word Prince, or principality, the principium or beginning
of Government is meant; this, if it be given to the Law, it robs the Monarch,
and makes the Law the primum mobile; and so that which is but the instrument,
or servant to the Monarch, becomes the master. Thus much of the word (...).

The other word is (...), solus, one alone: the Monarch must not only have the
supreme power unlimited, but he must have it alone (without any companions.)
Our Author teaches P. 15.
us, He is no Monarch if the Supreme power be not in one. And again he says,
if you put P. 17.
the apex potestatis, or supreme power, in the whole body, or a part of it, you
destroy the being of Monarchy.

Now let us see if his mixed Monarchy be framed according to these his own
principles: First, he says, in a mixed Monarchy the sovereign power must be
originally in all three Estates. And again, his words are, The three Estates
are all sharers in the supreme power -- the primity of share in the supreme
power is in One. Here we find, that he that told us the supreme power must be
in one, will now allow his mixed Monarch but one share only of the supreme
power, and gives other shares to the Estates: thus he destroys the being of
Monarchy, by putting the supreme power, or culmen potestatis, or a part of it,
in the whole body, or a part thereof; and yet formerly he confesses, that the
power of Magistracy cannot well be divided, P. 5.
for it is one simple thing, or indivisable beam of divine perfection: but he
can make this indivisable beam to be divisable into three shares. I have done
with the word (...), solus, alone.

I have dwelt the longer upon this definition of Monarchy, because the
apprehending of it out of the Authors own grounds, quite overthrows both his
Monarch Limited by Law, and his Monarch Mixed with the States. For to Govern,
is to give a law to others, and not to have a Law given to Govern and limit him
that Governs: And to govern alone, is not to have sharers or companions mixed
with the Governor. Thus the two words of which Monarchy is compounded,
contradict the two sorts of Monarchy which he pleads for; and by consequence
his whole Treatise: for these two sorts of limited and mixed Monarchy take up
(in a manner) his whole Book.

I will now touch some few particular passages in the Treatise.

Our Author first confesses, it is Gods P. 2.
express ordinance there should be Government; and he proves it by Genesis 3. 16.
where God ordained Adam to rule over his Wife, and her desires were to be
subject to his; and as hers, so all theirs that should come of her. Here we
have the original grant of Government, and the fountain of all power placed in
the Father of all mankind; accordingly we find the law for obedience to
government given in the terms of honor thy Father: not only the constitution
of power in general, but the limitation of it to one kind (that is, to
Monarchy, or the government of one alone) and the determination of it to the
individual person and line of Adam, are all three ordinances of God. Neither
Eve nor her Children could either limit Adams power, or join others with him in
the government; and what was given unto Adam, was given in his person to his
posterity. This paternal power continued monarchical to the Flood, and after
the Flood to the confusion of Babel: when Kingdoms were first erected, planted,
or scattered over the face of the world, we find Genesis 10. 11. it was done by
Colonies of whole families, over which the prime Fathers had supreme power, and
were Kings, who were all the sons or grandchildren of Noah, from whom they
derived a fatherly and regal power over their families. Now if this supreme
power was settled and founded by God himself in the fatherhood, how is it
possible for the people to have any right or title to alter and dispose of it
otherwise? what commission can they show that gives them power either of
limitation or mixture? It was Gods ordinance, that Supremacy should be
unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the acts of his will: and as in him, so
in all others that have supreme power, as appears by the judgment and speech
of the people to Ioshuah when he was supreme Governor, these are their words
to him, All that thou command us we will do; whosoever he be that does rebel
against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou
command him, he shall be put to death: we may not say that these were evil
Councillors or flattering Courtiers of Ioshuah, or that he himself was a
Tyrant for having such arbitrary power. Our Author, and all those who affirm
that power is conveyed to persons by public consent, are forced to confess,
that it is the fatherly power that first inables a people to make such
conveyance; so that admitting (as they hold) that our Ancestors did at first
convey power, yet the reason why we now living do submit to such power, is, for
that our Forefathers every one for himself, his family, and posterity, had a
power of resigning up themselves and us to a supreme power. As the Scripture
teaches us that supreme power was originally in the fatherhood without any
limitation, so likewise Reason does evince it, that if God ordained that
Supremacy should be, that then Supremacy must of necessity be unlimited: for
the power that limits must be above that power which is limited; if it be
limited, it cannot be supreme: so that if our Author will grant supreme power
to be the ordinance of God, the supreme power will prove it self to be
unlimited by the same ordinance, because a supreme limited power is a
contradiction.

The Monarchical power of Adam the Father of all flesh, being by a general
binding ordinance settled by God in him and his posterity by right of
fatherhood, the form of Monarchy must be preferred above other forms, except
the like ordinance for other forms can be showed: neither may men according to
their relations to the form they live under, to their affections and judgments
in diverse respects, prefer or compare any other form with Monarchy. The point
that most perplexeth our Author and many others, is, that if Monarchy be
allowed to be the ordinance of God, an absurdity would follow, that we should
uncharitably condemn all the Communities which have not that form, for
violation of Gods ordinance, and pronounce those other powers unlawful. If
those who live under a Monarchy can justify the form they live under to be
Gods ordinance, they are not bound to forbear their own justification, because
others cannot do the like for the form they live under; let others look to the
defense of their own Government: if it cannot be proud or showed that any other
form of government had ever any lawful beginning, but was brought in or erected
by Rebellion, must therefore the lawful and just obedience to Monarchy be
denied to be the ordinance of God?

To proceed with our Author; in the 3 page he says, the Higher Power is Gods
ordinance: That it resideth in One or more, in such or such a way, is from
humane designment; God by no word binds any people to this or that form, till
they by their own act bind themselves. Because the power and consent of the
people in government is the burden of the whole Book, and our author expects it
should be admitted as a magisterial postulation, without any other proof than a
naked supposition; and since others also maintain that originally Power was, or
now is in the People, and that the first Kings were chosen by the People: they
may not be offended, if they be asked in what sense they understand the word [
People] because this, as many other words, has different acceptions, being
sometimes taken in a larger, otherwhiles in a stricter sense. Literally, and in
the largest sense, the word People signifies the whole multitude of mankind;
but figu^tively and synecdochically, it notes many times the ^ajor part of a
multitude, or sometimes the better, or the richer, or the wiser, or some other
part; and oftentimes a very small part of the people, if there be no other
apparent opposite party, has the name of the people by presumption.

If they understand that the entire multitude or whole people have originally
by nature power to choose a King, they must remember, that by their own
principles and rules, by nature all mankind in the world makes but one People,
who they suppose to be born alike to an equal freedom from subjection; and
where such freedom is, there ^ll things must of necessity be common: and
therefore without a joint consent of the whole people ^f the world, no one
thing can be made proper (...) any one man, but it will be an injury, and an
^urpation upon the common right of all others. from whence it follows, that
natural freedom be^ing once granted, there cannot be any one man ^osen a King
without the universal consent of all the people of the world at one instant,
nemine contradicente. Nay, if it be true that nature has made all men free;
though all mankind should concur in one vote, yet it cannot seem reasonable,
that they should have power to alter the law of nature; for if no man have
power to take away his own life without the guilt of being a murderer of
himself, how can any people confer such a power as they have not themselves
upon any one man, without being accessories to their own deaths, and every
particular man become guilty of being felo de se?

If this general signification of the word people be disavowed, and men will
suppose that the people of particular Regions or Countries have power and
freedom to choose unto themselves Kings; then let them but observe the
consequence: Since nature has not distinguished the habitable world into
Kingdoms, nor determined what part of a people shall belong to one Kingdom,
and what to another, it follows, that the original freedom of mankind being
supposed, every man is at liberty to be of what Kingdom he please, and so
every petty company has a right to make a Kingdom by it self; and not only
every City, but every Village, and every Family, nay and every particular man,
a liberty to choose himself to be his own King if he please; and he were a
madman that being by nature free, would choose any man but himself to be his own
Governor. Thus to avoid the having but of one King of the whole world, we
shall run into a liberty of having as many Kings as there be men in the world,
which upon the matter, is to have no King at all, but to leave all men to their
natural liberty, which is the mischief the Pleaders for natural liberty do
pretend they would most avoid.

But if neither the whole people of the world, nor the whole people of any part
of the world be meant, but only the major part, or some other part of a part of
the world; yet still the objection will be the stronger. For besides that
nature has made no partition of the world, or of the people into distict
Kingdoms, and that without an universal consent at one and the same instant no
partition can be made: yet if it were lawful for particular parts of the world
by consent to choose their Kings, nevertheless their elections would bind none
to subjection but only such as consented; for the major part never binds, but
where men at first either agree to be so bound, or where a higher power so
commands: Now there being no higher power than nature, but God himself; where
neither nature nor God appoints the major part to bind, their consent is not
binding to any but only to themselves who consent.

Yet, for the present to gratify them so far as to admit that either by
nature, or by a general consent of all mankind, the world at first was divided
into particular Kingdoms, and the major part of the people of each Kingdom
assembled, allowed to choose their King: yet it cannot truly be said that ever
the whole people, or the major part, or indeed any considerable part of the
whole people of any nation ever assembled to any such purpose. For except by
some secret miraculous instinct they should all meet at one time, and place,
what one man, or company of men less than the whole people has power to
appoint either time or place of elections, where all be alike free by nature?
and without a lawful summons, it is most unjust to bind those that be absent.
The whole people cannot summon it self; one man is sick, another is lame, a
third is aged, and a fourth is under age of discretion: all these at some time
or other, or at some place or other, might be able to meet, if they might choose
their own time and place, as men naturally free should.

In Assemblies that are by humane politic constitution, the superior power
that ordains such assemblies, can regulate and confine them, both for time,
place, persons, and other circumstances: but where there is an equality by
nature, there can be no superior power; there every Infant at the hour it is
born in, has a like interest with the greatest and wisest man in the world.
Mankind is like the sea, ever ebbing or flowing, every minute one is born,
another dies; those that are the people this minute, are not the people the
next minute, in every instant and point of time there is a variation no one
time can be indifferent for all mankind to assemble; it cannot but be
mischievous always at the least to all Infants, and others under age of
discretion; not to speak of women, especially Virgins, who by birth have as
much natural freedom as any other, and therefore ought not to lose their
liberty without their own consent.

But in part of salve this, it will be said that Infants and Children may be
concluded by the votes of their Parents. This remedy may cure some part of the
mischief, but it destroys the whole cause* and at last stumbles upon the true
original of government. For if it be allowed, that the acts of Parents bind the
Children, then farewell the doctrine of the natural freedom of mankind; where
subjection of Children to Parents is natural, there can be no natural freedom.
If any reply, that not all Children shall be bound by their Parents consent,
but only those that are under age: It must be considered, that in nature there
is no nonage; if a man be not born free, she does not assign him any other time
when he shall attain his freedom: or if she did, then Children attaining that
age, should be discharged of their Parents contract. So that in conclusion, if
it be imagined that the people were ever but once free from subjection by
nature, it will prove a mere impossibility ever lawfully to introduce any kind
of government whatsoever, without apparent wrong to a multitude of people.

It is further observable, that ordinarily Children and Servants are far a
greater number than Parents and Masters; and for the major part of these to be
able to vote and appoint what Government or Governors their Fathers and
Masters shall be subject unto, is most unnatural, and in effect to give the
Children the government over their Parents.

To all this it may be opposed, What need dispute how a people can choose a
King, since there be multitude of examples that Kings have been, and are now
adays chosen by their people? The answer is, 1. The question is not of the
fact, but of the right, whether it have been done by a natural, or by an
usurped right. 2. Many Kings are, and have bin chosen by some small part of a
people; but by the the whole, or major part of a Kingdom not any at all. Most
have been elected by the Nobility, Great men, and Princes of the blood, as in
Poland, Denmark, and in Sweden; not by any collective or representative body
of any Nation: sometimes a sactious or seditious City, or a mutinous Army has
set up a King, but none of all those could ever prove they had right or just
title either by nature, or any otherwise, for such elections. We may resolve
upon these two propositions: 1. That the people have no power or right of
themselves to choose Kings. 2. If they had any such right, it is not possible
for them any way lawfully to exercise it.

You will say, There must necessarily be a right in somebody to elect, in case
a King die without an Heir. I answer, No King can die without an Heir, as long
as there is any one man living in the world. It may be the Heir may be unknown
to the people; but that is no fault in nature, but the negligence or ignorance
of those whom it concerns. But if a King could die without an Heir, yet the
Kingly power in that case shall not escheat to the whole people, but to the
supreme Heads and Fathers of Families; not as they are the people, but quatenus
they are Fathers of people, over whom they have a supreme power devolved unto
them after the death of their sovereign Ancestor: and if any can have a right
to choose a King, it must be these Fathers, by conferring their distinct
fatherly powers upon one man alone. Chief fathers in Scripture are accounted as
all the people, as all the Children of Israel, as all the Congregation, as the
Text plainly expounds it self, 2 Chr. 1. 2. where Solomon speaks to All Israel,
that is, to the Captains* the Judges, and to every Governor, the CHIEF OF THE
FATHERS: and so the Elders of Israel are expounded to be the chief of the
Fathers of the Children of Israel, 1 King. 8. 1. and the 2 Chr. 5. 2.

If it be objected, That Kings are not now (as they were at the first planting
or peopling of the world) the Fathers of their People or Kingdoms, and that the
fatherhood has lost the right of governing; An answer is, That all Kings that
now are, or ever were, are, or were either Fathers of their people, or the
Heirs of such Fathers, or Usurpers of the right of such Fathers. It is a truth
undeniable, that there cannot be any multitude of men whatsoever, either great,
or small, though gathered together from the several corners and remotest
regions of the world, but that in the same multitude, considered by it self,
there is one man amongst them that in nature has a right to be the King of all
the rest, as being the next Heir to Adam, and all the others subject unto him:
every man by nature is a King, or a Subject: the obedience which all Subjects
yield to Kings, is but the paying of that duty which is due to the supreme
fatherhood: Many times by the act either of an Usurper himself, or of those
that set him up, the true Heir of a Crown is dispossessed, God using the
ministry of the wickedest men for the removing and setting up of Kings: in such
cases the Subjects obedience to the fatherly power must go along and wait upon
Gods providence, who only has right to give and take away Kingdoms, and
thereby to adopt Subjects into the obedience of another fatherly power:
according to that of Arist. (...) A Monarchy or Kingdom will be a fatherly
government. Ethic. l. 8. c. 12.

However the natural freedom of the people be cried up as the sole means to
determine the kind Government and the Governors: yet in the close, all the
favorers of this opinion are constrained to grant that the obedience which is
due to the fatherly power is the true and only cause of the subjection which we
that are now living give to Kings, since none of us gave consent to government,
but only our Forefathers act and consent has concluded us.

Whereas many confess that Government only in the abstract is the ordinance of
God, they are not able to prove any such ordinance in the Scripture, but only
in the fatherly power, and therefore we find the Commandment that enjoins
obedience to superiors, given in the terms of Honor thy Father: so that not
only the power or right of government, but the form of the power of governing,
and the person having that power, are all the ordinance of God: the first
Father had not only simply power, but power Monarchical, as he was a Father,
immediately from God. For by the appointment of God, as soon as Adam was
created he was Monarch of the World, though he had no subjects; for though
there could not be actual government until there were Subjects, yet by the
right of nature it was due to Adam to be Governor of his posterity: though not
in act, yet at least in habit, Adam was a King from his Creation: And in the
state of innocence he had been Governor of his Children; for the integrity or
excellency of the subjects does not take away the order or eminency of the
Governor. Eve was subject to Adam before he sinned; the Angels, who are of a
pure nature, are subject to God: which confutes their saying, who in disgrace
of civil Government or power say it was brought in by sin: Government as to
coactive power was after sin, because coaction supposes some disorder, which
was not in the state of innocence: But as for directive power, the condition of
humane nature requires it, since civil society cannot be imagined without power
of Government: for although as long as men continued in the state of innocence
they might not need the direction of Adam in those things which were
necessarily and morally to be done; yet things indifferent, that depended
merely on their free will, might be directed by the power of Adams command.

If we consider the first plantations of the world which were after the
building of Babel when the confusion of tongues was, we may find the division
of the earth into distinct Kingdoms and Countries, by several families,
whereof the Sons or Grandchildren of Noah were the Kings or Governors by a
fatherly right; and for the preservation of this power and right in the
Fathers, God was pleased upon several Families to bestow a Language on each by
it self, the better to unite it into a Nation or Kingdom; as appears by the
words of the Text, Genesis 10. These are the Families of the Sons of Noah, after
their generations in their Nations, and by these were the Nations divided in
the earth after the flood: Every one after HIS TONGUE, AFTER THEIR FAMILIES in
their Nations.

The Kings of England have been graciously pleased to admit and accept the
Commons in Parliament as the representees of the Kingdom, yet really and truly
they are not the representative body of the whole Kingdom.

The commons in Parliament are not the representative body of the whole
Kingdom; they do not represent the King, who is the head and principal member
of the Kingdom; nor do they represent the Lords, who are the nobler and higher
part of the body of the Realm, and are personally present in Parliament, and
therefore need no representation. The Commons only represent a part of the
lower (...) inferior part of the body of the People, which are the Freeholders
worth 40 s. by the year, and the Commons or Freemen of Cities and Buroughs,
or the major part of them. All which are not one quarter, nay, not a tenth part
of the Commons of the Kingdom; for in every Parish, for one Freeholder there
may be found ten that are no Freeholders: and anciently before Rents were
improved, there were nothing near so many Freeholders of 40 s. by the year as
now are to be found.

The scope and Conclusion of this discourse and Argument is, That the people
taken in what notion or sense soever, either diffusively, collectively, or
representatively, have not, nor cannot exercise any right or power of their own
by nature, either in choosing or in regulating Kings. But whatsoever power any
people does lawfully exercise, it must receive it from a supreme power on
earth, and practice it with such limitations as that superior power shall
appoint. To return to our Author.

He divides Monarchy into
Absolute, Limited.
Absolute Monarchy (says he) is, when the P. 6.
Sovereignty is so fully in one, that it has no limits or bounds under God but
his own will. This definition of his I embrace. And as before I charged our
Author for not giving us a definition of Monarchy in general, so I now note him
for not affording us any definition of any other particular and of Monarchy but
only of absolute: it may peradventure make some doubt that there is no other
sort but only that which he calls absolute.

Concerning absolute Monarchy, he grants, that such were the ancient Eastern
Monarchies, and that of the Turk and Persian at this day. Herein he says very
true. And we must remember him, though he do not mention them, that the
Monarchs of Judah and Israel must be comprehended under the number of those he
calls the Eastern Monarchies: and truly if he had said that all the ancient
Monarchies of the world had been absolute, I should not have quarreld at him,
^or do I know who could have disproved him.

Next it follows, that Absolute Monarchy is, when (...) people are absolutely
resigned up, or resign up themselves to be governed by the will of One man
Where men put themselves into this utmost degree of subjection by oath and
contract, or are born and brought unto it by Gods providence. In both these
places he acknowledges there may be other means of obtaining a Monarchy,
besides the contract of a Nation or peoples resigning up themselves to be
governed, which is contrary to what he after says, that the sole mean or root
of all Sovereignty, is P. 12.
the consent and fundamental contract of a Nation of men.

Moreover, the Author determines, that Absolute Monarchy is a lawful
government, and that men may be born and brought unto it by Gods providence; it
binds them, and they must abide it, because an oath to a lawful thing is
obligatory. This Position of his I approve, but his Reason does not satisfy;
for men are bound to obey a lawful Governor, though neither they nor their
Ancestors ever took oath.

Then he proceeds, and confesses that in Romans 13. the power which then was,
was Absolute: P. 7.
yet the Apostle not excluding it, calls it Gods ordinance, and commands
subjection to it. So Christ commands Tribute to be paid, and pays it himself;
yet it was an arbitrary tax, the production of an absolute power. These are the
loyal expressions of our Author touching absolute or arbitrary Monarchy. I do
the rather mention these passages of our Author, because very many in these
days do not stick to maintain, that an arbitrary or Absolute Monarch not
limited by law, is all one with a Tyrant; and to be governed by one man's will,
is to be made a slave. It is a question whether our Author be not of that
mind, when he says, absolute subjection is servitude: and thereupon a late
friend to limited Monarchy affirms in a discourse upon the question in debate
bebetween P. 54.
the King and Parliament, That to make a King by the standard of Gods word, is
to make the Subjects slaves for conscience sake. A hard saying, and I doubt
whether he that gives this censure can be excused from blasphemy. It is a bold
speech, to condemn all the Kings of Judah for Tyrants, or to say all their
Subjects were slaves. But certainly the man does not know neither what a Tyrant
is, or what a Slave is: indeed the words ^re frequent enough in every man's
mouth, and our old English Translation of the Bible uses sometimes the word
Tyrant; but the Authors of our new Translation have been so careful, as not
once to use the word, but only for the proper name of a man, Act. 19. 9.
because they find no Hebrew word in the Scripture to signify a Tyrant or a
Slave. Neither Aristotle, Bodin, nor Sir Walter Rawleigh, (who were all men of
deep judgment) can agree in a definition or description of Tyranny, though
they have all three labored in the point. And I make some question whether any
man can possibly describe what a Tyrant is, and then tell me any one man that
ever was in the world that was a Tyrant according to that description.

I return again to our Treatise of Monarchy, where I find three DEGREES of
absolute Monarchy.

1. Where the Monarch, whose will is the law, does set himself no law to rule
by, but by commands of his (...) judgment as he thinks fit. 2. When he sets a
law by which he will ordina^ily govern, reserving to himself a liberty to vary
from it as often as in his discretion he thinks FIT; and in this the Sovereign is
as free as the former. 3. Where he not only sets a rule, but promises in many
cases not to alter it; but this promise or engagement is an after-condescent or
act of grace, not dissolving the absolute Oath of subjection which went before
it.
For the first of these three, there is no question but it is a pure absolute
Monarchy; but as for the other two, though he say they be absolute, yet in
regard they set themselves limits or laws to govern by, if it please our Author
to term them limited Monarchs, I will not oppose him; yet I must tell him, that
his third degree of absolute Monarchy is such a kind, as I believe, never has
been, nor ever can be in the world. For a Monarch to promise and engage in many
cases not to alter a law, it is most necessary that those many cases should be
particularly expressed at the bargain making. Now he that understands the
nature and condition of all humane laws, knows that particular cases are
infinite, and not comprehensible within any rules or laws: and if many cases
should be comprehended, and many omitted, yet even those that were comprehended
would admit of variety of interpretations and disputations; therefore our
Author does not, nor can tell us of any such reserved cases promised by any
Monarch.

Again, where he says, An after-condescent or Act of grace does not dissolve
the absolute Oath of subjection which went before it; though in this he speak
true, yet still he seems to insinuate, that an Oath only binds to subjection,
which Oath, as he would have us believe, was at first arbitrary: whereas
Subjects are bound to obey Monarchs though they never take oath of subjection,
as well as childen are bound to obey their parents, though they never swear to
do it.

Next, his distincton between the rule of power, and the exercise of it, is
vain; for to rule, P. 7. P. 1.
is to exercise power: for himself says, that Government is potestatis
exercitium, the exercise of a moral power*

Lastly, whereas our Author says, a Monarch cannot break his promise without
sin; let me add, that if the safety of the people, salus populi, require a
breach of the Monarchs promise, then the sin, if there be any, is rather in the
making, than breaking of the promise; the safety of the people is an exception
implied in every Monarchical promise.

But it seems these three degrees of Monarchy do not satisfy our Author; he is
not content to have a Monarch have a Law or rule to govern by, but he must have
this limitation or P. 12.
law to be ab externo, from somebody else, and not from the determination of
the Monarchs own will; and therefore he says, By original constitution the
society public confers on one man a power by limited contract, resigning
themselves to be governed by such a Law: also before he told us, the P. 13.
sole means of Sovereignty is the consent and fundamental contract; which
consent puts them in their power, which can be no more nor other than is
con^eyed to them by such contract of subjection. If the sole means of a limited
Monarchy be the consent and fundamental contract of a Nation, how is it that he
says, A Monarch may be limited by aftercondescent? is an after-condescent all
one with a fundamental contract, with original and radical constitution? why
yea: he tells us it is a secundary original constitution, a secundary original,
that is, a second first: And if that condescent be an act of grace, does not
this condescent to a limitation come from the free determination of the
Monarchs will? If he either formally, or virtually (as our Author supposes)
desert his absolute or arbitrary power which he has by conquest, or other
right.

And if it be from the free will of the Monarch, why does he say the limitation
must be ab externo? he told us before, that subjection P. 8.
cannot be dissolved or lessened by an Act of grace coming afterward: but he
has better bethought himself, and now he will have acts of grace to be of two
kinds, and the latter kind may amount (as he says) to a resignation of
absolute Monarchy. But can any man believe that a Monarch who by conquest or
other right has an absolute arbitrary power, will voluntarily resign that
absoluteness, and accept so much power only as the people shall please to give
him, and such laws to govern by as they shall make choice of? can he show that
ever any Monarch was so gracious or kind-hearted as to lay down his lawful
power freely at his Subjects feet? is it not sufficient grace if such an
absolute Monarch be content to set down a Law to himself by which he will
ordinarily govern, but he must needs relinquish his old independent commission,
and take a new one from his Subjects, clogged with limitations?

Finally, I observe, that howsoever our Author speak big of the radical,
fundamental, and original power of the people as the root of all Sovereignty:
yet in a better mood he will take up, and be contented with a Monarchy limited
by an aftercondescent and act of grace from the Monarch himself.

Thus I have briefly touched his grounds of Limited Monarchy; if now we shall
ask, what proof or examples he has to justify his doctrine, he is as mute as
a fish: only Pythagoras has said it, and we must believe him; for though our
Author would have Monarchy to be limited, yet he could be content his opinion
should be absolute, and not limited to any rule or example.

The main Charge I have against our Author now remains to be discussed; and it
is this, That instead of a Treatise of Monarchy, he has brought forth a
Treatise of Anarchy, and that by his own confessions shall be made good.

First, he holds, A limited Monarch transcends his bounds if he commands beyond
the law; and the Subject legally is not bound to subjection in such cases.

Now if you ask the Author who shall be judge whether the Monarch transcend his
bounds, and of the excesses of the sovereign power; His answer is, There is an
impossibility of constituting P. 16.
a judge to determine this last controversy. -- I conceive in a limited legal
P. 17.
Monarchy there can be no stated internal Judge of the Monarchs actions, if
there grow a fundamental ^riance betwixt him and the community. There can be no
Judge legal and constituted within that form of government. In these answers it
appears, there is no Judge to determine the Sovereigns or the Monarchs
transgressing his fundamental limits: yet our Author is very cautelous, and
supposes only a fundamental variance betwixt the Monarch and the Community;
he is ashamed to put the question home. I demand of him if there be a variance
betwixt the Monarch and any of the meanest persons of the Community, who shall
be the Judge? for instance, The King commands me, or gives judgment against
me: I reply, His commands are illegal, and his judgment not according to Law:
who must judge? if the Monarch himself judge, then you destroy the frame of the
State, and make it absolute, says our Author; and he gives his reason: for, to
define a Monarch to a Law, and then to make him judge of his own deviations
from that Law, is to absolve him from all Law. On the other side, if any, or
all the people may judge, then you put the Sovereignty in the whole body, or
part of it, and destroy the being of Monarchy. Thus our Author has caught
himself in a plain dilemma: If the King be judge, then he is no limited
Monarch; If the people be judge, then he is no Monarch at all. So farewell
limited Monarchy, nay farewell all government if there be no Judge.

Would you know what help our Author has found out for this mischief? First,
he says, that a Subject is bound to yield to a Magistrate, P, 14.
when he cannot, de jure, challenge obedience, if it be in a thing in which he
can possibly without subversion, and in which his act may not be made a leading
case, and so bring on a prescription against public liberty: Again he says,
If the act in which the exorbitance or transgression P. 17.
of the Monarch is supposed to be, b^ of lesser moment, and not striking at the
very being of that Government, it ought to be born by public patience, rather
than to endanger the being of the State. The like words he uses in another
place, saying, If the will of the Monarch P. 49.
exceed the limits of the law, it ought to b^ submitted to, so it be not
contrary to Gods Law nor bring with it such an evil to our selves, or the
public, that we cannot be accessory to it by obeying. These are but fig leaves
to cover the nakedness of our Authors limited Monarch, formed upon weak
supposals in cases of lesser moment. For if the Monarch be to govern only
according to Law, no transgression of his can be of so small moment if he break
the bounds of Law, but it is a subversion of the government it self, and may be
made a leading case, and so bring on a prescription against public liberty; it
strikes at the very being of the Government, and brings with it such an evil,
as the party that suffers, or the public cannot be accessory to: let the case
be never so small, yet if there be illegality in the act, it strikes ^t the
very being of limited Monarchy, which is to be legal: unless our Author will
say, as in effect he does, That his limited Monarch must govern according to
Law in great and public matters only, and that in smaller matters which
concern private men, or poor persons, he may rule according to his own will.

Secondly, our Author tells us, if the Monarchs P. 17.
act of exorbitancy or transgression be mortal, and such as suffered dissolves
the frame of Government and public liberty, then the illegality is to be s^t
open, and redresment sought by petition; which if failing, prevention by
resistance ought to be: and if it be apparent, and appeal be made to the
consciences of mankind, then the fundamental Laws of that Monarchy must judge
and pronounce the sentence in every man's conscience, and every man (so far as
concerns him) must follow the evidence of Truth in his own soul to oppose or
not to oppose, according as he can in conscience acquit or condemn the act of
the governor or Monarch.

Whereas my Author requires, that the destructive nature of illegal commands
should be set open: Surely his mind is, That each private man in his particular
case should make a public remonstrance to the world of the illegal act of the
Monarch; and then if upon his Petition he cannot be relieved according to his
desire, he ought, or it is his duty to make resistance. Here I would know, who
can be the judge whether the illegality be made apparent? it is a main point,
since every man is prone to flatter himself in his own cause, and to think it
good, and that the wrong or injustice he suffers is apparent, when other
moderate and indifferent men can discover no such thing: and in this case the
judgment of the common people cannot be gathered or known by any possible
means; or if it could, it were like to be various and erroneous.

Yet our Author will have an appeal made to the conscience of all Mankind, and
that being made, he concludes, The fundamental Laws must judge, and pronounce
sentence in every man's conscience. Whereas he says, The Fundamental Laws P. 18.
must judge; I would very gladly learn of him, or of any other for him, what a
Fundamental Law is, or else have but any one Law named me that any man can say
is a Fundamental Law of the Monarchy. I confess he tells us, that the Common
Laws are the foundation, and P. 38.
the Statute Laws are superstructive; yet I think he dares not say that there
is any one branch or part of the Common Law, but that it may be taken away by
an act of Parliament: for many points of the Common Law (de facto) have, and
(de jure) any point may be taken away. How can that be called Fundamental,
which has and may be removed, and yet the Statute-Laws stand firm and stable?
It is contrary to the nature of Fundamental, for the building to stand when the
foundation is taken away.

Besides, the Common Law is generally acknowledged to be nothing else but
common usage or custom, which by length of time only obtains authority: So
that it follows in time after Government, but cannot go before it, and be the
rule to Government, by any original or radical constitution.

Also the Common Law being unwritten, doubtful, and difficult, cannot but be an
uncertain rule to govern by; which is against the nature of a rule, which is
and ought to be certain.

Lastly, by making the common Law only to be the foundation, Magna Charta is
excluded from being a Fundamental Law, and also all other Statutes from being
limitations to Monarchy, since the Fundamental Laws only are to be judge.

Truly the conscience of all Mankind is a pretty large Tribunal for the
Fundamental Laws to pronounce sentence in. It is very much that Laws which in
their own nature are dumb, and always need a Judge to pronounce sentence,
should now be able to speak, and pronounce sentence themselves: such a sentence
surely must be upon the hearing of one party only; for it is impossible for a
Monarch to make his defense and answer, and produce his witnesses, in every
man's conscience, in each man's cause, who will but question the legality of the
Monarchs Government. Certainly the sentence cannot but be unjust, where but one
man's tale is heard. For all this, the conclusion is, Every man must oppose or
not oppose the Monarch according to his own conscience. Thus at the last, every
man is brought, by this Doctrine of our Authors, to be his own judge. And I
also appeal to the consciences of all mankind, whether the end of this be not
utter confusion, and Anarchy.

Yet after all this, the Author says, This power of every man's judging the
illegal P. 18.
acts of the Monarch, argues not a superiority of those who judge over him who
is judged; and he gives a profound reason for it; his words are, It is not
authoritative and civil, but moral, residing in reasonable creatures, and
lawful for them to execute. What our Author means by these words, (not
authoritative and civil, but moral) perhaps I understand not, though I think I
do; yet it serves my turn that he says, that resistance ought to be made, and
every man must oppose or not oppose, according as in conscience he can acquit
or condemn the acts of his Governor; for if it enable a man to resist and
oppose his Governor, without question it is authoritative and civil. Whereas he
adds, that moral judgment is residing in reasonable creatures, and lawful for
them to execute; he seems to imply, that authoritative, and civil judgment
does not reside in reasonable creatures, nor can be lawfully executed: Such a
conclusion fits well with Anarchy; for he that takes away all Government, and
leaves every man to his own conscience, and so makes him an independent in
State, may well teach that authority resides not in reasonable creatures, nor
can be lawfully executed.

I pass from his absolute and limited Monarchy, to his division or partition
(for he allows no division) of Monarchy into simple and mixed, viz. of a
Monarch, the Nobility, and Community.

Where first, observe a doubt of our Authors, whether a firm union can be in a
mixture P. 25.
of equality; he rather thinks there must be a priority of order in one of the
three, or else there can be no unity. He must know, that priority of order does
not hinder, but that there may be an equality of mixture, if the shares be
equal; for he that has the first share may have no more than the others: so
that if he will have an inequality of mixture, a primity of share will not
serve the turn: the first share must be greater or better than the others, or
else they will be equal, and then he cannot call it a mixed Monarchy, where
only a primity of share in the Supreme power is in one: but by his own
confession he may better call it a mixed Aristocracy or mixed Democracy, than a
mixed Monarchy, since he tells us, the Houses of P. 56.
Parliament sure have two parts of the greatest legislative authority; and if
the King have but a third part, sure their shares are equal.

The first step our Author makes, is this, The sovereign power must be
originally in all three* next he finds, that if there be an equality of shares
in three Estates, there can be no ground to denominate a Monarch; and then his
mixed Monarch might be thought but an empty title: Therefore in the third place
he resolves us, that to salve all, A power must be sought out wherewith the
Monarch P. 25.
must be invested, which is not so great as to destroy the mixture, nor so
titular as to destroy the Monarchy; and therefore he conceives it may be in
these particulars.

First, a Monarch in a mixed Monarchy may be said to be a Monarch (as he
conceives) P. 26.
if he be the head and fountain of the power which governs and executes the
established Laws; that is, a man may be a Monarch, though he do but give power
to others to govern and execute the established Laws: thus he brings his
Monarch one step or peg* lower still than he was before: at first he made us
believe his Monarch should have the supreme power, which is the legislative;
then he falls from that, and tells us, A limited Monarch must govern according
to Law only; thus he is brought from the legislative to the gubernative or
executive power only; nor does he stay here, but is taken a hole lower, for
now he must not govern, but he must constitute Officers to govern by Laws; if
choosing Officers to govern be governing, then our Author will allow his Monarch
to be a Governor, not else: and therefore he that divided Supreme power into
legislative and gubernative, does now divide it into legislative, and power of
constituting Officers for governing by Laws; and this he says is left to the
Monarch. Indeed you have left him a fair portion of power, but are we sure he
may enjoy this? it seems our Author is not confident in this neither, and some
others do deny it him: our Author speaking of the government of this Kingdom,
says, The choice of the Officers is entrusted to the judgment P. 38.
of the Monarch for ought I know: he is not resolute in the point; but for
ought he knows, and for ought I know, his Monarch is but titular, an empty
title, certain of no power at all.

The power of choosing Officers only, is the basest of all powers. Aristotle
(as I remember) says, The common people are fit for nothing but to choose
Officers, and to take accounts: and indeed, in all popular governments the
multitude perform this work: and this work in a King puts him below all his
Subjects, and makes him the only subject in a Kingdom, or the only man that
cannot Govern: there is not the poorest man of the multitude but is capable of
some Office or other, and by that means may sometime or other perhaps govern
according to the Laws; only the King can be no Officer, but to choose Officers;
his Subjects may all Govern, but he may not.

Next, I cannot see how in true sense our Author can say, his Monarch is the
head and fountain of power, since his doctrine is, that in a limited Monarchy,
the public society by original constitution confer on one man power: is not
then the public society the head and fountain of power, and not the King?

Again, when he tells us of his Monarch, that both the other States, as well
conjunctim as divisim, be his sworn subjects, and owe obedience to his
commands: he does but flout his poor Monarch; for why are they called his
Subjects and his Commons? he (without any complement) is their Subject; for
they, as Officers, may govern and command according to Law: but he may not, for
he must judge by his judges in Courts of Justice only: that is, he may not
judge or govern at all.

2. As for the second particular, The sole or chief power in capacitating
persons for the Supreme power. And

3. As to this third particular, The power of convocating such persons, they
are both so far from making a Monarch, that they are the only way to make him
none, by choosing and calling others to share in the Supreme power.

4. Lastly, concerning his Authority being the last and greatest in the
establishing every Act, it makes him no Monarch, except he be sole that has
that Authority; neither his primity of share in the Supreme power, nor his
Authority being last, no, nor his having the greatest Authority, does make him
a Monarch, unless he have that Authority alone.

Besides, how can he show that in his mixed Monarchy the Monarchs power is the
greatest? The greatest share that our Author allows him in the Legislative
power, is a Negative voice, and the like is allowed to the Nobility and
Commons: And truly, a Negative voice is but a base term to express a
Legislative power; a Negative voice is but a privative power, or indeed, no
power at all to do any thing, only a power to hinder an Act from being done.

Wherefore I conclude, not any of his four, nor all of them put into one
person, P. 26.
makes the State Monarchical.

This mixed Monarchy, just like the limited, ends in confusion and destruction
of all Government: you shall hear the Authors confession, That one
inconvenience must necessarily be in all mixed P. 28.
Governments, which I showed to be in limited Governments; there can be no
constituted legal Authoritative Judge of the Fundamental Controversies arising
between the three Estates: If such do rise, it is the fatal disease of those
Governments, for which no salve can be applied It is a case beyond the possible
provision of such a Government; of this question there is no legal judge. The
accusing side must make it evident to every man's Conscience. -- The appeal must
be to the community, as if there were no Government; and as by evidence
Consciences are convinced, they are bound to give their assistance. The wit of
man cannot say more for Anarchy.

Thus have I picked out the flowers out of his Doctrine about limited Monarchy,
and presented them with some brief Annotations; it were a tedious work to
collect all the learned contradictions, and ambiguous expressions that occur in
every page of his Platonic Monarchy; the Book has so much of fancy, that it
is a better piece of Poetry then Policy.

Because many may think, that the main Doctrine of limited and mixed Monarchy
may in it self be most authentical, and grounded upon strong and evident
reason, although our Author perhaps have failed in some of his expressions, and
be liable to exceptions: Therefore I will be bold to enquire, whether Aristotle
could find either reason or example, of a limited or mixed Monarchy; and the
rather, because I find our Author altogether insists upon a rational way of
justifying his opinion. No man I think will deny, but that Aristotle was
sufficiently curious in searching out the several forms of Commonwealths and
Kingdoms; yet I do not find, that he ever so much as dreamed of either a
limited or mixed Monarchy. Several other sorts of Monarchies he reckons up: in
the Third Book of his Politics, he spends three whole Chapters together, upon
the several kinds of Monarchy.

First, in his fourteenth Chapter he mentions four kinds of Monarchy.

The Laconique or Lacedemonian. The Barbarique. The Aesymnetical. The Heroique.
The Laconique or Lacedemonian King, (says he) had only Supreme power when he
was out of the bounds of the Lacedemonian Territories; then he had absolute
power, his Kingdom was like to a perpetual Lord General of an Army.

The Barbarique King (says Aristotle) had a power very near to Tyranny; yet
they were lawful and Paternal, because the Barbarians are of a more servile
nature than the Grecians, and the Asiatiques than the Europeans; they do
willingly, without repining, live under a Masterly Government; yet their
Government is stable and safe, because they are Paternal and lawful Kingdoms,
and their Guards are Royal and not Tyrannical: for Kings are guarded by their
own Subjects, and Tyrants are guarded by Strangers.

The Aesymnetical King (says Arist.) in old time in Greece, was an Elective
Tyrant, and differed only from the Barbarian Kings, in that he was Elective
and not Paternal; these sorts of Kings, because they were Tyrannical, were
Masterly; but because they were over such as voluntarily Elected them, they
were Regal.

The Heroique were those (says Aristotle) which flourished in the Heroical
times, to whom the people did willingly obey; and they were Paternal and
lawful, because these Kings did deserve well of the multitude, either by
teaching them Arts, or by Warring for them, or by gathering them together when
they were dispersed, or by dividing Lands amongst them: these Kings had Supreme
power in War, in Sacrifices, in Judicature.

These four sorts of Monarchy has Aristotle thus distinguished, and after sums
them up together, and concludes his Chapter as if he had forgot himself, and
reckons up a fifth kind of Monarchy; which is, says he, When one alone has
Supreme power of all the rest: for as there is a domestical Kingdom of one
house, so the Kingdom of a City, or of one or many Nations, is a Family.

These are all the sorts of Monarchy that Aristotle has found out, and he has
strained hard to make them so many: first, for his Lacedemonian King, himself
confesses that he was but a kind of Military Commander in War, and so in
effect no more a King than all Generals of Armies: And yet this No-king of his
was not limited by any Law, nor mixed with any companions of his Government:
when he was in the Wars out of the Confines of Lacedemon, he was, as Aristotle
styles him, (...), of full and absolute command, no Law, no companion to govern
his Army but his own will.

Next, for Aristotle's Aesymnetical King, it appears, he was out of date in
Aristotle's time, for he says, he was amongst the ancient Greeks, (...)
Aristotle might well have spared the naming him, (if he had not wanted other
sorts) for the honor of his own Nation: for he that but now told us the
Barbarians were of a more servile nature than the Grecians, comes here, and
tells us, that these old Greek Kings were Elective Tyrants. The Barbarians did
but suffer Tyrants in show, but the old Grecians chose Tyrants indeed; which
then must we think were the greater slaves, the Greeks or the Barbarians? Now
if these sorts of Kings were Tyrants, we cannot suppose they were limited
either by Law, or joined with companions: Indeed Arist. says, some of these
Tyrants were limited to certain times and actions, for they had not all their
power for term of life, nor could meddle but in certain businesses; yet during
the time they were Tyrants, and in the actions whereto they were limited, they
had absolute power to do what they list according to their own will, or else
they could not have been said to be Tyrants.

As for Aristotle's Heroic King, he gives the like note upon him, that he did
upon the Aesymnet, that he was in old time (...) in the Heroic times. The
thing that made these Heroical Kingdoms differ from other sorts of Kingdoms,
was only the means by which the first Kings obtained their Kingdoms, and not
the manner of Government, for in that they were as absolute as other Kings
were, without either limitation by Law, or mixture of companions.

Lastly, as for Arist. Barbarick sort of Kings, since he reckoned all the world
Barbarians except the Grecians, his Barbarick King must extend to all other
sorts of Kings in the world, besides those of Greece, and so may go under
Aristotle's fifth sort of Kings, which in general comprehends all other sorts,
and is no special form of Monarchy.

Thus upon a true account it is evident, that the five several sorts of Kings
mentioned by Aristotle, are at the most but different and accidental means of
the first obtaining or holding of Monarchies, and not real or essential
differences of the manner of Government, which was always absolute, without
either limitation or mixture.

I may be thought perhaps to mistake, or wrong Aristotle, in questioning his
diversities of Kings; but it seems Aristotle himself was partly of the same
mind; for in the very next Chapter, when he had better considered of the point,
he confessed, that to speak the truth, there were almost but two sorts of
Monarchies worth the considering, that is, his first or Laconique sort, and his
fifth or last sort, where one alone has Supreme power over all the rest: thus
he has brought his five sorts to two. Now for the first of these two, his
Lacedemonian King, he has confessed before, that he was no more than a
Generalissimo of an Army, and so upon the matter no King at all: and then there
remains only his last sort of Kings, where one alone has the Supreme power.
And this in substance is the final resolution of Aristotle himself: for in his
sixteenth Chapter, where he delivers his last thoughts touching the kinds of
Monarchy, he first discharges his Laconick King from being any sort of
Monarchy, and then gives us two exact rules about Monarchy; and both these are
pointblank against limited and mixed Monarchy; therefore I shall propose them
to be considered of, as concluding all Monarchy to be absolute and Arbitrary.

1. The one Rule is, that he that is said Arist. pol. l. 3. c. 16.
to be a King according to Law, is no sort of Government or Kingdom at all:
(...)

2. The second rule is, that a true King is he that rules all according to his
own will, (...).

This latter frees a Monarch from the mixture of partners or sharers in
Government, as the former rule does from limitation by Laws.

Thus in brief I have traced Aristotle in his crabbed and broken passages,
touching diversities of Kings; where he first finds but four sorts, and then he
stumbles upon a fifth; and in the next Chapter contents himself only with two
sorts of Kings, but in the Chapter following concludes with one, which is the
true perfect Monarch, who rules all by his own will: in all this we find
nothing for a regulated or mixed Monarchy, but against it.

Moreover, whereas the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy affirms it as a prime
principle, That all Monarchies, (except that of the Jews) depend upon humane
designment, when the consent of a society of men, and a fundamental contract of
a Nation, by original or radical constitution confers power; He must know that
Arist. searching into the original of Government, shows himself in this point a
better Divine than our Author; and as if he had studied the Book of Genesis,
teaches, That Monarchies fetch their Pedigree from the right of Fathers, and
not from the gift or contract of people; his words may thus be Englished. At
the first, Cities were Governed by Kings, and so even to this day are Nations
also: for such as were under Kingly Government did come together; for every
House is governed by a King, who is the eldest; and so also Colonies are
governed for kindred sake. And immediately before, he tells us, That the first
society made of many Houses is a Village, which naturally seems to be a Colony
of a House, which some call foster-brethren, or Children, and Childrens
Children.

So in conclusion we have gained Aristotle's judgment in three main and
essential points.

1. A King according to Law makes no kind of Government. 2. A King must rule
according to his own will. 3. The Original of Kings, is from the right of
Fatherhood.
What Aristotle's judgment was two thousand years since, is agreeable to the
Doctrine of the great modern Politician Bodin: Hear him touching limited
Monarchy: Unto Majesty or Sovereignty (says he) belongs an absolute power,
not subject to any Law -- Chief power given unto a Prince with condition, is
not properly Sovereignty, or power absolute, except such conditions annexed to
the Sovereignty, be directly comprehended within the Laws of God and Nature. --
Albeit by the sufferance of the King of England, controversies between the King
and his people are sometimes determined by the high Court of Parliament, and
sometimes by the Lord Chief Justice of England; yet all the Estates remain in
full subjection to the King, who is no ways bound to follow their advice,
neither to consent to their requests. -- It is certain, that the Laws,
Privileges, and Grants of Princes, have no force but during their life, if
they be not ratified by the express consent, or by sufferance of the Prince
following, especially Privileges. -- Much less should a Prince be bound unto
the Laws he makes himself; for a man may well receive a Law from another man,
but impossible it is in nature for to give a Law unto himself, no more than it
is to command a man's self in a matter depending of his own will. The Law says,
Nulla obligatio consistere potest, quae a voluntate promittentis statum capit.
The Sovereign Prince may derogate unto the Laws that he has promised and sworn
to keep, if the equity thereof be ceased; and that of himself, without the
consent of his Subjects. -- The Majesty of a true Sovereign Prince is to be
known, when the Estates of all the people assembled, in all humility present
their requests and supplications to their Prince, without having power in any
thing, to command, determine, or give voice, but that that which it pleases
the King to like or dislike, to command or bid, is holden for Law: wherein they
which have written of the duty of Magistrates have deceived themselves, in
maintaining that the power of the people is greater than the Prince; a thing
which causes often true Subjects to revolt from their obedience to their Prince,
and ministers matter of great troubles in Commonwealths; of which their
opinion there is neither reason nor ground: for if the King be subject unto the
Assemblies and Decrees of the people, he should neither be King nor Sovereign,
and the Commonwealth neither Realm nor Monarchy, but a mere Aristocracie. So
we see the principal point of Sovereign Majesty, and absolute power, to consist
principally in giving Laws unto the Subjects in general without their consent.
Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.

To confound the state of Monarchy with the Popular or Aristocratical estate,
is a thing impossible, and in effect incompatible, and such as cannot be
imagined: for Sovereignty being of it self indivisible, how can it at one and
the same time be divided betwixt one Prince, the Nobility, and the people in
common? The first mark of Sovereign Majesty, is to be of power to give Laws,
and to command over them unto the Subjects; and who should those Subjects be,
that should yield their obedience to the Law, if they should have also power to
make the Laws? who should he be that could give the Law? being himself
constrained to receive it of them, unto whom himself gave it? so that of
necessity we must conclude, That as no one in particular has the power to make
the Law in such a State, that then the State must needs be a State popular. --
Never any Commonwealth has been made of an Aristocracy and popular Estate,
much less of the three Estates of a Commonweal. -- Such States wherein the
rights of Sovereignty are divided, are not rightly to be called Common-weals,
but rather the corruption of Commonweals, as Herodotus has most briefly but
truly written. -- Common-weals which change their state, the Sovereign right
and power of them being divided, find no rest from Civil wars and broils, till
they again recover some one of the three Forms, and the Sovereignty be wholly
in one of the states or other. Where the rights of the Sovereignty are divided
betwixt the Prince and his Subjects, in that confusion of state there is still
endless stirs and quarrels for the superiority, until that some one, some few,
or all together, have got the Sovereignty. Id. lib. 2. c. 1.

This Judgment of Bodin's touching Limited and Mixed Monarchy, is not according
to the mind of our Author, nor yet of the Observator, who uses the strength of
his Wit to overthrow Absolute and Arbitrary Government in this Kingdom; and yet
in the main body of his discourse, lets fall such Truths from his pen, as give
a deadly wound to the Cause he pleads for, if they be indifferently weighed and
considered. I will not pick a line or two here and there to wrest against him,
but will present a whole Page of his Book, or more together, that so we may
have an entire prospect upon the Observators mind: Without society (says the
Observator) men could not live; without Laws men could not be sociable; and
without Authority somewhere to judge according to Law, Law was vain: It was
soon therefore provided, that Laws according to the dictate of Reason, should
be ratified by common consent; when it afterward appeared, that man was yet
subject to unnatural destruction, by the Tyranny of entrusted Magistrates, a
mischief almost as fatal, as to be without all Magistracy. How to provide a
wholesome remedy therefore, was not so easy to be invented: it was not
difficult to invent Laws for the limiting of Supreme Governors; but to invent
how those Laws should be executed, or by whom interpreted, was almost
impossible, Nam quis Custodiet ipsos Custodes, to place a Superior above a
Supreme, was held unnatural; yet what a lifeless thing would Law be without any
Judge to determine and force it? If it be agreed upon, that limits should be
prefixed to Princes and Judges to decree according to those limits, yet another
inconvenience will presently affront us: for we cannot restrain Princes too
far, but we shall disable them from some good: long it was ere the world could
extricate it self out of all these extremities, or find out an orderly means
whereby to avoid the danger of unbounded Prerogative on this hand, and to
excessive liberty on the other; and scarce has long experience yet fully
satisfied the minds of all men in it. In the Infancy of the world, when man was
not so artificial and obdurate in cruelty and oppression as now, and Policy
most rude, most Nations did choose rather to subject themselves to the mere
discretion of their Lords, than rely upon any limits; and so be ruled by
Arbitrary Edicts, than written Statutes. But since Tyranny being more
exquisite, and Policy more perfect, especially where Learning and Religion
flourish, few Nations will endure the thraldom which usually accompanies
unbounded and unconditionate Royalty; Yet long it was ere the bounds and
conditions of Supreme Lords was so wisely determined, or quietly conserved as
now they are: for at first, when as Ephori, Tribuni, Curatores, etc. were
erected to poise against the scale of Sovereignty, much blood was shed about
them, and States were put into new broils by them, and some places the remedy
proved worse than the disease. In all great distresses, the body of the people
were ever constrained to rise, and by force of the major party to put an end to
all intestine strifes, and make a redress of all public grievances: But many
times calamities grew to a strange height, before so cumbersome a body could be
raised; and when it was raised, the motions of it were so distracted and
irregular, that after much spoil and effusion of blood, sometimes only one
Tyranny was exchanged for another, till some was invented to regulate the
motions of the peoples moliminous body. I think Arbitrary rule was most safe
for the World: but Now, since most Countries have found an art and peaceable
order for public Assemblies, whereby the people may assume its own power to do
it self right, without disturbance to it self or injury to Princes; he is very
unjust that will oppose this art or order. That Princes may not be Now beyond
all limits and Laws, nor yet to be tied upon those limits by any private
parties; the whole Community, in its underived Majesty, shall convene to do
justice; and that the Convention may not be without intelligence, certain
times, and places, and forms, shall be appointed for its reglement; and that
the vastness of its own bulk may not breed confusion, by virtue of election and
representation, a few shall act for many, the wise shall consent for the
simple, the virtue of all shall redound to some, and the prudence of some shall
redound to all; and surely as this admirably-composed Court, which is now
called a Parliament, is more regularly and orderly formed, than when it was
called mickle Synod of Wittena-gemot, or when this real body of the people did
throng together at it: so it is not yet perhaps without some defects, which by
art and policy might receive farther amendment: some divisions have sprung up
of late between both Houses, and some between the King and both Houses, by
reason of incertainty of Jurisdiction; and some Lawyers doubt how far the
Parliament is able to create new forms and presidents, and has a Jurisdiction
over it self; all these doubts would be solemnly solved: but in the first
place, the true privileges of Parliament belonging not only to the being and
efficacy of it, but to the honor and complement of it, would be clearly
declared: for the very naming of privileges of Parliament, as if they were
chimera's to the ignorant sort, and utterly unknown unto the Learned, has been
entertained with scorn since the beginning of this Parliament.

In this large passage taken out of the Observator which concerns the Original
of all Government, two notable Propositions may be principally observed.

First, our Observator confesses arbitrary or absolute government to be the
first, and the safest government for the world.

Secondly, he acknowledges that the Jurisdiction is uncertain, and the
privileges not clearly declared of limited Monarchy.

These two evident truths delivered by him, he labors mainly to disguise. He
seems to insinuate that Arbitrary Government was but in the infancy of the
World, for so he terms it; but if we enquire of him, how long he will have this
infancy of the world to last, he grants it continued above three thousand
years, which is an unreasonable time for the world to continue under-age: for
the first opposers he does find of Arbitrary power, were the Ephori, Tribuni,
Curatores, etc. The Ephori were above three thousand years after the Creation,
and the Tribuni were later; as for his Curatores, I know not whom he means,
except the Master of the Court of Wards, I cannot English the word Curator
better. I do not believe that he can show that any Curatores or and caetera's
which he mentions were so ancient as the Ephori. As for the Tribuni, he
mistakes much if he thinks they were erected to limit and bound Monarchy; for
the State of Rome was at the least Aristocratical (as they call it) if not
popular, when Tribunes of the people were first hatched. And for the Ephori,
their power did not limit or regulate Monarchy, but quite take it away; for a
Lacedemonian King in the judgment of Aristotle was no King indeed, but in name
only, as Generalissimo of an Army; and the best Politicians reckon the Spartan
Commonwealth to have been Aristocratical, and not Monarchical; and if a limited
Monarchy cannot be found in Lacedemon, I doubt our Observator will hardly find
it any where else in the whole World; and in substance he confesses as much,
when he says, Now most Countries have found out an art and peaceable order for
public Assemblies; as if it were a thing but new done, and not before; for so
the word Now does import.

The Observator in confessing the Jurisdiction to be uncertain, and the
privileges undetermined of that Court that should bound and limit Monarchy,
does in effect acknowledge there is no such Court at all: for every Court
consists of Jurisdictions and Privileges; it is these two that create a Court,
and are the essentials of it: If the admirably composed Court of Parliament
have some defects which may receive amendment, as he says, and if those
defects be such as cause divisions both between the Houses, and between the
King and both Houses, and these divisions be about so main a matter as
Jurisdictions and Privileges, and power to create new Privileges, all which
are the Fundamentals of every Court, (for until they be agreed upon, the act of
every Court may not only be uncertain, but invalid, and cause of tumults and
sedition:) And if all these doubts and divisions have need to be solemnly
solved, as our Observator confesses: Then he has no reason at all to say,
that Now the conditions of Supreme Lords are wisely determined and quietly
conserved, or that Now most Countries have found out an art, and peaceable
order for public affairs, whereby the people may resume its own power to do it
self right without injury unto Princes: for how can the underived Majesty of
the people by assuming its own power, tell how to do her self right, or how to
avoid doing injury to the Prince, if her Jurisdiction be uncertain, and
Privileges undetermined?

He tells us Now most Countries have found an art, and peaceable order for
public Assemblies: and to the intent that Princes may not be Now beyond all
limits and Laws, the whole community in its underived Majesty shall convene to
do Justice. But he does not name so much as one Country or Kingdom that has
found out this art, where the whole Community in its underived Majesty did ever
convene to do Justice. I challenge him, or any other for him, to name but one
Kingdom that has either Now or heretofore found out this art or peaceable
order. We do hear a great rumor in this age, of moderated and limited Kings;
Poland, Sweden, and Denmark, are talked of for such; and in these Kingdoms, or
nowhere, is such a moderated Government, as our Observator means, to be found.
A little enquiry would be made into the manner of the Government of these
Kingdoms: for these Northern people, as Bodin observes, breath after liberty.

First for Poland, Boterus says, that the Government of it is elective
altogether, and represents rather an Aristocracie than a Kingdom: the
Nobility, who have great authority in the Diets, choosing the King, and limiting
His Authority, making His Sovereignty but a slavish Royalty: these diminutions
of Regality began first by default of King Lewis, and Jagello, who to gain the
succession in the Kingdom contrary to the Laws, one for his daughter, and the
other for his son, departed with many of his Royalties and Prerogatives, to buy
the voices of the Nobility. The French Author of the book called the Estates of
the world, does inform us that the Princes Authority was more free, not being
subject to any Laws, and having absolute Power, not only of their estates, but
also of life and death. Since Christian Religion was received, it began to be
moderated, first by holy admonitions of the Bishops and Clergy, and then by
services of the Nobility in war: Religious Princes gave many Honors, and many
liberties to the Clergy and Nobility, and quit much of their Rights, the which
their successors have continued. The superior dignity is reduced to two
degrees, that is, the Palatinate and the Chastelleine, for that Kings in former
times did by little and little call these men to public consultations,
notwithstanding that they had absolute power to do all things of themselves, to
command, dispose, recompense, and punish, of their own motions: since they have
ordained that these Dignities should make the body of a Senate, the King does
not challenge much right and power over His Nobility, nor over their estates,
neither has he any over the Clergy. And though the Kings Authority depends on
the Nobility for His election, yet in many things it is absolute after He is
chosen: He appoints the Diets at what time and place He pleases; He chooses
Lay-Councellors, and nominates the Bishops, and whom He will have to be His
Privy Council: He is absolute disposer of the Revenues of the Crown: He is
absolute establisher of the Decrees of the Diets: It is in His power to advance
and reward whom he pleases. He is Lord immediate of His Subjects, but not of
His Nobility: He is Sovereign Judge of his Nobility in criminal causes. The
power of the Nobility daily increases, for that in respect of the Kings
election, they neither have Law, rule, nor form to do it, neither by writing
nor tradition. As the King governs His Subjects which are immediately His, with
absolute Authority; so the Nobility dispose immediately of their vassals, over
whom every one has more than a Regal power, so as they entreat them like
slaves. There be certain men in Poland who are called EARTHLY MESSENGERS or
Nuntio's, they are as it were Agents of Jurisdictions or Circles of the
Nobility: these have a certain Authority, and, as Boterus says, in the time of
their Diets these men assemble in a place near to the Senate House, where they
choose two Marshals, by whom (but with a Tribune-like authority) they signify
unto the Council what their requests are. Not long since, their authority and
reputation grew so mightily, that they now carry themselves as Heads and
Governors, rather than officers and ministers of the public decrees of the
State: One of the Council refused his Senators place, to become one of these
officers. Every Palatine, the King requiring it, calls together all the
Nobility of His Palatinate; where having propounded unto them the matters
whereon they are to treat, and their will being known, they choose four or six
out of the company of the EARTHLY MESSENGERS; these deputies meet and make one
body, which they call the order of Knights.

This being of late years the manner and order of the government of Poland, it
is not possible for the Observator to find among them that the whole Community
in its underived Majesty does ever convene to do Justice: nor any election or
representation of the Community, or that the people assume its own power to do
it self right. The EARTHLY MESSENGERS, though they may be thought to represent
the Commons, and of late take much upon them, yet they are elected and chosen
by the Nobility, as their agents and officers. The Community are either vassals
to the King, or to the Nobility, and enjoy as little freedom or liberty as any
Nation. But it may be said perhaps, that though the Community do not limit the
King, yet the Nobility do, and so he is a limited Monarchy. The Answer is, that
in truth, though the Nobility at the choosing of their King do limit his power,
and do give him an Oath; yet afterward they have always a desire to please
him, and to second his will; and this they are forced to do, to avoid discord:
for by reason of their great power, they are subject to great dissentions, not
only among themselves, but between them and the order of Knights, which are
the Earthly Messengers: yea, the Provinces are at discord one with another: and
as for Religion, the diversity of Sects in Poland breed perpetual jars and
hatred among the people, there being as many Sects as in Amsterdam it self, or
any popular government can desire. The danger of sedition is the cause, that
though the Crown depends on the election of the Nobility; yet they have never
rejected the Kings successor, or transferred the Realm to any other family,
but once, when deposing Ladislaus for his idleness (whom yet afterward they
restored) they elected Wencelaus King of Bohemia. But if the Nobility do agree
to hold their King to his conditions, which is, not to conclude any thing but
by the advice of his Council of Nobles, nor to choose any wife without their
leaves, then it must be said to be a Commonweal, not a Royalty; and the King
but only the mouth of the Kingdom, or as Queen Christina complained, that Her
Husband was but the shadow of a Sovereign.

Next, if it be considered how the Nobility of Poland came to this great power;
it was not by any original contract, or popular convention: for it is said they
have neither Law, Rule, nor Form written or unwritten, for the election of
their King; they may thank the Bishops and Clergy: for by their holy
admonitions and advice, good and Religious Princes, to show their piety, were
first brought to give much of their Rights and Privileges to their Subjects,
devout Kings were merely cheated of some of their Royalties. What power soever
general Assemblies of the Estates claim or exercise over and above the bare
naked act of Councelling, they were first beholding to the Popish Clergy for
it: it is they first brought Parliaments into request and power: I cannot find
in any Kingdom, but only where Popery has been, that Parliaments have been of
reputation; and in the greatest times of Superstition they are first mentioned.

As for the Kingdom of Denmark, I read that the Senators, who are all chosen
out of the Nobility, and seldom exceed the number of 28, with the chief of the
Realm, do choose their King. They have always in a manner set the Kings eldest
Son upon the Royal Throne. The Nobility of Denmark withstood the Coronation of
Frederick 1559, till he swear not to put any Nobleman to death until he were
judged of the Senate; and that all Noblemen should have power of life and
death over their Subjects without appeal; and the King to give no Office
without consent of the Council. There is a Chancelour of the Realm, before whom
they do appeal from all the Provinces and Islands, and from him to the King
himself. I hear of nothing in this Kingdom that tends to Popularity; no
Assembly of the Commons, no elections, or representation of them.

Sweden is governed by a King heretofore elective, but now made hereditary in
Gustavus time: it is divided into Provinces: an appeal lies from the Vicount
of every territory to a Sovereign Judge called a Lamen; from the Lamens, to the
Kings Council; and from this Council, to the King himself.

Now let the Observator bethink himself, whether all, or any of these three
Countries have found out any art at all whereby the people or community may
assume its own power: if neither of these Kingdoms have, most Countries have
not, nay none have. The people or Community in these three Realms are as
absolute vassals as any in the world; the regulating power, if any be, is in
the Nobility: Nor is it such in the Nobility as it makes show for. The election
of Kings is rather a Formality, than any real power: for they dare hardly choose
any but the Heir, or one of the blood Royal: if they should choose one among the
Nobility, it would prove very factious; if a stranger, odious, neither safe.
For the Government, though the Kings be sworn to reign according to the Laws,
and are not to do any thing without the consent of their Council in public
affairs: yet in regard they have power both to advance and reward whom they
please, the Nobility and Senators do comply with their Kings. And Boterus
concludes of the Kings of Poland, who seem to be most moderated, that such as
is their valor, dexterity, and wisdom, such is their Power, Authority, and
Government. Also Bodin says, that these three Kingdoms are States changable
and uncertain, as the Nobility is stronger than the Prince, or the Prince than
the Nobility; and the people are so far from liberty, that he says, Diverse
particular Lords exact not only Customs, but Tributes also; which are
confirmed and grow stronger, both by long prescription of time, and use of
Judgments.

The End.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE JURYMEN of ENGLAND, TOUCHING WITCHES.

ADVERTISEMENT To the JURYMEN OF ENGLAND.
THE late Executon of Witches at the Summer Assizes in Kent, occasioned this
brief Exercitation, which addresses it self to such as have not deliberately
thought upon the great difficulty in discovering, what, or who a Witch is. To
have nothing but the public Faith of the present Age, is none of the best
Evidence, unless the universality of elder times do concur with these
Doctrines, which ignorance in the times of darkness brought forth, and
credulity in these days of light has continued.

Such as shall not be pleased with this Tractate, are left to their liberty to
consider, whether all those Proofs and Presumptions numbered up by Mr. Perkins,
for the Conviction of a Witch, be not all Condemned, or confessed by himself to
be unsufficient or uncertain.

He brings no less than eighteen signs or proofs, whereby a Witch may be
discovered, which are too many to be all true: his seven first he himself
confesses to be insufficient for Conviction of a Witch; His eight next proofs
(which he says men in place have used) he acknowledges to be false or
insufficient. Thus of his Eighteen proofs, which made a great show, fifteen of
them are cast off by himself; there remains then his sixteenth, which is the
Confession of a Witch; yet presently he is forced to yield, That a bare
Confession is not a sufficient proof, and so he comes to his seventeenth
proof, which is, two credible witnesses; and he here grants, that the League
between the Devil and the Witch is closely made, and the practices of Witches
be very secret, that hardly a man can be brought, which upon his own knowledge
can aver such things. Therefore at last, when all other proofs fail, he is
forced to fly to his eighteenth proof, and tells us, that yet there is a way to
come to the knowledge of a Witch, which is, that Satan uses all means to
discover a Witch; which how it can be well done, except the Devil be bound over
to give in evidence against the Witch, cannot be understood.

And as Mr. Perkins weakens and discredits all his own proofs, so he does the
like for all those of King James, who, as I remember, has but Three Arguments
for the discovery of a Witch. First, the secret Mark of a Witch, of which Mr.
Perkins says, it has no power by Gods Ordinance. Secondly, The discovery by a
fellow- Witch; this Mr. Perkins by no means will allow to be a good proof.
Thirdly, the swimming of a Witch, who is to be flung cross ways into the water,
that is, as Wierus interprets it, when the Thumb of the right Hand is bound to
the great Toe of the left Foot, and the Thumb of the left Hand to the great Toe
of the right Foot, Against this Trial by water, together with a disability in a
Witch to shed Tears, (which King James mentions) Delrio and Mr. Perkins both
argue; for it seems they both write after King James, who put forth his Book of
Daemonologie in his youth, being in Scotland, about his age of thirty years.

It concerns the people of this Nation to be more diligently instructed in the
Doctrine of Witchcraft, than those of Foreign Countries, because here they
are tied to a stricter or exacter Rule in giving their sentence than others
are: for all of them must agree in their Verdict, which in a case of extreme
difficulty is very dangerous; and it is a sad thing for men to be reduced to
that extremity, that they must hazard their Consciences or their Lives.

A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN An English and Hebrew WITCH.
THE Point in Question is briefly this; Whether such a Witch as is Condemned by
the Laws and Statutes of this Land, be one and the same with the Witch
forbidden by the Law of Moses.

The Witch Condemned by our Statute Law is, 1 Jacob. Cap. 12.

One that shall use, practice, or exercise any Invocation or Conjuration of any
evil or wicked spirit, or consult, covenant with, entertain or employ, feed or
reward any evil or wicked spirit, to or for any intent or purpose; or take up
any dead man, woman, or child, out of his, her, or their grave, or any other
place, where the dead body rests; or the skin, bone, or other part of any
dead person, to be employed or used in any manner of Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charm
or Enchantment; or shall use, practice, or exercise any Witchcraft,
Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery, whereby any person shall he killed, destroyed,
wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in his or her body, or any part thereof: such
Offenders duly and lawfully Convicted and Attainted, shall suffer death.

If any person shall take upon him by Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm or
Sorcery, to tell or declace in what place any Treasure of Gold or Silver should
or might be found or had in the Earth, or other secret places, or where Goods,
or things lost or stolen should be found or become: Or to the intent to provoke
any person to unlawful love, or whereby any Cattle or Goods of any person shall
be destroyed, wasted, or impaired; or to destroy or hurt any person, in his, or
her body, though the same be not effected, etc. a years Imprisonment, and
Pillory, etc. and the second Conviction Death.

In this Statute, these Points are observable.
1. That this Statute was first framed in 5. Eliz. and only the penalties here
a little altered, and the last clause concerning provoking of persons to love,
and destroying of Cattle and Goods, etc. is so changed, that I cannot well make
sense of it, except it be rectified according to the words of the former
Statute which stands repealed. 2. Although the Statute runs altogether in the
disjunctive Or, and so makes every single crime capital, yet the Judges usually
by a favorable interpretation, take the disjunctive Or, for the copulative
And; and therefore ordinarily they condemn none for Witches, unless they be
charged with the Murdering of some person. 3. This Statute pre-supposeth that
every one knows what a Conjurer, a Witch, an Inchanter, a Charmer, and Sorcerer
is, as being to be learned best of Divines; and therefore it has not described
or distinguished between them: and yet the Law is very just in requiring a due
and lawful conviction.
The definition of Witchcraft.
FOr the better discovery of the qualities of these crimes, I shall spend some
discourse upon the Definition of those Arts by Divines: for both those of the
Reformed Churches, as well as these of the Roman, in a manner, agree in their
definition of the sin of Witchcraft. I shall instance in two late Writers,
viz. Mr. William Perkins in his Discourse of Witchcraft, and in Martin Delrio,
a Jesuit of Lorrain, in his Book of Magical Disquisitions.

Our English word Witch, is derived from the Dutch word Wiechelen, or
Wijchelen, which does properly signify whinying or neying like a Horse, and
does also signify to foretell or prophecy; and Weicheler signifies a
Southsayer; for that the Germans, from whom our Ancestors the Saxons descended,
usually and principally did, as Tacitus tells us, divine and foretell things
to come, by the whinying and neying of their Horses. Hinnitu and fremitu are
his words.

For the Definition Mr. Perkins says, Cap. 1.
Witchcraft is an Art serving for the working of wonders, by the assistance of
the Devil, so far as God shall permit.

Delrio defines it to be an Art, which by the power of a Contract entered into
with the Lib. 1. c. 2.
Devil, some wonders are wrought which pass the common understanding of men.
Ars qua vi pacti cum Daemonibus initi mira quaedam communem hominum captum
superantia officiuntur.

In these two Definitions, some Points are worth the noting.

1. They both agree in the main Foundation, which is a Contract with the Devil,
and therefore Mr. Perkins thought it most necessary, that this main point
should be proved; to which purpose he promises to define a Witch, by opening
the nature of Witchcraft, as it is delivered Cap. 2.
in the old and new Testament; and yet after he confesses a manifest Covenant
is not so Cap. 2.
fully set down in Scripture: And out of the New Testament he offers no proof
at all, though he promised it; nevertheless, he resolves us that a Covenant is
a most evident and certain truth, that may not be called in question.

For proof of a Covenant, he produces only one Text out of the old Testament;
neither does he say, that the Text proves a Contract with the Devil, but only
that it intimates so much: Thus at the first he falls from a proof to an
intimation only. The Text is, Psalm. 58. v. 5. of which his words are these:
Howsoever the Cap. 2.
common Translation runs in other terms, yet the words are properly to be
read thus: Which hears not the voice of the mutterer joining Societies
cunningly -- the main Foundation of the Charm, Societies or Confederacies
cunningly made, not between man and man, but, as the words import, between the
Enchanter and the Devil, Deuteronomy. 18. 11.

Answer. Though there be neither mention of Spirit or Devil in this Psalm, yet
Mr. Perkins would have us believe that there can be no conjoyning or
consociating but with the Devil: but Mr. Ainsworth, as great a Rabby as Mr.
Perkins, finds other Interpretations of this Text; and though he mentions
fellowship with the Devil, yet he puts it in the third and last place, as the
newest and latest Interpretation: for he teaches us, that the Enchanter had
his title both in Psalm 58. and in Deuteronomy. 18. either because be associates
Serpents, making them tame and familiar that they hurt not, or because such
persons use to bind and tie bonds, or things about the body, to heal or hurt by
Sorcery. Also he teaches us, that a Charmer does join or speak words of a
strange language, and without sense, etc.

Delrio it seems puts no confidence in this Text of Mr. Perkins, for he does
not cite it to prove a Contract; yet he has also one Text of his own to that
purpose, it is Esaias 28. 15. where it is said, We have made a Covenant with Lib.
2. Qu. 4.
Death, and with Hell we are at an agreement; Percussimus foedus cum morte, and
cum inferno fecimus pactum: and Delrio tells us, that Tho. Aquinas did apply
this Text to Witches, magis satis probabili interpretatione.

Answer. If this Text be considered, it proves nothing at all: for it does not
charge the proud and drunken Ephraimites, of whom it is spoken, that they had
made an agreement with Hell, but it is only a false brag of their own, to
justify their wickedness by a lie: for it is not possible to make a Covenant
with Death, which in it self is nothing but a mere not being; and whereas it is
called an agreement with Hell, it may be translated as well, if not better in
this place, an agreement with the Grave; and so the Interlineary Bible has it;
and Tremelius and Iunius render it, Pepigimus foedus cum morte, and cum
sepulchro egimus cautum; which they term a Thrasonical hyperbole: and Deodatus
his Italian Bible has, Habbiamo fatto lega col sepolcro; so likewise the
Spanish Bible translates it, Concierto tenemos hecho con la muerte, e con la
sepultura hazimos acuerdo.

It may be wondered that neither Mr. Perkins nor the Jesuit have any other or
better Texts to prove this Contract between the Witch and the Devil. But the
truth is, it is very little that either of them say of this great point, but
pass it over perfunctorily. Perhaps it may be thought that King James has
said, or brought more and better proofs in this point; but I do not find that
he does meddle with it at all, but takes it for granted that if there be
Witches, there must needs be a Covenant, and so leaves it without further proof.

A second note is, that the agreement between the Witch and the Devil they call
a Covenant, and yet neither of the parties are any way bound to perform their
part; and the Devil, without doubt, notwithstanding all his craft, has far the
worst part of the bargain. The bargain runs thus in Mr. P. the Witch as a slave
Cap. 12.
binds himself by Vow to believe in the Devil, and to give him either Body, or
Soul, or both, under his handwriting, or some part of his Blood. The Devil
promises to be ready at his vassals command to appear in the likeness of any
Creature, to consult, and to aid him for the procuring of Pleasure, Honor,
Wealth, or Preferment; to go for him, to carry him any whither, and do any
command. Whereby we see the Devil is not to have benefit of his bargain till
the Death of the Witch; in the mean time he is to appear always at the Witches
command, to go for him, to carry him any whither, and to do any command: which
argues the Devil to be the Witches slave, and not the Witch the Devils.

Though it be true which Delrio affirms, that the Devil is at liberty to
perform or break his compact, for that no man can compel him to keep his
promise; yet on the other side, it is as possible for the Witch to frustrate
the Devils Contract, if he or she have so much grace as to repent; the which
there may be good cause to do, if the Devil be found not to perform his
promise: Besides, a Witch may many times require that to be done by the Devil,
which God permits not the Devil to do; thus against his will the Devil may lose
his credit, and give occasion of repentance, though he endeavor to the utmost
of his power to bring to pass whatsoever he has promised; and so fail of the
benefit of his bargain, though he have the handwriting, or some part of the
blood of the Witch for his security, or the solemnity before witnesses, as
Delrio imagines.

I am certain they will not say that Witchcraft is like the sin against the
Holy Ghost, unpardonaable: for Mr. Perkins confesses the contrary, and Delrio
denies it not; for he allows the Sacrament of the Eucharist to be administered
Lib. 5. Sect. 18.
to a condemned Witch, with this limitation, that there may be about four hours
space between the Communion, and the Execution, in which time it may be
probably thought that the Sacramental Species (as they call it) may be consumed.

3. Delrio in his second Book, and fourth Question, gives this Rule, which he
says is common to all Contracts with the Devil, That first they must deny the
Faith, and Christianism, and Obedience to God, and reject the patronage of the
Virgin Mary, and revile her. To the same purpose Mr. Perkins affirms that
Witches renounce God and their Baptism. But if this be common to all Contracts
with the Devil, it will follow that none can be Witches but such as have first
been Christians, nay and Roman Catholics, if Delrio say true; for who else
can renounce the patronage of the Virgin Mary? And what shall be said then of
all those Idolatrous Natious of Lapland, Finland, and of diverse parts of
Africa, and many other Heathenish Nations, which our Travelers report to be
full of Witches? and indeed, what need or benefit can the Devil gain by
contracting with those Idolaters, who are surer his own, than any Covenant can
make them?

4. Whereas it is said that Witchcraft is an Art working wonders, it must be
understood that the art must be the Witches Art, and not the Devils, otherwise
it is no Witchcraft, but Devilscraft. It is confessed on all hands, that the
Witch does not work the wonder, but the Devil only. It is a rare Art for a
Witch by her Art to be able to do nothing her self, but to command another to
practice the Art. In other Arts, Mr. Perkins confesses that the Arts Master is
able by himself to practice his Art, and to do things belonging thereunto
without the help Cap. 1. Sect. 4.
of another; but in this it is otherwise -- the power of effecting strange
works does not flow from the skill of the Witch, but is derived wholly from
Satan. To the same purpose he says, that the means of working wonders Cap. 4.
Sect. 1.
are Charms used as a Watchword to the Devil to cause him to work wonders: so
that the Devil is the worker of the wonder, and the Witch but the Counselor,
Perswader, or Commander of it, and only accessory before the Fact, and the
Devil only principal. Now the difficulty will be, how the accessory can be
duly and lawfully convicted and attainted according as our Statute requires,
unless the Devil, who is the Principal, be first convicted, or at least
outlawed* which cannot be, because the Devil can never be lawfully summoned
according to the rules of our Common Law. For further proof that the Devil is
the principal in all such wonders, I shall show it by the testimony of King
James, in a case of Murder, which is the most capital crime our Laws look
upon. First, he tells us that the Devil teaches Witches how to make Pictures of
Wax and Clay, that by the rosting thereof the persons that they bear the Name
of may be continually melted, or dried away by continual sickness -- not that
any of these means which he teaches them (except poisons, which are composed
of things natural) can of themselves help anything to these turns they are
employed in. Secondly, King Iame affirms that Witches Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
can bewitch, and take the life of Men or Women by rosting of the Pictures,
which is very possible to their Master to perform: for although that instrument
of Wax have no virtue in the turn doing, yet may he not very well, by that same
measure that his conjured Slave melts that Wax at the fire, may he not I say at
these same times, subtly as a spirit, so weaken and scatter the spirits of
life of the patient, as may make him on the one part for faintness to sweat out
the humors of his body; and on the other part, for the not concurring of these
spirits which cause his digestion, so debilitate his stomach, that his humor
radical continually sweating out on the one part, and no new good Suck being
put in the place thereof for lack of digestion on the other, he at last shall
vanish away even as his Picture will do at the Fire. Here we see the Picture of
Wax, roasted by the Witch, has no virtue in the Murdering, but the Devil
only. It is necessary in the first place that it be duly proved that the party
Murdered be Murdered by the Devil: for it is a shame to belly the Devil; and
it is not possible to be proved, if it be Subtilely done as a Spirit.

5. Our Definers of Witchcraft dispute much, whether the Devil can work a
Miracle: they resolve he can do a Wonder, but not a Miracle; Mirum, but not
Miraculum. A Miracle, says Mr. Perkins, is that which is above or against
nature simply; a Wonder is that which proceeds not from the ordinary course of
nature. Delrio will have a Miracle to be praeter, or supra naturae creatae
vires: both seem to agree in this, that he had need be an admirable or profound
Philosopher, that can distinguish between a Wonder and a Miracle; it would pose
Aristotle himself, to tell us every thing that can be done by the power of
Nature, and what things cannot; for there be daily many things found out, and
daily more may be, which our Forefathers never knew to be possible in Nature.
Those that were converted by the Miracles of our Savior, never stayed to
enquire of their Philosophers what the power of Nature was; it was sufficient
to them, when they saw things done, the like whereof they had neither seen nor
heard of, to believe them to be Miracles.

6. It is commonly believed and affirmed by Mr. Perkins, that the cause which
moves the Devil to bargain with a Witch, is a desire to obtain thereby the Soul
and Body of the Witch. But I cannot see how this can agree with another
Doctrine of his, where he says, The Precepts of Witchcraft are not delivered
indifferently to every Man, but to his own subjects the wicked; and not to them
all, but to special and tried ones, whom he most betrusteth with his secrets,
as being the fittest to to serve his turn, both in respect of their willingness
to learn and practice, as also for their ability to become Instruments of the
mischief he intends to others. All this argues, the end of the Devils rules
of Witchcraft is not to gain Novices for new Subjects, but to make use of old
ones to serve his turn.

7. The last clause of Mr. Perkins definition is, that Witchcraft does work
wonders so far as God shall permit. I should here desire to have known whether
Mr. Perkins had thought that God does permit farther power to the Devil upon
his contracting with the Witch, than he had before the Contract: for if the
Devil had the same permission before the Contract, then he does no more
mischief upon the Contract, than he would have gladly done before, seeing, as
Mr. Perkins says, The Devils malice toward all Men is of so high a degree,
that he cannot endure they Cap. 7.
should enjoy the World, or the benefits of this life (if it were possible) so
much as one hour. But yet afterward I find Master Perkins is more favorable
to the Devil, where he writes, that if the Devil were not stirred up and
provoked by the Witch, he would never do so much hurt as he does.

Of the Discerning and Discovery of a Witch.
A Magistrate, says Mr. Perkins, may not take upon him to examine whom Cap. 7.
Sect. 1.
and how he wills of any Crime, nor to proceed upon slight causes, or to show
his Authority, or upon sinister respects, or to revenge his malice, or to bring
parties into danger and suspicion; but he must proceed upon special
presumptions.

He calls those presumptions, which do at Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
least probably and conjecturally note one to be a Witch, and are certain signs
whereby the Witch may be discovered. I cannot but wonder that Mr. Perkins
should say, that presumptions do at least probably and conjecturally note, and
are certain signs to discover a Witch; when he confesses, that though
presumptions give occasion to examine, yet they are no sufficient causes of
conviction: and though presumptions be never so strong, yet they are not proofs
sufficient for Conviction, but only for Examination. Therefore no credit is to
be given to those presumptions he reckons up. 1. For common fame, it falls out
many times, says he, that the innocent may be suspected, and some of the
better sort notoriously defamed. 2. The testimony of a fellow-Witch, he
confesses, does not probably note one to be a Witch. The like may be said of
his third and fourth presumption, if after cursing, or quarrelling, or
threatening, there follow present mischief. And the fifth presumption is more
frivolous, which is, if the party be the Son or Daughter, or Servant, or
Friend, near neighbor, or old companion of a Witch. The sixth presumption Mr.
Perkins dares not, or is loath to own, but says, Some add, if the party
suspected have the Devils Mark; and yet be resolves, if such a Mark be
descried, whereof no evident reason in nature can be given, the Magistrate may
cause such to be examined, or take the matter into his own hands, that the
truth may appear; but he does not teach how the truth may be made to appear.
The last presumption he names, is, if the party examined be unconstant, or
contrary to himself; here he confesses, a good man may be fearful in a good
cause, sometimes by nature, sometimes in regard of the presence of the Judge,
or the greatness of the Audience; some may be suddenly taken, and others want
that liberty of speech which other men have.

Touching Examination, Mr. Perkins names two kinds of proceedings, either by
simple Question, or by Torture: Torture, when besides the enquiry by words, the
Magistrate uses the Rack, or some other violent means to urge Confession; this
he says, may be lawfully used, howbeit not in every case, but only upon
strong and great presumptions, and when the party is obstinate. Here it may be
noted, that it is not lawful for any person, but the Judge only, to allow
Torture: suspicious Neighbors may not, of their own heads, use either Threats,
Terrors, or Tortures. I know not any one of those presumptions beforecited, to
be sufficient to warrant a Magistrate to use Torture; or whether when the party
constantly denies the Fact, it must be counted obstinacy. In case of Treason
sometimes, when the main Fact has been either confessed, or by some infallible
proofs manifested, the Magistrate, for a farther discovery of some circumstance
of the Time, the Place, and the Persons, or the like, have made use of the
Rack: and yet that kind of torture has not been of ancient usage in this
Kingdom; for if my memory fail not, I have read, that the Rack has been called
the Duke of Exeters Daughter, and was first used about Hen. 6. days.

From presumptions, Mr. Perkins proceeds to proofs of a Witch; and here he has
a neat distinction of proofs, less sufficient, or more sufficient; by less
sufficient he means insufficient, but gives them this mild and strange phrase
of less sufficient, that it may not displease such friends (as I conceive)
allow those less sufficient proofs for sufficient, though he reckons them for
no better than Witchcraft* Those unsufficient sufficient proofs are weaker and
worse than his presumptions, which he confesses are no proofs at all; yet we
must reckon them up. His first less sufficient proof is, The ancient trial by
taking red-hot Irons, or putting the hand in hot scalding water; this, he
says, has been condemned for Diabolical and wicked, as in truth it is: for an
innocent man may thereby be condemned, and a rank Witch escape unpunished. A
second insufficient proof is, Scratching of the suspected party, and the
present recovery thereupon. A third is, the burning the thing bewitched, is a
Hog, an Ox, or other Creature, it is imagined a forcible means to cause the
Witch to discover her self. A fourth, is the burning the Thatch of the
suspected parties House. The fifth less* sufficient proof is, the binding of
the party hand and foot, and casting crossways into the water; if she sinks,
she is counted innocent; if she float on the water and sink not, she is taken
for a Witch, convicted, and punished. The Germans used this Trial by cold
water; and it was imagined, that the Devil being most light, as participating
more of Air than of Water, would hold them up above the water, either by
putting himself under the Witch, and lifting her up, as it were with his back,
or by uniting himself, and possessing her whole body.

All these less sufficient proofs, says Mr. Perkins, are so far from being
sufficient, that some of them, if not all, are after a sort practices of
Witchcraft, having no power* by Gods Ordinance. Hereby he condemns point blank
King James's judgment, as savouring of Witchraft, in allowing of the Trial of a
Witch by swimming as a principal proof. And as I take it, he condemns himself
also, except he can find any Ordinance of God, that the having of an incurable
and insensible mark or sore, shall be a presumption, or certain sign of a Witch.

A sixth less sufficient proof, is the Testimony of a Wizard, Witch, or cunning
man, who is gone or sent unto, and informs that he can show in a glass the Face
of the Witch. This accusation of a Witch by another Witch, Mr. Perkins denies
to be sufficient; and he puts this case: If the Devil appear to a grand Jury,
in the likeness of some known man, and offer to take his Oath that the person
in question is a Witch, should the Enquest receive his Oath or accusation to
condemn the party? He answers, Surely no; and yet that is as much as the
Testimony of another Witch, who only by the help of the Devil reveals the
Witch: if this should be taken for a sufficient proof, the Devil would not
leave one good man alive in the world.

This discrediting of the Testimony of a Witch, takes away the other (for he
has but two) of King James main proofs for the discovery of a Witch; for he
says, Who but Witches can be provers, and so witnesses of the doings of
Witches? and to the same purpose Mr. Perkins himself confesses, that the
Precepts of Witchcraft are not delivered, but to the Devils own Subjects, the
wicked.

A seventh less sufficient proof is, when a man in open Court affirms, such a
one fell out with me, and cursed me, threatening I should smart for it in my
person or goods; upon these threats, such Evils and Losses presently befell me;
this is no sure ground for Conviction, says Mr. Perkins, for it pleases God
many times to lay his Hands upon men's persons and goods, without the
procurement of Witches; and yet says Mr. Perkins, Experience shows, that
ignorant people will make strong proofs of such presumptions, whereupon
sometimes Jurors do give their Verdict against parties innocent.

The last less sufficient proof is, if a man being sick, upon suspicion will
take it on his death, that such a one has bewitched him, it is of no moment,
says Mr. Perkins; it is but the suspicion of one man for himself, and is of no
more force than another man's word against him.

All these proofs, says Mr. Perkins, which men in place have ordinarily used,
be either false or insufficient signs.

At the last Mr. Perkins comes to his more sufficient proofs, which are in all
but two. The confession of the Witch, or the proof of two witnesses. Against
the confession of a Witch, Mr. Perkins confesses, it is objected, that one may
confess against himself an untruth, being urged by Chap. 7. Sect. 1.
force or threatening, or by desire upon some grief to be out of the World; or
at least being in trouble, and persuaded it is the best course to save their
lives and obtain their liberty, they may upon simplicity be induced to confess
that they never did, even against themselves. The truth of this Allegation Mr.
Perkins does not deny, but grants it, in that his Answer is, That he does not
say a bare Confession is sufficient, but a Confession after due Examination
taken upon pregnant presumptions. But if a bare confession be not a sufficient
proof, a pregnant presumption can never make it such; or if it could, then it
would not be a sufficient proof. For the farther weakening of the confession of
a suspected Witch, we may remember what Mr. Perkins has formerly answered,
when it was alleged, that upon a melancholy humor, many Cap. 7. Sect. 1.
confess of themselves things false and impossible, That they are carried
through the Air in a moment, that they pass through key-holes and cleffs of
Doors; that they be sometimes turned into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures, and
such like; all which are mere fables, and things impossible. Here Mr. Perkins
answers, that when Witches begin to make a League, they are sober and sound in
understanding; but after they be once in the League, their reason and
understanding may be depraved, memory weakened, and all the powers of their Soul
blemished; they are deluded, and so intoxicated, that they will run into a
thousand of fantastical imaginations, holding themselves to be transformed
into the shapes of other Creatures, to be transported in the Air, to do many
strange things which in truth they do not.

Now Mr. Perkins will confess, that the Examination and Confession of a
suspected Witch, is always after such time as her Covenant is made; when she is
by his Confession deluded, and not fit to give testimony against her self.

His second more sufficient proof (he says, if the party will not confess, as
commonly it falls out) is two witnesses avouching upon their own knowledge,
either that the party accused has made League with the Devil, or has done
some known practices of Witchcraft, or has invocated the Devil, or desired
his help. But if every man that has invocated the Devil, or desired his help,
must have formerly made a League with him, then whole Nations are every man of
them Witches; which I think none will say.

As for the League, and proof of Witchraft, Mr. Perkins confesses, Some may
say, If these be the only strong proofs for the Conviction of a Witch, it will
be then impossible to put any one to death; because the League with Satan is
closely made, and the practices of Witchcraft are also very secret, and hardly
can a man be brought, which upon his own knowledge can aver such things. To
this Mr. Perkins answer is a confession: that howsoever the ground and practice
be secret, and be to many unknown, yet there is a way to come to the knowledge
thereof. -- Satan endeavoreth the discovery, and uses all means to disclose
Witches. This means he speaks of should be in the power of the Judge, or else
it is no help for the Discovery of a Witch, but only when the Devil pleases.
I do not find he proves that it is usual with Satan to endeavor any such
Discovery; neither do I see how it is practicable by the Devil: for either he
must do it by his own relation or report; which as it cannot be proved he ever
did, so it is vain, and to no purpose if he do it; for Mr. Perkins has
discredited the testimony of the Devil, as invalid, and of no force for
conviction: or else the Devil must discover it by some second means; and if
there had been any such second means usual, Mr. Perkins would have taught us
what they are, and not have left us only to his two more sufficient proofs,
which he confesses are not infallible.

King James tells us, that the Devils first discovering of himself for the
gaining of a Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
Witch, is either upon their walking solitarily in the Fields, or else lying
pausing in their bed, but always without the company of any other; and at the
making of Circles and Conjurations, none of that craft will permit any others
to behold; when the Devil and his Subjects are thus close and secret in their
actions, it cannot be imagined that he will use all means to discover his most
special and trustiest Subjects: and though Mr. Perkins tells us, that by virtue
of the Precontract, the Devil Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
is cock-sure of his instruments; yet within a few lines* he changes his note,
and says, Though he have good hope of them, yet he is not certain of their
continuance, because some by the mercy of God have been reclaimed and freed
from his Covenant. Besides, he confesses, the Devil suffers some to live
long undisclosed, that they may exercise the greater measure of his malice in
the world. It remains, that if the two true proofs of Mr. Perkins, which are
the Witches Confession, or sufficient witnesses, fail, we have not warrant, as
he says, in the word, to put such an one to death.

I conclude this point in the words of Mr. Perkins; I advise all Jurors, that
as they be diligent in the zeal of Gods glory, so they would be careful what
they do, and not to condemn any party suspected upon bare presumptions, without
sound and sufficient proofs, that they be not guilty through their own
rashness, of shedding innocent blood.

Of the Hebrew Witch.
IN Deuteronomy. 18. The Witch is named with diverse other sorts of such as used the
like unlawful Arts; as the Diviner, the Observer of times, an Inchanter, a
Charmer, a Consulter with a familiar Spirit, a Wisard, or a Necromancer. The
Text adds, All that do these things are an abomination to the Lord, and
because of these abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them [the Nations]
out from before thee. If we desire to know what those abominations of the
Nations were, we are told in general in the 14. Verse of the same Chapter:
These Nations hearkened unto observers of times, and unto Diviners. There is no
other crime in this Chapter laid to the charge of all, or any of these
practisers of such unlawful Arts, but of lying Prophesies; and therefore the
Text adds, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst
of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, and not to
the Diviners, Wisards, Charmers, etc.

Setting aside the case of Job (wherein God gave a special and extraordinary
Commission) I do not find in Scripture that the Devil, or Witch, or any other,
had power ordinarily permitted them, either to kill or hurt any man, or to
meddle with the Goods of any: for though, for the trial of the hearts of men,
God does permit the Devil ordinarily to tempt them; yet he has no Commission
to destroy the Lives or Goods of men; it is little less than blasphemy to say
any such thing of the admirable providence of God, whereby he preserves all his
Creatures.

It was crime sufficient for all those practicers of unlawful Arts, to delude
the people with false and lying Prophesies, thereby to make them forget to
depend upon God, and to have their Souls turn after such as have Familiar
Spirits, and after Wisards, to go a whoring after them, as the Lord says,
Levit. 20. 6. This spiritual whoredom is flat Idolatry, in the common phrase
of the Old Testament; and those that be enticers to it, thereby endeavor to
destroy the Souls of the People, and are by many degrees more worthy of death,
than those that only destroy the Bodies or Goods of men.

If there were a Law that every one should be put to Death, or punished, that
should advisedly endeavor to persuade men that they are skilful in those
forbidden Arts, or in foretelling of things to come, or that they have
contracted with the Devil, and can thereby murder or destroy men's Goods; I
should never deny such a Law to be most consonant and agreeing with the Law of
Moses.

But because I may be thought by some a favourer of these forbidden Arts,
through want of understanding the Scripture about the quality of them; I have
made choice of a Man who is no friend to Witches, and whose learning in this
point will not be denied. In his own words I shall set down, what either* out
of the Hebrew Names of those prohibited Arts, or out of the exposition of the
Jewish Doctors can be gathered for the understanding of them.

A Diviner, in Hebrew, a Foreseer, or Ainsworth upon Deuteronomy. 18.
Presager, a Foreteller of things to come, as does a Prophet -- The Hebrews
take a Diviner to be one that does things whereby he may foretell things to
come, and say, Such a thing shall be, or not be, or say, It is good to do such
a thing -- The means of Divining; some doing it with Sand, some with Stones,
some by lying down on the Ground, some with Iron, some with a Staff -- He that
asked of a Diviner, is chastised with stripes.

2. An observer of times, or Soothsayer, an Observer of the Clouds, a
Planetary, or an observer of the flying of Fowls, an Augur. As the Diviners
were carried much by inward and Spiritual Motions, so these by outward
Observations in the Creatures. The Hebrews say, they were such as did set times
for the doing of things, saying, Such a day is good, and such a day is naught.

3. An Observer of Fortunes, one that curiously searches signs of good or evil
luck, which are learned by Experience: the Hebrew is, to find out by
Experience; Whereupon the word here used is one that too curiously observes,
and abuses things that do fall out, as lucky or unlucky. The Hebrews describe
it thus, as if one should say, Because the morsel of Bread is fallen out of my
mouth, or my Staff out of my hand, I will not go to such a place: because a Fox
passed by on my right hand, I will not go out of my House this day. Our new
Translation renders this word an Inchanter.

4. A Witch, a Sorcerer, such as do bewitch the Senses or minds of Men, by
changing the forms of things to another hew. The Hebrew word for a Witch
properly signifies a Jugler, and is derived from a word which signifies
changing or turning; and Moses teaches, Exodus 7. that Witches wrought by
Enchantments, that is, by secret Sleights, Iuglings, Close conveyance, or of
Glistering like the flame of Fire, or a Sword, wherewith Men's Eyes were dazzled.

5. A Charmer, or one that conjureth Conjurations; the Hebrew signifies
conjoyning or consociating -- The Charmer is said to be he, that speaks words
of a strange Language, and without sense; that if one say so or so unto a
Serpent, it cannot hurt him; he that whispereth over a wound, or that reads
over an Infant that it may not be frighted, or lays the Bible upon a Child
that it may sleep.

6. A Wisard or cunning Man, in Hebrew named of his knowledge or cunning -- The
Hebrews describe him thus, That he put in his mouth a bone of a Bird, and
burned incense, and did other things until he fell down with shame, and spoke
with his mouth things that were to come to pass.

7. A Necromancer, one that seeks unto the Dead: of him they say, he made
himself hungry, and went and lodged among the Graves, that the dead might come
unto him in a Dream, and make known unto him that which he asked of him; and
others there were that clad themselves with Clothes for that purpose* and spoke
certain words, and burned Incense, and slept by themselves; that such a dead
person might come and talk with them in a dream.

8. Lastly, The Consulter with Familiar Spirits, in Hebrew, a Consulter with
Ob, applied here to Magitians, who possessed with an evil Spirit, spoke with a
hollow voice as out of a bottle. -- The Hebrews explain it thus, That he which
had a Familiar spirit stood and burned Incense, and held a rod of Mirtle-tree
in his hand, and waved it, and spoke certain words in secret, until he that
enquired did hear one speak unto him, and answer him touching that he enquired,
with words from under the Earth, with a very low voice, etc. Likewise, one took
a dead man's Skull and burnt Incense thereto, and enchanted thereby till he
heard a very low voice, etc. This Text in our English Translation being
expounded a Familiar Spirit, and seconded by the History of the Woman of Endor,
may seem a strong evidence that the Devil convenanted with Witches: but if all
be granted that can be desired, that this Familiar Spirit signifies a Devil,
yet it comes not home to prove the main point; for it is no proof that the
Familiar Spirit entered upon Covenant, or had or could give power to others to
kill the persons, or destroy the Goods of others. King James confesses, the
Devil can make some to be possessed, and so become very Daemoniaques; and that
she who had the spirit of Python in Acts 16. whereby she conquested such gain
to her Master; that Spirit was not of her own raising or commanding, as she
pleased to appoint, but spoke by her Tongue as well privately as publicly. We
do not find the Pythonesse condemned or reproved, but the unclean Spirit
commanded in the Name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. The Child which was
too young to make a Covenant with the Devil, was possessed with a dumb and deaf
Spirit, and the Devil charged to come out, and enter no more into him, Mark 9.
A Daughter of Abraham (that is, of the Faith of Abraham) was troubled with a
spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and bowed together that she could not lift
her self up, Luke 13. 10, 16.

It is observable, that in Deuteronomy. 18. where all the unlawful Arts are reckoned
up, and most fully prohibited, the crime of them is charged upon the practisers
of those Arts; but the crime of having a Familiar Spirit is not there
condemned, but the consulter of a Familiar Spirit; so in Levit. 19. 31. the
prohibition is, Regard not them that have Familiar Spirits; and so in Levit.
20. 6. The Soul that turns after such as have Familiar Spirits; so that it
was not the having, but the consulting, was condemned.

If we draw nearer to the words of the Text, it will be found, that these
words, a Consulter with a Familiar Spirit, are no other than a Consulter with
Ob; where the question will be what Ob signifies. Expositors agree, that
originally Ob signifies a Bottle, and they say is applied here to one
possessed with an evil Spirit, and speaks with a hollow voice as out of a
Bottle: but for this I find no proof they bring out of Scripture, that says,
or expounds that Ob signifies one possessed with a Familiar Spirit in the
Belly; the only proof is, that the Greek Interpreters of the Bible Translate
it Engastromuthi, which is, speaking in the Belly; and the word anciently, and
long before the time of the Septuagint Translators, was properly used for one
that had the cunning or slight to shut his mouth, and seem to speak with his
Belly; which that it can be done without the help of a Familiar Spirit,
experience of this Age shows in an Irishman. We do not find it said, that the
Woman of Endor did foretell any thing to Saul, by the hollow voice of a
Familiar Spirit in her Belly; neither did Saul require, nor the Woman promise
so to answer him; but he required, Bring me him up who I shall name unto thee;
and she undertook to do it; which argues a desire in Saul to consult with the
dead, which is called Necromancy, or consulting with the dead.

But it has been said, she raised the Devil in Samuels likeness, yet there is
no such thing said in the Text; when the Woman went about her work, the first
thing noted is, that when she saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice: An
Argument she was frighted with seeing something she did not expect to see: it
is not said, that when she knew Saul, but when she saw Samuel* she cried out
with a loud voice; when she knew Saul, she had no reason to be afraid, but
rather comforted, for that she had his Oath for her security.

It may well be, that if either she had a Familiar Spirit, or the Art of
hollow-speaking, her intention was to deceive Saul, and by her secret voice to
have made him believe, that Samuel in another room had answered him; for it
appears that Saul was not in the place where she made a show of raising Samuel:
for when she cried out with a loud voice, Saul comforted her, and bid her not
be afraid, and asked her what she saw? and what form is he of? which questions
need not have been, if Saul had been in the Chamber with the Witch. King James
confesses, that Saul was in another chamber at the conjuration; and it is
likely the woman had told Saul she had seen some fearful sight, which made him
ask her what she saw? and her answer was, she saw gods ascending out of the
Earth; and it may be understood, that Angels waited upon Samuel, who was raised
by God, and not any Puppets or Devils that she conjured up; otherwise, the
words may be Translated as Deodat in the Margent of his Italian Bible has it,
She saw a Man of Majesty or Divine Authority ascend, un' huomo di Majesta e d'
Authorita Divina, which well answers the question of what form is he of? which
is in the singular, not in the plural number.

We find it said in Esaias 29. 4. Thou shall be brought down, and shall speak out
of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall
be as one that has a Fimiliar Spirit out of the ground, and thy speech shall
wisper out of the Earth; which argues, the voice of Ob was out of the Earth,
rather than out of the Belly; and so the Hebrew Exposition which I cited before
affirms. Some learned have been of Opinion that a natural reason may be given
why in some places certain exhalations out of the earth may give to some a
prophetical spirit. Add hereunto, that some of the Heathen Oracles were said to
speak out of the Earth: and among those five sorts of Necromancy, mentioned by
Doctor Reynolds, in his 76 Lecture of his censure of the Apocryphals, not any
of them is said to have any Spirit in their Belly. The Romanists, who are all
great affirmers of the power of Witches, agree, that the soul of Samuel was
sent by God to the Woman of Endor: to this not only Delrio, but Bellarmine
before him agrees. That true Samuel did appear as sent by God, as he sent Elias
to Ochosias King of Israel, who being sick sent to consult with Beelzebub the
God of Echron, may appear, for that Samuel is so true and certain in his
prediction to Saul; which no Witch, no Devil could ever have told: for though
the Wisdom and Experience of the Devil do enable him to conjecture probably of
many events, yet positively to say, To morrow thou and thy Sons shall die, is
more than naturally the Devil could know.

Mr. Perkins confesses the Devil could not foretell the exact time of Saul's
death; and therefore he answers, that God revealed to the Devil as his
Instrument Saul's overthrow, by which means, and no other, the Devil was enabled
to foretell the death of Saul. Here Mr. Perkins proves not that Satan was
appointed by God to work Saul's overthrow, or that it was made known to him when
it should be done.

As the rest of the Speech of Samuel is true, so these words of his, Why have
thou disquieted me to bring me up? may be also true; which cannot be, if it be
spoken by the Devil; or why should the Devil tell truths in all other things
else, and lie only in this, I know no reason. Doctor Reynolds presses these
words against the appearing of Samuel, thus: If Samuel had said them, he had
lied; but Samuel could not lie, for Samuel could not be disquieted, nor raised
by Saul. It is true, God only raised Samuel effectually, but occasionally Saul
might raise him. But, says Doctor Reynolds, though Saul was the occasion, yet
Samuel could not truly say that Saul had disquieted him; for blessed are they
that die in the Lord, says the Spirit, because they rest from their labors;
and Samuel was no more to be disquieted (if he were sent by God) than Moses and
Elias were when they appeared to show the Glory of Christ, Mat. 17. Answer. It
did not displease Samuel to be employed in the Office of an Angel, but he
obeyed God gladly; yet since the occasion of his appearing displeased God, it
might for that cause displease also Samuel. Besides, we need not understand the
disquieting of Samuels mind, but of his body, by not suffering it to rest in
peace after death, according to the common and usual condition of Mankind: this
sense the Original will well bear. Again, it cannot be believed that the Devil
would ever have preached so Divine and excellent a Sermon to Saul, which was
able to have converted, and brought him to Repentance; this was not the way for
the devil to bring either Saul or the woman to renounce God. Lastly, the Text
does not say that the woman raised Samuel; yet it calls him Samuel, and says
that Saul perceived or understood that it was Samuel.

Mr. Perkins and many others esteem Balaam to have been a Witch or Conjurer,
but I find no such thing in the Text; when he was required to curse the people
of Israel, his answer was, I will bring you word as the Lord shall speak unto
me, Numb. 22. 8. and God came unto Balaam in v. 9. and in v. 13. Balaam says,
The Lord refuses to give me leave; and when Balak sent a second time, his
answer was, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and Gold, I cannot
go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. In v. 20. God comes
to Balaam and said, If the men come to call thee, go; but yet the words which I
shall say unto thee, that shall thou do. And when Balaam came before Balak he
said, v. 38. Lo I am come unto thee, have I now any power at all to say any
thing? the word which God puts into my mouth, that shall I speak: and in the
23. Chap. v. 18. Balaam says, How shall I curse whom God has not cursed? and
in v. 12. he says, Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord has put
into my mouth? These places laid together, prove Balaam to have been a true
Prophet of the Lord; and he prophesied nothing contrary to the Lords command,
therefore St. Peter calls him a Prophet.

Nevertheless it is true, that Balaam sinned notoriously, though not by being a
Witch or Conjurer, or a false Prophet; his faults were, that when God had told
him he should not go to Balak, yet in his covetous heart he desired to go,
being tempted with the rewards of Divination, and promise of promotion; so that
upon a second Message from Balak he stayed the Messengers to see if God would
suffer him to go; wherefore the Lord in his anger sent Balaam. Also when God
had told Balaam that he would bless Israel, yet Balaam did strive to tempt God,
and by several Altars and Sacrifices to change the mind of God. Again, when
Balaam saw God immutable in blessing Israel, he taught Balak to lay a
stumbling block before the Sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols,
and to commit Fornication, Rev. 2. 14. Whereas it is said that Balaam went not
up as other times to seek for Enchantments, Number. 24. 2. the Original is, to
meet Divinations, that is, he did not go seek the Lord by Sacrifices, as he
did, Numb. 23. 3. 15.

An exact difference between all those Arts prohibited in Deuteronomy. no man I think
can give; that in some they did agree, and in others differed, seems probable.
That they were all lying and false Prophets, though in several ways, I think
none can deny. That they differed in their degrees of punishments is possible:
there are but three sorts that can be proved were to be put to death, viz. the
Witch, the Familiar Spirit, the Wisard. As for the Witch, there has been some
doubt made of it. The Hebrew Doctors that were skild in the Laws of Moses,
observe, that wheresoever one was to die by their Law, the Law always did run
in an affirmative precept; as, the Man shall be stoned, shall die, shall be put
to death, or the like; but in this text, and no where else in Scripture, the
sentence is only a Prohibition negative, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live, and not, Thou shall put her to death, or stone her, or the like. Hence
some have been of Opinion, that not to suffer a Witch to live, was meant not to
relieve or maintain her by running after her, and rewarding her. The Hebrews
seem to have two sorts of Witches, some that did hurt, others that did hold the
Eyes, that is, by juggling and slights deceived Men's senses. The first they say
was to be stoned, the other, which according to the proper notation of the word
was the true Witch, was only to be beaten.

The Septuagint have translated a Witch, an Apothecary, a Druggister, one that
compounds poisons; and so the Latin word for a Witch is venefica, a maker of
poisons: if any such there ever were, or be, that by the help of the Devil do
poison, such a one is to be put to death, though there be no Covenant with the
Devil, because she is an Actor and principal her self, not by any wonder
wrought by the Devil, but by the natural or occult property of the Poison.

For the time of Christ, says Mr. Perkins, though there be no particular
mention made of any such Witch, yet thence it follows not that there were
none, for all things that then happened are not Recorded; and I would fain know
of the chief Patrons of them, whether those persons possessed with the Devil,
and troubled with strange Diseases, whom Christ healed, were not bewitched with
some such people as our Witches are? if they say no, let them if they can prove
the contrary.

Here it may be thought that Mr. Perkins puts his Adversaries to a great pinch;
but it does not prove so: for the Question being only whether those that were
possessed in our Saviors Time were bewitched; The Opposers of Mr. Perkins say
they were not bewitched: but if he or any other, say they, were, the Proof will
rest wholly on him or them to make good their Affirmative; it cannot in reason
be expected that his Adversaries should prove the Negative, it is against the
Rules of Disputation to require it.

FINIS.

