THE PLEA OF THE CHILDREN OF BELIEVING-PARENTS, for their Interest in Abraham
's Covenant, their Right to Church-Member-ship with their Parents, and
consequently their Title to BAPTISM.

The Cause of publishing this Discourse after so many Learned Men have labored
in this Province, is declared in the Preface to the Reader.

Baptizandos esse paruulos, nemo dubitet: quando nec illi hinc dubitant, qui ex
part aliqua Contradicunt. August, de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 14. It will surely
be rewarded by Christ at the latter day, as a work of more then ordinary
Charity, to have pleaded, and maintained the Right of these poor Members of
his, who want a Tongue to speak for themselves.

Dr. Tho. Goodwin, in his Preface to Mr. Cotton, of Infant Baptism.

By GILES FIRMIN.

1 Cor. 7.14. -- Else were your Children Unclean, but now they are Holy.
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street, near
Ludgate, 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IF the Reader demands a reason, why after so many Books written by other Men
(far more able then my self) upon this Subject, that now I should appear? my
answer is ready. I had as few thoughts of writing, as any Man could have of
reading any thing of mine upon the Subject. But hearing of a Book against
Infant Baptism, very much cried up, and observing some discourse about
Anabaptism this Spring, more in the Town then ever I heard before, I sent to
borrow the Book, I took a brief view of it, and the Book was sent for again. To
spend the Lord's Day so much as one Exercise upon any Controversy, I did much
dislike it, yet I thought I was bound to say something to it, and did borrow a
little time, before I went on my other course.

About (...) We^ks after I had done, come^ down an An^^aptist from London, to a
Town Seven (...) Miles distant from me, and writes me ^ Letter, informing me,
That he was one that ^^d walk in Gospel-Communion with Col. Danvers, (
sometimes he styles him Esquire Danvers) then writes to me thus. You have cast the
Odium of Falsehood and Fergery upon his Book to your Auditory: If it was to
deter your Hearers from reading his Book, it does demonstrate the badness of
your Cause, in that you are not willing it should be inspected. If you design
thereby to degrade the Gentleman, as infamous, though unknown, you have therein
greatly erred, -- therefore I request you on the behalf of Col. Danvers, that
you be pleased to do him the common Justice, as to publish to the World in
Print, what you have spoken in your more private Meetings, by way of detection
of his Forgery, -- and not only to Print what you have traduced him with, but
also any other new things you have Preached, that will lend any assistance to
your Infant Baptism, that this Gentleman does endeavor to throw down as a
spurious thing; -- several of your own Party have written against him, but he,
with others, have so answered them, that they have set down silent under -- The
Colonel has a better Character than you give of him, -- he has a large
Portion of this Worlds goods, etc. Thus he runs on in commendation of the
Colonel, and ends it in such a way, that neither I, nor others that read the
Letter, could understand his meaning.

As to this Letter, the Reader may please to understand, the Book which I
borrowed had in the Title Page, only H.D. I could not tell whither D. stood for
Den (whose name I had seen) or Dell, or Danvars, of whose name only I had
heard, but never saw any thing of his; but whoever was the Author, I found
fault with him. 1. For his Falsehood in the Historical part (which if my Memory
fails me not, took up above half his Book.) 2ly, His fraudulent dealing. 3ly,
His raising a dust upon the Scriptures he quotes, to trouble his Reader. 4ly,
For his Logic. But for any other Opinions, or any thing concerning his
Conversation, I speak not one word: for how could I, when I knew nothing of
him, and only heard three times (as I remember) there was one Colonel Danvers,
an Anabaptist, and that was all; nor was I certain the Book was his.

It was never my intent to answer every particular in his Book, partly because
I would not spend the Lord's Day in Controversies, and partly because
Catechizing was the thing I intended, being far more necessary, so that I did
grudge the time I spent about this Book; out of which I only wrote the most
material things, and the Book was sent for away.

For the new things, this Epistoler would have me publish. Does he mean new
Scriptures, or new Arguments, or both?

1st. Why new? since the old are not yet answered; it is one thing to write
against Men, another to answer them.

2ly, Why new? since my Author borrows so much old out of Mr. Tombes's Book,
which I look upon as instar omnium, and is the only Anabaptist Book I have.

3ly, Why new? since my Author opposes old Texts, and I must take the part of a
Respondent.

4ly, Why new? my Epistoler should tell me what Controversies are there, which
have been handled so long, by very able Divines as this has been, that he that
comes last, has wrote all new?

5ly, To conclude then, as to these new things, I am forced to take up the old
Texts, because of my Author's opposing them: I do but touch other Texts, and
not insist upon them, where others have been before me: for other Men's
Arguments, I borrow but one from Mr. Baxter, and tell you whose it is, and
improve it my way. If I have hit upon other Men's notions, it is unknown to me,
as I see I have upon Mr. Wills, in answer to the old Britains: but I had given
the answer in the Congregation, and wrote it in my Copy, before I saw Mr.
Wills.

For his crying Victoria, telling me our Divines sit silent under the Answers
the Colonel, and his Party have given them. If this Epistoler, read Mr.
Baxter's Second Defense of Infants, etc. he may read a full answer to this, and
the reason of their silence, p. 211. We may allow some Honor to a Colonel,
but why do they sit silent? not because the Colonel, or any other Anabaptist
have put them to silence, by Arguments from Scripture, by Truth in History, or
Strength of Learning, the contrary appears to judicious Readers: but who will
care for dealing with unreasonable Men? They have other work to do of higher
concernment: Let the Anabaptists indulge themselves in their Opinions and
Practices, Redgness. 24. August, 1682.
if they please, I have performed that common Justice my Epistoler requires of
me, only for brevities sake, I left out several things I would have added; if
this may do the Church of Christ any service, I shall have my end, and bless
God,

G. FIRMIN.

THE PLEA OF THE CHILDREN OF Beleiving-Parents, etc.
THE Right of the Children of Beleiving-Parents to Church Membership with their
Parents, and consequently to Baptism, was never so strongly opposed, nor better
defended, than it has been within these forty yearts in this English Nation. I
think there is enough Written to satisfy the minds of sober Christians; but
the Enemy of the Church is not yet quiet, nor will be, till the Church Militant
becomes Triumphant.

A difference we may observe between Christians now, and those in former times
in England, since I can remember: How wary were they then, what Doctrines they
received: Though they would not pin their Faith upon any Man's Sleeve, yet they
would consider what Persons they were for soundest of Faith, and Holiness in
Conversation, from whom they would receive any Doctrine, which has made me
wonder many times how this Doctrine of Anti-Pado Baptism, which was first
hatched in the Brain of that Notorious Heretic [for so upon search I find him]
Auxentius, Chereshed by Pelagius, and afterward revived by Men of corrupt
Minds, and lewd Conversations; as that Learned and Pious Martyr, Mr. Philpot,
tells his Fellow Prisoner in Newgate, That this wretched Doctrine as Mr. Thomas
Hooker calls it, should fi^^ entertainment in the Hearts of any truly Godly as
it has done in England of late: At this, as I said, I have wondered! For this
was not the frame of the Right Old English Puritans, they would have abhorred
the Doctrine for the Authors sake, Good Mr. Jessey, I knew between 50 and 60
years since, but then I heard of no Inclination this way: and one I have met
with, truly Pious, sound in all other Points humble, made no noise of his
Opinion, [whither Re-baptised, I cannot tell] with him we held Communion in the
Holy Supper.

To me it seems strange, and so strange, that I will never believe it, That
Christ should Promise his Spirit to his Church, and that good Spirit should
suffer both his Martyrs and choice People to err in such a Point [if it be an
Error] from the Apostles days to this day. Since the Reformation, I believe
England, Scotland, and Ireland, have, through Gods Rich Grace, afforded as many
Holy, Heavenly, Gracious, and Learned Men, as any Nations under the Sun; As
smart Enemies to Mystical Babylon, [of which the Anabaptists tells us,
Infant Baptism is a Relique] as any Anabaptists can be; and have done more
against that Babylon, than all the Anabaptists that ever were or shall be, have
done, or can do: and till of late years, I never heard of one [what others have
done I know not] that did approve, but did detest this Doctrine, till our
unhappy Wars: in which time, and since that time, this Doctrine is much spread.

May I have leave to inquire what should occasion the spreading of this Opinion
in this Nation, [besides the Sovereign pleasure of God, who for wise ends, may
suffer a Gracious Man to err in some particular] I have thought of these Causes.

First, The first and chief Reason was, even good Men did not improve their
Father-Abrahams-Covenant, nor their Infant Baptism Covenant, as they ought.
Hence not improving these, they did not experience the goodness of God in them,
and our advantage by them; Then no wonder though Men in times of Dispute and
Temptations, be at a loss, and come at last to deny that, which others, who
have improved and experienced, have found to be a greater privilege,
advantage, and support to their Souls, under their fears, and other temptations.

Experiences (you say) unless well grounded upon Scriptures, are but deluding
Fancies; I know it very well, therefore the grounds have been well weighed. On
the other side, though the Scriptures be plain, yet the Gospel, and things
apprehended only by Faith, are such, and Temptations about them [especially in
some Men] so strong, that if a Man has not attained to some experience of what
he does believe, if his Faith has not brought in some Spiritual Sense, in the
Hurricanes of long and strong Temptations, a Man's Faith will be terribly shaken
in the very Gospel it self. The wind having blown at that Door before. I could
not but take special notice of what the worthy Author of the Book, Entitled,
The fulfilling of Scriptures, has told us concerning that Holy Man, and
Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Bruce, telling his People, I think it to be a
greater matter to believe there is a God, than people judge, p. 430. The same
Author speaking about Experience [from his own Experience I doubt not] how it
helps to Witness that great Truth of Godhead, p. 111. in the next Page, 112.
speaks thus, It is not the Contemplation of Nature in its highest flight, can
answer such an Assault of the Devil, which may try the most Established
Christian Adult in the being of a God, etc. but then he shows how Experience of
God helps the Soul. Whether these be not Truths, I leave it to those who have
been long exercised with these Temptations; now if in that Point, as to the
being of a God, than much more as to Gospel Truths: that no wonder the Apostle
Prays, that Beleivers may abound in all Knowledge and Sense, (...) 1 Phil. 9.
we read Judgment, but the Greek word, and so the Margent tells you, is Sense.
The Arabic word is very significant, Grotius and Gomarus, understand by Sense,
Experience: Hemmingius and Zanchie, opens the word excellently.

Some Men are exercised with Temptations exceedingly more than others, and God
is pleased to be more Dark, or exceeding Dark to some over he is to others,
which has made me often think and say,

It is only Divine Teaching, and the experimental Sense of what is taught, that
can make a sound Christian bear up and hold to the Word in the time of long and
sore Temptations. I could here give a very sad but true Story, the like scarce
ever heard before, pertinent to the Point in hand; but I fear the Devil would
make ill use of it among tempted Christians, and therefore I will not commit it
to Writing.

To return to the Head I am upon. If the Anabaptists say, How can a Man improve
a Nullity, and get Experience of it? Abraham's Covenant with the Seed of
Believers, now is Null, Infant Baptism is Null. True, I do not know how a Man
can improve a Nullity. But I doubt not there are many Anabaptists in England,
who lived several years before they drank in this Opinion of Anabaptism, and in
that time did not think Abraham's Covenant, nor their Infant Baptism to be Null;
many of them also had Parents not only visible, but real Christians; I appeal
to their Consciences, did you in that time before you drank in this Opinion,
improve the Covenant, and your Infant Baptism? did you mind these? did you
meditate well upon them? did you believe them upon these Meditations and Faith?
did you follow God close and earnestly in Prayer for the benefits of them? and
though you met with Temptations, yet did you hold on? and what, did God give you
in nothing, no support, no relief, no comfort from these? did you find no
advantage to your Souls by these? I will never believe it. God is gracious, God
is faithful, what ever we think of him in our dark hours I will rather believe
they did not follow close their improvement of these, for I meet but with very
few, even good Christians, though they hate Anabaptism, that do improve them as
they ought. No wonder then though Men cry out, Abraham's Covenant is Null, and
Infant Baptism Null, when they never improved them, so found no good by them,
and now turn Anabaptists.

I know Christians that lie under some Temptations, may, and do expect more
from the Covenant, Promise, and Sacraments, than God intended, or the Scripture
holds forth, they would make one Scripture contradict another: If God gives in
but a little, and will suffer us to lie under our Temptations, but yet will
supply us with so much from his Covenant, that we are able to hold up our hands
in the day of Battle: that our Hearts are kept close to him, and do not in the
least depart from him; If we cannot get the fatted Calf, and Music, etc. Luke
15.23. [which some Christians have] if we can but get a Kid, and have a Father
to own us at last, it is worth our Beleiving, Praying, and Writing.

What it was that Woman [a noted Midwife I knew] expected to find at the Lords
Supper, I know not, but it seems she found it not: whereupon she forsook the
Lords Table, with this blasphemous Speech, A Man may find as much good by a
Loaf in the Bakers Shop, as by the Bread in the Lords Supper, for she had been
often there and could find no good. Hearing of this Speech, I inquired after
her, by those who had been long acquainted with her [I know not whether I saw
her after I heard it] they took her always for a civil Woman, but did not
think she was acquainted with the work of Regeneration; but that made me to
wonder the more, for such persons commonly take up their Priest in the work
done, in above partaking of the Ordinance.

If Christians be at this Point, we expect so much from Promises, so much from
Ordinances, or we have nothing, then we may do as she did, throw off all
Ordinances, and Promises too. Though I am far from attaining what I have sought
and desired, yet I bless God, so much I have attained from my understanding,
and improving of Abraham's Covenant, and my Infant Baptism, that I have but a
light esteem of all the Anabaptists Books against them, they signify nothing
with me: but of this, more hereafter.

Disputing without experiencing, signifies little in Divinity to a tempted
Soul. But this I doubt not to affirm, Did Christians set in earnest to their
work, and labor to improve Abraham's Covenant, and their Infant Baptism, they
should find as much profit, advantage, and support to their Souls, as any
Anabaptists do by their Dipping when Adult. But if Ordinances be not improved,
how can Men expect any good by them?

When God made that Covenant with Abraham, to be the God of him and his Seed,
and appointed the seal of his Covenant to be Administered to the Infant on the
eigth day. Might not? ought not all the Jews, and did not many of them when
they came to years of discretion, and were taught the meaning of them, improve
them to their Souls advantage? why then may not we as well improve the same
Covenant, and our Infant Baptism, when we are come to years of discretion, to
our Spititual advantage, when we understand them by our Pastors and Parents
teaching?

If there be such an advantage in Adult-Baptism, over there is in
Infant Baptism, what is the matter that some of them could say, they found no
such good by it? and I do believe them by their Conversation; but especially,
what is the reason that so many hundreds of them cast off both Infant and
Adult-Baptism, and deny Baptism altogether, for which they were sometime so
zealous? if there had been such advantage in it, they would not have done so
wickedly to cast away such an Institution of Christ.

Secondly, A second thing which might occasion this, is, That so many Children
of Godly Parents, who were Dedicated to God in Baptism in their Infancy, and
Parents have bestowed great pains in their Education, yet prove wicked.

The deeper the wounds of such Parents, and the sorer the damnation of such
Children without Repentance.

But first, We may observe the greatest number of visible, yea true Christians
in the visible Church, consist of the Children of such Parents.

Since the Flood of Iniquity of late years brake in upon this Nation, it has
risen so high that it has flown into the Houses of Godly Parents, more than
ever it did since England knew the Gospel. This is a Lamentation.

Secondly, Was it not so in Isaac's Family, where but two, and one naught.

Thridly, We never understood that when God made that Covenant with our Father
Abraham, and his Seed, that he intended to make all his Seed Godly; but we
understand such a Privilege in it, that neither Parents nor Children, who have
their Eyes opened, will part with it, let the Anabaptists write what they
please against it.

Fourthly, But do this Disping, None deny that Regenerate persons are the
subjects of Baptism, he must say only, else he opposed not us Christins Scrip.
pract. of Int. etc. p. 147, 148.
and Re-Baptising of Adult persons help it? are they all Godly? If the Elect
and Regenerate be the only Subjects of Babtism, [as my Author tells me] I am
sure they are not of Anabaptism, to my knowledge, unless drunkenness and
uncleanness, be Notes of Regeneration; we shall not need to go to Germany to
inquire, England will afford proof enough. Mr. Baxter has given us a sad
account of some of them, enough to make a serious Christian afraid of the
Opinion. By a serious Christian who came from New England, we are informed,
That a [ Seaman as I remember] one being Baptized, how long the Baptist held
him under Water I know not, but so soon as his Head was above Water, he wrapped
out an Oath [so I heard it] what do you make account to drown me?

Thirdly, Another is this, The great Adversary of Christ and his Church, seeing
how earnestly the Spirits of good Christians were set for the Reformation of
the Church in all Points, according to the Holy Scriptures which we profess, to
hinder this work, by dividing of Christians, and raising Animosities one
against another, used this for one Engine. Baptising of Infants of Beleiving
Parents, being the Opinion and Practice of such Christians, they must now be
thrown by, because in the Scriptures we can no where read that Christ gave
command to his Apostles to Baptize Infants. While I was answering this Book,
word was sent me, That there was one who would Dispute with me in the
Congregation, expecting his coming, and knowing he had thrown away
Water Baptism; for an Introduction to my work, I laid down Ten Arguments to
prove that Water Baptism was still an Institution of Christ, obliging all that
professed Faith in him, to practice, to hear what he would say to them, judging
it a silly act in him, to come to oppose me in Infant Baptism, who had
renounced Water Baptism altogether: but that day which he said he would come,
he did not. About three Weeks after he did, and this was all he had against me
[what concerned others I regard not] Where did Christ give command to Baptize
Infants? To this I had spoken several times before, that this was no New thing
to the Congregation. There was no such express command in those words I
granted, but there was a command to Baptize Infants, employed, included in that
command of Christ to his Apostles, to Baptize Disciples, Matthew. 28.19. I framed
my Argument, but the Man could not tell which Proposition to deny: but after
some words [little to the purpose] civilly departed.

They who desire the Reformation of the Church, do not say every thing must be
expressly set down in Scripture; but if it be contained in the Scripture, and by
necessary consequence deducted from thence, we are bound to believe, or
practice it.

Our Lord taught us this in proving the Resurrection against the Sadduces; A
Point of infinite more consequence, then the Baptising of an Infant. For if
there be no Resurrection, to what purpose is our Religion? But according to the
Anabaptists Argument, that Call for an express command to baptize Infants, and
therefore reject it, our Lord did not prove the Resurrection.

I will personate a Sadduce, and take their Argument; the Question is, Shall
there be a Resurrection of the Dead? The Sadduce denies it, our Lord affirms
it, and proves it from Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham, etc. Matthew.
22.29.31. v. But what is this to the proof of the Question, Does God say
expressly to Moses, there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead? if so, then we
will believe it, else not. Thus the Anabaptist, Does Christ expressly command
the Apostles to Ba^tise Infants? then we will Practice it, else we Condemn it.
But though God did not expressly say there shall be a Resurrection, yet he said
that, which by necessary Consequence will force it. For though Jacob, who died
last of the three, had been dead two hundred years, when God spoke those words,
yet he says, he is their God, but he is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; Mark 12.28. The people said, He answered them well, and 22 Matthew. 33.
They were astonished at it. Yet I may say, the necessity of this Consequence,
from that Antecedent, is nothing so obvious and clear to many, even good
Christians, as the Consequence of Infants of Believing-Parents, being under
Abraham's Covenant, and Church Members with their Parents. But what mischief
this Principle and Practice has done, and how it has served the Devils
Design, we are sad Witnesses.

Fourthly, Though I do not put so much stress upon this, because the Argument of
the Anabaptist cast out all the Posterity of the soundest Believers, and holy
Men, as well as the most wicked out of the Church; yet I believe this has
helped on with the rest, to see what ignorant and debauched persons [because it
is the Mode of the Nation] require Baptism for their Children, and it is
Administered to them. The Anabaptists Principle is, That Regenerate Persons are
the only Subject of Baptism, but how far is this Practice from their Principle?
This does a little confirm me in it; because that Man whom I mentioned in my
first Page, with whom we held Communion; when those who are esteemed godly, and
he did think so, had Children to be baptized, he desired he might know it, and
would be present at the Administration, though he was not clear for
Infant Baptism.

This I will say, I had rather baptize the Children of some Heathen, than of
many who are called Christians, their Ignorance is not more, nor Conversations
worse, and yet these Christians have lived long under Gospel Light: Had they
but the knowledge required in the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book, and
Conversations as civil as some Indians I have known, it were tolerable; but
when men are asked,

Quest. What is God?

Ans. A good old man.

Qu. What is Jesus Christ?

Ans. A courteous young Gentleman.

Quest. How many Gods are there?

Ans. Ten.

Qu. How many Commandments are there?

Ans. Two.

Qu. Which is the first?

Ans. Salvation.

What the second was he forgot that stood by, and showed the three last
Questions, [the first two were another person's] and professed to my
Father-in-law, when he came to have his Child baptized, That he answered him as
well as he could. For want of Catechizing and good Discipline in Church and
State: Into what a miserable condition is this Nation fallen? That this has
helped on among these who are godly Anabaptists, I do not much doubt.

Fifthly, I cannot exclude the holy and just government of God. When people
come to be glutted with the precious Gospel Truths, the life of a Christian;
these are stale and common; new things would be welcome. I doubt not to say,
God may permit some of his own dear people to fall into some Error, which in
them he overlooks and pardons: when others shall take up that Error, and bear
up themselves in it, because such godly men were of that Opinion, and that
Error to them, shall be an inlet to other Errors, and so fall from one to
another, filling their heads with notions, and spending time in dispute about
slight matters, and ruin their Souls at last. I thought it was a smart and
terrible speech of Tertullian, Nec periclitor dicere, etc. Nor do I think it
any danger to say, The very Scriptures themselves to be so ordered or disposed
by the will of God, that they should minister matter to Heretics, when I read
there must be Heresy, 1 Cor. 11.19. which without the Scriptures could not be.
De prescrip. adv. Haeret. p. 86.

And here I cannot but observe the judgment of God [I can call it no other]
That two great Corporations I know, where there were great Assemblies of
Anabaptists, [It is the same in many other places in England] the greatest
number of them turned Quakers, the Anabaptists Society dwindle almost to
nothing. Thus they who threw off Infant Baptism, throw off the Ordinance of
Baptism it self, the Lord's Supper, and the great Gospel Truth, setting up
Self, and a Heathenish morality, being now fallen into the Mare mortuum, from
which few or none return.

Sixthly, Another thing which has prevailed to draw away some honest meaning
persons, not able to judge, have been, the great stress and absolute necessity
the Anabaptists put upon Baptism, and their Baptism, for so they style
themselves the Baptized Congregations, and none baptized but themselves, which
strikes diverse good Christians with fear; and what great good things they may
expect who do come into their way, being Rebaptized, from Mark 16. This Text
Peter de Bruis a Waldensian [in great esteem with my Author, for his judgment
against Infant Baptism; though herein, as in other things charged upon him, by
his railing Popish Adversary, who took them up by Report from others, he
confesses, it is thought he is abused,] makes great use of, neutrum enim sine
alteo salvat.
and tells us, Not one of these alone does save, but jointly; not Baptism
without our own proper Faith; nor our own proper Faith without Baptism, is able
to do any thing; neither of them without the other saves. Therefore though
Infants be baptized by you, yet because by the hinderance of their, they cannot
believe, by no means are they saved. With other strange Tenets, not worthy the
Transcribing. If my Author be not of the same Opinion with this De Bran, [if he
be not abused] why does he so much glory of him in his Book, and in his
Title Page? And if this be true, That sound Faith in Christ cannot save without
persons be of age, and Dowzed over Head and Ears; no wonder though they who
believe it, yield to Dipping.

I intend not to meddle with the Opinion, only this I say, They who do believe
Jesus Christ to be God-man in one Person truly Immanuel, do reverence the
Institution of Christ, and do acknowledge a necessity of the Ordinance, both a
Necessitas modii and praecepti, nor dare we omit it: Yea, some of the
Socinians, [which I note because of the Quaquers, some of which I know to be
rather worse than Socinians, as to the Person of Christ, and deny Baptism
altogether; as also the Lord's Supper, and no wonder] do acknowledge Baptism
not to be a thing indifferent, but necessary, as Martin. Crechonicius, and a
means of Salvation, as Schlichtingius, That no man is to be esteemed a Member
of the Church of Christ without Baptism, as Ostorodus. Therefore he thinks, and
Socinus, Socin. Proflig. de Baptis.
That Infants may be baptized. All quoted with the Pages of their Books, by
Calonius; and tells us also, That in a Socinian Synod, held Anno 1636. in
Transylvania, [as I understand it was] the Synod concluded for Water-bapism, In
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So that the Quaker as to Gospel
Ordinances, and other greatest Gospel Truths, are the worst Enemies Christ has
among them who own the Gospel, which they do after a fashion.

But though we own the Necessity of Baptism, The necessity of Baptism, both for
the Adult and little children, but not absolute nenessity.
yet we do not think a sound Believer in Christ dying without Baptism, shall be
damned: Our Lord does not say in the next words Mark 16.16. but he that
believes not, nor is baptized, shall be damned. Sound Believers may be hindered
from Baptism, and have been so.

How the Hopes of spiritual advantage, as to more Grace and sense of God's
Love. Upon the Suasions some Sectaries have used to draw honest persons into
their way, have prevailed, and how miserably they have complained after of
Disappointment, I could give Instance.

The Learned Reignolds Praeter. 3. de Lib. Apoc. does assert, with many others
whom he mentions.

I can also instance one Woman reputed for a serious Christian, who hearing an
Anabaptist, and after discoursing with him, he told her, she must unravel all
again, she wanted this Ordinance of Baptism, put her into such a fright, that
the Woman could not be quiet in her mind till she was Dipped, and then fell
distracted, and never recovered. I had this from her own relation. The
Spaniards drive the Indians to Baptism; and the Anabaptists, scar^e sound
Christians, baptized to Anabaptism.

I wrote to an Acquaintance of mine in a Corporation where were many
Anabaptists, to certify me about the Conversation of Anabaptists. He answers
me, they are mouldered away to nothing, most turn Quakers. Two that lived the
next door to him were the best he knew. The Woman, when Dipped, thought she was
in a state of Salvation, [as she said] but threw off that all Ordinances and
Prayer. He a little before his Death, slighted the Blood of Christ, and both
died Quakers; yet by their carriage drew diverse to be Quakers.

SECT. II.
As to the Book it self, who ever was the Author, I charged it with falsehood in
the Historical part: When I sent to borrow it again, a second Edition was sent
me, then I saw the Letter was true, which assured me Colonel Danvers was the
Author; and abundance of Authors more added than were in the first: A whole
Regiment is drawn up, to the admiration of the Ignorant Anabaptists that now
cry Victoria, if he does not abuse his Authors, and the Anabaptists too, which
he has most grossly.

For the ancient Fathers, several of them I had read, and knew them to be
contrary to his Opinion: But to follow Authors in particular, I thought it a
vain thing on the Lord's Day, and that in a Country Congregation. His quoting of
the old Britains, and the Waldenses, as being Enemies to Infant Baptism, I took
notice of, answered that and no more. Of which a little afterward.

As to the numerous company of Authors he has quoted, I shall say but two
things.

First, I desire my Author to tell us if amongst them all he can find, who was
the Author of Infant Baptism, if it be an Error; as we can tell him who first
opposed Infant Baptism, Heretics not of the lower rank.

The Lord Brooks, is a person whom the Anabaptists would persuade us, was one
of their Sect, because of some Lines of his, with which I accord: But he tells
us what prevailed with him on the contrary; his words are these.

For ought I could ever learn, it was the constant custom of the purest and
most primitive Church, [mark Sir, not mystical Babylon then] to baptize the
Infants of believing Parents: For I could never find the beginning and first
Rise of this Practice; where as it is very easy to tract Heresies to their
first rising up and seting foot in the Church.

This agrees with what I am upon, why then do you quote him as if he were
yours? As for what he says about Schismatics, Sir, you are the Schismatic,
for I have kept Communion with a godly Anabaptist; but one tells me, that he
desired Communion with one of your Churches, but they would not admit him to
Communion, because he would not be dipped.

I see my Author has named Master D. Rogers, as if he did favor his Opinion,
when as living in the next Town to him, and having intimate acquaintance with
him, I knew him to be a smart Enemy to the Anabaptists.

2. The second thing I would say to them, is this, That ancient Father, pious,
humble, and learned Austin flourished above twelve hundred years before my
Author, or any Anabaptist in England was born; then he lived so many years
nearer the Primitive Churches, than my Author, or any of our Anabaptists:
Whether then B. Austin, or those Anabaptists should best know the practice of
the Primitive Churches as to Baptizing of Infants, let any sober man judge: He
being a person so learned and so famous, no question had all those Authors
which my Author quotes, that wrote before him, if not many more which we have
not: And did not that learned pious Father understand them as well as my
Author, or any Anabaptist now in England? And though he was no Christian
himself, yet was not he acquainted with the practice of the Greek Churches in
his time better than our Anabaptists? Now he says, the practice of
Infant Baptism was so universal in the Church, Austin. l. 1. de peccat. mer.
and renis. c. 26. De baptis. contra. Denat. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 4. c. 24.
that it could not but come from the Apostles. Ecclesia semper habuit, etc. The
Church ever heard it, says he.

Had not Austin spoke true, there was one did watch him [Pelagius] who would
have told him of it to purpose, for that Practice stood in Pelagius's way, but
Pelagius did not deny it.

And whereas my Author does not regard the Writers as to this Controversy,
that wrote after the Third Centuary; I am very confident there is no Author
that wrote in the three first Centuaries, that have any thing in them to oppose
the baptizing of the Infants of believing Parents; but on the contrary, some of
them speak for it.

They that read the most ancient Writers next the Apostles, may see the subject
matter they treated upon, did not give them any occasion to speak of
Infant Baptism, they had other Points in hand.

As to the old Britains, I was a little startled to read them brought against
Infant Baptism, the Proof my Author brings out of Fabianus, I did read in him,
but I much question the truth of Fabianus, because Mr. Fox, giving us an
account what Austin the Monk required of the British Bishops when he came into
England; tells us, He required that they should Preach the Gospel to the
Englishmen, and that they should among themselves reform certain Rites and
usages in their Church, specially for keeping Eastertide, and Baptizing after
the manner of Rome.

Mr. Fox quotes several Authors besides Fabianus, for this: But that passage,
That they should give Christendom to children, which Fabianus reports, he does
not mention.

To Baptize after the manner of Rome, to use their Ceremonies in Baptism, and
to baptize Children; differ much. I searched what Ceremonies were then used in
Rome in Gregory's time, and no wonder though the British Bishops rejected them.

But that the old Britains were against Infant Baptism, is very false, which I
thus prove.

What year God first sent the Gospel into England, the Learned do not agree;
there seem to be strong grounds to believe, that it was before King Lucius sent
to Eleutherius B. of Rome; some say it was, An. 156, others 169, others 170,
others 180. The Contest between Austin and Pelagius, was about 417, in the 63
year of Austins life, as Bucolcerus gathers. Pelagius denied Original Sin; upon
that denied Infant Baptism as being superfluous: not because Infants cannot
believe, which is the sole Argument of our Anabaptists, Pelagius a learned man
would have slighted such an Argument as this. Austin proves Infants to be
guilty of Original Sin, from the universal practice of the Church to take away
Original Sin, they did baptize Infants: Now this Infant Baptism says Austin,
The Church ever had it, ever held it, De verb. Apo. Ser. 10.
they received this from the faith of their Ancestors, and this will it keep
with perseverance to the end. Let Pelagius who was a Britain, answer this:
Britany had received the Gospel 240 years before this Contest. Pelagius knew
the practice of his own Country, and if it had been true, that the old Britains
did not baptize Infants, as my Author says, why did not Pelagius Confute
Austin, charge him with falsehood; the Britains do not baptize Infants, ergo, it
is not the practice of the Universal Church: This being an Argument Austin did
so urge, and put so much stress upon it, Pelagius would have removed it if he
could.

But so far was Pelagius and his followers from denying what Austin affirmed,
that Celestius a Pelagian, in a Book which he put ^orth at Rome, has these
words, which Austin quotes out of it; We do confess that Infants ought to be
baptized for remission of sins, according to the rule of the Universal Church,
and according to the sentence of the Gospel, though Caelestius do not mention
the Text, ^et by the following words, we may plain^y see he means, John 3.5.
Except a man be ^orn again of Water and of the Spirit. So that according to
this Pelagian, here is Scripture ground, and the Rule of the Universal Church
for Infant Baptism.

So then for the old Britains, they were not against Infant Baptism: Now then
for the Waldenses, were I to charge any Opinion or practice upon other
Churches, I should first look to the Confession of their Faith, then I may
boldly charge them or not. As we have a few Anabaptistical Writers in England,
should their Books a hundred years hence fall into the hands of Anabaptists in
foreign parts, should they then assirm that the Church of England, [or the
Churches in England] were Anabaptists, would not this be false, and take it as
a wrong done unto us? View the Confession of Faith of the Church of England, of
the Assembly of Divines, of the Independents in England, in New England, all
their Confessions declare for Infant Baptism. Thus should my Author have done,
if he would deal honestly with the Waldenses, produce their Confession of
Faith, and the Article in which they condemn Infant Baptism. In the Articles
which I have read over, I find no such thing, but that Baptism ought to be
Administered only with pure Water, without any mixture of hallowed Oil.

The Ministers in the Valleys of Piemont, in the year 1532, when the
Anabaptists in Germany were risen up, in the 17th Article of their Confession,
declare for Infant Baptism: The Churches in those Valleys, kept chaste to
Christ from the Apostles times, and were long before the Waldenses were named;
they were called Waldenses, but this was a Nickname put upon them by their
Adversaries, to make the World believe, that their Religion was but a Novelty.
[ Morland. p. 12.]

In the Confession of the Faith of the Waldenses in Bohemia, (so Vergerius
three times calls them) the 12th Article Declares for Infant Baptism, Anno
1535. As the Anabaptists rose up, so the Churches drew up their Confessions
against them: The Ministers in their Preface to their Confession, write, That
some malicious Spirits, because they would cast all the Odium upon them that
they could, did reckon them amongst the Anabaptists. But they answer, Nos ex
factione Anabaptistarum non esse, nemini ignotum est. All men know they were
none of that Faction, nor had any thing to do with the Anabaptists. The
Doctrine they confessed in their Churches, they held and owned, before the name
of the Anabaptists was so much as heard of.

So that my Author has plainly abused both the old Britains, and the Waldenses.

Observing how my Author and Mrs. Tombs insulted over Mr. Baxter, and he that
gave me the Challenge to Print, telling me, All my Party were silent, and I
living in a Country small Town, and not hearing what Books came forth, I could
not tell what to think of it; but when I wrote my Copy for the Press, I left
here a space, till I wrote to Mr. Baxter, to know whether he had met with any
Arguments to change his thought. I thank him, he sent me down his Book in
answer to them both. Then one lent me Mr. Wills. I heard also of Mr. Whitston,
but I saw none of these Authors till my Copy was written, but I see they have
answered Mr. Danvers to purpose, discovered his gross falsehood and forgery.
Another Divine I met with that knows Mr. Danvers, though he has not written
against him, yet he has so traced him, that he told me, never did Jesuits
abuse Authors in their Quotations, more than he has done.

That the Jesuits practice lies this way, we may see in Bellarmine, who quotes
Ten of the Fathers to justify his Doctrine of Christ's preaching to the Spirits
in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. when as Six of them (I may say, Eight of them) give
that Interpretation of the Text, which Bellarmine himself condemns. See (says
that pious and learned Reignolds) With what Conscience these Jesuits handle
the Controversies of Religion; which may well be applied to Mr. Danvers,
abusing so many Authors as he has done. [ Reignold. Praelec. 86. de lib.
Apochr. p. 1044. See him again, p. 1083.]

SECTION III.
Leaving then the Historieal part, by which Infant Baptism is much confirmed:
Let us come to the holy Scriptures, out of which our Divines who have labored
in this Controversy, have produced so many, that I know not how more can be
well added; where therefore others have been large, I will be brief.

One man I knew (though I had no inward acquaintance with him) about fifty
years since, a Mechanic, and Head of a separate Company in those days; he had
none but his Mother Tongue, but a very good head in Polemical Divinity. This
Doctrine of Anti-paedobaptism then being propounded to him, he rejected, though
he had other Arguments against it, yet I took notice of this: I observe (says
he) ever since God had a people upon the earth, he made a difference between
the families of his servants, and of wicked men, even before the flood, Genesis
6.2. There is not only truth, but strength in it, whatever the Anabaptists
scribble against it.

Two Texts especially my Author pitch upon, because he thinks we build much
upon them; Genesis 17.7. and 1 Cor. 7.14. and so we do: these he labors to take
from us. That the children of the Jews were Church Members with their Parents,
the Anabaptists acknowledge: Then they were made so, by this Covenant of God
with Abraham and with his Seed, and the Commandment to Circumcise them; here
then we must begin.

From the 17. Genesis 7. I lay the Argument thus.

A gracious Covenant made, signed, and sealed by God, with a believing Person
and his Seed, and never repealed by God; that Covenant remains in force, and
is to be signed and sealed unto his Seed.

But that Covenant of God with Abraham (to be his God, and the God of his Seed,
was such a Covenant, and never repealed, Therefore

This we premise, There is a great difference between the outward
Administration of an Ordinance, and the inward Efficacy? This is clear in the
Lords Supper, preaching the Word, and so in Baptism; the Scripture is plain for
this, and the Anabaptists cannot deny it.

Or, if you please to take Mr. Tho. Hooker's distinction, There is an Inward
and an Outward Covenant. [ Cov. of Grace, p. 2.3.]

Inward, standing in a spiritual Institution of it between God and man.

When God calls a people, and with his Call gives them Faith to answer his
Call: So that now he is indeed their God, becomes theirs by Faith, and they who
are thus in Covenant with him shall never fall.

2ly, The outward Covenant is more large; The Dispensation of this God gives on
his part to Christians, and their Engagements on their part, is Faith in him,
subjection to him: He does engage himself to them, and if they answer the
outward Privilege, he will make them a choice people, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 26.17,
18, etc. too long to transcribe.

By virtue of this Covenant, God was said, To know them above all the Nations
in the world, Amos 3.2. God set up his Tabernacle amongst them, and dwelt
amongst them, Exodus 25.8. Psalm. 135.1. Chose Israel for his peculiar treasure,
Psalm. 135.4. Gave them his Ordinances, Psalm. 147.19, 20. God wrought for them
wonderfully; and though they provoked him exceedingly, yet he bare with them,
and did not for Abraham 's sake cast them out of his presence as yet, 2 King.
13.23. Thus was he a God to them, the whole visible Church of the Jews; by it
God gave them a great advantage to lay hold upon God, to become their God, in
an outward Covenant, in Efficacy, as well as in outward Administration: This I
say, by virtue of this Covenant with Abraham, till, they dealt most wickedly
with God in Covenant, rejecting Christ, the promised Seed in Abraham's.
Covenant, in whom they should be blessed; then God brake Covenant with them,
and cast them off, Zech. 11.10, 14.

As a people may besaid to be Gods people, so God their God.

1. When they acknowledge God to be the only true God, and their God.

2. When they worship him with his own Worship only.

3. When they profess his Truths, Doctrines, and take his Word for their Rule.

4. When they do Covenant and engage themselves to God. Yet among these may be
many Hypocrites, and but formal Christians; as Branches are said to be in
Christ, John 15.2.

My Author moves six Questions here to raise a dust, and trouble the Reader,
when things are plain; he might have reduced them to Three, what is
considerable in the rest I shall touch.

First, I call it a Gracious Covenant: We read of several Promises God made to
Abraham, Genesis 12.2, 3, 7. and Chap. 13, 14, 15, 16. and Chap. 15.1, 4, 5. But
the word Covenant we read not of till this 17th Chapter, here we have it
several times: and this Covenant between Abraham and his Seed, being the last
branch of the Covenant [for Canaan in the next Verse, was promised three times
before] God now adds a Sign, verse 11. which the Apostle calls a Seal, Romans
4.11. So that now all the former Promises, God binds them up, and seals them up
in a Covenant. The great Promise of all Chap. 12.3. In thy Seed shall all the
Nations be blessed, is not mentioned in this Chapter, since God began to speak
of a Covenant; but this was a part of the Covenant, the Apostle Peter tells the
Jews, Acts 3.25. Ye are the Children of the Covenant which God made with our
Fathers, saying to Abrabam, And in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the earth
be blessed.

Hence that this was a Covenant of Grace, no man can rationally deny. The
Apostle is so clear for it in Romans 4. and Gal. 3.

1. How can God after the breach of the first Covenant, now Covenant with any
to be their God, but by a Covenant of Grace?

2. A Covenant in which Christ is promised, and it is confirmed in Christ,
Galat. 3.17.

3. A Covenant wherein God preaches the Gospel to Abraham, Gal. 3.8.

4. A Covenant, the Righteousness whereof is the Righteousness of Faith, Romans
4.11.

5. A Covenant made 430 years, before the Covenant at Mount Sinai, which Sinai
Covenant could not disanul, Galat. 3.17.

Our Divines have cleared this so, that I say no more of it; and therefore
being confirmed in Christ, it must be the same with the new Covenant. But as
Christ was first revealed but obscurely in a promised Seed, but afterward by
the Prophets there was a clearer revealing of Christ the nearer the time this
Son of Righteousness should rise: So the new Covenant was comprehended in this
Covenant made with Abraham, but by the Prophets afterward God revealed it more
fully, after the Jews had so violated the Mount Sinai-Covenant. Hence that
which Divines-call the Anima faederis, the Soul of the Covenant, I will be
their God, was also in Abraham's Covenant.

My Author denies that Abraham's Covenant and the new Covenant are the same; he
tells us, it was a mixed Covenant; there were two Seeds, and so Promises, and
of two sorts, which must he applied right to the two Seeds.

Ans. 1. How many Covenants shall we have in the Bible, by this Author? Camero
is blamed by some Divines for making Three Covenants, but by this Author we
shall have Four. 1. Adam's Covenant, or Covenant of Nature; 2. Abraham's
Covenant; 3. The Israelites Covenant at Mount Sinai; 4. The New Covenant.

2. Are there not outward Promises also annexed to the New Covenant, as well as
to Abraham's? Do we not read them plainly?

3. Are there not two Seeds in your Administration of Baptism, to Adult Persons
by Dipping; Real, and Formal? I am sure they are not all Real Christians; and
do not your Baptism belong to the New Covenant, a Sign and Seal of the Grace
threof? Yet this you Administer to such, as prove Notorious Hypocrites.

4. Did not Abraham's Seed by this mixed Covenant, enjoy besides outward
Corporal Blessings, those Blessings I mentioned before, in the Church, with
more I might have mentioned?

5. Did not God engage himself to be the God of all the Seed? and did not
Circumcision Seal up his Covenant and Engagement to them, if they did perform
the Condition? and had they not a great advantage by God's engaging himself
thus to them to lay hold upon God, for their God and Eternal Portion?

2ly, This Covenant was made with Abraham as a Believing Person, and the Father
of Believers; it was not made with him as a Man, nor with his Seed as Men, but
as the Seed of a Believing Father. Circumcision was the Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. Romans 4.11. in which Chapter twice he is called, The
Father of all Believers, both Jews and Gentiles; and Gal. 3.29.

Here a Question might be moved, why Abraham should be called, The Father of
Believers; my Reason is, were there no Believers before Abraham? was he the
First and Eldest Believer? The Father in the Family is the first in the Family;
so Abraham, if the Father, should be the first. But was not Abel a Believer in
Christ, Enoch, Noah, etc. surely there were Believers in Christ a Thousand
Years before Abraham was Born, what may we think of Adam and Eve in Charity,
may we not think they Believed in the Promised Seed? why then should Abraham be
the Father?

Aquinas Answering to a Question, Why Circumcision was commanded first to
Abraham, and to none before? [ Sermon. Doct. 3. q. 70. Act. 2.] Answers, That
Abraham was the first that received the Promise from God of Christ to be born
out of his Seed, and the first that separated himself from the Society of
Infidels. If this were true, it would serve to Answer our Question. Though A La
i would labors to defend the Vulgar Transaction, Genesis 3.15. She shall bruise thy
Head; yet he says it come all to one. For it is the Woman by her Seed, that is
Christ, that bruised the Serpents Head; Do we think the Lord did not teach his
Servants then the use and end of the Sacrifices? So that Christ was promised
before, and there were Believers before, if there were a little more revealing
of Christ to Abraham now, that is all. I do more admire his Act in sacrificing
his Son Isaac, though that is given to his fear of God, Genesis 22.12.

I cannot think of any better reason than this, though there were Believers in
Christ, and Abraham might be a stronger Believer, but with none did God make an
express Covenant, a Believer and his Seed, and seal the Covenant to his
Posterity, but with Abraham only.

I shall add a few more words presently.

3. This Covenant was made also with, and sealed to his Seed.

The great Question is, who are this Seed? my Author tells me, His Spiritual
Seed: Whence I meet with this once and again, That Abraham's natural Seed was a
Type of the spiritual Seed; Elect, Regenerate. Thus in answer to the question,
Whether not baptizing Infants makes not the Privilege under the Gospel, less
than under the Law? He answers, The natual Seed of Abraham was a typical
shadowing thing -- as the Antitype exceeds the Type, the spiritual birth the
carnal birth; so much are we better.

Ans. 1. What do you mean by, so much are we better? Were none of these who
were Circumcised being Abraham's natural Seed, also his spiritual Seed? Your
words carried it as if not. Besides here would be a question, How the
Elect-regenerate, the spiritual Seed, are Abraham's Seed; how is he a Father to
them, as such? I am sure they are Christ's Seed, Isa. 53.10, 11. And we can
give reasons, why they should be called his Seed. he is the meritorious and
efficient cause of them, but Abraham neither way: You would have done well to
have shown us this. Abraham is not so much a Father to us, as Paul was to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15. neither I am sure in this respect he was Father to
Isaac, he did not convey Faith in his Generation of Isaac; how then is he a
Father to us now? That there were Believers before Abraham, the Apostle, Heb.
11.4, 5, 7. Instance in Abel, Enoch, and Noah; (and more I doubt not) but yet
in the History written by Moses, Abraham is the first person who is called a
Believer, upon a special Promise given to him, Genesis 15.6. if any cause, he was
but Causa exemplaris, which is Causa adjuvnans to the principal: By his example
we should be stirred up to believe the Promise of God, as Abraham our Father
did; An example how God will justify us.
but he had such an advantage as we have not: he knew the Promise was made to
him immediately, without any discourse, which we cannot know, but must first
prove the Condition. But this I think also is a reason, He was the first person
sealed, that received the Seal of that Promise or Covenant, and all his Seed
after him commanded to receive and observe the same. This Sign and Seal being
visible, I conceive Abraham is to be considered, as a visible-believing Father,
and all his visible Seed must be sealed as the Father.

2. As to what you say, the natural Seed are the Type of the spiritual Seed;
was not Isaac his natural Seed, and was he not also his spiritual Seed; then it
seems Isaac was a Type of himself. So all the godly Jews after, that were
Abraham's Seed after the flesh, were Types of themselves. I pray tell us how
the Type and Antitype meet in one individual person? To what Topic in Logic
will you refer the Type and Antitype?

2ly, When the Antitype comes, the Type cease: When then Isaac, Jacob, and the
Israelites, that are the natural Seed, come to be the Spiritual Seed, then they
must cease to be his natural Seed: But how is this possible? When Christ came,
the Types ceased.

3ly, When you Dip your Regenerate persons; actual Believers you think they
are: then they are the Seed of Abraham you judge; then Abraham is their Father;
then God is their God: but diverse of these are Hypocrites, we know they have
proved so, and we shall hear an Anabaptist anon acknowledge it: they professed
they took him for their God, and worshipped him, etc. while they then lived in
your Churches, and did not as yet openly discover themselves; was God in no
sense their God?

4ly, To whom Christ is a Head, to them God may be said to be a God: But Christ
is the Head of the visible Church, in which are many unsound Members; Branches
in him that bear no fruit, John 15.2. Then God in some sense is their God, if
Christ may in some sense be their Head.

5ly, Is there not an external and an internal Adoption? Romans 9.4. to them
pertained the Adoption: Were they not called God's children? Deuteronomy. 14.1. Is not
God then the God of his children? Do not God say, They are mine? Ezekiel. 16.20,
21. and yet is God no way their God?

6ly, If the spiritual Seed be there only meant, then all the Israelites in
the Land of Canaan were the spiritual Seed; which I answer is false. That they
must be so according to your interpretation, the next Verse proves it; Genesis
17.7, 8, 9. At the 8th verse, I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee,
the I and wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession. And I will be their God: Thou shall therefore keep my
Covenant, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. Can the Holy One
speak plainer than he does? Does he not tell you, that that seed of Abraham
which shall inherit the Land of Canaan [where his Tabernacle and all his
Instituted Worship was set up] and there kept the Seal of his Covenant, that he
will be their God? Does not God speak the same, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. to the
men, women and children, who then entered into Covenant with God. That he may
establish thee to day for a people unto himself: And that he may be a God unto
thee, as he has said unto thee, and as he has sworn to thy Fathers, etc.

When Peter would draw the Jews to believe in Christ Crucified, who as yet were
Unbelievers, and not turned from their iniquities, Acts 3.25, 26. Do he not use
this Argument, You are the children of the Covenant which God made with our
Fathers; Abraham in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
This part of the Covenant was most proper to the thing Peter had in hand. But
if they were now the children of that Covenant God made with Abraham, then God
was their God, though as yet they were not a spiritual seed.

As to this Seed the Jews tell us, The Seed of Ishmael is excepted from
Circumcision; as it is written; For in Isaac shall thy seed be called to thee,
Gen 11.12. And Esau is excepted, for lo, Isaac said to Jacob, and he give to
thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed, Genesis 28.4. Ishmael was
cast out of the Church. Profane Esau despised his Birthright, and is cast off.

As to the Sons Abraham had by Keturah, though the Scripture does not say they
they were circumcised, yet we may rather think they were. But whether after
Abraham had sent them away, they kept up Circumcision in their Families, [
Ishmael and Esau kept up Circumcision we know] and taught their Children the
spiritual meaning of it, the Scripture is silent. So that from them we can draw
no Argument pro or con. This is enough for me, that when God says, I will
stablish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, -- To be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And the very next words, God
promises to give the Land of Canaan to his seed, and will be their God there.
And these were the Seed of Isaac, the Seed of Jacob; and as the Martyr Stephen
calls them, Acts 7.38. the Church of God in the Wilderness, [that is, Ecclesia
instituta, vel organica, though God might have some belong to him that sprung
from the other Sons of Abraham.] This is plain and clear, but I am sure all
these were not the spiritual seed.

7ly, Elect-regenerate stand upon even ground with Abraham, but here God puts
some honor upon Abraham, that his see shall have a blessing for his sake.

8ly, If Elect-regenerate be only mean by the Seed, then there needed not the
word Seed to be put in, unless you will say, God is not the God of
Elect-regenerate, unless they be Abraham's Seed; wa^ he not of Abel, Enoch.
Noah, etc.

9ly, This Covenant with Abraham and h^ seed was signed and sealed, Genesis 17.9,
10, 11, 12. What Moses calls a Sign, or Token the Apostle Romans 4.11. calls a
Seal.

My Author tells me, Circumcision was ^ Seal to Abraham only, not to Believers,
no^ their seed. To Infants it was a sign put i^^ their flesh, etc. too tedious
to transcribe all.

A. You tell us, it sealed to Abraham only the Truth of that Promise, That in
his see^ all the Familes should be blessed. But the same Promise was made to
Isaac, Genesis 26.4. and to Jacob, Genesis 28.14. Did it not seal to them as well?
Yea, the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.25. tells the Jews, they were children of the
Covenant God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in thy seed shall
all the kinreds of the earth be blessed. Did dot Circumcision seal this to them
as well? The end of Seals is to confirm Faith: had not they, have not we need
to have our Faith strenthned? Is the Anabaptists Faith so strong, that they
need no Seals?

2ly, I took God's Signs to be Seals, by the Apostle's Authority: I look on the
Rainbow which God calls, Genesis 9.12, 13. the Token, (...) [the same word used,
Genesis 17.11. of Circumcision] of his Covenant, to be not only a Sign, but a Seal
of his Covenant, that he will not drown the World.

3ly. But why do you say, it sealed that Promise; What did it seal nothing but
that? That Promise is not mentioned in this Chapter, but in the 12th, and 22th;
but in this Chapter, so soon as the Lord had made the Covenant between himself,
Abraham, and his Seed, immediately the the Lord adds this Circumcision, and
calls it his Covenant. I am sure it seals this, and I doubt not but the Jews
did so look upon it, as a Seal of the Covenant between God and them; that God
was their God, and they his people.

Sir, you must give me better grounds than these, or else I must still be of
the opinion of the great body of the most learned and pious Divines; viz. That
all the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, were and are Signs of the
Covenant, sealing up the Grace of God to Believers. My Author has more Notions
about Circumcision: but of them afterward.

In the Child, Circumcision left a signal Impression, says he.

A. 1. That which you call a signal Impression, God calls his Covenant. But

2ly, Though there were a signal Impression left in the Infant, yet if when it
came to years it were not taught the spiritual meaning of it, the Child would
get no benefit by it.

3ly, What signal Impression is left upon those whom you baptize by Dipping,
when Adult, more than upon those who are baptized by pouring of Water upon them
when Infants? True, you can remember better you were dipped; but Children, though
they have but a moral certainty from their Parents and others, and the
Testimony of the Book in which they are recorded, yet being taught the meaning
of it, and especially if as some Parents who compose short Prayers for their
Children, put in that Petition, for the blessing of their Baptism, as some
Parents do; Children may keep it in mind, and in time come to make as good use
of it, as those who are dipped when Adult; and Experience I hope will prove it.

4ly, If that be true which Mr. Tom^^s is willing to believe out of Mr. Seldom,
that the Jews admitted Proselites, by Baptism the female kind, the same Author
Mr. Seldom, and so Baxter tells us, the Children also of the Proselites were
admitted by Baptism; to what purpose says the Anaba tist, since they
understand it not, and there is no Impression left? Let the Jews answer that.

5ly, Abraham's Seed being so numerous as the Stars in the Heavens, how could
the Infants circumcised, when they came to riper years, and living only in
Canaan, know that there was any Signal Impression made upon their flesh, unless
their Parents or others told them: might not they well think al^ men were as
they, or it might be proper to their Nation? If they then were certain by their
Parents and others informing them, cannot we be as certain by our Parents
Information, that we were baptized?

6ly, May there not be a Conveyance of a great Estate to a Child that lies in
the Cradle, and understand nothing many years; but when it comes to ripe years,
and see its Name in the Conveyance, and the Witnesses, now it can sue for it.
Two things are very desirable, if there were nothing to trouble the Conscience
[a thing to be lamented] and other things concur. First, That Baptism should
ever be administered in the face of the Church. Secondly, The Names of all
baptized Recorded; [both which I have known the constant practice in
Independent Churches:] By both which, and Parents Education, a Child when it
comes to years of understanding, may be as sure of its Baptism, though it makes
no Impression as Circumcision did in the flesh, and now sue out the Blessings
which there the Lord did signify, and conditionally seal to be mine.

7ly, Were our Churches in that order they ought to be; and were that laudable
Practice [which certainly is our Duty] taken up, viz. That special care b^
taken, that Children baptized be diligently Catechized, and when they come to
fit years, be called before the Eldership, there to own their Baptismal
Covenant, and give an account of their Faith; solemn Prayer made for them, and
the Church now to take care of them, and inspection over them, as being their
Members; there would be no room for this Objection, and less ground for
Anabaptists to cry down Infant Baptism. If we will keep Churches [so far as our
Duty can reach] for Christ, it is not preaching a Sermon or two on the
Lord's Day, will do the work, there is more required than so.

Though the Anabaptists strength lie in the incapacity of Infants to believe in
Christ, yet because this notion has been a trouble to me heretofore, therefore
I speak the more to it.

5ly, This Covenant never repealed by God. Now I come to the Pinch: Mr. Tombs
the greatest Adversary that ever the Seed of Believers had, yields two things.

1. That the Children of the Jews were Members with their Parents in the Jewish
Church. [But then, say I, it must be by virtue of this Parental-Covenant God
made with Abraham; else how they should be Members with their Parents, I know
not.]

2ly, That if the Children of believing Parents, be Members of the Church with
the Parents, then they must be baptized. For I grant, (says he) that Baptism
is the way and manner of solemn Admission into the Church, I mean the regular
way.

Then the Question must be thus stated.

Quest. When the Jews believed in Christ, come, crucified, risen, and ascended,
as the five thousand in Acts 4.4. Did the Lord now repeal his Covenant which he
made with Abraham and his Seed; admit only the Parents into the Gospel Church,
but bar the Doors against their Posterity, or Children?

I think I have stated the Question right, and if this cannot be proved, then I
hope believing Gentiles shall find a way to bring in their Children too with
the Jews, and find a Title to Baptism by Mr. Tombes's Concession.

Affirmanti incumbit probatio; This lie upon the Anabaptists to prove. And here
though I am far from that absurd, irrational Principle of Veronius, who lays
down this for a Rule in our Disputation with the Papists; That we must bring
express Scriptures to confute them, yet this casting all the Posterity of the
Godly out of the Church, is so wretched a Doctrine, [as Mr. Thomas Hooker calls
it] against the poor Infants, that as yet want a Tongue to plead for
themselves, that the Anabaptists must bring Scriptures, if not express, yet as
clear and strong as express Scriptures, else I shall little regard their
Writings. And this I require upon these grounds.

First, The Anabaptists require of us an express Command from Christ to the
Apostles, to baptize Infants. This was put upon me in the Congregation: Now it
is meet the Anabaptists should be honest men, buy and sell by the same measure.
If they require of us express Scriptures, we may well require of them the same.

Secondly, All the Arguments which the Anabaptists draw from Scripture against
Infants Church Membership, and Baptism, do strike at the Grace and Wisdom of
God in his Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, and his Constitution of the
Church of the Jews, as if the Lord had not done wisely, but they will teach him
how to Constitute Churches better. We shall hear their Arguments anon.

Thirdly, The holy Page tells us, how much weight the Jews and false Teachers
put upon Circumcision, what a stir it made in the Churches, while the Apostles
labored to remove it, though it was a painful bloody Ordinance. We read Acts
21.21. This was the great Objection against Paul, and this was 21 years after
Paul's Conversion: I am apt to think till the Temple [the head of all the
Ceremonies] was utterly demolished; the believing Jews did Circumcise their
Children; But had Paul told them, the Reason was, that Christ is come, and now
the Covenant with Abraham as to his Seed, is repealed, and their Seed are all
cast out of the Church, and therefore they must not Circumcise their Children:
Should we not have read the Jews Clamours and Outcries against the Apostles,
in the Acts, and in every Epistle, and what a bar had this been against the
reception of the Gospel; I appeal to the Consciences of the Anabaptists. But
though we read of Circumcision in several places, both in the Acts and the
Epistles, there is not one word of this.

Fourthly, God did expressly repeal his Covenant with Israel made at Mount
Sinai, Heb. 8.13. That which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish away.
This Covenant of God with Abraham and his Seed, is a Covenant much noted in the
Scripture, and long before Sinai-Covenant: Now if the Lord does indeed repeal
this Covenant with Abraham, why should we not expect clear Scripture-ground.
The Jews quarrelled with the Apostles, because they changed the Customs of
Moses, Acts 6.14. and chap. 21. v. 21. but if they had taught the nulling of
the Covenant of God with Abraham their Father too, the Apostles should have
heard of it with both ears, and we should have read it. God tells them when he
repealed that Covenant, He would make a new Covenant with the House of Israel,
and the House of Judah: are not Children a part of the House? They were so when
God made that Covenant with the House of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. then they
are in the House still, then they are capable of the Grace of the new Covenant
with their Parents; then the want of actual Faith does not exclude them from
Baptism.

Fifthly, God tells Abraham, he will establish his Covenant, -- and it shall be
an ever lasting Covenant, Genesis 17.7. If God establish, it must stand: If he
says, it is everlasting, the Entail is not cut off: Nor do I doubt in the
least, but as when they rejected Christ, and said, Let his blood be upon us and
our children, Mat. 27.25. God did cast away Parents and Children: so when God
receives them again, Romans 11.15.26. the Parents shall not be received, and
Children remain cast out, but they shall come in with their Parents.

If they say, the word Everlasting, is spoken of their possession of Canaan,
verse 8. and Circumcision, v. 13.

Ans. I know well how the word (...) for ever, or everlasting is taken in
Scripture, but it does not at all hinder the Argument.

1. For in this Covenant is nothing Typical, it is pure Grace; and we have
other Scriptures in the Gospel will confirm it.

2. As to Circumcision, it was a bloody Ordinance, as was the Passover, all
Ordinances so, till Christ came with his Blood fulfilling all, removed them: No
more blood in any Ordinance after Christ. Zipporah calls Moses a bloody
Husband, at the Circumcising of her Son, Exodus 4.25, 26. At this time when the
Jews circumcise their Children; they say they may do it from Sunrising to
Sunsetting, any hour on the Eighth day: but they choose the Morning, because
the Child then being empty, it will not bleed so much: The Mohet, or he that
circumciseth, sucks the Wound three times, and use other means to stop the
blood, but no bloody Ordinance now. [ Buxt. Synor. Isid. p. 81.86.]

3. For the Land of Canaan, that was conditional, their abiding in it; but
however, though they are now cast out of possession, yet they have jus ad rem,
a just Title to it at this day. Hence Ezekiel. 37.14.21. and Ezekiel. 36.24. Three
times the Lord promised to bring them into their own Land, ver. 28. the Promise
runs for them. It is their own; then now to depart from the literal sense,
without some eminent absurdity that will follow upon the literal sense, we
ought not.

6ly, If God will not bring an unclean Creature forbidden, into a believing
Jew's House, without an express word to warrant it, will God cast a holy Seed
out of his House, and not give as clear a ground to the believing Parent to
know his mind? The unclean Creatures signifying the Heathen of several sorts,
[the Hebrews say, Babylonians, Medes, Persians, Greeks, Romans] not eat; that
is, not to have communion, Acts 10.28. Compare Levit. 11.5, 6, 7. with Acts
10.11, 12, 13, 15. and must now the holy Seed be cast out of the Church, and
looked upon as the Swine were then? We must have clearer grounds and Texts,
than ever yet the Anabaptists have brought, I say as strong as express
Scriptures.

7ly, The New Testament does give us clear Texts to prove the Church Membership
of believing Parents; you cannot give us clearer Texts for their unchurching,
unless you give us express Scriptures.

8ly, Let me take up one of Mr. Baxter's Arguments, and improve it my way.

If God has repeled his Covenant, and cast the Seed of the believing Jews out
of the Church, then it was either in justice or in mercy.

But neither this nor that; therefore not cast out, etc. thus Mr. Baxter.

For the first, not in justice, I prove thus. Let Parents be never such sound
Believers, walk in the steps of their Father Abraham, keep close in the
Covenant, yet the Anabaptists cast out all their Seed; but this cannot be in
justice: for the Text says, Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy
and truth unto such as keep his Covenant. But these Jews, believing Parents do
so; yet God repeals his Covenant with their Seed, and cast them out of the
Church.

2. In mercy the Lord does it not; For then God gives a greater mercy in the
room of that which in mercy he takes away, says Mr. Baxter.

This is true what Mr. Baxter says, I prove what he says, the believing Jew
shall say, though God has repealed his Covenant with my Seed, and cast them
out of the Church, yet he has given my Seed a better mercy, both my self and
my children, if they could speak, would say, We would not be under Abraham 's
Covenant with our Parents, nor Church Members with our Parents, as we were
before Christ came, for Christ has left us Infants a better Blessing in the
room. As it was a great favor to the Israelites, that God gave his Oracles to
them, Psalm 147.19, 28. That God was in Covenant with them, Ephesians. 2.12. But
God will null that Covenant, Heb. 8.13. It shall vanish away: But God will make
another Covenant, new, a better Covenant, having better Promises in the room of
that old vanishing Covenant: So that if Isreal's eyes be opened, they would say,
they would by no means be under the old Covenant, this new is so much better.
Thus let the Anabaptists tell us what God has left better for the Infant Seed
of a Jew now believing in Christ, that now it would not be Churchmember with
the Parents, nor under Abraham's Covenant, nor would now be baptized, as before
Christ they were circumcised: For my part I can conceive nothing; keep to the
state of the Question.

9. There is so much evil in this Doctrine and Practice of the Anabaptists,
that we must have clearer Scriptures than ever were produced as yet to prove
it, and clear it from that evil.

As 1. For the blessed God; How does (...) dishonor him in straitning his Love
and Grace now under the Gospel, over it was under the Law. Moses tells the
Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.37. The Lord loved thy Fathers, Chap. 7.8. and chap. 33.3. So it
appears, that he would not only take the Fathers, but their Children also into
Covenant, and constitute his Church of them also. But now whatever the Gospel
says of the Philanthropie of God, Tit. 3.4. and God so loving the world, Joh.
16.3. when that Seed promised to Abraham is come, in whom all Nations shall be
blessed, he nulls the Covenant with his Seed, cast them out of the Church, and
leaves no blessing for their Infants, when their Parents believe in the
promised Seed come.

Before the Lord calls the little children under the Covenant, and in the
Church, (Mine) Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. But now the Jews believe in Christ, God calls
none of their Children Mine, though now they do more gladly bear them unto him
than they did before.

2ly, It dishonours Christ; He took upon him indeed the Seed of Abraham, Heb.
2.16. and turned the Seed of Abraham out of the Covenant, and out of the
Church, if the Anabaptists Doctrine be true.

Though he seemed to have an affection to Children, and was much displeased
with his Disciples, when they rebuked the Parents when they came to seek his
blessing for their Babes, Mark 10. 13, 14. and bad them bring their children to
him, and told them, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. If our sweet Lord meant
as he spoke, and we believe he did, then they are still Members of the Church,
he does not shut the Door against them, now he is come. But the Anabaptists
tell us a contrary Tale to the dishonor of our blessed Savior. When the
believing Jews now carry their children to Christ, Dedicate them to him with
earnest Prayer in Baptism, and engage to bring them up for him, the Anabaptists
forbid them, and tell them, the Kingdom of Heaven does not consist of such
little Ones.

Per absurdum vero est, ut per Messiae adventum imminutum sit foedus sanctu,
Vossius. Genesis 17.7. That the blessed, and blessing, Messia, by his coming,
should null the Covenant with Abraham, it is not only absurd, but very absurd,
a great reproach is cast upon Christ.

Doctor Thomas Goodwin pleading the Infant's case against the Anabaptists,
says, In a manner half the Church of God, the purest part of it; Elect Infants
die in their bud and infancy, and grow not up to partake of the dews and
influence of any other outward Ordinance; and were they deprived of this, [i.e.
Baptism] should go out of this world [into which God only sent them to receive
that which should make them meet for the common Inheritance of the Saints]
without any outward owning them, or visible way of blessing from him, etc. --
yea and the other half that grow up to glorify God in their riper years,
whereof many also are holy from the Womb; these also should, during their years
of nonage, want an outward badg, and any outward acknowledgment of what they
are, even Fellowheirs of the Kingdom with their Brethren, which even in the
Infancy of the World, whilst all were under Tutors and Governors was their
privilege. Thus this Gospel-Divine speaks, and that to the purpose.

3ly, As to Parents, be they never so godly, what grief must it needs be to
them, if their children die out of the Covenant and visible Church; what hopes
can they have of their Salvation, more than an Indian has of his being both in
the same state? An Indian-child may be Elected as well as a sound Believer.
2ly, nor can a believing Parent pray for his children upon any grounds more
than an Indian: the Covenant and Promisies scattered in the World to the Godly
and their Seed, they cannot plead upon them. 3ly, Whereas the Covenant and the
Engagement of the children to God in Baptism, is the Infant's Circumcision,
might be Arguments to whet upon their children, and encourage them: now no such
Arguments are in date. 4ly, The Jews before Christ came, in the day of their
circumcising their Infants, did use to give thanks to God, and bless him for
Abraham's Covenant, and his Ordinance of Circumcision, the Seal of his
Covenant: but when the Jews believe Christ's come, now Thanksgiving and
blessing of God cease; for the Govenant is nulled, children cast out of the
Church.

4ly, As for the Children of believing Parents, if they come to years of
discretion, and God bless Parents instructions so as to keep Conscience awake,
though they play the wretches, and have cause to be humbled all their days; yet
I say, if Conscience be kept awake, and God begin to open their Eyes more, and
make them in earnest to mind the Salvation of their Souls, then they will
understand what a wretched Doctrine, this Doctrine of the Anabaptists is, by
denying that to them by which they may take hold of God in the time of their
fears. Quare patet non prorsus vanum esse atque inane ex pio genere nasci,
says Peter Martyn, [Hoc Com. p. 8.] It is not a vain empty thing to be born of
godly Parents: this is true which he says.

Here, though it was far from my thoughts to speak, much less to write what
benefit I have experimentally found from a Parental-Covenant, and
Infant Baptism; yet because the Lord's Providence has engaged me in this
Controversy, which I never intended, and because it may be a help to others,
Children of good Parents, I shall declare.

God blessed my godly Parents Education of me, to keep my Conscience awake, as
I said, though I have cause to abhor my self all my days; but above fifty years
past, I began to have more serious thoughts about an eternal state, and how to
get an Interest in Christ and the Promises. I found several qualifications that
did prepare hearts for Promises, Isa. 61.1. Isa. 55.1, 2. Mat. 11.28. Luke
19.10. My trouble for some years, now how to make out these qualifications: I
would have them, prayed for them, but could not satissie my self that I had
them as I ought to have them. While I was writing my Copy, these very words,
there comes to me a good christian woman, who I know for many years had walked
with God, and she puts this Question to me, How she might know whether she ever
had these qualifications, in Mat. 11.28. and engaged me to send one Exercise
upon it, as I did: I could not but take notice of this Providence.

While I was thus troubled about making out these qualifications, there comes a
motion into my mind; What say you to your Father's Covenant? You know your
Parents were godly, and God promised to be the God of Abraham and his seed;
will you stand to your Father's Covenant, and choose your Father's God for your
God? I began to think of it, my heart answered, Yes, I will stand to my
Father's Covenant: But how do you take your Father's God to be your God? I
answered, As he was my Father's God. My teaching ^od, my heart-humbling God, my
reconciled God, my justifying God, my sanctifying God, my God to lead me all my
days; for thus he was my Father's God. Here my qualification was the choice of
my Father's God, who was mine before by an external Covenant-administration;
but now to have him my God, my portion, by an internal Covenant and efficacy?
Here now I was pent up; Will you choose him, or refuse him? Blessed be God who
gave me this advantage to lay hold upon him, by virtue of this
Parental-Covenant.

Further, to clear my meaning, Ido not by this Discourse about Qualifications
of Promises, intend that Christians should not regard them. I am far from that:
if they be sound Christians, I Will warrant them they shall regard them. Nor do I
think but Christians reflecting upon themselves, the good Spirit assisting, may
find them certainly wrought.

But this I mean, Young persons brought up under the droppings of good
Education, upon whom God works more gradually; that cannot tell the time when,
nor the manner how God works; as some Adult persons upon whom God many times
breaks in with his Terrors; these use to be much troubled about the making out
the qualifications of Inviting Promises, because they cannot find them so
sensibly as they would, though they have them in truth, but cannot discern it:
the question is, Whether now Abraham 's Covenant may not do such a Soul a
pleasure?

Quest. When God made this Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, did not God
intend good to Abraham 's Seed? If not, it was a vain Covenant? God forbid.

To say, it signifies no more than that, when he gave them his Oracles, Romans
3.2. Was not that a Privilege, if his Seed would improve them?

But this Covenant was distinct from the Oracles, made before the Oracles were
given: and may not Abraham's Seed? ought they not to improve it to their
spiritual good and advantage: who will deny it?

God in Isa. 56.4. speaks of taking hold of his Covenant. I say, by this
Covenant God puts forth his hand to Abraham's Seed to take hold upon him, so as
to become their God for ever.

1. Suppose we two sorts of persons under the Conviction of a miserable state:
One sort is under Abraham's Covenant, the other not; There are Inviting
Promises to all sorts, whether without, or within the Covenant. They who are
within the Covenant, can make use of all the Inviting Promises offered to
others, and Abraham's Covenant too: But they who are out of the Covenant,
cannot make use of, or lay hold upon God by Abraham's Covenant.

2ly, God is nearer to his Covenanted-seed than to others, Psalm 148.14. Israel
a people near unto the Lord: Israel is in Covenant with him: God loved their
Fathers, Deuteronomy. 4.37. By this he puts forth his hand to them to lay hold upon
him more immediately, than to others out of Covenant. The choosing of their
Father's God for their God in sincerity, is the Condition, and he becomes their
God, and his Covenant gives them a ground for the assurance of it.

3ly, This Covenanted-Seed may plead with God in Prayer for many Promises made
to the Upright and their Seed, Psalm. 112.2. Prove. 20.7. with diverse other
Promises, fetching the strength of their pleading from the Covenant and
Promises, which others out of the Covenant cannot do. And since God has
promised blessing to this Seed; the Seed may choose their blessing, any
spiritual blessing in Christ, and have his Promise to warrant it.

4ly, When their hearts are in fears, troubles, doubts, and cannot make out the
qualifications of other Promises, as they would, they may come hither: here is
no winding out, but answer Catagorice, will you have your Father's God, or
refuse him? You see he offers himself, and is in Covenant with you one way
already, by an external Covenant-administration; and if you will stand to that
Covenant, and take him for your God indeed, and yield up your self to him, he
will be your God in a saving manner, and portion for ever.

5ly, Since all the Word and Promises are then efficacious when the Spirit will
please to work with them; and it is free for him to make this or that Word
efficacious to us: I doubt not to say, Abraham's Covenant, is as fit as any
inviting Promise, and it is as rational for the Seed of godly Parents to lay
hold upon God by it, as by any other Word.

My Parents then looking upon me as being in Covenant, and a Churchmember with
them, they did Dedicate me to God, and brought me under the Seal of his
gracious Covenant in Baptism. And what our Lord said to Peter when he washed
his Feet, John 13. 6, 7. What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter: Was truly verified of me. What the Lord did then, when he poured
clean water upon me in my Baptism, I know not, but now I do know, and did many
years since. What was the opinion of the ancient Fathers, and many Divines now,
about the Efficacy of Baptism, I did not then know, nor do I now concern my
self about it, to discourse it. But this I took for a Truth, It does not
consist with the Infinite wisdom and holiness of God, to Institute any
Ordinance in his House that is of trivial concernment, whatever they seem to be
to a carnal heart: they are things of great weight; Where the great God engages
himself to a Creature, and therefore to be attended with great reverence, and
as diligently improved. Now when I came to reflect upon my Baptism, how God was
first with me, before I understood him, he was aforehand with me, took hold of
me, brought me under the Seal of his blessed Covenant; and when I read over the
several Texts, which tells us what blessings are there signified and sealed,
God was engaged for his part; if I will look to my part, to answer the
Condition, then these should be mine; this gave me encouragement. As for my
Dedication to him, I was willing to stand to it, I did like it very well: but
both for the Condition, and to answer my Dedication, I went to him, whose
Covenant it is, and who was first with me, that he would please to perform his
part, and in the strength of his performance, I would perform my part. Why
would that blessed One be first? Why did he begin with me, when I did not know
him? But since he will be a God, and Triumph in his Grace, since I came to
understand it, by his Grace I have held him, and will hold him. And though as I
said, I have not attained what I seek after, yet I have found in my dismal
Temptations, wherein I have had as deep a share as most Christians ever had,
when I could not tell where to lay hold, my Parent al-covenant and
Infant Baptism, which I am still improving now my Head is gray, have been a
support unto me. So that I bless God, 1. for Abraham's Covenant, 2ly, I bless
God that I had godly Parents: 3ly, I bless God my Parents were no Anabaptists,
but that while I was an Infant they brought me under the Seal of the blessed
Covenant, a stay and comfort to me in my old age, and I hope improved, as well
as they who were Dipped yesterday.

When people do either not understand things, or if they do, yet they do not
mind and improve them, so get no good by them; no wonder though they talk
against them, when others bless God for them, and daore his grace in them.

Let the Children of Godly Parents look to themselves, they have a price in
their hands, if they have wisdom and hearts to improve it; it is a fearful
thing to hear of the Child of a Godly, Praying, Parent to dye in an unconverted
State.

Only a word, some may think you had Godly Parents, mine were not so; it may be
I had a Godly Grandfather, or a Mother: had you so? no doubt but you may
improve the Covenant from him. The second Commandment will help you.

David pleaded 86 Psalm. 16. Save the Son of thy Handmaid: he pleads the
Parental- Covenant (says Mr. Hooker.) Born thy Servant of Godly Parents, who
were thy Servitors (says Ainsworth?) Insignis est priorum praerogativa, qua
etiam David, hic animum suum in precibus fulcit, quod sciunt se in Ecclesia a
fidelibus Parentibus, qui fuerunt servi, and ancillae Domini, natos esse. Says
Gesnor on the Text, and stirs up Parents to learn this Treasure to their
Children; and Children of such Parents to make use of it. Junius also speaks
well to this Head.

Others it may be will say, Baptized I am, but my Parents bad enough. Well, art
awake, and art in earnest for Christ, and the saving Blessings come by him? you
may improve your Baptism. When the Gibeonites by Craft got Israel into a
Covenant with them, and confirmed it by an Oath. 9 Josh. 15. the God of Israel
would not suffer them to destroy them; They were made Servants indeed; the
breach of this cost Israel dear. 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3. If you be got under the
Seal of the Covenant, it was not by Craft, but God's Providence ordered it; and
now you are under it, prize it, and improve it; do not you fear, the God of
Israel will hold to his part.

These being the Evils that arise from the Anabaptists Doctrine, we must have
very clear Texts, for the nulling of Abraham's Covenant, and casting Children
out of the Church.

10ly, If Blessed Jesus upon his coming does repeat Abraham's Covenant, and so
the Children of the Believing Jews be no Church Members, then Jesus Christ by
his coming does null the Promises made to the Fathers. But the Text says, Romans
15. 8. He confirms the Promises made to the Fathers. I am sure this was one
made to the Fathers, I will be a God to thee and thy Seed, then it is not
nulled, but confirmed. Christ confirms Abraham's Charter, Act. 3.26. God sent
his Son Jesus to the Jews first, to Bless them: one great Blessing he mentions,
but it seems by the Anabaptists, Christ, takes away a Blessing; tell us I pray
what Blessing does Christ leave the Seed of the Believing Jews, while Infants
in the Room of it.

11ly, We read Gal. 3.16. of Promises made to Abraham and his Seed; Promises in
the Plural Number, Seed in the Singular, not Seeds; the Jews a part, and the
Gentiles a part, not so, but Seed; that is, Christ Mystical, not Personal: the
Promises were not made to Christ, but Christ was Promised to Abraham; So that
it is Christ in Aggregato, the Jews and Gentiles make up one Body, and one Seed.

There were several Promises made to Abraham, some concerned him alone, some
concerned himself and his Seed, according to the Flesh alone; The Gentiles had
nothing to do with them: That all Nations should be Blessed in Abraham's Seed;
This belongs to the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, This is one Promise. But we
must have Promises in the Plural Number made to Abraham, that belong to the
Gentiles, if you take away this, I will be the God of thee and thy Seed, I know
not how to make the Text true.

But if this be granted, then this Verse and the fourteenth Verse are both
true; now the Blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ.

I have insisted long upon this Branch, because the pinch of the Controversy
lies here, and these Grounds are to me so strong, that unless the Anabaptists
bring Texts as strong as an express Scripture for the Repeal, I shall not
regard them: nor am I come yet to the Texts in the New Testament, to prove the
Church Membership of Infants, though it may be inferred from some I have named
already.

The last Branch in the Sillogism is, That if this Gracious Covenant be not
Repealed but stand firm, then it must be Signed, and Sealed to them who are
under it; this I suppose will not be denied. The Blessed God makes no
Covenants, but he Seals them.

That the Tree of Life, and the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, were
Sacraments and Seals, belonging to the first Covenant, I see is the Opinion of
very Learned and Godly Divines. When God makes a Covenant with Noah, and all
the Creatures, God Seals it; when with Abraham, God Seals it; and though the
Seal be changed, yet it has another Seal added in the Room of it. Our weak
Faith has need of strengthening, and all too little, if God's Spirit does not
step in.

SECT. IV.
NOw let us come to the Anabaptists, and hear how they prove the Repealing of
the Covenant, and the un-Churching of the Children of Believing Jews.

About a quarter of a year after I had finished my Discourse, a Neighbor
brought me Mr. Edward Hutchinson against Paedopabtism, to read it, but it was
sent for again, so that I did but read his Epistle to the Baptized
Congregations; and a Letter, which I think concerned Mr. Wills, and the
beginning of his Book, p. 3. he states the Question, and proves, That the
Infants of Believing Gentiles are not the Seed of Abraham; so that Infant
Church Membership and Baptism falls to the Ground.

Ans. But he must prove that the Infants of the Believing Jews, are not the
Seed of Abraham, or else Infants Church Membership does not fall. I had reason
to state the Question so, as to the Believing Jews; but if he will yield the
Infants of Believing Jews to be Members, and have a Right to Baptism, I will
prove the Infants of Believing Gentiles are Church Members, and have a Right to
Baptism. There is neither Jew nor Greek, etc. Gal. 3.28. no difference now but
of this more hereafter.

Again, we shall see whether his Arguments do not cut off the Infants of
Believing Jews, as well as Gentiles.

1. Argu. His first Sillogism, If none be the Children of Abraham, but those
that do the works of Abraham, then Infants are not the Seed of Abraham, but the
Antecedent is true. Joh. 8.39. Therefore,

Ans. If none be rational Creatures, but those that can Sillogize, as Mr.
Hutchison does, then Infants are not rational Creatures. But, etc.

If you say my Antecedent is false, so is yours; but it shows how strong your
Argument is.

2. If Isaac at eight Days old, when Circumcised, do not the works of his
Father Abraham, then he is not Abraham's Seed; you argue from no Doing, to no
Seed. A strange Argument Sir!

3. If any of those Jews, to whom our Lord spoke these words, had any
Male-Children born that day, they had been reputed Abraham's Seed, Members of
the Church, and must be Circumcised the eighth day, or Sin.

2. Argu. His second Sillogism, If those who are Christ's are only Abraham's
Seed, then Infants are not Abraham's Seed, but the Antecedent is true. Gal.
3.3.19. they are not Christ's by Calling.

Ans. Is there no way to be made Christ's, but by Calling? can he that made the
Ear and the Heart, come no way to the Heart, but by the Ear? what Divinity is
this? cannot he that infuses the Soul into the Body, infuse Grace into the
Soul, but by the ^ar?

2. Christ commands little Children to be brought to him, and none to forbid
them. Mark 10.13, 14. etc. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, then they must be
Christ's; we believe Christ, Sir, before you.

3. Because Isaac at eight days old, cannot answer a Call of Christ's,
therefore he is none of Christ's, a good Argument. Was John none of Christ's,
when he leaped in his Mothers Womb, when Mary came to Elizabeth? Luke 1.44.

Argu. 3. His third Sillogism, If none be Blessed with Abraham, but those that
are of Faith, than Infants are not the Seed of Abraham, but the Antecedent is
true. Gal. 3.9. Therefore,

Ans. Does the Text say Actual Faith?

2. Alas, poor Infants! by this Author ye are Cursed, no poor Infant dying an
Infant, can be Blessed. Yea, those Infants whom Christ Blessed, Mark 10.16.
were Cursed though he Blessed them, for they could not Act Faith upon Christ.
Did Isaac when Circumcised the eighth Day, put forth an Act of Faith upon
Christ to come?

3. Believers in Christ are so, either Actually or Siminally.


4. Actual Believers in Christ are so, either Visibly and Really, or Visibly
only.


Visibly only, such were those, to whom in your Preface to your Baptized
Congregations, you thus speak, they are not all Israel, that are of Israel. I
know there is dross mingled with your Silver, Chaff among your Wheat, and the
Canaanite is still in the Land. It seems then you find Dross, Chaff,
Canaanites, and not true Israelites in your Baptized Congregations; but you did
look on them as visible Believers, when you Dipped them.

2. Seminally so, and they first; such as are Reputed so by God's Covenant,
with Believing Parents and their Seed. 2ly, Such, who besides this Reputation,
are regenerated by the Spirit, which is not without Faith Seminally.

Argu. 4. His fourth Sillogism, If the Children of the Flesh are not the
Children of God, then Infants now are not the Seed of Abraham, but the
Antecedent is true. Romans 9.8. Therefore, etc.

Ans. I deny the Consequence.

2ly, It seems then, no Infants are the Children of God, by this Argument; a
very bold and wretched Assertion.

2. There is a double Adoption, External, Ecclesiastical, and Internal,
Heavenly Saving, that has a Heavenly, Eternal Inheritance belonging to it;
they who had only the first, these were called the Children of God. Deuteronomy. 14.1.
and 16. Ezekiel. 21. to these pertain the Adoption. Romans 9.4.

Our Question is not who are the true Children of God, that have that
Inheritance prepared for them, but who are to be Reputed the Children of God,
in foro Ecclesiastico, Visibly; so that they are Members of a Visible Church,
and have Right to a Visible Ordinance, in the Visible Church. The Dross, the
Chaff, the Canaanites, the false Israelites, which you tell us, are in your
Baptized Congregations, are none of the Children of God, in a saving Sense; but
your Baptists did judge them to be Believers Actually in Christ, if so, then
Children of God, then you admited them Members of your Churches, and so
Baptized them by Dipping. They were looked upon as Abraham's Seed, when you
admitted them.

The next thing he falls upon is, Act. 2.39. of which after.

I could go no further, the Book was sent for, nor did I intend to make any
large Discourse, though it had continued with me: by these four Arguments we
have a taste of the Man's strength.

By these Arguments, [and the next which follows, which is in all their mouths]
let the Reader judge, whither they do not all strike as much at the Grace and
Wisdom of God, in his Covenanting with Abraham, and his Seed; Constituting the
Church of the Jewish Parents, and their Seed, and Circumcising of the Infants,
as they do prove, that now the Infants should not be admitted into the
Gospel Church, nor Baptized. So that the Anabaptists tells God, that if he will
Constitute the Church of the Jews right, he must let their Children be grown
up. First, Learn to know the God of Abraham. Second, Put forth an Actual Faith
in Christ, the Promised Seed to come, as Abraham saw his Day and rejoiced. Joh.
8.56. Thirdly, Let them do the works of their Father Abraham. Joh. 8.39.
Fourthly, Let them manifest that they are really the Children of God, then
admit them Members, and Circumcise them. Does not all their Arguments tend to
this? they will teach the Holy, Wise God, how to Constitute Churches better. I
will not be afraid to say, That all the Anabaptists that ever were, or shall
be, shall never be able to cast the Seed of Believing Parents out of the
Church, by any Consequence drawn from any Text in the Bible, therefore they
must give us clearer Texts, before we shall believe them.

SECT. V.
BUt come we to the great Argument, which all use, and that wherewith I was
assaulted. Matthew. 28.19. and Mark 16.16. Only Believers are to be Baptized. To
which I Answer,

This took with me in my Meditations, I thought there was strength in it.

Had the Gospel Church been first erected amongst the Gentiles, and had Baptism
been first Instituted in the Gentile-Churches, then the Anabaptists Argument
from hence, would have carried me. But the first Gospel Church was erected
among the Jews, in Jerusalem, and Baptism was Instituted in the Jewish-Church
first, where the Anabaptists cannot deny but the Infants were Members with
their Parents, and under the Seal of the Covenant. So that they must first
prove that by this Text, the Children of the Believing Jews in the
Gospel Church, were not Members with their Parents, which I am sure cannot be
forced from this Text, nor does it in the least prove the Repealing of
Abraham's Covenant with his Seed.

Circumcision did Seal up the Promised Seed, in whom all Nations should be
Blessed, or Christ to come; and surely required, therefore their Faith in the
Messiah to come. After Christ's Ascension, in the Gospel Church Baptism seals
up this Promised Seed, or Christ now come, with a full and clear Revelation of
him; the difference of the Faith as to the Object of it, is only Christ to
come, and come. If then the Children of the Jews, while the Parents did believe
in the Messiah to come, were under a Covenant, Reputed Members of the Church,
and Circumcised; should, when their Parents believe in Christ come, be cast out
of Covenant, out of the Church, and not Baptized, I know no Reason, nor Warrant
from God's Word; this would have made strange work.

If the Anabaptists say the Jews did not believe in the Messiah to come, they
must prove it; the Messiah ran much in their minds, we may see by the Woman of
Samaria. Joh. 4.25. Read Acts 26.7. and by the Jews. Joh. 1.19, 20, 21. If
Christ were then clearly revealed, why should this cast the Infant out? the
Infant is not therefore guilty of the more Sin, when Christ was clearly
revealed, and so deserve to be cast out.

We are to consider Ordinances in their Institution, wherefore God appointed
them, what they carry in them, in their own Nature, and what Men ought to do
who partake of them, not what Men do; we know what Baptism signifies, what it
implies, and what they ought to do who partake of it, though Men abuse it. The
Case was the same as to Circumcision.

That this was one thing it Sealed up, as I said, the Promise of Christ to
come, the Anabaptists cannot deny, and it is the true Answer which Pererius
gives, from Aquinus, to that Question, what was the difference between the
Circumcision of the Jews, and of other Nations? for that other Nations did
Circumcise besides the Jews, not only Cyprian, de ratione Circumvis, and
Hierom. on Jer. 9. ult. [who upon that Text I think well;] but also Herodotus,
who lived some hundreds of years before Christ in Xerxes's Time, tells us,
insomuch, that Herodotus says the Jews took it up from the Egyptians; among
whom it was in so much esteem, that there was no entrance into the most
Honorable Offices amongst them, unless they were Circumcised. Now Pererius
makes this difference: Other Nations used it, taking it up as a custom and
right, transmitted to them from their Forefathers, whom they had in Honor.
But the Jews used it, as it was a Sacrament containing in it, the Profession of
their Faith and Obedience toward God, and the Divine Promise of the Messiah to
come; he adds, And Expiation of Original Sin, as the Ancients speak of Baptism,
and so many do now.

That other Nations do not use it as a Seal of God's Covenant, it appears by
the time of Circumcising; the day God appointed, was the eigth day, but
Ishmael's Posterity, Circumcise in the thirteenth year of their Age, then
Ishmael was Circumcised; so that it is merely in Honor of him, so Josephus
tells us. l. 1. c. 12.

To go on, If then the Seed of the Jews believing in Christ come, be still
under the Covenant, and Church Members with their Parents, and if so, ought to
be Baptized, by Mr. Tombe's Concession; Then let the Believing Gentiles and
their Seed come in also for now no difference between Jew and Greek, Gal. 3.28.
And for more full proof, the Apostle tells the believing Ephesians, and so all
believing Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.19. We are no more strangers [ from the
commonwealth of Israel, v. 12.] but Christ having broken down the middle Wall
of Partition between the Jews and us, v. 14.] we are now fellow-citizens with
the Saints, and of the Household of God.

For the word Fellow-citizens, in the City or Church of the Jews: I pray, who
were esteemed Citizens? Were not the Children put into Abraham's Charter: were
not they then Citizens with their Parents? What, has God sent his Quo
Warranto, and taken away Abraham's Charter, when the Parents, the Citizens,
believe in Christ sincerely, and keep Covenant with him, and walk in the steps
of Abraham: will now God take away their Charter, and cast out their Seed from
being Citizens? What, has Christ by his blood made us both One, taking down
the partition wall between Jew and Gentile, v. 14. And does he now set up the
partition Wall between the Jewish believing Parent and his Seed, bringing now
the Seed of the believing Jews into that condition the Gentiles were in before
Christ came, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Shall the Anabaptists make us believe this,
unless God has said so in express terms? What a Bar had this been against the
Jews ever receiving the Gospel: Did they any where make this Objection against
it? Now we Gentiles believing, are Fellow-citizens with them of the same
Household of God with them. Are not Children part of the Household? Were not the
Jews Children part of the Household of God? then the Apostle tells us, we also
are Fellow-citizens, and of the Household of God, as the Jews are.

As for the Texts, Matthew. 28. and Mark 16. Blessed Jesus, the Promised Seed to
Abraham, in whom all Nations should be blessed, is now come; fulfilled the Law,
Crucified, Dead, Ascended: Salvation is only to be had in him. Now this was
the great Doctrine the Apostles were to preach, first to the Jews, than to the
Gentiles, and call all Nations to believe in this Christ, that they may be
blessed, according to the Promise made to Abraham. True, none but Adult
persons, or persons of understanding, can understand this Doctrine, and
actually believe in Christ. No more could any but Jews Adult, or of ripe years,
understand the Promise of Christ to come, in whom all Nations should be
blessed; but yet the Jews Children were reputed with them Believers in the
Messiah to come, by Gods Covenant with them, and the Church Constituted of
them. So now Believers in Christ come, their Seed are Reputed with them.

Musculus [whom my Author has put in his Catalogue of Authors, [hoc. com. p.
603.] which makes the ignorant Anabaptist think he is on their side; but rancks
the Anabaptists in a second, or lower degree of Heretics, for denying
Infant Baptism, and an Oath.] In answer to an Argument of the Anabaptists,
there was a Command for Circumcising, but no express Command for Baptising.
Thus writes, Facit hoc non contra nos, sed pro nobis, etc. [ ibid. 338.] This
does not make against us, but for us, says he, the sum of his answer [being
too long to transcribe all] is this. Since God has plainly declared his Will,
that the Infants of Believers, whose Father Abraham is, should be Partakers of
the Grace and Sign of the Covenant, and no where do we read that this Will of
God is Repealed; what necessity is there, after such a clear expression of his
Will, to desire another Command in the New Testament? Since therefore Christ
gave no special Command, what should be done with the Infants of Believers, he
did sufficiently intimate to his Apostles, who were Jews, and brought up among
the Jews, that he did not take away that Grace, by which God declared himself
to be the God, not only of Believers, but also of their Seed, and that he will
have them Sealed with the Sign of his Grace. To which, do but add, Matthew.
19.13, 14, 15. we may see Christ has not taken away this Grace from them. This
Answer of Musculus, is full and clear, and runs upon that I have been calling
for, an Infallible proof of God's Repealing of Abraham's Covenant. I have
rather wronged Musculus, by not Transcribing the whole Paragraph, for brevities
sake, I desire the Reader to view him. For my part, I do not yet see any
absurdity, if I should say, as in the fourth Commandment, the morality of it
being, that a seventh part of time be set a part for the Worship of God;
therefore let God please to change the day, yet that Commandment binds us to
sanctify that day. So when God shall please to make a Gracious Covenant with
Believing Abraham, and his Seed, and gives Command to have that Covenant
Sealed, and never declares his Repealing of the Covenant, and its Sealing; the
Covenant standing still in force, though God may please to change the Seal, and
bring in another Seal under a new dispensation, yet God's former Command may
well warrant us to administer the Sign and Seal of the Covenant to Abraham's
Seed, as before.

Sure I am, this express Command the Anabaptists require for Baptising Infants,
will cast out the Lord's Day, and Magistracy out of a Christian Commonwealth,
Women from the Lord's Table; For though there were diverse Women attended
Christ, Luke 8.2, 3. yet there was not one of them with him at his Institution
of the Lord's Supper: nor do we read expressly, that Women were at the Lord's
Table in their Churches; For him that would prove it from the words, 1 Cor.
11.28. (...), there tell us, That (...) is of the Epiceen Gender, and includes
Male and Female.

I answer, If (...) did always signify Male and Female, and not the Male only,
then it were a good proof: but I told twenty places in Matthew's Gospel [I
looked no further] where it signifies only the Male. Besides, what Gender is
(...) of, which is joined with it? Nor can we have ground to Excommunicate
Women, if they walk impenitently scandalous in the Church.

Partly upon their Principle, who call for express Command, and partly because
the casting out of the Seed of Believers, and Repealing the Covenant, are so
strange, that it cannot be proved by any Consequence I have yet met with,
therefore I call for Srciptures as clear at least as express Commands, or
signification of God's Will.

To return to Infants, They must be regenerate, and have Faith some way, else
they must all perish; what should make the thing so impoisible they should have
the Habit or Seed of Faith, and of all saving Graces in them? I hope it is not
because Christ is known only by Revelation. I pray, what Act of Faith in God,
what Act of Love to God, or Fear of God, etc. did Isaach or John put forth
toward God, when, being Infants they were Circumcised? yet I am confident they
had the Seeds of all these at that time they were sanctified then, and why not
then a Seed of Faith in Christ? had not John it when he leaped? etc.

In the first Synod held in New England, this was one question discussed;
Whether we be justified by the Habit, or the Act of Faith? Arguments were
brought pro and con, some were for the Habit of Faith, then why not Infants
justified by a Habit of Faith? Dr. Ames in his proofs for Infant Baptism, makes
this his first Argument; That in the very beginning of Regeneration, the Soul
is a mere passive, the Infant is as capable of a passive reception of Christ
and Grace, as another Man: but Baptism Seals to our Regeneration. [modul.
theal. c. 4. th. 12. Got. of grace, p. 27. etc. Socin. pro. flig. p. 781.]

That servant of Christ Mr. Tho. Hooker, proves that Children may have Faith,
and has a pretty large discourse upon it; The Socinians say it is a Dream [if
they mean Actual Faith, who do not say it] Caelonius in answer to them, proves
by ten or eleven Arguments, that Children may have Faith, to be sure, we may
observe that they whom the Holy Page Records to be Godly [except Menasseh] were
so from their Childhood. Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Hezekiah, Josiah, David,
Obadiah, Jehoshaphat, where do you read of the Saints first running a course of
wickedness, and then Converted? How many Children may we observe, that we may
say as Dr. Thomas Goodwin said, are sanctified from the Womb. What is the
matter then, that all Infants are cast out of the Church, and must not be
Baptized?

Object. If you say, If you could tell which they are, they should be Baptized.

Answ. Can you tell who have saving-Faith and Grace, though they make Actual
Profession, and tell you they have it? they who you say are Dross, Chaff,
Canaanites, no true Israelites, in your Baptized Congregations, they told you
they had Faith, when you Dipped them, but you were mistaken.

2. If that be yielded, that Infants may be Regenerate, may have Faith and
Grace Seminally, then this Text which you do so talk of does not cut them off
from Baptism.

3. By Abraham's Covenant, let the Parents be visible Believers, by their
competent knowledge of Christ, profession of their Faith in him, and
Conversation in some measure becoming Christians, giving up themselves to the
Ordinances, and Rules of Christ's House, prove themselves thus to be visible
Christians: and we can as regularly Baptize the Children of such Believers, as
you Baptize your Adult persons, though as to the reality of saving Faith, we
are mistaken, and so are you.

Once more take the word (...), Mat. 28.19. as Dr. Hammond says it ought to be
Translated, Disciple ye all Nations, or make Disciples. Hence the Argument.

All they that are Disciples ought to be Baptized.

But the Children of Believing Parents are Disciples.

Therefore the Children of Believing Parents ought to be Baptized.

This Argument I gave to him who opposed me, but he could not tell which
Proposition to deny; a fit Man to dispute in a Congregation.

For the proof of the Argument.

The Major, is the plain Text, there is no opposing of that.

The Minor, that such Children are Disciples, our Divines have so cleared it
from Acts 15.1. and 10. v. compared, and other Texts, that I will not say what
they have said before.

I give my thoughts thus, They are Disciples.

1st. By God's Reputation he esteems them so; they are mine says God, born to
me. Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.

2ly, They are so by their Parents Dedication of them to Christ.

3ly, They are so by their Parents Education of them for Christ.

4ly, They are so, as I may say, jure Gentium, or rather jure Religionum, all
Natitions, all Religions, take their Children to be the same that the Parents
are.

Did not the Jews take their Children to be Moses's Disciples, as well as
themselves? John 9.28.

Do not the Turks take their Children to be Mahomet's Disci^les, as well as
themselves? Should you deny it, you should hear of it, if not feel it.

Yea, go the Indians whose Religion [i^ I may call it so] is very Devilish and
Superstitious, were it not too good a word. When the English first began to
dwell in New England, Massasoit the Sachem of Mount Hope, made a League with
the English at Plymouth to live in Amity with them; The Articles were Seven; he
kept the League well: A little before his death, he comes to renew his League
for himself and his two Sons, Alexander and Philip, this was on September 25,
1630. But in his Treatise he urged this, That the English should engage never
to attempt to draw any of his people to the Christian Religion: he insisted
upon it very much; but the English were resolute, and would make no League upon
such terms. But this we see by this Heathen, that he would have his Posterity
to be reckoned as he was, though his Religion was Devilish.

If then the Children of Jews, Turks, Pagans be reckoned with the Parents, why
must not the Children of Believers in Christ be reckoned Disciples of Christ
with their Parents.

The Reader I suppose will pardon me, though I make a little Digression: The
Wars between the Indians and the English in New England, I suppose must have
heard. This Philip the Son of Massasoit, beforementioned, was he that began
the Wars with the English, 1675. which lasted till 1677. The English when they
saw Massasoit stand so upon that Article, then said, That God would root out
the Posterity of that Massasoit; and so now it is come to pass.

That Story which my worthy Friend Mr. William Hubbard gives us of
Passalonaway, [the most noted Paneaw or Sorcerer; and I believe the oldest man
in the Country. When I saw him, he was reckoned one of the oldest men of the
Indians, but I perceived by the time of his dying, he lived about thirty years
after] is worthy the observing. About Merimach River, Anno 1660, several
Sagamoors meeting together, there was a great Dance: These Solemnities, are the
Times when the most Ancient tell Stories, and transmit them to their Posterity.
Passalonaway being present made his last Speech, and took his Farewell: thus,

I am ready to die, and not likely ever to see you meet any more; I will now
leave this word of Council with you; That you take heed how you quarrel with
the English, for though you may do them much mischief, yet assuredly you will
all be destroyed and rooted out of the Earth if you do; for I was as much an
Enemy to the English at their first coming into these Parts, as any one
whatever, and did try all ways and means possible to have destroyed them, at
least to have prevented their sitting down here, but I could no way effect it.
Therefore I advise you never to contend with the English, nor make War with
them. Accordingly his eldest Son Wonnalancot, as soon as he perceived the
Indians were up in Arms, he withdrew himself into some remote place, that he
might not be hurt by the English, or their Enemies.

SECT. VI.
TO return to my Author: His Sixth Question is, Whether Baptism did succeed in
the room and use of Circumcision? He says, By no means.

But the Body of our Learned and Pious Divines say, It does, and our Divines
have spoken to it so often, that I am loath to say any thing to it. Shortly my
thoughts were these:

1. Circumcision came in upon Faith: Abraham believed, then he was Circumcised:
And so does Baptism.

2. Circumcision did sign Christ to come in the flesh. So says my Author; and
Baptism signs he is come in the flesh.

3. Circumcision did signify [you may say Seal] the Righteousness of Faith: So
does Baptism.

4. Circumcision signified Sanctification: so do Baptism.

5. Circumcision signified and sealed the Covenant between God and the Seed of
Abraham, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. So does Baptism.

6. Circumcision did oblige Israel to walk with God: so Baptism obliges us.

7. Circumcision did distinguish Israel from other Nations: so Baptism
distinguishes us.

Circumcision respecting Christ to come, and Baptism Christ come. Hence the
Jews though circumcised, yet coming under a new Dispensation, ought to be
baptized: much more reason for this, than for Timothy, who being a Disciple,
Acts 16.1. no question was baptized, and yet after that circumcised by Paul, v.
3.

Circumcision (says my Author) was to be a Bond and Obligation to keep the
whole Law of Moses: but Baptism is contrary.

Ans. 1. For the Moral Law, the Rule of our Obedience, Baptism does not solve
us from that, but bind us to it: for Sanctification is held forth in our
Baptism.

2. As for the Ceremonial Law where Christ was set forth in shadows, no wonder,
though when Christ is come, and the shadow's gone, that Baptism was contrary to
it. Evangelium relatum and Revelatum. But what does this hurt us?

3. Paul did not Circumcise Timothy, with that respect to Circumcision; the
Jews did. The Jews did look to be justified by the observation of the moral and
ceremonial Law both, Gal. 5.3. the 4th verse unties the knot. The false
Apostles urged Circumcision, Acts 15.1. according to the Law of Moses. [But
Circumcision is not of Moses, but the Fathers, says our Lord, John 7.22.] If
you Circumcise thus, and seek Justification thus, you are fallen from grace,
Gal. 5.4.

My Author goes on; Circumcision initiated the carnal Seed into a carnal
Church, and gave them right to carnal Ordinances: But Baptism was to give the
spiritual Seed an orderly entrance into the spiritual Church.

Ans. 1. These Carnal Ordinances had their Spiritual significations as well as
ours.

2. The Element in Baptism, Water; do but wash the flesh, and may be said to be
Carnal too in some sense, 1 Pet. 3.21.

3. There was a Spiritual Seed admited also into that Church by Circumcision,
as well as now by Baptism, how many Saints were in that Church?

4. Chaff, Dross, Canaanites are no Spiritual Seed, yet such have been admitted
into your Spiritual Church, by Dipping. Mr. Hutcheson writes true and can
testify it.

5. Define a Church, and you shall find all the Causes in that Church [a
difference only between a Church, and such a Church] take it in the strictest
notion. 1. The efficient Cause is God, that is here. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Ezra 9.21. 3ly,
The formal Cause joined in Covenant, with God and one with another, Deuteronomy.
29.12. Zech. 11.10, 14. Exodus 24.8. [Besides their Circumcision.] This some
Brethren make the form of a Church: here it is. 4ly, Final Cause, To walk with
God, and keep his Ordinances: it was here, Exodus 24.7. Mr. Baxter has spoken
so much to this, that I say no more.

Women were not circumcised, says my Author.

Ans. No, how could they? 1. The Apostle gives you an answer, 1 Cor. 11.3. 2ly,
Rivet says well; Sed quia in viris actinum, ut loquuntur, generationis and
propagationis hominum est principium, quo transmittunt corruptionem in
posteros, signum ideo obtinuit in praecipuo sexu, ita tamen, ut foeminae viris
annexae and in iis censerentur, qui familiorum capitae debebant esse.

For Acts 38.39. which my Author opposes, and brings in Bishop Tailor, [a man
cross to the Doctrine of the Church of England in point of Original Sin.] And
Dr. Hammond on his side, telling us, It is an Vncludent Argument to infer
Baptism from hence. [I do not wonder that Anabaptists make so much use of Dr.
Tailor.]

Answ. With the Bishop's favor, there is a difference between these two
Phrases, The Children of Israel, and this; You and your children. Here is a
Copulative Conjunction which is not there. They were the wounded Persons to
whom Peter speaks, that asked him a question, but their Children did not ask,
nor were present with them most likely.

Calvin says, Notandi autem, etc. But the three degrees are to be noted, to
whom the Promise is made, 1. To the Jews. 2. To their Children. 3. To the
Gentiles.

As for Dr. Hammond, though I honor him much for his great Learning one way,
yet I think as to an Argument, whether it be Concludent or not, other men may
know as well as he. Vossius, Rivet, Calvin, Gerhard, Aretius, and the Assembly
of Divines, [though slighted by him] do all conclude Infant Baptism from hence;
they could judge of a Concludent Argument.

1. What this Promise is, I see there are very different Apprehensions. Some
take it to be that in Joel 2.28. So Dr. Hammond, and diverse others. The Dutch
say, Joel 2.28. and Genesis 17.7. Ahapide says, The Promised Seed in whom all
Nations should be blessed. Thus Aretius, The Promise of the Messiah, and the
benefits that come by him, made to Abraham and his Seed, Genesis 13. To which the
Apostle, Romans 9.4. has a respect, the Promises belong to them. Thus Aretius,
and Horino inclines this way.

2ly, whatever the Promise be, it was that which the Jews and their Children
were now under, [ For to you do the benefit of that Promise appertain if you
will lay hold of it, says Dr. Hammond on Text.] The Promise did appertain to
them, both Parents and Children, but not to the Gentiles as yet till they be
called.

3ly, That (...) is a general word I grant, seven or eight times used for
little Children in the New Testament. Fit mentitio liberorum (...) sine
discretione aetatis, says Vossius. Let your Children be little or great, to
your Children the Promise does belong, as well as to you. Matthew. 27.25. His
Blood be upon us, (...) and upon your Children; were not there the Children
distinct from the Parents? and do not Children there signify their little ones,
their posterity, of what Age soever? would Bishop Tailor deny it? and it is
probable that God brought this Imprecation to mind, and Peter may aim at that.

Be the promise what it will then, I would try for one Argument from hence.

They that are Church Members ought to be Baptized.

But Children of Believing Parents are Church Members.

Therefore, they ought to be Baptized.

The Major, the Doctor, nor any else will deny.

The Minor, I prove thus.

They to whom Promises do appertain, they are Church Members.

But to the Children of Believing Parents Promises do appertain. Therefore,

The Major is plain, no Promise belong to any person out of the Visible Church.
Ephesians. 2.12. while the Ephesians were out of the Visible Church, they were
Strangers from the Covenants of Promise. Romans 9.4. the Promise did belong to
the Jews, not to us Gentiles, till grafted into Abraham's stock.

The Minor is proud from the words of the Apostle, The Promise is to you, and
your Children, we are under the outward dispenpensation now; you nor your
Children shall lose your Title to it, by Repenting and Believing, but then you
shall feel the saving benefit added to pour outward Title. Again,

Will you restrain the promise to the gift of the Spirit, as the Verse before;
Dr. Hammond moves the Question? what kind of gifts these were, inward or
outward, for both these are promised indefinitely to Believers. Joh. 7.38, 39.
there the inward gifts, enabling humble sincere Christians, for the Duties of a
Christian Life, called, The Renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5. joined to the
Laver of Regeneration; he concludes it is best to comprehend both. Thus Dr.
Hammond on the Text.

Let me add, If the Spirit be here meant, it must be so understood, that it may
be the benefit of as many as ever God shall call to the Worlds End, be they
never so many Millions; the words (...) and (...) will force it. The Promise is
to All, as many, be they never so many, if called. There are many called, few
chosen, but if called, there is an outward Title to it, and to their Children,
else the Sentence is not full; and I proved before we are fellow-Citizens of
the same household, grafted into the same stock, Jew and Greek all one: The Jews
and their Children were under it, when not effectually called. The Promise is
to you and your Children, now they were Children of the Covenant. Act. 3.25.
nor can there be any reason given, why the Children of the Believing Gentile
should not be included, and meant here, as well as of the Jews. Hence, since
the Doctor thus interprets the Promise of the Spirit.

They to whom the Promise of the renewing Spirit does belong, they may be
Baptized.

But to the Children of Believing Parents, the Promise of the renewing Spirit
does belong, as it did to the Jews. Therefore the Children of Believing Parents
may be Baptized.

That there can be Regeneration without the Spirit, no Christian will affirm.
That there can be a Heavenly Inheritance without Regeneration the Scripture
denies. That the Spirit of God cannot Regenerate an Infant, he must be a
strange Christian, [if any at all] who dares say it. If John was filled with
the Spirit, from his Mothers Womb, God can give his Spirit to other Infants,
though in a less measure.

As to the Text 1 Cor. 7.14. that Text has been so cleared by our Divines,
that I wonder my Author should not be fatisfied, but to come up with his
Ligitimacy, as if that were the sense of Children being Holy. When as

1st. The Apostle is not writing to a Corinthian Husband, that had two Wives,
but only one Wife; as 12, 13, 14. v. so that if that Text, Mat. 2.15. could be
brought to prove a Matrimonial-Holiness, then they were Holy, and Children
Holy, before the Gospel came; but this is a Holiness arising from one of the
Parents, being a Believer: Besides, Joseph, Benjamin, Solomon, and diverse
others, were never called Bastards, or thought to be so, though Jacob and David
had more Wives then one.

2ly, Then all the Children in Corinth, though the Parents were lawfully
Married, were Bastards, before the Gospel came.

3ly, When then the Apostle writes to the Saints in Corinth. 1 Cor. 1, 2. 2
Cor. 1.1. the meaning is, to you that are Legitimate, and not Bastards in
Corinth. What difference between (...) there, and (...) here? Neither do your
examples from (...) and (...) help you at all.

For 1st. By an Antiphrasis, or Euphemismus, the words signifies the quite
contrary, Bless, and Curse, Holy, and Unclean; [or Sodomite, as we Translate.]

2ly, The words are so used in an opposite sense, in several other Scriptures,
that prove one another.

3ly, The sense of the Text forces us so to render their signification.

1. But then you must Translate (...) by some word which is quite contrary to
Holiness, so that one expel the other: Contraria sunt pellentis naturae, but
Legitimacy and Holiness are not contraries in respect of this Subject, for he
may be Legitimate and Holy too, I know: you must then read else were your
Children unclean, but now they are unclean. This is good Sense.

2. As the word Holy, is never taken in the Holy Page for Legitamacy, nor can
you justify it by any Text, as we can the former, clearly by several Texts. A
Seed according to God's Institution in Marriage, according to his appointment,
Ordination in Mat. 2.15. and the Holy Seed. Ezra. 9.2. differ very much:
besides, as I said, the Children of the Corinthians were Holy, if that were the
Sense before the Gospel came.

3. Nor is there the least pressing necessity why it should not be taken, as in
the Scriptures I mention. Nay, there is a presing necessity to force that it
cannot be meant Legitimacy, because it follows upon the Faith of one Parent,
which Legitimacy does not.

For (...) which you say always signifies Authority, yet 1 Cor. 11.15. [I
suppose you mean the tenth] it signifies a Vail.

Ans. Who translated the word so? I have viewed nine Translators, and they
render it Power as we do. A Metonimy of the Subject, we know there is the
meaning being, a covering in sign that she is under the Authority of her
Husband. Genesis 24.65. A Phrase whereby the thing signified is ascribed to the
Sign, the propriety of the word is here meant and intended; that she show her
self to be under Authority. The Acthiopick Translation, to give the Sense, turn
the Substantive into a Verb; but hour, this does not at all suit your design.
In the word Holy, here is no Metonimy, Sign, or thing signified.

I see nothing of moment more to answer, and I doubt not my Author has been
better answered by others, though I saw none, till I had done.

SECT. VII.
THen my Author proceeds to the manner of Baptising, and tells us what (...)
signifies; quotes Bishop Tailor, Doctor Hammond, and many that say it signifies
Immersion; and who is so ignorant, that knows not this? but is my Author so
knowing, that he can prove it signifies only Immersion, or dowzing a person
over head and cars? did Bishop Tailor, and Doctor Hammond Baptize so, and only
so? let him enquire. Why did not my Author prove that the word signifies only
so, in Heb. 9.10. 1 Cor. 10.2. [something you would say to this, but it is
pittyful] Mark 7.4. Luke 11.38. the Pharisee marvelled that Christ (...) had
not first Baptized before Dinner; How the Jews use to wash hands, you may
guess, by 2 Kings 3.11. when Elisha waited on Elijah; He powered water on the
hands of Elijah, did not Elijah then Baptize, or wash his hands? was not the
Basin and Ewer, and the little Cisterns with Water, common in England, and in
some places still to this day? and do we not wash by letting of Water run upon
our hands, or pouring upon them.

That the Holy Ghost is signified you tell us; and threetimes Baptising with
the Holy Ghost, is expressed by powering of the Holy Ghost.

What our Authors have said about their practice in hotter Countries, where
Baptism was first Instituted, you know; there they did commonly wash, you were
bound by the Law to wash. 2 Samuel 11.^.4. with Levit. 15.19. and 18, 19. So
Pharaoh's Daughter. Exodus 2.5. but in our cold Climates, this is not so common.

However, to me it seems strange, that there should be so much stress put upon
Baptism, and so much upon the manner of Baptising, as the Anabaptists lay, and
yet the Holy Page has not Recorded how it should be performed. To Baptize an
Infant, I could do as Mr. Chancy did in New England, and as of old they did in
England; as an Ancient Gentleman, of good quality in Suffolk told me, He
remembered the practice, by a good token, One Infant was so fowled with its
green Excrement, when it came to be Dipped, [a handsome sight in a
Congregation, when we are about Holy Things] that he could not forget it; but
how to Baptize an Adult person, and heavy Body, I cannot tell. If they go into
the Water, into the Element, they Baptize themselves so far as their body is in
the Water; The Baptist does not Dip that part.

As for their Clothes, I hope they do not go in with them, to Baptize, or Wash
them. certainly there ought to be an immediate Aplication of the Sign, [the
Water] to the Body; that our Baptism has a reference to the Ezekiel. 16.4. I see
several Men conclude, and have shown us how this Custom of Washing new born
Babes was derived almost to all Nations, but neither then, nor now do our Women
put on a Shirt, or any thing upon the Infant, and then wash it, but they apply
the Water immediately to the Body; I am sure it should be so in Baptism.
Vossius gives us large Testimonies out of Ancient Writers, how that Men, Women,
and Children, in those Countries, were all Baptized. [ De Baptis. p. 350.] [I
wonder the Anabaptists should be so angry with Mr. Baxter] because he says
they Baptize naked, the Women only had a little covering before them, (yea they
had a Mystery in the pulling off their Clothes, to show their pulling off the
Old Man, some where I have read,) after their Dipping, they were Anointed.
When a tumult arose in the City about Chrysolstom, how the Women that were
about Baptising, ran away naked; with other things there we may read.

Certainly God's Institutions are such, that we may Celebrate them at Noonday,
before all Men, let them be Spectators; and if this must be the way, let them
Baptize for me, and Anoint too if they please.

So that Modesty and Life, be preserved, I am of Cyrian's, and Austin's mind in
this Point, who left it indifferent, so you do not absolutely tie us up to one,
and deny all Baptism by Dipping. [ Cypr. 249. Aust. 10.3. p. 207.]

Other Divines have answered this more fully, and therefore I break off.

Here a Question falls in, which I never did so much as think of, till now I
say Mr. Mode, That Water in Baptism, he says, has no respect to the blood of
Christ; that it does concur in the Mystery by way of efficacy and merit, he
grants, but not as the thing there figured, for that is the Spirit? This may
help as to the manner of Baptising.

I thought both Spirit and Blood, he denies the latter, and says the Church of
England does so also, as he thinks.

The Question is new to me, I shall hardly propound my thoughts.

1. If cleansing of the Soul from Sin be the thing Baptism holds out, then,
what does primacily, properly, and effectually cleanse, is there signified, but
the Antecedent is true: Cleansing is as much given to the Blood of Christ, as
to the Spirit. 1 John 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. Hebr. 9.14.22. Almost all things were
purged by Blood.

2ly, We read three times, Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. Acts 2.38. that Remission of
Sins is signified and Sealed in Baptism; but how can this be, if there is no
respect to his Blood in Baptism? Without Blood there is no Remission, Heb.
9.22. Why is it called Baptism for remission of sins?

3ly, Why are we said in Baptism to have Communion with Christ in his Death,
and buried with him in Baptism? Romans 6.3. It should rather be said buried with
the Spirit, if the Spirit only be signified. Does not the Death of Christ
comprehend in it, the effusion of his Blood?

4ly, It is certain, that in the Types of the Old Testament, by Water the blood
of Christ was signified. Numb. 19.9. The Water is said to be a Purification for
Sin. In the Hebrew it is a Sin, the word often used for a Sin Offering, the
Dutch render it, It is an Expiation. Have not that Fountain, Zech. 13.1. set
open a respect to the blood of Jesus? all the Interpreters I see, respect both
his Blood and Spirit: Why not then so in Baptism.

5ly, As we are filthy, are we not as guilty? Is there nothing in the Ordinance
to respect our guilt? then it were sad, yea, guilt being upon us, can God give
out the blessing of Regeneration to us, till in order his justice be first
satisfied? though Regeneration and Pardon are simul tempore?

To say it concurrs by way of efficacy and merit, so it does in any Ordinance
to make it effectual. But Remission of Sins being in a special manner sealed up
in this Ordinance, which is only by Christ's Blood, methinks the Element should
have a respect to his Blood.

The utter Abolition of Sin, both guilt and power is given to the Blood of
Christ alone: but taking away guilt, is not given to the Spirit.

6ly, Out of the side of our Blessed Lord when he was pierced, came Blood and
Water. Joh. 19.34. There is our Pardon, and Sanctification: If both these be
signified in our Baptism, why is not that Blood and Water of his signified in
this Water in Baptism?

Hence Alcinus's Baptism was signified in the passion of Christ, by the Water
and Blood which came from his side; Several Verses he has upon it. [ Cent. 6.
p. 112.]

In That Tract which go under Cyprian's Name. Baptizabantur in nube, and mari
Hebraei, and jam Spiritu sancto and sanguine Christi, mundatur a peccatis
populus Dei. [De Resur. Chri.]

Hence Ambrose speaking of Baptism -- Ideoqque legisti, quod tres Testes in
Baptismate unum sunt, aqua, sanguis; and spiritusqui si unum horum detrahas,
non stat Baptismatis Sacramentum: quid enim est aqua sine cruce Christi? [Deris
qui c. 4.]

Hence Luther, Baptizari nihil aliud est quum reseo illo, and precioso sanguine
Christi, lanari, and mundari.

Res significata in Baptismo est sanguis Christi. Walaeu. to. 1. p. 84. I could
produce more Authors.

The Application of the Blood of Christ, and the renewing of the Spirit,
without both which our State cannot be happy, I think may both be signified,
and these either by Dipping, or powering of Water: The sprinkling of the Blood
of Jesus [set out of old by the Ceremonial sprinkling] is a famous Sentence in
the Gospel. Heb. 12.24. and 1 Pet. 1.2. so the powering out of the Spirit, Tit.
3.5, 6. Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 52.15. Joel 2.28, 29. Prove. 1.23.

The Abolishing of Sin, is the end of all; [Lord what a do is here before we
can be delivered from the misery we have brought ourselves into! what an Evil
is Sin!] now this is not set down one way, but several ways in Scripture,
sometimes by mortification, or the Death of Sin. Dipping sets out that, Buried
with Christ, sometimes by cleansing, and by purging. Heb. 9.14. 1 Jo. 1.9.
Apoc. 1.5. But the grave do not represent that, we do not use to purge, and
cleanse, by Burying, but this we do by pouring Water upon our Hands, upon
Rooms, Tables, etc. we can cleanse that way, purge me with Hyssop. Psalm. 51.7.
How was that? Levit. 14.6, 7. Numb. 19.18. not by Dipping.

Whither then you Dip, or pour Water. Here is, 1. The same Sign, or Element.
2ly, Here is the same thing signified, the Spirit, and Blood of Christ. 3ly.
The same end aimed at, the taking away, or purgeing of Sin; nor did I ever
contend with any Man about Dipping, but to deny all Baptism, unless by Dipping,
and so set up Rebaptising, and to administer Baptism only to Adult persons,
excluding all the Children of Believing Parents; This I could never yield to.

To conclude, though I was moved to publish my Notes by some Friends, yet had I
not received this Challenge, (for so I may call it) by this Letter, I think I
should never have done it, because I knew Men far more able than my self, had
done more service, than I could do in the Controversy.

I wish the Anabaptists, before they had Condemned, and wrote against
Infant Baptism, had well studied, and well improved their Parental, and
Infant-baptismal Covenant, followed God close for the benefits, and waited,
though they found temptations, and did not meet with all they would, and
reproved others for neglecting, and vigorously stirred up people to the serious
improvement of them; Then had they done good service to Christ and his Church:
Whereas by the course they have taken, they have increased our Divisions, (a
thing deeply to be lamented) which I shall never live to see healed.

I shall only desire the Anabaptists to give me answer to these two Questions,
clearly from Scripture.

Quest. 1. Since God was so Gracious to make a Covenant with Abraham and his
Seed, and it did then consist with his Wisdom, to Constitute his Church of
Parents and Children, while the Parents did believe in the Messiah to come, why
may it not consist with his Grace to continue that Covenant, and with his
Wisdom, still to Constitute his Gospel Church of Parents and Children, the Jews
now believing in Christ come?

If God has plainly declared his pleasure to the contrary, tell us where, and
we are satisfied: but you must produce other Scriptures then you have done yet.

Quest. 2. If God has repealed his Covenant, with the Believing Jews Seed,
turned their Children out of the Church, and deny them Baptism, though the Jews
truly Believe in Christ come, what has God left in the room of these, that
carry any show of his Blessing, or good Will toward their Children, during
their Infant State?

As to their Internal and Eternal State, the Infants were in as good a State
then, as now? Christ is Yesterday, to Day, and the same for ever, the Lamb
slain for the Foundation of the World. Apoc. 13.8. But as to their visible
State, how come they to be in the same condition, that we Gentiles, and our
Children were in. Ephesians. 2.12. Before Christ came, and we believed in him?

I state the Question, concerning the Jews Believing in Christ come. As for the
Believing Gentiles, I shall let them alone, till I see how you prove the
casting out of the Seed of the Believing Jews.

FINIS.

