THE STATE OF THE Church of Christ, IN ITS MILITANCY upon EARTH, And the DUTY
of it, with respect to Penal LAWS, IN A SERMON Preached at the Assizes at
Chelmsford In the County of ESSEX, 8 MARCH 1687/8. By RICHARD GOLTY M. A.
Minister of Hutton in the County aforesaid.

Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne feceris. LONDON, Printed and Published by Randall
Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1688.

This may be Printed.

SVNDERLAND. P.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Wright Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
England, to the Honorable Sir John Powel Knight, one of the Justices of His
Majesty's Court of King's Bench; My Lords, the Judges at the Assize holden at
Chelmsford, etc. And also to the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Manby Knight, High
Sheriff of the County aforesaid.
THis Sermon, at the Appointment of the High Sheriff, was Preached before* Your
Lordships and the Great Assembly at the Assizes; and whatever unkind and
sinistrous Censures in this nice and critical Age, may be cast upon me and it,
yet it was honestly designed by me, in Service to the Peace and Unity of the
Christian Church, to affect that Auditory with a sense of their Obligation
constantly to assert what is necessary to the support and honor of Religion
among us, and to allay our salt and eager Differences and Animosities, in what
is impertinent thereunto; to dispose us to a willingness to be rid of those
Apples of Strife, that have been the notorious occasion of Discord and
Contention in this unhappily divided Kingdom. I cannot but hope that there is
such a general sense of our having been too long under those symptoms of Gods
disp^^asure, which the Prophet Isaiah 9. 21. observes, concerning the Jews
(that while Ephraim was divided against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim,
and both against Judah, Gods Anger was not turned away, but his hand was
stretched out still against them) as may prepare our hearts to a cheerful
concurrence in, and compliance with such healing Proposals, as are proper for
the establishing amongst us a Christian Amity and brotherly Reconciliation. I
have humble Considence that this, which was my end in Preaching, is Your
Lordships and Worships, in laying me under such Obligation to the Publication
of it, as I cannot in decency decline; not doubting but that all such as bear
Good Will to Zion, will promote such uniting Methods, that all single and
narrow Interests, may give place to that of common Christianity; that no
unchristian heats and contests, may cause such alienation in affection among
Brethren of the same Sacred Family, as for trifles to fall out in their way to
their Fathers House; but that we may all consent in the pursuit of the Divine
Ends of Religion, which are sincere Devotion toward God, sound Faith in
Christ, Holiness in Heart and Life, Humility, Meekness, Brother-Love and
Charity toward Men; in service to which, that Your Honors and Worship may be
eminent in your respective Stations Instrumentally, is the most hearty Prayer of

Your most Obedient and Humble Servant RIC. GOLTY.

S. Matthew Chap. XIII. the 29th and the former part of the 30th. Verse. But he
said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with
them; Let both grow up together until the Harvest.
THe shortest Preface will be an unseasonable Remora to my Entry into that
Spacious Field in which my Text ingages my travel; it being by the most Divine
Expositor, with respect to its Extent, styled the World.

I shall therefore observe to you, That in this whole Parable of the Tares and
Wheat, our Blessed Savior does first describe the State, and secondly
prescribe the Duty of his Church in its Militancy here upon Earth.

In the first of which it is evident, that tho Christ himself the Seedsman, tho
he sows only the good seed of Pure and Divine Doctrine, yet when the blade
springs up, the tares also appear: Tho the Church is styled here the Kingdom of
God, in which he in especial governs, yet there are in it too many rebellious
and undutiful Subjects: Tho the Apostle tells us, It Is the House of God, in
which by his grace and spirit, he particularly resides, yet it is not void of
ungracious and disobedient servants. It Is Magna Domus Dei, but in it there are
not only Vessels of Gold and Silver, but of Wood and Earth; some to honor and
some to dishonor. Tho it is that Vine which Gods right hand has planted, yet
it has some dead and infertile branches. That this is the condition of the
Christian Church in this World, is not only the purport of this but of the
Parable of the Fold, consisting both of Sheep and Goats, of the Barn Floor,
having both Wheat and Chafe, and of the Net enclosing Fishes good and bad.

To this purpose St. Austine in his First Book De Civitate Dei, says,
Perplexae sunt istae duae Civitates in hoc seculo invicemque permistae; The
City of God and the City of Satan, are so intermixed in this World, that they
are not to be separated till the Day of Judgment.

This from all that make common Observation, commands such an universal
acknowledgment, that I shall not waste the time in offering further enlargment
upon it; only from it observe the Vnacaccountableness of the Separation in the
Donatists of old, and some others, of late, from the Visible Church, upon
pretense of Spots and Corruptions in it; notwithstanding which, we are to be
firm to that Article in our Creed, in believing One Holy Catholic Church.
Denominatio sit a nobiliori; and it is one, tho one part is Militant here on
Earth, and the other Triumphant in Heaven.

It must be here in a state of Imperfection; it is at the great Harvest, then,
and not till then, it will be Perfect, consisting only of the Righteous, as St.
Austine, Contra Donatistas, Tandent ipsam unam and sanctam Ecclesiam, nunc
habere mixtos malos, tunc non habituram: Now the Holy Church has a mixture of
unholy Men in it, which then it will not have. At that great Day Christ will
present it to himself without spot, and blameless. Then, only the Wheat will be
gathered into his Barn.

But it is the Direction Christ gives in this place [that being the most
seasonable and useful at this time] to which I shall now confine my Discourse.
When the Blade sprung up, the Tarcs also appeared, the Servants inquiring in
this uneasy, and to them unexpected Case, Will thou that we go and gather them
up? In answer to this their demand, he said, Nay, etc.

Where first he enters his Denial.

2. He gives his positive Sentence, Let them grow up together.

The Reason of the Negative, Lest while ye gather up the Tares, etc.

And of the Positive, why suffered in their growth? Because at the time of the
Harvest they could more seasonably, and with greater safety, be separated from
the Wbeat. Then I will say to the Reapers, etc.

In my procedure upon this, I shall endeavor first to show you what is meant
by Tares:

2. What Christ intends in this his Answer: And 3. To accommodate the whole of
it to our Use.

First, (...) which is the greek word, is mentioned only in this place in the
New Testament, and it is rarely to be found in other Authors, that its
obscurity gives the occasion of variety in Translations of it; the Frencb
render it Lolium darnel, and Theophrast. says, That Corn does sometime
Loliescere, degenerate into Darnel.

Diodate thinks it some particular Weed growing amongst Corn in that Country.
Dr. Hammond translates it Cockle. Others give a more general Interpretation of
it, as Mala Herba and planta semini noxia; we translate it Tares:

By which may be understood Tyne, or a sort of Wild Fitches, which has small
fibrous Roots, and in twisting about the Roots of the Corn, sucks away its
Nourishment, and has claspers in the Branches, that fastening upon the Stalk,
depresses it, and without greatest hazard to it, cannot be separated from it.

Since in this Parable the Devil is the Sower of them, and the Tares are Wicked
Men, in this Variety may be meant [as in our Marginal Notes] all noisome Weeds
whatsoever that are noxious to the Corn, and particularly Infelix Lolium
Darnel, which naturally disaffects the Head, and so may properly de^ote Men
Erring in Judgment, or more rank and unsavory Weeds, as Carlock, Mayweed, etc.
which may properly describe Men Vicious in their Lives, such as walk
disorderly; it is the unhappy Fate of the Church to be infested with them both.
Infelix Lolium and steriles dominantur Avenae.

But 2. What does Christ mean in forbidding his Servants to gather these up,
and in suffering their growth 'till the Harvest, which himself being the
Expositor, is to the end of the World?

First, Negatively, Christ is not to be interpreted in this, as if he were at
all pleased with the growth of these Weeds.

It would undoubtedly be most grateful to him to have only such pure Grain in
his Field, as is fit to be gathered into his Barn, Beauxamis in locum, Docetur
hic non quale sit officium nostrum, sed quae sit futura Ecclesiae conditio. We
are advised here not so much in the Duty of the Servants, as in the Condition
of the Field.

Yet neither 2. does Christ intend the least prohibition to the Magistrates
Execution of Justice in punishing Malefactors.

The Sword of Justice is not to be born in vain, Magistrates are to be a
Terror to Evil Doers; in their rooting out them there can be no danger, but
altogether safety to the Wheat; if they should be let alone, so as to proceed
in impunity till the Harvest, the World would be but Magnum La* trocinium, or a
Circean Stable; it would be an unclean Stage, where only Vice and Villainy would
act its part; it would be like to that Field under the Curse of Job 31. 40.
Thistles would grow instead of Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley; or like
Solomon's Field of the Sluggard, nothing would appear in it to denominate it a
Field of Corn, but 'twould be all overgrown with Briars and Thorns.

It Is observable, Christ does not say, Regna hujus Mundi, the Kingdom of this
World, but Regnum Coeli, the Kingdom of Heaven; which is universally
interpreted of the Church, and tho in our Saviors Exposition of it, it is
styled the World, yet that is in respect to its Catholicism and Universality,
as dispersed over the whole World; according to the Prophesies of it, it
extends from Sea to Sea, and Christ sent his Disciples to all Nations, and the
Apostle tells us, That their sound is gone into all the World; it is properly
his Kingdom redeemed by his Blood, sanctified and enlightened by his Spirit,
and will at last be presented to himself without spot and blemish.

That this Parable is meant not of a Civil and Political, but of an
Ecclesiastical Body, is generally agreed; but then still the Question returns,
Whether our Savior enters his Noli Pros -- against Ecclesiastical Censures?

To this it is answered 3. Negatively, That Christ here intends no Prohibition
to Church Censures for the punishing of Offenders.

St. Austin puts and determines this Case thus, Ipse Dominus cum servis
volentibus (...) colligere dicit, sinite utraque crescere usque ad messem,
premisit causam dicens, ne forte cum vultis colligere (...) eradicetis and
triticum; ubi satis ostendit, tum metus iste non subest, non dormiat severitas
disciplinae. Our Lord to the Servants appearing in readiness to gather the
tares, requiring their growth together till the Harvest; he intimates the
Cause, Lest with them ye root up also the Wheat: in evidence that when no
danger of that, then the severity of Discipline is to take place. Of which at
large in his Epistle contra Parmen. and contra Vincent.

Christ himself decreed that he that would not hear the Church, should be as an
Heathen or Publican, and the Apostles by unquestionable Authority gave Sentence
of Excommunication upon the Incestuous Corinthian; 1 Cor. 5. 4. and upon
Hymenus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20.

The Church is not to be supposed an undisciplined Rout, divested of power
necessary to its consistence; which it would be, if it were here or elsewhere,
under prohibition of exercising its Censures.

What then does our Savior mean in his thus expressing himself in this case to
the servants? To which positively,

First in general, He expects patience, lenity, and tender caution, in
eradicating those tares, he corrects the intemperate zeal of his Disciples, in
whom he foresaw a disposition with improper and undue severities to prosecute
offenders; of which they gave an early instance, in demanding fire from heaven
to consume the Samaritans.

The mind of Christ in this will be more particularly understood by considering
his Sentence

First, With respect to the Question, as put by the Servants, Will thou that we
go and gather them up? And

Secondly, With respect to his Reason, Why not? Lest while ye gather up the
Tares, ye root up the Wheat also.

Now in their Enquiry, Will thou that we go and gather them up? They signify
their intent of a sudden and immediate dispatch of them without the exercise of
due Patience, and necessary Consideration; thus,

Chrisost. in Matthew. interprets the Servants intending to prosecute Heretics
with Fire and Sword, and says, That if by his Negative they had not been
obliged to alter their Resolutions, Bloodshed and War must have followed all
over the World.

The Word in the Original for gathering up, is (...), and signifies not so much
a single Collection, as a Gathering them up in Bundles; they would at once have
swept away these Tares by some devouring Judgment, like that of Fire from
Heaven; to this their Proposition Christ enters his dissent, and tho he well
enough approved of the thing, yet by no means consented with them in the time
and manner they would effect it, but gives check to that devouring Zeal that
would destroy all Opposers; and does intend first, that this gathering
together, or rooting up, be rather gladio oris then ore gladie; that no other
Sword, then the Sword of the Spirit be used; that by Admonition by the Sword of
the Spirit of Meekness they be rather restored; Christ determines against their
immediate and utter destruction in that way they designed, lest in gathering
them up, they root up the Wheat.

The Sword tho never so well edged, is an ill distinguisher between Wheat and
Tares, and War the most improper Judge to determine Religious Controversies:
It Is gladius delphicus, and strikes on both sides without difference to Men or
their Doctrines; it involves the Innocent and the Guilty in the same Calamity;
like those dreadful Thunderbolts, Minutius Faelix tells of, Sine delectu
tangunt sacra and profana, hominis noxios feriunt and religiosos; they without
distinction, strike places sacred and profane, and personsinnocent and nocent;
but it is never more fatally devouring, than when in the hands of those in whom
Glesselius one of the Anti-remonstrants in Roterdam placed it, who defined,
That if the Prince or Clergy neglected the Reformation of a Church, Necesse est
id facere plebeios licet ad sanguinem usque pro ea pugnent: That the Plebeians
must Reform, tho it be with a Resistance unto Blood.

Theophylact makes the more Christian Comment upon the Text, who says, God
would not by War have the Tares pulled up, lest in so doing the Righteous
suffer with the Wicked.

Theophylact in Loc. says, The Servants were so incensed and inflamed against
these Tares upon their appearance in their Lords Field (...), to save the
trouble of a dilatory Process, were resolved by a rash Execution to rid them
from the troubles of this miserable and wretched Life.

This return of our Lord to the Servants, if it be not a strict Prohibition of
Capital Punishments, it is a severe Caution, that due care be had in inflicting
it, lest the Wheat also be rooted up.

It Is certain the Primitive Christians did interpret Christ, in saying, He came
to save men's lives, not to destroy them; and here in my Text, as entering not
barely a Caveat, but a Prohibition of punishing with death upon the score of
Religion.

They reckoned such a Process foreign to the Temper and contradictory to the
Rules of Christianity.

It was once St. Austin's Opinion, Neminem ad unitatem Christi cogendum esse,
That none were to be compelled to become Christians: And when the insolence of
the Donatists made it necessary for him to alter his mind, yet as Bellarmin
confesses, Semper excepit supplicium mortis; He always excepted punishment with
death.

If it had been thought lawful to punish Heresy with death, the Apologies of
Tertullian and the Primitive Christians, would have been in a great part
insignificant.

It Is a Modern Maxim in Christianity, but no where, that I can find, an
Article of Faith, Posse Haereticos ab Ecclesia damnatos temporalibus poenis and
etiam morte mulctari: That Herericks condemned by the Church, were by the Civil
Magistrate to be sentenced to Temporal Punishment, yea to Death it self.

It was Calvin's Opinion, Haereticos jure gladii coercendos; That Heretics
were to be restrained by the Power of the Sword: Which Beza improves in his
Tract, De Haereticis puniendis, where he lays down this Thesis, Haereticos
interdum capitali supplicio a Magistratibus coercendos: That Heretics are to
suffer Capital Punishment.

This Question was better determined in the more early and purer Times of
Christianity, as by Lactantius lib. 5. cap. 10. Defendendam esse religionem non
occidendo sed moriendo. Religion is to be defended rather by the exposing our
own, than violating the lives of others.

Our Savior here forbids their thus being gathered up, lest the Wheat be
rooted up also; it being evident if the servants had gone in that Method, they
had wronged the Harvest; for as St. Austine says, Multi primo (...) sunt and
postea triticum fiunt; fieri potest ut qui noxio dogmate depravatus est cras
resipiscat and defendere potest veritatem: as St. Austin, once a Manichee,
afterward Malleus Hereticorum. Many at first appear tares, which afterward
become wheat; he that is depraved with Error now, may repent too morrow.

Upon this says St. Jerome, Monemur non cito amputare fratrem, not rashly to
cut off a Brother, for they that are bad now, may be better hereafter; Nisi
Deus expactaret impium, non haberet unde glorificaret pium; Had not God
patiently expected the Repentance and Conversion of such whom Men would
destroy, ad laudabilem mutationem non pervenissent, they had never attained to
Saving Repentance.

Had F^^e at the instance of the Disciples consumed the Samaritans, they had
been prevented in their after receiving the Gospel; had not Gods Patience given
respite to the Tares after their first discovery, nec Mattheum de Publicano
Evangelistam, nec Magdalenam de Meretrice penitentem habuisset; si Deus
eradicasset Paulum persecuentem, non haberet Ecclesia Paulum praedicantem;
Matthew of a Publican had never been an Evangelist, nor Magdalen the Harlot
become Magdalen the Penitent; if Saul had been rooted out when he was a
Persecutor, the Church would ever have wanted Paul the Apostle. The meaning of
Christ in the Text then is, That they might have space for Repentance.

St. Chrysostom. affirms, That a Heretic, tho he persists with obstinacy in his
Heresy, yet is not to be Punished with Death, with whom Euthimius consents.
Christ, says he, in this Parable would not suffer the plucking up the Tares,
lest the Wheat should be rooted up with them; forbidding the execution of
Heretics, lest the Orthodox suffer with them.

It was therefore an unchristian heat in Calvin, that sent Servetus to the
Flames, and in the Switzers, that commanded the Execution of Valentine Gentilis
at Bazil; and in Maximilian the Emperor in causing the Priscillianists to be
put to death; tho Sulpitius Severus says of them, That they were homines luce
indignissimi; yet he adds they were pessimo exemplo necati; tho they were the
worst of Men, yet their Execution was of dangerous Consequence. And when
Alexius of Constantinople caused the Bongomili to be put to Death, who (if
their Opinions were heartily represented) were sufficiently bad, yet the
Eastern Bishops, disallowed of the Fact; and Baronius tells us, it was the
ancient usuage of the Primitive Bishops in moving the Secular Power against
Heretics, so to manage it, Vt tamen a capitali supplicio inferendo dehortati
sunt.

It Is evident that Capital Punishment had its first rise from the Heathen and
Arrian Emperors, and in that it was after returned by the Christians upon
their Enemies; it was because the Man was too hard for the Christian.

Thirdly, Tho it is more generally interpreted, that the Servants resolved by
the abovementioned Severity, to cut them off from the body of Mankind, yet
others, that they intended only to cut them from the Body of the Church; and
Lyra and Gorran are of Opinion, That the Servants design to gather them up, was
in such a way as was proper to the Church, Separando eos a Communione
Ecclesiae, by separating them from Church Communion.

Christ may probably here intend a caution and lenity in that direful and
solemn Sentence of Exmunication, which is an Amputation or a cutting off from
the Body of Christ; it is in the Name and Power of Christ, a delivery over unto
Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus.

In comport with the meaning of Christ here, it was an old Rule, Non
Excommunicandam multitudinem, that a multitude were not to be Excommunicated.

There was to be no gathering up in Bundles in this Life: the Church did only
Legere, select one out of many Offenders, Vt paena ad paucos esset, metus ad
omnes; tormenta paucorum exempla omnium: That the Punishment of a few, might be
caution to all.

Dr. Tailor in Duct. Dubitant, tells us, The Judgment of the Church in this
Censure is an effective terrible Declaration of the Judgment of God, and
therefore must not be exterminating and final for things of little concernment.

The Second Canon of the Council at Worms, does Decree, Vt Nullus sacerdotum,
quanquam rectae fidei, homines, pro parvis and levibus causis suspendat: That
no Priest, tho never so sound in the Faith, may suspend Men from Church
Communion for a light Cause.

Dr. Tailor in his Duct. Dubitant. asserts, That no Man is to be separated from
the Church, but he that separates himself from God; and tells us, That he who
for a trifling cause cuts off a man from Church Communion, is like him in the
Fable, who with an Axe beat out his Neighbors brains, that he might brush off
a fly, which he espied on his Forehead: or like an indiscreet and severe
Nurse, that to clean the Child's head of the Dandruff, fleas off his Skin.

All endeavors ought first to be used, that he may be restored with the Spirit
of Meekness, that by Admonition and Reproof, to which the Scriptures are
profitable, he may be reclaimed, and till it appears vulnus immedicabile, he is
not with that severity to be cut off.

Fourthly, The meaning of Christ may probably be, That in the (...) in
Religion, such as are mentioned Romans 14. in which the Kingdom of Heaven does
not consist, the obligation of Christians is to exercise Charity, mutual
Condescension, and Forbearance one toward another.

The Apostle there directs to the alloy of all Animosity and Discord about such
things, and provides that there be no Censuring or Grieving one another, and to
this purpose he allows a Liberty to Men of either Persuasion, informing us,
That Christ died for both, and that God received both:

The Controversy in these indifferent things, lies not between Wheat and
Tares, but between Wheat and Wheat, and it may be is founded only because one
grows in a more fertile Soil, and on a more Florid Stalk, or is of a brighter
Complexion than the other.

That the true Corn should thus go together by the Ears, we may be sure is
assignable to the hand of an Enemy, and if our Lord permits the Concrescence of
Tares and Wheat, much more that Wheat and Wheat grow together.

It Is as natural and usual for Christians to differ in their Sentiments in
matters of that kind, as it is for Men to be of diverse Statures and Complexions,
wherefore (the Apostle telling us; That he who doubts is damned if he eat) by
Penalties to require a consent in one Opinion in things so indifferent, would
be as hard as for one to thrust out his Neighbors Eye, because not so strong
and piercing as his own; and would be a barbarity exceeding that of Procrustes
the Robber, who measured all men by his own bed, and would bring them to that
dimension, either by a Rack or Defalcation, he only torturing the Bodies, while
the other wounds the Consciences, and cruciates the Minds of Men.

It Is observeable in this Parable, that the Servants entered their Complaint
against such as appeared Tares, and it was for the rooting up of them they
offered their service, to which our Savior answered as in my Text, Nay, etc.

If they had addressed to their Lord with their Censures of their Fellow
Servants, and had signified an Inclination, because in every trifling punctilio
they agreed not with the Complainants that therefore they would go and gather
them up our Lord would have given them another kind of Answer.

If the Pharisees were inexcuseable in their neglect of the great things of the
Law, through their Zeal in the lesser things of it, Christians are much more
Criminal in violating the great Gospel Law of Charity and Meekness, upon the
score of such things as are not at all required by any Divine Law.

If it were inimicus homo that sowed those Tares that endangered the Wheat,
certainly it is inimicissimus homo that would gather up the Wheat instead of
Tares.

It Is here observeable, that tho the Tares appeared to the eyes of the Servants,
yet our Savior did not adventure the well-doing of his Field upon their hand,
so as to allow their Eradication; if he had given any intimation of the Field,
being committed to such a Conduct, as without possibility of being injurious to
the Wheat, the Tares might be gathered up, the force of the reason of his
Prohibition, Lest with them ye root up the Wheat, would be enervated.

It Is probable our Savior designed the prevention of this, when he respited
them till the Harvest, well knowing that they may then appear to be Children of
the Kingdom, which through the passion or inadvertency of his Servants, would
as Tares have been bundled up for the fire.

Thirdly, In the Accommodation of all this to our use, though it may be
indecent for me to insist too particularly on the Parallel between the State of
the Field, and the Condition of the Church of Christ amongst us, so as to
charge the growth of the Tares to the Supineness or any other default in the
Servants, or to suggest, that those concerned in gathering the Tares, have not
with the Servants of the Household consulted their Lord, nor taken their
measures from him: Yet I shall adventure to give you the Judgments of such as
are of great Honor and Authority upon this Subject; and shall close my
Discourse with a Recommendation of the Example of the Servants to our Imitation.

The Authorities of such as have given their Opinion in this Matter:

The Lord Chancellor Hide his Speech to the Parliament 1660, is filled up with
the Expressions of his Sense of this Case and Directions for its Cure.

The Honorable and Pious Lord Chief Justice Hale, lamenting that the Cause of
Love and Piety was hindered by our present Constitutions, did declare, That the
only means to beal us, was a New Act of Uniformity, that should neither leave
all at liberty, nor impose any thing but what was necessary: And with the
Assistance of the Lord Keeper Bridgman and Bishop Wilkins, drew up the Form of
a Bill to be tendered to the Parliament to that purpose.

The Archbishop of Armagh, for the healing of Distractions, and for the return
of a Wished for Peace and Unity, did contrive some prudent Accommodation
necessary.

Bishop Tailor in his Duct. Dubitant, expresses himself abundantly in this
Case, as thus, with respect to our Condition he gives it as a Rule, That the
Ecclesiastical Laws must be easy and charirable, and when they are not, they
oblige not, and that Ecclesiastical Laws that are merely such, cannot be
universal and perpetual.

Bishop Davenant in his Letter to Dureus says, That which makes Schisms
perptual, is it he exercise of a Tyrannical Power, so as not to acknowledge any
for Brethren, or admit any to Communion with them, who will not receive from
them, in any difference of Opinion, a Law both of believing and speaking.

It Is the determination of a Learned Doctor of our Church, That without
Controversy, the main inlet of all the Distractions, Confusions, and
Divisions, of the Christian World, is by adding other Conditions of Church
Communion, than Christ has done.

Were it needful, I might fill a Volume with Quotations of this kind; but,

I shall only instance in these which next to that in my Text, ought to be the
greatest Authority with us.

King James the First of Pious Memory, as Causabon in his Epistle to Cardinal
Perron, informs us, Thought that for Concord there is no nearer way than
diligently to separate things necessary from the unnecessary, and to bestow all
our Labor, that we may agree in what is necessary, and that in what is not so,
there may be Christian Liberty allowed.

The Royal Martyr Charles the First of glorious Memory, in Consideration of the
State of the Kingdom in 1641, speaks thus, As for Differences among our selves
for Matters in their own nature, that are indifferent concerning Religion, We
shall willingly Comply, with the Advice of our Parliament, that some Law may be
made for the exemption of Tender Consciences from Punishment or Prosecution for
such Ceremonies, which by the judgment of most men are held to be matters
indifferent, and of some, to be absolutely unlawful.

The late King Charles the Second of blessed Memory, in his Declaration from
Breda first, and in his Declaration for Indulgence to Tender Consciences
afterward, gave sufficient Evidence of his Concurrent Opinion with his Royal
Progenitors.

Thus it cannot but be acknowledged, That some of the Wisest and most Learned,
and the greatest of Men in these Three last Reigns, were affected with a sense
of a Disease that the Church and Nation have been laboring under, and it
appears that his Majesty's Royal Ancestors had it often in their Thoughts, and
upon their Desires, that it might be healed.

And as for our present Gracious Sovereign, that now wears the Imperial Crown,
and sways the Royal Scepter, whom God preserve; it appears that what was in the
Heart of David his Father, has a long time been upon the Heart, and now is
upon the Hand of our Solomon his Son, and his Hand finds to do it with all
his Might: He like a Tender and Prudent Physician, experiencing the inefficacy
and inconvenience of those corroding and acrimonious Applications, that have
been too long used, thinks it proper, instead of that Salt and Vinegar, which
has only increased and inflamed our Wounds, to recommend the Lenitives of Oil
and Balsam; most probably hoping, that the warm Beams of an Indulging Sun will
prevail to the laying of that viciousness of Temper, which the rough and
tempestuous Wind had occasioned.

Our Healing Sovereign observing the Body Politic and Ecclesiastic, like the
Man in the Gospel that fell among Thieves, if not half dead, yet lying sorely
wounded, like the Good Samaritan, is pouring in Oil and Wine, and while he is
so, let not any of us be like him that passed by on the other side, as all
together unconcerned, or like him that only vouchsafed to look, but offered
nothing to relieve him in that distressed Case; but let us all to our
Capacities help to the quenching those common Flames, and the allaying those
threatening heats that have been so fatal to us, and contribute our utmost in
this most Christian Service: some of us by Humility and Obedience, others of us
by Compassion and Condescension, and all of us by our Prayers and Tears.

Lastly, To this we must reckon our selves obliged, by considering the Example
of the Servants in the Text, In servis habemus tam quod laudemus quam quod
imitemur: We have in the Servants both what is commendable and imitable.

They cleared themselves from a treacherous betraying the Trust reposed in
them, of the Field, by reporting to their Master the unexpected accident of the
growth of the Tares; they being informed that an Enemy had done it, offered
their service to redress the Mischief; that if the Enemy entered the Field by
their Sloth, he might be expelled by their Zeal. St. Austin to that Inquiry,
Who is that Man that is eaten up with Zeal to Gods House? Answers, Qui omnia
quae videt perversa satagit emendare: That if he sees the foundation of it too
narrow and strait, will endeavor the enlargement of its basis to its due
extent.

If he perceives an inconvenience in the fense incompassing the Field, will
consult such an Amendment of it as may neither keep out such as belong to
Christ's Fold, nor suffer the wild Beast of the Field, nor the wild Boar of the
Wood, neither Turk nor Pagan, to enter in. And that our Zeal in this, may not
be an Ignis Fatuus to precipitate us into unsafe and dangerous Methods, that it
may not be a feavorish heat, that invades the Health, and threatens the Life of
that Body that cherishes it, but that it may be a Coal kindled at Gods Altar,
let us with the Servants in the Text, go to our Lord.

So, first, not to be too much influenced by our Passions. Solomon tells us,
Wrath is Cruel, Anger is outrageous, and nothing can stand before Envy, Pro.
27. 4.

So as, secondly, Not to take our Measures from the Examples of others, to
return to them in proportion to those undue severities which at any time have
been received from them, the Rule of our Savior, Is not to do to others as
they do, but as we would have them do to our selves.

Let us therefore receive our Directions from Christ, and acquiesce in them,
referring all to our Masters Will, and then proceed according to his Dictates,
whose Service consists altogether in the following of his own Rules; for in so
doing we shall most promote our Masters Honor, and be most servicable to his
Field the Church; and best provide, that when we shall be translated from our
Stations in his Kingdom here, we may be made partakers of his Eternal Kingdom
in Heaven; and in the mean time, God in his infinite Mercy, so direct the
Counsels and Influence the Hearts of Men, that the Tares which at the Harvest
shall be gathered, may not in the mean time be able either to suppress the
Wheat, or destroy the Field; and that our Lord Jesus, who loved his Church, and
gave himself for it, may Sanctify and Cleanse it, and at last present it to
Himself a Glorious Church without spot or blemish. To Him, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, and Praise, both now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

