THE Old Religion Demonstrated in its PRINCIPLES, And described in the LIFE and
PRACTICE thereof.

Jerem. vi. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the Old Paths, where is the Good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find Rest
for your Souls.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston, BookSeller to His most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXIV.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Pious Reader.
Good Reader,
THou art here presented with a new Book concerning the Old Religion. As
therefore thou art not to expect thy curiosity should here be gratified with
new Notions, (for I am not describing a new way to Heaven, but directing thee
in the good old way which the holy Scriptures have marked out, and which wise
and good men have all along walked in); so neither art thou to think thy self
disappointed, if thou meetest not with a Discourse modishly dressed up, with all
the fashionable Ornaments of Wit and Eloquence. For give me leave to tell thee,
though that would have been acceptable to the humor of the Age, and perhaps
might without any great difficulty have been complied with; yet it would
neither have suited so well with the nature of the subject I am upon, nor
especially have fitted the persons for whose sake this little Book was written.

That therefore which I here pretend, and which I hope thou will not fail of in
the Papers before thee, is, First, A brief but plain and substantial proof of
the grounds and fundamental Principles of Religion in general. Secondly, A
discovery and confutation of several vulgar Opinions, which deform the beauty,
and defeat the efficacy of Christian Religion in particular. And lastly, A
clear description, a rational deduction, and a serious inculcation of the most
important duties of that Religion, wherein either the glory of God, our own
comfort, or the peace and happiness of Mankind are principally concerned.

As for the management of these Points, though I have not given countenance to
this Discourse by citation of Authors, nor either adorned the Text with fine
Sayings, nor the Margin with great Names; yet I hope thou will find a vein of
sound Reason in it, and the spirit of the Gospel running quite through it. I
assure thee I have dealt sincerely and conscientiously herein, I have
impartially consulted the holy Scriptures, I have made use of the best
understanding God has given me, and I here set before thee (though not the
product, yet) the result of many years observation, consideration, and
experience. And so I leave it to Gods blessing, and thy candid acceptance.
Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. An Introduction to an holy and comfortable Life.
CHAP. I. THE wisdom of being religious. Page 1 CHAP. II. The reasonableness of
Religion in general. p. 9 CHAP. III. Of the rewards of Religion in another
World. p. 21 CHAP. IV. Of the great influence and mighty efficacy of believing
Heaven and Hell, or rewards and punishments in another World. p. 38 CHAP. V. Of
the choice of a Religion, or what particular Religion a man should apply
himself to. p. 55 CHAP. VI. More particular Directions for the settling a man's
mind in Religion. p. 71 CHAP. VII. Cautions against some Opinions which are
hindrances both of an holy and of a comfortable life. p. 85 CHAP. VIII.
Directions for the effectual prosecution of Religion. p. 139
PART II. The practice of holy and comfortable Living.
CHAP. I. OF Secret Devotion and particularly of secret Prayer. p. 181 CHAP.
II. Of several other instances of secret Devotion. p. 209 CHAP. III. Of private
Devotion, or Family-Piety in general. p. 235 CHAP. IV. Of Family Duties in
special. p. 254 CHAP. V. Of Family-Discipline, or by what means a Family may be
brought to the observance of Religion. p. 281 CHAP. VI. Of public Piety and
particularly in relation to the Church and public Assembly of Christians. p.
301 CHAP. VII. Of Civil Piety, or how a man may and ought to promote Gods
honor, and the public good of the Parish, considered only as a Civil Society
or Neighborhood. p. 346
AN Introduction TO AN HOLY AND A Comfortable LIFE.
CHAP. I. The Wisdom of being Religious.
THE Holy Scripture (that Book of Books, and Treasury of Divine Wisdom)
expresses it self thus concerning Religion,

Psalm. III. V. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and a good
understanding have all they that keep his commandments.

Eccles. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and
keep his commandments, for this is the whole (duty or business) of man.

St Luke 13. 23. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able.

Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, etc.

2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

St Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added to you.

St John 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which
endures to eternal life.

St Mat. 16. 26. What shall it profit a man if he should gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul.

By all which, and abundance of other such like passages, it appears, that
Religion is as much our interest as our duty; and that Piety and Care of
another World, are not only the Commands of God, and his impositions upon us,
but the upshot and result of the best and truest Wisdom. For Wisdom does not
consist in skeptical jealousies and suspicions, but in a determinate knowledge
and resolution what is fit to be done; not in a superficial smattering of many
things, but in a clear and distinct apprehension of the just nature, value, and
moment of them; not in an endless hunting after curiosity, but to know where to
stick and fasten; not in pilling a flint, or laborious beating out of
unprofitable difficulties, but in applying a man's self to such things as are
savoury and useful; not in tricks of wit, sophistry, or eloquence; and least of
all in a jest or a repartee; but to discover what is fit to propound to a man's
self as his end and design, and by what means to attain it; to have great
things in a man's thoughts, and to despise and scorn little and petty designs:
in a word, to see a great way before him, and to be well provided for the
future.

Now all this is verified in Religion more than in any other thing in the whole
World; for here a man's mind is taken up with the greatest thoughts and
sublimest objects, God and Eternity; he takes care to secure the main stake,
his own Soul; he imploys himself about things of the greatest moment and
consequence; by inquiring about another World, he gives proof of the greatest
foresight; in considering of it, he gives evidence of a sagacious temper; in
resolving upon it, he shows judgment; in pursuing it by the means appointed, he
demonstrates the command he has over himself, and that he is led by his
reason, not ridden by his passions; and by persevering in this course, he
arrives at true tranquillity of mind, the Crown and Glory of Wisdom.

Accordingly we find by experience, that commonly wherever there is a grave,
thoughtful, sedate, Person, such an one as is either fit to give or to take
advice, he is seldom destitute of a sense of Religion: But on the contrary,
wherever you see an incogitant shatter-brain'd fellow, that knows not himself
enough to make him modest and civil, that has not so much reason as to weigh
an argument, nor so much Arithmetic as to value any thing but what is present;
that is so much under the power of his Senses, as scarcely to know whether he
has such a thing as a Spirit within him, or has so much Drink about him, that
his head works nothing but yest and froth; here is a man cut out to be an
Advocate for Skepticism or Atheism; this is the Person that will be captious
against Religion, and malapert toward God Almighty.

But let such men enjoy their humor as long as they can, they will be sure
sadly to repent, or rue it at last: and in the mean time, they only betray
their own shame and folly, for their tongue will prove no slander to Religion;
the mighty concern of which, is not only declared by God Almighty, confirmed by
our own reason, and justified by our experience, but also affectionately
recommended to us by all wise and good men; by those whose sagacity and
discretion is such, that we have no reason to suspect they are deceived or
imposed upon themselves; and whose sincerity and integrity is such, that we can
as little think they should have any design to impose upon us.

And therefore those Persons, who being either prevailed upon by the evil
examples of the World, or discountenanced by the lewd sayings of such as we
mentioned even now, and (declining the ways of Piety and Devotion) give
themselves up to a loose and irreligious life, are in the first place errant
Cowards toward men, whilst they are insolent toward God: And in the next
place, they are false to the common reason of mankind, which obliges men to
provide for the future. In the third place, they are false to their own
interest of self-preservation. And lastly, they are false and ungrateful to
their best friends, whose counsels they forsake, and abandon themselves to the
conduct of the most silly and profligate Wretches.

But if any shall think to excuse themselves from this censure, by suggesting,
that they look upon Devotion, as either the effect of a weak judgment, or of a
melancholy and timorous constitution. I add, that this makes the matter so much
worse, as that it involves them, not only in the guilt of all the former, but
also of extreme rudeness and incivility toward the best of men.

To make all this more clear and convincing, and to lay the surer foundation of
all that is to be said hereafter, we will now in the next place show the
grounds upon which Religion stands.

CHAP. II. The Reasonableness of Religion in general.
THAT which is meant by Religion (in the general notion of it) is nothing else
but a due regard toward the Divine Majesty, a diligent care of approving our
selves to the supreme Being, the Creator and Governor of the World: Or, which
comes to the same effect, the prudent ordering a man's conversation in this
World, so that he may erect his mind with comfortable expectations of the
favor of God and happiness in another World. Thus much we are taught by the
Author to the Hebews, Chap. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; in which few
words, we may observe in the first place the matter or duty of Religion,
expressed by diligent seeking of God; and secondly, the two Pillars, or (as I may
say) Poles of it, namely, 1. the persuasion of the Being of God, 2. the
expectation of rewards from him; the former of which most properly contains the
first rise and reason of Religion, and the latter the motives and inducements
to pursue it.

If these two Pillars be united, they make so firm an arch, that no objection
can shake the Building; but if they be taken and considered singly, they are
each of them of mighty strength for the upholding of Religion.

. 2. As for the former, if (I say) we consider the nature of God only, that
alone is able to possess us with an apprehension of the fitness and
reasonableness of diligently seeking him.

It is true we cannot see the Divine Majesty as we may behold corporeal
objects, because he is of a spiritual nature, and for the same reason we cannot
see our own Souls. And it is true also, that we cannot fully comprehend him in
our minds neither, because of his infinite perfections; yet we cannot so much
as doubt whether there be any such Being or no, if we do but bethink our selves
in this one thing, namely, how we our selves came to be? For, though it may be
at the first blush of this question, we shall think it sufficient to say, we
had our beginning from our immediate Parents, and they in like manner
successively from their Progenitors; yet when we proceed on in our inquiry so
far as to consider and ask our selves, what it was which brought the whole race
of mankind into Being? we shall then find our selves forced to acknowledge the
hand of God in it.

Forasmuch as in the first place, it is certain that nothing could take a
beginning without a cause, and in the next place, it is as certain that this
thing called mankind, could not be the cause of it self, or produce it self;
and then to impute it to chance, or to imagine that such an excellent Being as
mankind is, wherein there is so much variety of Parts, and yet order and
decency, and in short, so many instances of admirable art and wisdom in the
very composure of his Body (setting aside his mind:) that this, I say, should
be the product of blind chance, is more absurd than either of the former;
therefore there must be a God, for none but a fool indeed can say, There is no
God.

Now if we acknowledge a God, who gave beginning to our selves, and to all
other things, we must also own him to be eternal, as being before all things,
and the cause of them; and as such, he must needs, not only have in himself
eminently all those perfections, which are to be found in any part of his
workmanship, but be also unlimited in his own perfections.

And this will inavoidably lead us to the acknowledgment of all, or most of
those Attributes, which either the Holy Scripture ascribes to him, or which
Religion is concerned in, namely, that he is a free Agent, that he is
Omnipotent, that he is infinitely wise, that he is just, and that he is good,
as will easily appear in particular.

First, He must needs be a free Agent, that is, such an one as acts not
necessarily, or that is bound down by any fatal necessity, or determined to
this or that act, or object, or measure of acting by any thing without him, but
wholly follows his own voluntary motion and choice, the counsel of his own
will; the reason is plain, because he made things when nothing was before, and
so there could be nothing to bound, limit, or determine him.

Secondly, He must needs be Powerful or Omnipotent, for the same reason,
namely, because he gave being and beginning to things that were not at all; for
we cannot conceive a greater instance of Power, than to bring something out of
nothing.

Thirdly, He must be wise, both because we see he has contrived things
according to the rules of exactest wisdom, insomuch, that the more we
understand the Divine workmanship, the more we admire it; and also, because he
has imprinted some image of of his wisdom upon our selves.

Fourthly, We must acknowledge him just, as well because (by reason of his
infinite power and wisdom) he can have no little ends to biass him, as because
he has also made an impression of justice upon our minds.

Lastly, He must needs be good, not only because he is wise (as aforesaid) but
because he is infinitely happy and perfect, and so can fear nothing, can envy
nothing, can need nothing from any other Being, but contrariwise, being
infinitely full, must have a pleasure to diffuse and communicate himself to
them.

. 3. All these Doctrines concerning the Deity, flow from that one persuasion,
that there is a God; and the influence of every of these upon Religion, is as
great and apparent as the consequence of them from the acknowledgment of such a
Being, was natural and necessary: so that a man may with as much reason deny
any of the aforesaid Attributes to belong to the Divine Majesty, as (granting
them to be in him, or belong to him) avoid the force of them upon his
conscience, to incline him to regard this great God, i. e. to be Religious,
which we will again show particularly.

First, If the Divine Majesty be a free Agent, then it is certain all the good
and all the evil which he does to us, he does by choice; and then we ought to
be sensible of our obligations to him for the one, and humble our selves to him
under the other. And then also, because we are convinced, that he has mercy on
whom he will have mercy, we know there is no trifling and dallying with such a
Deity, but we ought to use all possible means of propitiating him toward our
selves.

Secondly, For the Divine Omnipotency, the natural consequence of that is, that
we fear him, and trust in him; for who is there that thinks of a God that made
him out of nothing, and is therefore able to destroy him, and resolve him into
nothing again when he pleases, who does not think it the highest wisdom in the
World that he shouldbe subject to him, pay him all possible homage, tremble
before him, and also think fit to trust and rely upon his Almighty Power in all
exigencies and difficulties?

Thirdly, The Divine Wisdom makes our obligations to Religion yet more strict
and close; for it convinces our reason that we ought to submit to his
Providence whatsoever they are, and not to dispute his commands, nor doubt his
promises, but hold him in the highest veneration and admiration that is
possible for us to express; to be reverent toward him upon all occasions, to
submit our wills to his; and especially in consideration that he must needs see
and take notice of all our carriage and behavior, to live with as much caution
in the greatest retirement and privacy, as when we are sensible that we are
upon the greatest Theater.

Fourthly, The apprehension of the Divine Justice and Integrity, not only
assures us that he hates all sin, but that he has no respect of Persons, but
will judge the World in righteousness, and then who will grumble at any of his
Providence, break any of his Laws, or do any unjust and base action, and that
because it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who
always can, and in due time will right himself?

Lastly, The consideration of Gods goodness, and that he is a Gracious and
Benign Majesty, cannot choose but mightily inflame our hearts with love to
him, and provoke us to serve him with all cheerfulness; for who that believes
him delighted to communicate himself to the relief of all his Creatures, does
not think of him with pleasure, and comfort himself in him; or who can find in
his heart to offend and abuse him, and not rather repent of all his former
follies and ingratitudes, and resolve to sin no more? For as the Apostle has
said, the goodness of God leads to repentance.

So that in this one Principle (the belief that there is a God) we have a large
foundation for Religion in general, which I have the rather insisted upon thus
particularly, for the sake of those who are called, or call themselves Theists
(because they pretend to be convinced of no more of the Articles of Religion,
but only of this great point, the Being of a Deity:) these men, I say, if upon
that single Principle they do not live religiously, are either men of no
Conscience, and then it will be all one what their Principles are; or are men
of no Principles at all, i. e. are Atheists rather than Theists, forasmuch as
by what has been said, it is apparent how pregnant that one Principle is of
Virtue and Piety, if it be sincerely believed, and rightly improved. But so
much for that.

CHAP. III. Of the rewards of Religion in another World.
LET us now consider the other Principle of Religion, viz. that God is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. This (as I intimated before) is
properly the motive or inducement to the observance of the Divine Majesty; for
it has pleased him to conjoin our interest with his own, and he has made the
greatest part of our duty toward him to consist in such things as conduce to
our own good, as well as to his glory; and to that purpose has laid the
foundation of Religion, by planting in us that principle of self-love, and
self-preservation, which is inseparable from our natures, and by which he works
upon us.

Concerning this point therefore of the rewards of Religion, we will first
consider the evidence of it, and when that is clear, we shall easily in the
second place be convinced of the efficacy of it, to the purposes of making men
devout.

The former of the two we will make way to the discovery of by this train of
discourse.

1. We have showed already that there is both justice and goodness in the
Divine Nature, either of which severally, but most certainly both together in
conjunction, afford ground of expectation, that he will make a difference
betwixt those that serve him, and those that serve him not. For seeing his
power and greatness render him a fit object of Worship, and our dependence upon
him as his Creatures, makes homage due from us to him: and seeing by his
infinite Wisdom, he must needs be sensible how men carry themselves toward
him; it cannot consist with his Justice to let those escape unpunished, who pay
no observance to him; nor stand with his goodness to suffer those to be
unrewarded, that serve and honor him.

Indeed it must be acknowledged, that this consideration of those Attributes
will not amount to a proof of rewards in another World, because of that other
Attribute of his, viz. the Divine Liberty or Freedom, upon account of which, he
cannot be bound to exercise whatsoever act or instance either of justice or
goodness is possible; for that would make him a necessary Agent (an error which
some men fall into unawares, whilst they are in pursuit of some extremes of
opinions) it may therefore be consistent enough with those Attributes (barely
considered, and looking no further) that he reward and punish only in this
World: but that which follows inevitably, is, that some such thing as rewards
and punishments there must be upon the account of men's carriage toward him,
which is all I intend hitherto. But then I subjoin.

2. It is highly reasonable upon other accounts, to expect greater rewards of
Virtue and Obedience, than what usually befall men in this World; as also
severer punishments of Impiety and neglect of the Divine Majesty, partly
because of the unequal distribution of things in this Life, where the race is
not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, etc. but good and bad
events happen oftentimes alike to all; wicked men are sometimes prosperous, and
holy men unfortunate and miserable; by which intricacy of divine Providence,
the Wisdom of God seems to lead us into an expectation of another World, where
amends shall be made for what is amiss here; partly also because the life of
men is so short, and they so quickly go off the stage of this World, that
neither the rewards of Virtue would be considerable, nor the punishments of
Impiety formidable enough, if they were no more than what men could receive or
suffer in this short Pilgrimage; but principally because the good things of
this World are so mean, and empty, and inconsiderable, that they afford no
satisfaction to the great mind of a virtuous man. Riches, and honor, and
pleasure, may perhaps fill and swell up a narrow sensual Soul, but a brave man
can by no means be contented with them; and therefore it is manifestly unworthy
of the greatness and goodness of the Divine Majesty, to give no better rewards
to those that love and honor him, than what they are capable of in this Life.

3. There is no impossibility in the thing, that there should be another World
besides this, and that we should live in it, either to reap the fruit of our
serving of God, or to receive the just reward of our Impiety; all the reason of
Mankind, nay all the wit, Skepticism and Sophistry together, can find no
repugnancy and contradiction in it; and therefore the concern of Religion is
not inconsiderable. If there were any impossibility in it, it must lie in this,
that men should live again after they are dead; but this is so far from
implying a contradiction, that it is not at all difficult to him that believes
an Almighty Power, which every one must acknowledge that owns a God; for why is
it harder to restore a man to life again, than to make him at first out of
nothing? so that he relapses into flat Atheism, that denies the possibility of
that which we are now making way for the belief of.

4. Nay, I add further, this thing is so far from being impossible or
incredible, that the consideration of the nature of our Souls renders it very
probable, and makes us capable of such a condition; for it is plain, we have
that in us which does not altogether depend upon our Bodies, but our Bodies
upon it; that which gives life and motion to the Body, but receives neither
from it; that which guides, governs, restrains and contradicts the Body when it
pleases, and which can act vigorously when the other is weak and languid, as we
oftentimes observe the strange efforts of wit and reason, when the Body is
almost worn out and at its last gasp. This being of a spiritual nature has no
contrary principles in its constitution, by the conflict of which it should be
brought to dissolution, as the other has. In a word, the Soul has life in it
self (though not from it self) and therefore cannot perish, unless either it
should be supposed to desert it self, or else that God by his Omnipotency
should oppress and destroy it; which last thing there is no reason to suspect,
since from the beginning of the World till now, he has not put out of being
any thing that ever he made; and we see in all the changes and revolutions of
things, the least Atom of matter is not lost: and can it then seem credible,
that a vital Spirit should utterly be extinct and perish when it leaves the
body, or rather is deserted by it? and this will be further confirmed if we add

5. He that made us, has implanted several things upon our natures which have
relation to another Life, and another World, and which make it reasonable for
us to expect it accordingly; such as not only a desire to live, which yet we
know we cannot do long here below, but a solicitude what shall come after, an
inquisitiveness and continual thoughtfulness for the future, extending it self
infinitely beyond the stage of this short life; nay, some kind of obscure
notion and anticipation of another World, which generally the best of men are
most sensible of, and usually the more wise and holy any men are, the more they
are under such apprehensions; and sure it would not consist with the goodness
of God to permit such men to be the most deluded, especially he himself would
not be guilty of putting a cheat upon them, which notwithstanding must be, if
there were nothing at all in it of truth; forasmuch as this is not the peculiar
fancy or opinion, either of the sanguine or of the melancholy constitution,
but of all the bravest and worthiest men; and this is that which principally
bears them up in adversity, and fortifies them against Death, and in the
approaches of it, sometimes ravishes and transports them.

Above all, there is such a thing as Conscience, which is common both to good
and bad, and which chears and animates the one whenever they do virtuously,
though no humane Eye be witness of the action, and when they expect no benefit
of their performance in this World: And on the other side terrifies and
affrights the other, viz. wicked men, though no man be privy to their misdeeds,
and this as it were binds them over to answer for them another day; now all
these things being the handwriting of our Creator upon our Souls, are more
than probable Arguments of another World.

6. God has declared there shall be such a state. He that created Mankind at
first, has assured them he will revive them after Death, and reward and punish
them in another World proportionably to their carriage toward himself in this.
This comes home to the purpose, whereas all that which has been said hitherto
(how reasonable soever) depends upon the uncertain and fluctuating Discourses
of men, (though it is very true, that wherever there has been wisdom and
virtue in conjunction, they have seldom failed to render this great point
competently clear to those who had no other light.) But some are more staggered
with a trifling objection, than convinced by a demonstration, and others are
not able to follow so long a train of consequences as is necessary to make out
so great a Question. But now we come into the Daylight, and have divine
Revelation for our guide, and Gods veracity for our assurance.

I confess I might have fallen upon this way of proof at first, and so have
saved all the labor of what I have been saying hitherto, but that I partly
thought it useful to show how far natural Theology would go in this business,
and principally I took this method to the intent that this great Doctrine of
Christianity might not seem strange to any one, but might be the more readily
entertained when it is prefaced to, and ushered in with so much probability of
humane reason.

Now, I say, God Almighty has himself assured us, that our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord, that Piety shall not go unrewarded in another World, nor
Impiety unpunished; this he has innumerable times expressly affirmed in the
Gospel, and with such circumstances, as may both best assure our judgments, and
awaken our affections. He has told us he will hold a solemn Judgment at the
end of the World, at which all men shall appear and receive their Doom; he has
declared who shall be the Judge, and confirmed him to be so, by that wonderful
instance of raising him from the Dead. He has foretold the circumstances, and
the manner of proceeding at that great day, he has described (as well as words
could admit it) the Joy and Glory that holy and good men shall thenceforth be
put into the Everlasting possession of, and set out the torments and anguish
that shall be inflicted upon the Ungodly.

I shall not need to go about to aggrandize these things, since they are so
vastly great and concerning that there is no way to despise them but by
disbelieving them. But what color or pretense can there be for that, after God
has said it, and sent his Son to declare this great news to the World?

Will men be so wretchedly absurd as to say still, it is impossible that men
should live again after they are once dead? when there is plain matter of fact
against this suggestion, which is beyond all the arguments in the World; for
was not our Savior most certainly put to Death, and did he not also exhibit
himself alive afterward to the Eyes and Ears, and very feeling of his Apostles
and many others?

Will men say, Heaven is but a Dream, or a Romantic fancy? when there were so
many Eye Witnesses of our Saviors Ascension to Heaven, and that he was alive
and in power there; there was that glorious proof, the descent of the Holy
Ghost upon his Apostles on the famous day of Pentecost, according to his
promise made whilst he was upon Earth.

Will they say, God has a mind to impose upon men? when he has no ends to
serve by it, when he can compass his designs without it; and when he has it in
his power to dissolve a World that would not comply with him, and make another
in its stead.

Or, Will they say, that men impose upon one another, and there was never any
such matters of fact as we have here supposed? But why do they not then
disbelive all History, all ancient Records, give the lie to all great actions,
and abrogate all Faith amongst men; yea, although there be never so plain,
never so numerous, so concurrent, and so disinteressed testimonies? all this,
and more than this, they must do that deny the matters of fact we speak of; and
if they do not do so, they must of necessity believe another Life, an Hell and
an Heaven.

And then, if those be believed, Piety will be the best Wisdom, and Religion
the greatest Truth; Sin will then be the greatest Folly, and trifling with God
and Religion the most dangerous thing imaginable; but that we shall more
particularly make out in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the great influence and mighty force of believing Heaven and
Hell, or rewards and punishments in another World.
THere are a sort of men, who (being too much in love with this World to have
any great mind to the other) will pretend that the grounds to believe these
things are not sufficient, and that there are, as the case stands, neither
encouragements enough to make a man Religious, nor Arguments powerful enough to
restrain Vice; because we are only pressed upon by hopes and fears of hereafter,
but nothing befalls presently. These men require, that for the countenance of
Religion, there should be a present discrimination between him that serves God,
and him that despises him; that the Sinner should be taken and Executed in the
very fact, and the good man Crowned upon the spot; or at least they think it
not an unreasonable demand, that if it be the will of God that evil men should
be reprieved, and good men kept in suspense till another World; yet he should
give Mankind a view of what shall befall hereafter, that they might have a sight
of Heaven and Hell, and so dispose themselves accordingly.

The former part of this fancy was taken notice of by Solomon, Eccles. 8. 11.
Because Sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the
heart of man is fully set to do wickedly. The other part of it is much like
that of the Forlorn wretch in the Gospel, Luke 16. 30. who thought it
reasonable to ask, that one might be sent from the dead to convince his
relations of the reality of another World.

But all these men, as they do too palpably betray they have no love to
Religion, nor no desire it should be true: so they evidently discover that they
neither understand what satisfaction is fit for God to give in these matters,
or for man to require; nor do they consider what the nature of Virtue and
Religion will admit of, no nor do they understand themselves so well as to know
what motives will work upon men; nor lastly, have they applied their minds to
take a just estimate of the value and efficacy of these motives of hopes and
fear which it pleases God to set before them.

First, They do not consider what satisfaction in these matters it is fit for
God to afford, or for men to require. It is not reasonable that the great God
should gratify the humor and curiosity of his Creatures, nor that they should
peremptorily prescribe to him. It is fit indeed for his goodness to give us
assurance in these important affairs; but he thinks good to satisfy our
reasons, and we will have our senses convinced, which is as much as to say, we
will not believe God but our own Eyes.

Secondly, They do not consider what evidence the nature of Virtue and Piety
will admit of, that requires such inducements as may encourage good, and
discourage evil, such as may provoke us to choose the one, and to avoid the
other, not such as will over bear our choice and necessarily determine us.
Religion requires. such Arguments as may improve humane nature, not supersede
or destroy it; and it is best promoted by such a state of things as wherein a
man conflicts with some difficulties, exercises self-denial, modesty, humility,
and trust in God. It consists in a prudent estimate of all circumstances, a
discretion and judgment to value things in reversion, and is worth nothing if
there be no such ingredients in it, as Faith, and Patience, and a virtuous
choice; all which there is no room for, if the rewards of it were wholly
present, or exposed to our senses.

Thirdly, Nor do the men that talk at this rate so much as understand
themselves and their own hearts so well, as to know what would be sufficient to
prevail with them. They phansy if they had the good luck to be Spectators of a
Miracle actually wrought, it would unquestionably lead them to assent; and yet
we see those that were Eyewitnesses of abundance of such, were never the
better for them. They imagine that if they had seen the passages of our
Saviors Life, Death and Resurrection, they should not have been incredulous;
yet there were multitudes that all those things wrought nothing upon. And
assuredly as Abraham told the rich man in the last mentioned passage of St.
Luke, if men hear not Moses and the Prophets, i. e. if they do not believe upon
such satisfaction as God gives them, neither will they believe upon such other
as their curiosity or capricious humor demands, no not if one rose from the
dead; for the same unwillingness which is in them to believe that Evidence
which they have, will follow them still, and the same captious temper will
except against their own demands, and find evasions if their very Eyes were
gratified; for Faith cannot be extorted from men, nor can any thing make him
believe that has not a mind to it.

Lastly, Nor do they understand the force and efficacy of these inducements of
hope and fear which God has set before us; which is the thing I principally
consider in this place. If indeed the objects of these passions, or the things
expected in another World were mean and inconsiderable, there were then no
reason to expect that they should have any great force upon the minds of men to
prevail with them to despise a present World for the attainment of Heaven. Or
(supposing the objects as great as we can) if the grounds of our hopes and fear
were childish and vain, i. e. our fears were panick and unaccountable, and our
hopes mere sanguine Dreams, and Romantic phancies; then it were justly to be
expected, that if Almighty God would oblige us to Religion, he should give us
better Evidence. But if both the things to be feared or expected in another
World are vastly great and concerning, if they prove to be real, and also the
Evidence or assurance of their reality be reasonable too, then it is no less
than madness, to run the hazard of them by neglect of Religion, whilst we
fondly cavil to have our humor satisfied.

Now that these hopes and fears of rewards and punishments in another World are
just and reasonable, and indeed as well grounded as hopes and fears can or
ought to be, I have showed already, forasmuch as if there were more evidence
than there is, they would cease to be hopes and fears, and would be the
apprehensions of sense. And that the things thus hoped for, and feared, or
expected, are of so unspeakable moment, as that if the evidence for them were
less than it is, it would be all the wisdom in the World not to run the hazard
of them, will easily appear by this short and faint representation.

That which good men hope for, and that which God Almighty promises them in the
other World, is no less than to be raised up again from the dead, and to live
for ever and ever, without any pain, sickness, want or infirmity of Body; with
minds secure from danger, free from temptation, void of care, incapable of
fear, error or disorder, together with serenity of Spirit, peace of
Conscience, unspeakable Joy, in the presence of the Divine Majesty, and the
blessed Jesus, and in the Society of glorious Angels and good men made perfect,
where also they shall partake of a felicity as great as divine Goodness could
design, as his wisdom could contrive, and his power effect for their
entertainment.

On the other side, that which God in the Holy Scripture gives wicked men
ground to expect and fear, is, that they also shall be raised up again from the
Grave, and then be exposed openly before all the World, their hypocrisy,
lewdness, folly and ingratitude being proved upon them; and they thereupon be
condemned to utter darkness, to be for ever abandoned of God and good men, and
to become the Company indeed, but the sport and triumph, of infernal Spirits,
who shall make them the subjects of their malice and tyranny, and there live
under the perpetual anguish of their own Consciences; and in short, full of the
wrath of the Almighty, which like Fire and Brimstone shall prey upon them and
burn them without remedy or remission of torment.

Who now can doubt whether these things are of mighty influence upon the hearts
and Consciences of men to incline them to Religion? For can any man be so void
of all manly discretion, as to despise such an happiness as is promised to good
men, or so destitute of all sense as to be content to dwell with Everlasting
burnings, which will be the portion of wicked men?

No wonder therefore if Felix (a loose and debauched man) trembled when St.
Paul preached to him of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, Acts
24. 25. and it would be strange and prodigious fool-hardiness, if any man that
lives without regard of God and Religion, should at any time happen to consider
these things, and should not find a Convulsion within himself like that of
Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 6. when he saw the fingers of an hand writing upon the wall
against him, of whom the Text tells us, that thereupon his countenance was
changed, his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote one against the other.

For certainly the least impression, which the consideration of these things
can make upon a man, is to render sin very uneasy to him, and to spoil his
greatest jollities. Forasmuch as every time he knowingly or wilfully commits
it, he not only judges himself unworthy of eternal life, but defies God
Almighty, and treasures up against himself wrath against the day of wrath. And
the reflection on this must needs make the prospect of death very terrible to
him, when these things shall come into Plea, and when what before was only
feared, must now be felt and undergone; and without a perpetual debauch, it
will be hardly possible for him to avoid thinking of this unpleasant Subject,
since while he has his senses about him, he cannot but take notice how daily
that unacceptable Guest makes his approaches toward him.

And if Death be terrible to a man, it is certain thenceforward life cannot be
very comfortable; for every accident will discompose him, every Disease is
dreaded by him, as the Harbinger of that King of terrors; his Spirits are
convulsed, his Joys are blasted, his diversions afford him no relief; he sees
reason to be afraid of every thing, and is tempted basely to flatter and humor
every man, because every body has it in his power to bring upon him the sum
of all Calamities, that is, to kill him.

Against all this there is no protection, no Sanctuary but in Religion; if the
Sinner flee not to that, he perishes, and which is worse, feels himself
tormented before the time: this therefore he is mightily pressed to do, by the
terrors of another World. And although it is true, that it is not in the nature
of fear (even of Hell it self,) to make a man generously good, because it only
cramps his powers, and is not a principle of action, yet it is an instrument of
caution, and if it be attended to, will make him less evil, wherein the first
work of Religion, namely Reformation, begins.

And then so long as there is Hope also in the other Scale, it may happily not
end there. The Apostle has told us, the law (which was a Ministry of fear and
death) made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by the
which we draw nigh to God, Hebr. 7. 19.

For the hopes of that unspeakable felicity and glory, which, as I showed
before, does await all good men in another World, is able to make a man forget
flesh and infirmity, to despise danger and difficulty, and to raise him above
himself, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Those great and precious promises which are propounded to
us by the Gospel, do make a man partaker of a divine nature. For great hopes
raise brave Spirits, and effect wonders.

The mere persuasion, that I have an immortal Soul, is of mighty efficacy to
make me value my self more, than to think my self made to eat and drink; and
will not permit me to drown this divine particle in drink and debauches, nor
exert it only in folly and buffonry; but will prompt me to cultivate this
immortal part, to furnish it with wisdom and knowledge, that I may enjoy it the
better in another World: To subdue my sensual inclinations, that I may learn
betimes to live like an Angel, and to castigate my anger and wrath, and fury
and malice, those unsociable vices, that I may be fit for that peaceable
conversation, and Everlasting Friendship in Heaven.

The thoughts of living for ever will not suffer a man to be fond of the
present life, but will enable him to banish all servile fear, to defy danger,
to flatter no bodies follies, to comply with no bodies vices, but to dare to be
good in spite of an evil Age, and bad Examples. For what should cow him that
has this Armor of proof, and is every way invulnerable?

The contemplation of those inestimable good things laid up for good men in
Heaven, is not only able to restrain sensuality, rapine, injustice, treachery;
but to make self-denial very easy, and to place a man so high above the
vanities of this World, that he shall only look down upon the things themselves
with contempt and scorn, and upon the men that dote upon them with wonder and
pity.

He that has hopes given him of seeing and enjoying the blessed Jesus in
Heaven, will according to the Apostle S. John 1. Epist. 3. 3. find himself
powerfully obliged to purify himself as he is pure.

And to say no more, he that believes that God is, and that he is such a
rewarder of those that diligently seek him, must needs find great inducements
to seek and serve him accordingly.

CHAP. V. What particular Religion we should apply our selves to.
HAving in the premises discovered the ground and foundation of Religion in
general, and thereby made it appear to be so highly reasonable, that it is
every man's wisdom and interest to comply with it; We now proceed to inquire,
what mode or profession of Religion in special, he ought to apply himself to,
who is convinced of the necessity of it in the general.

And this is the rather to be done, because some men make the variety of
Religions which they observe in the World, an argument against them all; and
because there are so many forms of it that they cannot easily resolve which to
addict themselves to, these men (as they think very wisely) pitch upon none,
but fairly stand Neuters.

Now for prevention of this mischief, as well as to make way for the resolution
of the great Question before us, let us consider these two things. First, that
it is not only an impious, but a very foolish and frantic resolution to stand
off from all Religion, upon pretense that there are differences and disputes
about it. For

1. Men will not be content to go by that rule in other Cases, no man will
conclude there is no such thing as meum and tuum, or right and wrong in their
Civil interests, because they observe Lawyers to wrangle at the Bar, or to give
different opinions in particular Cases; nor because Physicians often disagree
in their Judgments of Diseases, will any discreet man refuse their assistance,
and resolve to let his Disease take its course: this objection therefore of
skeptical men, is but a mere pretense made use of to countenance their
aversation to Religion, and not a real Maxim of Reason with them.

2. The ground of this objection is foolishly or maliciously represented; for
it is plain, that the main things of Religion are very little or nothing in
dispute, but are confessed and agreed in by all. Or if there be some points of
moment disputed, they are generally such as are speculative, not matters of
practice. For who disputes whether God should be worshipped? whether a man
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World? in such
things as these, all discreet and well disposed men agree. Let the skeptical
person therefore agree to these too, and practice them; or else let him be so
ingenuous as to acknowledge, it is only his unwillingness to comply with the
rules of a good life, which makes him pretend to stumble at disputes.

3. It is to be considered, that even those who differ and dispute in several
points, agree notwithstanding in this, that it is the wisest and safest course
to come to a resolution in Religion, forasmuch as particular disputes about it,
prove undeniably this in the general, that by confession of all Parties there
is great moment in it; because there could be no reason why either the one side
or the other should trouble themselves, and raise such heats about it, but that
both are satisfied of the great consequence of the subject of the question, and
the consideration of that is it which makes them be so nice, curious and
critical, about the very punctilioes of it. But,

Fourthly and lastly, It is especially to be considered, that he that stands
neutral, and holds off from all Religion upon pretense of the danger of
mistake, upon account of the great variety of persuasions, runs into the most
fatal mistake of all, and is of all men in the most desperate condition; for
whatsoever becomes of other men, under a mistaken zeal or a false opinion, he
is certainly a lost man who has no Zeal or Religion at all. For though it be
certain, all persuasions cannot be right, and therefore some must miscarry; yet
so long as there is a real foundation for Religion in general (as we have seen)
it is evident the Sceptist cannot be saved (whoever be damned) who entertains
no persuasion at all. Therefore as it is better uncertainly to err, than
certainly to perish; so it must needs be a wiser course to determine our selves
someway, notwithstanding the disputes, than gravely to doubt our selves into
Hell by a fantastical neutrality.

But then secondly, as it is a very dangerous and absurd resolution to be of no
Religion, for fear we should mistake the right; it is not much better on the
other side, to be such Latitudinarians, as to think it indifferent what
Religion a man be of, so long as he is zealous and devout in his way, unless we
could be assured, that the broad way was the way to Heaven, which is most
certainly false.

I confess it is a very bad Religion indeed which is not better than none at
all, as the faintest hopes are better than utter desperation. And it is
undoubtedly true, that without fervor and devotion in the prosecution of a
man's persuasion, no Religion, be it never so good and Orthodox, will signify
any thing. It is true also, that a man of a devout temper has the ground of
Piety, and a foundation for good institution to work upon; yet notwithstanding
Religion speaks something more than to be in earnest, and Piety requires more
than a good intention. For unless that honest temper be cultivated and
improved, it will bring forth nothing but wild fruit; that zeal must be
governed and conducted by good principles, or it will betray a man to
presumption, to superstition, and to a thousand irregularities.

We are set to run a race toward Heaven, but in that case it is not only
speed, but the keeping the exact course withal, that intitles to the reward. He
that runs wrong, the more have he makes, the worse is his speed; for he has
the more to undo again.

Nor is this any reflection upon the Divine Majesty, who is infinitely good,
and consequently very pitiful to the well-meant errors of Mankind; for it must
be considered, that he is wise, and great, and just also, not so soft and fond
as to be pleased with whatsoever is well meant toward him, or to be contented
with whatever men phansy. No, he has a mind and will of his own, and requires
and expects those be complied withal by such as he rewards with Eternal Life.

Therefore the Question which we are now upon is very serious and necessary,
viz. how amidst such variety of persuasions or forms of Religion as are in the
World, a man may make a right choice, and know which of them in particular he
ought to determine himself upon.

But the assoiling of it cannot be difficult, forasmuch as if God will be
served in his own way, it is evident, that he must have taken some course or
other for the discovery and interpreting of his mind and will to the Sons of
men, to the intent that they may have a rule to govern their devotions by.

Now it is plain, beyond dispute, that there are three and but three things
which can with any color of probability pretend to give us aim in this Case,
viz. natural light, the Spirit, or the holy Scriptures; and therefore all the
difficulty comes to this point, which of these three we are to follow and
govern our selves by.

As for the first of the three, namely the light of nature, or natural reason;
it is true, that this is able in some measure to discover to us that there is a
God, and to assure us also of some of his Attributes and perfections, so as to
lay a general foundation of Religion (as we have briefly showed already) but it
can neither discover all the divine perfections, because he is infinite and
beyond our comprehension, nor much less penetrate the depths of his counsels,
or the secrets of his will and pleasure, because (as we also noted before) he
is a free Agent, and has no necessary measures, but freely chooses as it
pleases him.

And therefore as no man knows the mind of a man but the spirit of a man which
is in him, so much less can any man know the mind of God till he be pleased to
reveal it. Now the design of Religion being to please and propitiate the divine
Majesty to us, it is impossible any man should pretend to know what will fully
do that by natural reason. Consequently not only the old Philosophers but the
modern Theists, and that Sect of men called Quakers, who pretend to attain
happiness by the natural notions of God, or the light within them; must
miserably be bewildered whilst they follow so imperfect and uncertain a Guide.

As for the second, namely a private Spirit, there is no doubt but that the
divine majesty could (if he had pleased) have conducted men by immediate
Revelation, and as it were led them by his own immediate hand from time to
time, dictating his own will to their minds; and there is as little reason to
question, but that sometimes in extraordinary Cases he has done so in former
times: but that this should be his ordinary and standing course, is not
reasonable to think; not only because we cannot now observe, that the best of
men either have experience of, or so much as pretend to any such thing, but
because in the first place it is evident that such immediate Revelation could
be of no further use than to that particular person to whom it was made, in
regard it would be like the white stone, Rev. 2. 17. which no man knows what is
written upon it, but he that receives it; and secondly, because the very person
himself that should pretend to it could not secure himself from illusion, but
might easily mistake the Idols of his own fancy, or the very illusions of the
Devil, for the dictates of the Divine Spirit (as we find by sad experience that
many have done) unless there were withal a constant succession of Miracles to
assure their minds that it was the divine impression: Therefore, forasmuch as
those who pretend to the Spirit, can give no assurance of it, and natural
reason cannot pretend to discover sufficiently the Divine Will; it remains,
that only the Holy Scripture is that which must be our guide in the way to
please God, and attain the Salvation expected in another World.

The holy Scripture then is that provision God has thought fit to make for our
weakness and ignorance. This is the transcript of the divine mind, a light that
shines in darkness, and by which divine wisdom designed to guide us through
all the maze of disputes, and to resolve us of all the important questions that
concern our eternal interest; and this is that which he has so fitted to our
use, that whosoever consults it with a mind free from prejudices and
anticipation, he shall not miss his way to Heaven.

Nor shall such a man as is disposed to receive the Kingdom of God as a little
Child, i. e. comes with a mind willing to learn and be convinced, and with that
temper applies himself to the holy Scripture, need either the pretended
infallibility of a Pope, or the Authority of a Church to interpret it to him:
For it is certain God is as able to express his mind to us, as either of these
are, whenever he thought fit to do so; and where he resolved to be obscure,
it is not to any purpose to consult them in the Case, who are no more privy to
his secret counsels than we our selves are. And it is not consistent either
with the goodness or wisdom of God, to order matters so, that he should be
betrayed to any capital error (so as to endanger his Salvation) who applies
himself to the holy Scripture, and comes qualified with an honest heart, and in
the use of such ordinary means as are afforded for the understanding of them.

It is indeed not impossible, but that such a man, notwithstanding both the
perfection and perspicuity of his rule, may err in some smaller matters; but
there is no reason to fear they should be either such as will abuse him in the
great Doctrines of Faith, or the rules of a good Life; he can neither mistake
the Object of his worship, nor the manner of it, nor endanger the glory of God,
or his own Salvation. For this will direct him to a Religion plain and easy,
humble and peaceable, reasonable and hearty; a Religion that neither imposes an
implicit Faith, nor countenances a bold presumption, that will make men devout
without superstition, and holy without arrogance or pretending to merit at Gods
hands; in a word, the holy Scripture impartially consulted, will bring us to a
Religion that shall neither consist of speculations, and be opinionative and
fanatical on the one side, nor made up of external show and pomp, as that of
the Church of Rome on the other side, but such as that of the Church of
England, which manifestly avoids both extremes.

CHAP. VI. More particular Directions for the settling a man's mind in Religion.
ALthough it be never so certain, that the holy Scripture was both composed and
preserved by the providence of God, for men's guidance in the way to Heaven; and
notwithstanding its great perspicuity and sufficiency in that case; yet (as I
intimated before) prejudice of mind is able to defeat the ends of it: therefore
for the removal of that, it will be of great use that the following particulars
be considered.

First, He that would make a right use of the holy Scripture, and thereby
discover the true lineaments of Religion, let him make inquiry after the most
ancient and the most Catholic Religion, and not indulge his curiosity so as to
be taken either with novelty, or singularity; for each of those will lead him
aside, both from the truth of Religion in general, and from the Christian
Religion in particular.

As for the former of these notes of Religion, viz. Antiquity, the oldest
Religion must needs be as much the truer, as God is before the Devil; therefore
the Prophet Jerem. 6. 16. directs the people to inquire for the good old way,
and walk therein, and they should find rest to their souls; and for
Christianity in particular, forasmuch as that depends upon Divine Revelation,
it is impossible that Afterages should add any thing to it, or make improvement
of it, without new revelation. Whilst God is of the same mind, Heaven of the
same nature, and the Gospel of the same tenor, there can be no new Christianity.

Therefore let all new lights go for Ignes fatui, and mere meteors, that serve
to no purpose but to bewilder men; he that seeks for true Christianity, let him
neither content himself to look back to 41, or the last Age, as some do; nor
500. years backward to a dark Age, as others; but let him inquire for a
Religion as old as Gospel, and observe in what Rules it was delivered, and in
what Examples it first showed it self in the World.

As for the other note of Religion, viz. Universality; It is certain, the true
Religion is the most truly Catholic. For it is evident, that our Savior
intended but one Church, and one Religion in all the World; and to that purpose
he instituted Christianity in such sort, that it should agree with all times
and ages, fit all Countries and Climates, suit all Constitutions and conditions
of men, and subsist under whatsoever form of Government, or Civil polity it
should meet with.

Those therefore who model Religion according to the peculiar fashion of some
one Country, or frame a notion of it which requires a certain complexion and
temper of Body; (as for instance, that make some austerities essential to it,
which all cannot comply with) or that describe a Religion for the Cloister, and
not adequate to common Life; or that model it so, as that it must have the
Civil Government submitted to it, or it cannot subsist; or in a word, that
confine it to narrow bounds, or Canton it into separate parties: none of these
understand the true genius of Christianity, nor take the measures of Religion
from the holy Scripture.

Secondly, He that would make a right choice of his Religion, must not take it
upon public Faith, or be determined by common fame, or so much as regard the
loud shouts and acclamations of the vulgar. For they are generally sworn
Enemies to sober reason, as being moved more by heat than light, and governed
by sense and fancy, and consequently cannot entertain any great esteem for a
modest, sedate, manly and rational Religion, but on the contrary infinitely
dote upon all the tricks of Superstition and Enthusiasm; and those two do so
wholly govern them, that they receive no impression of Religion where one or
other of them does not strike their imaginations.

As for Superstition, the wonderful efficacy of that upon common minds, is so
notorious, that nothing can be more. If they see a man so extremely scrupulous,
that he finds (as we say) a knot in a Bullrush; so squeamish and strait-laced,
that he becomes a burden to himself and all about him; so infinitely full of
doubts, and fears, and jealousies, that he scandalizes Religion by his
impertinency, and renders God Almighty a very unbenign and severe Majesty: such
a man notwithstanding is apt to be cried up as a great Saint, although in
greater matters perhaps he gives himself more liberty than other men.

Or if they observe a man pretend to great austerity and mortification by the
carelessness of his habit, dejectedness of his Countenance, or other
peculiarity of his garb, as wearing an hair shirt, or girt with a rope,
especially if he also macerate himself with Fasting, or whip himself till the
blood comes, or use any such severity toward himself, they are strangely
affected with this pageant of Piety, and these things alone are security enough
to them that he is an holy man, and of the best Religion.

Thus no doubt the Priests of Baal, who (as we read, 1 Kings 18. 26.) prayed
from Morning to Midday, made horrible outcries, and used antic postures, and
amongst the rest, in a blind Zeal, cut themselves with Knives and Lancets, had
a mighty veneration amongst the rabble of superstitious Israelites, insomuch
that the Prophet Elijah, with all the holiness of his life, and very great
austerity of conversation too, was not able to bear up with them.

And thus the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors time, what by their demure
and mortified looks, disfigured Faces, and outward appearance of Sanctimony;
what by their broad phylacteries, and fringes of their Garments, beset with
sharp thorns to prick and vex them; what with long Prayers and frequent
Fastings, and such other Artifices, they so led the people by the Nose, that
all the wisdom, temper, goodness, nay Miracles of our Savior were scarce
sufficient to procure their attention to him.

And thus it will be also with Enthusiasm, that raises the admiration, and
captivates the minds of the generality as much or more than superstition. If a
man pretend to the Spirit, and to extraordinary Communications from the Divine
Majesty; if he now and then either feel or can counterfeit raptures and
transports, so that by turns he shall be sometimes as it were snatched up to the
third Heaven, and at another time be cast down to Hell; and if in these fits he
can talk nonsense confidently, can make vehement harangues against pride,
formality, or superstition; if he make show of extraordinary Zeal and Devotion,
and have the pride or insolency to speak ill of his Betters, to slight all
ordinary Forms and censure the Government; if he have either an horrible Voice,
or an oily melting tone, an artificial Countenance, a peculiar motion of his
Eyes, or especially has the trick to resemble an Epilepsy in all this
Legerdemain, then when he speaks evil of dignities, he shall be thought to have
the zeal and spirit of Elias, but unquestionably the spirit of God is in him,
and he is admired, if not adored, by inconsiderate people. When in the mean
time, sound Doctrine, sober reason, wise conversation, and grave Piety, shall
signify nothing but form and carnality with them.

For (as I intimated before) such things as I last named, commend themselves
only to a sedate mind, and a considerative temper; but the other bear strongly
upon the senses and the phancies of men, and so carry away the vulgar.

He therefore that would not have his devout intention abused, must not suffer
the multitude to choose his Religion for him, nor take it upon trust from
public fame and noise; for if he decide this case by the poll, he shall be
sure to have shadow for substance, and either embrace a Religion made up of
paint and varnish, or else one animated only by a spirit of Enthusiasm.

Thirdly, He that would make a right choice in Religion, and is content to
follow the measures of the holy Scripture therein, must resolve with himself,
not to seek for, or pitch upon such a way as will put him to the least pains,
and give him the least trouble; but be willing to deny himself, and to conflict
with any difficulty that he may save his Soul; for pretended easy Religions are
like Mountebanks Cures, deceitful and palliative.

Some men have the folly to persuade themselves, that a Religion consisting of
mere Faith, without the trouble of a good Life will serve the turn; nay, that
to be of a peculiar Party, Sect or Church will be sufficient; but then it is
strange our Savior should bid us strive to enter in at the strait gate: for it
would be a wonder if any should miss of Heaven upon these terms; or if any be
so sottish, they deserve to perish without pity.

Others there are that entertain a conceit of getting to Heaven by the merits
of other men, as by purchasing an Indulgence, or by hiring a Priest to say
Prayers for the man when he is dead, that would not be at the trouble to pray
for himself whilst he was alive; or by getting a plenary absolution of all his
sins at the last gasp, or some other such voluptuous and compendious ways of
Salvation.

He that seeks out such expedients as these, argues that he has some little
love to himself, so far as to be loath to be damned, but that he has none at
all toward God or Virtue; and indeed demonstrates, that he has not so much as
any worthy notion of God, or apprehension of the nature of the happiness of the
other World. Nay, he gives evidence, that he is as much in love with his sins
as with himself, and would have both saved together.

St. Paul assures us 2 Cor. 5. 10. that when we shall appear at the
Judgment Seat of Christ, we shall receive our Doom, according to the things
done in the body, whether good or evil; not according to what shall be done for
us when we are out of the Body, much less according to what others have either
officiously or mercenarily performed for us. All such methods are Cheats, the
artifices of Hypocrisy, and constitute only a Religion for an Epicure, but are
as far, as Hell is from Heaven, from the institutions of the Scripture.

It is true our Savior says, his yoke is easy, and his burden light, but
that is spoken either comparatively to the burden of the Mosaic Law,
especially considered with the additional impositions of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who as he tells us, laid heavy burdens upon others, but would not
buckle under them themselves; or with respect to the great assistance and
mighty encouragement which those men shall meet with that apply themselves in
earnest to Christianity. For certainly, if there had been no considerable
difficulty in the Christian Religion, the first Lesson of it would not have
been, that a man must deny himself. Nor would our Savior have required us,
that if our right eye or right hand offend us, we must pluck out the one, and
cut off the other, that we may enter into Life.

CHAP. VII. Cautions against some opinions which are hindrances both of an Holy
and of a Comfortable Life.
WHen a man has settled his Principles, and made a good choice of his
Profession of Religion, he is then in a fair way toward an Holy and a
Comfortable Life; yet there are several vulgar opinions, which if they be not
carefully avoided will have an unhappy influence upon both, and therefore it is
expedient he should be cautioned against them; especially such as those whereof
I will here give a Catalogue in the particulars following.

To which I will premise this in the general, that although some of the
opinions that shall be mentioned, may seem only mere speculations in the first
view of them, and perhaps may go no further with some persons, whose singular
probity and sincerity of heart may antidote them against the malignity of such
tenets, yet in their own nature and the genuine consequences of them, they are
very dangerous, as shall now be made appear in particular.

1. Therefore let him that would make a due improvement of the Principles of
Christianity, take care of allowing himself to pry too curiously into the
secret counsels of God, or of marshalling too confidently the Decrees of
Election and Reprobation, and especially of arguing presumptuously concerning
his own or other men's Salvation or Damnation from them.

There is no question with me but that God Almighty foreknew from all Eternity
whatsoever should come to pass in after times; and let it be taken for granted
also, that from the same Eternity he decreed with himself whatsoever he would
afterward effect or permit; nay let us moreover suppose he has expressly
determined with himself who shall be saved and who shall be damned, and that so
peremptorily, that only they shall be saved whom he has so decreed to save,
and those shall certainly be damned whom he has past such a Decree upon. But
what then? the proper and only reasonable use we can make of these
suppositions, is to admire the Divine Eternity, Sovereignty, Power and
Omniscience; here is neither matter for our curiosity nor for our reason to
descant upon: not for our curiosity, since it is plainly impossible to know,
what the particular import of those Decrees is, or whom they concern; and less
for our reason, since if we will argue any thing hence, it must be no better
than deducing conclusions from unknown premises.

The very prying into these Cabinet Counsels (besides the folly and immodesty
of it) tends to very ill purposes, for it certainly either blows men up with
presumption, or casts them headlong into desperation. The sanguine, and
confident, and self-applauding, are filled with vain hopes by these
speculations; and the modest, melancholy and despondent tempers, are inclined
to despair by them.

But the arguing and drawing consequences of Salvation or Damnation from
thence, contradicts the design of the whole Scripture, which charges us to work
out our own salvation with fear and trembling, and to use diligence to make our
calling and election sure; Nay it turns into ridicule all the Exhortations,
threatenings and promises of the Gospel. For to what purpose does God persuade
us, when he has irrevocably determined our fate with himself? It discourages
all use of means, and all comfort in so doing, since it will be labor in vain:
it baffles Conscience whenever it either checks us for sin, or would comfort
us for doing virtuously; for what matter is it what Conscience says, when God
has decreed? it renders the solemnity of the great day of judgment a mere
piece of empty pomp and pageantry, seeing men's Cases are all decided
beforehand; nay it makes the very coming of our Savior, his Life, Death,
Propitiation and Intercession, to be illusory and insignificant things;
forasmuch as upon this supposition, men are saved or damned antecedently to his
undertaking.

Now if after all this, any man will be so desperately absurd and foolhardy,
as to say nevertheless Gods Decrees are irrevocable, and therefore the matter
of fact is true, that if I be decreed to Salvation, I shall then be saved
without more ado; and if I be decreed to be damned, I must perish, and there
will be no help for it; it will be in vain to use means seeing I shall but
strive against the stream; my Doom is past, and I may bewail my hard fortune,
but cannot reverse it. I would only further ask such a man this plain Question,
viz. How he came to persuade himself that God Almighty has decreed to save and
damn men right or wrong (as we say) i. e. whether they repent and believe in
Christ, Jesus or no. Forasmuch as it is evident, that he that harbors such an
opinion of the Divine Majesty contradicts the very notion of a God, and
represents him to be the worst and most hateful Being imaginable; a Being that
has only power and will, but has neither love nor hatred, neither wisdom,
justice nor goodness in him at all; that has no esteem for Faith, Virtue or
Piety, no sense of gratitude and ingenuity, nor any aversation to baseness and
villainy; but as if he were an unmoved, rigid Idol, is inflexible by any
repentance, prayers, tears, addresses and importunities, and insensible of, and
unprovoked by all the affronts and insolences that can be done to him: to be
sure he that can think thus of God, will easily believe him to have set a mean
value upon the blood of his only Son; forasmuch as he has given him up to
Death to no purpose upon the aforesaid supposition. Now unless all this be true
(which is impossible) there can be no color nor foundation for such an horrid
and barbarous opinion.

And if this be false, as most certainly it is, then we shall easily be led
into this Scriptural Hypothesis of the divine Decrees, viz. that as he decreed
from all Eternity to send his Son to be the Savior of the World, so he then
also determined that as many as should believe on him should be saved, and such
as did not so, should be damned. And then, what if we find it to follow from
the nature of Gods Omniscience, that he must foreknow the individual persons
that shall be saved or damned, or from the nature of his determinations, that
only such and no other can be saved, namely, those he has decreed to it; yet
then it will be evidently to no purpose to gaze up to Gods Decrees: for then
whatever has been written in the Archives of Heaven, it is certain it cannot
contradict this, That if I believe and repent, and become a good and holy man,
I shall be saved, or otherwise I shall be damned; and then all is plain before
me: for in this case I have nothing further to do, but to make use of the means
of Grace which God affords me, and to look into my own heart and life for my
Evidences of Heaven.

Thus as the wise Persian, who sooner found the Sun to be upon the Horizon, by
turning himself toward the Western Hills, than he that fixing his Eyes upon
the East, expected to see the Sun it self: so we shall sooner find the beams of
divine favor in the reverse and reflection of them upon our own Souls, than by
a presumptuous prying into his secret purposes.

And the consideration of this truth will engage men in all care and caution,
in all diligence and humility, in the use of means, till they gradually improve
into a state of holiness and comfort here, and to assurance of the Kingdom of
Heaven hereafter.

And this is the course which the Apostle leads us to, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
foundation of God stands sure, having his seal, the Lord knows who are his,
and let him that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; as if he had
said, It is true indeed, God knows from Eternity whom he intends to save, and
all such shall eventually be saved and none else, but our hope and comfort
cannot be built upon unknown principles, such as only are recorded in Heaven,
but upon the counterpart of an holy life, or a conformity to those conditions
which God has expressed in his Gospel, as a Copy from the Original, kept in
his own bosom.

2. The next dangerous mistake which we ought carefully to avoid, is,
concerning the Grace and holy Spirit of God. When men unreasonably expect that
God should do all for them in the business of their Salvation, without their
own endeavors, upon pretense that we can do nothing our selves, and therefore
it is in vain to go about it; our part is only to wait Gods time of working,
and when his holy Spirit moves, the business will be done without more ado, but
in the mean time all our diligence is discharged as impertinent, and even our
Prayers too (if this Doctrine be consistent with it self): for according to
this opinion, if ever men come to Heaven, they must be dragged thither by
Omnipotency, (as the Disciples of Mahumet expect to be by the hair of their
heads.)

Now though it be undoubtedly true, that all the good that is in us, is owing
to the father of lights from whom every good and perfect gift comes, forasmuch
as he works in us both to will and to do; and therefore we can never magnify
grace enough, nor attribute too much to the holy Spirit (without making
machines of our selves, and nonsense of the Gospel) yet it is as sure on the
other hand, that God needs not that we should tell a lie for him, nor would
have us slander his Creation for the honor of Regeneration, since he does not
destroy the man when he makes a Christian. So far from it, that (as I have
noted before) he charges us to strive to enter in at the strait gate, and to
use all our diligence to make our calling and election sure, Which plainly
implies, that he does not intend to supersede our powers when he repairs our
natures; and that although he made us without our own activity, yet he will not
save us without our own endeavors. And therefore the holy Scripture always
represents to us the way of Gods working good in our Souls, to be by exciting
our Spirits, by assisting and strengthening our faculties, and by cooperating
with us, not by over-bearing our capacity, and doing all for us without us;
insomuch that that man who dreams of being carried to Heaven by Omnipotency,
without his own concurrence, is so far from any encouragement from the
Scripture, to hope that ever he shall come there, that it is most certain he
shall never see that happy estate, unless it please the divine mercy to make
him so early sensible of this fatal error, that he may timely repent and
pursue the right way thither. For he that expects to attain the Kingdom of
Heaven by Miracle, it will be a Miracle indeed if he come thither.

And this fond opinion is as mischievous as it is unscriptural, not only as it
apparently deprives a man of all the comfortable reflections of his own
Conscience upon whatsoever (by the grace of God) he has obtained, forasmuch as
it equals the condition and character of the most slothful Epicure, with that
of the most generous and industrious; but especially as it disposes men to
slight all the means of grace, and all the advantages of Gods Church, and that
upon good reason: for if this opinion be true, they are all insignificant and
collusory. It also tempts men to sin, and that without regret or remorse, under
a pretense that they cannot help it; and in short, it perfectly betrays them to
their own lusts, and into the hands of the Devil, making way for whatsoever
temptation he will think fit to make use of. For the man of this persuasion
(that it is impossible to make resistance) is bound by his own principles, and
to save himself useless trouble, to strike Sail and surrender upon the first
assault or Summons.

3. A third dangerous opinion, which it is necessary to be cautioned against,
is a mistaken notion of sins of infirmity; this at first mention of it may seem
of kin to that which I last spoke of, but as I intend it, it is of a different
nature, viz. when men do not altogether discourage their own endeavors upon
the pretense of natural impotency in general, but yet persuade themselves that
some certain sins in particular are so necessary to them, and unavoidable, that
God will allow of them under the favorable notion of infirmities, and pardon
them without repentance.

It is very true, there are such things as pitiable infirmities, which the best
of men cannot be altogether free from, and which infinite goodness therefore so
far considers, as to make a vast difference between them and wilful or
presumptuous sins; pardoning the former upon a general repentance, whereas he
requires a very particular repentance for, and reformation of the latter. But
the mischief (which I seek here to prevent) is when men cheat themselves into a
persuasion that some voluntary sin or other is necessary to them, and therefore
must come under this estimate of infirmity, and consequently need neither be
repented of nor forsaken; from whence it comes to pass, that ordinarily the sin
which has been most customary and habitual to them, (because it easily besets
them, and they find it not easy or pleasant to them to forgo it) is therefore
encouraged under the favorable name of infirmity. For thus they say, every man
has his infirmities, and this is mine; and so the mouth of Conscience is made
up, as if a pardon of course were due to it, without the solemnity of
Reformation.

They will allow such a case to be that which they must always complain of, but
yet they never expect or desire to see it cured; for these sins are thought to
be only like the Canaanites in the land, or some other remainder of those
devoted and accursed Nations, which must never be quite rooted out, but be
always as Thorns in the Eyes, and Goads in the sides of the true Israelites, i.
e. tolerated but not extirpated.

But if this be not a very false notion, what was the meaning of our Savior
when he requires us to cut off our right hand, and to pluck out our right eye,
when either of them offend us? That is, that if we will enter into life, we
must part with the sin that is as pleasant to us as our Eyes, as necessary or
convenient to us as our right hand, and as painful to part withal as either of
them. Whereas if the aforesaid Doctrine of infirmity take place with us, it
will save all the pains and trouble of mortification, and keep the body of sin
whole and entire, and yet put men in hopes they may go to Heaven
notwithstanding; and no sin that we have a kindness to, but a man may enjoy it
without danger. For thus, it shall be one man's infirmity to be drunk, another
man's to swear, a third man's to be seditious or censorious; and in short, by the
benefit of a soft word or distinction (together with a good opinion of a man's
self) he may reconcile God and Mammon, Christ and Belial, Hell and Heaven.

But this cheat is too palpable, for the Plea of infirmity is only allowable in
such Cases as these following; namely, when either ignorance or misinformation
betrays a man into error, or he fails in the manner of doing that which was
otherwise good for the matter of it, or a great fear over-powers him, or the
suddenness of a temptation surprises him before he was so much aware as to
collect himself; or something of like nature to these, may be called sins of
infirmity. But assuredly, that which a man knows to be a sin, and yet commits
it, that which a man takes pleasure in, and lives in the habitual practice of,
can never be esteemed a mere pitiable infirmity; and therefore whosoever truly
loves his own Soul, and is in earnest for Eternity, has great reason to take
care of this error.

4. A fourth danger I would give warning against, is the mistaken opinion about
Conversion to God, which if it be rightly understood, is a great, solemn and
divine thing, and wherever it is truly accomplished, is the happiest passage of
a man's whole life, and the very Crisis of Eternity, viz. when either a man who
(by unhappy Education or otherwise) was betrayed to evil and mischievous
opinions, comes by the advantage of better information and the grace of God, to
be otherwise instructed and set right in his principles, or especially when one
who was formerly of a lewd and flagitious life, is by the grace of the Gospel
now brought to a sight of his sin, a sense of his danger, and thereupon changes
his whole course and becomes a new and holy man: Both these are (as I said)
great, and solemn, and happy things, to be spoken of with all reverence, and
considered with joy and admiration.

But now there is a two fold mistake very common in this great affair, viz.
when either such a Conversion (as we have now described) is looked upon as
universally necessary, and prescribed to all men, as the condition of their
Salvation, or else (which is far worse) when the whole nature of the thing is
mistaken, and conversion from sin to God, is made to be a mere momentaneous
act, a kind of qualm or fit of Religion, and as such is relied upon, as
sufficient to Salvation, without an habitual course of holy life subsequent to
it.

Both these last named are false and dangerous opinions, but the evil of the
former of them lies in this, that it is apt to perplex the Consciences, and
disturb the peace of very good men, viz. When those who by the blessing of God
have been trained up in good principles, and by his grace not only preserved
from a loose and debauched life, but engaged also in a holy and virtuous course
all along, shall notwithstanding have it preached to them, and pressed upon them,
that they also must be converted and born again, or else they shall never see
the Kingdom of God. This indeed was necessary and proper Doctrine from our
Savior to Nicodemus, and to the generality of the Jews, as well as from the
Apostles to the Pagan World, who had been nursed up in Ignorance, Superstition
and Idolatry: But it was not preached to John the Baptist, nor to St. John the
Apostle, nor to Timothy, who had known the holy Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy
3. 15. and who had been early engaged in an holy life, by the blessing of God
upon the careful instructions of his Grandmother Lois and his mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5. not can such Doctrine (without equal indiscretion and danger) be
preached to several others now who are of that condition, that as our Savior
says, they need no repentance.

But it is the latter of these opinions about Conversion, which I intend in
this place principally to give caution against, viz. when a man who has been
formerly either of a sottish and careless, or of a notoriously debaucht and
profligate life, shall be encouraged to think his peace is made with God from
such time as he has had a qualm come over his Conscience, and been put into a
mood of seriousness and devotion, having been taught to date his Regeneration
from hence.

The mischief of this mistake is very frequent and apparent, for that it tempts
men to grow secure before they are safe, and it is very common and natural for
such persons to grow careless of themselves upon a vain confidence in this kind
of Conversion, as if now their work were done, without the trouble of bringing
forth fruits worthy of repentance and amendment of life. Nay further, when
perhaps such men have committed some such great sin, as (that were it not for
this unhappy error) would startle their Consciences, they are hereby (instead
of applying themselves to God by hearty repentance) inclined only fondly to
look back, and to remember that such a time I was converted, and entered into a
state of grace, and therefore all is well enough already; and from hence it
comes to pass also, that nothing is more frequent than such men's falling from
grace in this sense, that is, to apostatize from such hopeful beginnings; for
indeed they were at most but beginnings, but being foolishly rested in, as if
they had amounted to the whole attainment of Christianity, they flatter men
into security first, and betray them to shame afterward.

And the falsity of this conceit is evident in this, that whereas it makes the
great business of Eternity to lie in an instantaneous act, the transaction
perhaps of a day or an hour, or a Sermon, the holy Scripture quite
contrary-wise represents it as the business of a man's whole life, and requires,
that men not only set out well, but that they make a daily and gradual
progression toward Heaven; forasmuch as it tells us, that otherwise he who
has begun in the spirit may end in the flesh, and that a man may return with
the Dog to his vomit, etc. and then the latter end of such a man is worse than
the beginning.

5. Another mistake not inferior to any of the former, either in respect of
error or danger, is about the power and authority of Conscience, viz. When men
persuade themselves that all is right and true, which they are satisfied of in
their Consciences, and that it is lawful for them to do whatsoever that
dictates to them, or allows them in, as if Conscience were not a thing to be
ruled but to rule, and were invested with a kind of Sovereignty, so that it
were a Law to it self, and to others also. If you reprove some man's opinion
(instead of arguments for it) he tells you it is his Conscience, and that is
enough; or if you blame some action of his life, he regards not your
reprehensions, for, says he, my Conscience smites me not for it, and therefore
I am safe; or if you forewarn him of some counsels or undertakings as tending
to Sedition and public disturbance, it is no matter, it is his Conscience, and
he must pursue it.

The mischief of this is very intolerable, for by this means the most foolish
and extravagant actions are justified, and the malefactor rendered
incorrigible, being both hardened in his sin and in his sufferings, for (if it
come to that) you cannot convince such men, for they have a testimony within
them which is infallible, and in confidence of that, whenever you bring an
Argument which they cannot answer, they reject and defy it as a temptation of
the Devil. If you rebuke them, you blaspheme the holy Spirit; if you go about
to restrain them, you violate the most sacred Prerogative of Conscience, and
are gulty of the only sacrilege which (in their opinion) can be committed, and
which is worst of all, thus God is entitled to the very passions and follies of
such men, and to all the extravagancies in the World: for if it be their
Conscience, God must patronize it, and bear the blame of all.

Now one would justly wonder what these men think this thing called Conscience
to be, surely no less than some God Almighty within them, and so indeed several
expressions of them seem to intimate. But certainly, if they thought Conscience
to be nothing else but a man's own mind, or opinion, or persuasion, or practical
Judgment (which certainly it is, and no more) they could not either in reason
or modesty think fit that this should have such a paramount Authority as to
bear all down before it, at least they could not imagine that their peculiar
fancy or humor, their particular Education or Idiopathy, their ignorance or
stubbornness, should be lawless and uncontrollable. For if men's opinions or
persuasions are infallible, what is instruction for? if the light within be
sufficient, what is the light of holy Scripture for? if Conscience be a guide
to it self, to what purpose are spiritual Guides provided by divine wisdom for
our conduct? and if that may not be restrained in its extravagancy, wherefore
were Laws made, and Magistrates appointed? So that either this wild notion of
the power of Conscience must be false, or else Instruction and Education are
useless, Magistracy and Ministry impertinent, and both Laws and Scripture of no
effect. And if notwithstanding this notion be embraced, it is plainly
impossible, that such men should live either holily or comfortably. Not holily,
because Conscience thus left alone to it self, without guide or rule, will in
all likelihood follow men's temper and inclination, and then a man's most beloved
Lusts shall be the dictate of his Conscience. Not comfortably, because he that
is destitute of a Law, and a guide to resolve him in difficulties, must needs
(if he consider and be sensible of any thing at all) be perplexed with
perpetual disputes, and endless scrupulosity upon every undertaking.

But it will be pretended that there is no help for it, but when all is done,
men must and will follow their own Consciences; forasmuch as Discourse, or
Laws, or Scripture, signify nothing till they are applied by Conscience; they
indeed may give aim, or may be of the nature of evidence in a Cause; but it is
Conscience which collects the result, and he that complies not with that, is
guilty of sin, whether the Evidence was well summed up or no. To this purpose
some passages of Scripture are usually misapplied: e. g. Let a man be persuaded
in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. That which is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.
and he that doubts is damned, etc.

I do confess here is something of truth in this Plea, but blended with a great
deal of error, and here I verily believe lies the rise or occasion of the
persuasion of the extravagant authority of Conscience. But when we consider
wisely, the truth is no more but this, that a man's Conscience ought to go along
with him in the acts of his Obedience to the Law, or that he ought to be
persuaded the thing is lawful to be done before he does it, otherwise he does
violence to himself, and condemns his own act. But it does not follow, that
therefore it is lawful to do whatsoever he is persuaded of in his Conscience,
or that it is not his duty to do any thing but what he is so persuaded of; for
this abrogates all the Laws both of God and Man, and makes their Legislations
to depend upon private consent. If therefore any man through ignorance or
prejudice, or any such cause, shall have his Conscience alienated from the Law,
or dictating otherwise to him; this as it cannot make a Law, so neither can it
discharge him from the obligation of one. All that this works, is, that it puts
a man into so sad a case that he may sin both ways, that is, both in obeying
and in disobeying; but because he is brought into this strait by his own
default, it is evident this cannot acquit his Conscience; for one sin is no
discharge for another. That therefore which he has now to do, is first to
inform his Conscience better, and then to comply with the rule.

And that this is the true state of this Case, will appear (beyond all
exception) by the resolution of our Savior himself in two passages of the
Gospel; the former Matt. 6. 23. if the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness! Where first he supposes that the principles of a man's
mind or Conscience may be very false and erroneous, and then pronounces, that
he that is in such a Case is in a very deplorable condition; forasmuch as the
error of his Conscience will be sure to run him upon miscarriages of life, and
the privilege of its being his Conscience will not exempt him from the
consequences of so doing.

The other passage is Joh. 16. 2. where he foretells his Disciples that they
should fall into so unhappy times, and lie under such prejudices and misprisons
with the World, that those that killed them, should think they did God good
service. Now those that think they do good service, and perform a meritorious
action in such a thing, most certainly follow their Consciences in so doing,
and yet it is as certain, that this did not justify the fact; for then the
Persecutors of Christianity and Murderers of the Apostles, must have been a
very conscientious and commendable sort of men: wherefore it is evident, that
Conscience is no rule nor sufficient warranty for our actions.

6. In the sixth place let him who has thoughts of attaining the happiness of
the World to come, take care of entertaining an opinion of the impossibility of
Religion according to the measures of the holy Scripture. This is a common
prejudice upon the minds of ignorant or cowardly people, for they phansy that a
life according to the Laws of the Gospel, is rather a fine speculation, or a
philosophical Hypothesis, than a necessary and practicable truth. They confess
it would be a very good and commendable thing, if we could comply with the
rules of our Savior, but they look upon it as impossible, and so of no
indispensable obligation. For they say, our natures are so corrupted by our
fall, and thereby our faculties are so weak and impaired, that we are indeed
nothing but infirmity on the one side; and on the other, we are so beset with
temptations, and the World, the Flesh and the Devil, are so much too strong for
us, that we must sin, there is no avoiding of it, and God must pardon, and
there is an end of the business.

Now if such an opinion as this possess a man, it will prove impossible that
ever he should live holily. For if natural corruption have not infeebled us
sufficiently, this cowardly conceit will be sure to do it effectually. For no
man (in this case especially) is ever better than his design, nor rises higher
than his aim or projection (no more than water rises above its Fountain) nay,
it is a thousand to one, but he that sets his mark low, will fall yet lower in
his prosecution; and he that is cowed and dejected in his own mind, so as to
think he shall never overcome the difficulties before him, most certainly never
will or can do it.

He only is like to prove a good Christian, that resolves with the true-hearted
Israelites to despise difficulty and danger, and to conquer the good Land,
whatsoever it cost him; for such a man unites his strength, collects his
Forces, and disheartens his Enemies as well as defies their opposition; but the
despondent cowardly Person, both infeebles himself and incourages his Enemies;
so that he can neither attempt, nor much less effect, any brave thing.

And the same conceit of impossibility will as certainly render our Spirits
uncomfortable as remiss; because after all the pretense a man can make for his
cowardice and remissness, he cannot but observe the strain of the whole
Scripture to be against him; and surely that man cannot enjoy himself very well
under those seize, which God and his own Conscience condemn as mean and
unworthy.

But after all, the ground of this opinion is as false as it is mischievous;
for in the first place, the holy Scripture assures us of some persons, and
particularly of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. That they walked in all the
commandments of the Lord blameless, and were both righteous before God, and yet
they were the Children of the same Adam, and exposed to all the temptations,
ill examples, and difficulties with other men. Besides, the aforesaid opinion,
under a pretense of modesty, and an humble acknowledgment of humane weakness,
reflects very dishonourably both upon the wisdom and goodness of God, when it
imputes to the great Lawgiver of the World, such oversight and severity, as
to prescribe such Laws as were not fitted to the capacities of those that were
to be subject to them, and to be judged by them; unto which add, that it puts
an intolerable slight upon the power of Faith, and (which is more) upon the
very grace of God also, as if neither of them could carry us through all the
difficulties we should be exposed to. Upon all which considerations (and
several such other which need not here be mentioned) this opinion of the
impossibility of Religion appears to be very bad, and such as ought by all
means to be avoided by him that would lead an holy and comfortable Life.

7. And yet there is another opinion, which is both as common and as dangerous
as any of the former; against which therefore I will give caution in the
seventh and last place, viz. when though perhaps Religion shall not be
universally pronounced to be impossible, yet it shall be thought to be only the
peculiar business, or especially to belong to some certain sorts or conditions
of men, but not to be the general calling, the necessary and indispensable duty
of all men. Under this pretense, serious and constant devotion is looked upon
as appropriate to the Cloister, where men live retired from the World, and are
thought to have nothing else to do; or to be the employment of Churchmen, whose
peculiar Profession it is; or for old and Bedridden persons, who are fit for
nothing else, but a Prayer Book; or at least for men fallen into adversity, who
have no other thing to retire to, and to suppor themselves withal, but the
contemplations of another World. But for men of callings and business, or for
those that are in the flower of youth, and warmth of blood, in health and
prosperity, these are thought to have allowances due to them, at least for the
present, and the more solemn consideration of Religion must be adjourned to
another time. If in the mean while such as these go to Church, and perhaps now
and then say their Prayers, it is as much as is to be expected; for their
business is pretended to be too great, or their temptations and avocations too
many, or at least their spirits are too light and brisk to permit them to be
strictly devotional, or to make Religion their business.

Thus men make vain Apologies, but does God Almighty allow of them, has he
made any such exceptions or distinctions? no certainly, he has made Religion
every man's duty, and has charged us first to seek the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness; he has equally imposed this task upon Prince and Peasant,
Clergy and Laity, rich and poor, Master and Servant, young and old, the
afflicted and the prosperous, the man of business as well as those of leisure
and retirement. He that has an absolute sovereignty over the World, that has
right to our homage and attendance, that has laid infinite obligations upon us
to love and obey him; he that has considered and forecast all our
circumstances, businesses, difficulties, temptations and excuses; he that
observes our carriage and behavior toward himself, he that cannot be
deceived, will not be mocked, and is no accepter of persons: He, I say, has
made no such exceptions or exemptions in this great concern of Religion; and
therefore they cannot be mentioned without great unreasonableness, nor relied
upon without horrible danger.

If indeed Eternity were the peculiar concern of a certain sort and condition
of men only; or if old men only died, and none else; or if rich men can be
contented that only poor men shall go to Heaven, then the other sorts of men
may excuse themselves from devotion: but otherwise it is the greatest absurdity
that can be to hope for the end without the means.

What though old men must die, yet will not young men quickly come to be, old
men too, at least if they do not die first?

And what if men of retired lives have more leisure for Devotion, and more time
to spend in it, yet is any man so hard put to it, but that he may (if he will)
spare some time for his Soul and Eternity?

What if it be acknowledged that Churchmen have peculiar obligations upon them
to recommend Religion to others, yet it is certain, that the necessity of
practicing it, is common to others with themselves; forasmuch as there is no
duty of it peculiar to them, unless it be to be exemplary in all.

It is true, poor men, and men in adversity, are justly accusable of
intolerable sottishness, if they who are frowned upon by the World, do not seek
to repair their unhappiness by the favor of God and the hopes of another
World. But it is as true, that rich men and those in prosperity, are as justly
to be upbraided with disingenuity, and base ingratitude, if they be not devout
toward him that has dealt so bountifully with them.

Besides all this, there is no calling or condition of men, but under it they
may (if they have a heart to it) very affectionately attend upon Religion,
consistently enough with all other lawful business or occasions. Almighty
Wisdom has not so ill contrived the state of this World, that there should be
any necessity that business should supplant Religion, or Religion entrench upon
business; nor if things be rightly considered, are these two kind of affairs so
contrary, or does Devotion take up so much time, or so much exhaust men's
spirits, but with a good zeal and a little forecast, both may be carried on
together. Or if it were otherwise, and that the care of our Souls would indeed
weary our Bodies, or the securing of Heaven would disorder, and a little
incommode our secular interests; yet neither is Life so certain, nor the
present World so considerable, nor Heaven so mean and contemptible an interest,
as that a man should not be willing to put himself to some trouble for the
latter as well as for the former.

And as there wants not reason for this course, so neither are Examples wanting
in this kind, where men that might have made such excuses, as aforesaid (as
justly as any persons whatsoever) have notwithstanding quitted and disdained
them all, and applied themselves remarkably to the service of God and Devotion.
For if riches, and the variety of Worldly cares and business which usually
attend them, were a just excuse from attendance upon Religion, then Job might
have claimed exemption, who was the richest man in all the East, and yet the
devoutest too. His thousands of Sheep, and Oxen, and Camels, his abundance of
Servants, his numerous Family, and the care of all these, did not tempt him to
the intermission of one days Devotion.

If either the temptations and pleasures of Youth, or the voluptuousness of a
Court, or the multitude of Examples of profaneness, or the cares of a prime
Minister of State, or the jealousies of a Favorite, could all together have
amounted to a just dispensation from the strictness of Religion: then Daniel
who was in all those circumstances might have pleaded it, and upon that account
might have retrencht his Conscience, and intermitted his praying three times a
day, especially when he knew his Enemies, watched advantage against him in this
particular.

If the general license of Soldiers, the temptations such men are exposed to,
the necessities they often are pressed with, or the sudden avocations they must
be subject to, could make a tolerable apology for profaneness, or an excuse for
Irreligion, then Cornelius, Acts 10. had been excused from praying to God
continually, and serving the Lord with all his house.

Nay, lastly, if either the state and grandeur, or the Prerogative of a
Sovereign Prince, if the impunity of a King, or the glory and affluence of a
Kingdom; nay, if either interest of State, or weight of affairs, the Cares and
Policies of Government, had been all together sufficient to make a dispensation
from the strict obligations of Religion, then David might have pretended to it,
in abatement of his duty to God, and of his constant and ardent Devotions.

But all these holy men considered, that God was a great Majesty, not to be
trifled with, and an impartial Judge, without respect of persons, that Eternity
was of more consequence than the present Life, and Heaven better than this
World; and they were so far from thinking an Eternal Interest to be
inconsistent with the management of temporal affairs, that contrariwise they
believed there was no such effectual way to succeed in the latter as by a
diligent prosecution of the former.

But as for those who being convinced of the absolute necessity of Religion,
and of the inexcusableness of a total and final omission of it, would
notwithstanding make it to be only the business of old Age, or a Sickbed; these
(although by the folly and sloth of men, they have too many followers in their
opinion, yet certainly) are the most absurd and inexcusable of all. Forasmuch
as in order to the making such an Hypothesis passable with their own
Consciences, they must not only suppose several very uncertain things, which no
wise man can have the confidence or rather madness to presume upon; but the
very supposition it self implies diverse other things so base and disingenuous,
as no good man can be guilty of.

First, they make very bold and desperate suppositions, as for Example, that
they shall live to old Age, and die by a leisurely and lingering sickness. That
God will then accept of men's return and repentance (who never stopped in their
carriere of sin and the World, till Death arrested them.) That God will give
them repentance what time they prefix to him, or that they can repent when they
will. That they shall be fit for the most weighty affairs when they are at the
last gasp, and the most important of all business can be transacted when their
strength and spirits are exhausted. And to say no more, that it is fit and
tolerable for a man to leave that to be last discharged, which if any accident
prevent him in, he is everlastingly ruined. All these things must be taken for
granted by him that shall venture to put off the business of his Soul to the
last act of his Life, every one of which are at the best uncertain, and for the
most part false, and therefore to build upon them is extreme presumption.

Secondly, If the foundation of such a course were not rotten and unsafe, yet
that which is built upon it is base and dis-ingenuous; for the man who upon any
considerations whatsoever can content himself to put off the things wherein
Gods Honor and his Souls Welfare are concerned to the very last, proclaims he
has an unreasonable love and admiration of this World, for the sake of which
he postpones Religion, and that he has no real kindness for, or good opinion
of the ways of God, in that he puts the care of that business as far off, as
possibly he can; and indeed that he would not mind God or his Soul at all, if
it were not for mere necessity and fear of damnation. Now whether this then can
be a reasonable course, or he be a Candidate of the Kingdom of Heaven that
governs himself by these measures, it is too easy to judge. Wherefore let the
man who has entertained any principles of Religion, and has any value for his
Soul, and care of Eternity, utterly abominate and avoid this last named, as
well as all the forementioned prejudices or opinions.

And having so done, let him then attend to the more positive and direct
advices in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Directions for an effectual prosecution of Religion.
HE that is resolved to be a Christian in earnest, will find it necessary (in
the prosecution of his design) to attend to the six following Directions.

1. Let such a man be sure always to keep himself strictly sober, by which I
mean, not only that he avoid the extremity of a debauch, but that he indulge
not himself so liberal an use of Wine and strong Drink, as that he shall come
too near the confines of intemperance, especially in the general habit of his
Life; or that he take care that through facility or carelessness he comply not
with the too common practice in this particular. Forasmuch as it is evident,
that the approving a man's self to God, and the taking care of Eternity, are
such weighty and important affairs, that they must needs require the greatest
composure of thoughts, and the utmost intention of our minds; and can neither
be worthily taken in hand, nor much less pursued as they ought, in such a light
and jolly humor as the custom of tippling does ordinarily put men into; for
that relaxes a man's thoughts, and fills his spirit with froth and levity; it
renders the mind of a man so airy and trifling, that he becomes transported
with a jest, and diverted by every impertinence; it banishes solicitude, and
puts him besides his guard of caution and circumspection; a man's head in such a
case is impatient of weighty considerations, incapable of grave deliberations;
his thoughts are fluctuating and uncertain, he comes to no stable resolution,
nor can he make any constant progress; and surely such a temper cannot make a
fit soil for Religion to take root in, or to thrive upon.

Besides, intemperance does not only disturb the reason of the mind, but also
weakens and depresses it, and exalts fancy in the room of it; which fills a
man with wild, loose, and incoherent Ideas: And which is still worse, it raises
the brutal passions also, both irascible and concupiscible, and thereby makes
work for repentance and mortification; which must needs become a very hard task
to perform, when the same causes which have made it necessary, have therewithal
impaired those powers that should accomplish it; and therefore this course is
utterly inconsistent with a design of Religion.

Moreover, besides the evil of intemperance it self, it exposes a man to a
thousand temptations, and puts him at the very mercy of the Devil, forasmuch as
he that is under the power of drink, is not only out of Gods keeping, but out
of his own also; he has quenched Gods Spirit whilst he inflamed his own, he
has deprived himself of Gods Providence by going out of his way, and he is not
perfectly in possession of his own mind, and therefore surely is in a dangerous
condition.

To which add, that whereas sobriety and watchfulness use always to be
accounted inseparable Companions; it is apparent, that he who neglects the
former, can never be able to maintain the latter; and consequently the
intemperate man cannot be fit for Prayer and Meditation, and other great
exercises of Piety. Upon all which accounts our Savior S. Luke 21. 34. charges
those that will be his Disciples to take heed to themselves, lest at any time
their hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, etc.

2. In the second place, let the man who designs to prosecute Religion
effectually, take care of intemperance of mind, as well as of that of the body;
and with equal heed, avoid intoxication by wild opinions, as he would do a
surfeit of meats and drinks. The Prophet Isaiah complains of the people of the
Jews, Isai. 29. 9. That they were drunken but not with Wine, they staggered but
not with strong drink; and the Apostle exhorts men to be sober minded: so that
it seems there is a kind of spiritual drunkenness, which disguises men's minds
as much as the other brutal custom disorders their outward person. Of this
there are a great many instances, but two most remarkable, viz. opiniatre and
scrupulosity: I mean by the former, when men have no settled judgment in
Religion, but allow themselves an endless inquisitiveness in matters of
opinion, and are always hunting after novelty: By the other I understand a
captious or squeamish humor of Conscience, under which men perpetually vex
both themselves and others with unreasonable fears and jealousies.

As for the former of these, it is notoriously the humor of some men to be
always doubting, disputing, and gazing after new light, as if all mankind had
been imposed upon till now, and the old way were not the good way, but every
new invention, or upstart notion contained some admirable mystery in it;
therefore they think it necessary to try all things before they can hold fast
that which is best, and indeed surfeit on the forbidden Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, as if it were the same with the Tree of Life. And
if perhaps they fall not into any of those dangerous opinions which I gave
caution against in the former Chapter, yet it is by chance if they do not; for
they having no judgment of discern the difference of things, no ballast to
poise and settle them, are driven up and down with every wind of Doctrine; they
are of the opinion of the last Book they read, or the last man they discoursed
with, for always the newest and freshest opinion is the best; and so (as they
say of the Chameleon) they take their color from the next object. This temper
is a mighty disparagement to divine truth, for it looks as if there were no
certain way of satisfaction to the minds of men, but that they must always seek
and never find, and endlesly dispute but could never come to a resolution: and
it is so intolerable an impediment of the life and practice of Religion, that
it is many times more harmless to be settled in some bad opinions, than to be
thus unsettled, and to dispute every thing. For besides that this course draws
off the spirits of men, and spends their best heat upon unprofitable notions,
and so takes them off from studying their own hearts, examining their
Consciences, and diligent attendance to their ways and actions; it raises
passion, nourishes pride, foments divisions, and in a word, turns Christianity
into vain Janglings. Whereas a truly sober Christian is readier to believe than
to dispute in divine things, and more careful to practice old rules than to
devise new models; he studies the Scripture sincerely, not for objections but
for resolution; he lives up to what he knows, and prays God to direct him where
he is uncertain; and so is led by the Divine Grace in a plain path toward
Heaven. The Novellist or great Disputer contrariwise, being unresolved of his
way, makes no have in his Journey, and cannot very earnestly practice any thing
to day, because he cannot tell what opinion he shall be of to morrow.

And then for the other instance of intemperance of mind, namely scrupulosity.
When men have such headstrong and ungovernable, or such shy and squeamish
Consciences, that they boggle at every thing which does not just fit their
peculiar fancy and humor, though they can give no reasonable account of their
jealousy or aversation, but only they dislike and are offended with such and
such (indifferent) things, they know not why, their Conscience takes check at
them, and there is no more to be said in the Case. Now such as these can by no
means be reputed sober men, who (like as we say of Drunkards) see double, and
consequently fear where no fear is, or who are terrified by their own idle
phancies, their brains being clouded and darkened by the crude steams of riot
and excess. This temper however in some cases it may be pitiable, is
notwithstanding very mischievous, not only as it disturbs the Peace of the
Church and of Mankind, by rendering those who are under the power of it, busy
and pragmatical, censorious and uncharitable toward all that are not just of
their own mode and size, but (which is far worse) it misrepresents the Divine
Majesty, as if he were a captious Deity, who watched men's haltings, to take
advantage against them, as having more mind to damn than to save them. By which
means it discourages men from Religion, as if it were the most anxious and
uncomfortable thing in the World; and consequently of all this, it extremely
hinders proficiency in virtue; for he that is always jealous of his way, will
often make halts, or have a very uncomfortable progress.

On the other side, he that is likely to make a good Christian, satisfies
himself of the Divine Goodness and Candor in interpreting the actions of his
Creatures, and being conscious of his own sincerity, in following closely the
rule of the Scripture, where it is plain, thinks himself at liberty where that
is silent, and takes the direction of his Spiritual Guides where it is obscure,
and then goes cheerfully and vigorously on his way toward Heaven.

3. Next to regard of Sobriety both of body and mind, let the man who designs
the other World, take heed that the present World grow not too much upon him,
and distract or overburden him in his Journey toward Heaven: and the diligence
and circumspection in this point ought to be the greater, in regard this World
is placed near us, and therefore is apt to seem great to our sight, and the
other (though incomparably greater) being at a distance from us, is apt to seem
little and contemptible. Besides, it is the chief aim of the Devil to make the
present World seem much more beautiful and valuable than it is, that by its
blandishments he may soften us, by its allurements debauch us, or at least by
the care and concerns of it distract us and take off our edge to better things.

It is certain also, that he whose affections are eagerly engaged upon secular
interests, can never be ingenuous and free enough to have a right understanding
of the true and real difference of things, nor conscientious enough to stand by
that truth which he understands; for he can never be steady in any principles,
but must turn with every Tide, and sail with every Wind, as it shall make for
his purpose: Besides, it is plain, that our Souls are too narrow to hold much
of this World, and yet to afford room for any great share of Heaven together
with it. Therefore our Savior has said, ye cannot serve God and Mammon, and
accordingly in his first Sermon on the Mount, Matt. 6. 24, 25, 26. to the
intent that his Doctrine of the Kingdom of Heaven might take place in the
hearts of his Disciples and hearers, he very emphatically and largely cautions
them against admiration of the World, and too eager pursuit of it. And in the
aforementioned passage, Luke 21. v. 34. to his admonition against over-charging
themselves with surfeiting and drunkenness, he subjoins the cares of this life,
intimating, that those two kinds of Vices (as opposite as they may seem to each
other) agree in their malignant influence upon Religion: neither indeed are
they so contrary in their natures as they seem to be; for as Drunkenness is
nothing but a liquid Covetousness, so on the other side, Covetousness is a kind
of dry thirst or drunken insatiable humor; and it is so much the more
dangerous and incurable than the other, as it is the less infamous, merely
because it does not presently discover it self by such odd and ridiculous
symptoms as the other does.

To avoid this therefore, let the man we speak of, consider constantly with
himself the shortness and uncertainty of the present life, by which he will
easily be apprehensive of how much more consequence it is to provide for
Eternity, than for that little abode we are to make in that state wherein the
things of this World are of any use to us.

Let him also observe the success of things, and he will easily conclude, that
much more of our prosperity is owing to the providence of God, than to our own
forecast and endeavors; and consequently, that it is a better provision for
our Children and Posterity, to leave them under the blessing of God, than in
great possessions.

And in consequence of these persuasions, he will not be tempted to grasp too
much business, so as to hinder him in devotion, but will rather consider his
own strength, viz. how much care and labor he can undergo, without depression
of his Spirit, or debasing his mind; and will weigh the dangers and temptations
of the World against the pleasures and all urements of riches.

This will also incline him prudently to methodize his affairs, and to put that
business which seems necessary, into the best order, that so it may take its
due place in subordination to his greater concerns, and not supplant or
interfere with them.

To which purpose also, if he have any considerable matters to dispose of, he
will think it convenient to set his House in order as well as his business, and
have always his Will made, not only, that thereby he may be the more
effectually admonished of his mortality, and be provided against the surprizal
of Death, but that in the mean time he may have the less solicitude upon his
spirit, and may the more singly and undistractedly apply himself to his main
business. And then

4. In the fourth place let him attend to the counsel of Jesus the Son of
Syrach, Ecclus. 2. 1. My Son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul
for temptation, that is, as if he had said,

Whenever thou undertakest a course of Religion, be not so fond as to imagine
thou shall be able to accomplish it without sweat and difficulty, or so secure
as to think of obtaining the Crown without a conflict, but expect to meet with
temptations of several kinds, and arm thy self accordingly; especially in thy
first entrance on such a course, thou must look for the sharpest encounters,
for thy Enemies are not so soon vanquished as defied, nor are they either so
fair and civil as to give thee scope to harden and fortify thy self in thy
enterprise, or so imprudent as to slip the opportunity of thy weakness and
security together. Beginnings in all such cases are attended with the greatest
hazards and difficulties. The Devil rages most at first, out of indignation to
suffer the prey to be taken out of his mouth, whereas when he is past hopes of
recovering it, he has more wit than to labor in vain, and will not so much
trouble himself to tempt when he sees no likelihood of success, but he is more
resolute than quickly to despair or give over his siege upon the first denial
of his Summons. No he will storm and batter thee night and day, and cast in all
his bombs and fiery darts to affright and compel thee to a surrender. And for
the flesh it is certain, that the first checks which are given to sensual
inclinations, are harshest, and go most against the grain, because they have
used to take their full scope and swinge; indeed when a man has accustomed
them to denial in their importunities, they by degrees and in time grow tame,
and submit to the yoke of reason, as fire is extinguished by being suppressed, or
as a violent torrent that is turned into a new Chanel, and restrained its
ancient course, at first rages, and foams and swells against those new banks,
though at length it ceases its tumult, and runs along quietly within its
boundaries. It is not one overthrow will dishearten the old man, he must be
baffled and vanquished over and over before he will cease to rebel, nor must you
think to find virtue easy till you have accustomed your self to it; for nothing
but custom can entirely subdue custom, wherefore (till that is introduced) you
must never be secure but always upon your guard. And then as for the World, the
first rejection of that out of a man's heart is performed with as great
difficulty as any of the former; when a man has once cast overboard that
luggage which otherwise was likely to have sunk him, it is possible he may be
glad of the exchange, and despise what before he admired; but it is a great
matter to be convinced of the necessity of unburdening the Vessel, and a long
dispute before men are willing to lose any thing for Heaven. It requires a
great sagacity to see the empty Pageantry of the World, so as to slight fame,
applause, riches, ease and pleasure; a hard piece of self-denial to abridge
himself of the liberty other men take; a great mastery of a man's self to be
deaf to all the charms, and insensible of all the caresses of the World, and in
a word, to keep a man's Eyes and thoughts steadily fixed upon another life.

Therefore there is great reason that a man should count upon difficulty in the
undertaking of Religion, lest when it comes upon him unforeseen, he turn
recreant, and come off with shame and loss.

Besides all this there is something more which (I apprehend) the Wise man
intended in the aforesaid advice, namely, that he that resolves to be a
virtuous man, must fortify his mind, as well against the persuasions, examples,
and discouragements of his less considerate Friends and acquaintance, as
against the bitter scoffs and reproaches of his Enemies, that neither the
insensible insinuations of the one dissolve him into lukewarmness and
remissness, nor the rough attacks of the other sink his spirits, and shake his
resolution.

Opposition from each of these he must expect to meet with: from the former,
out of folly, or else in their own defense, that such a man's zeal may not
reproach their negligence; from the other, out of malice and as assailants,
that they may reak their spite upon God and his holy ways; and therefore he
ought to be provided for both.

Against the soft insinuations of injudicious persons, he must be provided, by
being girt about with truth, and have on the breastplate of righteousness, as
the Apostle advises, Ephesians. 6. 14. that is, he must establish his heart in an
undoubted belief of the truth on his side, by considering the authority of God,
the Example of our Savior, and other holy men, and hence be able to render a
reason of the hope that is in him with meekness and fear; and if this do not
ease him of their fond importunities, he must then put on some degree of
morosity, and resolve with David, 2 Samuel 6. 22. that if this be to be vile, he
will yet be more vile.

Against the rude treatments of lewd and malicious men, he must as the same
Apostle advises, Ephesians. 6. 16, 17. take the shield of faith, whereby he shall
repel all the fiery darts of the wicked, and for an helmet the hope of
salvation; and in contemplation of the Objects of both those, he will be able
generously to contemn all obloquy and reproach, as disdaining to be hectored
out of Salvation.

In a word, for altogether he must always remember, that selfdenial is the
first Lesson of Christianity, and that he that has not so learnt it, as to
take up his Cross and follow Christ, cannot be his Disciple.

5. In the fifth place, let the Candidate of the Kingdom of Heaven take care
that he do not precipitate himself into temptation; for as on the one side we
ought to behave our selves stoutly and bravely, when it pleases God to lay it
upon us, so on the other side, ought we to be as cautious and timorous of
drawing it upon our selves; the first of which is seldom separate from the
last; for he that knows how to encounter a danger, will not ordinarily thrust
himself into it; and usually those who are so stupid and foolhardy, as to run
themselves into difficulties, show as little courage and conduct in conflicting
with them, as they did discretion in the adventure upon them; and no wonder,
seeing in such a case they put themselves out of Gods protection, trusting to
themselves, and then they cannot in reason expect other than to be deserted by
his grace in such unwarrantalbe enterprises.

Let the piously disposed man therefore not be so fond as to try experiments
upon himself, lest he buy his knowledge of his own weakness at the cost of too
great an hazard. Let him not go too near sin, in confidence that he can divide
by an hair, and come off clever enough. For instance, let him not nibble at an
Oath, nor mince the matter of profaneness, nor drink to the highest pitch of
sobriety, nor go to the utmost extremity of justice in his dealings; for he
knows not the deceitfulness of his own heart, nor considers the slippery ground
he stands upon, that will thus venture to the very brink of his liberty.

Nor let him provoke Enemies to himself by intemperate zeal, as if a good man
should not meet with opposition enough without his own procuring, nor the World
had malice enough unless he inflamed and exasperated it; especially, let him
not thrust himself into lewd Company, in confidence of his own integrity and
stability: for he has no sufficient apprehension of the power and malice of
the Devil, who by any of the aforesaid imprudences tempts him to tempt himself;
nay, nor does he seem to hate and abominate sin so absolutely as he ought to
do, that loves the Vicinage and Neighborhood of it. What the wise man
therefore advises, Prove. 5. 8. concerning the whorish woman, is very applicable
to this Case, Remove thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her
house; and so also he says of flagitious men, chap. 4. 14, 15. Enter not into
the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not
by it, turn from it, and pass away; for he that goes ordinarily to the brink of
a Precipice, is in great danger sometime or other to fall in, and he that
nibbles at the bait, will one time or other be taken with the hook.

6. Sixthly and lastly, as a discreet man, and concerned for Eternal Life,
ought not to be overdaring and confident in his approaches toward sin and
danger, so neither ought he on the other hand to be timorous and strait-laced
in things eminently and unquestionably good; whether it be in instances of
devotion toward God, or of self-denial and mortification of himself, or in
acts of Charity toward others; for in all these, there is such a scope and
latitude, as that a brave and noble spirit of Christianity, may and will
distinguish it self from a narrow and stingy temper in the discharge of them.

For Example, such a man as we speak of, neither will nor ought to confine his
Devotions to such strict and precise measures, as that he that falls short of
them will be guilty of an omission of his duty; but will contrariwise find in
his heart to spend something more than ordinary of his time in Prayers and
Meditation, and such other acts of immediate worship. He will not stick to
apply somewhat more than the just tenth or tithe of his increase, to the
encouragement of Religion; nor will he grudge to deny himself, upon weighty
occasions, some of that pleasure which at other times he can allow himself
without sin: or if occasion be, he will give alms, not only out of the
superfluity of his estate, but to the utmost of his ability, perhaps beyond his
convenience; for these things though (generally considered) they are not
matters of express duty, yet do they not cease to be good, merely because they
are not commanded, so long as the species and kind of them is commanded; and
besides, such extraordinary expressions of obedience to a general command, are
very fit to demonstrate our love to God, our gratitude for his unspeakable
bounty toward us, and our value of the Kingdom of Heaven, seeing that by such
instances especially, we show, that we love the Lord our God with all our
heart, and soul, and strength; and that we think nothing too dear for the
assuring our selves of Eternal Life.

And though it would not be expressly a sin to omit any one of the instances of
the several kinds aforesaid, yet it must be a palpable argument of a narrow
heart toward God, to yield no such instances at all, and cannot but proceed
from very culpable superstition to be afraid of so doing; nay more, for a man
to be barren of such fruits, and careless of such performances, is a great
point of folly and imprudence toward our selves, in respect of the comfort
which our hearts might receive by such generosity; for although by no after act
of ours (how excellent soever) it be possible for us, to make any proper amends
to the Divine Majesty, for our former offenses and omissions, yet by such
expressions as these (we speak of) we show our selves sensible of those
miscarriages, and that we are under remorse for them, and we give proof, that
we truly love God, though we have offended him, and desire to obtain his favor
by the most costly oblations. Upon all which accounts it seems very advisable,
that he who sets his Face toward Heaven, should endeavor to open and enlarge
his heart this way, and not suffer himself to be cramped and contracted by any
odd opinions to the contrary.

Whereas therefore some men seem to fancy a frugal way of Religion, and
accordingly inquire for the minimum quod sic (as we say) or the lowest degree
of saving grace, as if Heaven and Hell were divided by an hair, and they would
be at the trouble of no more piety than would just carry them out of danger;
They are to be admonished that they seek after impossibilities and
contradictions; for it is in truth as if they should say, they would have fire
without heat, Religion without Devotion, Piety without Affection, Holiness
without Zeal, or that they desire to fear God, but have no inclination to love
him.

To speak plainly, the lowest degree of goodness is never sought after but in
an ill temper of mind, and by a cowardly and hypocritical heart, nor can it be
found with comfort; for the essence of grace is no more discoverable without
the fruits, than a body without its accidents; and therefore there are but two
ways of obtaining true comfort in our Souls, viz. either by our daily
proficiency, or by our extraordinary fervency. First, By daily proficiency we
discover the life of grace in our hearts, as we discern a plant to be alive
because we see it grows. Secondly, By extraordinary fervency, as when perhaps a
man has not had time to give proof of himself by a long course of growing
daily better and better, he may yet demonstrate a vital principle of good in
his Soul, by such generous efforts of zeal as we have been speaking of; in
consideration of which, it is therefore not only sordid and ungrateful toward
God, but very uncomfortable to our selves to inquire for the mere essence of
grace, and to stand upon strict and precise terms of duty.

But perhaps these men think a pretense of modesty will countenance them
against any imputation of cowardice or hypocrisy, for they will say they are
contented with the lowest seat in Heaven, and so they may arrive at that state,
they are ambitious of no more. Silly men! as if it were a culpable ambition to
endeavor to be very good! as if supreme happiness could be modestly or remisly
desired! or that he either understood or truly desired Heaven, who would
modestly complement, others to enter before him! No, no; the chiefest good is
desirable for it self, and the natural manner of desiring it, is to do it
without measure and bounds, and it is impossible it should be otherwise; he
therefore that has these modest desires of Heaven, is either a stark
hypocrite, or has no true notion of that state at all.

Besides, if it were or could be possible for a man to be modest and good in
this sense, I mean to love Heaven but moderately, and yet to comethere,
notwithstanding it could not be without great folly and danger, for a man to
set himself too low a mark in so high a concern; for (as I observed before) we
see it is almost constant with men to shoot below their aim, and nothing more
ordinary than for their practice to fall short of their speculations; and
therefore every man that would not miscarry in his design, takes care to direct
himself high enough; accordingly in this great affair of Religion, he that
yields to such a faint-hearted temper, under the notion of modesty, will not
only never be very good, but scarcely ever be tolerable or good at all; for if
his projections be mean, his performances will be worse, in regard the
deceitfulness of his own heart, the reluctance of the flesh, and the
temptations of the Devil, will be sure to get some ground upon him; and when
abatements are made for all such disadvantages, what a pitiful dwarfish
sanctity will this over modesty arrive to at last?

But yet after all this, some perhaps will be found so silly as to think, or so
disingenuous as to pretend to a suspicion, at least, that such extraordinary
works as we have been now recommending, may savor of merit or supererogation;
very likely, if any man could be so absurd as to attribute any such thing to
them; but surely he that takes his measures of things from the holy Scripture,
will be in little danger of such a gross mistake, especially whilst we are
expressly told by our Savior, that when we have done all that we can, we are
still but unprofitable servants; for can a mortal man oblige his Maker? can
infinite perfection become a Debtor to Dust and Ashes? But forasmuch as God
requires and deserves that we should love him with all our Soul, and heart, and
strength; it is impossible we should love him too much, but great danger we
should love him too little: it cannot therefore choose but be the wisest and
safest course to incline to the side of God Almighty, and to favor his
interest against the sensuality, deadness and deceitfulness of our own hearts.

O but (may some man say) will it not at least be will worship to affect
uncommanded instances of love to God and zeal of his glory? I answer, it is
possible that such a thing may be, if these things be done with neglect of
those expressions of love and zeal which God has particularly appointed; for
this looks as if a man pretended to be wiser than God himself, and so would
undertake to choose for him, what he should be pleased with. But now, if
neither his appointments in special be superseded by these voluntary
performances, nor these voluntary performances be unagreeable to those standing
and general rules he has given us, there can be no danger that divine goodness
should ill interpret them, especially since there can be no imaginable reason
why he that was pleased with a free-will-offering under the Law, should be
offended with the like under the Gospel; where above all things he requires a
free, cheerful, generous and reasonable service.

Wherefore let the man who really believes there will be rewards of well-doing
in another World, and is resolved to obtain them, be always ready to every good
work, and cheerfully embrace the opportunity wherein he may perform a costly or
a difficult service; and let him take care that no tradition of men, nor
superstitious conceit of his own head, neither the example of other men's
careless lives, nor the too natural remissness of his own heart, prevail upon
him to neglect such instances, whereby the glory of God may be most advanced,
and his own Comfort assured.

PART II. THE PRACTICE OF Holy and Comfortable LIVING.
Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls.
THE PRACTICE OF Holy and Comfortable LIVING.
CHAP. I. Of secret Devotion, between God and a Man's own Soul, and particularly
of Prayer.
HItherto in the former part of this little Book, we principally designed these
four things, First, To discover the foundations of Religion in general, and
from thence to demonstrate the reality, importance and necessity of it.
Secondly, To settle men's judgments and determine them in the choice of their
profession of Religion in particular. Thirdly, To give caution against certain
common but dangerous mistakes, which might otherwise undermine and disappoint
the ends and purposes of Religion. Fourthly and lastly, To lay down some
general directions necessary to be premised in order to the effectual
prosecution of a religious design, and all this we comprised under the title of
An Introduction.

But now we come to build upon those foundations, and more particularly and
plainly to draw out the lines of an holy and comfortable Life.

Here therefore it may seem expedient that we should in the first place
consider the extent and whole compass of Religion, to the intent that it may
not be taken for such a narrow and stingy thing as the generality of men
represent it, namely to show, that it is not a mere scuffle about opinion, nor
a canting with peculiar phrases, neither a clubbing into a distinct party under
the notion of a Church or select Society, nor yet the formal acting of a part
with the observance of abundance of nice Rites, Ceremonies and Punctilio's;
that it is not a thing which looks beautifully, and promises fairly in public,
but is forgotten or laid aside at home, nor is it immured in a Closet, and
never sufferd to take the air in Conversation; to say no more, that it is not
mere morality, nor mere devotion, but both these in Conjunction, together with
all that is brave and noble, and wise and good; all that can better the minds
and tempers, and lives of men, and all that can improve the state of the World;
all this is within the Verge of Religion, especially the Christian Religion.

For so the Apostle intimates, Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, (or grave), whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely (or friendly),
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, think of these things, i. e. Count them branches of Christianity,
for true Religion is nothing less, nothing, I mean of no narrower extent than a
wise and worthy conduct and manage of a man's self in all those Relations we
stand in, namely toward God, our Neighbor, and our selves.

This I take to be the true notion and the just Province of Religion, but I can
neither think it possible to handle all the parts of so vast a subject in this
short Treatise, nor indeed do I apprehend the discoursing of them all to be
equally necessary to those for whose use I principally intend these Papers.
Therefore omitting (but not excluding) all other branches of Religion, I will
here only speak of these three things.

First, Of secret Devotion, or those acts of Piety which are transacted only
between Almighty God and a Man's own Soul.

Secondly, Of private Piety, or the exercises of Religion in every particular
Family.

Thirdly, Of the more public acts of Religion, and concerning a man's governing
himself so as to consult the honor and service of God in the Parish wherein he
lives.

I begin with the first, viz. of secret or Closet Devotion.

That this is an essential branch of true Religion, and a necessary and
universal duty, appears by the command of our Savior, Mat. 6. 6. When thou
prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy
father who is in secret, etc. in which words it is not our Saviors meaning to
forbid or put a slight upon all but Closet Devotion; for he himself frequently
prayed publicly and taught his Disciples so to do; nor though he speak of a
Closet, does he intend to confine this duty to the strict formalities of a
Closet, but that it may be done in the Fields, or in any recess or place of
secrecy whatsoever, as he himself practiced; nor lastly, though he use the word
Prayer only, does he make that strictly taken to be the whole office of secret
Piety; for it is usual in the Scripture, and in common speech also, to express
all the acts of immediate worship by the name of Prayer, whether they be
Praises, or Adorations, or Confessions, or Thanksgiving, or Meditation or
Self-Examination; all therefore which our Savior here intended, was to
represent the necessity of secret Devotion as well as public, and to press
that upon his Disciples which the hypocrisy and ostentation of the Pharisees
had laid aside, because in truth they sought not Gods glory but their own.

And this is further recommended to us by the universal practice of all good
men in all Ages and Countries of the World, and of whatsoever opinion or
persuasion otherwise. There have perhaps been those who under some pretense or
other have neglected Family worship, and those also who have been abased by
some scruples into an omission of public worship; but I verily think that none
but flat Atheists, or gross Hypocrites (which are much the same thing) could
ever dispense with themselves in the common and habitual neglect of secret
worship; for a man cannot believe there is a God, or much less have any worthy
apprehensions of him, but it naturally puts him upon some act or other of
adoration toward him.

Acts of public worship are to the Soul as exercise is to the Body, it may
live and subsist, though not long and healthfully without it; but secret
Devotion is like the motion of the heart and lungs, without which a man is
presently choked up and destroyed; if his heart do not move toward God, and
as it were by circulation return in praises, all those benefits which it
continually receives from him, it is stifled by repletion; and if by Prayer he
do not breathe out his griefs, and as it were ventilate his spirits, he is
strangled by his own melancholy: for the public performance of religious
offices cannot make a supply in these Cases, because every man has his secret
sins to confess to God, which it is ordinarily unsafe to make other men privy
to, and his peculiar infirmities and temptations, his griefs and burdens, which
it is in vain to lay open to men, seeing only God can relieve them; and every
man has received sundry personal mercies and savours from the hands of God, in
answer of his Prayers, which require a personal acknowledgment to the Divine
Goodness. And the opening of a man's heart in any of these Cases is commonly
attended with such affections and passionate expressions, as would be indecent
to the Eyes of men, though they are very becoming toward God, in respect of
which last thing, we find, 1 Samuel 1. 13. Hannah was thought to be drunk, by the
holy and wise man Eli the Priest, when yet, as the truth appeared afterward,
he saw in her only the devout symptoms of a sorrowful Spirit.

Besides, these acts of secret worship are very necessary in order to public
worship, both as they dispose and fit a man's heart for it before he enters upon
it, by composing the thoughts and raising the affections; and as they make
application of it afterward, pressing home upon the Conscience, the
instructions there received, and improving and confirming into a stable
resolution, those good affections and inclinations which were stirred up by it;
insomuch, that that man will either have no mind to Gods public service, or no
suitable temper in it, or be little the better after it, that has not first
fitted and prepared his heart for it by secret Devotion. And herein lies the
true reason, as well of the lamentable unprofitableness as of the common
irreverence of public performances; because men rush into Gods House without
the due Preface of secret preparation, and they turn their backs upon God when
they depart from the Church, never attending to, or improving those good
motions which the spirit of God had kindled in them.

Moreover, these devout offices of Religion, though they are by no means to
supplant and supersede the public (as we have intimated already, and shall
demonstrate at large by and by) yet in some respects they are more acceptable
to God than the other; forasmuch as they are founded upon an acknowledgment of
his Omniscience, and demonstrate the great and intimate sense we have of the
Divine Majesty, and consequently of this they give the greatest assurance to
our own hearts, of our sincerity, and so are the most comfortable: for public
Devotion may possibly have a great alloy of secular interest, and may owe it
self in a great measure to the authority of Laws, or to public fame and
reputation; but he that worships God in secret, where and when no Eye is privy
but only that of God Almighty, is secure to himself, that he can have no mean
or sinister end in so doing, nothing can move him to this but the mere
reverence of God, and therefore our Savior in the forementioned passage, Mat.
6. 6. lays an Emphasis upon those words, thy father which is in secret, and
adds this encouragement of such addresses to God, thy father which sees in
secret will reward thee openly.

Upon all which considerations let the man who either values Gods glory, or his
own improvement, Peace and Comfort, or indeed who makes any pretense to
Religion, strictly make Conscience of, and constantly practice secret Devotion.
The nature, extent, manner, instances and circumstances whereof, I am now
further to explain in the following particulars.

1. And I begin with that which is so universally acknowledged, and so
principal a part of Divine Worship, that (as I noted before) it is ordinarily
put for the whole, I mean Prayer to God, touching the secret exercise whereof,
let the good Christian take these following Directions.

First, Let him not fail Night and Morning (at least) solemnly and devoutly to
pray to God: Diverse holy men we read of, who according to the greatness of
their zeal, or urgency of the occasion for it, have prescribed to themselves
stricter measures than this; particularly, David says he would worship God
seven times in a day, and Daniels custom was to do it three times a day, Dan.
6. 10. as seems also to have been that of the Primitive Christians; but less
than twice a day I cannot find to agree with the practice of any good men,
unless either sickness disabled them, or some very extraordinary occasion
diverted them: and it is wondrously fit and decorous, that we, who owe our
whole time to God, should pay him the tribute of devoting those critical
periods of it (I mean Evening and Morning) to him, especially in consideration
of the peculiar circumstances these two points of time are attended with,
namely in the Evening, having finished the course of that day, and reflecting
upon our infirmities in it, we cannot but observe by how many failings we have
justly incurred Gods displeasure, if he should severely animadvert upon us; and
therefore have great cause to deprecate his anger, and to make our peace with
him: and we must needs also be sensible both how many dangers we have escaped,
by his Providence, and how many instances of blessing we have received from his
goodness, and therefore have reason to praise and magnify his name; nd
especially being then also to betake our selves to sleep, when above all times
we are out of our own keeping, and are exposed to a thousand dangers from
thieves, from malicious men, from violent Elements of Wind, Fire and Water,
from the enterprises of evil spirits, and frightful Dreams, and our own foolish
Imaginations, in which and sundry other respects, no man knows what a night may
bring forth, and in consideration of which, he is a stupidly secure, and
foolhardy person, that does not think it highly to be his interest, by
peculiar addresses, to recommend himself and all his concerns to the watchful
Eye of Providence, which neither slumbers nor sleeps.

And in the Morning, having not only by the guard of holy Angels been preserved
from all those dangers which might have surprised us in the dark, and when our
senses were so locked up that we could not help our selves, but refreshed and
recruited in all our powers by that admirable divine Opiate, sleep; nothing
less can become us than to consecrate anew all these restored powers to our
Creator and Preserver, by hearty Adorations. Besides this, we are then sensible
that we are now entering upon a new scene of business, where we shall be exposed
to innumerable accidents, dangers, difficulties, and temptations, none of which
we are match for without divine assistance, and have therefore need to implore
his grace and good providence before we encounter them, so that it is not
timidity or superstitious fear, but just wisdom not to dare either to go to
Bed, or to set our foot out of doors, till we have recommended our selves to
Almighty God by Prayer. And by so doing (as aforesaid) we maintain the juge
sacrificium, and (in Gods gracious interpretation are said to) pray
continually, and to consecrate our whole time to him; and besides, we keep up a
lively and constant sense of him upon our hearts.

Secondly, Let him be sure that these duties be done fervently as well as
constantly and frequently, not formally and customarily, without life and
feeling of what a man is about, or with wandering thoughts and distracted
affections, but with the greatest vigor and intention of mind that is
possible; for if a man's heart be flat and remiss in these special approaches to
God, he will be sure to be much worse, and even loose and Atheistical upon
other occasions; for these secret duties are the special instruments and
exercises of raising our hearts toward Heaven, and as it were the nicking up
of our Watch to that cue in which we would have it go.

In the more public offices of Religion the credit and reputation of it is
principally concerned, and therefore they ought to be performed with all
gravity and solemnity, but the very life and soul of piety lies in these secret
duties, and therefore they ought to be discharged with the quickest sense and
most inflamed affections; insomuch that a man must not think he has acquitted
himself when he has repeated such, or so many Prayers, until he find also his
heart warmed, and his temper of mind raised and improved by them; to this
purpose therefore, let him in the entrance upon these retirements place himself
under the Eye of God, and be apprehensive of the immediate presence of the
Divine Majesty, that this may give check to all levity of spirit and wandering
of thoughts, and make him grave and reverential; let him also all along be
sensible of the great value and necessity of those things which he either begs
of God, or returns thanks for; that this may render him ardent in his desires,
and affectionate in his praises, and whilst he perseveres in these duties, let
him join with them, reading and meditation, not only to fix his mind, but to
prevent barrenness, and to impreganate and enrich his Souls with divine notions
and affections. To this end,

Thirdly, Let him take care that he tempt not himself to flatness by an
affected length of these holy duties; for though it be a sign of an indevout
temper to be too compendious and concise in them, as if we grudged the time
spent in Gods Service; and although it be also irreverent toward God to be so
short and abrupt, as if we briefly dictated to him what we would have done; yet
it is to be guilty of the same fault, to be impertinently tedious with him, as
if he could not understand us without many words, or would be wrought upon by
tedious importunity.

Besides all this, it is to be considered, that often, when the spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak, and that our bodies cannot always correspond with
our minds: now in such a case to affect the prolonging of our Devotions, is to
lose in the intention what we get in the extension of them; for it will be sure
either to make us go unwillingly to our duty, or to perform it very
superficially; in either of which circumstances it is not likely we should be
pleasing to God, or be able to make any comfortable reflections afterward upon
such performance.

The measures of Devotion therefore are not expressly prescribed by God, but are
to be determined by a prudent respect to the peculiar constitution of the
person, the condition of his affairs, and the extraordinariness of the
occasion; and to go about to exceed these bounds, is an argument of intemperate
zeal, which is never acceptable to God, and is so far injurious to a man's self,
that it manifestly hinders what it pretends to promote. To these I add,

Fourthly, Let not the devout man be very curious or sollicitious about the
from or expressions of his secret duties; I mean, whether his Prayers be read
out of a Book, or be the present conceptions of his own mind, so long as they
are offered up from an understanding Soul, and an humble and affectionate
heart, for these are all the things that God looks at, and wherein his honor
is directly concerned; and therefore as he has no value for eloquence of
speech on the one hand, so neither has he for strength of memory, or for
pregnancy and variety of fancy on the other; but only (as I said) that we
worship him with our understanding, and do not like Parrots, utter words
whereof we have no sense or notion; that we bring an humble and contrite
spirit, as sensible of the infinite distance between him and us, and an heart
seriously affected with his presence and the nature and value of the things we
are conversant about.

It is true, that a composed form is most suitable to public worship, where (as
I noted before) the dignity and credit of Religion is concerned, and that
perhaps in private duties, our present conceptions may most please and affect
our selves; but our acceptance with God (especially in these secret duties)
depends neither upon the one nor the other, but upon those inward dispositions
of the Soul aforesaid.

Wherefore let no man cheat himself into an opinion that those heats of fancy
or transports of affection which sometimes happen in conceived Prayer, are
instances of real and extraordinary devotion; or that because the use of a form
or Book may perhaps be destitute of such flights, therefore those duties are
dead and formal: forasmuch as those services may be most acceptable to God
which are less pleasant to our selves; since it is not those sudden flashes but
a constant and even servour of piety which he has regard to. And this leads me
to another advice, namely,

Fifthly, Let the pious man think himself obliged to pray without ceasing, and
that he is never to lay aside or intermit the regular course of a daily
devotion upon any pretense whatsoever, but especially not upon the absurd
pretext of awaiting the motion of the spirit; for although it be true, that the
Spirit of God ceases not to move men to their duty, the way of the Spirit of
God is not to move sensibly, and to make violent impressions upon us; and
therefore he that suspends the performance of his duty till he is so jogged and
stirred up to it, will never pray at all: and indeed what reason can there be
to expect such a thing, or what need of it in the case of a known duty? if it
were the will of God to put us upon some extraordinary service, then it were
reasonable to expect some special mandate or impulse upon our spirits from him,
which might both warrant the enterprise, and quicken us in the prosecution; but
in ordinary duties, the motion of the holy spirit in the Scripture, is and
ought to be sufficient, and he that will not be stirred up by that, does but
pretend to wait for a spirit in excuse of his own Atheism, Unbelief, or
intolerable slothfulness; and in so doing lays himself open to an evil spirit,
whose design it is to check and withdraw men from Religion, and this is matter
of sad and common experience, that from waiting for the motion of the spirit,
men very usually grow first to frequent omissions, then to carelessness of
their duty, and at last to a total neglect of it.

Therefore let not any man slight a regular and methodical Devotion, as a mere
formal and customary thing, since this is the very attainment of Piety, when
that which is matter of duty becomes also in a good sense customary and
habitual; and he that out of such a temper performs the duties of Religion
constantly and reverently, gives far greater proof of sincere Christianity,
than he that seems to himself to do them with greater heat and transport, but
needs from time to time to be jogged and provoked to the performance.

Sixthly, To all these I add in the last place, that it is very advisable,
though not absolutely necessary, that in these secret Devotions, a man should
(where it may be done with privacy, and without oftentation or such other
impediment) pray vocally and audibly; for although God knows our hearts, and
observes all our thoughts, and the motions of our affections before we express
them, and therefore needs not that we should interpret our minds to him by
words, yet it is fit we should employ all the powers and capacities we have in
his service; our Bodies as well as our Souls, and our Lips as well as our
hearts. Besides, though we cannot affect God with the tone and accents of our
Speech, yet we often times affect our own hearts the more, and raise them a
note higher in concord with the elevation of our Voices: but that which I
principally intend is this, viz. by the harmony of our tongue and voice, our
hearts are as it were charmed into the greater composure and intention upon
that we are about. And so whereas it is the usual complaint, especially of
melancholy and thoughtful persons, that their hearts are apt to rove and wander
in these secret duties of Religion, by this means we have it very much in our
power to keep them from extravagancy, and at once to make our Devotions the
less tedious to our selves, and the more acceptable to God.

CHAP. II. Of several other instances of secret Devotion.
THough Prayer be the most general duty of Religion, the common instrument of
all Piety, and the most immediate address to God; yet it is a great mistake to
make it the only instance of secret Devotion, for there are several others of
great moment, amongst which I reckon in the next place,

2. Study and Meditation; not only to direct and assist our Prayers (of which I
said something before) but especially to cultivate and improve our own minds,
that we may be wiser, and consequently both more capable of doing God better
service in this World, and also fitter for the Society of Angels and the
Conversation of the spirits of just men made perfect in the other World. For we
are to consider, that God Almighty has set a mighty value upon our Souls, in
redeeming them by no less a price than the blood of his only Son; and therefore
we should be intolerably ungrateful toward him, if we bestow no cost upon
them, but live as if we were mere matter and body, and take care only to please
and gratify our senses, and in the mean time abandon our minds to folly and
ignorance, to sloth and superstition. We are to consider also, that the same
infinite goodness has by the same purchase delivered us from the fear of
Eternal Death, which otherwise would have kept us in perpetual bondage, and so
have contracted our spirits, and rendered our very selves so inconsiderable to
our selves, that no man could have had the heart to take any care of himself,
but would be tempted to have lived like a beast because he expected to die like
one, or worse; but now that we are made to hope for immortality, and to live
for ever and ever, there is great reason a man should spare no cost, no labor
and pains about himself, since he may reap the fruit and enjoy the comfort of
so doing in the better enjoyment of himself a thousand Ages hence, and to all
Eternity. Moreover the same Divine Goodness has designed us to a glorious
estate of happiness in his own Kingdom of Heaven, a state of intellectual
pleasure, and the most sublimed ingredients of felicity, which a dull, sottish,
and sensual Soul can never be capable of perceiving, if he were placed in the
midst of them, and therefore he is more than brutish that does not dispose
himself so, that he may be meet, to partake of that inheritance with the Saints
in light.

To all this we are to consider, that the general apostafy of mankind has
weakened our natures, clouded our understanding, and disordered all our powers;
and together herewith the foolish opinions and traditions of the World have
abused and deceived us yet more and more, so that we must be most silly and
unhappy Creatures, if we do not endeavor to deliver and disingage our selves
from both these Calamities. And the case is not totally irreparable in respect
of either of these mischiefs, if we be not wanting to our selves; for to the
intent that we might in some measure recover our selves, it has pleased God to
give us time to consider in privacy and retirement from the noise of the World,
that we may recollect our selves; he has set before us his works and
providence to meditate upon, we have his holy Scriptures to inlighten our
minds, and guide us out of the perplexed state of things we enjoy, the public
ministry and abundance of good Books to help us to understand those Scriptures,
and above all we are assured of the assistances of his holy spirit against the
weakness and confusion of our own understandings.

So that as there is great reason and great necessity that we should apply our
selves to study and meditation; so we have as great encouragement to hope for
success in so doing: for by application of our selves to the means aforesaid,
we may not only rid our selves of that wildness and ferity which is ordinarily
upon our natures, but outgrow vulgar opinion and tradition, and come to be able
to make a true estimate of things set before us; we may greaten our spirits so
as to despise those little things which silly men dote upon; we may free our
minds of childish fears and unaccountable superstitions; we may understand the
true reason of Religion, the loveliness of virtue, and in a word, have worthier
notions of God, and clearer apprehensions of the World to come.

And although it be acknowledged that all men are not alike capable of these
improvements, either by reason of the weakness of their minds, or the unhappy
constitution of their bodies, or the perplexed condition of their outward
affairs; yet certainly God Almighty has by the means aforesaid put it into
every man's power to be wiser than he is if he would but apply himself to the
use of them, and therefore let the devout man be sure to make the experiment.

To further him the more wherein, let him to all the considerations foregoing
add these two following. First, That forasmuch as he was made in Gods Image,
it is no less than a contempt of the Divine Majesty to have no regard to the
cultivating and adorning that part of himself wherein he especially resembles
his Maker; and consequently it will appear to him to be a very fit and proper
instance of worship toward God to improve his own Soul; and therefore it is
here justly placed amongst the expressions of Devotion. Secondly, Let him
consider, that the great game of Eternity is but once to be played, and that
there is no retrieving of our neglects and carelessness afterward; therefore
there is all the reason in the World that we should play it intently and
warily: my meaning is, that therefore we ought to redeem time from folly and
sensuality, and apply it to the advantage of our Souls; and he that does so,
and begs Gods blessing upon it, will undoubtedly find his mind enlarged, his
life more regular, and his spirit more comfortable, which are all the chief
ends of Devotion.

3. The next instance of secret Devotion (for I am not curious in what order I
place them) shall be the exercise of Faith in God and dependence upon him, in
pursuance of an acknowledgment that he alone governs the World, and the framing
a man's heart to take notice of him, to have recourse to him, and stay it self
upon him in all exigencies, and accidents and passages whatsoever, that he may
impute nothing to chance, fate or the stars, but possess himself with a deep
and settled apprehension of the great interest of God in all revolutions or
occurrences.

This is a point of great and real honor to the Divine Majesty, as it sets God
always before us, and places him continually in our Eye, as it brings us to an
entire resignation of our selves to his dispose and puts us into a constant
gravity and a reverence toward him, as it provokes us to address our selves to
him upon all occasions, to pray to him, to trust in him, to walk humbly and
thankfully before him. And it is of mighty advantage to our selves, as it
strengthens and fortifies our weak spirits by the contemplation of that mighty
providence we are under, and that we are protected by a wise, and good, and
powerful Being, whom nothing can be too hard for, and who is liable to no
surprise or mistake, as it assures us, that nothing befalls without him, and
therefore every thing is ordained for wise ends, and shall be turned to good in
the conclusion; this also inables us to be contented in every condition, secure
against all fears, and to arrive at such an evenness of spirit, that we shall
not be tossed with every accident, hurried by every emergency, but possess our
selves in patience and tranquillity.

And consequently this must needs be a very worthy entertainment of our
retirements, and such as deserves and requires the application of our minds to
it, that we may be under the power of this persuasion, and be able to answer to
our selves the atheistical objections against it, to give some account of the
intricacy and obscure passages of Providence, without (some skill in) which it
will be very difficult, if not impossible, to walk either piously or
comfortably; but by this exercise we hold continual conversation with God, we
live and walk with him, he is always at hand to us, to awe us, to support and
comfort us, and our hearts become not only a Temple where we solemnly offer up
our services at set times to him, but an Altar where the holy fire never goes
out, but sends up constantly the sweet odours of Prayers and Praises to him.

4. Another exercise of secret Devotion is to premeditate our conversation, and
so to forecast the occurrences of life, that we may conduct our selves both
with safety to our Souls, and to the best advantage of our spiritual interests;
forasmuch as he that lives ex tempore (as we say) and unpremeditately, will
neither be able to avoid the dangers which will be sure to encounter him, nor
to improve the opportunities which may offer themselves to him.

In our converse in this World we must expect temptations from the Devil,
allurements from sensual objects, provocations from the folly or malice of evil
men, vexations by unhappy accidents, and above all abundance of evil examples
to debauch and corrupt us; and that man will most certainly be surprised by
some or all of these, that does not forecast them: and arm himself against
them, and therefore a wise man will not adventure to go abroad and take in the
infectious air of the World, till he has antidoted himself against the danger,
by the advantages of retirement, and the secret exercises of Devotion.

To this purpose he will before he goes out of his Closet, not only consider
the common Calamities of the World, the reigning sins of the Age, but the
especial difficulties of his calling and profession, and the peculiar
infirmities of his own temper; and withal will forethink and prepare himself
against such efforts as by reason of any of these may be made upon him.

If he can foresee that he shall unavoidably fall into evil Company, he will
first endeavor to warm and affect his heart with the quicker sense of
Religion, that he may not only take no hurt himself, but (if it be possible)
imprint some sense of good upon those he converses with.

If any thing be likely to happen that will strike him with melancholy, he will
first go to God by Prayer for strength and constancy of mind, and endeavor to
fix his heart so intently upon another World, as that the occurrences of this
may not discompose him.

If he be likely to meet with that which may provoke him to anger, he will
compose himself to as great a coolness as possibly he can, that no passage may
inflame him.

If any allurement to sensuality present it self, he will consider how he may
retreat into grave Company, or earnest business, that so he may decline that
which is not easily to be withstood.

And on the other side concerning opportunities of doing or receiving good;
forasmuch as every wise man is sensible that the seasons of things are no more
in his power than the time of his life is, that no enterprise succeeds well
which is not nicked with a fit season, and that it is impossible to recall it
when it is slipped by; therefore the pious man will forethink what may offer
themselves probably in such circumstances as he stands in, lest he should
overlook them when they present, and so he lose an advantage of doing glory to
God, or good to men, and of promoting the interest of his own Soul, and
accordingly will dispose his heart in secret to apprehend them, and to improve
them; he examines his capacity, and stirs up his attention, and projects the
means, either how he may reap some benefit by good and wise Company, or how he
may seasonably interpose a word on Gods behalf in common Conversation, or how
he may do some good thing that will turn to account another day.

5. But if either by the neglect of such opportunities as aforesaid, the pious
man omit the doing of some good he might have done, or by security of
conversation he fall into any of those dangers he ought to have watched against,
then there is a fifth great work for private Devotion, for in this case there
lies a double care upon him; first, that he slight not his danger, and
secondly, that he despair not of remedy, but be both deeply sensible of his
miscarriage, and also rise again with indignation and resolution.

First, That he slight not his fault (as generally men do by the plea of
Example, or the pretense of humane infirmity) and so harden himself in his sin,
but feel a deep remorse, and conceive a mighty displeasure against himself for
it.

Secondly, That on the other side he aggravate not his guilt to such a degree
as to preclude repentance by despairing of the divine mercy, but presently flee
to the grace of the Gospel, and implore Gods Pardon, with settled purposes never
to offend in the like kind again.

Now neither of these are done as they ought to be, but in retirement, viz.
when a man has opportunity of dealing impartially between God and his own
Soul, and therefore (especially because the occasions of them often happen) are
justly reckonable as a part of Closet Devotion, and accordingly they are
represented by the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in awe and sin not, commune
with your own hearts in your chamber, and be still, etc.

Wherefore let every man that has any sense of God upon him be thoroughly
persuaded to set some time apart for this purpose, that he may romage his own
heart, and find out all the evils of his life; and when he has discovered any
particular guilt upon his Soul, let him not forsake his Closet, and depart out
of Gods presence till he have affected himself with deep sorrow and contrition
for his sin, and prostrated himself at the throne of grace with strong and
earnest cries for pardon, and until he have confirmed his heart in a resolution
of watchfulness and more strict obedience for the time to come.

And let him do this often, that he may not run up too big a score, and so
either his heart become hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, or his
Conscience be so affrighted with the greatness of his guilt, that like a
Bankrupt he be tempted to decline looking into his accounts, because he can
have no comfortable prospect of them, or run away from God in a fit of
desperation, instead of running to him by repentance.

Let him, I say, do this often, not by chance or unwillingly, but frequently
and periodically (set times being appointed for it) and though I would be loath
to impose a burden upon the Consciences of men, yet I think it ordinarily very
advisable, that this be done once a month, viz. whilst a man has his past
actions and carriage in remembrance, and can take a just account of himself;
but especially it is very fit to do it against the time of the administration
of the Holy Sacrament, and then would be extraordinarily proper and seasonable:
for these two things, Self-examination and partaking of the Lords Supper, do
marvellously suit and answer to each other; the former preparing a man's heart
for that sacred solemnity, and that holy solemnity sealing to him the pardon of
those sins he has discovered and repented of in secret.

But whether this work of selfreflection and ransacking a man's own heart in
secret be absolutely necessary to be done at certain times and periods, it is
wonderfully useful, that it be seriously and conscientiously practiced some
time or other; forasmuch as on the one side it is not conceivable how a man
should be able to maintain an holy and comfortable Life without it; so on the
other hand it seems equally impossible that he should continue to be an evil
man who habitually and sincerely practices it: for as there is no way so
effectual to preserve an estate from being squandred away extravagantly, as the
keeping constant and strict accounts of receipts and expenses, so there is no
method more powerful to restrain sin than this of self-examination; the very
searching into our hearts jogs and awakens Conscience, and that being rowsed,
will be a faithful Monitor of all that was done amiss, the mere prospect of
which will make a man very uneasy, by the fears and horrors that attend it; the
consideration of the silly motives upon which a man was induced to sin, will
fill him with ingenuous shame and indignation, and the easiness (which he
cannot but find) of withstanding such motions, by the grace of God will provoke
him to a resolution of amendment; in a word, the sight and knowledge of the
Disease is a great step to the Cure, and an heart well searched is half healed.
But this leads me to another instance of great affinity with what we have now
been speaking of, and which shall be the last exercise of secret Devotion
which I will here make mention of, viz.

6. Trial of our proficiency and growth in grace, this is of great importance;
forasmuch as (we have seen before) the truth of grace is scarcely any otherway
discernible but by its progress, and in that it makes men daily better and
better, for the essences of things are indiscernible, and a man may endlesly
dispute with himself whether such or such a thing be a sign of grace, and of
spiritual life in him, till he puts all out of controversy by the fruits and
improvement of such a vital principle; and therefore it is extremely necessary,
if we will arrive at spiritual comfort, that we make experiment of our selves
in this particular, which can no otherwise be done than by retirement into the
Cabinet of our hearts, and the diligent comparing our selves both with our
selves and with the rules of the Gospel.

The common estimation of the World is a very fallacious and improper measure
of divine life, and as the Apostle tells us, it is a small thing to be judged
of men one way or other, but if our hearts condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God; for they being privy to our ends and designs and to all
our circumstances as well as to matter of fact, cannot nor will not deceive us,
if they be secretly examined, and therefore must be impartially consulted, if
we would indeed know our selves, and be able to prejudge our own condition.

Now the testimony which our hearts can give us of our spiritual improvement,
is not to be grounded upon the increased length of our Prayers, nor merely from
the passion and earnestness of them; for the former of these may be the effect
of hypocrisy, and the latter may proceed from some peculiar temper of body or
outward accident; nor upon our affectionate hearing of Sermons, for the stony
ground received the seed with joy as well as the good ground; nor yet upon a
more than ordinary scrupulosity of Conscience (especially in smaller matters)
for this may proceed from Ignorance, Superstition or Hypocrisy. But the safest
decision of this great case, whether we grow in grace or no, is to be made by
examining our hearts in such points as these following, viz. Whether we be more
constant in all the duties of Religion than formerly? Whether we be more exact
and regular in our lives daily? Whether our hearts be more in Heaven than they
were wont, and that we have arrived at a greater contempt of the World? Whether
we are more dead to temptation, especially in the case of such sins as agree
with our constitution and circumstances? Whether affliction be more easy than
it used to be, and we can better submit to the yoke of Christ? Whether we are
more conscientious of secret sins, and such as no Eye of man can take notice of
and upbraid us for? Whether we are more sagacious in apprehending, and more
careful of improving opportunities of doing good than heretofore? In a word,
Whether we are grown more meek, more humble and obedient to our Superiors, etc.

If upon due inquiry, oru hearts can answer affirmatively for us in such points
as these, then we may comfortably conclude, that we have not received the grace
of God in vain, which being of unspeakable consequence to us to be
substantially resolved of, self-examination in the aforesaid particulars (as
the only way to arrive at it) ought to have its share in our Closet Devotions.

CHAP. III. Of Family-Piety in general.
THough the consideration of Gods Almighty Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and his
other perfections, together with our dependence upon him, and obnoxiousness to
him, be the first reason and ground of religion (as we have already showed) and
so the Divine Majesty is the immediate and principal object of it; yet
notwithstanding this is not so to be understood, as if the obligations of
Religion extended no further than to acts of worship or address to God: for it
is as much our duty to manage our selves well toward others for Gods sake, as
toward him for his own sake. And therefore (as has been intimated heretofore)
true Piety in its just dimensions comprizes no less than a worthy discharge of
our selves in all those relations Divine Providence has placed us in.

Now next to our obligations to our Creator and Preserver, and next to our
concern for the better part of our selves, our own Souls, a man stands related
to his Family so nearly, that he is wanting in both the former that is
negligent of this.

Almighty Wisdom and Goodness pronounced it not fit for man to be alone, and
therefore the first provision he made against the uncomfortable state of
solitude, was to enter him into the Society of a Family; partly, that in so
near a station, they might mutually relieve and help one another in
difficulties, entertain one another by Discourse, and improve one another
reason; partly, that in this Conjunction they might fortify one another
Spirits against all ill accidents, or the enterprises of wicked and malicious
Spirits more powerful than themselves; but principally, that they might
mutually provoke and inflame one another hearts to admiration, love and
reverence of their great Creator.

And this end is so great and the injunction of it so strict, that every man in
this Society stands charged with the Soul of another, and is accountable for
it, at least so far, that he cannot be excusable that does not endeavor to
bring those with whom he so intimately converses, and upon whom he has so many
opportunities, to a sense and regard of God and Religion. And this especially
concerns those that are heads of Families; forasmuch as by virtue of their
place they have always been accounted, not only Kings and Governors, but also
Prophets and Priests within their peculiar sphere and province.

Accordingly we find it to have been the constant care and practice of all good
men in all Ages, to train up those of their Families in the knowledge of the
true God, and the exercises of true Religion: particularly God himself
testifies of Abraham, Genesis 18 -- 19. that he knew he would command his children
and his household after him that they keep the way of the Lord, etc.

And Job 1. 5. we find it to have been the continual care of that holy man to
sanctify his Children and Family, and daily to intercede with God for them by
Sacrifice.

Deuteronomy. 6. 6. it is an express injunction upon the Children of Israel, that they
not only keep the laws of God in their own hearts, but that they should teach
them diligently to their Children, and talk of them when they sat in their
houses, and when they walked by the way, etc. that is, that they should convey
and imprint a sense of God and his Religion upon the minds of those they
familiarly conversed with.

And so great is the authority and influence of Governors of Families, and so
powerful is good example in this particular, that Josh. 24. 15. Joshua
undertakes for his Family, that they should serve the Lord, whether other
people would do so or no.

David often declares his zeal for the maintenance of Religion in his Family,
so far, that he resolves those persons should be excluded his House that made
no Conscience of God, and most remarkably, 1 Chr. 28. 9. he gives this solemn
charge to his Son Solomon, Thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imagination of the
thoughts: if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he
will cast thee off for ever.

And for the times of the New Testament there is abundant evidence, that it was
the constant practice of all those who had a sense of Religion in their hearts,
to set it up in their Families also, of which the testimonies are so many, and
so ready at hand, that it is needless here to recite them; and the success was
commonly answerable to the endeavor: from whence it comes to pass that Acts
10. 2. it is said of Cornelius, that he was not only a devout man and prayed to
God always, but that he feared the Lord with all his house, i. e. his Example,
Prayers and instruction prevailed upon all those that were under the influence
of them, to bring them to (at least) a profession of piety also; upon which
account it is further observable, that generally when any Governor of a Family
embraced the Christian Faith, and was converted to that Religion, it is said
that such an one believed and all his house, or he and all his house were
baptized, namely, because truly good men did not fail by their example and
endeavors to bring those over to the same Religion which themselves were
heartily persuaded of, and accordingly we see it often come to pass in these
times wherein we live, that several persons very heartily bless God that his
providence disposed them into such or such pious Families wherein the
foundation of their eternal happiness has been laid, by the means of the
instructive and exemplary devotion which they have there been under the
advantages of; upon consideration of all which reasons, examples and
encouragements, and several others which might with great ease have been added,
let no good Christian be of so monastic a spirit as to extend his care no
farther than his own Cell, and to think he has acquitted himself well enough
when he has discharged the offices of his Closet, and has kept Religion
glowing in his own heart; but think it his duty to take care that his light
shine quite through his House, and that his zeal warm all his Family.

In order to which we will here consider these three things. First, Of the
several members which usually a Family consists of, and which are concerned in
its discipline. Secondly, The several duties of piety which especially become
and concern a Family. And thirdly, By what means the members of a Family may be
brought to comply with all those duties.

1. First, The ordinary relations of a Family (especially as it signifies those
which dwell or converse together under the same roof) are Husband and Wife,
Parent and Children, Master and Servant, Friend and Friend; and all these I
take to be comprised in those several passages of the Acts of the Apostles,
where it is said, that such a man and all his house were converted or baptized,
for there are great interests of Religion which intercede between every of
these; as for the relation of Husband and Wife, as it is the nearest and
strictest that can be, so consequently it is of mighty importance to their
mutual comfort, and a wonderful indearment of affections, when both the
relatives are animated with the same spirit of Religion, and promote the
eternal interest of one another: As it is vastly mischievous and unhappy when
those who are inseparably yoked together, draw diverse ways, one toward Heaven,
and the other toward Hell; in respect of which danger the Apostle advises
those who are free not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
for says he, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what
communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? and
what part has he that believes, with an infidel? Yet because it is possible,
that light may prevail against darkness, therefore when such an unequal Society
is contracted, he does not think it a sufficient ground for separation; for
says he, 1 Cor. 7. 16. What know thou, O Wife, but thou may save thy
Husband? or what know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife?
especially since by the piety of one of the Parents, the Children are
sanctified and placed under the advantages of the Covenant of grace, as he
there adds, v. 14.

And seeing it is possible for one of these relatives to be so great a blessing
to the other, there is mighty reason they both should endeavor it, out of
self-love as well as charity and conjugal affection, since it is both very
difficult to go to Heaven alone, and also equally easy and comfortable, when
those in this relation join hearts and hands in the way thither.

As for the relation of Parents and Children, that is also very near and
intimate, and consequently their interest and happiness is bound up together;
for as it is a mighty advantage to have holy Parents, in regard the Posterity
of such persons ordinarily fare the better to many Generations, as is assured
in the second Commandment, and therefore there is a double obligation upon
Parents to be good and virtuous, not only for the sake of their own Souls, but
also for the sake of their Children; so on the other hand, it is no less glory
and comfort to Parents to have good and pious Children, and therefore they are
strictly charged to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord;
and indeed he is worse than an Infidel, nay worse than a Brute, that can be
content to bring them up to Hell and the Devil; for they are part of our
selves, and a man that considers any thing, can as well be willing to be damned
himself, as that they should be so if he can help it. Now that there is much in
their power this way, appears by that charge of the Apostle last named, as also
by the observation of Solomon, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child in the way he
should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it; for Children in their
young and tender years are like Wax, yielding and pliable to whatsoever form we
will put them into, but if we miss this opportunity it will be no easy matter
to recover them to good afterward, when they are debauched by evil principles,
confident of their own opinions, headstrong by the uncontrouled use of liberty,
and hardened by the custom of sinning. And therefore it is observable, that far
the most part of good men and women are such as had the foundations of piety
laid in their youth, and very few are to be found who were effectually
reclaimed afterward.

But whilst Children wholly depend upon their Parents, and their natures are
soft and pliant, when as yet they have not the hardiness to rebel, nor the
confidence to dispute the commands of their Fathers; so long they may by the
grace of God easily be wrought upon to good, and which is very remarkable, the
influence of the mother is especially considerable in this case: for so we find
not only that King Lemuel, Prove. 31. 1. remembered the Lessons which his mother
taught him, but as I have noted before, Timothy was seasoned with grace, by the
instructions of his Mother Eunice, and his Grandmother Lois, 2 Timothy 1. 5. and
many other instances there are of the successfulness of the Mothers pious
endeavors. But where Parents neglect their duty, usually the Children perish,
and their blood will be required at the hands of careless Parents: and which is
more, there is commonly this dreadful token of divine vengeance in this World,
that those who are careless of their duty both toward God, and toward their
Children in this particular, feel the sad effects of it in the undutifulness,
contumacy, and rebellion of those Children against themselves afterward, as if
God permitted them to revenge his quarrel.

In the next place, as for the relation of Master and Servants, it is a mighty
mistake to think they are merely our slaves to do our will, and that nothing is
due from us to them but what is expressly bargained for, since they are or ought
to be Gods Servants as well as ours, and must do him service as well as us, and
they are put under our protection, and placed in our Families, that they may be
instructed in his pleasure, and have the liberty to serve him, of whom the
whole family of heaven and earth is called. So that properly speaking, we and
they are common Servants to one great Master, only in different ranks, as the
one part (after the manner of Stewards) is allowed to have Servants under them,
and the other must do the inferior business, but still they are Gods Servants
more properly than ours, and must therefore have not only (as I said) liberty
and leisure to serve our common Master, but also instructions from us and
encouragement so to do: and he that denies them any of these, might as justly
deny them their. Bread or their Wages; nay more, he that forgets to pray for
them too, remembers himself but by halves, forasmuch as his interest is
concerned, not only in their health and prosperity, but in their virtue and
piety; for it is evident, that the better men they are, the better Servants
they will prove. So St. Paul tells Philemon in his Epistle to him, that he
would be a gainer by Onesimus's Conversion, for that he would be so much a more
profitable servant henceforth as he was now become a better man, such persons
being not only the most faithful and trusty, but by so much the more
industrious as they are the more conscientious: Besides, that it is well known
that Divine Providence often blesses a Family for the sake of a pious Servant,
as God blessed Labans substance for the sake of Jacob, and the House and all
the affairs of Potiphar for the piety of Joseph. So that in short, he loves
himself as little as he loves God, who does not endeavor that his Servants
should be sincerely religious. And though it is true, it is not altogether in
his power to make them so, or to put grace into their hearts, yet by virtue of
his place and authority, he has mighty advantages of doing them good, and will
be sure to be called to account how he has improved his Stewardship in this
particular.

Lastly, In a Family there are commonly some who under the general relation of
Friends or Acquaintance, are either resident in it, or at least hospitably
entertained by it; now as this lays an obligation upon the persons treated, so
it gives some authority to him who treats them: and consequently as such a
Master of a Family is in some measure answerable toward men for the scandals
and misdemeanors of his Guests; so is he much more responsible to God for any
profaneness they shall be guilty of toward his Divine Majesty. For (as I said
before) every man being King in his own Family may give Laws to it, and oblige
those who are under his protection to pay him Allegiance, and to serve and
worship God with him, especially he ought to do this, because the fourth
Commandment requires at our hands that we use this authority, not only over our
Sons and Daughters, our Man-Servants and Maidservants, but over all those that
are within our Gates. But so much in the general, let us now consider in the
second place the particular duties of Religion in a Family; of which in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of Family Duties in special.
IN the first place I look upon it as the duty of every Family, that (besides
Closet-Devotions, of which I have spoken before; and besides public Worship,
of which I shall speak anon) once a day at the least they join together in
Prayers to God. I say once a day at the least, in favor of men's occasions, and
the peculiar circumstances of some Families, were it not for which, it would be
very fit that there should be Prayers Morning and Evening, as is the general
practice of most pious Families; but certainly it is wonderfully decent, that
all the members of every Family should once in the day meet together, and with
one heart and one mouth glorify God and pay their homage to the great Master of
the whole Family of Heaven and Earth; and it is very strange, if any excuse
should be pleaded or admitted in this case. For as I said before, every several
Family is a peculiar Body or Society, which has its distinct circumstances,
effects and consideration; it has its respective needs to be supplied, and
therefore has occasion to make proper and peculiar requests to God, as that he
will be pleased to continue it in health, to settle concord and unity amongst
the several members of it, that the whole may enjoy prosperity and safety from
Thieves, from Fire and other dangers. And every such Society has also proper
and peculiar mercies to give thanks to God for, as namely for success in
affairs, for quiet habitation, that they are not molested with ill Neighbors,
nor vexed with Lawsuits, for hopeful Children, faithful Servants, etc. for in
several of these respects a man may be well and comfortable in his own person,
and yet be unhappy in the Society; and contrariwise the Society or Family may
be happy in the general, and yet a particular person may be in ill
circumstances: and therefore there is just reason of addresses and
acknowledgments to God in relation to the Family, and by the whole Family in
Conjunction, as well as by every single person apart, and in his Closet.

And though perhaps there may be some Family wherein there is no person who can
aptly and properly represent the peculiar concerns of it to the Almighty, and
it may be also there is no form of Prayer at hand that will express all the
respective circumstances of such a Society; yet they may lift up their hearts
and voices together in a general form, and supply with their thoughts and
affections whatsoever is wanting in the expressions.

And as there is just ground and reason for such family worship, so there is
good cause to expect it will be singularly successful, when the whole community
joins together, and present themselves and their tribute of praise before the
Lord: no question but the very manner of doing it, as well as the matter, will
be highly acceptable to him; and when with prostrate bodies, devout hearts and
hands, and eyes lift up to Heaven, they combine together to importune, and as
it were, besiege the Almighty, they cannot fail of a blessing; or however it is
a mighty satisfaction to the minds of all such persons, and a great security to
them that they have thus jointly and solemnly commended themselves to the
divine protection.

Besides, that this course is an effectual means to conciliate peace and love
and kindness, between all the members of this body, and to knit their hearts to
one another, when they are thus accustomed to unite their hearts and join their
hands in Gods service, and conspire to pray with and for each other, which is
the greatest indearment of affection.

Perhaps some man will now say, there is no express Scripture which requires of
men this daily office of Family Prayer: To which I answer, first, what if it
were so, yet nevertheless it is a duty, seeing there is so apparent reason for
it. For God who considered, that he gave Laws to reasonable men, did not think
himself bound to prescribe every thing in particular, especially in natural
worship, where the reason of man might supply him with direction what was fit
to be done in such a case.

Besides, secondly, (as I discoursed in the former part of this Treatise) it is
a stingy and narrow-soul'd trick, and an argument of no true love to God and
goodness, to stand upon so strict terms in our piety, as to require an express
command in particular, for that which is admirably good in the general, and
has also been the general practice of all good men, as this has been.

But after all, I would in the last place crave leave to ask those men a plain
question, who insist upon more express proof of Family Prayers, and it is no
more but this, Whether they think there is any such thing as public worship
required of men? if they do, then let them remember there was a time when there
was no more public Society than that of Families, namely at the first planting
of the World, and then either public worship must be this of Families or none
at all; and to inlighten them in this case, let them consider that passage,
Genesis 4. 26. when Seth had Enos born to him, it is said, then began men to call
upon the name of the Lord, that is, so soon as there began to be a Family in
the pious line of Seth, then presently they set up Gods worship in it. Now this
was not the beginning of secret worship, for no doubt but Seth was careful of
that before Enos was born; nor was it properly public or Ecclesiastic
worship, for in that minority of the World, there neither was nor as yet could
be any Church established in such a sense: therefore it must follow that Family
worship is as ancient as the being of Families themselves.

Or let pious and ingenious persons consider of that passage of the Gospel,
Luke 11. 1. where in the first place we find our Savior was at Prayers; and
that it was not secret Prayer but with his Disciples, is more than probable,
since they were present at them: and accordingly, when he had concluded, one of
them asks him to instruct them how to pray. Now if this be acknowledged, then
here is our Saviors Example for what we are discoursing of, forasmuch as the
Disciples with whom he was at Prayer, were his Family. But that which I observe
further is, they ask him to teach them to pray, as John taught his Disciples,
that is, to prescribe them a form wherein they (who were his Family) might join
together, as the Family or Disciples of John did; or not only to pray severally
or secretly, but in Conjunction and Society: and this our Savior gratifies
them in, by prescribing to them the well-known and admirable form: in which
these two things are further remarkable to this purpose; first, that the Prayer
is in the plural number, which renders it far more probable, that it was
intended for a social office. For though some other account may be given of his
using that number, yet nothing is so natural as this reason which I have
intimated. Secondly, The very petitions themselves (if they be considered) will
incline a man to think, that though the Prayer was contrived with infinite
wisdom to fit other purposes, yet it was primarily intended for the use of a
Family or Society, especially such an one as this of our Saviors Disciples
was; but so much for that.

2. The next instance of Family Duty is the sanctification of the Lords Day,
and other days and times set apart for his service. As for the Lords Day,
though it be undoubtedly true, that as the Jewish Sabbath (which is our
Saturday) is not obliging to Christians at all; so neither are we bound to
observe any day with that Sabbatical nicety and strictness, which (for special
reasons) was required of that people: yet that the first day of the Week, or
the Lords Day, be observed piously and devoutly, is recommended to us by the
constant practice of the Christian Church.

And the sanctification of it principally consists in this, that we make it a
day peculiar for the offices of Piety and Devotion, as other days are for
common and secular affairs; for though the business of Religion must be carried
on every day of our lives, and that be a profane day indeed in which God has
not some share allowed for his service, yet as God has not required that it be
the whole work of those days, but after a little of the time be consecrated to
him, the residue be applied to the common affairs of Life; so on the Lords Day
we are allowed to consult our infirmity, to provide for necessity, and to do
works of humanity or mercy: but the proper business of the day is Religion, and
to that the main of it must be applied.

And there is great reason for this, namely by this interruption of the course
of Worldly affairs, in some measure to take our hearts off from them; for we
should hardly avoid sinking absolutely into the cares and business of this
life, if we went on in a continual course, and were not obliged at certain
intervals of time to retreat from them, and betake our selves to things of
another nature, by which means also, we begin to practice an Heavenly
Sabbatism, and inure our selves by degrees to those spiritual employments which
we are to enter upon, and be everlastingly performing in another World.

Let therefore the pious man thus sanctify the Lords Day by applying it to holy
uses, that is (besides public worship) to reading, Meditation, singing of
Psalms, and grave Discourses of Religion, and let him according as he has
Warrant from the fourth Commandment oblige all those within his Gates to do so
too, and not only restrain his Family from common labors, but from lightness
and folly, tippling and gossipping, idle visits and impertinent talking of News;
and use his endeavor to engage them to be as much in earnest about the service
of God and their Souls on that day, as they are about their business or
pleasure on other days.

As for other holy days set apart by the appointment of the Church, there is
very good use to be made of them too: for besides, that the great Festivals are
the ignorant man's Gospel, and bring to his mind all the great passages of our
Savior and his Apostles, it is certain also, that God has not so strictly
tasked us to the labor of six days, as that he will not be better pleased if
we now and then apply some of them to his honor, and make a sally toward
Heaven; but then the observation of these days is not to be made merely a
relaxation from servile work, nor much less a dispensation for looseness and
profaneness, but God must be served on them with greater diligence than can be
ordinarily expected on other days. And this is another branch of the pious man's
duty in his Family.

3. There is another thing I would mention in the third place, amongst Family
exercises, which I do not call a necessary duty, but would offer it to
consideration, whether it be not advisable in some cases for the promotion of
Family Piety, that in every Family, where it can be done, some persons should
be encouraged to take notes of the Sermons which are preached in the Church,
and repeat them at home; forasmuch as this course would not only afford a very
seasonable and excellent entertainment for the Family in the intervals of
public worship on the Lords Day, but would also be very advantageous, both to
Minister and People.

For the Minister, it would encourage him to study and to deliver weighty
things, when he saw his words were not likely to perish in the hearing, and be
lost in the air, but be reviewed and considered of; by which means one Sermon
would be as good as two, and might serve accordingly.

For the People, it would put the most ordinary sort of them upon considering
and endeavoring to remember and make something of that which is delivered to
them, when they observe, that some of the ablest of the Congregation think it
worth their pains to take so exact notice of it as to write it down; at least
they would be ashamed to snore and yawn, when others are so intent and serious.

And as for the Family in which the repetition is made, they would have further
occasion to observe, with what clearness and evidence the doctrine was inferred
from the Text, opportunity to weigh the arguments used to enforce it, and be
put upon making application of all to their own Consciences.

But I foresee several objections (such as they are) will be made against this;
it will be said, this course is unfashionable and puritanical, that experience
has discovered that writing after Sermons has taught men to be conceited and
captious, and presently sets up men for Lay-Preachers; and in a word, that
repeating Sermons raised the Rebellion. But

In answer to the first of these, I observe, that it is neither unusual nor
under any ill character in Courts of Judicature, for men to take Notes of the
reasonings, determinations, and even the opinions of the Judges; and surely
Religion is of as much moment as the municipal Laws; and Cases of Conscience
are of as great consequence as meum and tuum: but if the Discourses of
Preachers be not so considerate, their reasonings not so close and weighty, nor
their determinations so well grounded as to be worth noting, the more is the
pity, to say no more. As for the second objection, I answer, that if the
Preacher handle only the indisputable Doctrines of Christianity, and press them
home and close upon the Consciences of men, these will afford little scope for
conceitedness or captiousness; but some men that are of such an humor will be
pragmatical and profane, whether they write after Sermons or no, and therefore
let us lay this blame where it is due. To the third objection it is answered,
that though writing after Sermons might perhaps furnish men with materials for
Lay-preaching; yet it was impudence which disposed men to it, and the
dissolution of Government which gave opportunity for it: and if the last of
these three things be taken care of, the second will be curbed, and the first
harmless and innocent.

But lastly, whereas it is objected that writing and repeating of Sermons was
accessory to the late Rebellion: I answer, that it is evident, it could be
neither the writing nor the repeating, but the seditious matter of the Sermons
that was in the fault; for it is certain, that good and pious Sermons are the
most effectual way to prevent all mischief of that kind, tending to make good
Subjects as well as good Christians, and the writing and repeating of such
Sermons is a means to settle such Doctrine the deeper in the hearts of men, and
therefore I see not but that it would be good prudence to apply that to a good
end which has been abused to a bad one, unless we will countenance the humor
of some late Reformers, whose method was to abolish things for the abuse of
them. Upon the whole matter, I see no just discouragement from this instance of
Family-Devotion; however I will say no more of it, but proceed to such as are
unexceptionable.

4. It is certainly a Family Duty to instruct all the young and ignorant
persons in it, in the substantial Doctrines of Religion, and rules of good
life. The obligation to, and the advantages of this office, have been
sufficiently represented before in the foregoing Chapter; now therefore only to
speak briefly and plainly of the manner of discharging it, it comprises these
following particulars.

First, That care be taken betimes to subdue the unruly wills and passions of
Children; which is ordinarily not very hard to do if it be minded time enough,
whilst they are tender and pliable, but the defect herein (like an error in
the first Concoction) is hardly remediable afterward: accordingly the wise man
advises, Prove. 19. 18. Chasten thy Son whilst there is hope, and let not thy
Soul spare for his crying: By breaking his stomach now, we prevent the breaking
of our own hearts hereafter; for by this means with the blessing of God upon
it, we shall have comfort in a Child, and the State and public Society, a
governable Subject; whereas contrariwise stubborness and malapertness in youth
grows to contemptuousness of Parents, and to faction and sedition in the State,
in age. In pursuance of this,

Secondly, Let them learn and be accustomed humbly to beg the blessing of their
Parents and Progenitors; this (as meanly as some inconsiderate people think of
it) is of mighty use: for it not only teaches Children to reverence their
Parents, but wonderfully provokes and inflames the affections of Parents
toward them; and besides this, it is the usual method of conveying the
blessings of God upon them: for though it be only God that bestows the
blessing, yet his way is to use the intervention and designation of Parents,
and generally those whom they bless (in this case) are blessed, and those whom
they curse are cursed.

Thirdly, Then let them learn to read, to pray, and especially to say their
Catechize; for though these things are not thoroughly understood by them now,
yet they will stick by them, and be remembered when they are more capable of
improving them: insomuch that it will be uneasy to one that has been well
principled in his minority, to be impious and profane hereafter; or if he
should prove so, there will yet be some hopes of reclaiming him, because these
things will some time or other revive and awaken his Conscience.

Fourthly, after this, let them be brought to the Bishop, that he may lay his
hands upon them, pray over them, bless and confirm them. For if the fervent
Prayer of every righteous man avail much, as St. James tells us, undoubtedly
the solemn Prayer and Benediction of Christ's immediate Substitute, and the
prime Officer of his Church is not inconsiderable. Besides, when men have
understandingly and solemnly addicted themselves to the Christian Religion, and
made it their own act by a voluntary and public choice, it will ordinarily
have a great influence upon them in modesty, honor and reputation as well as
Conscience, that they shall not easily go back from it, and renounce it: and
though it is too true, that many have miscarried afterward in point of
practice, yet it is very observable in experience, that few or none who have
been confirmed as aforesaid, have apostatized from the profession of
Christianity.

Fifthly and lastly, After such foundations are laid, it is no time yet to be
secure, but these beginnings must be followed with further instructions, that
such persons may be brought to a savoury sense of Piety, and to understand the
reasons of the Religion which they have embraced, and so neither be debauched
with Examples, nor tossed to and fro by every wind of new Doctrine; nay
further, these young persons ought to be put upon all the ingenuous learning
they are capable of receiving, and we are able to afford them, for the
improvement of their minds, that they be the more serviceable to God both in
Church and State, by the intent prosecution of which, they will not only be
kept out of the dangers which rash and unimployed youth is ready to run upon,
but become an Ornament to themselves and to their Relations; and which is more,
be able to employ and enjoy themselves in elder years, without the usual
diversions of drinking and gaming, which commonly are the silly resorts and
refuges of those who wanted Education in their youth.

5. There is a principal branch of Family Discipline yet remains to be taken
notice of, and that is the curbing and restraining first of all profaneness and
contempt of things sacred, whether it be by cursing, swearing, blaspheming, or
any other impudent scurrility; and then in the next place, of all intemperance,
drunkenness and debauchery; for such things as these do not only bring a stain
and blemish, but a Curse upon the Family, and to be sure the allowance of them
is utterly inconsistent with any pretense to Piety.

And the care and concern for the suppressing these Vices, extends not only so
far as to the restraining of it in all the constant and settled members of the
Family, but also to the discountenancing of it in those that are only
occasionally as Guests in it. For how can any man that loves God, endure to see
him abused before his face, and not interpose for him, especially where he has
authority, namely, within his own Gates? Shall a man pretend Piety, and make
his table become a snare to his own Soul, and his House a Sanctuary and
privileged place for profaneness? Nor let any man think it becomes him in
gentility and complaisance to take no notice of the one, or out of hospitality
to indulge the other; for he that loves God as he ought to do, and has any
measure of manly courage, will not be so sheepish, but that he will at least
discountenance such indecencies within his jurisdiction.

But as for those that are settled members of the Family, as Servants and
Relations; if any of them be guilty of such lewdness, I do not say, that they
must presently be banished the Society: for it may be divine Providence sent
them thither on purpose for their Cure, and that we might have the glory of
performing so worthy a work, and those Sinners the happiness of meeting with
the means of reformation; and therefore we must when it happens so, look upon
it as our duty to apply our selves in good earnest to recover them: but if
after all good means used, there appear no hopes of reformation, it is
certainly a good man's duty to dismiss such persons, both to avoid the scandal
and the infection of them. And he that is truly conscientious of Gods honor
and the spiritual interest of his Family, will not stick to Sacrifice the petty
interests of an useful Servant, or a beneficial relation, thereupon.

CHAP. V. Family Discipline, Or by what means the several members of a Family
may be brought to conform to the aforesaid Duties.
HE that resolves to maintain Piety in his Family, must do it by such a method
as this. First, Let him be sure to keep up the authority which God has given
him, and not through carelessness, facility or sheepishness, level himself with
those he is to govern, and suffer every body to do what is right in their own
Eyes; for then no wonder if Piety and all things else be out of order. He that
abjects himself shall be a mere cipher, and signify nothing in his own House;
but it is very much in a man's own power whether he will be despised or no: for
he that values himself upon the dignity of his place, and asserts his own just
authority, shall find Divine Providence standing by him therein, and striking
an awe upon the spirits of those that ought to be governed, and so he will be
able to do good service, not only in his Closet, but within the whole sphere of
his Family.

To this end let him observe, that as in the fourth Command God requires and
expects, that every Master of a Family be responsible for all those that are
within his Gates; so accordingly in the fifth Commandment he has invested him
with honor under the title of Father and Mother, and both commanded and
promised to reward obedience to him: and let not any one think that God will
desert his own institution, so as to permit the authority he has here invested
Parents with, to be either trampled upon by others, or prostituted by
themselves, without severe animadversion.

Let him consider also the great interest that lies in the conserving of
paternal authority, in which the foundation is laid, both of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government; forasmuch as accordingly as people are inured to
order, and to be in subjection in private Families, such will be their
behavior afterward in Church or State: for he that suffers his Children and
Servants to be contumacious toward himself, trains them up for instruments of
Schism and Rebellion; and he that on the other side countenances Faction and
Disobedience to public Authority, makes a leading case for Rebellion and
confusion in his own Family; but he that accustoms those which belong to him,
to obedience at home, makes his House a Seminary of good Subjects, and of good
Christians, and will feel the comfort, and reap the blessing of both.

Above all let him consider the nearness and naturalness of the Principles of
Religion to the minds of men; insomuch that there are hardly any but are
convinced of the necessity and obligation of it in their own Consciences; in
other things Inferiors may perhaps dispute the wisdom of their Governors, and
so be tempted to disobey their Commands; but plain matters of devotion admit of
no dispute, they are imposed by divine authority, written upon the hearts of
men, and inacted and proclaimed within their Consciences, and therefore people
may with the greater readiness be brought to the observance of them, if we do
but stir up and awaken, or at most second Conscience by our Authority. But then

Secondly, This authority ought to be tempered with sweetness and benignity in
the exercise of it; for a man is not to be a Tyrant but a Father in his Family,
he must not superciliously command, and imperiously will and require, but
incline and persuade by the use of all motives and encouragements, and by all
the arts of indearment oblige men to their Duty.

A man's Family is his own Body, and may be called himself, considered at large
and in all his capacities, therefore unnecessary harshness and severity is as
indecent in this Society, as cruelty to his own flesh is unnatural. And it is
commonly as insuccessful as it is indecent; for power without goodness is a
weapon without edge, which will go no further than mere force carries it. When
men only fear, they will hate too, and be sure to obey no more than needs must.
Therefore the Apostle Ephesians. 6. 4. advises, Fathers provoke not your children to
wrath, and v. 9. forbids Masters to use threatenings toward Servants, but
especially Col. 3. 19. all bitterness toward wives is prohibited; for these
courses (in such near Relations) ordinarily make them worse instead of mending
them, and stir up all the mud and dirt of their temper. Besides, it is to be
considered, that the interest of making men good is very great and valuable,
and he does a very acceptable service to God who obliges his Family to serve
and honor him; for by so doing a man promotes the Salvation of his own Soul,
and he will have great allowances made for his personal infirmities at the day
of Judgment, who in his more public capacity has advanced Gods glory in the
Salvation of others. Therefore it is exceedingly worth the while, that we
should deny our selves, and condescend to any honest art and method of engaging
men in Religion.

Especially this is to be considered, that the instances of Piety and Devotion
are above all things to be voluntary, free and cheerful, or they are nothing
worth; and therefore harshness and severity are the most improper instruments
for such an effect; consequently it must be wise Discourses, obliging carriage,
sweetness of temper, kindness and benignity, that are the most likely methods
of prevailing in such a case; and ordinarily to gain this point, no more is
requisite, than that a man discriminate between the good and the bad, that he
favor the one and discountenance the other; and this alone will in time make a
strange change in a Family. Especially

Thirdly, If in the third place the Governor of a Family be a great Example of
Piety himself: Rules without Examples are neither understood nor considered by
those to whom they are propounded; and he that goes about to overruled his
Family to Piety without making Conscience of it in his own practice, nay, who
does not make his own life a great pattern of what he persuades to, undermines
his own endeavors, and shall not only fail of success, but be ridiculous for
his pains; for every body is aware of this, that if Devotion be necessary to
one, it is so to another; if the Servant ought to pray to God, so ought the
Master; if one ought to be zealous, certainly the other ought not to be
careless or profane; or if one may be excused the trouble of Religion, so may
the other also.

And indeed it is hardly possible for a man in these matters to have the
confidence earnestly to press the observation of that upon those under him,
which is not conspicuous in his own practice; or at least, if he have the
forehead to do it, and can so well act the part of the Hypocritical Pharisee,
as to lay heavy burdens upon others, which he himself will not touch with one
of his fingers; yet as he cannot do it heartily, so he must be very vain if he
thinks men will not be able to see through the disguise, and very sottish if he
can expect that such commands of his should carry any authority with them.

But there is a majesty in holy Example, it not only commands but charms men
into compliance; there is life and spirit in it, insomuch, that it animates and
inflames all about a man; it makes Piety to become visible, and not only shows
it to be necessary, but represents it with all its advantages of goodness,
beauty and ornament; it confutes men's mistakes of it, answers their objections
against it, removes their suspicions, shames their cowardice and lukewarmness:
in a word, it does (after the manner of all great Engines) work powerfully,
though almost insensibly.

We find by common experience, that men are sooner made wise and fit for great
actions by the reading of History than by studying of Politics; because matter
of fact strikes us more powerfully, and the circumstances of things as they are
done, instruct us more effectually than all dry rules and speculations can do:
to which purpose it is to be remarked, that the way of the holy Scripture is
rather to teach men by Examples than by rules; and accordingly the whole sacred
Writ consists principally of the History of the Lives of holy men, Almighty
Wisdom thinking that way the fittest, not only to express the Laws of Virtue,
but to make impression of them upon the spirits of men; and indeed (which is
further remarkable) there are some of the more curious and excellent lines of
Piety, which can hardly be expressed by words, but are easily legible in the
lives of holy men.

Therefore let him who would engage his Family to Devotion, give them a fair
Copy of it in his own Example, and then he shall not fail of the honor and
comfort to see it transcribed and imitated by those about him.

4. But that he may with the more certainty and expedition attain this
desirable effect, it is very necessary, that he neither make the lives of
those he would gain upon, burdensome to them, and exhaust their spirits by too
great and constant drudgery about the affairs of the World, nor that he make
the business of Religion irksome and unpleasant to them by unnecessary length
and tediousness of Family-Devotion* For the former of these will take off their
edge, and leave them with no heart to Religion; and the latter will beget an
utter aversation to it.

As for the former, our Savior has told us, we cannot serve God and Mammon,
and that no man can serve two Masters; i. e. either one of them must be
neglected, or both served very remisly: for it is certain, when men are harassed
with secular business, they cannot have spirits enough to attend Religion with
any vigor.

And for the other, if the duties of Religion be drawn out phantastically to a
tedious length, it will be impossible (whilst men are men) that they should
either be inclined to go to them with such cheerfulness, or persevere in them
with such delight and fervor as is requisite.

Therefore let the World be so moderately pursued, as that time, and strength
and room, may be left for Devotion; and let the Duties of Religion be so
contrived, that they may be pleasant and easy, and then (besides that Devotions
so performed are most acceptable to God) it will be no hard matter to bring our
Families to comply with them. Especially

5. If in the fifth place the Governors of Families take care to order and
methodize affairs so, that these different things entrench not upon each other,
neither the World incroach upon Religion, nor Religion shut out and exclude the
common affairs of life; but both may take their places in a just subordination.

We commonly observe, that things in an heap, and which are not digested into
any order, look vast and numerous, so as to amuse our minds in the
contemplation of them, insomuch that we neither apprehend any of them
distinctly, nor comprehend them all together; and in a crowd of business, we
are either so confounded with the multiplicity, or distracted with the variety
of things before us, that we apply our selves to nothing at all effectually;
for one hinders and supplants the other. So it is here in the case between the
affairs of the two Worlds, if both lie in gross before men, and no distinct
place be assigned to each of them; the effect is, that both together being an
intolerable burden, one of the two must necessarily be neglected, and that
commonly falls to be the lot of Religion: or if it happen that these offices
are not totally omitted, they will be sure to be superficially performed; the
minds of men neither being sufficiently prepared for them, nor united enough to
attend them without distraction and wanderings. Therefore as the wise man tells
us, there is a time for every thing; so let every man, who would promote
Religion in his Family, appoint set hours for Prayer, and all the offices of
Devotion, and then it will neither be difficult to obtain the constant
observance of them, nor so ordinary to perform them carelessly and formally.

6. Sixthly and lastly, It will be the wisdom of every Master of a Family who
would bring those which are under his care and tuition to an uniformity in
Religion and the worship of God, and to seriousness and heartiness therein,
that he express all tender affection to them and regard of them, when any of
them happen to be sick, or under any adversity, and by that means make to
himself an opportunity of obliging them to take his counsel, and follow his
direction in all other cases.

We use to say, he that will gain an interest in any man, so that he may be
useful to him, or compliant with him in his prosperity, must lay the foundation
of his Friendship in that man's adversity. For no man knows who are his Friends
till he has occasion to make experiment of them, which cannot be done but in
adversity; for every man is a Friend to him that has no need to him, but he
that like the good Samaritan, deserts us not in our greatest difficulties, him
we have just grounds to value and confide in. Now above all kindnesses men are
most sensible of those which are done to their Bodies, and they commonly take
the measures of all Friendship and sincerity from thence, and therefore he that
will win upon the minds of men, must first oblige them in their bodily
interests.

Besides, as we observe, that all inferior Creatures are most tractable and
docible at such times as wherein they are lowest and can least help themselves;
so mankind is most disposed to take advice, and most obedient to counsel when
he is at a nonplus in his affairs, and especially when the vanities of this
World, which dazzled his Eyes before, begin to vanish, and there seems to be but
one way left with him (that is, to prepare for another life) he will then
freely admit of Discourse of the other World, and be glad to comply with all
serious advice in order thereunto. These seasons of adversity therefore are by
no means to be let slip by him who is tender of the Souls of those who are
under his charge.

To which add, that forasmuch as it is the constant method of all the Zealots
and Emissaries of false Religions to insinuate themselves into sick and
calamitous persons, to the end that by such an opportunity they may gain
Disciples to their party, and they too frequently find this subtilty
successful: the consideration hereof ought to awaken the diligence, and
encourage the hopes and endeavors of all those that sincerely desire to save
their own Souls, and those that are imbarqued with them, to apprehend and
improve such opportunities to better purposes; especially seeing that in such
seasons men are as capable of good principles as of bad, if there be not as
much shameful and supine carelessness on the one side, as there is commonly
vigilance and application on the other. And so much for Family-Piety.

CHAP. VI. Of public Piety, and particularly of governing a man's self in
relation to the Church and public assembly of Christians.
AS it is certain we were not born for our selves, so neither is it a
sufficient discharge of our duty, that we be useful in our private Family, or
amongst our Kindred and Relations only, but that we express a zeal of Gods
glory and the good of Mankind, answerable to the full extent of our capacity,
and let our light so shine out before men, that we may provoke, as many as are
within our reach, to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Now every private man is in some measure concerned in the Neighborhood and
Parish wherein he dwells, and whereto he belongs; and therefore should so far
at least dispense the influence of his zeal for God and Religion: for Almighty
God, who has appointed the bounds of men's habitation, having thus settled every
man in his station, expects that he should look upon this as his proper sphere,
and adorn it as his peculiar Province.

No private man has any just reason ordinarily to prompt him to go beyond
this, forasmuch as if every good man would do his part within these bounds, the
whole World would be amended, and he that is remiss and negligent in this,
cannot easily satisfy himself that he has demonstrated such love to God as
becomes him, nor can he expect to reap all those comforts and benefits which
otherwise by a conscientious discharge of himself in this particular might
redound to him.

Now that which we mean by the relation to a Neighborhood or a Parish has a
double consideration. First, As every Parish is or ought to be a branch or
member of the Church. Secondly, As it is a branch or member of the
Commonwealth. Accordingly there is a double obligation lies upon every man that
is within the bounds of it, and from thence arise duties of a different nature:
for brevity and perspicuity, I will distinguish them by the names of
Ecclesiastical and Civil Piety, and then show what each of them comprehends,
beginning with that which I call Ecclesiastical Piety, or the discharge of such
public duties as especially concern the Society of a Church. And this consists
in these few following particulars.

1. That a man join himself to, and carry himself as a member of the Church,
and not out of pride, phantastry or contempt separate himself from it, or
schismatically set up Factions and Conventicles against it. It is evident, that
our Lord Jesus Christ established the Society of a Church; that is, appointed
that all those who would be his Disciples, should not content themselves singly
and particularly to believe on him, but should all be obliged to associate
themselves, and make up a body or spiritual corporation wherein they were to
hold Communion with each other, as members, as well as with him their head. The
ends and uses of this institution were very many and great; for besides that by
this means order and unity is promoted, which is very beautiful in the Eyes of
God himself, our Lord hereby provided that the truth of Christianity might be
jointly held up in the World, and the several members of this Society become
mutually more helpful and comfortable to each other, and also that by a
constant method of Christian intercourse here, they may be fitted for Eternal
Friendship and Society in Heaven. In subserviency to all these ends, public
Officers were appointed in the Church to govern and to instruct the several
members of it, which it were plainly impossible for them to do (unless their
numbers were almost infinite and equal to that of the people) if it had not
been that the people were to join together, and become a common flock for those
Officers to govern and instruct.

Moreover it was also the intention of our Savior, that this Church of his
should be but one, and Catholic, embracing all the true Believers all the
World over, and therefore it is called his Body and his Spouse: from whence it
follows that every man who will partake of the benefits which flow from him,
must be a part of this Body, and thereby hold Communion with him by Conjunction
with that, which is otherwise impossible to be done, than by joining with that
part of the Catholic Church where it has pleased the Divine Providence to
settle our abode and habitation, that is, in the Parish and Neighborhood where
we dwell; for without this, though it is possible we may retain the fame Faith
in our hearts with the Catholic Church, yet we cannot perform the offices of
members, nor serve the ends of such a Society. The result is therefore, that it
is ordinarily every Christians Duty to communicate in all the offices of
Christianity, to submit to the Officers, to be subject to the censures, ahd to
comply with the orders of that part of the Church amongst which the Divine
Providence has placed him.

I say ordinarily, because it may happen that the Society of Christians amongst
whom a man lives may be heretical in their Doctrine, or Idolatrous in their
Worship, and then it will not be his sin but his duty to separate from them;
but bating that case, and where the Doctrine is sound, and the worship free
from Idolatry, I see not what else can acquit him of Schism that separates, or
what can be sufficient to dissolve the obligation of joining with the Catholic
Church by Conjunction with that particular Society, or Member of it, where he
is placed.

Therefore let not the good Christian without flat necessity, suffer himself to
be alienated from the particular Church, lest by so doing he lose the comforts
and benefits of the Catholic Church; but let it be his care and endeavor (so
far as it is in his power) that there may be but one Church in the World, as
was the intention of our Savior: to this purpose let him not hearken to the
fond pretenses of purer Ordinances and double refined worship, or to the vain
boasts of greater edification in other Assemblies; for besides that a man may
justly expect most of Gods blessing upon those means which are most his duty to
apply himself unto; it is also evident, that if such suggestions be attended
to, it will be flatly impossible that there should ever be such a thing as
unity or order in the Christian Church; nay these conceits will not only
distract and confound the order of the Church, but they serve to fill men's
heads with endless disputes, and their hearts with perpetual scruples about
purity of administrations, so that they shall rest no where, but under pretense
of soaring higher and higher, shall ramble from one Church to another, till at
last they cast off all Ordinances as the highest attainment of spirituality.

Nor let him give ear to any peevish insinuations against the Church and
public worship, upon account that there are some Rites or Ceremonies made use
of which are only of humane institution; for it is not only reasonable to hope
that God will be well pleased with humility, peaceableness and obedience to
humane Laws, but certain, that there is no Church in the World, that is or can
be without some observances, that have no higher original than humane
institution. But against these, and all other such like principles of
separation, let him endeavor to secure himself; First, by dismissing the
prejudices of Education, and the unnecessary scrupulosities of a melancholy
temper, and above all, acquit himself of pride and pragmaticalness, and then he
will easily and comfortably comply with any sound part of the Christian Church.
In pursuance whereof

2. He must diligently frequent all the public offices of Religion in that
Society, whether it be Prayers, Preaching or reading the word of God, or
Administration of the Sacraments, etc. For it is a mighty shame that a man
should pretend to be of the Church, who cares not how little or how seldom he
comes at it, and who slights the advantages of its Communion. For such a man,
however he may hector and swagger for the notion of a Church, manifestly
betrays that all is but humor or interest, and no true principle of
Christianity at the bottom; and really, he does more dishonor to that Society,
than the professed Schismatic does or can do. For besides that he incourages
them in their contempt of it, and discourages good men in their zeal for it; he
foments the suspicion of Atheistical men, that Religion is but a politic trick
to catch silly persons with, whilst those that are privy to the plot, keep out
of the bondage of it: I need not add, That he defeats the institution of our
Savior, that he baulks his own Conscience (if he have any) and aggravates his
own Damnation, which are all very sad things.

On the other side, the blessings and comforts of frequenting the offices of
the Church are so many and great, that it is not imaginable how any man who is
convinced of the duty of Communion in general, should be able to neglect the
particular instances of it. For besides that the Church is Gods House, where he
is especially present, and where we meet him, and place our selves under his
eye and observation, and from whence he usually dispenses his favors; it is a
great furtherance of our zeal and piety, to be in the presence of one another,
where the example of holy fervor and devotion in one, powerfully strikes and
affects others. There is also an extraordinary majesty in the word of God, when
it is not only fitted to our peculiar condition, but authoritatively
pronounced, and applied to our Conscience by Gods Messenger. Above all, in
Prayers, when our Petitions and requests are not only put up to Almighty God,
by his own Minister appointed for this purpose; but our weakness is relieved,
our spirits encouraged, and we are enabled (notwithstanding our private
meanness or guilt) to hope for acceptance and success in our desires, by the
concurrent Devotions of so many holy men as there join with us in the same
suit, and in the same words, and whose united importunity besieges Heaven, and
prevails with Almighty Goodness for a blessing. Wherefore let no man permit the
private exercises of Piety it self, such as Prayer, reading, or Meditation, to
supersede or hinder his attendance upon the public offices of the Church,
seeing that as these yield more public honor to the Divine Majesty, so they
are more effectual for our own benefit; much less let sloth or too great
eagerness upon the affairs of the World, make us forget or neglect them; but
least of all let any lukewarm indifferency or Atheistical carelessness seize
upon any man in this particular; but let the man who glories to be of the
Christian Church, be sure to be found there in the Assemblies of Gods Servants.

3. And more particularly, let him not neglect the opportunities of receiving
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as often as they are presented to him,
unless some weighty occasion hinder or disable him. It is well known to have
been the use of the primitive Church to administer this holy Sacrament as often
as it held any solemn Assembly for divine worship, and the Christians then as
duly received it as they came to Church; nor did the frequency of it abate
their reverence to it, but highly increased it rather. And this office they
therefore called the Communion, because it was the symbol of a complete member
of the Church, and the fullest instance of that Society. To have been kept from
it by any accident, was then looked upon as a great Calamity; but to be
debarred from it by the censure of the Church, was as dreadful to them as the
Sentence of Death. They sought to be restored to it with tears, with
prostrations in SackCloth and Ashes, with all the intercession of their
Friends, and all the interests they could make.

There was no need in those times to use arguments to convince men of the duty,
or repeated exhortations to press them to the performance of it; the Ministers
of the Church had no trouble in answering objections against it, or removing
impertinent scruples about it, much less was there any occasion to urge the
observance of it by humane Laws; for they remembered it was instituted by their
Savior on the same night in which he was betrayed, for the Commemoration of
his Passion, and recommended to their observance by the most obliging
circumstances; they found the constant solemnity of it settled in all Churches
by the Apostles, and they were well aware of the unspeakable comforts of it.

Now the reason of all these things holds as much in these times as then
(saving that men are not so conscientious and devout as they were): for in the
first place, it has been the custom of the Church in all times since, to make
this Sacrament the badge and cognizance of her members, until of late those
have pretended to be Churches where there was neither Order nor Unity, neither
Sacraments administered nor indeed persons qualified to administer them; and
it is great pity and shame that such an unhappy novelty should prescribe against
all Antiquity. And then secondly, as for the institution of this Sacrament by
our Savior, it is manifest, that he did not deliver himself by way of counsel
and advice, so as to leave it to our discretion or courtesy to observe this
Sacrament or omit it, but by express and positive command, Do this in
remembrance of me; and therefore there is no room for the cavil against mixed
Communion, as if we were excused from celebrating the Lord's Supper, because
others do it unworthily; which is as much as to say, because some do it as they
should not, I may choose whether I will do it at all. But (as I said) here is an
express command that we do it, and therefore we have no liberty to omit it upon
any such pretense. And upon the same account it will be in vain to pretend I am
not prepared for it, and therefore must be excused; for when our Lord has made
it our duty to do it, it is our duty also to do it as we should do, and the
neglect of one duty will not excuse another, i. e. our sin of unpreparedness
will be no apology for our sin in total omission of the Sacrament. The whole
truth is, here are two things required of us, one expressed and the other
implied; the express duty is; that we celebrate the memorial of our Saviors
Passion; the implied duty is, that this be done with such preparation as agrees
with so sacred a mystery; both these therefore are to be performed: for as my
coming to the Sacrament will not excuse my coming unpreparedly, so much less
will my unpreparedness excuse my not coming at all. But of the two, it seems
far the more pardonable to come, though somewhat unpreparedly, than not to come
because of unpreparedness; for that is neither to come nor prepare neither. I
say, though neither ought to be done, yet it is plainly better to offend in the
point of an implied duty, than of an express one; but especially, it is more
tolerable to commit one sin than both, as he that comes not to the Lords Supper
at all, notoriously does.

But then thirdly, for the comforts of this holy Sacrament, those are so vastly
great, that the man is as well insensible of his own good as of the honor of
Christ Jesus, who wilfully neglects the Lords Supper. For in the first place,
by commemorating the Passion of our Lord in that holy Feast, we not only
perform an office of obedience and gratitude to our Savior, but we strengthen
our Faith in the efficacy of his Death and Sacrifice for the expiation of sin,
which affords the greatest relief to our guilty Consciences that can be. And
together herewith we melt our own hearts into contrition, fears and sorrow for
those sins of ours which required such an atonement. For who can consider what
his Savior suffered, and look upon him whom we have pierced, and not mourn
heartily for his sin and his danger? Again, by eating and drinking at the Lords
Table we are made sensible of the happy estate of Friendship with God, which we
are now restored to by the intercession of our Lord Jesus. Moreover by
commemorating his Death, and the ends and effects of it, we fortify our own
minds against the fear of Death, and by feeding upon his body and blood we have
the pledges of our own Resurrection and Immortality, and to say no more (though
in so copious and comfortable a subject) by partaking of his body and blood we
become united to him, and partake of the same spirit that was in him.

And now after all this, who will make that an excuse for omitting the
Sacrament, that they do not find or observe, that either themselves or others
profit by it? What, is it no profit that we have done our duty and expressed our
gratitude to so great a Benefactor? Is it no profit to see Christ Crucified
before our Eyes, and to see him pour out his heart blood for Sinners? Is it no
profit to be made ingenuously to weep over our own sins? Is it no privilege,
no comfort to be admitted to the Lords Table, in token of Friendship and
reconciliation with him? Certainly there is no body but profits something more
or less by these things; and if there be any man who does not profit greatly by
them, he must needs have a very naughty heart indeed, and had need to prepare
himself, and go often to the Sacrament that it may be mended. But however let
the good Christian gladly embrace all opportunities of this holy solemnity, and
not doubt to find comfort by it.

4. As for the other offices of the Church, such as Prayers especially, let him
remember to frequent them constantly and entirely. By constancy of attendance
upon public worship, I mean, that he should not only apply himself to it on
the Sundays or Lords Days, but every Day of the Week if there be opportunity:
and by intireness of Gods Service, I understand it to be his duty both to go at
the beginning, and to join in it both Morning and Evening, that by all together
he may not only sure himself and his own Conscience of his heartiness and
sincerity, but demonstrate to all about him the great sense he has of the
moment of Religion, and that he looks upon the serving of God as of greater
consequence than all other interests whatsoever.

As for the first of these, viz. the frequenting the public Prayers every day
(where they are to be had) it is observable in the character of Cornelius, Acts
10. 2. that amongst other instances of devotion it is said of him that he
prayed to God always, which cannot well be understood of any thing else but his
daily frequenting the public Prayers, because his private Prayers could not be
so well known as to make his Character. But most expressly it is said of all
that believed, Acts 2. 46. that they continued daily with one accord in the
temple, which must needs principally have reference to this duty of public
Prayer; and it is very hard if any man be so put to it, that he cannot spare
one hour in a Day to do public honor to the Divine Majesty, or rather it is a
great sign of unbelief in his providence as well as want of love to him, if a
man cannot trust God so far as to hope that such a time spent in his service
shall be recompensed by his blessing upon the residue of the Day; or however, a
good Christian will be well contented, and gladly sacrifice so much of his
secular interests (as this comes to) to the Divine Majesty.

As for the second point, viz. going at the beginning of Prayers, it is a
shameful neglect which several persons are guilty of, who will not altogether
be absent from the Church, but yet will come commonly so late, that they not
only lose part of the Prayers, but enter very abruptly and irreverently upon
that which they partake of. It is possible a man may sometimes be surprised by
the time, or diverted from his intention by some emergency; but to be
frequently tardy is an argument that he loves something better than God and his
worship. For doubtless a good Christian would ordinarily choose rather to stay
for the Minister, than that the public office should stay for him, and thinks
it fitter to spend a little time in preparing and disposing his heart for the
duties of Religion, than either to enter into the divine presence rudely, or to
serve him only by halves.

And as for the third branch of this instance of Devotion, viz. the resorting
both to Morning and Evening Service, it is observable Acts 3. 1. that the
Apostles were at the temple at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour, which
is both a proof of their frequenting the Evening Service as well as that of the
Morning, and also an example of observing the just and stated times of public
worship; and surely it will become every good Christian to be lead by such a
precedent, especially seeing the Gospel worship which we resort to is so much
more excellent and comfortable than the Jewish was (which those holy men thus
carefully frequented) as we shall see by and by.

5. In the next place it is to be minded, that in all these public approaches
to Gods House, we are to express a great reverence toward the Divine Majesty:
by which I do not only mean that we ought in our hearts to think worthily of
him, and prostrate all the inward powers of our Souls to him, but that in our
outward man, in our carriage and bodily deportment we express an awful regard
to him, by all such gestures and signs, as according to the common opinion of
men, are taken to betoken the highest reverence and observance, such as
standing, kneeling, bowing, and prostrations of our selves before him.

For though the heart be that which God principally looks at, yet forasmuch as
he made our bodies as well as our Souls, and we hope he will save both, he
therefore expects we should glorify him, both with our souls and with our
bodies which are his, and which he has bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And
indeed there is such a nearness and sympathy between our bodies and spirits,
that they ordinarily move by consent, and draw one another into compliance.
Insomuch, that he who truly bows his Soul to God, can scarcely forbear at the
same time to bow his knees to him also; and he on the other side that bows his
knee to him, is by that very motion of his body in some measure put in mind to
entertain reverential thoughts and affections toward him.

And this care of bodily worship is the more important in public service, and
especially in Gods House, because (as I noted before) then and there his honor
and grandeur is concerned, and any indecent carriage in such a case, is an
affront to him, and exposes him to contempt in the eyes of men, and therefore
that carriage which in secret worship might admit of excuse, will in public be
intolerable profaneness.

Wherefore let not the pious man be affrighted by any one out of the
expressions of bodily reverence, under the notion of superstition, which is
become a Bugbear, by which weak men are made afraid of every instance of a
decorous or generous Devotion. There can be no culpable superstition in our
worship, so long as we have the true object for it, and whilst we use not such
expressions of our Devotion as he has forbidden; but this of bodily reverence
is so far from being forbidden, that it is expressly required in the holy
Scripture, and has been constantly practiced by all holy men.

Nor let the fancy of a spiritual worship, required under the Gospel, beguile
any man into a contempt or neglect of bodily reverence; for it is plain, that
although the Christian Religion raises men's inward Devotion higher, yet it
abates nothing of outward adoration; but rather when it requires the former
should be more intense and affectionate, it supposes the other should be
answerable, because it is natural so to be; for this being the accessory cannot
but follow the principal.

It is true, there is a possibility that more stress may be laid upon the
shadow than the substance, and some men may hope to complement God Almighty out
of his right to their hearts, by the addresses of their bodies: but the fault
in this case is not, that there is too much of the latter, but too little of
the former; and the good Christian therefore will be sure to join both
together; and as he will come to Gods House with the most elevated affections,
so he will express his apprehensions of the infinite distance between him and
the Divine Majesty by the lowliest postures of his body.

6. Next to this let the pious man think it his duty to pay some measure of
reverence to Gods Minister as well as to the Divine Majesty, and for his sake.
In the Old Testament, God took special care of the respect and dignity of his
Ministers as well as of their maintenance; for indeed all contumely toward
them redounds upon himself: And the new Testament is very full and express in
this particular, they are those that watch for our souls, and must give account
for them, they are Gods Ambassadors, and workers together with him, those by
whose hands he pardons and blesses his people, and therefore he holds them as
the stars in his right hand, and those who slight them that speak in his name
on earth affront him that speaks from heaven, but amongst the many passages
in the New Testament to this purpose, that of the Apostle to the Thessal. 1.
Ep. 5. 13. is very considerable, the words are these, We beseech you brethren
to know those who labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. The last words are so
emphatical they cannot be expressed in English, (...), to give them greater
esteem than otherwise is due to them for their work and office sake, i. e. to
value them above their parts and merits and quality in other respects, for the
sake of that relation they stand in to God, and for their office and usefulness
toward our Souls.

And indeed touching that last particular, it is evident in experience, that
all those who have any regard to their own Souls, are such as endeavor to
raise in their hearts an esteem for their Minister; not only that they may
encourage his studies and sweeten his labors to him, but that they may render
themselves the more capable of following his counsels and receiving benefit by
his instructions: and on the other side, those that slight and vilify the
persons of such, neither do nor possibly can (ordinarily) receive any benefit
by their Ministry, and therefore the Prophet Hosea 4. 4. speaking of a
profligate and hopeless sort of people, uses this expression, this people are
as those that strive with the Priest, q. d. they are not only horribly vicious
and profane, but they are incorrigible too. Therefore the piously disposed man
will be sure to reverence Gods Ministers, both for Gods sake and his own too,
and this leads me to another duty of kind to the former, viz.

7. That the good Christian account it an office of public Piety as well as of
common justice, to pay truly and faithfully his Tithes and Church dues to the
Minister: this the Apostle intimates by the expression of double honor, 1 Timothy
5. 17. Natural reason and the common sense of mankind requires that they which
serve at the Altar should live upon the Altar. And in the Old Testament when
God himself settled the provision for his Ministers, he did it most amply and
honorably; and under the Gospel pious antiquity took care that the Christian
Church and Ministry thereof should be liberally endowed, till the envy and
rapacity of aftertimes deprived it of a great part of its rights; but now
after those depredations it would be an horrible sin and shame to rob the
Church of any part of that remainder, or fraudulently to diminish or impair it.
For it is evident, that no man can pretend any right to it, as having neither
purchased it nor hired it, nor had it descend upon him by inheritance; the
Churches due being a reserved estate, or a rentcharge upon every private
estate. And it is notorious that it is what pious Ancestry consecrated to this
use, and therefore no part of it can be invaded, intercepted or incroached upon
without Sacrilege and the Curse of God.

And for proof of this, we need no more than to observe the common success of
such men as purloin from the Church, and (as their own phrase is) are always
pinching on the Parsons side. They are generally a querulous, uneasy, lean,
hungry and unthrifty sort of people, God Almighty blowing upon and blasting
their other labors for the sake of this accursed thing in their Tents; or if
any of them thrive for the present, yet, one time or other, a Coal from the
Altar will take hold of, and fire their Nests. Whereas on the other side, those
that are just to God in this particular, ordinarily find the benefit of it in
the success of their affairs, and they are commonly cheerful in their spirits
and prosperous in the World.

But the good Christian will not need these arguments, for he loves God and his
service, and his Ministers, and thinks it fit that he that reaps spiritual
things ought liberally to sow temporal things, at least he will rather abridge
himself than wrong the Church, although it may be never so cleverly done, under
the countenance of a corrupt custom or prescription. So far from it, that

8. In the eighth place he will be an example of pious munificence, and put
himself to some voluntary cost for the Ornaments of Religion and the House of
God, and that his public service may be performed with gravity, decency and
solemnity. For he thinks it very fit that the great Majesty of Heaven and Earth
should not only be worshipped with sincerity and devotion, but with grandeur
and magnificence. He will not therefore humor the profaneness of degenerate
times so much as to forswear building of Churches, if it be in his power, nor
much less will be backward or stingy in repairing of them when there is
occasion; for he cannot find in his heart to let Gods House lie waste when he
builds his own, nor frame his mind to think that is good enough for the uses of
Religion which he could not be contented with for his private accommodation, if
better were in his power, and therefore will in all Parish-meetings about these
matters vote for God against his own Purse, for he is of David's mind, who had
no fancy for a cheap Religion, nor would serve God with that which cost him
nothing, 1 Chronicles. 21. 24. And as he Psalm. 84. verses 5, 6, 7. blesses those
that took pains to repair the ways, and to make the passage easy toward God
House at Jerusalem; so the pious Christian will endeavor by his counsel and
example, that the whole external face of Religion may be lightsome, beautiful
and decorous in the place where he dwells, to the end that not only his animal
spirits may the more cheerfully comply with the devotion of his mind, but that
those also may be invited to frequent Gods House and worship, who have not yet
experimented the spiritual ravishments of it. In further pursuance whereof

9. The pious man (we speak of) will together with all the aforesaid
allurements, use also his utmost endeavors by persuasions, encouragements, and
all other fit means to prevail with the whole Neighborhood or Parish to
frequent the Church. For as he would not go to Heaven alone, nay knows
assuredly he shall not come there, if he do not endeavor to carry others along
with him; so neither is he contented to feed upon the fatness of Gods House
alone, but would have others partake with him.

He has a holy indignation to observe Theaters to be filled, Exchanges and
Markets thronged, and Gods House unfurnished with Guests. He wonders at the
inconsiderateness of men who incur such a guilt by the contempt of Religion,
and pitties their folly that deny themselves so many comforts and advantages as
Gods House affords above any other place of resort whatsoever.

Besides, he considers, that not only God is more honored by a general
confluence to his service, but that his own heart is more enlarged and
cheerful, and his affections more raised (as it were moving in Consort) when
there is a brave concourse in Divine Offices.

Psalm. 122. 1, 2. I rejoiced (says the holy man) when they said, Come, let us
go up to the House of the Lord, our feet shall stand within thy gates O
Jerusalem. Well-disposed persons (it seems) then were wont to call upon and
provoke one another, and to flock together in Companies toward the Temple, and
it was a pleasant spectacle to the Psalmist to behold it. And let good
Christians be ashamed to be outdone in any thing of this kind, since our Church
and worship is so incomparably more excellent than theirs. What was it that a
zealous Jew could provoke his Neighbors to go up to the Temple for? to see a
Beast slain and a smoke made with the fat and entrails, or to muse upon the
obscure Hieroglyphics in the Fabric, the Utensils, the Ornaments and Service
of that House? But a Christian goes to the Church to hear the lively Oracles of
God, to see Heaven opened in all its glories, and to be showed the way thither.

Therefore he that is sensible of the great odds on the side of the Christian
worship, and who has so much Prudence and Charity as to render him serviceable
amongst his Neighbors to such a purpose, will jog and awaken them out of their
sloth and negligence of going to the Church, by wise and manly Discourses, and
friendly and familiar Exhortations, from the considerations of the scandal to
Religion, and discouragement to the Minister by the peoples remissness, and of
the duty and benefit of diligent attendance, and he will with the same zeal and
care endeavor to answer their objections, and remove their scruples about it;
and especially considering, that this is commonly better taken, and sinks
deeper into such men as need it, when it is done (not only by the Minister, who
is presumed by these incogitant persons to do it for his interest or the
reputation of his person or profession, but) by those who are upon the same
terms with themselves.

To all this, the pious man aforesaid will wisely improve the interest of his
Charity to oblige the poorer sort to their duty, dispensing most liberally to
them who are most inclinable to follow his counsel in this particular; and for
the middle sort of men, he will trade and buy and sell upon choice with those
that are best affected to the Church and Religion. But if all this should not
do, and that he cannot prevail upon all, yet

10. In the last place, he will not fail at least to overruled his own Family,
that they shall universally and constantly frequent the Church, and so be an
example to the Neighborhood. This I have showed before, every Governor of a
Family has authority from God to do, and the holy Scripture affords us several
instances of the efficacy and success of making use of it to this purpose;
amongst the rest, by virtue hereof, Joshua undertook for his House, that they
should serve the Lord; and Cornelius prevailed upon those under him so, that he
is said to fear the Lord with all his House.

And indeed a Master of a Family will be able to give a very sorry account of
his Family, if he cannot oblige them to go to Church with him; for we find by
woeful experience, that where under pretense of scruples about the public
worship, inferiors have claimed the privilege of exemption, and been
permitted to resort to Conventicles, the effect has been, that such persons
have not only grown captious and insolent, and by degrees to despise their
Superiors, but having by this means gotten from under the Eye of their
Governors have made no scruple to run into Debauchery.

Therefore let the pious man strictly charge himself thus far, and look upon
himself as very insignificant in his place, if he do not so much public honor
to God and Religion, as to bring his Family to the House of God.

CHAP. VII. Of Civil Piety, Or, How a good man may carry himself so, as to
promote Gods honor, and the public good, together with his own peace and
comfort, in the Parish, considered only as a Civil Society or Neighborhood.
WHen our blessed Savior, Mat. 5. 13. says to his Disciples, Ye are the salt
of the earth, he did not direct himself only to his Apostles, or to them and
their Successors, the Pastors of his Church (as some have imagined) but to all
his Disciples in general. For besides that the Beatitudes which he pronounces
in the former part of the Chapter, and his other Discourse (pursuant of them)
which immediately precedes these words, apparently concern all Christians, so
far as they are qualified for them; It is evident also by S. Luke, Chap. 14.
comparing the 25 Verse with the 32. that it was his intention to apply this
title of being the salt of the earth, to the whole body of true Christians.

And then the importance of that expression will be this, That the true spirit
of Christianity is and ought to be a principle of activity; and the Professors
of this Religion are not to content themselves with passive innocence, and that
they escape the contagion of evil Example, nor be corrupted and debauched by
the temptations or customs of the World: But that they must look upon it as
their duty to better and improve the state of Mankind, to influence upon it, to
season and preserve others from corruption as well as themselves.

Nor is this activity of true Christianity to be strictly confined within the
limits of the Church, or to display it self merely in the great duties of
Religion properly considered. For as our Savior designed not only to show men
a way to another World above, but also to amend the condition of this present
World below, and to make it a more quiet and comfortable habitation: so
doubtless when he calls his Disciples the salt of the whole Earth, he intended
to require, that every good man should (within his whole sphere) endeavor to
promote humanity, morality, and the civil and political happiness of mankind.
The discharge of which is that which I call civil Piety, and the measures
whereof (at least so far as concerns the purpose in hand) are briefly described
in the following particulars.

1. The first office of civil Piety is to maintain Government and Order, to
keep up the honor and dignity of the Prince, to preserve the reverence of
Magistracy and the Laws of a man's Country. For the doing of this, we have as
express and urgent commands of God as any are to be found in the whole
Scripture; and therefore the conscientious discharge hereof is as acceptable to
him as any act of immediate worship. For God Almighty needs nothing at our
hands for himself, or for his own use and advantage, but makes the public good
of his Creatures the matter and reason of his Laws: Now public Peace and
tranquillity (which are only to be preserved by Laws and Magistracy) are of
mighty concernment to mankind, as well as beautiful in the Eyes of him that
calls himself a God of order. For without Government we could have no quiet
in our habitations, no security of our persons, no propriety in our Estates, no
defense against Foreign Invasion, nor any refuge from the enraged multitude or
combined force of evil men; but the weak would be a prey to the strong, the
slothful would eat the labors of the industrious, the World would be filled
with Murders, Rapine and Violence, and become an Hell upon Earth; and therefore
it is not only worthy of a wise man's care to uphold Government, but must be his
important duty to endeavor it.

And the being instrumental herein, is not only very honorable to Religion,
and consequently procures the benign aspect of Princes toward it, and provokes
them to become nursing Fathers of it, but is peculiarly commodious to all the
offices and exercises thereof. Therefore it is observable, that the Apostles
generally in all their Writings, immediately after they have discoursed of the
peculiar Duties of Christianity, subjoin earnest exhortations to obedience to
humane Laws and civil Powers; and the primitive Christians were so infinitely
tender herein, as if they thought that God could not have his honor, and
glory, and service rightly performed to him, unless Peace and Order were
preserved in the World.

Now forasmuch as the greatest Kingdoms consist of so many several lesser
Bodies, as the integral parts thereof; and those again of so many Parishes: And
forasmuch as it is impossible there should be peace and good order in the
Whole, if the particular parts or members be out of order: Therefore it must
not only be the duty, but be within the power of every private person to
contribute something toward the great ends aforesaid; first by disposing
himself, secondly by principling his Family, and thirdly, by persuading and
inclining his Neighbors to favor and assist the Government toward the
attainment of the design of humane Society. And this the good Christian ought
at this time especially to set himself about with the greater zeal, because the
looseness herein seems to be one of the peculiar evils of the present age we
live in, and that which not only makes an ill reflection upon Religion, but
indangers the state of it.

In order therefore to the upholding of Government, let the good man endeavor
in converse with his Neighbors to possess them with an apprehension of the
necessity of submitting private interests to common utility, and particular
opinion to public discretion, and so bring them into a good opinion of the
reasonableness of the Laws, and of the wisdom of their Governors. Let him
labor to remove peoples discontents, to confute their jealousies, and to make
them cheerful and well-pleased with the state of the World, which God has
ordered. Let him discountenance all seditious Libels and News, not permit in
his Company any pragmatical censuring of the Laws or public Counsels; no
traducing the persons or exposing the infirmities of Governors; nor no
repining at, and envying the glory and splendor of those that are preferred
above themselves.

That he may be successful in all this, let him be careful to preserve and keep
up the distinct ranks, orders and degrees of men, and that those differences
which it has pleased the Divine Providence to make in the fortunes and
conditions of men be observed, I mean in respect of age and youth, riches and
poverty, honor and obscruity; the neglect of which is not only a malapert
Quakerly humor, but a principle of sedition and confusion in the World. For as
it is evident, that there can be no peace and quiet in the World, if there be
no Government; so it is as certain, there can be no Government where there is
no Order, nor the different degrees amongst men observed: and therefore he that
would either level the condition of all men, or (which is the same things in
effect) would destroy that reverence which keeps up that distinction and
diversity of condition, dissolves the very sinews of humane Society.

God Almighty indeed could easily have levelled the condition of all men, and
taken away or prevented the differences of Rich and Poor, honorable and
ignoble; and of old and young too, if he had so pleased. But then, it is not
imaginable how there could have been any Society amongst men, at least, unless
he had also by his omnipotency made them all to be wise and good too: but
forasmuch as he resolved to have order and government amongst men, and yet
would not effect it by violence; he therefore resolved by means of those
different conditions aforesaid, to subordinate them one to another, and to
unite them together in the Bonds of mutual usefulness and dependence.

So he ordered that some should be poor to ease the rich of labor and
drudgery, and others rich to employ and encourage their industry; that the one
might have superfluity to relieve the others want, and the other be obliged by
their bounty: the same Providence ordered that there should be some men in
power and dignity, and others in privacy and obscurity; that the man of honor
standing by and countenancing the ignoble as his Client, he on the other side
should observe and acknowledge him as his Patron, and so harmony arises out of
this discord.

Again, he ordered the World so, that all should not be of a stature and
capacity of body or mind, but that there should be old men able to counsel and
advise others, but not of strength to execute; and young men of spirit and
vigor for Execution, but destitute of counsel and wisdom: that the former by
their experience and observation instructing the latter, and the latter by
their strength and courage assisting the former; they might be mutually
indeared to each other as members of the same Body.

He therefore who incourages or suffers (if he can help it) the Poor to be
surly and insolent toward the Rich, or the private person to be contumacious
toward those in dignity, or the young to be rude and malapert toward the
aged, opposes himself to Divine Providence, and is the Author of dissolution of
Government and confusion in the World. But he that persuades the poor to be
modest, as well as the rich to be charitable; that puts private persons in mind
of subjection, as well as great men of generosity and mildness; that disposes
young men to reverence the gray hairs of the aged, as well as them to do
worthily of their respect and gravity, subserves the Divine Providence in his
wise method of preserving peace and order, and lays the first foundation of
good Government. For the foundation of all Laws and Magistracy is to be laid in
the hearts and principles of men; and unless a modest reverence of superiority
be first settled there, the exercise of mere power and authority will be very
difficult and insuccessful. So that it is in the power of private persons to
promote public Government, and the office of virtuous men to do so.

2. The second office of a Christian in his Parish is to promote justice and
honesty amongst the Neighborhood in all their dealings and transactions one
with another. It is commonly and truly said, that justice is the Pillar of the
World, and therefore it is observable, that the great Creator and Governor of
the World usually interposes by a visible Providence, more in behalf of this
Virtue than of any other; insomuch, that oppression, and those secret instances
of injustice, which cannot ordinarily be discerned and punished by the hand of
the Magistrate, seldom escape a curse and Divine Vengeance in this Life. For
besides the mischief that such sins do to humane society, they are Arguments of
great Infidelity and Atheism; forasmuch as it plainly betrays that man to have
no persuasion of a World to come, who can be tempted for the sake of the
present World to do such base and ununworthy actions; and therefore it is as
well an act of Piety toward God, and of Charity to men, as of advantage to the
state of civil Society, to use all endeavors to prevent such kind of
transgressions.

But it is not only strict justice which I here intend, but my meaning is to
take it in the full latitude, so as to comprise truth, and faithfulness, and
equity also; that men be true in their assertions, faithful and steady in their
promises, and equitable and candid in all their dealings, and so far from doing
violence to each other, that they do not enterprise to out-wit, surprise, or
over reach one another, but that they use a humane temper, and express a
public spirit; and in a word, that they govern themselves by that golden Rule
of doing to others as they would be content to be done unto, every man making
the case of his Neighbor to be his own.

And this I the rather represent to the good Christians care, because this kind
of injustice is become another very common and epidemical sin of the age, and
men seem to applaud themselves in being able to cheat beyond the cognizance of
humane Laws, and to play upon and abuse the simplicity, credulity, or
inadvertency one of another.

For prevention and remedy of which, the Person we speak of, must in the first
place render himself a great example of integrity and equity, especially
because the measures of these Virtues cannot be so well delivered by the
prescription of any Laws whatsoever, as they may be expressed in the Life, and
observed in the conversation of good men. And in the next place he ought to
endeavor by discourse to make those he converses with, sensible of the
baseness and villainy of injustice, by representing the sordid love of the World
from which it proceeds, the distrust in Gods Providence with which it is
accompanied, or rather the utter unbelief of a God by which it is encouraged.
How treacherous and cowardly a thing it is to work upon other men's necessity or
facility: how selfish and un-neighbourly a thing to have no respect to any
thing but our own private interest: how little is commonly gotten at last by
such kind of courses: and to how little purpose, since a man cannot but expect
the curse of God upon his honest endeavors (otherwise) for the sake of his
unjust acquisitions.

3. The third office of good neighborhood is to endeavor to bring into
fashion again that almost antiquated Virtue of simplicity and plain-heartedness
in our discourses and communications; that men, especially Neighbors, should
ordinarily be free and open and plain to one another without cunning and
scrupulous reservation, than which nothing is more suitable to the relation of
Neighbors, nothing more friendly and obliging; for it makes conversation safe
and easy when men express a moderate confidence one in another: and although
this like some of the lesser stars, make no great show in the World; yet is it
of very great influence to sweeten the tempers of men, and improve the comforts
of Society. Besides, it is an argument of sincerity of heart, of competent
assurance of a man's own judgment, and a real instance of true greatness of
mind; whereas little artifices of concealment are justly looked upon as the
disguises of weakness, or the prefaces to fraud, and consequently render a man
either dangerous or contemptible to those he converses with.

Some men indeed please themselves much in closeness and caution, and count it
not only a point of prudence, but a piece of state and greatness to live in the
dark to all about them; but it is easy to observe, that if any men admire such
persons for their depth, they withal suspect them for their designs, and to be
sure do not love them.

I acknowledge there is such a thing as a prudent and virtuous secrecy and
taciturnity, which is very commendable and necessary in some cases; for no man
values him that labors under a looseness of tongue, and an incontinency of
mind, so that he cannot keep his own counsel: and who shall trust him with
their secrets who is a blab of his own? And it is well enough said, that
nakedness of mind is as undecent as that of the Body. But then on the other
side, must a man be accounted naked unless he cloth himself in Armor? To be
always upon the Ward, and to stand continually upon our guard, as if we were in
an Enemies Country, is at least un-neighbourly and disobliging. For besides
that such an artificial conversation is very troublesome to both Parties, in
regard on the one hand it is very difficult to the reserved man always to stand
bent, so as never to betray himself, and then he spoils all his design: And on
the other hand, it puts other men upon their guard too; for men are naturally
shy of those whom they observe to be constantly and rigidly close, and so
conversation is interrupted; whereas nothing unlocks other men's hearts, like
the opening of our own to them.

Again too great reservedness as it is always entertained with jealousy and
suspicion for the present, so it commonly breeds disputes and contests in the
conclusion; whereas plain-heartedness has no rubs nor difficulties in its way,
nor no after-game to play: for every man believes and trusts such a man as
plays upon the square, and such a conversation is pleasant and acceptable.

Moreover cunning is always looked upon as an argument of a little mind and of a
cowardly temper; for what should tempt a man to dissemble and work
underground, but mistrust of his own abilities or consciousness of evil
designs; and this is so far from affording a man any security, that it provokes
other men, first to pry the more curiously into him, and then to countermine
him, and at last to expose him.

To all which add, that if this reservedness we speak of proceeds from
insincerity and design, it betrays great unbelief of God and of Providence; for
the clear apprehensions of those great points will encourage a man to be open,
and plain and confident: but if it proceed from temper and constitution only,
yet even then it does far more harm than good, and particularly (as I said
before) it makes life and conversation very uncomfortable, and good
Neighborhood plainly impossible; and therefore it is well worthy of the care
and endeavors of a good man to reduce and recover the ancient sincerity and
simplicity, instead of that hollow complemental hypocrisy which has of late
supplanted and excluded it.

4. But yet care is to be taken withal, that this plainness and simplicity
degenerate not into rudeness, or frothy and foolish conversation, and therefore
it is the fourth office of a virtuous man amongst his Neighbors, to endeavor
to render conversation favoury, and manly and profitable as well as sincere;
that is, that it be neither trifled away with flat, inspid and gossiping
impertinence, nor misimployed in light and idle drollery, nor turned into an
occasion of tippling and sensuality, much less debauched by profaneness and
malapert reflections on things sacred, but that it be applied to the
furtherance of real business, to the bettering of men's understandings, to
virtuous purposes, and especially to the advantage of Religion. These last
things are useful to the World, and worthy of men; but the other are a
mis-expence of time, a degrading of our selves, a reproach to our reason, and
the bane of conversation.

With a peculiar respect to such things as these it is that Christians are
called the salt of the earth (as I observed before) because they are not only
to prevent the rottenness and putrefaction, but also the flatness and
insipidity of conversation. And as for that which I intimated in the last
place, namely, the consulting the advantage of Religion, I must now say
further, that although it be true that that is not the only subject of good
Discourse, forasmuch as God allows us both the refreshment of our spirits, and
a moderate concern about the affairs of this life; and therefore consequently
the affair of another World ought not to be importunely thrust in upon all
occasions to the exclusion of other entertainments: yet most certainly it ought
to have its place and share in our friendly communications, as being the most
weighty and important subject, and if it be dexterously managed, the most
gentile and obliging. Neither will it be so very difficult as is commonly
imagined, to turn the stream of Neighbourly Discourse this way, if men would be
persuaded to try, and apply themselves seriously to it: and surely he that
hopes to attain the joys of Heaven himself, cannot but wish his Neighbors in
the way thither also; nor can he whose heart is thoroughly affected with the
apprehensions of it, omit now and then to let fall something or other that way
tending; at least every good man owes so much to God and Religion, as to
interpose a good word sometimes in their behalf, which besides that it gives
some countenance to Piety for the present, may by the blessing of God make a
greater impression than we are aware of, and redound to his own comfortable
account another day. But

5. It is unquestionably the duty of every Christian to labor to the utmost of
his power to make and preserve peace amongst his Neighbors. To this purpose it
is very observable, that our Savior, Mark 9. 50. joins these two things
together, have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another; as if he
had said, Though you are the salt of the Earth, yet you must take care you be
not too sharp and acrimonious. You must indeed preserve the World from
corruption, but yet you must not exasperate it into passion and disorder; for
you must compose men to peace and quietness, and quench their combustions as
well as inflame their Zeal and Devotion.

And indeed the latter of these can never successfully be undertaken, unless at
the same time, the former be provided for; for Religion never takes place in
men's hearts, nor brings forth fruits in their lives, when the spirits of men
are imbroiled with heats and animosities. Men are not fit to consider of the
counsels of the Gospel, nor to estimate the reason and importance of them, when
their minds are in a flame, and their thoughts in an hurry. Nor if they were
already persuaded of them, could they be in a temper to comply with them, or to
make any fit expression of love and service toward God, whilst they are at
variance with their Brethren, and therefore the Apostle tells us, the fruits of
righteousness are sown in peace, James 3. 18.

And as peace is very advantageous to Gods service, so the making and procuring
it is very honorable and comfortable to them that are employed about it. They
are under one of our Saviors Beatitudes, and he intitles them the Children of
God in a peculiar manner, Mat. 5. 9. viz. as being those who especially imitate
and resemble him. And one instance of the blessedness of such men is this, that
they which make peace, commonly reap the fruits of it, both in the benign and
kindly cheerfulness of their own spirits, and in the fair and courteous usage
they generally meet with from other men, as well as in the repose and quiet
they enjoy when all the World is peaceable and still round about them; whereas
Makebates and Incendiaries torment themselves first before they torture other
men, and besides, bring the fire home to their own Houses when they have
inflamed other men's.

The Good Christian therefore is not only peaceable himself, but a Peacemaker
in his Parish, to which end he will in the first place discountenance all
Whisperers, Eves-Droppers and TaleBearers as the pest of Society; for these are
the Bellows that blow up a spark into a flame.

He will endeavor to prevent and take up Lawsuits, which commonly begin in
passion and end in malice: for the decision of them rather immortalizes the
quarrel than finishes the dispute; and he that overcomes, very often like the
Be, destroys himself whilst he fastens his sting upon another.

He sets a mark upon them that single themselves from the rest of their
Neighbors, and divide into parties as men of a great deal of Pride, but of
little Wit; for a great and generous mind would be easily able to animate such
a Society as a Parish, and render himself considerable in the whole without
tearing it in pieces that he may lead a Faction.

He detests and abhors all affected singularity, though the instance of it be
in it self unblameable (so long as it is not absolutely necessary) because he
considers such things first raise Jealousy, then provoke Emulation; and at last
end in alienation of affections.

He endeavors that no new Opinions in Religion may be broached amongst the
Neighborhood, as knowing well there can be no new Gospel, or new way to
Heaven, and he has learnt by experience, that whilst men stand gazing after
new lights they make halt in the race of virtue, and lose the way of peace,
without which they shall never come at Heaven.

He endeavors therefore to keep up the ancient Landmarks, both in spiritual
and temporal affairs; but if any disputes be raised, he will presently bring
Water to quench the Fire in the beginning, and by discreet and temperate
Discourses incline both Parties to coolness and moderation, by representing the
littleness of the matter in Controversy between them, the great benefit of
Unity and Concord amongst Neighbors, and especially by putting them in mind of
the approaches of Death, which will very shortly take away the subject of the
Question, and the Disputants too.

6. Sixthly, Next to this and to the intent that his endeavors of making Peace
may be the more successful, he will contrive to render his person acceptable
and fit to be interposed in quarrels, by making himself remarkable for all
other offices of Charity and Beneficence, such as relieving of the Poor to the
very utmost of his ability, and by sympathizing with those he cannot help, by
visiting the sick, counselling the weak and injudicious, comforting the
disconsolate, vindicating the injured, rescuing the oppressed, and taking the
part of the Widow and Fatherless; by all which and several other good offices
he will become a common Father and Friend to the whole Neighborhood.

Most of these things may be performed without much cost or trouble, or if they
be chargeable either way, the expense will be abundantly recompensed by the
delight that attends the discharge of them: for they are commonly as
comfortable in the doing to those that undertake them, as they are beneficial
to those for whose sake they are undertaken. Thus at a cheap rate a man becomes
a Benefactor and a blessing to the times and places where he lives, and
besides, does a singular service to God, vindicating his Providence in the
inequal distribution of his temporal blessings, and he renders Religion lovely
in the Eyes of all the World, and he very effectually consults the comfort of
his own Soul, giving proof to himself, that he loves God whom he has not seen,
because he loves his Brother whom he has seen.

7. Seventhly and lastly, (and to speak summarily) it is the duty and the
practice of a good Christian by all the means he can devise, to promote the
welfare and prosperity of his Parish and Neighborhood, not only because it is
far more comfortable living amongst those who are in a prosperous condition (as
to their outward affairs) in regard that moderate prosperity sweetens men's
spirits and betters their temper, as much as pinching want and necessity,
soures and disorders them: but also because generally God is better loved and
served by men whose hearts are cheerful and easy, than by the querulous and
unhappy.

In order therefore to the wealth and prosperity of the place where he dwells,
the good Christian will in the first place take care to prevent the idleness of
the Inhabitants by bringing in some manufacture or other (if it be possible)
that so all hands may be set on work in some honest way of living; for
Idleness, besides that it makes a very ugly figure, clothing the slothful
persons with Rags, it commonly inclines people to be great Eaters, having
nothing else to do but to mind their Bellies, and so they become a sort of
Caterpillars which devour other men's labors; it also tempts them by their
necessity to pilfer, cheat, lie and steal, and do any base action imaginable;
and moreover such people are generally envious, malicious, busy bodies, medlers
in other men's matters, and in a word, being desperate in their fortunes, they
are past fear and shame. Whereas on the other side, honest industry, besides
that it is attended with the blessing of God, renders people modest, quiet,
governable, cheerful, good natured, and public spirited.

In the next place, and in pursuance of the same ends, the pious Parishioner
will, as far as he is able, prevent tippling and drunkenness amongst his
Neighbors, which is well known to be the common cause of want amongst the
inferior sort of People; for this beastly way they will swill down presently
that which might go a great way in the maintenance of their Families, besides,
that the custom of it loses their time, softens and relaxes their Nerves, and
makes them impatient of labor; it raises their passions, and abates their
discretion, and so disposes them to be quarrelsome with their Families when
they come home; and which is worst of all, renders them proud, insolent and
ungovernable.

Furthermore, the good man will endeavor (if it be wanting, and the place be
capable of it) to get a good School settled in the Parish, which besides the
great advantage of it, for the education of youth, does generally enrich the
place, and is more beneficial than a manufacture; for this affords some
employment for those poor that are there already, and makes no more, nor draws
other such to the place as manufacture usually does.

And lastly, to all this, a good Neighbor will endeavor to bring all vicious
and incorrigible people to shame and punishment, than which nothing conduces
more to the honor of Religion, to the peace of the Inhabitants, or the
felicity of the place.

There are notwithstanding some fond and incogitant people who think this
course quite contrary to good Neighborhood, and look upon those as the best
Townsmen that will connive at men's Vices, and let every Body do what they list:
but with their leave, as it is the greatest kindness toward such vicious
persons, to make use of the provision which the wisdom of Laws has made for
their amendment, so he is the best Christian that discriminates between good
and bad men, as well as the best Townsman who will not permit virtue and
industry to be discouraged by the impudence and impunity of some lewd persons;
but so much for that.

These things which I have now treated of in this Chapter, are a certain kind
of lesser Morals, and the peculiar instances of that which I called Civil
Piety; But if the good Christian will (as he ought) take care of them, he will
do at least a collateral service to Almighty God, by being a Benefactor to the
World; he will render the attendance upon Religion more easy, and make his own
passage through the World toward Heaven the more quiet and comfortable, which
is the thing aimed at all along in these Papers.

THE END.

