THE PAGANS Debt, and Dowry.

OR A Brief Discussion of these Questions, Whether, How far, and in what Sense,
such Persons of Mankind amongst whom the Letter of the Gospel never came, are
notwithstanding bound to Believe on Jesus Christ (with some other particulars
relating hereunto.)

Returned by way of Answer to a Discourse in Writing, lately sent without Name
(together with a Letter, subscribed only, T. S.) unto Mr John Goodwin; the
Author as yet being unknown to him, yet (as appears by the said Discourse) a
Person of worth, and learning, and (as he supposes) a Minister of the Gospel.

By the said JOHN GOODWIN, Minister of the Gospel.

Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways: Nevertheless
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, etc. Act. 14 16, 17
But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the world, Romans 10. 18. There is no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard. Psalm. 19. 3. Caeterum Crux
ista [Christi] and in Britannia est, and in India est, and in universo Orb
Terrarum. Hieron. in Psalm. 95 10. London, Printed by J. Macock, for H. Cripps,
and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in Popes head Alley. 1651.

THE PAGANS Debt, and Dowry.
SIR,
ABout a Month since I received some Papers from you by Mr Robinson,
Bookseller, together with a Letter, full of respects, and such acknowledgments,
which I should neither satisfy my self, nor (I suppose) you, to own, though
you were pleased to spread the snare in my way. Nevertheless to deal freely
with you (because I find you a man of a far better spirit, more ingenuous then
I have yet met with in any Antagonist) my sense is, that every man's estimate of
himself for Gifts and Parts, ought to be commensurable to the Grace of God
vouchsafed unto him in these things, lest by an undervaluation of himself, his
hand be disabled from such service, which God upon the account of such gifts
expects from him. But Sir, neither my genius, nor time, will suffer me to
anti-complement with you: only I cannot but kindly resent that worthy
disposition in you, to put honor where it was wanting, and to help with your
respects to fill up the pit, which others have dug in the field of my
reputation, to find the treasure of their own. I am sorry that my time, since
the receipt of your Papers, has been from day to day, and from hour to hour,
so drunk up by other occasions, that I could not, until now, compass any
convenient liberty for a perusal of them. Nor indeed have I now obtained it
without the regret of some other engagements on my hand.

Concerning the weighty business discoursed in your Papers, I greatly desire it
at the hand of my God, both yours and mine, that I may be able to give you
satisfaction in it, or that himself will please to do it by some other hand.
For though I verily believe that you have pleaded the cause of that which is
not, with as much ingenuity and strength, as any other man whatsoever could
have done, yet I conceive withal, that whatsoever you have said to encumber
the conclusive validity of that Argument, about which you profess your self
(and I confess, not without grounds worthy a learned man) dissatisfied, may be
fairly taken off, and to very reasonable satisfaction, whether God will
vouchsafe to do it by me, or no. And sorry I am for your sake, that I should
(at present) be so deeply and indispensably engaged in more public
employments, that I am in no capacity of leisure to follow you (...) in your
writing with those particularities of satisfaction, which every passage therein
respectively requires. The truth is, that (according to my Principles
concerning God) I am rather (...), then (...), more intent (of the two) to
promote the concernments of the good of the generality of men, then the
accomodations of my particular Friends; though as far as (...) will extend, I
am desirous also to observe the just Laws of Friendship as inviolably as any
other man: And though I very much honor you (how ever unknown) for those signal
parts of Christian worth and ingenuity, which by the light of your Papers sent
unto me I sufficiently discern in you; yet should I scarce have been entreated
to have made you any so large return in writing as this, had I not conceived,
that what I should draw up for the satisfaction of your desire herein (though
probably not of your scruple) might by the publishing of it turn to some
account of a more public benefit and edification. The consideration of the
subject matter of your Papers, will fall directly and of course in my way, if
God should judge it meet to spare me life and health and liberty otherwise, for
the composure of the second part of my Book of Redemption, whereof I give some
overture toward the latter end of the book already published: my purpose is
there to discuss the contents of your Papers more particularly. In the mean
time you shall perform the part of a Friend to me (and it will be no point of
unkindnes, or ill consequence to your self) to consider, that the stress of my
Judgment, standing as it does about the extent of Redemption by Christ, does
not lie, or lean, upon the demonstrative clearness or evidence of Truth in that
Argument, about which you are scrupled, nor indeed so much upon any other of
the Grounds or Reasons insisted on in my Book for the defense thereof, no nor
yet upon them all; as upon the express pregnancy of the Scriptures themselves
from place to place, which (to my understanding) cannot by any congruous or
rational Interpretation be drawn another way; as also upon the scantness and
defectiveness of proof universally found in those Passages and Texts, which are
with greatest plausibleness alleged and argued (proof-wise) for the contrary
Opinion. So that though all my Arguments should fall to the ground and sink,
yet if the Scriptures argued by me in favor of that my Judgment, will stand in
those respective senses, wherein I interpret them, and (as I judge) without any
violation or breach (in the least) of the best, and best-known Laws of
Interpretation, yea and with the Observation of them all, the Doctrine
maintained by me will stand impregnable, and like the good Word of God it self,
irreprovable. I do not speak this, as if I were either conscious, or jealous,
of any weakness, or non-concludency, in any of my Arguments proposed and
discussed in the 18. Chapter of my Book of Redemption: but to let you know,
where, or in what, the firstborn of my strength and confidence of Truth, in
what I hold concerning Redemption, resideth: and what weapons of all others
they are, which you must take from me, before I can surrender.

But Sir, very briefly, and according to the short tedder of my time, to touch
some of the more material Heads of your Discourse, though (happily) not in the
same order, unto which I might be directed by your Papers, but only as they
come to remembrance, some days after my perusal thereof, as not having leisure
for a second review.

1. By your Judgment, which stands for a possibility of Repentance (I presume
you mean that which is true, and accompanying Salvation, because otherwise you
should not counter-argue me in my Notion) without Faith, I perceive you are a
man of the same conscientious confederacy with me in leaving the road, when you
judge the Truth lies beside it: Notwithstanding at this turn I conceive you
leave it without cause. For if there may be a Repentance found and saving
without Faith, either it must be a work or fruit of the Law (whether natural,
or positive, it varieth not the case we now speak of) or else of some third
Covenant made by God with Men in order to their Salvation, really distinct both
from the Covenant of Works in the Law, and from the Covenant of Grace in the
Gospel. For you cannot affirm it to be a work, or fruit, of the Gospel, because
you hold, 1. That it is required of those, to whom the Gospel is never
vouchsafed: And, 2. That there is no Law or Commandment given unto such
persons, which are in no capacity of yielding obedience to it: (which latter
Principle will do you worthy service at many turns, if you will work it
accordingly.) That the Repentance you speak of, is any fruit or work of any
third Covenant, is not (I presume) in your thoughts: however, I am not able to
comprehend what this third Covenant should be. That it cannot be any work of
the Law, or of the Covenant of Works, is evident from hence; because by the
Works of the Law shall no flesh be justified; whereas this Repentance is judged
by you to be both justifying and saving. Besides, it is the common and known
Opinion of learned Divines (and doubtless of good accord with the Truth) that
the Law knows no Repentance. For the Tenor of the Law is more district and
inexorable: Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them, Galat. 3. 10. By the way, your
Notion that Adam, during the interim between his Fall, and the Evangelical
Promise of the woman's seed made unto him, was obliged to Repentance, is but a
mistake. Such an interim supposed, Adam was therein no more obliged to
Repentance, then the Devil is since his Fall.

The Premises considered, when I argued the Command of God to Believe, from
his Command unto Men to Repent, Acts 17. 30. you had no commendable cause of
that false demand; Sed quid hoc ad Iphicli boves? But I consider how hard a
thing it is for a man not to be a little warm in a contest; and I could for
Iphiclus his Oxen, return Balaams Ass in exchange: but I shall not go forward
with the bargain. Certainly when God commands Men to Repent, he does in the
very substance and import of this duty, command them also to Believe; in as
much as that Repentance, which he at any time commands, is Evangelical, and of
a saving tendency; and so can be no work of the Law, unless it be the Law of
Life, (I mean, the Gospel.)

From the said Premises it further appears, That the Gentiles, to whom the
letter, or written letter, of the Gospel never came, and amongst whom the Name
of Christ (happily) was never named, may yet in sufficient propriety of speech,
and with largeness enough of Truth (though not in that critical formality of
the signification of the words (...), and praedicare, which you urge from
Grammarians and Civilians; a curiosity of dialect which the Holy Ghost commonly
neglects, yea and Grammarians and Civilians themselves Multos hoc decipit,
quod Christum arbitrantur ubique exact and solicit, quomodo Aristoteles
aliquis, locutum fuisse; quod est a vero al^^num. Camero. Myroth. p. 72.
) may be said to have, and to have had, the Gospel preached unto them. The
Gospel is said to have been preached unto the ancient Jews, Heb. 4. 2, 6. yet
Christ by Name was not preached unto them, nor known amongst them. And as the
Rock, out of which Moses, or God by Moses, gave them water to drink, is said to
have been, Christ, viz. spiritually, in type, or representation: in like
manner, yea and with much more pregnancy and neerness of signification, and
revelation, the patience, and goodness, and bountifulness of God daily
vouchsafed unto the Heathen, may be termed, Christ. And upon this account the
Apostle clearly implies, that the goodness of God leads men to Repentance,
(Romans 2. 4.) and consequently (the Premises evincing it) unto Faith in Christ,
whether known, or not known, by them. For God being by the Light of Nature,
known, or at least (...), knowable, to be infinitely just, infinitely bent in
hatred and severity against sin; when notwithstanding he shall express himself
in goodness, and patience, and bountifulness toward those, who know themselves
to be sinners, hereby he sufficiently testifies and declares unto them, that
his justice and severity against sin have been (and this must in reason needs
be supposed to have been, by a way or means proportionable to so great and
glorious an effect) satisfied, and that he has so far accepted an atonement
for them, that in case they shall truly Repent of their former sins, and
persevere repentant unto the end, they shall escape the punishment due unto
their sins, and consequently be saved. And what is this, being interpreted, but
to have (...), the effect or substance of the Gospel preached unto them? The
Scriptures in several places (which I have not leisure at present to examine or
discuss) plainly insinuate a capacity in the Heathen, yea in all men by the
Light of Nature (I mean, where this Light is given, and shines) by such a
regular and rational process of discourse, as that mentioned, to attain or make
out this Evangelical Conclusion, That some Mediation, some Atonement or other,
has been made, and accepted by God, for the sins of men. But I demand (says
the Apostle Paul,) Romans 10. 18.
Have they not heard? Yes verily (says he) their sound went forth into all the
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World. He had said in the Verse
immediately foregoing, that Faith comes by hearing: In this Verse, he shows (in
an Answer which he gives to a demand or question put by him) what hearing it
is, by which Faith comes; or at least what hearing is sufficient to believe
upon, or to produce Faith. This hearing, he says, is the hearing of that
sound, and of those words, which the Heavens, and the Day, and the Night speak,
and that are gone forth into the ends of the World, (as appears by the place,
Psalm. 19. 4.
in Psalm. 19. from whence these words are cited.) If you ask me, but what is
the sound, or what are the words which the Heavens, and the Day, and the Night,
i. e. the constant course of the Providence of God, in the Government of the
World, speak in the ears of all Nations, and of all People, that Faith should
come by the hearing of them? I answer: they are the words of Eternal Life too,
as well as those, which (as Peter acknowledges) our Savior himself had to
speak; yea and did speak upon all occasions; only they are not so plainly
spoken, as he was wont to speak: their Parable is somewhat more dark, and
harder to be understood. But the sense and import of what the Heavens moving
still in their natural course, and the gracious Providence of God, jointly
speak in the ears of all flesh, is, that God is taken off from the fierceness
of his Displeasure against sin, and that he holds forth his white flag, and
offers terms and conditions of Peace unto the World; and that upon their coming
into him by Repentance, they shall be received into grace and favor. And what
is this but the very tenor, sum, and substance of the Gospel? which yet is more
plain from that of the same Apostle, Act. 14. 16, 17.
Acts 14. to the men of Lystra. Who (says he, speaking of God) in times past
suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. In respect of what
was it, that God left not himself without witness amongst the Gentiles, even
then when he suffered them to walk in their own ways? (viz. without admonishing
and directing them how to walk, and what to do, after any such manner as now he
does by the letter of the Gospel sent amongst them:) what did the witnesses the
Apostle here speaks of, witness concerning God, or, on his behalf? Doubtless he
does not speak here of his Godhead, nor of his Power, nor of his Wisdom, as if
his meaning were, that God left not himself without witness of these (though it
be true, that he did not leave himself without witness, i. e. means of
convincing men, of these also,) but the Works of Creation, as distinguished
from the Works of Providence (whereof he here speaks) are sufficient witnesses
of these, Romans 1. 20.
according to the tenor of Romans 1. 20. and besides there are natural
impressions of these in the spirits and consciences of men, which are witnesses
on Gods behalf thus far. But doubtless, that in God, or concerning God, which
(as the Apostle here says) God intended should be testified or witnessed on
his behalf unto men, was somewhat, more secret, more out of the way (as it
were) of men's, common thoughts or apprehensions; and particularly it was that
gracious and good affection which he bears unto the World through Jesus Christ,
his inclination unto Peace with Men, upon their Repentance (which is the
substance of the Gospel.) This appears, 1. By the nature or quality of the
witnesses here spoken of, which were, Gods giving men rain from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, his filling their hearts with food and gladness. Such
witnesses as these, are only proper to testify grace, and love, and desire of
the good of those, to whom they are given, in him that gives them. They
plainly show, that he that bestows them, is not extreme, uses not extremity
against those that do amiss; and consequently that he is by one means or other,
taken off from the rigor of his Justice, and severity of his Wrath against
sinners. And, 2. It appears from hence; because Paul, who was not only a
diligent and faithful Preacher of the Gospel where ever he became, but was in
special manner designed to be an Apostle to the Gentiles, preached no other
Doctrine but this at Lystra (a City of the Gentiles) upon that great
opportunity that was now offered him. We cannot think that he should only
preach a Philosophical or Metaphysical Sermon, concerning the Essence or
natural Properties of God only; but that which was Evangelical, and favoring
of the Gospel. Now the Holy Ghost recording either the whole, or (at least) the
sum and substance of what he preached in this place, reports nothing
Evangelical as spoken by him, except this be acknowledged for such. So that
clear it is from the Scriptures, That all the World, even those that are most
straitened and scanted in this kind, those that have not the letter of the
Gospel, have yet sufficient means of believing granted unto them; of believing
I mean, 1. That God is, 2. That he is a Rewarder of those that diligently seek
him: which is all the Faith or Belief that the Apostle makes simply and
absolutely necessary to bring a man unto God, Hebr. 11 6.
i. e. into grace or favor with him, Heb. 11. There are several other
Scriptures that speak home to this point, besides those argued; particularly,
that Romans Rom, 2. 4.
2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance? The long-suffering and goodness of God are said to lead Men to
Repentance, because they testify, according to a rational and clear
Interpretation, a willingness and readiness in God, to receive all such into
grace and favor with himself, who shall unfeignedly repent of their sins. There
is no other consideration, but this (at least, none without this) in respect
whereof, the patience or bountifulness of God, can be said to lead, i. to
persuade or invite, to Repentance. There is no motive or persuasive, whereof
sinners are capable, unto Repentance, without hope of Pardon upon Repentance.
In the mean season, you see it clear from the Scriptures (and the Scriptures,
as ye have seen, run parallel with evident and clear reason all along in this
point) that even Heathen men, and those that want the History of the Gospel,
have yet a sufficiency of means whereby to believe, and so to prevent the wrath
and indignation which is to come: in which regard, they are altogether
unexcusable, if they do it not.

Consonant unto these things argued from the Scriptures, are the Judgments of
our best Protestant Divines, at least when overshadowed with the Spirit of
Truth. For-though (says Calvin) there will be found nothing in the World
worthy the Favor of God, yet he shows himself PROPITIOUS UNTO THE WHOLE WORLD
in that HE CALLS ALL MEN WITHOUT EXCEPTION TO BELIEVE IN CHRIST, which is
nothing else but an entrance into Life. Tametsi eaim in mundo nibil reperietur
savore Dei digaum, se tamen (...) mundo propitium oftendit, cum sine exceptione
omnes ad Fidem Christi vocat, quae nihil aliud est, quam ingressus in vitam.
Calvin. in Job. 3. 15, 16.
So likewise Wolfgangus Musculus, After the same manner it is in this
Redemption of Mankind, of which we speak: That Reprobates and desperately
wicked men partake not of it, IS NOT THROUGH ANY DEFECT OF THE GRACE OF GOD:
nor is it meet, that, for the sons of Perdition sake, it should lose the Glory
and Title of an UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION, since it is PREPARED [or, procured] FOR
ALL, AND ALL ARE CALLED TO IT Adeum modum habet and Redemptis istae generis
oumam, de qua loquiatur, quod illam homines reprobi, ac deplorate impii non
accipiant, neque defectu sit gratiae Dei, atque justam est ut illa propter
filios perditionis, gloriam ac titulum universalus Redemptionis amittat, cum
sit parata cunctis, and omnes ad illam vocentur. Musculus, Loc. De Redempt.
Generis Humani.
Our English Divines themselves in the Synod of Dort, express themselves to the
same purpose thus: So then Christ dyed for all Men, THAT ALL AND EVERY ONE, by
the Mediation of Faith, MAY through the virtue of this Ransom, obtain Remission
of Sins, and Eternal Life. So that the express sense of these men is, That even
the Heathen themselves, omnes and singuti, to whom the Gospel was never
preached (in your sense, I mean) by men, and in the letter of it, are yet
called by God to it, yea and may so believe, that by the Mediation of their
Faith, through the Ransom paid for them, they may obtain Salvation.

But suppose we (for Argument sake) that the Heathen, to whom the Gospel was
never orally preached, were not in an immediate capacity of believing it (upon
those terms of believing lately signified,) yet this proves not but that they
might be in a remote capacity of believing it; such a capacity I mean, which by
a regular and conscientious exercise and acting of those worthy abilities,
which God had conferred upon them, might, by the ordinary blessing, and
according to the standing course of the gracious Providence of God in such
cases, have risen up and grown to an immediate capacity in this kind. So that
(for example) an Heathen man, who never heard of the Name of Christ, may
notwithstanding, by means of the (...), i. e. the effect of the Law written in
his heart, quit himself to such a degree of well-pleasing unto God, that God
will not fail to reveal or make known his Son Christ unto him, after some such
manner and degree, which shall be saving unto him. This is the express Doctrine
of learned M. Bucer. Here (says he, writing upon Romans 2.) let us observe two
things: That God in no Age whatsoever left Men destitute of the Doctrine of
Salvation. Therefore who ever at any time perished perished through their own
default [or neglect.] For God so bedeweth [or besprinkleth] Nature with his
Light, that they only remain strangers unto Righteousness, who willingly and
of their own accord cast it from them. There are at this day Nations not a few,
to whom the Gospel of Christ is not sincerely preached: others there are, WHO
HEAR NOTHING OF IT. But if these did not voluntarily put from themselves the
desire of Righteousness, the Lord (QUESTIONLESS) would so antmate [or enliven
them] with his Spirit, that they should [or, might] perform the things of the
Law, commit themselves wholly to his [grace, or] goodness, and do unto their
Neighbors what they would that they should do unto them. Hence it would come to
pass that God would sooner send an Angel unto them, as he did unto Cornelius,
then suffer them to remain ignorant of his Christ. But whilst through impious
ingratitude, they detain his Truth revealed unto them in Unrighteousness, they
do not only deserve to have no more of the good Spirit of God given unto them,
but even to be given up to a reprobate sense, etc. The other thing to be taken
notice of, is, That we our selves also harken unto the work, or effect of the
Law, which is written in our hearts, that same right and divinely impressed
sense of things within us, whereby we are continually called upon for holy and
honest courses, and called back from those that are dishonest, etc. Afterward,
upon Verse. 25. of the same Chapter, he has these words: But (as we formerly
also showed) this was rather that which Paul intended, viz. to offer to the
consideration of the Jews, that the Gentiles, even before Christ was revealed
unto them, were Partakers of true Righteousness Hic duo observemus: Deum nullis
unquam seculis homines Doctrina salutis destituisse; proinde, quicunq, unquam
perierunt, sua culpa periisse. Naturam ita perfundit sua lucc Deus, ut hi
tantum a justicia aliem maneant qui eam ultro a se rejiciunt. Sunt and hodie
Gentes non paucae quibus Evangelium Christi liaudquaquam sinceriter prae
dicatur; sunt, quae de to nihil ptorsus audiunt. Hi autem si non ultro
justiciae studium repudiarent, Dominus INDU^IE Spiritu suo sic eos animaret, ut
quae legis sunt, praestarent, committerent se totos ipsius bonitati, proximis
faccrent, quae cupiunt fieri sibi. Hinc fieret ut Deus citius Angelum cis
mitteret uti fecit Corailio, quam ut ignorare cos Christum suum pateretur. Sed
dum impie ingrati iniquitate sua detinent revelatam jam ipsis veritatem,
merentur, non solum ut nihil praeterea boni spiritus acciptant, sed etiam ut
dentur in sensum reprobum, etc. Alterum hic observandum est, ut ipsi quoque
huic operi legis, quod insctiptum est cordibus nostris, recto illi (ut
divinitus impresso) sensui, quo perperuo vocamtr ad fancta and honesta studia,
revocamur a pravis, auscultemus, etc. Buter in Enar, ad Roman. c. 2. v. 14 Sed
ut superius quoque ostendimus, magis id ex instituto Pauli fuit, ut objiceret
Iudaeis Gentes etiam ante cis revelatum Christum, verae justiciae fuiffe
compotes. Idem in verse. 25. ejusdem Cap.
. The clear result of this Discourse is, That the Heathen, who never had the
Gospel, or Christ, de facto preached in the letter, or by men, unto them, were
yet in a sufficient capacity of doing such things, upon the account whereof God
would have revealed them unto them by one means or other, and this upon such
terms, which should have been available to Salvation. I might add much from
Calvin and other Protestant Writers of best account, of like import, who very
frequently and familiarly in their Writings promise with greatest confidence,
the super-vening of the saving Grace of God, unto the regular industry and
diligence of men, in the improvement of the light they have received. Yea, the
substance of this Doctrine is ever and anon preached by those, who are by some
counted Pillars of the Ministry amongst us at this day: who notwithstanding
again destroy that Faith, which they build up in such a Doctrine, by denying
the Universality of Redemption by Christ. Mr Edmond Calamy (in a Sermon
preached by him Jan. 12. 1644. on 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.) amongst many other Passages
pointing the same way, taught his People and Hearers thus: A wicked man may do
that, which is right in the sight of the Lord, by the Light of Nature, and by
the help of common Grace. And although God be not bouna to reward him for it,
yet I DOUBT NOT but God, out of the abyss of his Mercies, if he make use of
common Grace; I DO NOT DOUBT (I say) but God out of his abundant Mercy, though
he be not bound unto it, yet will give him spiritual [or, special] Grace: if he
make use of common Nature well, God will find some way or other to do good to
that man's Soul. Luke 16. 11. If therefore you have not been faithful in the
unrighteous Mammon, who shall commit to your trust the true riches? This place
seems to hold out thus much; That if a man improves the outward Mercies of God,
or the work of common Grace, God will entrust that man with better riches; God
will find out a way to do that man good. Afterward (in the same Sermon) thus:
Thou ought to do according to the gift and power, which God has given thee
in a natural way: and that God, which has given thee power to do it in a
natural way, will (NO DOUBT) assist thee with power to do things in a spiritual
way. For that man which improves his natural Talent, God will one time or other
entrust him with a spiritual Talent. For there was never any man went to Hell
for, CANNOT, but for, WILL NOT. If you shall please further to peruse my Answer
to Mr Jenkin, entitled, (...), page 69, 70, 71, etc. you shall find the
concurrent Judgment of some others of no mean esteem for Learning, Piety, and
whatsoever is called Orthodox amongst us. And the truth is, that in such a
Doctrine as this, they cleave to the Scriptures themselves, and are one spirit
with them. For when our Savior, toward the cloze of the Parable of the
Talents, teaches thus: For unto every one that has, shall be given, and he
shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that which he has; he clearly avoucheth this for Truth, That whatsoever a man's
original stock, in gifts or endowments in one kind or other, from Gods hand
shall be, be it never so weak, small, or inconsiderable, yet by a careful
employment, it shall, through the grace and blessing of God hereupon, improve
to a spiritual estate, which is therefore compared to an abundance, because the
possessor hereof is enriched above measure by it. For that our Savior by, him
that has, and to whom he promises, that more shall be given, does not mean a
person already converted, regenerate, or endued with true Faith, saving grace,
or the like, so neither, by him that has not, him that wants saving grace,
is evident; 1. Because by the servants who received the Talents, as in a glass,
is represented the state and condition, not of Believers only, or those that
shall be saved, but of the generality of Mankind, or (at least) as well of
such who will perish, as of those who shall be saved. This is evident from that
which the Parable relates concerning the unprofitable servant, who went and
hid his Talent in the Earth; for which his Lord commands him to be cast into
outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now the words
under debate were uttered by our Savior, upon occasion of this severe award
(as it may seem) which the Lord passed against this unprofitable servant; Take
therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him that has ten Talents. Of
the equity of this order, he gives an account in the said words: For unto every
one that has, shall etc. plainly implying, that by him that has, he means,
him that has upon improvement, or (which comes to the same) him that shows
and declares that he has [somewhat given him] by his employment and
improvement of it: for otherwise, he that had his Talent taken from him because
of his hiding, or non-employment, of it, had, as well as the other, by original
gift. And if by, him that has, he should mean, him that has, simply, or, in
any consideration, then he that had received the one Talent, notwithstanding
his hiding it, should have had given unto him, and so had more abundantly, as
well as the other. Again, 2. there is no ground, nor (I suppose) color of
reason, or ground, to conceive, but that all the Talents (mentioned in the
Parable) the five, the two, the one, were all of one and the same nature, or
kind; and that none of them signified any supernatural, or necessarily-saving
grace, but only natural gifts, or endowments, such as men unregenerate were
capable of, as well as regenerate. Nor do either Calvin himself, Musculus, or
any other of our Protestant Expositors, give the least intimation of their
sense to the contrary, in their Commentaries upon the said Parable; though
Musculus be more assertive and express in the point, then any of the rest that
I have seen. Amongst the ancient, Ambrose, by these Talents, understands the
gifts or endowments of natural Reason nam in terra abscondisse dicit, quod
rationem quae ad imaginem and st. m^l^^tudinem data est nobis, studio
voluptatis obeuit, and tanquam in sovea ca^^^ abscondit. Ambr. 1. 3. l. 8.
Comment. in Luc. c. 8. circa finem Nam illa Talenta, quae cuique distribuuntur
(...), nego significare posse vitam aeternam, Ratio certissima, quia illa
distribuuntur servis omnibus, non tantum frugi, sed etiam nequam.
; which differs not at all in any thing material from the sense of our late
Orthodox Interpreters. If then by the Talents be signified endowments or gifts
of Nature, and such as the generality of men receive from God in some measure
and degree, or other, evident it is from the clause under consideration, unto
him that has shall be given, etc. that by a faithful and careful use of those
natural abilities, that light of Reason, Et paulo post; Itaque necesse est
referri [Talenta] ad gratias temporales, quas Deus communicate, non piis tantum
sed etiam impi^s; non Electis tantum, sed etiam rep obis. Chamier. Panstr. 1.
c. 3. l: 8. c. 3 Sect, 15, 16
Conscience and Understanding, which every person of Mankind under Heaven
receives from God, he may and shall receive from him yet further, that which
shall be of a saving import and consequence unto him. For that, by that which
is (in the Parable) promised to be given, and that in abundance, to him that
has, must of necessity be meant somewhat that is of a spiritual and saving
nature, is evident from the carriage of the same Parable; where the servants,
who had received the Talents, and employed them faithfully (by whom are
typified our Saviors, (...), those that have, as was lately said) are
graciously invited by their Master into his joy: Enter thou into thy Masters
joy: So to the other; Enter thou into thy Masters joy. Now if either God, or
Christ, be signified and meant by the Master of these servants (as I suppose no
man questions, but that either the one, or the other, are typified hereby) by,
entering into their joy, cannot be meant a receiving of a greater measure of
natural gifts or endowments, nor of receiving any reward which belongs to
persons qualified only with such Endowments as these, but, Salvation, or
Eternal Blessedness and glory. If so, it roundly follows, that by what Christ
promises shall be given to him that has (in the sense declared) is meant
somewhat of a saving consequence, as regenerating Grace, the sanctifying Spirit
of God, Faith, and the like. And promising, not only, or simply, that to him
that has, shall be given, but further, that he shall have abundantly, he
clearly signifies, that in case men will provoke, stir up, and lay out
themselves accordingly in the improvement of such abilities and gifts, which
shall from time to time be vouchsafed unto them, they may, by virtue of the
Bounty and gracious Decree of God in that behalf, attain and receive from God
what proportion or measure of the Spirit of Grace, and of God, they can desire.

What has been argued, and (I suppose) demonstratively proved from the Parable
of the Talents, and more especially from this promise or engagement of our
Savior, To him that has, shall be given, viz. that upon a regular and
reasonable improvement of those principles or abilities (which we more
commonly, then properly, call, natural) vouchsafed by God unto men, they shall
certainly receive from him that which is spiritual and saving, might be further
evidenced and confirmed from many other Scriptures; as from Mat. 13. 12. Mark
4. 25. Luke 8. 18. (where the same promise, almost in the same words, upon a
like occasion, is made, and taught for sound Doctrine, by our Savior;) so
likewise from Mat. 10. 11, 13. Mark 12. 34. Luke 8. 15. and 11. 52. Joh. 6. 27,
45. Ephesians. 5. 14. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21, etc. Hebr. 11. 6, etc. (besides twenty
more.) In all which places there is a perfect eye of the Notion contended for,
visible enough to him that shall narrowly look upon them, and enquire into
them. And indeed the Opinion or Doctrine it self, which we now plead, is so
rational, so intimously comporting with, and suitable to, the Genius and main
Design of the Gospel, which is to advance Godliness, and all excellent and
worthy ways and works amongst men, that there is nothing can be alleged
against the truth of it, but what upon due consideration will be found
manifestly prejudicial and obstructive to the practice of Godliness, and of
things worthy and honorable amongst men.

From these Discussions then it clearly follows, That the Heathen, who only
have, or have had, the benefit and help of the Light of Nature, together with
those impressions of Good and Evil which accompany it, are, and have been, by
means hereof, in such a capacity of having the Gospel, if not preached, yet
(which is altogether as much, or rather more) revealed unto them, and
consequently of believing it, that were they, had they been, true and faithful
to the dear Interest of their own Peace and Happiness, they may, and might
believe it, If so, the want of the letter, or oral preaching of it unto them,
does not excuse them from sin in their non-beleeving it; unless we shall say,
that the committing of one sin, excuses from the guilt of another, or that the
neglect of one duty, discharges from the obligation of another.

3. (And lastly) Suppose and grant we yet further (for Argument sake) that the
Heathen actually wanting the letter and external Ministry of the Gospel by men,
were in no capacity at all of coming to the knowledge of it, either by the Works
of Creation and Providence, nor yet by any improvement of their natural
Abilities (possible unto them;) yet it must needs be acknowledged that they
were in a capacity of being made Partakers even of the letter and oral
Administration hereof, in such a sense, as all Nations are in a capacity of
having and enjoying such merchandise or commodities, which are exportable from
any one Nation under Heaven, and may be had by recourse and equitable
applications made to this Nation for them. When God erected and set up, first
his Tabernacle, and afterward his Temple, amongst the Jews, together with that
entire systeme or body of his Ceremonial Worship, wherein, though under Types
and Figures, he discovered his gracious Counsel and Intentions by Jesus Christ
toward the world, and (indeed) preached the Gospel, though his intent and
purpose herein was to privilege and accommodate this Nation above any other
People and Nation under Heaven, yet was it no part of his mind, that these
Discoveries of Himself, or the great Blessing accruing thereby unto men, should
be so confined or appropriated unto this People, but that all the World, and
all the Nations round about them, far and near, yea and every particular
person, born or dwelling in any of these Nations, might, if they pleased, have
had part and fellowship with them in all this Grace and Blessedness, as many
actually had, who became Proselytes to the Religion and Worship of this Nation.
Yea all the privilege or prerogative which this Nation had above others, in, or
about the Word, and Worship of God, the Apostle Paul resolves into this,
(...), Romans 3. 2. that they were entrusted with, made Feoffees (as it were) in
trust of that great treasure, the Oracles of God, not for themselves, nor their
posterities only, but for the World, or generality of Mankind; even as the
same Apostle, speaking of himself, and of the Gospel, says (in the same word,
(...), Gal. 2. 7.) that he was entrusted with it for the Gentiles, or Gentile
part of the World, as Peter was for the Circumcision, i. e. the Jews. This
Apostle, as in consideration that the said Ceremonial Worship, or Mosaical
Gospel, was committed, or deposited in trust with the Jews, he calls it,
theirs, (Romans 9. 4.) So because they were entrusted with it on the behalf of
the World, elsewhere calls it, in respect of the several members, parts, and
veins of it, (...), the rudiments, or elements, of the world, (Gal. 4. 3.
Colos. 2. 8, 20.) meaning, those Mosaical Ceremonies and Observations, which
God delivered unto Jews by Moses, for the nurture and training up of the World
(during the infancy and pupillage of it) in the Knowledge of God, and the things
of their Eternal Peace. In like manner, in that Spirit of Prophecy, which God
poured out so abundantly upon this Nation, in those Prophets which he raised up
and sent unto them from time to time, to instruct, admonish, reprove, declare
unto them things to come, etc. he had respect, as well to the Nations of the
World, as to the Jews themselves, as appears by sundry particular Prophecies,
which much more nearly concerned other States and Nations, as Babylon, Egypt,
Tire, Edom, Moab, etc. then the Jews. Athanasius (among the Fathers) very
excellently and fully to this point discourses in his Treatise concerning the
Incanation of the Word of God: where, having affirmed that the Grace of that
Image stamped upon men according to the likeness of God, is, and was,
sufficient to afford unto men the Knowledge of the Word of God; and yet, that,
in case men should neglect to know him, by looking into themselves, he had
provided this remedy for such their weakness, viZ. That by the Works of Nature
they might understand him to be the Workman, etc. he advances his discourse in
words to this effect. But when as the negligence of men by degrees grew worse
and worse, God yet again provided for this weakness also, sending unto them
Laws and Prophets familiar with them [or, which might be well known to them,]
that in case it were troublesome unto them to look up toward Heaven, they might
receive instruction from their Neighbors, [or, near at hand.] For one man may
learn of another that which is excellent, nearer hand. So then they might by
lifting up their eyes to the vast magnitude of the Heavens, and considering the
sweet harmony of Nature [or, the Creation] come to know the Word of the Father
to be the Captain [or Guider] hereof, and that by his Providence over all
things, he discovers and makes known the Father unto all Men, and that he
therefore gives motion unto all things, that all Men by him may know God. Or if
this were grievous to them, they might converse with Saints [or, holy men,] and
from these learn to know God the Maker of all things to be the Father of
Christ, and that the worshipping of Idols is impiety, and full of all
ungodliness. They might also by the Knowledge of the Law abstain from all
Transgression, and live righteously [or, virtuously.] For the Law was not
[brought into the world] for the Jews only, nor were the Prophets sent only
for them [or, their sakes.] They were sent indeed unto the Jews, and of the
Jews were persecuted: but they were the sacred and public School of the whole
World, to instruct men as well in the Knowledge of things appertaining unto God,
as in matters relating to the Discipline and Government of the Soul (...), etc.
Athanas. de Incarn. Verbi. p. 39, 40. Edis. Commel.
. Consonant to the import of this Discourse, is that of Calvin also,
transcribed by me, page 508, 509. of my Redemption Redeemed: toward the cloze
whereof he speaks words to this purpose: Although indeed there was no
necessity to seek him [God] very far, by reason that each one might find him
in his own self, being that we are all kept and preserved by his virtue
dwelling in us. In the mean time, to manifest more imply his goodness and
infinite clemency amongst men [or, toward men] he has not contented himself
to instruct them by all such documents, as those we have expressed, but has
specially given to understand his Voice to a certain People, etc. [meaning,
that from, and by means of, these, the rest of the World might have opportunity
to receive the Knowledge of those things, which were revealed unto them, not for
their own sakes only, but for the accommodation and benefit also of all
others.] If you please to peruse the Commentaries of our best Protestant
Writers upon those passages of Christ, Joh. 4. 36, 37, 38. sent you to reap
that, whereon you bestowed no labor: other men labored, etc. you will find many
things directly pointing toward the Notion in hand. Calvin himself
acknowledges that some understand these passages as well of the Gentiles, as
the Jews; and confesses, that in all ages there were some grains [or, seeds]
of Piety [or, true Religion] scattered over the whole World Et sunt qui
promiscue tom de Gentibus, quam de ludaeis haec exponant. Fateor quidem
pieratis ^^aenam grana semper in toto Orb fuisse sparsa, etc. Calvin. in Ioh.
4. 36.
. Gualter writing upon the said Verses, plainly affirms, That the Fathers and
the Prophets, by their diligent husbandry about the Lords Field, sew the seeds
of true Piety all the World over Promittit ergo illos ejus gaudii consortes
fore, in quod jam olim ingrests sint sancti Patres and Propherae, qui agrum
Domini studiose colendo, vetae pieratis femina in toto Orb sparserunt.
Gualter. Homil. 31. in Johan.
. Again, a little after he says, that God used the Labor and Ministry of the
Patriarchs and Prophets in tilling or culturing the World, and preparing it for
the Evangelical Harvest Id veto de Patriarchis and Prophetis dicitur, quoium
opera and ministerio Deus usus est in mundo excolendo, and praeparando ad
meflem hanc Evangelieam. Ibid. Secuti sunt Prophetae quorum sermones long
lateque per diversas Gentes fuerunt vulgati.
. Afterward he shows at large, into what Countries, first the Partiarchs
traveled, spreading abroad where they came, the sweet savor of the true
Knowledge of God; and then, how the Prophets following them, by the spreading of
their Sermons and Prophecies into diverse Nations far and near, advanced the
same service: which also he further says was much promoted by means of the
Captivities and Banishments of the Jews, in Assyria, Babylon, and over all the
East. Having hereunto added the Consideration of the Translation of the
Scriptures (then extant) or of the Old Testament, into the Greek Tongue,
procured by Ptolomy Philadelphus King of Egypt after the Babylonian Captivity,
which (as he truly says) was of very great consequence for the Propagation of
the Knowledge of the true God through the World, he concludes that these
particulars did much facilitate and help forward the Work and Labors of the
Apostles in the Conversion of the World. Hugo Grotius likewise upon the same
place to the same purpose: The Field was broke up, and brought into tilth, by
the Prophets, who not only in Judea, but in many other Countries and Nations
amongst the Gentiles, both by word and writing awakened men to the Worship of
the One God, which is the seed of an Evangelical Harvest, or Enerease Subactum
est arvum a Prophetis, qui non tantam in lucae, sed andper dispersio ne^ varias
acpud gentes voce ac lcriptis homines ad unius Dei cultum excitarant, quod
semen est Evangelicae frugi^. Hug. Grot. in Job. 4. 38
.

Thus then you see that it is not my sense alone, but the Judgment likewise of
many wiser and more learned men, That God in setting up that great Light of the
Knowledge of himself in the Land of Judea, which some conceive to be the Center
or middle part of the habitable World, and amongst the Jews, as upon a
Candlestick, did intend the benefit and blessing of the shining of it
throughout the great House of the whole World. And as many did partake of this
Benefit and Blessing, who inhabited Countries far remote from the Jews, joining
themselves unto the people of the God of Abraham, so had all others the
opportunity of doing likewise. And though remoteness of Country, or dwelling,
from Judea, might happily be some extenuation or mitigation of the sin of men's
remaining ignorant of God, his true Worship, and Service, and of those
spiritual Mysteries, which were to be learned in Judea; yet was it no adequate
or sufficient excuse thereof.

These things duly weighed and considered, the particulars objected by you
against that Proposition of mine, about which (it seems) you are at present
dissatisfied, appear reconcilable enough to it, and fairly answerable.

For, 1. whereas you argue, that all Men have not a legal tie or obligation
upon them to believe on Jesus Christ, and upon this account cannot stand bound
to believe on him; I answer, by denying your Antecedent, and affirm, That all
Men [i. e. all men not wholly disabled, either through want of years, or defect
of natural capacity, to believe; though there be a sense, which the Schoolmen
term, sensus divisus, wherein even such persons as these are under a tie of
believing,] but all others (I affirm) are simply and directly under an
obligation of believing on Jesus Christ.

Whereas you further argue; If so, then are they under this obligation, either
by the Law of Nature, or else by some positive Law of God; and affirm, that by
neither; and hence conclude, not at all: I answer; The obligation you speak of
lies upon them, by the force and authority of both these Laws. First, The Law
of Nature requires all Men, teaches all Men, 1. To seek and enquire after
God, i. e. the Knowledge of his Nature, Attributes, Excellency and Perfection
of Being. 2. After the richest and best Discoveries of his Will and Pleasure
concerning men, which are any where to he found. 3. (And lastly) This Law
requires likewise of all Men, to submit unto every part of the Will and
Pleasure of God concerning them, being any ways made known to them. Otherwise
we must hold, either that this Law teaches not men, to regard, mind, look, or
listen after any Manifestation or Dicovery, which God makes of himself in any
part of the World, but only near to them, and (as the saying is) under their
noses, or within their own thresholds; or else that it teaches them to rest
satisfied with such. Discoveries in this kind, which are imperfect, and
unsatisfactory: or lastly, that it does not teach them to submit to the Will of
God in all things, as far as it shall be discovered unto them. None of all
which can be affirmed with truth, or likelihood of truth. First then, if the
Law of Nature requires of all Men (except the before excepted) to enquire
after the best and fullest Discovery, which God any where makes of himself,
his Will and Pleasure concerning Men; And, 2. if the Gospel be the fullest and
richest Discovery in this kind, which he has made, or which is to be found
(which I presume is no Christian man's Question:) And lastly, if it be the
express revealed Will of God in this Gospel-Discovery of himself, That all Men
who hear of it, or come to the knowledge of it, should believe in his Son Jesus
Christ; it roundly follows, That by the Law of Nature, all Men of years and
competent understanding, stand obliged to believe in Christ, either in sensu
composito, as viz. if they have, or have had, the letter of the Gospel, or
live, or have lived, under the found of the Ministry of it; or else in sensu
divisa, viz. in case the Gospel has never yet in the Letter or Ministry of it
been revealed unto them.

Nor is that which you alledg concerning the inability of the Light of Nature
to discover, that there was, or ever would be, such a Man and Mediator as Jesus
Christ, much considerable to your purpose, though it should be granted in as
ample terms, as you propound it. For what though the Light of Nature be not
sufficient to make such a Discovery, yet is it sufficient to teach men that it
is their Duty to enquire and harken out what Discoveries God makes of himself
in the World: and when they have heard of, or found out, the Discovery you
speak of (I mean of such a Man and Mediator as Jesus Christ) it is able to
inform and teach them that it is their Duty to believe in him accordingly. The
Light of Nature (probably) is not sufficient to inform every Member or Subject
in a State or Commonwealth what Laws or Statutes the Parliamentary or
Legistative Authority of their State, will enact, or impose upon the respective
Members hereof. Nor can it reasonably or equitably be expected from the persons
invested with the Legislative Power, that they should cause all the Laws which
they enact from time to time for the due Government of their State, to be
proclaimed by an Officer of State at every particular man's door, no nor yet in
every particular Village or Town, to oblige the Inhabitants to a subjection
unto them. It is sufficient for such an end and purpose as this, if they be
proclaimed, published, or promulgated in the Metropolis or head City of this
State, where, or from whence all and every the respective Inhabitants and
Subjects hereof, may and ought to receive information of them, what they be.
And they that live most remote from the said Metropolis, or place, where the
Publication of the said Laws is made, are notwithstanding as well obliged to
the observation and keeping of them, as the Inhabitants of this City it self,
though these, by reason of their dwelling, have a readier and better
opportunity to come to the knowledge of them. In like manner God being the
Absolute Monarch of, and Lawgiver unto, the World, it is sufficient for him,
and as much as can reasonably be expected from him, only that he should take
care and provide, that that great Law of Life and Death, the Gospel, should be
published, and promulgated in some eminent place, or places of the World, from
whence all other parts of the World round about might have an opportunity to
receive the Knowledge of it. Nor are any of the respective Subjects of this
great Kingdom of the World, privileged or exempted from yielding Obedience and
Subjection to their King in that great Law of his Gospel, because of any
remoteness of their dwellings from those places, where he has made any solemn
Publication of it, or because he has not sent a public: Officer of Heaven,
an Authorized Minister of this Gospel home to their Houses, to proclaim or
publish it within their doors. So that (by the way) the meaning of those
Demands of the Apostle, on which you insist, How shall they believe on him, of
whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how
shall they preach, except they be sent? the meaning (I say) of these
Interrogatories, or any of them, is not, either as if no man could possibly
believe the Gospel, but he that had personally heard it preached by a Minister,
or that men could never come to hear it, but only from the mouth of such a
Minister; or that none could publish it upon such terms, as to cause it to be
believed by men, but some such Minister only; all such suppositions as these
are palpably irrelative to the mind of the Apostle in those Demands. His
meaning in them is only to imply, 1. That the World, having generally so
corrupted themselves with all manner of wickedness, and voluntarily estranged
their hearts and minds from God, were in no likely posture or condition to be
brought to believe on him by means of Christ, or on Christ himself, without the
opportunity and advantage of some declaration or report of the Gospel made in
one kind or other unto them. 2. That they were not like to hear of God, or of
Jesus Christ, in the Gospel, had there not been some, one, or more, to have
preached, or published it in the World. 3. (And lastly) That there was no
likelihood, that any such man, or number of men, would ever have been found or
heard of, who should, or would, have preached or published the Gospel, or Name
of Jesus Christ, up and down the World, had they not been sent, i. e. had they
not received both instructions from God concerning the truth, tenor, and
substance of the Gospel, and how they were to proceed in the preaching of it,
as also a special charge and injunction from him to preach it accordingly. None
of these particulars give the least intimation, as if no man were either in a
capacity, or under an obligation, to believe the Gospel, but only they to
whose habitations some Minister of the Gospel was, or should be, sent to preach
it. It is sufficiently known, and generally granted by Divines, that there
were, and are, several Nations and Countries in the World, unto which none of
the Apostles ever came to preach the Gospel: yet the Apostle Paul informs us,
and that with an emphatical asseveration, (...), translated, verily, that their
sound went forth into all the Earth, and their words unto the end of the World,
Romans 10. 18. How can this assertion of his stand, but in the strength of this
rational supposition, That their preaching and publishing the Gospel in such
parts and places of the World, where they came and had opportunity to do it,
was vertually and constructively a preaching and publishing of it throughout
the whole World; and that those Nations, unto which the Apostles did not preach
it personally, had yet a gracious opportunity to come to the Knowledge of it, by
means of their preaching and spreading of it so far, and in such Countries, as
they did? And unless such a supposition as this be admitted, we must fall hard
and heavy in our censures upon the Apostles, and conceive of them as men
unfaithful and defective in the Execution of that High Commission, and most
weighty Charge, imposed on them by the Lord Christ, concerning the preaching of
the Gospel; the Tenor whereof (as we know) was, that they should go, and teach
ALL Nations, baptizing them, etc. Mat. 28. 19. And again (as another Evangelist
draws it up) that they should go into ALL the World, and preach the Gospel to
EVERY Creature. No Interpretation of what the Apostles did, in, or about the
discharge of this their Commission (the equity of this Commission salved) can
render them obedient and faithful therein unto their great Lord and Master, but
only that which supposes every Creature to have been sufficiently Evangelized
or taught by them, in the Teachings of that party of the Creature, or of those
particular Creatures, which were actually and personally taught by them: and
that all the World was put into a sufficient capacity of believing, or (which
is the same) into a way of having the Gospel even in the letter of it made
known unto them, by their enlightening those parts of the World with the
Knowledge of it, in which they preached it. Nor can that of the Apostle claim
the honor of truth, where, speaking of the Gospel, he says, it was (...) (the
word so emphatically urged by you) (...), i. e. preached unto every Creature
which is under Heaven, (Col. 1. 23.) but upon the account and warrant of such a
construction.

But, 2. neither will my Principles allow me to gratify you with my belief of
this your saying (unless very rigidly understood, and in such a sense wherein
it will little accommodate your cause) That the Light of Nature, neither can,
nor ever could, discover to Mankind, that there was, or ever would be, such a
Man, and Mediator as Jesus Christ, etc. What the Light of Nature has de facto
discovered unto Mankind, may much better be known and judged of, then what it
can, or could, discover. I confess my apprehensions concerning the extent of
the Power and Abilities of the Light of Nature carefully preserved, prudently
managed, and industriously improved and employed, run very high: and I judge
that the greatest part of what this Light has hitherto discovered unto
Mankind, is not commensurable to the least part of what it is, and has been,
able to discover. But what if it be granted, That it neither is, nor has been
able to discover, that there was, or ever would be, such a Man and Mediator, as
Jesus Christ, viz. in all particularities relating to his Person, wherein the
Gospel presents him to the World, yet may it be able so far to discover him,
that a man by the discovery may be rationally persuaded, through, or by means
of him, to depend upon God, for the Pardon of his Sins, and Salvation of his
Person, yea and this to the real obtaining of both at the hand of God. I have
no ground at all to believe or think, that such Jews, who before, and under,
yea and long after Moses, did believe in God unto Salvation, had Jesus Christ
discovered unto them in any such Vision of Particularities, as that exhibited
in the Gospel. The sum and substance of what they (at least the far greater
part of them) apprehended, knew, or believed concerning Christ, amounted not (I
suppose) to much more then this; viz. That God had found out, and pleased
himself in, a way or means, how to show Mercy and to forgive the Sins, and save
the Souls, of such who should put their trust in him, and live righteously and
holily in this present World. For that God did not declare, [i. e. make plainly
and fully known in the World] upon what account of Righteousness or Justice, he
pardoned sin committed in the World before the great Atonement made by the
Death of Christ, until this Atonement was actually made, is evident by this
passage of the Apostle, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his Grace
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, TO DECLARE HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS FOR THE
REMISSION OF SINS THAT ARE PAST, through the forbearance of God; [meaning, that
God through his great patience, or strength of forbearance, (...), remitted
sin, even long before any Satisfaction or Atonement made for it;] To declare,
I say; at this time [viz. when Christ suffered in the flesh] his Righteousness,
that he might be just, and a Justifier of him that is of the Faith of Jesus, i.
e. that he might appear to be, and to have been, just, in justifying him [i. e.
every one, or whosoever] (...), that was, is, or shall be a Believer in Christ.
From this last clause, (...), that is of the Faith of Jesus, i. e. that
believes, or depends, on Christ for Righteousness (relating in special manner
to the believing Jews before the coming of Christ in the flesh,) it is
observable, that they are reputed by God (and consequently, ought to be so
reputed by men also) Believers in Christ, not only who know him by Name, or in
the hypostatical union of the two Natures, or the like, and believe on him
under such a Notion as this (for thus the believing Jews, who were justified by
God before the Coming of Christ, neither knew him, nor believed on him, as was
formerly said,) but also they that believe on God by, or through him (as Peter
expresses it, 1 Pet. 1. 21.) i. e. who either by Grace purchased or procured
by him, or by any Providence, or Dispensation, one or more, issued by God for
his sake, or upon his account, in the World, are brought, or prevailed with, to
depend on God for the forgiveness of their sins upon their Repentance. And that
the Jews I speak of, when they did believe on God unto Justification, did not
explicitly, or by Name, believe in Jesus Christ, seems to me very apparent
from those words of Christ to his Apostles, Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God:
believe also in me. If they had believed in him as explicitly, and distinctly,
as they did believe in God, there had been no more ground, why he should exhort
or encourage them to believe in him, then in God: nor why he should have owned
them in their belief in God, more then in their belief in himself. And that
that their belief in God, which our Savior here acknowledges in them, was unto
Justification, I suppose that you neither will, nor reasonably can, deny. Now
then if such a Faith, which had Jesus Christ only vertually and
interpretatively in it, and none but God himself explicitly, and directly, was
notwithstanding available to the Justification of the Jews, who had better
opportunities of means for an explicit Knowledge of him, then the Gentiles;
much more reasonable is it to conceive that the like Faith will be accepted in
the Gentiles to their Justification; especially considering, 1. That same
Divine Attribute, which the Scripture calls, (...), a non-acceptation of
persons (so frequently asserted and inculcated by the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures:) and, 2. That the Justification of men, is a judiciary act awarded,
according to the Tenor of a known Law, by God.

Besides, That Jesus Christ is in such a Faith, by which men are actually
enabled to come with acceptance unto God, I presume you will not deny,
considering what Christ himself says, No man comes unto the Father, but by
me, Joh. 14. 6. That by such a Faith, whereby a man believes, 1. That God is:
2. That he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, he is enabled thus
to come unto God, is the express Doctrine of the Apostle, Hebr. 11. 6. And that
the Heathen, who never had the advantage of the letter of the Gospel, were
notwithstanding, partly by the Light of Nature, partly by the Works of
Creation, partly by the patient and gracious Administrations of God in the
course of his Providence toward the World, in a very sufficient capacity of
attaining such a Faith as this, if I judged it matter of question, either to
your self, or any other considering man, might be largely demonstrated, not
only from the Scriptures, but even by many pregnant Testimonies extant in the
Writings of the Heathen themselves. Not to impose any great tax upon you,
though for your own satisfaction, in this kind, if you will please to peruse
only the fifth and nineteenth Chapters of the L. du Pless is de Veritate
Religionis Christianae, you will find by several passages drawn together by
this learned Author from the Writings of such Heathens as we now speak of, 1.
That the Light of Nature was sufficient to discover unto them somewhat
concerning Christ: And, 2. (and more clearly) That they did (I mean, many of
them, and consequently, that more, yea, that all, might) believe, both that God
was, and that He is a Rewarder of those, who diligently seek him. And I presume
you know that much more of this latter import might readily be cited from the
Books and Writings of several others of them, not mentioned by the late named
Author. Again,

2. That the Heathen we speak of (and consequently, all Men without exception)
had, and at this day have, a tie upon them by the Law of Nature to believe in
Jesus Christ, is evident upon this consideration; viz. because this Law
obliges all Men to do that, which is essentially conducing to their sovereign
Welfare and Peace, and without which it is unpossible for them to escape ruin,
and destruction. And if men stand bound by the Law we speak of, to use such
means for the preservation of their natural Lives and Beings, without which
they cannot reasonably expect or judge that they should be preserved; much more
must they needs be obliged by the same Law to provide things needful for their
eternal safety and well-being, and without which they cannot, upon any
reasonable account, expect or look for these so importantly-necessary
accommodations. Now the Scripture says expressly; Neither is there Salvation in
any other, [meaning, but in Jesus Christ,] for there is none other Name under
Heaven given among men whereby we [men] must be saved, (Acts 4. 12.) and this
by believing on this Name, Joh. 20. 31. These latter words, There is no other
Name UNDER HEAVEN given, etc. clearly overthrow two of the main Pillars of your
Discourse, which are these; 1. That this Law of Salvation, Whosoever believes,
shall be saved, respects only such, unto whom the Letter, or vocal Ministry
of the Gospel is sent, and that there is another Law, Covenant, or Promise, by
which others shall, or may, be saved, (which by the way, I look upon as a very
adventurous Position, and of dangerous consequence.) 2. That such a Repentance,
which neither includes, nor supposes Faith in Christ, in one kind or other,
and whereof persons unevangelized (in the sense often mentioned) are capable, is
available to these persons unto Justification and Salvation. For if there be
none other Name [but that of Jesus Christ] UNDER HEAVEN given among men,
whereby etc. i. e. no other method, course, way, or means whatsoever vouchsafed
by God unto men for their Salvation, it demonstratively follows, 1. That this
Law of Salvation, Whosoever believes on Jesus Christ, shall be saved, with
that of Condemnation (opposite to it) He that believes not, shall be damned,
does not respect only persons Gospelized (in the sense declared,) so that
these only shall be either saved, or condemned, according to the different
tenor and import of them; but the generality or universality of Mankind, where
ever the Faculties of Reason, Judgment, Conscience, Understanding, etc. are
found in any competent growth or maturity. 2. That no Repentance whatsoever,
which has not the Name, i. e. the virtue, grace, merit, influence (in one
kind or other) of Christ in it, will avail any man unto Salvation.

Nor is that of the Apostle, Romans 2. 12. any ways contradicting that which has
been now said: For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish
without Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law.
For the intent and purport of this passage only is to show, that God in the
Judgment and Condemnation of wicked men, will have respect to the different
degrees of means and opportunities, which have been vouchsafed unto them
respectively, for the restraining of them from the ways of sin and wickedness;
and to imply withal, that because the Letter and oral Ministry of the
Scriptures, or Word of God (frequently termed, the Law) superadded to the Law
and Light of Nature, and those other advantages (common unto all men) of the
Works of Creation, Providence, etc. are a means of greater efficacy and a more
potent tendency to restrain from sin, then those other alone, and without
these, therefore they, who shall be found to have lived wickedly and ungodlily
under these, shall receive a greater Damnation, then those who have lived
sinfully under the want of them.

If it be yet further objected (against the Argument in hand) That the Law of
Nature cannot oblige men to things unpossible, no not in order to their own
Preservation, or Peace; and therefore cannot oblige those to believe in Jesus
Christ, to whom he was never preached, this being unpossible unto such persons,
as these: To this I answer,

1. That the sinews of this reasoning have been already cut, where we proved,
that Jesus Christ, is so, so far, and upon such terms, preached, or made known
unto all Men without exception, that no man lies under an impossibility of
believing in him; I mean, of believing in him upon such terms, which will be
available to his Salvation, (as has been formerly declared.) But,

2. I answer yet further, That if the positive, or written, Law, or Word, of
God, binds men unto that which is unpossible, what Reason can there be given,
why the Law of Nature may not do the like? (especially considering that this is
the Law of God, as well as that.) But that the positive or written Law of God
requires things unpossible of men, is (I suppose) your own Sense and Judgment;
certain I am, it is the general Sense of those, who are Enemies to the Doctrine
of Universal Atonement.

3. (And lastly) Were it granted that the Law of Nature does not bind to
things impossible, in sensu diviso, yet it may very equitably and well bind to
things unpossible, in sensu composito. As for example; suppose I have a Child,
or Wife, lying sick in an upper Chamber, or room in my House, and at present I
am below; the Law of Nature in this case binds me to visit them, which yet is
unpossible for me to do, whilst I remain below, and in my present posture of
absence from them. But because I may very possibly go and get up to them by the
opportunity of such stairs or steps, which are purposely provided to make the
way into this Chamber passable for men, therefore the tie which is upon me by
the Law of Nature, to visit them, is no ways hard, or unreasonable. In like
manner, were it granted, that men who never heard of the Name of Christ, are,
in their present condition, posture, and frame, under an impossibility of
believing on him, and so not bound by the Law of Nature to believe on him,
during this incapacity; yet this no ways proves, but that they may stand bound
by this Law to believe on him, yea and that this believing is possible enough
to them, in sensu diviso, (as has been said) though not in sensu composito,
that is, by using such means, and applying themselves to such a course, whereof
they are, actually, and de presenti, capable, and which have a proper and
direct tendency to enable them to believe actually in due time. Sed de his,
prius. Nor do I believe that any person whatsoever of Mankind (such only
excepted, who have sinned the sin unto death, as John expresses it, who, in
and by the said sin, cast in their lot with Devils, and deserve no longer to be
numbered amongst men) lives under any simple, absolute, or invincible
impossibility of being saved. Yea if it shall be supposed, that any other
person lies under such an impossibility, it must needs take off from the
hearts and consciences of men much of that fear and dread, which are of a very
sovereign consequence and import to preserve them from the horrid guilt of that
sin. And thus (I trust) I have given a fair and satisfactory account unto you
of the truth of this Doctrine, That all Men stand bound by the Law of Nature to
believe on Jesus Christ; or at least (in your own phrase) somewhat that seems
to me very like to such an account. Again,

2. That the like Obligation is imposed by God upon all Men (in the sense
explained, and avouched) by a written, or positive Law, is (I suppose) of a
like ready and easy demonstration. When the Holy Ghost by the mouth of the
Kingly Prophet admonishes and calls upon the Kings and Judges of the Earth,
thus: Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled, etc. (Psalm. 2. 12.) 1. By the Son, evident it is (and
Interpreters generally consent) that the Lord Christ is meant. 2. That by
kissing this Son, is meant such subjection to him, which includes, or
presupposes Faith (at least) in him, is so evident likewise, that I know no
Expositor otherwise minded. And besides, this clause, lest he be angry, and ye
perish, etc. plainly evinceth it; in as much as no kissing him, or subjection
to him, without believing on him, will prevent his anger. 3. (And lastly) That
by the Kings and Judges of the Earth, he does not (in the first place) mean
some of these only, as (for example) those who have the Gospel preached unto
them, with an exclusion of the rest; nor, 2. That by Kings and Judges of the
Earth, he means the mere persons of men invested with these dignities, but (by
a Synecdoche, and according to the frequent dialect of the Scriptures) those
entire Bodies and Communities of men, of which Kings and Judges are the Heads,
are things, both so rational in themselves, and so demonstrable also from the
first Verse of the Psalm, and indeed from the whole carriage of it, that to
give any further proof of them, were but to light up a Candle to the Sun. Or if
it shall be importunely, and as it were by the teeth, held and maintained, that
none but the persons themselves of Kings and Judges are here meant; yet will it
even from hence, and this with a notoriety of consequence, follow, That all
their Subjects, and consequently, all the World, stand bound, by virtue, as
well of the same Command, as of the same Caveat, or Threatening, to exhibit the
same Subjection unto the Son of God. Musculus may be consulted upon the place
Expendamus etiam quanta sitista Christi Filii hominis majestas, potentia, and
gloria, quod ad pedum illius oscula Reges terrae, absque ulla discriminatione,
quanti quanti sint, vocantur. Quis nam mortalium ab hac submissione excipitur,
quando illa ipsis quoque regibus imponitur? Musculus, in Psalm. 2. Verse. 12.
.

Again, when the Apostle John asserteth this to be the Commandment of God, that
we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, (1 John 5. 23.) he
cannot be conceived to speak only of Saints, or such who are Believers
already, as if these only were the men, whom God commands to believe in the
Name of his Son: for then it would follow, that every Believer in the first act
of believing super-erogates, and does more then God requires of him by any Law,
Precept, or Commandment of his. Nor, 2. can he reasonably be conceived to speak
of such only, who have the Letter or oral Ministry of the Gospel sent, or
granted, unto them: because then (in like process of consequence) it will
follow, that in case any of those, to whom the said Privileges are not
vouchsafed, shall believe in Christ, he also shall super-erogate, and do more
in a way of righteousness, then God commands him. Therefore when this Apostle
says, It is the Commandment of God, that WE should believe, etc. his meaning
is not, either, 1. That WE Saints, with the exclusion of all others; nor, 2.
That WE who have the Gospel preached by men to us, with the exclusion of all
others: But, 3. (and lastly) That WE Men, with the inclusion of all other men
whatsoever, should believe.

If it be objected and said; That such men, who have neither the Letter, nor
oral Ministry of the Gospel, are in no capacity, no possibility of believing:
and therefore to argue, that in case they should believe, they should
super-erogate, is to argue, not only from an unsound, but even from an
unpossible supposition; and no better, then if a man should argue, thus; If a
stone, or a brute beast, should with an audible, or intelligible voice,
magnify God, they should super-erogate, because there is no Commandment
imposed upon them by God to do such a thing: To this I answer,

1. That it has been already sufficiently proved, that the supposition which
this Objection faulteth, is neither impossible, no nor yet unsound; but that
such persons, who neither have the letter of the Gospel, nor yet the preaching
of it by men, are notwithstanding in a capacity of believing. I add,

2. That if there be an impossibility that such persons should believe, then
their believing supposes, or includes, some other thing which is unpossible
also. For this is a true Rule, and of unquestionable evidence: Possibile est,
quo posito, nihil sequitur impossible: That is possible, upon the supposal
whereof no impossibility follows. Now in case it should be supposed that a
man without the Letter, or oral Ministry of the Gospel, should, or might,
believe, it cannot reasonably be imagined what impossibility would follow (I
mean, in argument, or supposal) hereupon. Therefore there is no impossibility
that such a person as we speak of, should believe.

3. (And lastly) In case men destitute at present of the Letter, and Ministry
of the Gospel by men, should not stand bound by some Law, or Commandment of
God, to believe, then, in case either the said Letter, or Ministry shall at any
time hereafter be vouchsafed unto them, they must either be supposed to remain
still as much disobliged from believing, as before (which, I presume, is none
of your thoughts,) or else, that there is some new Commandment imposed upon
them by God, which was not imposed on them before. Now with God (the Scripture
plainly affirms) there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, [or,
change, Jam. 1. 17.] Nor does he create, or make new Laws to subject men unto
upon emergent or accidental occasions: but all his Laws were made, given unto,
and imposed upon, men, before any new emergency, or change of circumstance, or
condition, befalls them. So that (for example) he that has formerly been
very poor, but has of late a great and plentiful Estate cast upon him by God,
does not now stand charged to distribute, to do good, to be rich in good works,
etc. by any new Commandment of God imposed on him since his advancement in the
World, which did not oblige him before, but by virtue of such a Command,
whereunto he was subject all the time of his poverty, as well as since his
being made rich, although he stood not bound by it to act according to the
tenor of it, but only then, or at such a time, when and in case he should
become rich; and now also not continually, but upon due and regular occasions
only. This Commandment of God, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, obliges a
man as well sleeping, as waking, as well in the midst of his lawful employment,
as at times of liberty and convenience for his actual worshipping of him:
otherwise God must be said to take off this Law from men, as often as they go to
sleep, or to the labor of their ordinary Callings; and again to lay it on them
anew, as often as they awake, or cease from their labor; or rather as often (and as
often only) as they have opportunity actually to worship him. Yet does it not
oblige any man to worship him at such a time, when, or whilst he is sleeping
(supposing his sleep in respect of the time or season of it lawful) nor yet
whilst he is at the work of his Calling, supposing that herein he does but
that which is his duty to do. I make no question but you have often met with
that common Maxim of Divines: Praecepta affirmativa semper obligant, sed non ad
semper: Affirmative Precepts always bind, but not unto always, i. e. not to a
perpetual or uninterrupted practice of that duty, whereunto they bind. A rich
man stands always bound to distribute to the poor, but not to distribute
always, but only upon all Christian Occasions and Opportunities. So a Minister
stands always bound to preach to his People: but he does not stand bound to
preach always or continually to them. In like manner suppose it were granted,
that an Heathen, who never heard of the Gospel, nor of the Name of Christ, nor
ever had opportunity to hear of either, does not stand bound to believe
(formally, or explicitly) in Christ, whilst he remains under these
disadvantages for such a believing; yet this proves not, but that even such a
person, stands simply and absolutely bound to believe in him, and this upon the
terms specified: or in case the Gospel shall at any time afterward be sent
unto him by God, that he now stands bound to believe by a Commandment newly
given or imposed upon him by God, and not by virtue of that Commandment,
wherewith he stood charged before.

Nor is that Text Acts 17. 30. cited by me to prove an universal Obligation
positively imposed by God upon all Men to believe on Christ, disabled by any
attempt made by you in that behalf; the words being these: And the times of
this ignorance God winked at: but now commands all Men every where to repent,
etc. For, 1. We have demonstratively (I suppose) proved already, That the
Repentance here mentioned, and commanded by God unto all Men every where,
includes, or presupposes, Faith in Christ, and that no Repentance whatsoever,
is, or can be, actually saving, but only such, which is influenced or raised
by Faith in Christ, of one kind or other, either formal and explicit, or else
consequential, implicit and interpretative. 2. It has been in like manner
proved, that these Universals, all Men, every where, cannot reasonably, nor
with that Reverence and Honor which are due to Scripture-expressions, be here
confined to such, either persons, or places, to whom, or where, the Gospel had
been then actually sent, and preached, when the words were uttered by the
Apostle, or should afterward be thus sent and preached; but are to be extended
to all Men simply, and to every Nation under Heaven; in as much as there is no
necessity for such a cautionary, or restrictive Interpretation.

Whereas you further argue from the Antithesis here made by the Apostle,
between the (...), the times of ignorance, and the (...), the present times
(when the Apostle spoke the words) or times of the Gospel Light, that how ever
God in these latter, commands all Men every where to Repent, yet under those
other he did not; I answer, 1. That the Conclusion which you hence infer,
fights directly (if I mistake not) against your own sense (otherwhere asserted
in your Papers) both concerning an Obligation lying upon Adam to repent, in the
interim between his Fall, and the Promulgation of the Gospel to him; as
likewise concerning the like Obligation lying upon all his posterity (without
exception, unless only of such, who either through defect of years, or of
understanding, or through inexpiableness of guilt, are incapable of Repentance)
whether the Letter or Ministry of the Gospel has been vouchsafed unto them, or
no. For by what Law persons, who never heard of the Gospel, stand now, or
whilst the Gospel shines in other parts of the World, bound to Repent, by the
same they stood bound to Repent-likewise, before the coming of the Gospel into
the World. Therefore you cannot with the safety of your own Principles, but
confess, that all Men every where, even (...), under those times of ignorance
of which the Apostle speaks, and before (...), or the times of the Gospel,
stood bound to Repent, so, or with such a kind of Repentance, which you affirm
to be meant in the Scripture in hand, i. e. such a Repentance which is conform
to the Law of Nature, and which includes not Faith in Christ; and which you
acknowledge also the unevangelized Heathen stand now bound unto.

2. Neither does the Antithesis or opposition between the two differing times
mentioned import any such different Dispensation of God, under the one, and the
other, as if he had left men free from all and all manner of Command and
Obligation to Repent, under the former, and only charged them with this duty
under the latter; but only shows, or supposes, that that Obligation to
repent, which lay upon men under the former, the times of ignorance, was but
weak, faint, obscure, and with little authority upon the Consciences of men, in
comparison of that tie, obligation, or engagement hereunto, which God by an
express Command imposes upon the World under the latter (the times of the
Gospel.) This to be the genuine and true import of the said Antithesis,
appears, 1. By the frequent and familiar usage of the Scripture in like cases:
2. By consideration of the state and condition of the Heathen throughout the
World in the Point in question, before the times of the Gospel.

First, It is a thing of frequent Observation amongst Expositors and Divines,
that the Holy Ghost intending to mention and assert any considerable increase
or advance of some former Dispensation, is wont to express it in simple,
positive, and absolute terms, and as if it were a new kind of Dispensation,
and which had not formerly been known, or heard of in the World Non enim
musitatum aut rarum est in Scriptura easdem Premissiones, vel Praedictiones,
velres alias semel jam datas and commemoratas, postea diversis temporibus
tanquam novas denuo tradere and commemorare. Pererius in Genesis 35. 9.
. Thus the Promises made to Abraham, Genesis 12. concerning the multiplication of
his seed, and their inheriting the Land of Canaan, are afterward, as viz. Cap.
17. 2, 4, 5, etc. again mentioned and expressed as if they had now been new, or
first made, only because they are expressed more largely, fully, and
emphatically. When Christ spoke thus to his Disciples after his Resurrection,
These are the words which I spoke unto you, whilst I was yet WITH YOU, (Luke
24. 44.) in this latter clause, whilst I was yet with you, he insinuates his
present being with them, by way of Antithesis to his former being with them
(viz. before his Death) not as if he were not now present with them, as well as
he had been formerly, but because his being now with them, Solet [Christus] de
his rebus quae alio modo, quam ante, post Resurrectionem eg^, ita loqui, qua si
non egerit. Maldonatus in Mat. 26. 29.
was of a more transcendent and peculiar nature and consideration, then his
former presence had been; in as much as he was now in the estate of the
Resurrection, whereas in his former being with them, he was but in the ordinary
condition of men. When Moses and the Priests spoke thus unto all Israel; Take
heed, and harken, O Israel, that this day thou art become the People of the
Lord thy God; (Deuteronomy. 27. 9.) their meaning was not to imply, that they never
had been the People of the Lord until now, [i. e. a People whom God had owned
and countenanced from Heaven, taken into Covenant with himself, etc.] but that
God by the constant Tenor of his gracious Administrations toward them from
time to time until that day, had made them now more his People, then ever, had
further declared himself to be their God, and to accept and own them for a
People peculiar to him, then formerly: and that upon this account it concerned
them more nearly, then ever, to harken unto him, and obey his voice. In like
Notion our Savior promises his Disciples that he will pray the Father, and
that he should give them another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, when as
in the very same period or passage of speech, he affirms that this Comforter,
or Spirit, was already given them, or (which is the same) dwelt now with, or
in, them, Joh. 14. 15, 16. So that he mentions a larger Effusion or Donation
of the same Spirit, as if it were the primitive or first gift thereof. In like
manner, when being now upon his Journey for the raising of Lazarus from the
dead, he says to his Disciples, I am glad for your sakes that I was not there,
to the intent that you MIGT BELIEVE, (Joh. 11. 15.) he expresses their
believing to a further degree, as if it were the first of their believing, and
that they had not believed before. Whereas it is evident from Joh. 2. 11, 22.
and other places, that they had believed on him before. When the Apostle
affirms this to be Gods end in chastising his People, That they might be
Partakers of his Holiness, (Hebr. 12. 10.) he does not suppose that they were
in no degree partakers of his Holiness before their chastisement; but he
expresses a fuller and richer participation hereof, as if it were a simple,
absolute, or original participation in this kind. So again when the Evangelist
John says, that the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not
glorified, (Joh. 7. 39.) his meaning is not, that the Spirit had in no measure
been formerly given, (for questionless all those who under the Law believed,
and so those, who in the days of our Saviors converse on Earth, before his
Glorification, believed unto Justification, were led hereunto by the Spirit
here spoken of;) but he expresses that abundant and most remarkable Donation
and pouring out of it upon the Apostles and others, after, upon, and by virtue
of Christ's Ascension into Glory, as if it had been the first, and only giving
of it. And it is a good rule or observation, which Testardus delivers hereupon.
Those things (says he) are said not to be, or not to be done, before the times
of the Gospel, which do less [or, not] appear, or are less perceived [or, felt]
before this fullness of times Verum ea non esse, aut non fieri ante Evangelii
tempora dicuntur, quae minus apparent, aut minus sentiuntur ante istam temporum
plenitudinem. Testard. Synops. Doctr. de Not. etc. These. 118.
So that when the Apostle says (in the Scripture under debate) that God now
[in the times of the Gospel] commands all men every where to repent, it does
not necessarily imply, that God never till now commanded the same thing. (I
mean, Repentance) unto them; but that now he commanded it upon other terms,
with more expressness and particularity of Command, upon more lively and
pregnant grounds, or motives, with another edg of Authority, under greater
severity, of punishment threatened in case of disobedience, then he had
commanded it formerly. Many instances from the Scriptures have been presented
unto you, (and many more, I doubt not, upon a little further search might be
added unto them,) wherein such a construction as this must of necessity be
admitted. And that this is the true and genuine sense of the place in hand,
appears yet further by the latter consideration mentioned, which respects the
state or condition of all Mankind under the times of that ignorance, of which
the Apostle speaks, and before the days of the Gospel. For that the World was
then under a Command from God to Repent, is evident from hence, viz. because
otherwise their impenitency, and obdurate proceedings in such ways and
practices, which are contrary to the Law of God, yea and the Law of Nature it
self, had been no sin in them, nor obligatory unto punishment, the Apostles
assertion being express, that it is the Law that works Wrath, [i. e. that
subjecteth men unto punishment,] because where no Law is, there is no
transgression, (Romans 4. 15.) meaning (as he expresses himself upon the account
in the Chapter following, verse. 13.) that sin is not imputed [i. e. charged
upon men, or punished] where there is no Law. So that unless we shall suppose
the World to have been absolutely lawless, and that the generality of men might
without contracting any guilt, or making themselves liable unto punishment,
have committed all the abominations, which they did commit, yea and ten times
more, until the times of the Gospel, we must of necessity make or suppose them
subject to some Law, or other of God, whereby he commands Repentance unto men.
Yea the Apostle himself, in the same Sermon, and a very few verses before the
words in contest, plainly supposes the men we speak of, even all the Nations
of men, to have been, all the time before the Gospel, under an engagement or
obligation from God, to have sought him, which supposes (at least) their
repentance. And has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on all
the face of the Earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitations, that THEY SHOULD SEEK THE LORD, if happily they
might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us,
etc. Act. 17. 26, 27. His meaning is, that God has taken such a wise and
gracious course, 1. In the creation and forming of men. 2. In disposing and
governing them, that they might be in a good capacity of seeking him, and this
so as to find him (and consequently to enjoy him, and to be made happy and
blessed by him) although their minds and understandings were much darkened
through corrupt principles, which they had voluntarily drank in, and sinful
practices wherein they had walked, in as much as he was near enough to them
all, to have been found by them, even by groping, or feeling, as men use to
seek for things in the dark; meaning, that by a very low strain of industry, an
ordinary diligence and enquiry they might have discovered and found him out, so
far as to have worshipped and served him with acceptance, and this under all
those great disadvantages for the finding him out, which they had brought upon
themselves. These things import much more then their being under a simple
Command from God to Repent; though it is true, that a Command to Repent,
vertually and with interpretation, contains and comprehends the whole duty of
man.

Nor do these words, which you urge and insist upon, And the times of this
ignorance God winked at, import any thing contrary to what has been now
argued, or as if God had neither taken, nor meant to take, any account at all
of those Heathen, who, before the times of the Gospel, had only the Books of
Nature, Providence, and Creation, to instruct them, for their misdemeanors in
sinning. The Apostle expressly says, that as many as have sinned without the
Law, shall perish without the Law, Romans 2. 12. And a little before: Tribulation
and anguish upon every Soul of him that does evil; of the Jew first, and ALSO
OF THE GENTILE, (to omit much more that might be readily cited from the same
Apostle to the same purpose.) Therefore when God is said (...) to have
over-looked, or winked at the times of ignorance, [i. e. the ways and doings of
men under these times,] it is to be understood in a comparative sense, implying
only some such thing as this, That whilst means for the Conversion of Men
from Sin to Righteousness, and for the bringing of them to the true Knowledge
and Fear of God, were but low, scant, and weak in the World, in comparison of
what they are now advanced unto by the shining of the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ amongst men, God was nothing so severe to mark what was done
amiss, nothing so swift to execute Judgment, or take Vengeance on
Transgressors, as now he is, and intends to be, under the Gospel; the
vouchsafement whereof unto the World, is as the laying of the Ax to the root of
the Trees, upon which follows the hewing down, and casting into the fire, every
tree, that brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 3. 10. This sense is both very
agreeable to the Scripture Phrase, which frequently and familiarly expresses a
comparative sense in a positive and absolute form, (see Joh. 6. 27. 1 Cor. 1.
17. Luke 12. 4. Joh. 7. 39. Gal. 4. 9. not to mention other places of like
purport, without number,) and likewise perfectly accords with that Principle
of Righteousness and Equity, in and about the punishing of sin and sinners,
which the Scripture from place to place ascribes unto God; and which inclines
him to punish sins, committed against greater Light, against means and motives
of greater Efficacy and Power, with more severity proportionably, then those,
which (though otherwise the same) are perpetrated, where means and motives for
the refraining of such sins, are either fewer, or less effectual. See upon this
account, Amos 3. 2. compared with Lam. 1. 12. and Dan. 9. 12. Deuteronomy. 6. 12. with
15. Matthew. 11. 21, 24. Luke 12. 47, 48. Jer. 32. 31. compared with Verse. 33.
besides many other passages of like import. Calvin, reading the words in
present consideration between us, thus, Et tempora quidem hujus ignorantiae cum
hactenus dissimulaverit Deus, neither approves your sense of them, nor mine,
though his censure falls much heavier on yours, then on mine. He affirms, that
Paul's intent was not to extenute the sins of men, but only to magnify the
Grace of God, which had now on the sudden shone upon the World: and labors to
confute such an Interpretation, from that of the same Apostle (lately cited,)
They that have sinned without the Law, shall notwithstanding perish without the
Law Alii secu^ interpretantur, Deum ignorantiae pepercisse, quasi conniveret,
punire nolens. Sed tale commentum prorsus alienum est a mente Pauli, and
consilio; cui minime proposit^m fuit extenuare hominum culpam, sed Dei gratiam,
quae repent astulserat, magnifacere. Et ex aliis locis salsum esse coarguitur,
quia qui sine leg peccaverint, sine lege nihilominus peribunt.
His sense of the words is only this, God winked at, or dissembled, the times
of that ignorance, i. e.-that during the long tract and continuance of these
times, God did not discover, or reveal himself unto men In summa, nihil aliud
sibi volunt verba Pauli, quam caec^tati addit^os fuisse homines donec se illis
pate fecit Deus.
. I find some other modern Expositors of good note steering the same course of
Interpretation with him. Some conceive that the Apostle speaks of the times
past with those that were then living, and that his meaning is, that God would
not lay to their charge [i. e. punish, or destroy them for] their Idolatries
past, if now they were willing to repent. Of this Judgment was Chrysostom, and
after him, Oecumenius. Neither of these Interpretations fall in with the genius
of your inference from the words, nor yet endamage my Notion in the least;
which says, That the Heathen here spoken of, were under a Command from God to
Repent, even all along the times of the ignorance, of which the Apostle
speaks. But besides what has been already offered to countenance the
Interpretation of the words awarded by me, I conceive this passage of the
Apostle, Hebr. 8. Verse. 8, 9, etc. does better the account: For finding fault
with them, he says: Behold, the days come (says the Lord) when I will make a
new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of Judah: Not according to
the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by the
hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in my
Covenant, AND I REGARDED THEM NOT (says the Lord:) For this is the Covenant
that I will make, etc. These words, And I regarded them not, seem to run
somewhat parallel with those in question, And the times of this ignorance God
winked at; and withal to carry some such sense and import as this; That God,
considering the weakness and imperfection of that Covenant, which he made with
them at Mount Horeb, upon their Deliverance from Egypt, how little spirit and
life there was in this Covenant to render them a people excellent and worthy
God, in comparison of that Covenant which he purposed to make with them
afterward in the Gospel, upon their great Deliverance from Sin and Hell to be
accomplished by Jesus Christ, did accordingly expect no great matters from
them, but was content (...) (as the Apostle speaks, Acts 13. 18.) to bear with
their manners, to overlook many miscarriages, neglected to punish and take
vengeance on them for such sins, the commission whereof under a Covenant of
more grace he would have vindicated most severely. But this only by the way.

Toward the Conclusion of your Writing, you make this ingenuous and Christian
Promise (which contains as much, as I can with Reason, or a good Conscience,
expect from you) That if I can make it appear (upon just, and carrying grounds)
that Infants, Naturals (to whom God has not given the use of Reason) and those
many millions in all ages, who never heard the Gospel, are bound to believe in
Christ for Salvation, then you shall grant my Minor, and admit my Argument to
be good; viZ. That Christ dyed for all without exception, because all without
exception are bound to believe. I suppose I have, and this upon no worse or
weaker grounds then you require, made it fully apparent, that all the three
sorts of persons you speak of, are, in a sense, which, I (with many others)
call, sensus divisus, and which I have explained, bound to believe on Christ
for Salvation. As for the sense, which (happily) you mean, and which I have
termed, sensus compositus, your self have in a former passage (and herein done
nothing neither, but what Reason and Ingenuity, together with the Interest of
your own Credit and Conscience, obliged you unto) acquitted me and my Doctrine
from intending it in reference to the two former sorts of persons, Infants, and
Naturals. Nor do I conceive that your self judge it any ways prejudicial to the
Salvation of either of these by Christ, that they are, in this sense, utterly
incapable of believing on him; unless you either judge them salvable by the Law
of Nature, and without Christ (which I judge you cannot reasonably do) or not at
all; which I suppose to be further from your thoughts, then the other. So that
whether Infants, or Naturals, be capable, or not capable of believing in
Christ, yet if they be salvable by him, it undeniably follows, that he dyed for
them.

Concerning the third and last sort, persons who though competent of
understanding, yet never from first to last tasted of the letter of the Gospel,
I have proved at large (and I trust, to your satisfaction, and other men's) That
such men as these, stand bound, both by the Law of Nature, and by positive Law
from God, to believe in Jesus Christ, and that without the letter of the Gospel
they are in a capacity of believing in him, so, or so far, as to be accepted
therein unto Salvation. Thus having performed your conditions, I trust I may
upon a legitimacy of claim demand the courtesy of your Promise, being nothing
but what is very lawful for you to grant, the admitance of my Minor, and
consequently the concluding validity of my Argument.

Whereas you somewhere in your Papers represent it as a thing very irrational,
and unworthy belief, that Christ should dye for those, who he knew were in no
capacity, or possibility, of receiving benefit thereby, as all those were, who
had perished in their sins, and were eternally condemned, before his Death: my
Answer is; That as at Christ's riding into Jerusalem, as well the multitudes
that went before, as those that followed, cried, Hosanna to the Son of David,
(Matt. 21. 9.) so those that lived in the World before his Incarnation, and
Sufferings, were in a blessed capacity of receiving Remission of Sins, and the
great Blessing of Salvation, by his Death, by believing on him as then to come,
as well as those, who take their turns of Mortality after him, and believe on
him as already come. Otherwise how should Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have been
in a capacity of siting down and eating bread in the Kingdom of God? So that
how ever the persons you speak of, who were under an irreversible sentence of
Condemnation for their sins, at the time when our Savior dyed, and in this
respect were in no possibility of receiving benefit by his death; yet there was
a time, viZ. whilst they lived in the World, when they were under the same
possibility with other men of receiving the great benefit and blessing of
Salvation by him: and in this respect he may properly enough be said to have
dyed for them; i. e. to have dyed upon such terms, that they believing on him,
whilst the day of Grace lasted, as intending, or as being to dye for them in
time, might have been saved by his death. And if this Objection were of any
force, neither can it truly be said that he dyed for Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob,
or for other Saints, who had dyed in the Faith (as the Apostle speaks) before
his coming in the Flesh, at least it cannot be said that he dyed for the
remission of their sins, because they having obtained already, and being in
full possession of, this heavenly Privilege, were in no possibility of
obtaining it by Christ at the time of his death. Nor is it (nor can it
reasonably be imagined that it should be) the intent of the Doctrine, which
teaches that Christ dyed for all men without exception, to affirm or teach
withal, that he dyed upon such terms for all men, that all men at any time, or
in every state and condition, whether living, or whether dead, whether free
from, or whether ensnared with, the guilt of the unpardonable sin, etc. should
be in a capacity, or under a possibility, of being saved by him. The entire and
clear meaning of the said Doctrine (as it is in effect stated by me Cap. 17..
1. of my Book of Redemption) is, That all persons of Mankind whatsoever, are,
or were, put into such a capacity of Salvation by the Death of Christ, that if
their own voluntary neglect, and notorious unworthiness, do not intervene and
hinder, they may, or might, be all actually saved thereby.

And thus I have, in the midst of many distractions, and under much encumbrance
of business otherwise, faithfully, with a single and upright heart, and as in
the presence of God, endeavored to satisfy your request touching the clearing
and removing such scruples and difficulties, which, as you signify, rendered
this Proposition of mine, All men, without exception, stand bound to believe on
Christ, questionable, or rather unquestionably false, unto you. Whether any
thing that has been said will turn to so happy an account unto you, as
satisfaction, I cannot prophecy: only I find you a man dis-ensnared from the
superstition of vulgar credulity, and that will not sell the Truth for the gain
or price of that corruptible Crown of being reputed Orthodox; and this is a
door of hope opened unto me, that such things, which are agreeable both to the
course and current of the Scriptures, and no less to clear Principles of
Reason, will overruled you into such acknowledgments, which in the day of Jesus
Christ will (I question not) be your honor, and peace. I confess I was
extremely unwilling to have been taken off from some other engagements lying
upon my hand, by such a diversion, as the drawing up of this Answer to your
Papers, must needs occasion: but God having overruled that inclination in me,
I have so much the more hope that he has somewhat of consequence to do with
his Providential interposure in this kind. I may very truly say, that the Work,
in respect of the undertaking of it, was very signally and emphatically, His,
having scarce had so much of my will in it, as in that respect, to bear that
denomination of being called, mine. Notwithstanding being engaged, it was once
in my thoughts to have made some further attempt upon your Judgment by some
other Arguments, to evince an Universal Obligation upon all Flesh to yield the
Obedience of Faith unto the Gospel, and to believe in Jesus Christ. But upon
consideration, judging you so propense in affection to the Truth, as to be
ready to meet it half way in its advance toward you; and being a little
unwilling too far to anticipate my intendments for a larger Discussion of the
Particulars discoursed in your Papers, I resolved rather to contain my self at
present within the narrow bounds of this Answer. The excrescency whereof to
prevent, I forbear the printing of your Papers with it; and this the rather,
because I had no commission from you to publish them. If your desire yet be to
have them published, my best assistance shall be yours for the procuring, and
best ordering of it. The God of all Grace and Truth, break up the Fountains of
the great Depths of Spiritual Knowledge, and Heavenly Understanding in his Word,
before both you, and me, and all others, who love the Truth at a better rate,
then to fear the shame of being counted erroneous for the profession of it;
that the Waters of Life may flow out abundantly from us, for the watering and
refreshing of the dry and barren root of the World round about us.

From my Study, Colemanstr. London, December. 11. 1651. Yours in Jesus Christ, as
your self, and your own Soul, J. Goodwin.

Postscript;
To be read in Page 8. lin. 13. immediately after these words, since his Fall.
THat Adam, during the interim between his Fall, and the Promulgation of the
Evangelical Promise unto him, was under no Obligation to Repent, is evident
from hence; because if so, this tie (according to your distribution) must be
upon him, either by virtue of the Law of Nature, written in his heart, or else,
of some positive Law of God. But, 1. For any positive Law, there was none made
or given unto him by God, during the time we speak of: nor was there any of
this import given unto him before; I mean, whereby he was commanded to repent,
in case he sinned, or rebelled against God. 2. If the Repentance we speak of,
was required of Adam as due by the Law of Nature, then was it required either
in order to his Salvation, and as sufficient and available hereunto; or else as
matter of mere Duty, without any reference to a Reward. If it were required of
him in order to his Salvation, then was there a Principle vested by God in the
Nature of Man, whereby he was enabled to recover and save himself, in case of
sin and disobedience: yea and this Principle must be supposed to have been
carried over by Adam, unmaimed and in sufficient strength for action, out of
his estate of Righteousness or Innocence, wherein he was created, into that
estate of Sin and Misery, wherein he plunged himself by his Fall. And if so,
then must it be supposed also to remain in the same vigor and strength in all
his posterity, (for there is no reason to imagine a difference in this point
between Adam fallen, and his posterity:) And if so, then all, and every Person
of Mankind without exception, must be supposed to be in a capacity of
Salvation, yea to be in an immediate capacity of doing such things which
accompany Salvation. And if so, then Christ must of necessity be supposed to
have dyed for them all, in as much as without shedding of Blood there is no
Remission, and consequently no Salvation, or capacity or possibility of being
saved.

If it be said, That that Repentance which we enquire after, was required of
Adam as mere matter of Duty, and not in reference to any Reward intended to be
given unto him by God thereupon; 1. This (I presume) is contrary to your own
sense, who (if I mistake you not) conceive, That the Heathen, without Faith in
Christ, are in a capacity of such a Repentance, which, in reference to them, is
available unto Salvation. 2. It seems contrary to the course and current of the
Scriptures, that God should require service or obedience from his Creature,
otherwise then in order to their Happiness. See to this purpose: Genesis 4. 7.
Deuteronomy. 6. 24. and 10. 12, 13. Psalm. 19. 11. and 81. 13, 14, etc. Isai. 45. 19.
Romans 2. 10. (besides many others.)

FINIS.

